Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise 
Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices

NATO Science Series
A Series presenting the results of scientific meetings supported under the NATO Science 
Programme.
The Series is published by IOS Press, Amsterdam, and Kluwer Academic Publishers in conjunction 
with the NATO Scientific Affairs Division
Sub-Series
I. Life and Behavioural Sciences
II. Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry
III. Computer and Systems Science
IV. Earth and Environmental Sciences
V. Science and Technology Policy
IOS Press
Kluwer Academic Publishers
IOS Press
Kluwer Academic Publishers
IOS Press
The NATO Science Series continues the series of books published formerly as the NATO ASI Series.
The NATO Science Programme offers support for collaboration in civil science between scientists of 
countries of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council. The types of scientific meeting generally supported 
are “Advanced Study Institutes” and “Advanced Research Workshops”, although other types of 
meeting are supported from time to time. The NATO Science Series collects together the results of 
these meetings. The meetings are co-organized bij scientists from NATO countries and scientists from 
NATO’s Partner countries - countries of the CIS and Central and Eastern Europe.
Advanced Study Institutes are high-level tutorial courses offering in-depth study of latest advances 
in a field.
Advanced Research Workshops are expert meetings aimed at critical assessment of a field, and 
identification of directions for future action.
As a consequence of the restructuring of the NATO Science Programme in 1999, the NATO Science 
Series has been re-organised and there are currently Five Sub-series as noted above. Please consult 
the following web sites for information on previous volumes published in the Series, as well as details of 
earlier Sub-series.
http://www.nato.int/science
http://www.wkap.nl
http://www.iospress.nl
http://www.wtv-books.de/nato-pco.htm
Series II: Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry - Vol. 151

Advanced Experimental Methods 
for Noise Research in Nanoscale 
Electronic Devices
edited by
Josef Sikula
Brno University of Technology,
Brno, Czech Republic
and
Michael Levinshtein
Ioffe Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences,
St. Petersburg, Russia
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK, BOSTON, DORDRECHT, LONDON, MOSCOW

eBook ISBN: 
1-4020-2170-4
Print ISBN: 
1-4020-2169-0
©2005 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
Print ©2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers
Dordrecht
All rights reserved
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without written consent from the Publisher
Created in the United States of America
Visit Springer's eBookstore at: 
http://ebooks.kluweronline.com
and the Springer Global Website Online at: 
http://www.springeronline.com

CONTENTS
PREFACE 
IX
I. Noise Sources
1/f Noise Sources 
3
F.N. Hooge
Noise Sources in GaN/AlGaN Quantum Wells and Devices 
11
S. Rumyantsev
1/f Noise in Nanomaterials and Nanostructures: Old Questions
in a New Fashion 
19
M. N. Mihaila
1/f Spectra as a Consequence of the Randomness of Variance 
29
G. Hartler
Quantum Phase Locking, 1/f Noise and Entanglement 
37
M. Planat and H.Rosu
Shot Noise in Mesoscopic Devices and Quantum Dot Networks 
45
M. Macucci, P. Marconcini, G. Iannaccone, M. Gattobigio, 
G. Basso and B. Pellegrini
Super-Poissonian Noise in Nanostructures 
53
Ya. M. Blanter
Stochastic and Deterministic Models of Noise 
61
J. Kumicak
II. Noise in Nanoscale Devices
Noise in Optoelectronic Devices 
71
R. Alabedra
Fluctuations of Optical and Electrical Parameters and Their 
Correlation of Multiple-Quantum-Well INGAAS/INP Lasers 
79
S. Pralgauskaite, V. Palenskis and J. Matukas
V

VI
Microwave Noise and Fast/Ultrafast Electronic Processes 
in Nitride 2DEG Channels 
89
A. Matulionis
Noise of High Temperature Superconducting Bolometers 
97
I.A. Khrebtov
1/f Noise in MOSTs: Faster is Noisier 
109
L.K.J. Vandamme
Experimental Assessment of Quantum Effects in the Low-
Frequency Noise and RTS of Deep Submicron MOSFETs 
121
E. Simoen, A. Mercha and C. Claeys
Noise and Tunneling Through the 2.5 nm Gate Oxide 
in SOI MOSFETs 
129
N. Lukyanchikova, E. Simoen, A. Mercha and C. Claeys
Low Frequency Noise Studies of Si Nano-Crystal Effects 
in MOS Transistors and Capacitors 
137
S. Ferraton, L. Montes, I. lonica, J. Zimmermann, 
and J. A. Chroboczek
Noise Modelling in Low Dimensional Electronic Structures 
145
L. Reggiani, V. Ya. Aleshkin and A. Reklaitis
Correlation Noise Measurements and Modeling of Nanoscale 
MOSFETs 
153
J. Lee and G. Bosman
Tunneling Effects and Low Frequency Noise of GaN/GaAlN 
HFETs 
161
M. Levinshtein, S. Rumyantsev and M. S. Shur
High Frequency Noise Sources Extraction in Nanometique 
MOSFETs 
169
F. Danneville, G. Pailloncy and G. Dambrine
Informative “Passport Data” of Surface Nano- and 
Microstructures 
177
S. F. Timashev, A. B. Solovieva and G. V. Vstovsky

VII
III. Noise Measurement Technique
Noise Measurement Techniques 
189
L.K.J. Vandamme
Techniques for High-Sensitivity Measurements of Shot Noise 
in Nanostructures 
203
B.Pellegrini, G. Basso and M. Macucci
Correlation Spectrum Analyzer: Principles and Limits 
in Noise Measurements 
211
G. Ferrari and M. Sampietro
Measurement and Analysis Methods for Random
Telegraph Signals 
219
Z. Qelik-Butler
RTS In Quantum Dots and MOSFETs: Experimental Set-Up 
with Long-Time Stability and Magnetic Field Compensation 
227
J. Sikula, J. Pavelka, M. Tacano, S. Hashiguchi and M. Toita
Some Considerations for the Construction of Low-Noise
Amplifiers in Very Low Frequency Region 
237
J. Sikula, S. Hashiguchi, M. Ohki and M. Tacano
Measurements of Low Frequency Noise in Nano-Grained
RuO2+Glass Films Below 1 K 
245
A. Kolek
Technique for Investigation of Non-Gaussian and Non-Stationary 
Properties of LF Noise in Nanoscale Semiconductor Devices 
253
A. Yakimov, A. Belyakov, S. Medvedev, A. Moryashin 
and M. Perov
The Noise Background Suppression of Noise Measuring Set-Up 261 
P. Hruska and K. Hajek
Accuracy of Noise Measurements for 1/f and GR Noise 
271
I. Slaidins
Radiofrequency and Microwave Noise Metrology 
279
E. Rubiola and V. Giordano

VIII
Treatment of Noise Data in Laplace Plane 
287
B. M. Grafov
Measurement of Noise Parameter Set in the Low Frequency
Range: Requirements and Instrumentation 
293
L. Hasse
Techniques of Interference Reduction in Probe System 
for Wafer Level Noise Measurements of Submicron
Semiconductor Devices 
303
L. Spiralski, A. Szewczyk and L. Hasse
Hooge Mobility Fluctuations in n-InSb Magnetoresistors 
as a Reference for Access Resistance LF-Noise Measurements
of SiGe Metamorphic HMOS FETs 
311
S. Durov, O.A. Mironov, M. Myronov, T.E. Whall, V.T. Igumenov,
V.M. Konstantinov and V.V. Paramonov
Optimised Preamplifier for LF-Noise MOSFET Characterization 319
S. Durov and O.A. Mironov
Net of YBCO and LSMO Thermometers for Bolometric
Applications 
327
B. Guillet, L Mlechin, F. Yang, J.M. Routoure, G. Le Dem,
C. Gunther, D. Robbes and R.A. Chakalov
Diagnostics of GaAs Light Emitting Diode pn Junctions 
337
P. Koktavy and B. Koktavy
New Tools for Fast and Sensitive Noise Measurements 
345
J. Sikula, M. Tacano, S. Yokokura and S. Hashiguchi
Using a Novel, Computer Controlled Automatic System 
for LF Noise Measurements under Point Probes 
355
J.A. Chroboczek, S. Ferraton and G. Piantino
AUTHOR INDEX 
363
SUBJECT INDEX
365

PREFACE
The NATO Advanced Research Workshop “Advanced Experimental 
Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices” was held in 
Brno, the Czech Republic, from 14 to 16 August, 2003, being the first event 
to be held in this country. The Workshop passed off before the 
17th International Conference on Noise and Fluctuations - ICNF 2003 that 
took place at the Charles University Conference Centre, Prague, Czech 
Republic, from 18 to 22 August, 2003.
The Workshop provided a forum for discussion on recently developed 
experimental methods for noise research in nanoscale electronic devices. It 
brought together specialists in the area of transport and stochastic 
phenomena in nanoscale physics, dealing with systems for future nanoscale 
electronics. The approach was to create methods for experimental 
observations of noise sources, their localization and their frequency 
spectrum, voltage - current and thermal dependences. The present 
knowledge of measurement methods for mesoscopic devices was 
summarized, to identify directions for future research, related to downscaling 
effects.
The directions for future research of fluctuation phenomena in quantum 
dot and quantum wire devices were specified. Another approach was to 
emphasize the fact, that nanoscale electronic devices will be the basic 
components for electronics of the 21st century. From this point of view the 
signal-to-noise ratio is a very important parameter for the device application. 
Since the noise is also a quality and reliability indicator, experimental 
methods will have a wide application in the future.
This ARW promoted and improved links between scientists from NATO 
and Partner countries and helped also to strengthen the scientific 
communities in the new NATO countries. The workshop linked the 
theoretical assessment of the phenomenon of noise with a discussion of the 
advanced experimental methods. Its main idea was to discuss new results in 
nanoscale physics and initiate new joint research programmes.
The Workshop was international in scope and included authors from 
Belgium, Czech Republic, France, German, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the 
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovak Republic, Ukraine, 
United Kingdom, the United States and Uzbekistan. This Book contains 41 
papers providing reviews and recent advances related to noise research in 
nanoscale electronic devices.
The organizers of the ARW gratefully acknowledge the financial support 
by the NATO Scientific Committee, Brno University of Technology and 
VS Technology Brno.
Brno, August 2003 
Josef Sikula
IX

I. NOISE SOURCES

1/f NOISE SOURCES
F.N. Hooge
Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology 
5600 MB Eindhoven
The Netherlands
Abstract 1/f noise is a fluctuation in the bulk conductance of semiconductors and 
metals. This noise could be a fluctuation in the number of the free electrons or 
in their mobility. Many experimental studies on homogenous layers have 
proved that the1/f noise is a fluctuation in the mobility. There is no theoretical 
model of mobility 1/f noise. The McWhorter model for 1/f noise in MOSTs 
simply adds generation-recombination spectra from surface states. According 
to this model, estimates of the noise magnitude give unrealistic values. More 
important, the McWhorter model is a model on number fluctuations, because 
GR noise always is a fluctuation in number. There is no experimental proof of 
number fluctuations in the 1/f noise of MOSTs.
Keywords: 
noise sources, 1/f noise, fluctuation in the mobility, number fluctuations
1. Introduction
We present a review of the study of 1/f noise in homogenous layers of 
metals and semiconductors. Homogenous layers are eminently suited to 
study the basic properties of 1/f noise.
Although most work has been done on devices, we will not discuss them 
because devices are much too complicated to reveal the unknown basic 
properties of the noise sources. There is one exception, however, the MOST. 
From the very beginning of noise research this noisy device has been studied 
extensively.
At first sight, the McWhorter model explains the noise correctly as a 
summation of generation-recombination from traps in the oxide layer. 
Because of its simplicity the McWhorter model is still very popular.
First we will demonstrate that experiments on homogenous layers prove 
that here the McWhorter model does not apply. The 1/f noise turns out to be 
in the mobility and not in the number of the elections as the result from GR
3
J. 
Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (3 - 10) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

4
noise. Whether the McWhorter model does apply to MOSTs, still is an open 
question.
It is impossible to give a complete survey of all literature on 1/f noise. 
We restrict ourselves to some important themes that lead to problems still 
under discussion now. We refer to survey papers [1,2]. We apologize to the 
original authors of important ideas, who have become invisible in this way. 
On the other hand the reader should not think that everything presented here 
was invented in Eindhoven.
2. The empirical relation
1/f noise is a fluctuation in the conductivity of metals and 
semiconductors. The spectral power density is proportional to 1/f over a 
wide range of frequencies. The noise can be measured with simple 
equipment between 10-2 Hz and 105 Hz. The slope of the spectrum is -(1,0 + 
0,1). Spectra with (sometimes varying) slopes between -0,5 to -1,5 should 
not be called 1/f spectra
The noise of homogenous layers can be expressed as
SR _ a 
R^~ N
(1)
where SR is the spectral power density of resistance, R the resistance of 
the sample, f the frequency at which the noise is measured, N the total 
number of free electrons, and ais an empirical, dimensionless constant with 
values usually between 10-6 and 10-4. There is no theory behind (1). The 
relation normalizes the relative noise to 1 electron. The only assumption 
behind (1) is that, whatever the electrons do, they do it independently. In 
high-quality material, like epitaxial layers, the a values are in the range 10-6 
to 10-4. In damaged materials, mechanical damage or radiation damage, the 
a values are much higher. This could explain why in the old investigations, 
around 1970, a=2x10-3 seemed a good average. At that time, samples were 
sawn out of large single crystals.
For measurements on homogenous, ohmic samples one uses
SR
R2
SG
G2
i const
(SL 1
I, i 2 J
V const
a 
fN
(2)
If one wishes to study the interference of current, temperature doping 
etc, then the 1/f noise has to be well above the thermal noise 4kTR. In order 
to avoid heating of the sample, currents should be not too extreme, this sets a 
limit to N; as a first indication: N<1013. This means that for a “good“ 1/f 
noise metal samples should be smaller than (10 pm)3 and semiconductor 

5
samples (n around 1017cm-3) could be much larger up to (1 mm)3. The 
reverse is also true: if one wishes to make samples free of 1/f noise, make 
them larger than (10 pm)3 in case of metals and (1 mm)3 in case of 
semiconductors.
2.1. Point contacts
Point contacts are notorious for their 1/f noise. A point contact may be 
homogenous as far as the material is concerned; it is inhomogeneous in the 
current density. We consider here a contact between two metal spheres. The 
contact area is a circle with radius a (see Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Point contact. Neff = a3n
The spherical shells between the (approximately) equipotential planes 
are homogenous. We apply (1) and (2) to shell with radius r and thickness 
dr, and calculate R(r) and SR(r). Then we integrate from r = a to r = «>, and 
find an expression like (1). But instead of N we now find
Neff = a3n 
(3)
where n is the electron density. Neff is the effective number of electrons; 
it is the number in the contact volume a3. The radius a of the contact area 
cannot be measured, but we know the relation between a and R: R ^ 1/a.
From this we calculate
S » x a r 3 
(4)
R 
fna fn
The dependence SR IR2 <x R3 is experimentally found in noise 
measurements in which the pressure on the contact is varied. We have 
calculated the contact noise from (1) which holds for bulk 1/f noise. Normal 
avalues are experimentally found. So contact noise is bulk 1/f noise.

6
2.2. Grainy layers
In grainy layers there are many point contacts between the grains. 
Estimates of the number of contacts and their individual contribution to the 
noise lead to a relation like (1) with Neff << Ntotal. This explains the high 
noise of grainy layers. One finds extremely high values of a when using the 
total number of electrons in the sample instead of the number in the contact 
regions. Superconductors often are in the form of grainy layers. If a is 
calculated from Ntotal, a is found to be extremely high. Probably this has 
nothing to do with superconductivity.
3. Mobility noise
Anor A/? So far, the empirical relation (1) has been used to describe 
the conductivity fluctuations in homogenous samples, thin layers and point 
contacts. The next step is to determine whether the conductivity fluctuates 
because of fluctuations in the number of the electrons or in their mobility. 
Number fluctuation was the obvious thing to assume; even today that is what 
many people do without any discussion.
One cannot decide on An or A/from measurement on Aa. One needs 
an effect where n and /do not appear as factors in the product nx/. Such 
effects are the Hall effect, thermo e.m.f., hot electron effects, etc. [1,2]. If, 
for instance, the average effect is proportional to /lnn as in Vth, the thermo 
e.m.f., then we find (6) for the noise
Vth = C/lnn 
(5)
(6)
These voltage fluctuations are compared with resistance fluctuations in
A Vth = A/ + A ln n = A/ + 1 A n 
Vth / ln n / ln n n
the same structure.
AR = A + A n
R /n
(7)
Mobility fluctuations:
a Vth = ar 
Vth 
R
(8)
Number fluctuations:
AVth 
1 AR < AR
Vth 
ln n R R
(9)

7
A nice example is the Hall effect in GaAs [3].
The noise across the Hall contacts is measured in applied magnetic 
fields, and compared to the noise across the same contacts without magnetic 
field. The lines for Aa and A n in Fig. 2 follow from rigorous, complicated 
calculations. The experimental points follow the Aa line, far away from the 
An line. Many more examples of such comparisons are given in the 
literature. Sometimes there is not much difference between Au and An 
lines, but if there is, then An is definitely excluded.
Sv(B)/Vg(B)
SvfOjMfO)
Figure 2. 
1/f noise in Hall effect. Epitax n-type GaAs. T=78K [K]. Lines: theory. Points:
experimental results
3.1. Lattice scattering
The mobility is determined by scattering of the free electrons. Lattice 
scattering by acoustic lattice vibrations is always present. Other scattering 
mechanism might be presented: impurity scattering by charged or neutral 
centres surface scattering against the crystal boundaries, electron scattering 
by other electrons. For the study of 1/f noise, materials with two scattering 
mechanism are of special interest. Let us consider a series of crystals of the 
same semiconductors material with varying amounts of impurity scattering 
together with the always present constant lattice scattering. The contribution 
of the two mechanisms to the resulting mobility A is given by Matthiessen’s 
rule
11 
1
— —-----------1-----------
A Alatt 
Amp
The observed noise is plotted as log a versus log A •
(10)

8
The a - u dependence experimentally found can only be explained by 
assuming 1/f noise in the lattice scattering whereas the other mechanism is 
noise free. From (10) follows
1 | ^u 
A u
(11)
a=
1 | ^Ula.tt | + 0
Ulatt V Ulatt )
(12)
Fig. 3 shows the result for epitaxial n-type GaAs [4], proving that the 1/f
noise is in the lattice scattering only.
Figure. 3. 
a versus Ll. Epitaxial n-type GaAs T=300K [4]
3.2. Scattered light
Measuring the noise in the intensity of scattered light provides an 
independent way of proving that the intensity of acoustic lattice modes 
varies with a 1/f spectrum. Electrons do not play any role in these 
experiments. Musha [5] designed an experimental set-up in which laser light 
was scattered in a quartz crystal. See Fig. 4. The spectrum of the scattered 
light showed peeks left and right of the laser frequency at a distance of the 
frequency of acoustic mode. The noise in the mode intensity is derived from 
the correlated part of the noise in the output of the two detectors.
More studies of the optical noise have been performed, also by 
measuring the transmission of very long glass fibers [6]. The conclusion 
from this experiment is that the noise spectrum of lattice modes definitively 
is 1/f however; the intensities - related to a- are problematic.

9
Figure 4. 
1/f noise in scattered light. [5]
4. The McWhorter model
The model is based on simple mathematical relations. A GR spectrum 
corresponds to transitions between the conduction band and a trap with 
relaxation time t
s (t )=(a< 1+i_ 
(13)
If the different kinds of traps have statistical weights
g (t ) dT = —d? 
(14)
t
Then a 1/f spectrum results by summation of GR spectra 
^ ^
S = Jg (t)S(t)dT = Jc(an)2  ----- — dr = 4c (an)2 ■ 
(15)
0 
00 t 
1 + mr2 
f
Finding a physical model is reduced now to finding a trap distribution 
with the required 1/t dependence McWhorter proposed a homogenous 
distribution of traps in an oxide layer in the semiconductor. This model is 
widely used for the noise in MOSTs. The electrons reach the traps by 
tunnelling. Therefore, t depends exponentially on x, the distance from the 
interface.
t=t0 ex2 
(16)

10
where 2 is an effective penetrations depth. If the number of traps is T, 
we find from (16)
dT_dTd^_dT 2 
dT dx dT dx T
(17)
The homogenous trap distribution (dT/dx = const.) gives the required 
statistical weight
This model is simple and therefore, very attractive. However, several 
assumptions have been made, which are usually passed over:
1. Equal values of (NN )  in each individual GR spectrum
2
2. Additivity of the GR spectra
3. GR noise is a Nn fluctuation
Ad 2. Under certain conditions for the numbers of the free and trapped 
electrons additivity is allowed [7-9]. I shall discus this problem at the Prague 
conference.
Ad 3. In principle, it could be true that the 1/f noise in MOSTs is of 
nature different from the noise in homogenous samples, for which we proved 
experimentally that the 1/f noise is mobility noise. Therefore, we need 
experimental evidence, that in MOSTs the 1/f noise is a fluctuation in 
number. Otherwise the McWhorter model is irrelevant.
References
[1] F.N.Hooge, T.G.M Kleinpenning and L.K.J. Vandamme, Rept. 
Progres. Phys 44,479 (1981)
[2] F.N.Hooge, IEEE Trans El.Dev. 41, 1926 (1994)
[3] L.Ren and J.S.Liberis, Physica B 183,40 (1993)
[4] L.Ren and M.R.Leys, Physica B 172,319 (1991)
[5] T. Musha, G Borbely and M.Shoji, Phys. Rev. Lett 64, 2394 (1990)
[6] F.N.Hooge, Proc. 7th Vilnius Conf. on Fluctuation Phenomena in 
Physical Systems Palanga 1994 Ed.V.Palenskis. Vilnius Univ. Press 
1994. P61
[7] F.N.Hooge, Physica B311, 238 (2002)
[8] F.N.Hooge, Physica B (in Press)
[9] L.K.J.Vandamme and F.N.Hooge, Submitted to Physica B

NOISE SOURCES IN GaN/AlGaN QUANTUM 
WELLS AND DEVICES
S. Rumyantsev
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and Ioffe Institute of Russian Academy of Science, 
Room 9015, CII, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 110 8-th Street, Troy, New York 12180 
USA
roumis2@rpi.edu
Abstract We will examine possible sources of generation-recombination and 1/f noise 
in GaN/AlGaN 2D structures, quantum wells, and devices including contacts, 
bulk and quantum well itself and show that sources of g-r noise, and most 
probably of 1/f noise in HFETs are located in GaN or AlGaN layers within 
some distance from the 2D channel.
Keywords: 
GaN, AlGaN, 1/f noise, generation-recombination noise, quantum well
1. Introduction
High electron sheet concentration in excess of 1013 cm-2 on the 
GaN/AlGaN interface, high breakdown field and high electron peak velocity 
make GaN/AlGaN 2D structures very attractive for high-temperature, high- 
power, high frequency, and radiation-hard applications. We will discuss 
results of the experimental and theoretical investigation of the low-frequency 
noise (LFN) in GaN/GaAlN heterojunctions and examine possible sources of 
noise, including contacts, surface and 2D channel itself.
2. Experimental details
The GaN/AlGaN heterostructures were grown by metalorganic 
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) on a semi-insulating 4H-SiC substrate.
11
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (11 - 18) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

12
They consisted of a 50-nm-thick AlN buffer layer, 0.4-pm-thick undoped 
GaN layer, followed by Al0.2Ga0.8N barrier layer. As in all our devices, we 
added traces of indium and carbon to improve materials quality. Transistors 
and Transmission Line Model (TLM) structures were fabricated on the same 
wafer. The transistors had the source-drain spacing of 4-5 pm, the gate 
length, L, of 1-1.5 pm, and a gate width, W, in the range of 50 -150 pm. The 
LFN was measured in the common source configuration in the frequency 
range from 1 Hz to 50 kHz.
3. Location of the noise sources
Many different noise sources in 2D structures might be important 
including the contact noise, channel noise, surface noise and contribution of 
the gate leakage current in HFETs (see Review[1] for references).
To evaluate the contribution of the gate leakage current, we measured 
the gate current fluctuations directly. The appropriate analysis of the results 
allowed us to calculate the contribution of gate current fluctuations to the 
output noise. The correlation between the gate and drain current fluctuations 
were measured and analyzed as well. We found that in the majority of 
devices the gate current gives only small contribution to the low frequency 
noise, if any.
To determine the contribution of the contact noise to the measured noise 
spectra, the noise measurements were performed on the TLM structures. 
Assuming that the contribution of the contact noise and of the noise from the 
channel layer are not correlated and taking into account that the contact 
resistance is much smaller than the channel resistance it easy to find the 
dependence of noise on the distance L between the contact pads. In the 
limiting case when the contact noise is dominant, the spectral noise density, 
SI /I2, should be proportional to L-2. In the opposite limiting case, we have 
SI/I2 ~ L-1. Since the experimental dependence was close to the 1/L law, we 
conclude that contacts do not contribute much to the overall noise.
To find the relative contributions to the overall noise from the channel 
and the surface, we measured the gate voltage dependence of noise in 
HFETs at a small drain voltage corresponding to the linear regime. We 
found that depending on the surface preparation, passivation, etc., the open 
surface might strongly contribute to LFN. For all measurements reported 
here, we selected transistors with no contribution of the surface noise.

13
4. Generation-Recombination noise in GaN/AlGaN 
heterostructures
The generation-recombination (GR) noise in GaN/AlGaN 
heterostructures was reported for the first time in 1999 in Refs. [2,3]. The 
temperature dependence of low-frequency noise revealed a contribution 
from a local level with the activation energy, Ea, of approximately 0.42 eV 
[2].
Figure1. Temperature dependence of noise for GaN/AlGaN heterostructure at low 
temperatures. Temperature dependence of T=1/2nf0 yields activation energy 
of Ea=1-3 meV [4].
Since that time a wide spectrum of the local levels have been found 
within the range of activation energy from 0.2 to 1.0 eV. The smallest 
activation energy has been measured at low temperatures T<30K in Ref. [4]. 
Fig.1 shows the noise spectra at three temperatures for the sample exhibited 
this GR noise. Temperature dependence of characteristic time T=1/'2nf0 gives 
activation energy of Ea=1-3 meV.
Noise data for the purpose of noise spectroscopy are often presented in 
the form of temperature dependence of noise at different frequencies f [5,6] 
(Fig.2).

14
Figure 2. Temperature dependence of low frequency noise in AlGaN/InGaN/GaN quantum 
well. Arrhenius plot yields the activation energy of 1.6 eV [6].
In this case, Tis taken to be equal to 1/2n, at the temperature Tmax, which 
corresponds to the noise maximum. The slope of the dependence of ln( f) 
versus 1/Tmax yields the activation energy Ea.
Fig. 2 shows the temperatures dependence of noise for 
GaN/InGaN/AlGaN quantum wells [6] with the largest activation energy of 
1.6 eV ever been found in GaN based devices.
For two dimensional (2D) case, the expression for relative spectral noise 
density SI/I2 generated by the single trap in the 2D channel has the following 
form:
S = 4 Nts tF (1 - F) 
12 L0WnS 1 + (rnr)2 ,
(1)
where Nts is the trap sheet concentration, L0 and W are the channel length and 
width respectively, ns is the electron sheet concentration, 0) = 2nf is the 
circular frequency, T = TcF is the time constant associated with return to 
equilibrium of the occupation of the level, F is the Fermi - Dirac occupancy 
function, Tc is the capture time constant
1 
Tc =----
OnsvF
(2)

15
where vF = ^2EF/m is the electron velocity on the Fermi level.
For the 2D degenerate electron gas (F ~ 1), with the experimentally found 
value of T, the capture cross section is:
1
O=-------
T nsvF
(3)
We found G~ 3x10-18 cm2. This value of the capture cross section is too 
small to be realistic. This result shows that for degenerate 2D gas the source 
of low frequency generation-recombination noise, with any activation 
energy, cannot be located directly in the 2D channel.
Another possible location of the traps responsible for generation 
recombination noise is fully depleted barrier layer including AlGaN surface 
from the gate side. The GR noise from the traps in the AlGaN layer can be 
approximately described by Eq. (1), where Nts is replaced with Ntd. Here Nt 
is the volume concentration of traps and d is the thickness of the AlGaN. In 
this case, the time constant Tis given by the Shockley-Hall-Read theory. 
Assuming zero free carrier concentration within the depletion region and that 
the level under consideration is located in the upper half of the forbidden 
gap, the expression for T can be written as [7]:
T= T0 exp(Et /kT)
(4)
where k is Boltzman constant, T is the temperature, To = (onvnNc)-1, Nc is the 
density of states in the conduction band.
Hence the slope of the plot of 1/kTmax against lnf (Arrhenius plot) yields 
the level position Ea.
Once Ea is known, the time constant To and electron capture cross 
section can be found.
Our estimate yields quite reasonable value of capture section 
on ~ (10-12 - 10-13) cm2 for all samples.
The trap concentration Nt can be crudely estimated as follows. Assuming 
that the main contribution to noise comes from the level with occupancy 
close to 0.5, we find for the trap concentration:
N   4^max Smax ns L0W
(5)
We obtained Nt ~5x1016 cm-3 for AlGaN/GaN 2D structures and 
AlGaN/InGaN/GaN quantum wells. Since the doping level of AlGaN barier 
layer is almost two orders of magnitude higher, this estimate also looks quite 
reasonable.
Local trap might also locate in GaN layer close to the channel (and close 
to the Femi level). In this case we have to assume that measured activation 

16
energy fully belongs to the temperature dependence of the capture cross 
section. The estimate of the of trap concentration in this case yields 
Nt ~5x1012 cm-3.
Measurements of the LFN in GaN films showed that contribution of GR 
noise is very weak. On the other hand, AlGaN films demonstrated 
pronounced GR noise with activation energy close to those found in 
AlGaN/GaN heterostructures. Therefore, we conclude that AlGaN is the 
most probable source of the GR noise in GaN based 2D structures.
5. 1/f noise
The 1/f noise level in different semiconductor materials and structures is 
usually characterized by the dimensionless Hooge parameter, a=(SI/I2)f.N, 
where N is the total number of the carriers in the sample, f is the frequency, 
S1/f = SI /I2 is the relative spectral density of the 1/f noise.
In spite of the difference in the absolute values of a, for different 
samples and structures we found that concentration dependencies a( ns) are 
identical for all samples. At low channel concentrations, a decreases with 
the increase of ns as a ~ 1/ns, reaches a minimum and then increases with a 
further increase of ns (Fig.3). This kind of a ~ 1/ns dependence was found 
for both AlGaN/InGaN/GaN quantum wells and GaN/AlGaN 
heterostructures.
Sheet Carrier Density, nS (cm-2)
Figure 3. The dependence of Hooge parameter a on 2D sheet carrier concentration nS 
for algan/ingan/gan quantum wells.

17
The dependence a ~ 1/ns indicates that the spectral density SI does not 
depend on the channel concentration. Note that such situation is very typical 
for Si MOSFETs, where the noise arises from the electron tunneling from 
the semiconductor to traps in the oxide. Hence, the observed a ~ 1/ns 
dependence might be linked to the electron tunneling from the 2D gas into 
the tail states in GaN or AlGaN.
6. 
Conclusion
Experimental study of the 1/f noise in GaN/AlGaN 2D structures and 
AlGaN/InGaN/GaN quantum wells showed that in the majority of devices 
contacts, surface and gate leakage current do not contribute much to noise.
The AlGaN layer is the most probable source of the GR noise in 
GaN/AlGaN 2D structures. Our estimates yielded a reasonable capture 
cross-section and concentration of traps located in AlGaN, which might be 
responsible for the noise.
The dependence of the 1/f noise on electron sheet concentration 
indicates that the most probable mechanism of the noise is tunneling from 
2D channel to the GaN or AlGaN layers.
References
[1] 
M. E. Levinshtein, A. A. Balandin, S. L. Rumyantsev, and M. S. Shur, 
Low-frequency noise in GaN-based Field Effect Transistors in: "Noise 
and Fluctuations Control in Electronic Devices", A. Balandin, ed., 
American Scientific Publishers (2002)
[2] 
S. Rumyantsev, M. E. Levinshtein, R. Gaska, M. S. Shur, A. Khan, J. 
W. Yang, G. Simin, A. Ping and T. Adesida, Low 1/f noise in 
AlGaN/GaN HEMTs on SiC substrates, Proc. of the Third 
International Conference on Nitride Semiconductors (ICNS3), 
Montpellier, France, July 1999, phys. stat. sol. (a), 176 (1999) 201.
[3] 
A. Balandin, S. Morozov, G. Wijeratne, S. J. Cai, R. Li, K. L. Wang, 
and C. R. Viswanathan, Effect of channel doping on the low- 
frequency noise in GaN/AlGaN heterostructure field-effect transistors 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 75 (1999) 2064.

18
[4] 
S. L. Rumyantsev, Y. Deng, E. Borovitskaya, A. Dmitriev, W. Knap, 
N. Pala, M. S. Shur, M. E. Levinshtein, M. Asif Khan, G. Simin, J. 
Yang, and X. Hu, Low-frequency noise in GaN/AlGaN 
heterostructure field-effect transistors at cryogenic temperatures, 
Journal of Applied Physics 92 (2002) 4726,
[5] 
M. E. Levinshtein and S. L. Rumyantsev, Noise spectroscopy of local 
levels in semiconductors, Semicond. Sci. and Technol., 9 (1994) 1183.
[6] 
N. Pala, S. Rumyantsev, M. Shur , R. Gaska, X. Hu, J. Yang, G. Simin 
and M. A. Khan, Low Frequency Noise in AlGaN/InGaN/GaN 
Double Heterostructure Field Effect Transistors, Solid State 
Electronics 47 (2003) 1099-1104.
[7] 
P. O. Lauritzen, Low-frequency generation noise in junction field­
effect transistors, Solid State Electron, 8 (1965) 58.

1/f NOISE IN NANOMATERIALS AND 
NANOSTRUCTURES: OLD QUESTIONS 
IN A NEW FASHION
M. N. Mihaila
National Institute of Microtechnology
32B Erou Iancu Nicolae str., 72996 Bucharest
Romania
mihaim@imt.ro
Abstract Some old, perennial questions in the field of low-frequency noise in solid are 
discussed in the light of some recent achievements concerning the 
investigation of the noise phenomena in nanomaterials and nanostructures. 
The main emphasis is placed on the very old yet still hot topic of 1/f noise. 
Possible new fashion is considered for three longstanding questions: 
Lorentzian superposition, surface vs. bulk and number vs. mobility 
fluctuation. Examination of the RTS noise behaviour in meso- and 
nanostructures does not support its fundamental character in the generation of 
the 1/f noise. Recent noise measurements on both Single- and Multiple­
Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWNT, MWNT) definitely relax the old dispute 
whether 1/f noise is a surface or a bulk effect: either surface or bulk or both of 
them can contribute to 1/f noise. As for the number fluctuation vs. mobility 
fluctuation controversy, noise measurements in nanomaterials favour mobility 
fluctuation hypothesis due to phonon scattering as the microscopic source of 
the 1/f noise.
Keywords: 
noise, nanomaterials, nanostructures, old questions, new fashion.
1. Introduction
The top down approach in the scaling of electronic devices is at and in 
some cases beyond the borderline of the nanoworld. Created either by top­
down or bottom-up procedures, the newborn nanostructures have fascinating 
properties. However, the ways to the nanoworld are inexorably accompanied 
by the increased low-frequency noise level, which is highly detrimental, 
especially to the nanostructures processing signals. Moreover, below some 
thresholds, one can encounter intrinsic noise levels comparable with the
19
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (19-27) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

20
signal these nanostructures have to process. In principle, one can alleviate 
these difficulties by nanoengineering, except for the situations when the 
microscopic roots of the unavoidable noise phenomena, which act as 
fundamental limits are reached. In the bottom-up approach one can, in 
principle at least, build-up nanostructures with the desired noise properties, 
therefore noise-oriented design could be of importance in nanoengineering. 
To do so, one needs principles and rules born out from the fundamental 
knowledge, which cannot be obtained without finding answers to the 
longstanding questions in the field of low-frequency noise.
The very old, perennial questions we would like to examine here from 
the perspective of the nanoscience results are connected with and refer to the 
well-known issue of 1/f noise. Simply stated, they are:
1. 
Superposition of Lorentzians. Is the RTS noise the 
fundamental component of the 1/f noise?
2. A problem of topology: surface vs. bulk;
3. Mobility vs. number fluctuations.
Although vividly debated for many decades, no one of these questions 
has a definite, “final” answer because they proved extremely intricate so far. 
In this contribution, we investigate whether the existing experimental noise 
data for nanomaterials and nanostructures can be used to advance in finding 
the answers to the above mentioned questions. Due to specific properties of 
and transport phenomena in nanomaterials and nanostructures, the 
interpretation of the noise data allows some new approaches in searching for 
the final answers. New fashion of the old questions is unveiled.
2. Superposition of Lorentzians. Is RTS noise the 
fundamental component of 1/f noise?
The idea of Lorentzians superposition to obtain a 1/f spectrum has been 
proposed by Bernamont [1] and Surdin [2] almost 70 years ago. Of course, 
Lorentzian superposition can mimic a spectrum with a 1/f shape, if the traps 
are independent [2] and with a 1/t statistical weight [3], where T is the trap 
time constant. In semiconductors and semiconductor devices such a 
distribution can be associated with the states in the oxide or in the forbidden 
gap. Starting from this idea, McWhorter [4] proposed his famous 
microscopic model of carrier tunnelling into oxide states as microscopic 
source of 1/f noise.
From a theoretical point of view, the superposition has been questioned 
by famous scientists. For instance, van Kampen [5] considered that, in 

21
general, the superposition “is not a physical explanation, unless one has an 
explanation for that particular superposition, as in the theory of 
McWhorter.”, while Hooge [6] deduced the condition of the spectra 
additivity. When the traps are not independent, the spectra mix and a Lorentz 
spectrum is found. Moreover, in a very recent paper, van Vliet [7] stated that 
for discrete traps of small density in the forbidden gap, the spectrum is “a 
sum of...Lorentzians”, while for “numerous traps” the spectrum is a 
Lorentzian. For continuously distributed energy range “Our conclusion is 
that the envelope spectrum for a continuous range of traps is never 1/f over 
more than 2 decades.” [7], unless band-bending occurs.
The reason why we discuss this topic here is that nanoscience is able to 
offer a definite answer to this longstanding question. According to 
McWorther, “a variation of [oxide] thickness from 20A to 40A, and a barrier 
height of one electronvolt, the transition times may vary from 10-4 to 
104sec.” [4]. In the case of the MOSFET, the scaling of the channel 
dimensions requires the reduction of the oxide thickness [8]. Therefore, in 
the case of a nano-MOSFET working in the ultimate limit of the oxide 
thickness, which is of the order (12-15)A corresponding to about four atomic 
layers, one would expect a reduction of the frequency range spanned by a 1/f 
spectrum. If the traps are distributed in the whole oxide thickness, a 
reduction in the oxide thickness will affect the low frequency part of the 
spectrum, hence below a given frequency one would observe quite an abrupt 
roll-off in the spectrum. So far, such an effect was not observed, on the 
contrary, the opposite was apparently found in an experiment done at Bell on 
MOS transistor with 100 nm gate length and 40 nm gate oxide [9]. In this 
device, the noise spectrum spanned over several (seven) frequency decades, 
the corner frequency increases, and the noise intensity is two orders of 
magnitude more than in a MOSFET with a 0.5 |tm gate length. It is as if the 
number of traps would increase by decreasing the channel length.
The device scaling by the top-down approach in the nanotechnology is 
accompanied, among other effects, by the occurrence of Random Telegraph 
Signal (RTS) noise. The phenomenon was observed in different physical 
systems such as MOSFETs [10-12], quantum point contact [13], metallic 
nanobridges [14] and others. As in the case of the g-r noise, the spectrum of 
the RTS noise is also a Lorentzian, therefore the superposition of 
Lorentzians would give a 1/f spectrum. This was mainly the reason behind 
the fact that many consider RTS noise as the fundamental source of the 1/f 
noise. It is also worthwhile mentioning that the similarities between g-r noise 
and RTS noise are only formal because physically they are very different: 
while g-r noise is gaussian, RTS noise is strongly nonlinear.
The observation of the RTS noise at low temperature generated by a 
single fluctuator is the strongest argument put forward in supporting RTS as 
the fundamental microscopic source of 1/f noise. In this respect, the most 

22
investigated device is the MOS transistor. Reducing the channel dimension 
in the nanometer range, one can see only a single fluctuator and a 
corresponding transition from 1/f spectrum to a Lorentzian. Moreover, in 
some devices the noise level increases by orders of magnitude [15]. Does 1/f 
noise disappear or its intensity is overwhelmed by Lorentzian? The search 
for a single fluctuators or even “zero trap” in the channel is a goal followed 
by some groups [16], which developed nanoMOSFET with cylindrical gate 
surrounding a few nanometers channel.
However, just observing a single Lorentz spectrum or resolving the 
spectrum “into a small number of Lorentzians” [17] at low temperature in 
meso or nanostructures it is not enough to state that RTS noise is the 
fundamental source of 1/f noise. A necessary condition would be to clean the 
raw signal by eliminating the RTS and to investigate the spectrum of the 
background signal. Such experiments performed on microstructures [18] 
undoubtedly revealed a 1/f spectrum for the background signal, therefore in 
these cases RTS noise are a “parasitic” noise signal. More important, the 
RTS noise intensity is almost always orders of magnitude above the 
“residual” 1/f noise intensity. It is apparent from these facts that by 
decreasing the temperature, the causes producing 1/f noise do not disappear 
but considerably diminish. In this respect, it is interesting to note that even in 
some cases [17], [19] when the fundamental fluctuators are seen, the best 
theoretical fit to the decomposed spectra is to use Lorentzians plus a ”1/f 
term to account for the small residual 1/f noise” [17]. These observations are 
also supported by noise measurements in quantum point contacts. For 
instance, Dekker’s results [13] on two quantum point contacts at very low 
temperature (2K) revealed RTS noise in one of them, while the other 
featured 1/f noise of intensity orders of magnitude lower. Increasing the 
temperature, the noise intensity of the Lorentz spectrum associated to RTS 
noise decreases by orders of magnitude and the shape becomes 1/f at 25K. 
RTS noise in excess of the 1/f noise has been reported for AlGaAs/GaAs 
quantum dot single-electron transistor [20]. These results cast some doubts 
on the RTS as the fundamental ingredient of the 1/f noise.
Another problem could be that only the presence of RTS is not enough 
to have a 1/f spectrum. As in the case of g-r noise, one needs not only a 
distribution of time constant but also a 1/t statistical weight. Especially in 
the case of a two level RTS it is not clear how a distribution of time constant 
can be obtained from a single fluctuator. In this respect, recently Belyakov et 
al. [21] reported that in light emitting diode with quantum dots, the RTS 
noise intensity is at least an order of magnitude above the 1/f noise intensity 
of the “residual” signal. In addition, they have found that the current 
dependence of the characteristic frequency of the RTS spectrum does not 
vary considerably for about two decades of currents. Therefore, RTS noise 
cannot be a source of time constant distribution, let alone a 1/t one.

23
Seeing the RTS noise as a perturbative phenomenon and not as a 
fundamental source of the 1/f noise is also considerably supported by the 
often observed fact that the frequency exponent in the presence of the RTS 
noise is considerably larger than 1, as in the cases reported for vacuum 
nanotriode [22] or metallic nanobridges [14]. Sometimes, in small 
dimensional systems, the two spectra, 1/f and RTS noise, mix (modulate 
each other) and what is obtained is a 1/fn spectrum, with n>3, as in the case 
of MOS transistors with 100 nm channel length and 25 nm channel width 
[12]. A 1/f3 spectrum occurs when one phenomenon modulates the other. In 
this case, 1/f noise is hidden in the RTS. These observations do not support 
the hypothesis of RTS noise as a fundamental source of the 1/f noise.
Introduced as a Deus ex machina to circumvent a difficult, maybe a 
profound physical problem, the idea that RTS noise is the fundamental 
source of the 1/f noise is a non sequitur because, among others arguments, 
1/f noise exists both in the absence and in the presence of the RTS noise.
3. A problem of topology: surface vs. bulk
The idea that 1/f noise is a surface effect is a corollary of the McWhorter 
model. The controversy surface vs. bulk was born out when Hooge [23] 
observed that 1/f noise intensity is inversely proportional to the total number 
of carriers in the sample, hence 1/f noise is a bulk effect. It has been long 
debated and the general belief is that, depending on the situation, there is 
either surface or bulk 1/f noise or both of them.
By far, the most interesting experiment nanoscience offers to clarify this 
controversy is the noise measurement on individual carbon nanotubes [24­
30]. According to the recent measurements of Collins et al. [24], and Postma 
et al. [25] on single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), 1/f noise cannot be 
a bulk effect but a surface one. That is because a SWNT is a roled surface 
which does not have any bulk atom. If the noise is not entirely determined by 
contacts, it results that in a SWNT 1/f noise is a pure surface effect. Hence, 
the controversy whether 1/f noise is a surface or a bulk effect came to the 
end. In any case, since the noise intensity depends quadratically on current, 
the contacts are ohmic. For a MWCT partially iron-filled, Roumiantsev et al. 
[26] observed nonlinear effects in the noise which were ascribed to a 
possible nonlinear contact. In two-crossed MWNTs [29], the noise intensity 
depends superlinearly on current. It has been also explained by the presence 
of a resistance either at the junction between nanotubes or to nanotube-metal 
contact.
A very interesting experiment in clarifying this controversy was done 
recently by Collins and Avouris on MWCTs [30]. Removing the carbon 
shells one after another by sequential burning, they found that the 

24
contribution of the bulk can be about 90%, while the surface contributes only 
10%. There is also a nonlinear component in the noise data of Collins and 
Avouris [30]. For instance, a close look at the figure 1b from [30] indicates 
that for current till about 50p.A, the noise intensity SI~I1.4, which points out 
to a driven, nonequilibrium 1/f noise mechanism. A transition from 
nonequilibrium to equilibrium 1/f noise (SI~I2) is observed for I>50p.A.
A very important source of 1/f noise has been found to be the interface 
between carbon nanotubes [27], quantum dots [31] and platinum 
nanoparticles [32] and the substrate they are sitting on. For highly functional 
applications of the nanomaterials this could be of great concern.
4. Number vs. mobility fluctuations
The number vs. mobility fluctuation controversy transfers into the 
validity of the physical mechanisms which support one model or another. 
The number fluctuation model is based on tunnelling of the carrier into the 
oxide or interface states. The microscopic mechanism behind the bulk 
hypothesis [23] is the mobility fluctuation due to phonon scattering [33]. 
Although the noise measurements on nanomaterials are quite scarce [34-37], 
some existing results merely support the mobility fluctuation microscopic 
model instead of the number fluctuation one. For instance, in comparison 
with a polycrystalline gold film, Ochs et al. [34] observed excess 1/f noise in 
a gold nanocrystalline film which has been attributed to a higher density of 
grain boundaries in nanomaterials. But associated to the higher density of 
grain boundaries in nanomaterials is the excess vibrational density of states 
observed at both ends of the phonon spectrum [38]. Recently, we have 
speculated [39] that this excess noise can be the result of the excess phonon 
density of states. Due to this fundamental property, the nanostructured 
materials are ideally suited for such a dedicated experiment which is still 
awaiting.
In carbon nanotubes, the number fluctuation due to carriers tunnelling 
into interface states does not work at all, therefore, for a physical 
explanation, one has to look for some other models such as: diffusion or 
electron-phonon interaction. The last hypothesis is strongly supported by 
Postma’s data [25] on the temperature dependence of 1/f noise in SWNTs 
which indicates the participation of Umklapp phonons in the 1/f noise.
Rich physical phenomena are encountered in nanoparticle films wherein 
tunnelling and hopping are fundamental conduction processes. In the 
experiments of Otten et al. [36] on PbS nanoparticle films, the substrate 
played a fundamental role in carrier transport but only diffusion noise was 
observed. On the contrary, in the noise measurement of Saminadayar on 
quantum dots [31] 1/f noise was found. The author attributed this result to

25
the “free charges moving around the dot” [31], hence to the carriers 
interaction with the substrate. One can conclude from these experiments that 
something more is necessary to have 1/f noise in the sense of number 
fluctuation model, only the interaction with the substrate does not suffice. In 
a recent experiment [32], nonequilibrium (nonlinear) 1/f-like noise has been 
found in platinum nanoparticle films, although the measurements were done 
in the ohmic region of the I-V characteristics. The temperature dependence 
of the film resistance, performed in the (8-300)K range, revealed a metallic 
conduction mechanism which is in opposition to the strong nonlinear 
character of the noise mechanism. Phonon-assisted variable range hopping 
(VRH) was the only mechanism capable to explain both the noise data and 
the conduction processes. Moreover, 1/f noise was found only in the (25- 
300)K temperature range where phonon-assisted VRH dominates the 
conduction. In the (8-25)K temperature range, where impurity scattering 
seems to dominate the conduction, there is no 1/f noise [32].
At the atomic scale, Koslowski et al. [40] investigated GaAs surface by 
STM and found that while both Ga and As atoms are “visible”, 1/f noise in 
the fluctuations of the tunneling current can be observed only when the tip is 
above the Ga atoms. This observation indicates that tunneling itself is not a 
source of 1/f noise. The necessary ingredient could be the phonons which 
inelastically assist the carriers tunneling. In fact, Koslowski et al.[39] 
tentatively attributed 1/f noise to the fluctuation of the surface phonon 
number. We consider that such an experiment performed on a SWNT would 
be of fundamental importance for the whole field.
5. Conclusions
Three fundamental longstanding questions in the field of low-frequency 
noise were discussed in the light of some recent noise measurements in 
nanomaterials and nanostructures. When possible, the Lorentzian 
superposition (McWhorther model) can be (in)validated by noise 
measurements in a nanoMOSFET with an oxide (12-15)A thick. Analysis of 
the existing data for quantum point contacts and other small dimensional 
systems indicates that RTS noise as the fundamental component of the 1/f 
noise is a nonsequitur. The surface origin of the 1/f noise is strongly 
supported by noise measurements in SW carbon nanotubes, while the noise 
data for MW carbon nanotubes support both surface and bulk hypothesis. As 
for the controversy number vs. mobility fluctuations, excess 1/f noise 
observed in nanocrystalline gold was tentatively associated with the 
enhanced phonon density of states, specific to nanomaterials. The hypothesis 
of phonons participation in the 1/f noise is also supported by noise 

26
measurements in platinum nanoparticle films. Certainly, nanoscience already 
shed much light on the old, still unsolved problems of 1/f noise.
References
[1] J. Bernamont, Ann. Phys. (Paris) 7 (1937) 71.
[2] M. Surdin, J. Phys. Radium, Serie 10 (1939) 188.
[3] A van der Ziel, Physica (Amsterdam) 16 (1950) 359.
[4] A. L. McWhorter, in “Semiconductor Surface Physics”, University of 
Pennsylvania Press, (1957) 207.
[5] N. G. van Kampen, in Noise in Physical Systems, C. M. van Vliet 
(ed.), World Scientific, (1987) 3..
[6] F. N. Hooge and P. A. Bobbert, Physica B 239 (1997) 223.
[7] C. M. van Vliet, J. Appl. Phys. 93 (2003) 6068.
[8] E. Simoen, C. Claeys, Solid-St. Electron. 43 (1999) 865.
[9] Samuel Martin et al., Bell Labs Technical Journal, 30 (Summer, 
1997).
[10] K. S. Ralls et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 228.
[11] M. J. Uren et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 47 (1985) 1195.
[12] H. M. Bu et al., Appl. Phys. A 71 (2000) 133.
[13] C. Dekker et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 2148.
[14] K. S. Ralls and R. A. Buhrman, Phys. Rev. B 44 (1991-I) 5800.
[15] G. Ghibaudo et al., Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 132 (1992) 501.
[16] T.A. Kramer and R. F. W. Pease, 
 /~tkramer/ 
ARLSymposium.pdf.
http:www.stanford.edu
[17] T. Rogers, R. A. Buhrman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 (1984) 1272.
[18] U. J. Strasilla and M. J. O. Strutt, Proc. IEEE 62 (1978) 1711.
[19] P. A. M. Holweg et al., Phys. Rev. B 45 (1992-II) 9311..
[20] T. Fujisawa and Y. Hirayama, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77 (2000) 543.
[21] A. V. Belyakov et al., Fluctuation and Noise Letters (in press).
[22] G. Driskill-Smith et al., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B18 (2000) 3481.
[23] F. N. Hooge, Phys. Lett. A29 (1969) 139.
[24] Philip G. Collins et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 76 (2000) 894.
[25] H. W. Ch. Postma, Ph. D. Thesis, Univ. of Delft (2001).

27
[26] S. Roumiantsev et al., Proc. of the 9th Int. Symp. on Nanostructures: 
Physics and Technology, St. Petersburg, (2001) 418.
[27] L. Roschier et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 78 (2001) 3295
[28] P.-E. Roche et al., Eur. Phys. J. B 28 (2002) 217.
[29] H. Ouacha, M. Willander et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 (2002) 1055.
[30] P. G. Collins and P. Avouris, ICNF, Prague (2003), in press.
[31] L. Samynadayar, Ph.D thesis, Univ. Paris VI (1997).
[32] M. Mihaila, D. Ursutiu et al., ICNF, Prague (2003), in press.
[33] F. N. Hooge and L. K.J. Vandamme, Phys. Lett. A 66 (1978) 315.
[34] Ochs et al., Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 168 (1998) R9-R11.
[35] F.Otten et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 77 (2000) 3421.
[36] Hoel et al., J. Appl. Phys. 91 (2002) 5221-5226.
[37] U. Stuhr et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 1449.
[38] M. Mihaila,Low-Frequency Noise in Nanomaterials and 
Nanostructures, in Noise and Fluctuations Control in Electronic 
Devices, A.Balandin(editor), American Scientific Publishers,(2002) 
367.
[39] B. Koslowski et al., Surf. Sci. 280 (1993) 106.

1/f SPECTRA AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THE 
RANDOMNESS OF VARIANCE
G. Hartler
Gosener Damm 20, 12559 Berlin
Germany
haergis@aol.com
Abstract: 
It is a general conviction that any measured noise be stochastically continuous
and weak stationary. Therefore, standard noise analysis uses the substitution 
of ensemble averages by time averages, and it considers likewise the 
autocorrelation function and the sample spectrum as an unbiased and complete 
characterization of the measured process. However, randomly distributed 
discontinuities make the constant variance turn into a random one. This 
contradicts the standard suppositions. We consider the random walk as a 
typical non-continuous process and derive the influence of the ‘variance of 
variance’ on the measured spectrum. In contrast to the standard analysis, sums 
of squares are no longer proportional to the chi-square-distribution, but to a 
distribution with a larger variance. When decomposing the data into fixed and 
random variance components, it can be shown that, despite independent 
increments, the random variance component produces a positive and time 
dependent expectation of the covariance. This is the source of the typically 
shaped non-zero autocorrelation function and the 1/f spectrum. The 
expectation of the autocorrelation at any given time difference is the product 
of the random variance component and a factor, which depends only on the 
total number of data and on the number of sampling intervals between the 
associated pairs of data. Consequently, the 1/f spectrum is no longer to be 
understood within the meaning of Parseval’ s theorem. The larger the ratio of 
the random to the fixed variance component, the higher the 1/f increase onset 
frequency. ‘Almost smooth’ processes yield an ‘almost white’ spectrum, 
larger variance of increments generates a 1/f spectrum over a larger range of 
frequencies, and if the quotient between random and fixed variance 
components approaches 1, the 1/f spectrum will appear to extend over the full 
range of frequencies.
Keywords: 
Discontinuities, Random variance, 1/f noise.
29
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (29 - 36) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

30
1. Introduction
Today, it is standard to formulate noise models solely in the frequency 
domain as a relationship between the measured spectrum and the parameters 
of possible noise sources. This is correct provided the noise data are 
stochastically continuous and weak stationary. These standard assumptions 
are crucial; nevertheless, they are generally taken for granted. They allow to 
characterize the noise process likewise by the frequency spectrum or by the 
autocorrelation function, both being non-random functions comprising the 
complete information on the noise process. The measured spectrum is a 
statistical estimate with well known properties. As a formal consequence of 
this standard model we should expect the measured spectra to approach white 
noise for sufficiently large sampling intervals and measuring times. In 
contrast, for up-to-now unknown reasons one mostly measures 1/f noise. 
Commonly, one postulates additional noise sources, e.g. mixtures of 
processes with distributed time constants. However, the 1/f spectra seem to 
increase up to arbitrarily low frequencies, which can hardly be explained 
within the paradigm of a standard noise process. Here, we consider an 
alternative and abandon the standard assumption of stochastic continuity.
In Ref. [1], there were explained some strange ‘memory properties’ of the 
observed 1/f noise for fluctuations, which are generated by a randomly 
indexed random walk, and which are measured at equidistant points in time. 
This model is the basis of our study, too. We assume the fluctuating variable 
to be generated by independent random increments at random time points 
following the Poisson process. This model seems appropriate for noise 
processes, e.g., because conductivity fluctuations are fluctuations of the 
number of free electrons, or because the measured data characterize the 
instantaneous states of a system that travels randomly through a discrete state 
space, etc. The randomly indexed random walk is neither stationary nor 
stochastically continuous. Gut [2] called this process the stopped random 
walk and investigated some of its mathematical properties, e.g., various limit 
theorems. In our context, the most interesting property is the randomness of 
variance, which for measured 1/f noises was already revealed by Brophy [3]. 
The source of the random variance is the fluctuating number of increments in 
time intervals of identical length. With increasing sampling intervals there 
increase both the average and the variance of the number of increments. 
Randomness of variance implies the randomness of the autocorrelation 
function and of the spectrum. It is obvious that in some way the variance of 
variance could influence the sample autocorrelation functions and spectra. 
The derivation of this influence is the topic of this paper. For the sake of 
simplicity and in contrast to Ref.[1], we neglect the additional effects of 
after-effects and of families of Poisson processes.

31
The meaning of the term ‘random variance’ is vague if it is used to 
characterize data that were obtained from a single time domain measurement. 
There is just a single sequence of data available, which cannot be 
individually characterized by a ‘variance’ denoting the ‘spread of the 
distribution’. The standard noise model supposes all data being realizations 
of one random variable, i.e. with identical variance. This variance may be 
estimated by time averaging. The random variance model supposes every 
value to be the realization of an individual random variable with an 
individual variance. It is impossible to estimate the ‘variance of variances’ 
from one measurement only. We need lots of them. Here, we study 
theoretically the influence of the ‘variance of variance’ for standard estimates 
of the autocorrelation function and the frequency spectrum. The starting 
point is the bivariate distribution of the mean squared data and the number of 
increments. This approach is exemplary of other non-continuous models, 
e.g., the RTS noise, where one has to apply the corresponding bivariate 
distribution.
2. The Model
Let {X1 ,X2,...,Xm} and Xt be the record of measured data and the value 
at time t, respectively. The sampling interval, A, denotes the time between 
consecutive measurements. For the sake of simplicity it is put A = 1. The 
random difference between X t and X t+A is the sum of a random number, n, 
of independent random increments, £v,
n
Xt +A - Xt = Z £v
(1)
v=1
Here, it holds X0 =0. We suppose that the ev’s follow the normal distribution 
N(0,a0) with the fixed variance a02. Hence, the increment of X in one 
sampling interval A follows the normal distribution whose expectation is 
zero and random variance, na0 .
3. Stochastic Properties of the Basic Statistics
The standard spectral estimate, which is obtainable only on a grid of 
discrete frequencies rnk = 2nk/m , k = 0,1,2,...,[m/ 2], see e.g. Ref.[4], reads
m-1
Im (®k) = 2 Z
1 m-|s|
s =-(m-1) _ m t =1
-X XtXt+s
cos s&k
(2)

32
For data following model (1) we need the expectation of the statistic 
Xt Xt+|s| at t = 1,2,..., m , and s = -(m-1),..., (m-1) .
3.1. Expectation of the random variance
The case s=0 and fixed number of increments, n, corresponds to the 
situation of the common standard model. It is known that the distribution of 
(Xt+A - Xt )2 is proportional to the X2-distribution with n degrees of 
freedom. Hence, the expectation and variance of (Xt+A - Xt )2 are na0 and 
2 n a0, respectively.
In the case of random n, we have to consider the additional influence of 
the distribution of n. The joint distribution of n and (Xt+A - Xt)2 is a 
bivariate distribution. Therefore, the expectation and variance of 
(Xt+A - Xt )2 under the influence of the random n are obtainable as the 
expectation and variance of the marginal distribution of (Xt+A - Xt)2 , which 
is a weighted sum of all conditional X2 - distributions over all possible n’s. 
The n follows the Poisson distribution
p(n) = " e'- , 
(3)
n!
with d denoting the intensity of the Poisson process, here defined at A = 1. 
The Poisson distribution is characterized by equality of expectation and 
variance, both being equal to N = 0A .
According to a theorem of the probability theory one obtains the 
expectation and variance of the marginal distribution as follows:
1. 
The expectation of the marginal distribution is the expectation of 
expectations of all conditional distributions; in our case, it is a02N .
2. 
The variance of the marginal distribution is the sum of the variance of 
the conditional distribution at the expectation of n , 2Na04 , and the 
variance of expectations of all conditional distributions, Na04 .
Hence, for data following the model (1), the variance of (Xt+A - Xt)2 is 
given by 3a04 N . The distribution of (Xt+A - Xt)2 is no longer proportional 
to the X2 -distribution. Instead, it follows a marginal distribution with the 
same expectation and a larger variance.

33
For the sake of brevity, we replace the ‘expectation’, ‘variance’, and 
‘covariance’ terms by operators E{...} , Var[...], and Cov[...] , respectively. 
Because the model (1) is additive, it follows
E{E[X\\ = to2 N, 
(4)
E{Var[X^]} = 3to04 N . 
(5)
In Eq. (2), we need the average of expectations of all variances
- E [1X21 = 1( m +1)002 N. 
(6)
m 
11=1 
J 2
m + 1
This corresponds to the variance at the mean time —-—A of the measured
process, which is an incremental process with an increasing variance.
3.2. Expectation of the random covariance
Next, we need the expectations of all Xt Xt+|s| at | s |= 1,..., (m -1) . 
According to the structure of the marginal variance, we decompose every 
random increment [Xt+A - Xt ] into the fixed and the random variance 
component, e(A) and a(A), respectively. These generate the expectation of 
the fixed and random variance component, 2No04 and No04 , respectively. 
For any t there is Xt = et + at with et = te(A) and at = ta(A) . Expanding 
Xt Xt +W = (e + at) (et+H + at +|,|) = e et +|,| + e at+W + at et +|,| + at at+W , 5 * 0, 
we arrive at following implications: Because of the independence of 
increments, there holds E[et et+|5|] = 0, because the increments are 
independent of the number of increments, there is 
E[at et+|5|] = E[at+|5| et ] = 0 . The properties of the Poisson process imply 
E[atat+5] =E[am2in[t,t+5]] =min[t, t+5]o04N, i.e. E[XtXt+5]>0. In Eq.(2), 
we need for every 5 * 0 the average of the expectation of the covariance
- E j mf' |XtXt+w 
m I t=1
(m-|5|)(m-|5|+1) 4
o0 N .
2m 
0
(7)
This is the main result: The random variance component causes a non-zero 
expectation of the covariance appearing as non-zero ‘autocorrelation’, and 
depending on o04 . The general structure of (m- | 5 |)(m- | 5 | +1)/(2m) 
implies that all autocorrelation functions are of similar shape.

34
4. Expectation of the Random Autocorrelation Function
The expectation of the random autocorrelation function, Cov(s), consists 
of two parts: At 5 = 0 it corresponds to the average variance, Eq. (6), at 5 ^ 0 
it is the expectation of the average covariance, Eq. (7). The latter is 
proportional to the average number of cases in which the time interval 
between t = 0 and min[t, t + 5] is overlapped.
Figure 1 shows the dependence of E[Cov(5)] on 5 for A = 1, m=10000, 
N=100, E [ e (A)] = 1 and E [ a (A)2] = 1; 0.9; 0.5; 0.25. The curves are 
distinguished by different dashing, where the shorter lines belong to the 
smaller E [ a (A)2]'s. If E [ a (A)2] < E [ e (A)2], Cov (0) has a sharp peak. 
Here, the case of E[a(A)2 ] > E[e(A)] will not be considered.
Figure 1. Autocorrelations, m = 10000 , E[e(A)] = 1 , E[a(A)2] = 1, 0.9, 0.5, 0.25 , top to bottom.
5. Expectation of the Random Sample Spectrum
The expectation of the random spectrum follows from Eq. (2). For the 
curves of Fig. 1, it is shown in Fig. 2.
The higher the frequency at which the sample spectrum approaches the 
1/f behavior, the closer to 1 the ratio of random and fixed variance 
components. At E[a(A)2]/E[a(A)2] = 1 , the sample spectrum extends over 
the full range of frequencies like a ‘1/f’ spectrum.

35
Figure 2. 
Spectra of curves of Figure 1, m = 10000, E [ e (A)] = 1, E [ a (A)2] = 1,0.9,0.5,0.25.
6. Conclusions
Random variance influences both the sample autocorrelation function and 
the sample spectrum. The reason is simple: Standard noise analysis uses the 
time averages of Xt X t+|s| ’s, and the embedded Poisson process yields 
E[X t Xt+w ] = a0 QAmin[t, t + a] > 0 . The factor of the random variance term 
depends only on m and m- | s | . This explains why sample spectra of random 
variance processes with the same ratio of random and fixed variance 
component become similar, and it also implicates that these spectra do not 
mean ‘noise power’ in the meaning of Parseval’s theorem.
One might express doubts as to the general applicability of the non- 
continuous model presented here. It was chosen as the simplest prototype of 
a non-continuous process allowing to show clearly how, despite independent 
increments, there emerges positive autocorrelation. This model may be 
linked to theoretic models and adapted to practical situations. For instance, 
data of typical RTS noise fluctuate during time intervals of random length 
around non-zero conditional averages. The bivariate distribution of the mean 
squared deviations and of the probabilities of different conditional averages 
in one sampling interval yield a marginal distribution, which is no longer a 
family of simple X2-distributions with degrees of freedom following the 
Poisson distribution.
In the case of our model, the magnitude of the positive autocorrelation 
depends on a0. Rather smooth processes, a2 ^ 0, yield a very small 
expectation of the covariance, which becomes only detectable at sufficiently 
large m and QA .

36
References
[1] 
G. Hartler, Statistical Explanation for the observation of 1/f noise from 
basically discrete fluctuations, Fluctuation and Noise Letters, 1 (2001) 
L139-L146.
[2] 
J. J. Brophy, Statistics of 1/f noise, Phys.Rev. 166 (1968) 827-831.
[3] 
A. Gut, Stopped Random Walks, Limit Theorems and Applications, 
Springer, New York (1988)
[4] 
M.B. Priestley, Spectral Analysis and Time Series, Academic Press, 
London, (1981)

QUANTUM PHASE LOCKING, 1/f NOISE 
AND ENTANGLEMENT
M. Planat
Laboratoire de Physique et Metrologie des Oscillateurs du CNRS 
32 Avenue de I’Observatoire, 25044 Besancon Cedex
France
planat@lpmo.edu
H. Rosu
Potosinian Institute of Scientific and Technological Research 
Apdo Postal 3-74, Tangamanga, San Luis Potosi, SLP
Mexico
hcr@ipicyt.edu.mx
Abstract We develop a new approach of the quantum phase in an Hilbert space of finite 
dimension which is based on the relation between the physical concept of phase 
locking and mathematical concepts such as cyclotomy and the Ramanujan sums. 
As a result phase variability looks quite similar to its classical counterpart, hav­
ing peaks at dimensions equal to a power of a prime number. Squeezing of that 
noise is allowed for specific quantum states. The concept of phase entanglement 
for pairs of phase-locked states is introduced.
Keywords: quantum phase noise, phase locking, phase entanglement, number theory
1. Introduction
Time and phase are not well defined concepts at the quantum level. The 
present work belongs to a longstanding effort to model phase noise and phase­
locking effects that are found in high stability oscillators. It was unambigu­
ously demonstrated that the observed variability, (i.e., the 1/f frequency noise 
of such oscillators) is related to the finite dynamics of states during the mea­
surement process and to the precise filtering rules that involve continued frac­
tion expansions, prime number decomposition, and hyperbolic geometry [1],[4].
37
J. 
Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (37 - 44) 
@2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

38
We seek here for a quantum counterpart of these effects by studying the 
new notions of quantum phase-locking and quantum phase entanglement. The 
problem of defining quantum phase operators was initiated by Dirac in 1927 
[6]. For excellent reviews, see [7]. The starting point is the Pegg and Bar­
nett quantum phase formalism [8] where the calculations are performed in an 
Hilbert space Hq of finite dimension q. The phase states are defined as super­
positions of number states from the so-called quantum Fourier transform (or 
QFT)
\Gp} = q- 1 /2 
exp( 2inpn) |n . 
(1)
n=0 
q
in which i2 = — 1. The states l^p) form an orthonormal set and in addition the 
projector over the subspace of phase states is ^2p_0 I^pX^pl = 1 q where 1 q is 
the identity operator in Hq . The inverse quantum Fourier transform follows as 
I -/ — - 1 /2 \ ' q 1 pvnt_ 2 inpn A |/i \ An । |ip <p| ul' nnmhpr QtntPQ I \ flip Qpf <il'
| ‘nj — p p_ 0 exp( q ) |*^pJ. ^xS tne set oi iiuiuuei states |n j, me set oi
phase states l^p) is a complete set spanning Hq. In addition the QFT operator
q 1 
pn
is a q by q unitary matrix with matrix elements Kpn — —q exp(2in—).
From now we emphasize phase states \3'p) satisfying phase-locking proper­
ties. We first impose the coprimality condition
(p, q)—1,
(2)
where (p, q ) is the greatest common divisor of p and q . Differently from the 
phase states (1), the \3'p) form an orthonormal base of a Hilbert space whose 
dimension is lower, and equals the number of irreducible fractions p/q, which 
is given by the Euler totient function 0(q). These states were studied in our 
recent publication [3].
Guided by the analogy with the classical situation [2] we call these irre­
ducible states the phase-locked quantum states. They generate a cyclotomic 
lattice L [9] with generator matrix M of matrix elements Kpq), (p,q)=1 and of 
size $ (q). The corresponding Gram matrix H — Mt M shows matrix elements 
h(nq,)l — cq(n - l) which are Ramanujan sums 
cq (n) — 
exp(2 inpn)
V (q 1) & (q)
& (q i)
with q1 — q/(q, n).
(3)
where the index p means summation from 0 to q - 1, and (p, q)—1. Ramanu­
jan sums are thus defined as the sums over the primitive characters exp(2inpn), 
(p,q)=1, of the group Zq — Z/qZ. In the equation above p,(q) is the Mobius 
function, which is 0 if the prime number decomposition of q contains a square, 
1 if q —1, and (-1)k if q is the product of k distinct primes [10]. Ramanujan 
sums are relative integers which are quasiperiodic versus n with quasi period 

39
^(q) and aperiodic versus q with a type of variability imposed by the Mobius 
function. Ramanujan sums were introduced by Ramanujan in the context of 
Goldbach conjecture.
They are also useful in the context of signal processing as an arithmetical 
alternative to the discrete Fourier transform [11]. In the discrete Fourier trans­
form the signal processing is performed by using all roots of unity of the form 
exp 2inp/q with p from 1 to q and taking their nth power ep (n) as basis func­
tion. We generalized the classical Fourier analysis by using Ramanujan sums 
cq (n) as in (3) instead of ep(n). This type of signal processing is more appro­
priate for arithmetical functions than is the ordinary discrete Fourier transform, 
while still preserving the metric and orthogonal properties of the latter. No­
table results relating arithmetical functions to each other can be obtained using 
Ramanujan sums expansion while the discrete Fourier transform would show 
instead the low frequency tails in the power spectrum.
In this paper we are also interested in pairs of phase-locked states which 
satisfy the two conditions
(P, q) = 1 and PP = -1(mod q). 
(4)
When it exists p is uniquely defined from minus the inverse of p modulo q. 
The two fractions p/q and p/q are the ones selected from the partition of the 
half plane by Ford circles. Ford circles are defined as the set of the images 
of the horizontal line z=x+i, x real, under all modular transformations in the 
group of 2 x 2 matrices SL(2, Z) [4]. Ford circles are tangent to the real axis 
at a Farey fraction p/q, and are tangent to each other. They have been intro­
duced by Rademacher as an optimum integration path to compute the number 
of partitions from the Ramanujan’s circle method. In that method two circles 
of indices p/q and pj/q, of the same radius 2112 are dual to each other on the 
integration path.
2. 
The Quantum Phase Operators
The projection operator over the subset of phase-locked quantum states \0') 
is calculated as 
1 
cq(n
q
lock
Pq 
=
l) nW,
(5)
n,l
YM Wp I = 
p
where the range of values of n, l is from 0 to fi(q). Thus the matrix elements 
of the projection are q(n[PqIl) = cq(n — l). This sheds light on the equiva­
lence between cyclotomic lattices of algebraic number theory and the quantum 
theory of phase-locked states.

40
The projection operator over the subset of pairs of phase-locked quantum 
states \9') is calculated as
FPairs = \ \0p)(&| = 1 \ kq(n,l)\n)[l\, 
P,P 
q n,l
(6)
where the notation p, p means that the summation is applied to such pairs of 
states satisfying (4). The matrix elements of the projection are q(n|Ppairs \l) = 
kq(n, l), which are in the form of so-called Kloosterman sums [5]
kq (n,l) = 12 exP[2q“ (Pn - Pl)],
(7)
Kloosterman sums kq(n, l) as well as Ramanujan sums cq(n - l) are relative 
integers. They are given below for the two cases of dimension q = 5(0(5) = 
4) and q = 6($(6) = 2).
4 -1 -1 -1
-1 -1 -1
q =5: k5 =
-1
-1 -1
-1 -1
4-1
c5 =
-14-1
-1 -14
-1 -1 -1
4 -1 -1
4
-1
-1
-1
4
q =6: k6
2
2
1
1
2
,c6 =
—1
—2
1
One defines the quantum phase-locking operator as
0 
=£ 9pI9'pWpI = nPq°ck with 9p =
p
2 n P.
q
(8)
The Pegg and Barnett operator [8] is obtained by removing the coprimality 
condition. In such a case it is Hermitian with eigenvalues 9p . Using the num­
ber operator Nq = n= q=10 n|n)(n| the authors get a generalization of Dirac’s 
commutator [0 q, Nq ] = — i.
Similarly one defines the quantum phase operator for pairs as
0pairs = £ 9pI9'p)(9'p| = nPqpairs with 9p = 2nP. 
(9)
p,p 
q
The phase number commutator for phase-locked states calculated from (8)
is
cq°ck = [©q°ck, Nq] = n £(l — n)Cq(n — l)\n){l\, 
(10)
q n,l
with antisymmetric matrix element (l|Cq°ck|n = q(l — n)cq(n — l).
For pairs of phase-locked states an antisymmetric commutator Cqpairs similar 
to (10) is obtained with kq(n, l) in place of cq(n — l).

41
Figure 1. Phase expectation value versus 
the dimension q of the Hilbert space. Plain 
lines: ft = 0, Dotted lines: ft = 1.
Figure 2. Phase expectation value versus 
the phase parameter ft. Plain lines: q =15.
Dotted lines q =13.
3. 
Phase Expectation Value and Variance
The finite quantum mechanical rules are encoded within expectation values 
of the phase operator and phase variance.
Rephrasing Pegg and Barnett let consider a pure phase state | f} = q— qn=10 un\n) 
having un of the form
Un = (1 /Jq )exp( in!3), 
(11)
where 3 is a real phase parameter. One defines the phase probability distri­
bution (0'p \f} 2, the phase expectation value (©q°ck} Pft p OpiO'p \f} 2, and the 
phase variance (A©2)lock = Ep(Op - {©q°ck))2(Ofp\f)2. One gets
{©^} = n En,l cq(l - n) exp[i3(n - l)], 
(12)
(A©2)lock = 4(©qock) + .((©q> - 2n), 
(13)
with the modified expectation value (©q°ck) = q2 n,l cq(l-n) exp[ift(n-l)], 
and the modified Ramanujan sums cq(n) = 
p(p/q)2 exp(2inmp).
Fig. 1 illustrates the phase expectation value versus the dimension q for 
two different values of the phase parameter 3 .For3 =1they are peaks at 
dimensions q = pr which are powers of a prime number p.For3 =0the 
peaks are smoothed out due to the averaging over the Ramanujan sums matrix. 
Fig. 2 shows the phase expectation value versus the phase parameter 3. For 
the case of the prime number q =13, it is high with absorption like lines at 
isolated values of 3. For the case of the dimension q = 15 which is not a prime 
power the phase expectation value is much lower and much random.

42
Figure 3. Phase variance versus the di­
mension q of the Hilbert space. Plain lines: 
0 =1. Dotted lines: 0 = n.
Figure 4. Phase expectation value ver­
sus the dimension q for pairs of phase-locked 
states. Plain lines: 0 =0. Dotted lines: 
0=1.
Fig. 3 illustrates the phase variance versus the dimension q. The case P = 1 
also leads to peaks at prime powers. Like the expectation value in Fig. 1, 
it is thus reminiscent of the Mangoldt function. Mangoldt function A(n) is 
defined as ln p if n is the power of a prime number p and 0 otherwise. It 
arises in the frame of prime number theory [1] from the logarithmic derivative 
of 
i otti otui ^^ to to i tt pt> /'xoi f ( o A o o   ^ 
^^ 
T t o oo wto na oroliio
oi the Riemann zeta function z (s) as z(s) — n >n 0 ns . Its average value 
oscillates about 1 with an error term which is explicitely related to the positions 
of zeros of Z (s) on the critical line s — 2. The error term shows a power 
spectral density close to that of 1/f noise [1]. It is stimulating to recover 
results reminding prime number theory in the new context of quantum phase­
locking.
Finally the phase variance is considerably smoothed out for P — n and 
is much lower than the classical limit n2 /3. The parameter P can thus be 
interpreted as a squeezing parameter since it allows to define quantum phase- 
locked states having weak phase variance for a whole range of dimensions.
4. 
Towards Phase Entanglement
The expectation value of quantum phase states can be rewritten from the 
projection operator of individual phase states np — \0'p){0'p| as follows
{©Jock) — 52 wKMif) — E 
pp
Op{f \np\f).
(14)

43
This suggests a definition of expectation values for pairs from the product npnp 
as follows
(e Pairs) = E W \Kpvp If). 
(15)
p,p
It is inspired by the quantum calculation of correlations in Bell’s theorem [12]. 
Using pure phase states as in (11) we get
2 n . .
{ e Pairs > = qiX kq (n,l )exp[ i^ (n - 1)], 
(^
where we introduced generalized Kloosterman sums
kq(n, l) = p,ppexp[2qn(p — p)(l — n)]. These sums are in general complex 
numbers (and are non Gaussian integers). The expectation value is real as 
expected. In Fig. 4 it is represented versus the dimension q for two different 
values P = 0 and P = 1. Note that the pair correlation (15) is very much 
dependant on q and can become quite huge at some values.
This result claims for a detailed study of Bell’s type inequalities based on 
quantum phase-locked states we are looking at, and their relationship to the 
properties of numbers. Calculations involving fully entangled states
If ) =
q s
\0p, 1 )®\0p, 2),
(17)
have to be carried out. This is left for future papers.
5. 
Conclusion
In conclusion, we pinpoint in this letter several properties resulting from 
introducing phase-locking in Pegg-Barnett quantum phase formalism. We re­
call that the idea of quantum teleportation was initially formulated by Bennett 
et al in finite-dimensional Hilbert space [13], but, yet independently of this, 
one can conjecture that cyclotomic locking could play an important role in 
many fundamental tests of quantum mechanics related to quantum entangle­
ment. As a matter of fact, Munro and Milburn [14] have already conjectured 
that the best way to see the quantum nature of correlations in entangled states 
is through the measurement of the observable canonically conjugate to pho­
ton number, i.e. the quantum phase. Moreover, in their paper dealing with 
the Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger quantum correlations, they presented a ho­
modyne scheme requiring discrete phase measurement, which has yet to be 
experimentally realized in the ultrahigh detector efficiency limit. Nevertheless, 
a homodyne scheme automatically implies phase-locking measurements with 
number theory coming into play.The remote phase-locking of atomic clocks is 
also envisaged [15].

44
References
[1] M. Planat, 1/f noise, the measurement of time and number theory, Fluc. 
and Noise Lett. 1 (2001) R63-R77.
[2] M. Planat and E. Henry, The arithmetic of 1/f noise in a phase-locked 
loop, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 (2002) 13-16.
[3] M. Planat and H. Rosu, Cyclotomy and Ramanujan sums in quantum 
phase locking, Phys. Lett. A (in press), ArXiv quant-ph/0304101.
Some errors and misprints are present in that earlier report. The summa­
tion in (3),(5),(7) and (9) should be from 0 to $(q). The expectation value 
(^lock) in (8) should be squared. They are also slight changes in the plots.
[4] M. Planat, Modular functions and Ramanujan sums for the analysis of 1/f 
noise in electronic circuits, ArXiv hep-th/0209243.
[5] A. Terras, Fourier Analysis on Finite Groups and Applications, Cam­
bridge Press (1999).
[6] P.A.M. Dirac, The quantum theory of the emission and absorption of ra­
diation, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 114 (1927) 243-265.
[7] R. Lynch, The quantum phase problem: A critical review, Phys. Rep. 256 
(1995) 367-436.
[8] D.T. Pegg and S.M. Barnett, Phase properties of the quantized single 
mode electromagnetic field, Phys. Rev. A39 (1989) 1665-1675.
[9] J.H. Conway and N.J.A. Sloane, Sphere packings, lattices and groups, 
Springer, New York (1999), p. 227.
[10] G.H. Hardy and E.M. Wright, An introduction to the theory of numbers, 
Oxford Press, Oxford (1979), p. 237.
[11] M. Planat, Ramanujan sums for signal processing of low frequency noise, 
Phys. Rev. E 66 (2002) 56128-56135.
[12] M. O. Scully and S. Zubairy, Quantum optics Cambridge Press, (1996), 
p. 515.
[13] C.H. Bennett et al, Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual clas­
sical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels Phys., Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 
1895-1899.
[14] W.J. Munro and G.J. Milburn, Characterizing GHZ Correlations in Non­
degenerate Parametric Oscillation via Phase Measurements, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 81 (1998) 4285-4288.
[15] R. Josza, D. S. Abrams, J. P. Dowling and C.P. Williams, Quantum atomic 
clock synchronization based on shared prior entanglement, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 85 (2000) 2010-2013.

SHOT NOISE IN MESOSCOPIC DEVICES 
AND QUANTUM DOT NETWORKS
M. Macucci, P. Marconcini, G. Iannaccone, M. Gattobigio, G. Basso, B. 
Pellegrini
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Universita degli Studi di Pisa
Via Diotisalvi, 2
I-56122 Pisa, Italy
macucci@mercurio.iet.unipi.it
Abstract We discuss specific noise phenomena in several ballistic mesoscopic structures 
and in networks of quantum dots or metallic dots interconnected by tunneling 
barriers, focusing on the techniques used for the numerical simulation and on 
the physical interpretation of the results.
Keywords: Shot noise suppression, Shot noise enhancement, Nanostructures, Numerical 
simulation
1. Ballistic structures without magnetic field
For the investigation of transport and noise in structures without magnetic 
field we use a technique based on the recursive evaluation of the overall Green’s 
function, starting from the analytically computed Green’s functions of elemen­
tary sections [1, 2]. From the transmission matrix it is then possible to obtain 
the conductance via the Landauer-Buttiker formula and the Fano factor, i.e. the 
shot noise suppression or enhancement factor, as will be detailed in the present 
section.
If we consider a section of the device such that the transverse potential can 
be considered constant along the direction of electron propagation, there will 
be no transverse mode mixing in it, thus the Green’s function matrix (con­
sisting in a representation over the transverse eigenmodes) will be diagonal 
and it will be possible to evaluate each element from an analytical expression 
[1], with the hypothesis of Dirichlet boundary conditions at the section ends. 
Starting from the semi-infinite section containing the output lead, we keep on
45
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (45 - 52) 
©2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

46
adding the preceding sections, one at a time, introducing a perturbation poten­
tial V which “opens up” facing section ends and connects them. The Green’s 
function of the perturbed structure (with the two sections joined) can be evalu­
ated from Dyson’s equation:
G = G0 + G0 VG , 
(1)
where G0 is the unperturbed Green’s function (with the two sections decou­
pled) and (J is the perturbed Green’s function (with the application of VJ). This 
S-.
is an implicit equation, since ( appears on both sides: with some algebra, 
considering a representation of the Green’s functions on the eigenmodes for 
the transverse direction and on the sites in real space for the longitudinal di­
rection, it is possible to obtain explicit relationships that can be applied in the 
recursive procedure [2]. Once the Green’s function of the overall structure has 
been computed, it is straightforward to obtain from it the transmission matrix 
t, following the procedure outlined in [1].
(-,Froin the transmission matrix t we obtain the conductance of the device 
via the Landauer-Buttiker formula:
G = 
^nmj 2 . 
(2)
n,m
The low-frequency noise power spectral density is given by Buttiker [3] as
Si =4 eh | V | 
Wn (1 - Wn) ,
n
(3)
where the wn’s are the eigenvalues of the matrix tt, V is the constant ex­
ternally applied voltage, e is the electron charge, and h is Planck’s constant. 
Since the full shot noise power spectral density is given by Schottky’s the­
orem as SIfs =2eI (where I is the average value of the current, given by 
the product of the applied voltage times the conductance), we obtain a simple 
expression for the ratio y, usually defined as Fano factor, of the noise power 
spectral density to that expected for full shot noise:
y=
j Wj (1 - Wj)
n,m ^nmj
(4)
Jalabert et al. have shown [4], using Random Matrix Theory, that a ballistic 
symmetric cavity delimited by apertures that are much smaller than the cavity 
size (such as the one shown in the inset of Fig. 1) is characterized by a Fano 
factor of 1/4. We have applied our numerical techniques to the investigation 
of shot noise suppression in such cavities in a variety of conditions, which can 
be treated easily with our approach.

47
Number of propagating modes in the constrictions
Figure 1. Fano factor in a chaotic cavity with no magnetic field
The Fano factor, which reaches the asymptotic value of 1/4 for narrow 
enough and symmetric input and output constrictions, decreases if the con­
strictions are made wider: in the limiting case of disappearing constrictions 
(when their width equals that of the wire) the Fano factor is known to drop to 
zero, since we reach the situation of a perfect, ballistic wire. Results for the 
Fano factor of a cavity with symmetric apertures as a function of the number 
of propagating modes in the constrictions are shown in Fig. 1. The width of 
the cavity is 8 p,m and its length is 5 p,m. Such results, although obtained with 
a coarse hard wall model, are in rather good agreement with the experimental 
data published by Oberholzer et al. in [5].
Our technique can be readily applied also to cascaded cavities, in particular 
we focus on identical cascaded cavities, finding that no appreciable variation 
of the Fano factor is observed with respect to that of a single cavity. Results for 
2, 3, and 4 cavities are reported in Fig. 2 as a function of the Fermi energy. This 
conclusion is in sharp contrast with the analytical conclusion reached by Ober- 
holzer et al. in [6], in which the authors state that the Fano factor for cascaded 
cavities should tend to the asymptotic limit 1/3, in analogy with what happens 
for a series of potential barriers, each of which is orthogonal to the propaga­
tion direction. Further investigation is needed to understand the discrepancy 
between the two approaches, which cannot be explained simply on the basis 
that our model is fully coherent while that of [6] assumes decoherence between 
adjacent cavities: the recent literature seems to agree on the irrelevance of the 
presence or lack of coherence on the noise behavior of mesoscopic devices.
Another interesting structure to be investigated is an antidot lattice inserted 
in a quantum wire [7]. Let us first examine the noise behavior of a square 
antidot lattice: we consider a quantum wire 1.2 p,m wide with 7 layers along 
the longitudinal direction (see the inset of Fig. 3) of square antidots with a side 
of 24 nm and a distance between antidot centers of 244 nm. The resulting 
Fano factor is shown in Fig. 3 (solid curve) as a function of the Fermi energy, 
and it clearly settles around a value of about 0.11. If we increase the size of

48
Fermi energy (meV)
Figure 2. Fano factor for cascaded cavities
the antidots to 48 nm (keeping the same distance between antidot centers as 
in the previous case), the Fano factor raises to about 0.14, as visible in Fig. 3 
(dashed curve). Further increases of the antidot size lead, for a square lattice, 
to a maximum Fano factor of about 0.15: as the antidot walls get closer along 
the transverse direction, which tends to increase the Fano factor, they also get 
closer along the longitudinal direction, thereby approaching the formation of 
regular, noiseless conduits. The result of these two competing effects is the 
saturation of the Fano factor to the mentioned limiting value. The dependence 
of the Fano factor on the number of layers exhibits a saturation, too: for 7 
layers we have already reached the asymptotic condition [7].
1
0.8
00123 
45678910
Fermi energy (meV)
Figure 3. Fano factor for a square antidot lattice
If, instead of a square antidot lattice, we consider a rectangular one, with the 
longitudinal separation much larger than that along the transverse direction, we 
have a situation very similar to that of cascaded chaotic cavities, with the only 
difference that each cavity has multiple input and output apertures instead of a 
single one: as long as the total width of the resulting apertures is significantly 

49
smaller than that of the wire, we achieve the conditions for shot noise suppres­
sion with a Fano factor of 0.25, as typical for chaotic cavities. This is shown 
in Fig. 4, where the results for shot noise suppression in the case of 188 nm 
square antidots separated by a distance of 278 nm along the transverse direc­
tion and of 1388 nm along the longitudinal direction are reported: the Fano 
factor settles around a value of about 0.25, as expected for chaotic cavities.
Fermi energy (meV)
Figure 4. Fano factor for a rectangular antidot lattice
2. 
Chaotic cavities in a magnetic field
In order to study the behavior of chaotic cavities in the presence of an or­
thogonal magnetic field, we have selected a scattering matrix approach, which 
makes treatment of the magnetic field simpler, for several cases, than the for­
mally similar Green’s function approach, although being in principle slightly 
less efficient from the computational point of view.
We have chosen a gauge for the representation of the vector potential with a 
nonzero component only in the longitudinal direction x (A = [ -By 0 0] T). 
We subdivide the structure into a number of transverse slices such that inside 
each of them the scalar and the vector potentials can be considered constant 
along the longitudinal direction. Then we consider the sections straddling from 
the middle of a slice to the middle of the following one and, from the transverse 
eigenfunctions and the longitudinal wave vectors in each slice, we compute the 
scattering matrix for each section by means of the mode-matching technique. 
We evaluate the overall scattering matrix of the device by recursively compos­
ing the scattering matrices of all of the slices, and, from its properly normalized 
transmission submatrix, we obtain the actual transmission matrix t. The most 
challenging task of this calculation is represented by the procedure to compute 
the transverse eigenfunctions and the longitudinal wave vectors in each slice, 
which is performed with the technique introduced by Tamura and Ando [8].
We have focused on the investigation of how the Fano factor varies in the 
presence of a magnetic field in a chaotic cavity. The results of our simulations 
show that, while for small or zero values of B the Fano factor in a symmetric

50
chaotic cavity is 0.25, such a value decreases for higher magnetic field values. 
We wish to point out that this result is independent of the dimensions of the 
cavity but strongly depends on the width of the constrictions which define it. 
The Fano factor as a function of magnetic field is shown in Fig. 5 for a few 
choices of the constriction width: we notice that, as the width is decreased, a 
larger magnetic field is needed to obtain the same Fano factor. Such a behavior 
can be explained by comparing the width of the constrictions Wc with the clas­
sical cyclotron radius of the electrons Rc = ^2m*Ef /(eB) (where m* is the 
effective mass of the electron and Ef is the Fermi energy): in a confined meso­
scopic structure in the presence of a magnetic field, edge states form, which 
can be classically explained as skipping orbits with radius Rc . For values of 
B such as to make Rc comparable with Wc , the edge states pass through the 
constrictions and mainly crawl along the walls of the cavity, thereby quenching 
the chaotic behavior of the cavity and, consequently, the value of the shot noise 
power spectral density.
0.3
40 nm
-A
Q,
§ 0.2 - \A 
''-'Q 
40 nm
g 
\ a''v 
1m 1 mode
<2 
. X\ '1,
° 
200 nm'\
8 modes 
'■-v 
„„ " - - - ..
fa 01 - 
A \ 
660 nm -O
. 
\ 100 nm''' 
~^2 modes
" 
.\4 modes -s A
A \ 
'A
0 ----------------- 1--------------A----------------1 
A—:
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2
Magnetic field (T)
200 nm
8 modes
100 nm
4 modes
2 modes
o
Figure 5. Fano factor as a function of the magnetic field
3. 
Shot noise suppression and enhancement in networks of 
metallic dots
Shot noise suppression and, more interestingly, enhancement have been pre­
dicted [9] to be observable in single electron circuits based on metallic is­
lands connected by tunnel junctions and capacitors. The particular structure 
for which we have demonstrated the existence of shot noise enhancement is 
a Quantum Cellular Automaton cell [10] biased near the point of switching. 
The cell we have considered is shown in the inset of Fig. 6 and consists of four 
metal islands: tunneling is possible between the two upper ones or between the 
lower ones, but not between the upper and lower pairs, which are connected 
only through standard capacitors. The voltage sources connected to the dots 
via tunneling junctions make a current flow through the upper and lower pair of 

51
dots, as long as the Coulomb blockade is lifted by adjusting the other voltage 
sources (which in the following we define bias voltages). In particular, we are 
interested in the condition in which an excess electron is present on each pair 
of dots. The Coulomb blockade is lifted when the chemical potentials in a pair 
of dots are aligned and electrons are therefore allowed to tunnel from one dot 
to the other.
2
1.8
1.6
Sh
1.4
,cd
1.2
a 
cd
100 
200 
300 
400 
500
Time (arbitrary units)
Figure 6. Fano factor for a circuit with 4 coupled dots
1
0.8
0.6
0
We compute the currents and noise in this structure by means of a Monte 
Carlo simulation, assuming that the bias voltages for each dot pair are varied 
with two linear ramps of opposite slope, so that at a specific instant the chem­
ical potentials of the two dots line up. A small shift is introduced between the 
ramps applied to the lower dot pair and those applied to the upper dot pair, so 
that the Coulomb blockade for the two pairs is lifted at slightly different times. 
This leads to an interaction between the upper and the lower pair, in which the 
current through one pair “drives” the other, bringing the other pair closer to 
the alignment condition. The role of the “driver” and of the “driven” currents 
are interchanged when the “driven” current becomes larger than the “driver” 
one. In Fig. 6 we report the behavior of the Fano factor for the two currents 
as a function of time (and actually of the bias point, since we are considering 
the application of linear ramps): the driver current (dashed curve in the left 
part of the plot) exhibits suppressed shot noise, while the driven current (solid 
curve in the left part of the plot) is characterized by a Fano factor larger than 1. 
This is a result of positive electron correlations: as an electron tunnels through 
the dot pair through which the driven current flows, it favors tunneling of an 
electron in the opposite direction in the other dot pair, whose potentials are 
thus changed in such a way as to increase the likelihood of a further electron 
tunneling through the former pair.

52
4. 
Conclusion
We have discussed shot noise suppression in several different nanostructures 
and a case of shot noise enhancement: it is apparent how important an analy­
sis of the noise behavior is for a better understanding of correlations between 
charge carriers and of transport mechanisms in low dimensional devices. A 
common value of the Fano factor may hint at deeper analogies between appar­
ently different structures, such as in the case of cascaded chaotic cavities and 
of transversally dense rectangular antidot lattices. Once again noise is shown 
to be a more sensitive probe of transport properties than other, more commonly 
considered, electrical quantities.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Italian CNR (Na­
tional Research Council) through the “5% Nanotecnologie” project and from 
the cofunding program of the University of Pisa.
References
[1] F. Sols, M. Macucci, U. Ravaioli, and Karl Hess, J. Appl. Phys. 66, (1989) 
3892.
[2] M. Macucci, A. Galick, and U. Ravaioli, Phys. Rev. B 52, (1995) 5210.
[3] M. Buttiker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, (1990) 2901.
[4] R. A. Jalabert, J.-L. Pichard, and C. W. J. Beenakker, Europhys. Lett. 27, 
(1994) 255.
[5] S. Oberholzer, E. V. Sukhorukov, and C. Schonenberger, Nature 415 
(2002) 765.
[6] S. Oberholzer, E. V. Sukhorukov, C. Strunk, and C. Schonenberger, Phys. 
Rev. B 66 (2002) 233304.
[7] M. Macucci, Physica B 314 (2002) 494.
[8] H. Tamura and T. Ando, Phys. Rev. B 44 (1991) 1792.
[9] M. Gattobigio, G. Iannaccone, and M. Macucci, Phys. Rev. B 65 (2002) 
115337.
[10] C. S. Lent, P. D. Tougaw, and W. Porod, Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, (1993) 714.

SUPER-POISSONIAN NOISE IN 
NANOSTRUCTURES
Ya. M. Blanter
Department of NanoScience, Delft University of Technology
Lorentzweg 1, 2628CJ Delft
The Netherlands
blanter@tnntw14.tn.tudelft.nl
Abstract We describe the transition from sub-Poissonian to super-Poissonian values of the 
zero-temperature shot noise power of a resonant double barrier of macroscopic 
cross-section. This transition occurs for driving voltages which are sufficiently 
strong to bring the system near an instability threshold. It is shown that interac­
tions in combination with the energy dependence of the tunneling rates dramat­
ically affect the noise level in such a system. Interaction-induced fluctuations 
of the band bottom of the well contribute to the noise and lead to a new energy 
in the Fano factor. They can enhance the noise to super-Poissonian values in a 
voltage range preceding the instability threshold of the system. This mechanism 
is different from the super-Poissonian enhancement due to the large effective 
charge.
Keywords: Shot noise, Fano factor, charge accumulation.
1. Introduction
In the last decade, studies of shot noise in mesoscopic conductors [1] have 
become very popular. This is because they reveal information on transport 
properties of nanostructures which is not available from conductance measure­
ments. Indeed, according to Landauer formula, the conductance of a meso­
scopic system can be expressed via the set of its transmission eigenvalues Tn 
in a simple way,
G = Gq £ Tn, 
Gq = 2se2/2nh, 
(1)
n
where the factor 2s counts the directions of spin. At the other hand, any process 
of electron transport is characterized by shot noise, which is a manifestation of 
randomness of transmission of electrons through the system. At zero tempera-
53
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (53 - 60)
@2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

54
ture, the (zero-frequency) spectral density shot noise is given by
S=2eGQ|V| 
Tn(1 - Tn).
n
(2)
At finite temperature, noise has a more complicated form due to the emergence 
of equilibrium (Nyquist-Johnson) noise.
We see, indeed, that shot noise measures a different combination of trans­
mission eigenvalues than the conductance and thus contains additional infor­
mation on the tranmission properties of the system. This is characterized by 
the Fano factor, 
S S 
En Tn (1 - Tn )
F = 2ei
n Tn
(3)
with I being the average current through the device. Since the transmission 
eigenvalues assume the values between zero and one, the Fano factor also 
varies between zero and one. It equals zero for Tn = 1 (ideal transmission) and 
tends to one when all the eigenvalues are small, Tn c 1, for instance, for the 
tunneling barrier. The maximal value of shot noise Smax =2eI corresponds to 
the random, uncorrelated transmission events and is referred as Poisson value 
of noise. Shot noise at zero temperature is always suppressed with respect to 
the Poisson value.
The above considerations refer to non-interacting electrons. A topic of re­
cent interest is whether for interacting electrons shot noise can exceed the Pois­
son value.
One option is the following. Poissonian noise results from uncorrelated 
transfer of electrons (with the charge e). Obviously, if the transfer processes 
are more complicated and involve the transfer of charge Ne, the Fano factor 
is increased by the factor of N . This is for example what happens for trans­
port between a normal and a superconducting electrodes [2]. For voltages and 
temperatures below the superconducting gap transfer of electrons into the su­
perconducting electrode is impossible. The transport proceeds by means of 
Andreev reflection: An electron is reflected back to the normal metal as a hole. 
Such a process is accompanied by the charge deficit 2e, which corresponds to 
the creation of a Cooper pair in the superconductor. Consequently, the Fano 
factor is multiplied by two. In particular, if the normal metal and the super­
conductor are separated by the barrier of low transparency, the Fano factor as­
sumes the value of 2 and noise is clearly super-Poissonian. This phenomenon 
has been recently observed experimentally [3].
A similar idea was used recently in a quite different situation. Safonov 
et al [4] observed super-Poissonian noise (with the Fano factor up to 1.5) in 
tunneling via localized states. To explain this enhancement, they suggested an 
ingenious model of transport controlled by two impurities, say A and B . Each 
of the impurities can be neutral or charged. For conceptual clarity, we consider

55
EF
LR
v
(a)
Figure 1. The potential profile of the quantum well (a); current (in units of cLE02/e, solid 
line) and the Fano factor F (dashed line) as functions of voltage for a particular choice of 
parameters: aL = aR, cL = cR, EF = 2E0 /3, e2 vA = 10cL. For this case v* = 2.70E0 (b).
2. Rate equations
We consider the geometry of the quantum well shown in Fig. 1a. The well 
is extended in x and y directions and has a total area A. Inz-direction the 
motion is quantized, and we assume that there is only one resonant level E0 
(all energies are measured from corresponding band bottoms). The transverse 
motion is described by a continuum of momenta p±. For simplicity we assume 
also that the Fermi energies EF in both banks are the same, and E0 >EF . 
The distribution functions of electrons in the left and right reservoirs are Fermi 
functions fL and fR , whereas the distribution of electrons inside the well is 
described by the function fw (Ez ,p±), which remains to be determined. Con­
sequently, the total charge of the well is
the situation when the charging of A shifts the energy level of B above the 
Fermi surface, so that the current can not flow via B . If, in addition, A changes 
its state (between charged and neutral) very slowly, it does not contribute to the 
transport itself, and only modulates the transport via B . This transport appears 
then to be uncorrelated transfer of N electrons, where N = TB/TA, with TA,B 
being the times with the impurity A, B spends in the neutral state. The Fano 
factor in this situation is enhanced by the factor of N . The analysis on a more 
qualitative level showed a good agreement with the experimental results.
In this paper, we consider in details a different mechanism of super-Poissonian 
shot noise enhancement, which originates from an instability in the I-V curve 
in combination with the charging effects. We present here the classical theory 
[1]; the quantum theory is also available [5]. The theoretical research was 
inspired by two experimental studies [6, 7] which observed super-Poissonian 
enhancement of noise in quantum wells in strongly non-linear regime.
Qw =2se
dEz fw (Ez ,P1) S (Ez - E0).
(4)

56
We now introduce the total charges QL(t) and QR(t) transmitted from the left 
to the right through the left and the right barriers, respectively, from a reference 
time t = 0 until the time moment t. At any instant of time the charge of the 
well is Qw (t) = QL(t) - QR(t). The time evolution of the charge QL is 
determined by the rate equation,
2e
Q l =
dEz rL(Ez) 6(Ez-E0) [fL(Ez + u 
v,pi) - fw(Ez,P1)] , 
(5)
where v/e and u are the driving voltage and the position of the band bottom of 
the well, respectively (Fig. 1a). For the energy-dependent tunneling rates rL,R 
through the left and right barrier, respectively, we take the specific forms
rL(Ez) = aLEz/2(Ez + u - v)1 /20(Ez)0(Ez + u - v);
r R (Ez) = aREz / 2( Ez + u )1 /2 0 (Ez) 0 (Ez + u), 
(6) 
which correspond to the tunneling through a simple rectangular barrier. For the 
following, we assume that the tunneling rates are much smaller than all other 
energy scales, which are u, v, E0 and EF. This means that the dimensionless 
constants aL and aR, defined by Eq. (5), are small. Performing the integration 
and taking Eq. (4) into account, we obtain
QL = L L 00) {evA(v + Ef - u - Eo)0(v + Ef - u - Eo)
x 0(Eo + u - v) - Ql + Qr} , 
(7)
where v is the density of transverse states. In the same way, we obtain
qr = IR^ (ql - qr). 
(8)
h
The rate equations (6) and (8) are supplemented by a formula relating the 
band bottom position u to the total charge of the well QL - QR . Introducing 
capacitances cL,R of the left (right) barriers, we write
e(QL - QR) = cL(u - v) + cRu,
(9)
which we assume to be valid at any instant of time. Finally, the last equation re-
lates current (which is the sum of particle and displacement currents) across the 
quantum well to the charges QL and QR (sometimes cited as Ramo-Shockley
theorem),
I = cLQ! R + cRQ! L
cL + cR
(10)

57
3. 
Stationary regime. Average current
We study first the average quantities in the stationary regime of the system. 
Then the band bottom position u is time independent. The average current is 
(I) = Q l = Q r .
First, we determine the quantity u. Subtracting Eq. (8) from Eq. (6) and 
taking Eq. (9) into account, we obtain a closed equation for u,
e2 v A r l (v + EF — u — E0) 9 (v + Ef — u — E 0) 9 (E0 + u — v)
- (rL + rR) [(CL(U — V)+ CRU]=h(CL + CR)u, 
(11)
with the notations rL,R = rL,R(E0). Eq. (10) determines the dependence of 
the energy u on the external bias voltage v. In a certain range of voltages, vb = 
(cL + cR) E0/cR < v < v*, an instability is induced: The equation has three 
solutions for u, u1 <u2 <u3. The solution u1 = CLv/(CL + CR) corresponds 
to the charge neutral well, while u2 and u3 describe the charged system. It is 
easily seen from Eqs. (6) and (8) that the solution u2 is unstable. The instability 
threshold v* is determined from the condition CL + CR + C0 [u(v)] = 0, where 
c0 = —edQ/du is the response of the charge of the well to an increment of 
the potential, Q = evArR(v + EF — u — E0).
For the average current we find from Eq. (8)
(I) = -„ (v+EF—u—E0)9(v+EF—u—E0)9(E0+u—v), (12) 
h rl + r r
which is an implicit function of voltage if Eq. (10) is taken into account. The 
current is only nonzero for voltages between va = (CL +CR)(E0 —EF)/CR and 
v*. Furthermore, for vb <v<v* it is a multi-valued function of the voltage; 
one of the solutions (I) = 0 corresponds to the charge neutral well, and the two 
others (one stable and one unstable) are due to charging. The current-voltage 
characteristic for this system is shown in Fig. 1b. Due to this multi-stability, the 
system shows hysteretic behavior: upon increasing voltage, the current stays 
finite until v*, and then jumps to the (I) = 0 branch. When the voltage is 
decreasing, the current is zero above vb , and becomes finite for lower voltages. 
In the real experiment, of course, this hysteretic behavior would be smeared 
due to the finite value of tunneling rates, and may even totally disappear.
4. 
Noise
To investigate current fluctuations, one has to include Langevin sources to 
the right hand side of the rate equations (6) and (8). To make this procedure 
meaningful, we have to linearize the equations. In the following, we assume 
that the voltage lies between va and v*. We write u(t) = u0(v) + Au(t),

58
where u0 is the stationary solution. (In the case of several solutions, u0 al­
ways represents the stable one for the charged well, denoted previously by u3). 
Linearizing Eqs. (6) and (8) in Au, we write
Q L = (I} + J - e- 1r L(cL + cR + c 0[ u 0])] + %L(t);
Qi R = 
(I} + J + e- 1r R(cL + cR + c 0[ u 0])] + %R (t), 
(13)
where the u-dependent tunneling rates rL,R are evaluated for u = u0, and 
the quantity J = d(rRO)/du (also taken for u = u0) is the response of the 
average current to the increment of the potential.
On the right hand sides of the rate equations we introduced now the random 
Langevin forces iL.(t) and £R(t). As usual, they vanish on average, (£L) = 
{£r) = 0. We assume furthermore that fluctuations in different contacts are 
independent and are correlated according to the classical shot noise rules,
{£a(t)(t')} = e{I)S(t - t')Sap, a, 3 = L, R. 
(14)
Now, defining the zero-frequency current-current spectral correlation function 
in a standard way,
S = 2^ d(t - tf) [{I(t)I(tf))-{I)2] , 
(15)
after some algebra we obtain the Fano factor,
F = 2 + 2(A-fAr)2, Ar s (rL- rR)>'2- A s J0■ 
(16)
For v ^ v* the denominator c + c0 of the interaction energy A(v) quite gen­
erally diverges as (v* - v) —1 /2, while the numerator J stays finite. Thus, the 
Fano factor diverges according to (v* - v)-1. In particular, close enough to 
the instability threshold V * the Fano factor increases above one: The noise 
becomes super-Poissonian. At the onset of current, for v = va the Fano fac­
tor can be calculated in closed form, and one has 1/2 < F(va) < 1. Thus, 
we describe the transition from sub-Poissonian to super-Poissonian noise. The 
minimal possible value of the Fano factor in this theory is F = 1/2. It can 
be shown that the voltage dependence of the Fano factor is peculiar, and, de­
pending on the relative value of the charging effects e2 v2 A/c, noise may be 
either suppressed as compared with the non-interacting value for low voltages 
and enhanced for high voltages (“weak interaction scenario”), or enhanced, 
then suppressed, and only after that enhanced again (“strong interaction sce­
nario”). The voltage dependence of the Fano factor is illustrated in Fig. 1b. 
The divergence of noise is clearly seen.
The finite value of the partial decay widths (tunneling rates) smears the 
singularities, and, in particular, induces a finite value of the Fano factor for 

59
v = v*. Another source of deviations from the experimental results is our 
linearization procedure. For voltages close to the instability threshold the lin­
ear approximation is clearly insufficient, and large fluctuations (transitions be­
tween the two states) must be taken into account. These fluctuations also would 
induce a finite value of noise for v = v* . We do not see any reason, how­
ever, why these processes should suppress noise below the Poisson value in 
the whole range of voltages.
5. 
Conclusions
We discuss now the following issue. To obtain the super-Poissonian noise 
enhancement, we needed multi-stable behavior of the I - V curve; in turn, the 
multi-stability in quantum wells is induced by charging effects. The charging 
(or, generally, interaction) effects are not required to cause the multi-stability. 
Indeed, if instead of a voltage controlled experiment, we discuss a current con­
trolled experiment, the I-V characteristics for the uncharged quantum well are 
multi-stable for any external current. For the case ofan arbitrary load line there 
typically exists a finite range of external parameters where multi-stable behav­
ior is developed. However, recent experiments on superlattice tunnel diodes [8] 
(where one has bistability but no charge accumulation) did not find any traces 
of noise enhancement. Thus, charging is essential by itself, and this remains 
an open question.
Usually such bistable systems are discussed from the point of view of tele­
graph noise, which is due to spontaneous random transitions between the two 
states. This is a consideration complementary to the one we developed above. 
Indeed, in the linear approximation the system does not know that it is multi­
stable. The shot noise grows indefinitely at the instability threshold only be­
cause the state around which we have linearized the system becomes unstable 
rather than metastable. This is a general feature of linear fluctuation theory. 
Clearly the divergence of shot noise in the linear approximation must be a gen­
eral feature of all the systems with multi-stable behavior. Interactions are not 
the necessary ingredient for this shot noise enhancement. On the other hand, 
as we have discussed, the transitions between different states, neglected in the 
linear approximation, will certainly soften the singularity and drive noise to a 
finite value at the instability threshold. To describe in this way the interplay 
between shot noise and random telegraph noise remains an open problem.
In conclusion, we described the transition from sub-Poissonian to super- 
Poissonian values of shot noise of a resonant quantum wells. The super- 
Poissonian enhancement appears due to the combination of charging, energy 
dependence of the tunneling rates, and the intrinsic instability induced by these 

60
two factors. This mechanism is different from the previously discussed in the 
literature super-Poissonian enhancement due to the large effective charge.
References
[1] For review, see Ya. M. Blanter and M. BUttiker, Shot noise in mesoscopic 
conductors, Phys. Rep. 336 (2000) 1-166.
[2] V. A. Khlus, Current and voltage fluctuations in microjunctions of nor­
__________ _  
mal and superconducting metal, Zh. l:ksp. Teor. Fiz. 93 (1987) 2179­
2190 [Sov. Phys. JETP 66 (1987) 1243-1249]; M. J. M. de Jong 
and C. W. J. Beenakker, Doubled shot-noise in disordered normal­
metal superconductor junctions, Phys. Rev. B 49 (1994) 16070-16073; 
B. A. Muzykantskii and D. E. Khmelnitskii, Quantum shot-noise in a 
normal metal - superconductor point contact, Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994) 
3982-3987; T. Martin, Wave packet approach to noise in N-S junctions, 
Phys. Lett. A220 (1996) 137-142.
[3] X. Jehl, M. Sanquer, R. Calemczuk, and D. Mailly, Detection of dou­
bled shot noise in short normal-metal/superconductor junctions, Nature 
405 (2000) 50-53; A. A. Kozhevnikov, R. J. Schoelkopf, L. E. Calvet, 
M. J. Rooks, and D. E. Prober, Shot noise measurements in diffusive 
normal metal-superconductor (N-S) junctions, J. Low. Temp. Phys. 118 
(2000) 671-678.
[4] S. S. Safonov, A. K. Savchenko, D. A. Bagrets, O. N. Jouravlev, 
Y. V. Nazarov, E. H. Linfield, and D. A. Ritchie, Enhanced shot noise 
in resonant tunneling via interacting localized states, Phys. Rev. Lett. (to 
be published).
[5] Ya. M. Blanter and M. BUttiker, Transition from sub-Poissonian to super- 
Poissonian shot noise in resonant quantum wells, Phys. Rev. B 59 (1999) 
10217-10226.
[6] G. Iannaccone, G. Lombardi, M. Macucci, and B. Pellegrini, Enhanced 
shot noise in resonant tunneling: Theory and experiment, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
80 (1998) 1054-1057.
[7] V. V. Kuznetsov, E. E. Mendez, J. D. Bruno, and J. T. Pham, Shot noise 
enhancement in resonant-tunneling structures in a magnetic field, Phys. 
Rev. B 58 (1998) R10159-R10162.
[8] W. Song, E. E. Mendez, V. Kuznetsov, and B. Nielsen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
82 (2003) 1568-1570.

STOCHASTIC AND DETERMINISTIC MODELS OF 
NOISE
J. Kumicak
Technical University of Kosice 
Vysokoskolska 4, 042 00 Kosice 
Slovakia
Juraj.Kumicak@tuke.sk
Abstract The paper describes several models which may be of use for explanation of 
the origin and properties of experimentally observed types of noise. The 
stochastic models are analyzed first, including the autoregressive scheme and 
the moving averages on the n-th order. Galton board model and generalized 
baker map represent deterministic systems with rich set of properties. The 
results presented in the second half of the paper are intimately connected to 
the theory of deterministic chaos, and the crucial role is played there by the 
attractors in phase spaces of the systems.
Keywords: 
Models of noises, stochastic and deterministic models, generalized baker map
1. Introduction
It is generally admitted that understanding the origin and properties of 
variety of noises may be aided by mathematical models which are able to 
generate many different types of noises by changing only a few model 
parameters. Even if such models will not yield immediate physical inter­
pretation, they can help us in our search for physical mechanisms by 
identifying model components, which critically influence relevant properties 
of generated processes, such as spectrum.
The models can be subdivided into stochastic and deterministic ones. 
The former have an appeal of simplicity and plausibility, the latter seem to 
promise better representation of the physical essence of the problem. One 
should evidently expect that both approaches will ultimately converge to the 
same results because conceptually both should represent one and the same 
physical phenomenon.
61
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (61 - 68) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

62
Noises observed in physical systems represent paradigmatic stochastic 
processes and therefore the most natural approach to them relies on their 
simulation by various types of stochastic mathematical models. Only two 
such models are analyzed in this context closely, namely the nonlinear gene­
ralization of autoregressive scheme of the first order, and the sequence of 
moving averages with variable order.
Deterministic models of noise may originate in the investigations of 
irreversibility of simple model systems. At first sight it might seem that this 
property is not related to the problem of noise, but the contrary is true. 
Irreversibility is found in systems with sufficiently chaotic dynamics and the 
latter is at the same time a necessary condition for observing noise in 
deterministic systems. Preliminary results seem to point to the conclusion 
that the joint treatment of irreversibility and noise represents the correct 
direction in which one has to go to arrive at the solution of both problems: 
the origin and essence of irreversibility, and the characterization of noises 
appearing in deterministic, microscopically reversible systems, with 
seemingly irreversible macroscopic behavior.
The paper reflects the author’s preferences and experiences with 
different models and could be considered as a review of his work. The 
contribution begins with the analysis of stochastic models. One of the simp­
lest is the one based on nonlinear generalization of autoregressive scheme of 
the first order.
2. Autoregressive scheme
The scheme is described by the iterative prescription
yk+1 = g (yk) + v+1, 
(1)
where {vk} denotes the sequence of uncorrelated normally distributed 
random variables with zero expectation and unit variance. The value a 
represents standard deviation of a white noise source. It is evident that for 
g(y) = 0 the scheme (1) will generate the white noise sequence and for 
g(y) = y the brownian one [1].
For a well defined set of functions g( y) the above scheme was shown to 
generate noises with 1/f k-like spectra with 0 < k < 2. However, the gene­
ration of 1/f noise using this model did not seem too convincing. 
Nevertheless, it was able to generate very satisfactory bistable burst 
noise [2]. To this effect one had to choose g( y) to be a step function 
g( y) = a sgn( y) with positive constant a. With such a choice of g( y), the 
waveform generated by the scheme (1) strongly resembled that of the bi­
stable burst noise. The two values a, - a represent evidently its attractors.

63
Numerical simulations performed for values a < a with samples of the 
length 1000 < N < 10000 confirmed that the sequences generated by the 
scheme - and with eliminated white noise component - have Lorentzian 
spectrum which, at higher frequencies, decays as 1/f k with k ~ 2. This result 
is easy to prove also analytically by demonstrating that the sequence 
generates random telegraph signal. The proof demonstrated that the latter 
may be obtained independently by similar simple iteration.
3. Moving averages
It is a well-known fact that any continuous spectrum of a stationary 
stochastic sequence can be arbitrarily closely approximated by the spectrum 
of some random sequence of moving averages of order n - or MA(n) for 
short. We will treat 1/f noise as MA(n) with n taken as a variable parameter.
Consider a stationary sequence of random variables {yt} having the 
spectral density S(X) of that of 1/f noise. The covariance function Cn(h) of 
such a sequence is related to its spectrum via the Wiener-Khintchine 
theorem, which enables to find it as a function of n. Consider now MA(n) 
generated by coefficients {ak} (k = 0 ... n) and defined as
n
yt = E akvt-k, 
(2)
k=0
where {v t} is a sequence of totally uncorrelated random variables with unit 
variance. The covariance function of the sequence {yt} equals
n-h
Rn(h) = Eakak+h, h = 0,1,2,..., n 
(3)
Choosing now ak in such a way that Rn (h) = Cn (h), the discretized spectrum 
of MA(n) will be 1/|Xs| (s = 0. n). We are thus facing the problem of 
finding, for any finite n, the corresponding set {ak }. The solution will give 
us a MA(n) sequence with 1/f spectrum for any sample length n.
We have solved the problem numerically [3] using the Seidel iteration 
method for 12 values of n, ranging from 100 to 10000. The results show that 
ak < 1/Vk (when counting k from 1), the difference between the left and right 
hand values being very small for all k except the small vicinity of k = n, 
where ak falls off quickly.
The results allow the following physical interpretation. The coefficients 
ak may be given the meaning of memory terms, or (decaying) correlations. 
Realistic correlations are nonzero for any k, so that realistic processes should 
be faithfully simulated by MA(n) with n tending to infinity. Since the 
infinite sum of ak is defined only for a > 1/2, this result is amenable to the 

64
interpretation that 1/f noise can be viewed as an undefined limit of well 
defined processes. This behavior represents a phenomenon not unfamiliar in 
physics and seems to be deeply related to the divergence of 1/f spectrum. 
This may also have some relation to the Fourier invariance of the Fourier 
(not power) spectrum of 1/f noise.
4. Noise in deterministic systems
The deterministic approach to noise is based on the well known fact that 
many deterministic systems manifest all the features of random processes, so 
that one can expect various kinds of noise in them. The paradigmatic 
explanation of this observation relies on the theory of deterministic chaos. 
The hard problem is, however, how to explain the specific character of 
fluctuations observed in different systems, expressed usually in the form of 
spectra, describing the distribution of amplitudes of constituting partial 
waves over their frequencies.
There are in principle two great groups of dynamical systems which 
exhibit chaotic behavior - equilibrium and nonequilibrium ones. Archetypal 
equilibrium systems are conservative and the state of equilibrium is 
considered a consequence of chaotic motion of phase point representing the 
state of the system in phase space. There is no problem to analyze 
equilibrium in deterministic systems if they are sufficiently chaotic. The 
situation is essentially different with nonequilibrium systems, where the state 
of nonequilibrium has to be supported by outer influences and the system 
cannot be therefore isolated: there must be a flow of energy through the 
system and since this energy should not accumulate in the system, it must be 
dissipated. The dissipation, however, was until recently considered quite 
naturally an irreversible process and thus a process not obeying deterministic 
laws. Only recently a new treatment of dissipation appeared, based on the 
use of “reversible thermostatting”, which enables to study also non­
equilibrium reversible deterministic systems.
In the following we will study two very simple models. The first one is 
the model of a particle moving in a plane among regularly arranged 
scatterers, the second one is a still simpler model generalizing the standard 
well-known baker map. The former of the models has a spectrum with power 
law dependence, the latter one exhibits a different type of noise, but defi­
nitely not the power law. Both models have strange attractors in their phase 
spaces so that their comparison does not confirm our originally favorite 
hypothesis [4], that the presence of such fractal objects always implies 1/f 
noise. We will try to demonstrate under what conditions one can expect such 
implication to hold.

65
5. Galton board, or driven Lorentz gas
In an attempt to reconcile time-reversibility of microscopic equations of 
motion with irreversibility of macroscopic flows, Nose-Hoover equations of 
motion began to be studied recently [5]. The aim is a better understanding of 
explicitly nonequilibrium systems driven away from equilibrium by bound­
ary conditions. The latter impose velocity (temperature) gradients on the 
systems and in such a way cause steady nonequilibrium states. In such 
systems, which can undergo corresponding reversible momentum and ener­
gy exchanges with their surroundings, the phase-space states are no more 
visited with equal probabilities.
The basis of the approach is to introduce heat reservoirs into mechanics 
implicitly, rather than explicitly, this being done by constraining the kinetic 
energy of selected “thermostatted” degrees of freedom of a many-body 
system. This can be achieved with the help of Gauss’ principle of least 
constraint, satisfying also nonholonomic constraints. As a result, additional 
time-reversible “friction” force appears, which causes the phase flow to 
collapse onto a strange attractor. Theoretical analysis shows that the systems 
obeying Nose-Hoover equations of motion are reversible, ergodic and have 
negative characteristic Lyapunov exponents.
The typical evolution of such systems is then the following. In the 
forward direction of time the phase-space hypervolumes shrink very quickly 
to a fractal object which is stable. Within the zero-volume fractal subspace 
the motion is chaotic and formally reversible, but the time-reversed 
trajectory is not stable. The reversed repellor object - differing from attractor 
just by that the signs of all the momenta and friction coefficients are reversed 
- is unstable. The lowered fractal dimensionality of the attractors implies the 
effective loss of degrees of freedom.
Among the models studied in the context of Nose-Hoover mechanics, 
there is one which seems to be highly relevant to understanding the 
properties of some noises. It is the model of externally driven 2-dimensional 
Lorentz gas, or Galton board [6]. In this model a point mass is driven 
through an infinite planar lattice of circular elastic scatterers (of radius R) by 
an external field E (pointing in x direction). The particle would be 
accelerated by the field, so in order to achieve a stationary nonequilibrium 
state it is necessary to constrain the kinetic energy which, using the Gauss’ 
principle, leads to the following equations of motion
x = px /m, y = py Im,
p x = E-Z Px , p y =- ZPy , 
(4)
with the thermostat (friction) variable of the form Z = pxE/p2 . Observing the 
dynamics only at collisions of the particle with the scatterer, one obtains a 

66
Poincare map in a two dimensional collision space. For non-zero field, 
measured by the value of EmR/p2, one observes trajectories approaching 
strange attractors with fractal structure and with Hausdorff dimension D, for 
which one finds 1 < D < 2. The dependence of D on E is not simple but in 
general D falls with growing E and for E = 0 we have, as expected, D = 2.
Since the Lorentz gas model has some features distantly reminding 
motion of charge carriers through lattice of atoms, we suspected that it could 
exhibit 1/f k spectrum. To verify this conjecture, we analyzed 2000 samples 
of simulated particle trajectories (suffering 10 000 collisions each) as 
represented by position vectors and vectors of momenta. Spectra of 
individual trajectories were analyzed using the standard FFT and subse­
quently averaged. It turned out that the power spectrum of trajectories in the 
subspace of positions reminded brownian spectrum, whereas the spectrum of 
momenta was surprisingly smooth and close to 1/f. In fact it was of 1/f k type 
with k exceeding very slightly the value of k = 1.
6. Generalized baker map
We conclude by the analysis of generalized baker maps, which are partly 
contracting and partly dilating, representing thus simple models of reversible 
and at the same time dissipative evolution [7]. The analysis of the maps has 
shown that the spectrum of their orbits is white. This seems to demonstrate 
that the presence of strange attractor alone is not sufficient for appearance of 
1/f noise, as is sometimes suggested. The example further demonstrates that 
nonequilibrium states are not necessarily results of global dissipation - local 
dissipation is quite sufficient to have nonequilibrium steady state.
The model is defined by the transformation Bw denoted as the “genera­
lized baker map” (GBM for short) which preserves the measure globally. 
The map is piecewise linear and it acts differently to the left and to the right 
of the vertical line x = (w - 1)/w (dividing line). To the left, i. e. for 
0 < x < (w-1)/w, we have Bw(x,y) = Lw(x,y), with
Lw(x, y) = (xw/(w -1), y/w), 
(5)
and to the right, we have Bw (x, y) = Rw (x, y), with
Rw(x,y)=(xw-w+1, y+(1-y)/w). 
(6)
Being piecewise linear, the map represents the simplest nonlinear 
transformation. The contraction ratio is defined by the parameter w > 1 such 
that the area (w- 1)/w of E, to the left of dividing line, is being contracted 
to 1/w. For w = 2, the map becomes standard baker map, which is measure 
preserving also locally, and for w = 1 it is the linear identity map. For w 2, 

67
the local measure preservation does not hold and with growing w > 2 the 
local contraction (of the left part of E) grows. This is the sense in which the 
model generalizes the classical baker map (hence the name). The conse­
quence of the local contraction is the appearance of an attractor in E: for 
w > 2, any point, or any subset of E approaches (in the forward direction of 
time) a multifractal object consisting of infinite set of lines parallel to the x- 
axis. This attractor is self-similar and can be generated by successive appli­
cations of Bw to the line y = 0 (primary line). Further analysis disclosed that 
with growing w the information dimension D1 of the attractor falls from 
D 1 = 2, for w = 2, to D 1 1, for w <».
The reversibility of the map implies that the analogue to time (velocity) 
reversal in this model is “rotation” of the “phase” point around the “second 
diagonal”, i.e. around the line y = 1 - x. Thus, to any attractor there 
corresponds a repellor, consisting of lines orthogonal to the lines of the 
attractor. The specific case of w = 2 has also the attractor-repellor pair. The 
attractor (repellor) consists in this specific case of equidistant horizontal 
(vertical) lines so that it is “hidden”, i. e. macroscopically invisible. The 
analysis of Bw for arbitrary w has therefore disclosed this hitherto unknown 
(or at least underestimated) property of the classical baker map.
If we consider E to be a 2-dimensional phase space, then contraction of 
its subset, induced by Bw, might be interpreted as “cooling”, and expansion 
of the rest as “heating”. Then Bw may be thought of as representing a 
“dynamics” of a system being cooled and heated at opposite sides. 
Evidently, Bw does not have any causal connection to physically relevant 
thermostatting - it is just its resulting behavior, which mathematically 
simulates thermostatting. We can, nevertheless, view this map as an 
extremely simple model of thermostatting, exactly because under its action 
one part of E is being contracted and another one expanded, and also 
because the presence of an attractor demonstrates the existence of a stable 
nonequilibrium state.
That is why we have analyzed the spectrum of orbits generated by this 
map. Evidently we could not expect to find 1/f noise, if for no other reason, 
then because the orbits are bounded. Equally bounded are distances between 
neighboring points on orbits which could be regarded as discrete analogue of 
velocities, and therefore neither these increments can have 1/f noise. If 
however the model would be endowed with inherent properties able to 
generate such noise, we should be able to observe at least some signs of such 
noise. Closer analysis however showed that the spectrum of y-components of 
orbits was unambiguously white and the spectrum of increments between 
two neighboring points on an orbit was also white except in a small 
neighborhood of f = 0.
White noise of y-coordinates is quite understandable because the x- 
coordinates of points on an orbit move chaotically and cover the interval 

68
(0 ; 1] uniformly. We can regard them as “random” values. Their position 
with respect to dividing line decides whether in the next iteration the y- 
coordinate of a point will be submitted to the action of Ly or Ry. This means 
that the sequence of applications of operators Ly, Ry is “random” as well, 
which immediately implies that the noise of x- and y-coordinates is white. 
Similar reasonings apply to increments of y between iterations.
To summarize this section we may state that the example of generalized 
baker map reveals that not every thermostatted system with strange attractor 
has 1/f k (k>0) spectrum. It demonstrates further that nonequilibrium states 
are not necessarily results of global dissipation - local dissipation is quite 
sufficient to have nonequilibrium steady state. The behavior of spectrum of 
Galton board then does not represent a situation to be expected everywhere. 
How typical the Galton board model is for a class of similar systems, 
deserves further investigation.
Acknowledgements
The author acknowledges the support of the Slovak Grant Agency for 
Science, VEGA, under the Grant No. 1/0428/03.
References
[1] J. Kumicak, Noises generated by nonlinear autoregression, Ann. 
Physik 3 (1994) 207-212.
[2] J. Kumicak, Generation of burst noise by nonlinear autoregression, 
Ann. Physik 4 (1995) 805-808.
[3] J. Kumicak, Modeling 1/fnoise using moving averages, Czech. J. 
Phys. 49 (1999) 527-537.
[4] J. Kumicak, Galton board as a model for fluctuations, in: Unsolved 
Problems of Noise and Fluctuations, Eds. D. Abbott and L. B. Kiss, 
AIP Conference Proceedings No. 511 (AIP, Melville, NY 2000), p. 
144-149.
[5] W. G. Hoover, Reversible mechanics and time’s arrow, Phys. Rev. A 
37 (1988) 252-257.
[6] J. Kumicak, Driven Lorentz gas with 1/fk noise, Microel. Reliab. 40 
(2000) 1799-1802.
[7] J. Kumicak, Character of fluctuations in deterministically thermostat- 
ted nonequilibrium systems, Chaos 11 (2001) 624-631.

II. NOISE IN NANOSCALE DEVICES

NOISE IN OPTOELECTRONIC DEVICES
R. Alabedra
Centre d’Electronique de Montpellier
Universite Montpellier II - 34095 Montpellier Cedex 5
France
alabedra@cem2.univ-montp2.fr
Abstract In the first part of this paper different kinds of electrical noise in photodiodes 
are summarized. In the second part electrical and optical noise of laser diodes 
are presented taking into account the correlation between both noise sources. 
In the last part some prospective aspects for new research into noise of optical 
amplifiers are briefly reviewed.
Keywords: 
Photodiodes, Lasers, Optoelectronic, Noise
1. 
Noise in photodiodes
1.1. 
Basic considerations
The photodiodes are light-to-current transducers and, as such, they can 
detect optical signals. A general behaviour of reverse-biased photodiodes 
includes basically three processes: carrier generation by absorbed photons, 
carrier transport without or with multiplication by impact ionization, and 
interaction of photocurrent with the external circuit to provide the output 
signal.
Several parameters are required in order to design P.I.N. photodiodes as 
photodetectors in optical communication systems. These parameters are, for 
example: a strong electric field to serve to separate the carriers, a narrow 
space charge to reduce the transit time, nevertheless a wide enough space 
charge in order to achieve a good quantum efficiency, a small active surface 
to reduce the capacitance of junction improving the gain-bandwidth product, 
a high absorption coefficient ab (expressed in cm-1) at the working 
wavelength X, as low dark current as possible, no-tunnelling effect, no 1/f 
noise in dark current and photocurrent, a good responsivity G0(X) in A/W.
71
J. 
Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (71 - 78) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

72
1.2. 
Noise in photodiodes
In this section we will divide the noise study into two parts: the noise of 
the device in the dark and the noise under illumination, because we will 
distinguish between the dark current and the photocurrent. We will also 
consider at present only excellent devices which one can find currently in 
modern systems.
In the dark, for an optimized device without leakage current, as is well 
known from the classical description [1], the device exhibits a shot noise 
given by:
Si (f)dark = 2 qIdark 
(A2/Hz) 
(1)
Of course the shot noise sets a lower limit to the noise in the dark 
current.
When P.I.N. photodiodes are illuminated by typical light sources 
(filament lamps or Lambertian sources), the light sources do not bring with 
their noise sources and the total number of photo-electrons produced during 
any time interval is much smaller than N atoms, and the individual ionization 
processes are statistically independent, in other words, the number of 
photons obeys Poisson statistic. The total noise in this situation will be the 
shot noise as following :
Si (f)total = Si (f)dark + Si (f)phot 
(A2/Hz) 
(2)
Si (f)total = 2 q[Idark + Iphot] 
(A2/Hz) 
(3)
Here it is assumed that there is no correlation between the photogenerated 
and thermal generated carriers. The ideal situation is obtained when the dark 
current is much smaller than the photocurrent. For P.I.N. silicon photodiodes 
at k = 0,9 pm the dark current is about 10-11 A and the working photocurrent 
about 10-8 or 10-7 A. This is not always the case for infra-red photodiodes 
designed in narrow-gap materials. Of course the shot noise is the lower limit 
to the total noise.
When P.I.N. photodiodes are illuminated by laser diodes the beam light 
can bring a noise source which is characterized by Relative Intensity Noise 
(RlN.). This term describes the fluctuations of laser diodes optical power by 
following relation:
R.I.N. = Siph 2qIph 
(Hz-1) 
(4)
I2ph
So if the P.I.N. photodiodes are illuminated with a thermal lamp, Siph 
is equal to shot noise and R.I.N. becomes equal to 0. This optical noise 
source will be discussed in the second part of this paper.

73
Finally, recent theoretical analysis [2,3,4] of the squeezing 
phenomenon and especially the balanced homodyne detection circuit used 
for its observation, have led to a renewed interest in the shot noise present in 
the photocurrent and photoelectric detectors. Quantum mechanical 
description is used as a general expression for noise in the photocurrent even 
in the case of non-classical states of the radiation. In this case the total noise 
may actually fall below the shot noise (classical limit), thus indicating the 
presence of non-classical features of the radiation field such as antihuching 
or squeezing.
1.3. 
Noise in avalanche P.I.N. photodiodes
1.3.1. 
Basic consideration
Avalanche photodiodes are P.I.N. photodiodes which exhibit an 
internal multiplication of carriers by impact ionization. There devices are 
strongly reverse-biased in order to obtain a high electric field region between 
5.104 and 6.105 V.cm-1 depending on the type of materials. Several 
theoretical and experimental studies have been reported for various 
structures [5,6]. In low noise photodetection application only multiplication 
process at low electric field is very useful in order to obtain a great 
difference between ionization coefficients a(E) and P(E) (in cm-1) of 
electrons and holes, respectively. Currently there are two groups of A.P.D. 
structures :
- 
classical A.P.D. homojunction or heterojunction Separated 
Absorption Multiplication Avalanche Photodiodes, where the 
ionization by impact is non-localized.
- 
Multi Quantum Well Avalanche Photodiode or Superlattice 
Avalanche detectors, where the impact ionization is localized in 
stages [7,8].
In brief, the principal theories of impact ionization processes have been 
developped by Schokley, Wolf, Baraff, Ridley etc. for various values of 
electric field in order to obtain the expressions of a(E) and P(E).
1.3.2. 
Noise in non-localized multiplication process
It is well known that the A.P.D. noise conventional expression is 
referred to the PhotoMultiplier Tube (PMT) noise given by :
Si (f) = 2 qIinj(M)2 
(A2/Hz) 
(5)
Here Iinj is the injected current and M the average multiplication factor. 
Therefore in the A.P.D. , where the multiplication process concerns both 
carrier types, the noise is given by :

74
Si (f) = 2 qIinj(M)2. F(M) 
(A2/Hz) 
(6)
Here F(M) is called the excess noise factor. The excess noise factor is a 
useful quantity because it compactly represents the statistical properties of 
the gain fluctuations that introduce multiplication noise; in all cases F(M) 
strongly depends from values a(E), P(E) or k = 0(E)/a(E). In the literature 
several authors have proposed [5,6] various theories relative to the statistical 
treatment of the avalanche process and the noise in A.P.D. in order to 
determine F(M). For example the Mc Intyre’s theory [5] permits, statistically 
speaking, all possibilities of the impact ionization compatible with thickness 
W, the a and 0 ionization coefficients without any limit for the random 
impact ionization number given by the probability laws. In the case of Van 
Vliet theory [6] based on discrete device physics, the M and variance (M) 
are obtained by means of the recurrent generating function method. In this 
approach the noise is always lower than the Mc Intyre’s limit, the latter 
being approached to within 5% for gains of the order of 100 or higher and 
the noise versus (M) shows break points when the regime changes from N to 
N + 1 possible ionizations per carrier transit.
1.3.3. Noise in multilayer avalanche photodiodes
An essential requirement for low noise avalanche photodiodes is to have 
a large difference between the ionization coefficients a and 0. There are two 
ways to obtain this large difference.
First: the main method to obtain high k or 1/k materials is to use the III­
V or II-VI ternary or quaternary alloys which exhibit a high k for a given 
value of stoichiometric composition such as Ga1-xAlxSb APD [9] or Hg1- 
xCdxTe [10]. In this case the ionization coefficients a and 0 material 
parameters depend on the semiconductor band structure.
Second: one can obtain high k values by designing new class of APD 
using the Band Structure Engineering such as Multi Quantum-Well 
Avalanche Photodiode or Staircase Avalanche Photodiodes [11].
The staircase A.P.D. is a sophisticated structure with a periodical 
distribution of graded gap wells. We have a ballistic only by electrons 
ionization process repeated at each stage. The noise approach proposed by 
Capasso [7] is the same as that for the P.M.T. but the variance of the random 
gain at each stage is 8(8-1), where 8 is the fraction of electrons which do not 
impact-ionize. Thus the excess noise factor after Capasso is:
F(N, S) = 1 + S (1- (2- S)-N) 
(2- S)
(7)
where N is the number of stages. A Generalized Excess Noise Factor for 
Avalanche Photodiodes of Arbitrary Structure is proposed by Hakim Saleh

75
and Teich [8]. The authors consider a generic multilayer avalanche 
photodiode model that admits arbitrary variation of the band gap, dark 
generation rate and ionization coefficients within each stage of the device. 
Their formalism follows the usual assumption that the ability of a carrier to 
ionize other carriers is independent of the carrier's history. Their calculations 
make use of Mc Intyre's general approach and they abandon the restriction 
that the multiplication shall assume a Bernouilli form with infinitesimal 
small success probability in the limit of an infinitesimal distance. Their 
generalized multilayer structure used for their calculation is shown in Fig. 1.
Figure 1. Generic model used for generalized excess noise
This theory is applied to Conventional Avalanche Photodiode APD, 
MultiQuantum-Well Avalanche Photodiode and Staircase APD, on the 
assumption that the number of photons at the input of the detector obeys the 
Poisson distribution. For example, with this theory in the continuous limit, 
formula (22-d) of 11 is a version of the expression obtained by Mc Intyre8. 
This incorporates both injected and dark generated carriers. The carrier 
history is taken into account, a(x) and 0(x) become a(x,x') and 0 (x,x') 
respectively, to reflect the ionization probabilities for a carrier at the point x 
when it was generated at the point x'. In this case the authors introduce a 
"dead space" which prohibits the carrier from multiplying within a certain 
distance of its birthplace.
2. 
Electrical and optical noise in laser diodes and their 
correlation
Several kinds of noise are often generated in semiconductor lasers 
because of the wideband response characteristics of carrier density 
fluctuations. 1/f noise, mode hopping noise or mode partition noise are 
troublesome: these kinds of noise impede attempts to improve optical 
coherence [12]. Some studies have been made in order to introduce the low 
and medium frequency noise as a characterization parameter with the 
fluctuations of the carrier density of lasers. On one hand, the Terminal

76
Electrical Noise (T.E.N.) is due to the fluctuations of the laser voltage Vd(t) 
and is given by the voltage noise spectral density SVd (V2/Hz). In our case, 
SVd can be written as :
Svd(f) =4kTRs+ f MkT H M2
I q J / n0Af
(8)
M=2+ Vol2>/2 v NV + Nc ]
(9)
where Nc ,Nv are the effective conduction and valence band densities, k 
is the Boltzman's constant, T is the absolute temperature, n0 is the steady 
state carrier density, .An (f) is the fluctuation of carrier density , Vol is the 
volume of the active layer and Rs is the series resistance. The first term gives 
the thermal noise due to the series resistance Rs.
On the other hand, the optical noise is due to the fluctuations of the 
optical power Popt of the laser, related to the fluctuations of the detected 
photocurrent Iph(t), and given by the photocurrent spectral density SIph 
(A2/Hz) :
SIph = G2 . SPopt 
(10)
In order to analyse the noise behaviour of the laser, we used the 
experimental set up shown in figure 2.
Figure 2. Experimental set-up
In the first channel we measure SVd thanks to a voltage amplifier, 
connected in parallel with the laser diode. With the second channel we 
measure Iph and SIph, through a standard InGaAs PIN photodiode, or via the 
DC and AC outputs of a current amplifier. Possible optical feedback due to 
the second channel is suppressed by an optical isolator when we measure 
simultaneously the electrical noise SVd and the photocurrent spectral density 
SIPh.

77
3. 
Noise of optical amplifiers
The amplifier noise model is based on the work by Simon [13] Olsson 
[14]. The amplifier output spontaneous emission power is given by:
Psp = Nsp(G-1)hvBo 
(12)
B0 is the optical bandwidth, Psp the spontaneous emission power, Nsp the 
spontaneous emission factor, hv the photon energy, G the optical gain. For 
an ideal amplifier Nsp = l, for an Erbium doped fiber amplifier Nsp = 2.2 and 
for a semiconductor laser amplifier Nsp ranges from 1.4 to 4 depending on 
both the pumping rate and the operating wavelength. This model is based on 
a talk given by P.S. Henry [15]. We assume an optical amplifier and a 
detector with unity quantum efficiency. After square law detection in the 
receiver, the signal power S is given by:
S = (GIsC1C2L)2 
(13)
Is is the photocurrent equivalent of amplifier input power, C1 - amplifier 
input coupling efficiency , C2 - amplifier output coupling efficiency, L - 
optical losses between amplifier and receiver. The total noise Ntot is:
Ntot = Nshot + Nsp-sp + Ns-sp+ Nth 
(14)
Nth is the receiver noise, q is the electronic charge, Nshot is the shot noise, 
Nsp-sp - the spontaneous-spontaneous beat noise, Ns-sp - the signal- 
spontaneous beat noise. A schematic diagram of the amplifier model is 
shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of an Erbium-doped fiber Amplified Model
One of the most interesting preamplifier applications is the receiver 
sensitivity dependence of the amplifier gain, noise figure, and optical 
bandwidth. The application of optical preamplifiers is at very high data rates.
4. 
Conclusions
Research in photonics and photon-electron interactions, as for example 
the correlation between electrical noise and optical noise, will become more 
and more important. Indeed, optics will take place in a very large number of 
modern systems. For instance, in the case of optical fibre telecommunication 
networks, noise limits the number of photons per bit which is about 400 
photons for a given Bit Error Rate of 10-9, while the theoretical limit is about 
40 photons.

78
References
[1] 
Van der Ziel, Noise Measurements, Proceeding IEEE 58 (1970) 1178.
[2] 
Paul H., Shot Noise in Photodiodes and vacuum fluctuations, J. 
Modern Optics 35 (1988) 1225-1235.
[3] 
Glauber RJ, Quantum Optics and Electronics, Edited by C. de Witt, A. 
Blandin and C. Cohen-Tannoudji (N.-Y. : Gordon and Breach) 1965.
[4] 
Yurke B., Squeezed-coherent-state generation via four-wave mixers 
and detection via homodyne detectors, Phys. Rev. A 35 (1985) 300.
[5] 
Mc Intyre RJ, Multiplication noise in uniform avalanche photodiodes, 
IEEE Trans Electronic Device, ED-13 (1966) 164-168.
[6] 
Van Vliet K.M. & Rucker L.M., Theory of carrier multiplication and 
noise in avalanche devices - I - One-carrier processes, IEEE Trans 
Electron Devices ED-6 (1979) 746-764.
[7] 
Capasso F. et al., Staircase solid-state photomultipliers and avalanche 
photodiodes with enhanced ionization rates ratio, IEEE Trans 
Electron. Device, ED-30 (1983) 381-390.
[8] 
Hakim N.Z., Saleh B.E.A., Teich M.C., Generalized excess noise 
factor for avalanche photodiodes of arbitrary structure, IEEE Trans 
electron devices 37, (1990) 599-610.
[9] 
Hildebrad O. et al., Ga/sub 1-x/Al/sub x/Sb avalanche photodiodes: 
resonant impact ionization with very high ratio of ionization 
coefficients, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE17 (1981) 284
[10] Orsal B., et al., Hg/sub 0.56/ Cd/sub 0.44/ Te 1.6- to 2.5-gm 
avalanche photodiode and noise study far from resonant impact 
ionization, IEEE Trans Electron Devices 38 (1991) 1748-1756
[11] Capasso F., Williams G.F., Tsana W.T., Tech. Dig. IEEE Specialist 
Conf. on Light Emitting Diodes and photodetectors (Ottawa - Hull 
Canada) (1982) 166-167.
[12] Ohtsu M., Highly Coherent Semiconductor Lasers. Edited by 
Culshaw, A ; Rogers, H. Taylor. Artech House Inc. Norwood M.A. 
02062 U.S.A., (1992).
[13] Simon J.C., GaInAsP semiconductor laser amplifiers for single-mode 
fiber communications , J. Lightwave Technology 5 (1987) 1286-1295
[14] Olsson N.A., Lightwave systems with optical amplifiers, J. Lightwave 
Technology 7 (1989) 1071-1082
[15] Henry P.S., Lightwave primer, I.E.E.E., J. Quantum Electron. QE-21 
(1985) 1862-1869

FLUCTUATIONS OF OPTICAL AND ELECTRICAL 
PARAMETERS AND THEIR CORRELATION OF 
MULTIPLE-QUANTUM-WELL InGaAs/InP LASERS
S. 
Pralgauskaite, V. Palenskis and J. Matukas
Departament of Radiophysics, Physics Faculty, Vilnius University
Sauletekio 9, LT-2040 Vilnius
Lithuania
sandra.pralgauskaite@ff.vu.lt
Abstract Low-frequency noise characteristics of Fabry-Perot (F-P) and distributed 
feedback, ridge-waveguide and buried-heterostructures InGaAsP/InP 
multiple-quantum-well lasers investigation has been carrier out. Mode 
hopping effect characteristic for F-P laser operation is caused by carrier 
gathering in barrier and cladding layers, and intensive optical and electrical 
noise during mode hopping is related with recombination in these layers. 
Defective laser diodes structures can be revealed by noise characteristic 
investigation, especially the correlation factor is more informative at threshold.
Keywords: 
Semiconductor laser, optical noise, electrical noise, correlation factor.
1. Introduction
Nowadays devices with various design quantum structures are of interest 
in semiconductor laser developing and application areas, because they give 
such advantages as quantized energy levels and finite density of states, better 
injected carrier confinement and, thus, lower threshold current, better optical 
confinement [1, 2]. Improvement of new and modern design laser diode 
(LD) structures requires detailed investigation of their properties. Noise 
characteristic investigation can clear up the features and reasons of various 
effects observed in the semiconductor laser operation. Low-frequency noise 
indicates various imperfections of material and device [1, 3, 4], and is caused 
by the same type of defects that also reduce device quality and reliability [3].
The comprehensive study of low-frequency noise characteristics of 
various design semiconductor lasers is presented in this paper. The basic
79
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (79 - 88) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

80
purpose of the investigation was to clear up the noise origin and features 
characteristic for InGaAsP/InP multiple-quantum-well different structure 
laser diodes, to elucidate the reasons and nature of processes that take part 
during mode hopping effect in Fabry-Perot laser operation.
2. 
Noise Measurement Technique and Investigated 
Devices
In the optoelectronic devices investigation it is important to know 
characteristics of both optical (laser output power fluctuations) and electrical 
(laser diode terminal voltage or current fluctuations) noises, and correlation 
between optical and electrical fluctuation characteristics. In Fig. 1, there is 
presented measurement circuit for simultaneous optical and electrical noise 
signals measurement and evaluation of their correlation factor.
Figure 1. Experiment circuit: LD - laser diode, PD - photodetector, RL1, RL2 - load 
resistances, Re1, Re2 - standard resistances, B1 and B2 - storage batteries, LNA - low-noise 
amplifier, F - filter system, SB - soundboard, ADC - analogue-to-digital converter, PC - 
personal computer, SA - spectrum analyzer.
Laser diode emitted light power and its fluctuations are detected by the 
specially selected Ge photodiode, which own noise spectrum was inversely 
proportional to the frequency, and noise intensity remained about two 
decades lower than LD optical noise in all lasing current region. Therefore, 
the optical noise is photodiode voltage fluctuations due to LD output power 
fluctuations.
Both noise signals were amplified by low-noise amplifiers (LNA). 
Standard soundboard that limits signal in the frequency range from 20 Hz to

81
20 kHz can be used as analogue-to-digital converter. Using data acquisition 
board and/or spectrum analyzers the frequency range was broadened from 
0.1 Hz to 35 MHz .The noise spectral density, SV, is valuated by comparing 
with the thermal noise of standard resistor Re
The investigated lasers were fabricated on the ground of material 
In1-xGaxAsyP1-y. Fabry-Perot (F-P) lasers with ridge-waveguide (RWG) 
radiating around 1.33 pm wavelength and DFB lasers with RWG and buried- 
heterostructure (BH) radiating around 1.55 pm have been investigated. All 
samples have graded-index separate-confinement-heterostructure 
(GRINSCH) with multiple quantum well (MQW) active layer (Fig. 2) grown 
by metal-organic vapor deposition [5, 6].
Figure 2. Schematic energy band diagram of the laser MQW active region within 
GRINSCH ( Egb - barrier layer energy band-gap).
F-P laser active region contains ten 4 nm thick compressively strained 
(0.7 %) InGaAsP quantum wells (QWs) separated by 10 nm thick p-doped 
InGaAsP/InP barriers lattice matched to InP (Fig. 2). DFB RWG laser diode 
active layer consists of 4 QWs , and DFB lasers with thyristor-type current­
blocking layers (BH) active region contains six 5.5 nm thick compressively 
strained QWs.
3. Semiconductor Laser Noise Characteristics
Optical and electrical laser diode noise spectra and correlation factor 
between optical and electrical fluctuations investigation has been carried out 
in the frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz at wide laser current and 
temperature regions. Typical LD noise characteristics are presented in Fig. 3. 
At the lasing operation region (above threshold) optical and electrical noise 
intensity slowly increases with laser current. In the investigated frequency 
range optical and electrical noise spectral density vs. frequency dependencies

82
Figure 3. DFB laser optical (a) and electrical (b) noise spectral density (1- 22 Hz, 2- 108 Hz, 
3- 1 kHz, 4- 10 kHz) and correlation factor (c; 20 Hz - 20 kHz) dependencies on laser current; 
optical (d) and electrical (e) noise spectra at different currents (T=290 K).
101 
102 
103 
104
f (Hz)
are 1/f type, where Ychanges from 0.95 to 1.43 (graphs d) and e) Fig. 3). 
This type of noise is characteristic for all (F-P and DFB) investigated 
samples at the stable operation (when there is no mode hopping), and does 
not change with laser current or temperature. Origin of the 1/f noise in laser 
diode, as in many semiconductor devices [3, 4], is a superposition of 
fluctuations due to charge carrier capture and emission processes in localized 
states with different capture cross-sections caused by various defects and 
impurities. Correlation factor between optical and electrical fluctuations at 
the lasing region changes in the range (10-60)%, mostly is positive, and has 
tendency slowly decrease with laser current increasing (graph c) in Fig. 3). 
Thus, at the lasing operation there are active some defects, that randomly 
modulate free charge carrier number in the active layer and, as a 
consequence, lead to the photon number fluctuations that have the same 
phase as LD terminal voltage fluctuations and 1/f type spectra.

83
3.1. 
Mode hopping effect in Fabry-Perot laser operation
At defined forward currents and temperatures F-P laser diodes have very 
large and strongly correlated (up to 98 %) Lorentzian type optical and 
electrical noises (Fig. 4). These noise peaks are related with mode hopping 
effect. It is found, that for some mode hopping peaks positive correlation 
factor is observed, and for others - negative one (Fig. 4). Different noise
w* 109 F
~ 10-11 r 
o
w
10-13 r
Ljdbkk
0,00 
0,05 
0,10 
0,15
10-14F
90 F
60 -
30 -
0 -
-30 -
-60 -
-90 L.
d)
4 fe
0,06 
0,08 
0,10 
0,12
.-16
I (A)
10 6 r
<D 
:
W> 18 
10—18E- 
0,00 
0,05 
0,10 
0,15
90 F 
— 60 - 
30 E-
I -301­
-60 -
-9o L 
o,oo 0,05 
0,10 
0,15
I (A)
b)
c)
f (Hz)
Figure 4. F-P laser optical (a) and electrical (b) noise spectral density (at 10 kHz) and 
correlation factor (c; 1 Hz - 1 kHz) dependencies on laser current; correlation factor (d) and 
electrical noise spectra (e) at mode hopping regions (T=290 K).
characteristics (positive or negative correlation, different cut-off frequency 
of Lorentzian type noise spectra: characteristic time ranges from 1 ps to 
1 ms (graph e) in Fig. 4)) at the mode hopping indicate various possible 
processes during mode hopping as noise origin. Thus, there is more than one 
reason for mode hopping effect appearing.
The measured charge carrier lifetime in the active region (2.2 ns [7]) that 
corresponds to the spontaneous recombination time is much shorter than the 
observed relaxation times of processes related with Lorentzian type noise 
during mode hopping (Fig. 4). So, mode hopping noise is not related with 
charge carrier spontaneous recombination in the quantum wells.
Fig. 5 illustrates the mode hopping noise correlation dependencies on both 
laser current and temperature. Logarithm of the peak center current 
dependency on the inverse temperature is linear and has the same slope (thus

84
the process activation energy is the same) independently on correlation 
factor sign. The activation energy has been evaluated to be 0.53 eV, what is 
very close to the half of the barrier and cladding layers band-gap energy 
(0.54 eV). This indicates that mode hopping noise is related to the 
recombination processes in the barrier or cladding layers. So, mode hopping 
effect causes the radiating mode instability due to the presence of injected 
charge carriers in the barrier or cladding layers. Back-reflected light 
influences charge carrier and photon redistribution in the active region. It is 
shown that F-P LD facet coating by antireflection layer (decreasing of the 
resonator quality) substantial suppresses mode hopping effect with only a 
small change of the light output power (Fig. 6).
90l 
45E-57 mA 
0fc
-45
-90 
90 i- 
45E 61 mA 
0
-45
-90 
90 h- 
45E 65 mA 
0r
-45
-90
90b „■ . 
451- 53 mA
0
-45
-90
276 279 282 285 288
0,00 
0,05 
0,10 
0,15
I (A)
T(K)
Figure 5. F-P laser noise correlation 
factor (1 Hz-1 kHz) dependencies on 
temperature and laser current at mode 
hopping regions.
Figure 6. F-P laser optical (a) and electrical (b) 
noise spectral density (at 10 kHz) and correlation 
factor (c; 1 Hz-1 kHz) dependencies on laser 
current without (I) and with (II) facet coating 
(T=290 K).

85
3.2. 
Ridge-waveguide and buried-heterostructure laser noise 
characteristics
Better charge carrier and photon confinement in the active layer is 
achieved in buried-heterostructure laser diodes thanks to the thyristor-type 
current-blocking layers ensure the lower threshold current and higher 
efficiency of BH lasers in comparing with ridge-waveguide ones.
Noise characteristic features at the lasing operation of BH and RWG 
lasers are quite similar (Fig. 7): optical and electrical noise intensities 
increase approximately proportional to the laser current. Noise intensity for 
different samples varies no more than an order of magnitude and noise 
spectra are 1/f type. Correlation factor between optical and electrical 
fluctuations is positive and varies in the range of (0-60) %.
10-13
10-14
10-15
D
F5
H2 , 
j__ —L
90 c)
60 ?c) 
30?
2- 
0>
-30
-60
-90
G2
H2
x- E1
D-D2
F5
0,00 
0,05 
0,10
I (A)
0,15
Figure 7. Comparison of optical (a) and electrical (b) noise spectral density (at 10 kHz), 
correlation factor between optical and electrical fluctuations (c; 20 Hz-20 kHz) dependencies 
on laser current for ridge-waveguide (D2, E1, and F5) and BH (G2, H2, and J1) lasers at room 
temperature

86
BH lasers have better operation characteristics, but growth of current 
blocking layers introduces additional defects into laser diode structure that 
could lead to a moderate noise increase: BH sample optical noise intensity is 
about a half order of magnitude larger than ridge-waveguide laser (graph a) 
in Fig. 8). Regardless of larger optical noise and due to higher efficiency, the 
BH laser signal-to-noise ratio is larger than for RWG samples.
Defects at the active region interface with current-blocking layers and 
non-optimal current-blocking layer position with respect to the active region 
can lead to a large leakage current and in particular cases to the thyristor 
(that is formed from current-blocking layers in BH) turn-on at comparatively 
low current. Low-frequency noise characteristic features (optical and 
electrical noise spectral densities are about 1-2 order of magnitude larger 
than for the BH lasers without the thyristor turn-on effect) suggest that in the 
“thyristor” case, the active region surface of the BH laser contains additional 
defects that cause non-uniform current flow and its leakage to the current­
blocking layers.
Threshold region is peculiar laser operation region where stimulated 
emission starts to dominate over spontaneous one. It is turned out that noise 
characteristics at the threshold are the most sensitive to the structure 
defectiveness and device quality. As it is seen in Fig. 8, optical and electrical 
noise at the threshold has additional very intensive Lorentzian type noise 
with characteristic negative correlation factor. The Lorentzian noise 
intensity, correlation sign and magnitude at the threshold are different for 
different investigated samples and are related with the defective nature of the 
surface or interface of the laser active layer [8]. Noise characteristics, 
especially correlation between optical and electrical fluctuations factor, 
investigation could help to evaluate LD quality and lifetime without aging 
experiments.
4. Conclusions
Optical and electrical noises of semiconductor lasers at stable operation 
regions are 1/f type, and are caused by the inherent material defects and 
defects created during the device formation. Positive correlation ((10-60) %) 
is characteristic for 1/f optical and electrical noise at the lasing operation.
Optical and electrical fluctuations due to mode hopping observed in F-P 
laser operation are strongly correlated and have Lorentzian type spectra. It is 
shown that there are more than one different process that take place during 
mode hopping. Mode hopping effect arises due to charge carrier gathering in 
the barrier and cladding layers, and noise during mode hopping is related 
with recombination processes in these layers.

87
Buried-heterostructure lasers have better operation characteristics in 
comparing with ridge-waveguide diodes, but formation of current-blocking 
layers introduces additional defects at the active region surface, what 
increases leakage currents and, in exceptional cases, can lead to the thyristor 
turn-on effect at low currents.
Carried out experimental investigations have shown that noise 
characteristics (especially correlation factor) are more informative on the 
physical processes in semiconductor laser structure related with operation 
characteristics and laser quality. Threshold noise characteristic investigation 
could be used for laser diode quality and reliability prediction.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Center for Electrophotonic Materials 
and Devices of McMaster University and Nortel Networks Optical 
Components in Canada for providing the devices.
References
[1] A. Dandridge and H. F. Taylor, Correlation o flow-frequency intensity 
and frequency fluctuations in GaAlAs lasers, IEEE J. Quant. Electron. 
QE-18 (1982) 1738-1750.
[2] P. J. A. Thijs, L. F. Tiemeijer, J. J. M. Binsma, and T. van Dongen, 
Progress in long-wavelenght strained-layer InGaAs(P) quantum-well 
semiconductor lasers and amplifiers, IEEE J. Quant. Electron. 30 
(1994) 477-499.
[3] B. K. Jones, Electrical noise as a measure of quality and reliability in 
electronic devices, Adv. electron. electron phys. 87 (1994) 201-257.
[4] J. Matukas and V. Palenskis, Low-frequency noise of the metal- 
gallium arsenide contact at various treatment of semiconductor 
surface, Lith. Phys. J. 36 (1996) 39-48.
[5] J. F. Hazell, J. G. Simmons, J. D. Evans, and C. Blaauw, The effect of 
varying barrier height on the operational characteristics of 1.3 pm 
strained-layer MQW lasers, IEEE J. Quant. Electron. 34 (1998) 2358­
2363.
[6] B. B. Elenkrig, S. Smetona, J. G. Simmons, T. Makino, and
J. D. Evans, Maximum operating power of 1.3 pm strained layer 
multiple quantum well InGaAsP lasers, J. Appl. Phys. 85 (1999) 
2367-2370.

88
[7] J. Matukas, V. Palenskis, C. Pavasaris, E. Sermuksnis, J. Vysniauskas, 
S. Pralgauskaite, G. Letal, S. Smetona, J. G. Simmons, and
R. Sobiestijanskas, Optical and electrical characteristics of InGaAsP 
MQW BH DFB laser diodes, Material science forum 384-385 (2002) 
91-94.
[8] G. Letal, S. Smetona, R. Mallard, J. Matukas, V. Palenskis, and
S. 
Pralgauskaite, Reliability and Low-Frequency Noise Measurements 
of InGaAsP MQW Buried-Heterostructure Lasers, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. A20 (2002) 1061-1066.

MICROWAVE NOISE AND FAST/ULTRAFAST 
ELECTRONIC PROCESSES IN NITRIDE 2DEG 
CHANNELS
A. Matulionis
Semiconductor Physics Institute
Vilnius
Lithuania
e-mail: matulionis@pfi.lt
Abstract Microwave noise technique is applied to study ultrafast correlations in 
AlGaN/GaN and AlN/GaN two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) channels 
subjected to a strong electric field applied in the plane of electron 
confinement. The experimental data are discussed in terms of hot-electron- 
energy dissipation on phonons, longitudinal-optical (LO) phonon conversion 
into other phonon modes, and hot-electron deconfinement. At high electric 
fields, the hot-electron energy relaxation is limited by the LO-phonon 
conversion. The LO-phonon conversion lifetime is estimated to be 350 fs in 
AlGaN/GaN channel. The lifetime is a useful parameter for extrapolation of 
hot-electron temperature beyond the field range where it is available from 
microwave noise experiments. The extrapolated hot-electron temperature is 
used to discuss hot-electron deconfinement noise.
microwave noise, hot electrons, hot phonons, fast and ultrafast processes, two- 
Keywords: 
dimensional electron gas channels, nitride heterostructures
1. Introduction
A two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) channel supports excellent 
performance of a field-effect transistor at microwave frequencies. Nitride 
2DEG transistors are high-power devices: a single transistor can generate a 
10 W power at a 10 GHz [1]; the cutoff frequency of a nanometer-gate 
device exceeds 80 GHz [2]. Investigation of power-speed tradeoff requires a 
better understanding of hot-electron energy dissipation and other ultrafast 
processes in a biased nitride 2DEG channel. The required information can be 
obtained through experiments on microwave fluctuations [3,4].
89
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (89 - 96) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

90
At a high bias, spontaneous emission of optical phonons by high-energy 
electrons is the main mechanism for electron energy dissipation [5-7]. 
Conversion of the emitted optical phonons into other phonon modes is a 
bottleneck of the dissipation process in nitride channels [8,9]. The bottleneck 
causes accumulation of nonequilibrium longitudinal-optical (LO) phonons, 
termed hot phonons [10]. Hot phonons limit electron drift velocity [11,12] 
and support electron deconfinement at a reduced bias [13]. Because of high 
electron density in nitride 2DEG channels for high-power applications, the 
hot-phonon effects are strong and deserve special attention at a high bias.
The standard electric characterization—measurement of electron 
mobility and sheet density—does not provide with sufficient data for 
considering hot-phonon effects. Time-resolved anti-Stokes Raman light 
scattering technique has been applied to investigate hot-phonon effects in 
bulk semiconductors and multi-quantum-well structures [10], but this 
technique has never been used for measuring LO-phonon conversion lifetime 
in a single-quantum-well nitride 2DEG channel. The microwave noise 
technique has demonstrated its potential for studying hot phonons in biased 
AlGaN/GaN, AlN/GaN, and AlGaN/AlN/GaN 2DEG channels [8, 9, 14-16].
The aim of this paper is to report on advances of microwave noise 
technique for characterization of electronic and phononic processes in a 
biased nitride 2DEG channel.
2. Experimental
Most experiments were carried out on two-electrode 2DEG channels 
prepared from nominally undoped nitride heterostructures grown in 
laboratories of Cornell University (Ithaca) and the University of Michigan 
(Ann Arbor). A channel was subjected to a strong electric field applied in the 
plane of electron confinement. Hot-electron noise was measured in the bias 
direction at a microwave frequency, usually near 10 GHz, where generation­
recombination, flicker, and other low-frequency sources of noise are of 
negligible intensity. Pulsed bias was applied in order to minimize channel 
self-heating. The noise temperature was measured during the voltage pulse 
with a gated modulation-type radiometer of microwave noise power in the 
way described elsewhere [3-5].
Fig. 1 illustrates bias dependence of the longitudinal excess noise 
temperature (open circles) [14]. Several ranges of electric field can be 
resolved. In range A, the transport and dissipation parameters are 
independent of electric field. As a result, the noise temperature equals the 
electron temperature and increases proportional to the squared electric field. 
In range B, spontaneous emission of optical phonons becomes important for 
non-ohmic transport and energy dissipation. Additional noise is caused by

91
fluctuations 5Te in hot-electron temperature, and the noise temperature Tn 
exceeds the electron temperature Te in this range [6]. Noise due to hot- 
electron deconfinement appears in range C [4,5,13,14]. The hot-electron 
noise is thermally quenched due to lattice heating in range D.
Figure 1. Field-dependent excess noise temperature Tn - TL at TL = 293 K (open circles) 
[14] and excess hot-electron temperature Te - TL: solid line—from Eq. (3) with F = 1 and 
Tph= 350 fs ; horizontal H bar stands for hot-electron luminescence data [20].
It has been shown for a high-density 2DEG [6,17] that the noise 
temperature is expressible in terms of the electron temperature and the 
conductivity tensor components. This holds in the field range where the 
electron deconfinement is negligible. The estimation for nitride channels 
shows [6,14] that one can assume Tn= Te in ranges A and B (Fig. 1).
3. Hot-electron energy relaxation time
Once the electron temperature is available from the noise experiment, 
hot-electron energy relaxation time te can be determined according to:
te = kb( Te- TL) /(UI/Nel) 
(1)
where TL is the lattice temperature—the temperature of all phonons except 
for those involved in the electron-LO-phonon interaction, Nel is the electron 
number, U is the applied voltage, I is the current.
Squares in Fig. 2 illustrate the results for AlGaN/GaN at two lattice 
temperatures. The relaxation time decreases as the field increases because 
the LO-phonon emission becomes increasingly important.
This expectation is confirmed by a modified Arrhenius plot (Fig. 3). 
Triangles in Fig. 3 stand for the supplied electric power per electron as a 
function of the reciprocal noise temperature in the field range where Tn = Te . 
The results at TL = 80 K can be fitted with the exponential dependence

92
UI/Nel = Ae/Tph exp( Ae/kBTn) where the activation energy Ae approximately 
equals the LO-phonon energy in GaN: Ae = h 0) = 0.092 eV. This result 
confirms that the supplied power is dissipated on LO phonons.
Figure 2. Field-dependent electron energy relaxation time: AlGaN/GaN at 303 K (open 
squares) [16], at 80 K (closed squares) [6]; AlN/GaN at 80 K (stars) [8]. Electron 
deconfinement relaxation time in AlGaN/GaN: 303 K (dash) [16], 80 K (dash-dot) [14].
Figure 3. Supplied electric power per electron against reciprocal electron temperature for 
AlGaN/GaN channel at different temperatures TL: 373 K [18] (open circles), 293 K [9] 
(bullets), and 80 K [9] (triangles). Solid lines stand for dissipated power due to LO-phonon 
conversion (r.h.s. of Eq. (3), h o> = 0.092 eV, Tph = 350 fs, F = 1). Nel = 7.2 107.
4. LO-phonon lifetime
Let us introduce the LO-phonon lifetime Tph with respect to LO-phonon 
conversion into other phonon modes. The conversion rate is assumed 
proportional to the excess occupancy Nph-Nph (TL) of the LO-phonon states:
dN?h/dt = - [ Nph- Nph (TL)] /Tph
(2)
where Nph(TL) is the occupancy at thermal equilibrium.

93
For strong electron-LO-phonon coupling the hot-electron temperature Te 
approximately equals the hot-phonon temperature Tph [9]. Thus, the power 
balance equation can be written as:
UI/Nei = F (Nph /Nei) (hffi/Tph) [Nph(Te) - N?h(TL)] 
(3)
where F = Nph /Nel is the form factor, Nph is the number of involved LO- 
phonon states, hffi is the LO-phonon energy, Nph(Te) is the nonequilibrium 
occupancy of these states when Tph = Te . Monte Carlo simulation shows that 
Eq. (3) is acceptable at moderate electron temperatures [18,19].
Solid lines in Fig. 3 illustrate the r.h.s. of Eq. (3) for Tph = 350 fs and F = 
1 at different lattice temperatures TL. A reasonable interpretation of the 
experimental data (symbols) is obtained. At low temperatures, TL < Te << 
h 0)/kB , Eq. (3) reduces to UI/Nel = h ffi/Tph exp(-h 0)/kB Te).
The balance equation (3) can be solved with respect to Tph . Now, the 
experimental data of Fig. 3 lead to the results illustrated in Fig. 4. The 
obtained mean LO-phonon lifetime seems to be independent of the lattice 
temperature. No systematic dependence on the electric field is found.
Let us use the value Tph = 350 fs for extrapolation of Te(E) dependence 
beyond the range where it can be measured through the noise experiment. 
For this, the balance equation (3) is solved with respect to Te, and the results 
are plotted in Fig. 1 (solid line). The estimated electron temperature is in a 
reasonable agreement with the temperature Te obtained from the spectrum of 
hot-electron luminescence emitted from the gate-drain region of a biased 
AlGaN/GaN transistor channel (Fig. 1, horizontal bar H)[20].
Electric field (kV/cm)
Figure 4. LO-phonon conversion lifetime for AlGaN/GaN 2DEG channel at different 
electric field and ambient temperature: 80 K—squares [9] and triangles [14], 303 K— 
diamonds [16], 373 K—circles [18].
When the electron temperature is known, the electron energy relaxation 
time can be estimated according to Eq. (1) (Fig. 2, solid line). Open squares 

94
stand for the experimental data in the field range where the energy relaxation 
time can be measured directly. Solid line tends to the constant high-field 
value and merges with the extrapolated LO-phonon lifetime (Fig. 2, dots). A 
0.55 ps field-independent value for the electron energy relaxation time has 
been observed at high fields [8] for AlN/GaN channels (Fig. 2, stars). 
Similar values of 0.5 ps have been obtained for GaN bulk samples during 
femtosecond optical pump-probe experiments [21, 22].
5. Electron deconfinement
The extrapolated field-dependence of the electron temperature Te(E) for 
AlGaN/GaN can be used for considering electron redistribution among 
subbands. Since the envelope wave function penetrates into AlGaN layer 
when the electron occupies the high-energy subband, the adjacent GaN and 
AlGaN layers share the high-energy electrons. The subband model [11] 
provides with the shared electron density as a function of the electron 
temperature, nsh(Te) [13]. The dependence nsh(Te) [13], together with the 
Te(E) dependence (Fig. 1, dashes), provides with the field dependence of the 
shared electron density, nsh(E).
Within a two-level model, the product of the shared and the confined 
electron densities nshncf is the measure of spectral intensity of the occupancy 
fluctuations. The product has the maximum in the field range where the 
spectral intensity of current fluctuations has the maximum [13,14,16]. The 
ratio nsh/ncf enters the expression for the relaxation time of the occupancy 
fluctuations [14, 16]. The fitted dependence of the relaxation time on 
electric field is illustrated in Fig. 2.
6. Conclusion
Microwave noise technique can be used for estimation of relaxation time 
constants and the LO-phonon conversion lifetime in nitride 2DEG channels. 
The LO-phonon lifetime is a useful parameter that decides hot-electron 
energy dissipation and electron deconfinement at high electric fields.
Acknowledgements
Partial support from USA ONR Grant No N00014-03-1-0558 and from 
NATO Grant No PST ARW 979380 is acknowledged.

95
References
[1] L. F Eastman, V. Tilak, V. Kaper, J. Smart, R. Thompson, B. Green, 
J. R. Shealy, and T. Prunty, Progress in high-power, high frequency 
AlGaN/GaN HEMT's, phys. stat. sol. (a) 194 (2002) 433-438.
[2] A. Vertiatchikh, H. Kim, W. J. Schaff, L. F. Eastman, R. Thompson, 
V. Kaper, and R. Shealy, Bias dependent frequency response of 
AlGaN/GaN HEMT, in Proc. 27th Workshop on Compound 
Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits held in Europe 2003, 
ed. W. Bachtold, pp. 41-42.
[3] H. Hartnagel, R. Katilius, and A. Matulionis, Microwave Noise in 
Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York (2001).
[4] A. Matulionis, I. Matulioniene, Hot-electron noise in III-V 
semiconductor structures for ultrafast devices, in: “Noise and 
Fluctuations Control in Electronic Devices”, Ed. A. Balandin, 
American Sci. Publishers (2002) pp. 249-266.
[5] A. Matulionis, J. Liberis, L. Ardaravicius, M. Ramonas,
I. Matulioniene, and J. Smart, Hot-electron energy relaxation time in 
AlGaN/GaN, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 17 (2002) L9-L14.
[6] A. Matulionis, R. Katilius, J. Liberis, L. Ardaravicius, L. F. Eastman, 
J. R. Shealy, and J. Smart, Hot-electron-temperature relaxation time in 
a two-dimensional electron gas: AlGaN/GaN at 80 K, J. Appl. Phys. 
92 (2002) 4490-4497.
[7] N. Balkan, M. C. Arikan, S. Gokden, V. Tilak, B. Schaff, and 
R. J. Shealy, Energy and momentum relaxation of hot electrons in 
GaN/AlGaN, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 14 (2002) 3457-3468.
[8] A. Matulionis, J. Liberis, L. Ardaravicius, J. Smart, D. Pavlidis, 
S. Hubbard, and L. F. Eastman, Hot-phonon limited electron energy 
relaxation in AlN/GaN, Intern. J. High Speed Electronics and Systems 
12 (2002) 253-262.
[9] A. Matulionis, J. Liberis, I. Matulioniene, L. F. Eastman, J. R. Shealy, 
V. Tilak, A. Vertiatchikh, Hot-phonon lifetime in a biased 
AlGaN/GaN channel, Phys. Rev. B 68, (2003), 035338-1-7.
[10] J. A. Kash, and J. C. Tsang, Nonequilibrium phonons in 
semiconductors, 1992 in: Spectroscopy of Nonequilibrium Electrons 
and Phonons, C. V. Shank and B. P. Zakharchenya, eds., Modern 
Problems in Condensed Matter Sci. Vol. 35, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam (1992) pp. 113-167.
[11] M. Ramonas, A. Matulionis, and L. Rota, Monte Carlo simulation of 
hot-phonon and degeneracy effects in the AlGaN/GaN two­

96
dimensional electron gas channel, Semicond.Sci.Technol.18 (2003) 
118-123.
[12] S. Gokden, N. Balkan, and B. K. Ridley, Effect of non-drifting hot 
phonons on high-field drift velocity in GaN/AlGaN, Semicond. Sci. 
Technol. 18 (2003) 206-211.
[13] A. Matulionis, J. Liberis, L. Ardaravicius, M. Ramonas, T. Zubkute, 
I. Matulioniene, L. F. Eastman, J. R. Shealy, J. Smart, D. Pavlidis, and 
S. Hubbard, Fast and ultrafast processes in AlGaN/GaN, phys. stat. 
sol. (b) 234 (2002) 826-829.
[14] A. Matulionis, Fast and ultra-fast dissipation and fluctuations in two­
dimensional channels for nitride and arsenide FETs, in: Proc. of SPIE 
Noise in Devices and Circuits, Vol. 5113 (2003) 237-251.
[15] A. Matulionis, J. Liberis, I. Matulioniene, L. F. Eastman, J. R. Shealy, 
J. Smart, V. Tilak, and A. Vertiatchikh, Estimation of hot-phonon 
temperature and lifetime from microwave noise measurements, Proc. 
17th International Conference on Noise and Fluctuations ICNF 2003, 
Ed. J. Sikula, Brno University of Technology (2003) pp. 251-254.
[16] J. Liberis and A. Matulionis, Hot-electron noise in nitride 2DEG 
channels, in: Proc. 17th International Conference on Noise and 
Fluctuations ICNF 2003, Ed. J. Sikula, Brno University of 
Technology (2003) pp.241-246.
[17] R. Katilius, Kinetic theory of fluctuations in a biased degenerate two- 
or three-dimensional electron gas, in: Proc. 17th International 
Conference on Noise and Fluctuations ICNF 2003, Ed. J. Sikula, Brno 
University of Technology (2003) pp.25-30.
[18] M. Ramonas, and A. Matulionis, Monte Carlo simulation of hot- 
phonon effects in a biased AlGaN/GaN channel, Semicond. Sci. 
Technol. (2004) (accepted).
[19] A. Matulionis, J. Liberis, L. Ardaravi cius, L. F. Eastman, J. R. Shealy, 
and A. Vertiatchikh, Hot-phonon lifetime in AlGaN/GaN at an 
elevated lattice temperature, Semicond. Sci. Technol. (2004).
[20] N. Shigekawa, K. Shiojima, and T. Suemitsu, Optical study of high- 
biased AlGaN/GaN high-electron-mobility transistors, J. Appl. Phys. 
92 (2002) 531-535.
[21] C.-K. Sun, Y.-L. Huang, S. Keller, U. K. Mishra, and S. P. DenBaars, 
Ultra-fast electron dynamics study of GaN, Phys. Rev. B 59 (1999) 
13535-13538.
[22] H. Ye, G. W. Wicks, and P. M. Fauchet, Hot electron relaxation time 
in GaN, Appl. Phys. Lett. 74 (1999) 711-713.

NOISE OF HIGH TEMPERATURE
SUPERCONDUCTING BOLOMETERS
I.A. Khrebtov
S.I. Vavilov State Optical Institute
199034 St.Petersburg
Russia
iiakhrebtov@yahoo.com
Abstract The review describes the noise properties of the high-Tc superconducting 
(HTS) bolometers developed for applications in optical electronic devices of 
infrared and submillimeter wavelengths. The principle of bolometer operation 
and its noise theory are considered. The published results of bolometer noise 
modeling are discussed. Various sources of the excess 1/f-noise in HTS films 
are reviewed. Comparative analysis of noise characteristics of the most 
developed HTS bolometers for application is carried out.
Keywords: 
noise, bolometer, film, high temperature superconductivity
1. 
Introduction
After the discovery of high-Tc superconductivity (HTS) it has become 
obvious that one of the most promising applications of HTS materials is the 
development of high-sensitivity bolometers [1-4]. The operating temperature 
close to 77 K, thin film technology, sharp temperature dependence of 
resistance in the superconducting transition region provide the high 
responsivity and small response time. The sensitivity of the HTS bolometer 
is limited by various noise sources due to the thermodynamic origin, the 
nature of high-Tc superconducting and HTS films technology. It should be 
noted that in spite of the evident progress of the manufacturing HTS 
bolometers the excess 1/f-noise problem is of primary importance [4].
2. 
Some Questions of Bolometer Noise Theory
The operating principle of the HTS bolometer is illustrated by Fig. 1.
97
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (97 - 107) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

98
The radiation is absorbed by a HTS film on a substrate with a heat capacity 
C [J/K], which is weakly coupled to a heat sink through thermal conductance 
G [W/K]. The absorbed radiation heats the HTS film, operating at the 
temperature Tb to change its resistance Rb proportionally to the temperature 
coefficient of resistance 0 = 1/RbxdR/dT [1/K]. The constant bias current Ib 
or voltage Vb are applied to the bolometer and an output voltage or current 
signals are measured with readout electronics.
Figure 1. 
a) Schematic design of bolometer; b) Change of the resistance Rb in the
superconducting transition region due to the absorbed IR radiation.
The ultimate sensitivity is determined by both the noise equivalent power 
{NEP) and the specific detectivity (D*), at bandwidth Af = 1Hz, equal to:
V 
1/2
NEP = -n, [W/Hz1/2], 
SV
(1)
A1/2
NEP
[cmHz1/2/W],
(2)
where Vn is the total noise as composed of a sum of various independent 
noise sources, A is the bolometer area, SV is the voltage responsivity [3]:
SV
Ib (1 - L 0 )(1 + & 2T2)1/2
, [V/W],
(3)
where: L0 = 0Pb /G is the electrothermal feedback (ETF) gain coefficient, Pb 
= Ib2Rb is the bias power, ffi = 2nf is the circle frequency, f is the operating 
frequency, L0 is positive value at the constant bias current (CCM) operation 
and L0 is negative one at constant bias voltage (CVM) operation. 
Accordingly, the effective thermal time constant is T e = t/(1-L0) for CCM 
and Te = t/(1+L0) for CVM, T is the intrinsic thermal time constant.

99
Theoretical value of the detectivity of HTS bolometer, limited by only the 
photon noise in the background radiation, is equal to D*phot=2.8x101° 
cmHz1/2/W at Tphot=300 K and Tb=77 K. Note that in the practice the NEP of 
HTS bolometers is due to other noise sources and, therefore, the resulting 
NEP, which is the same for both positive and negative ETF operations, is 
rewritten as [3-5]:
NEPV,I =
4KTb2 G
~i~+ f ■<
I £2P2Pb
2° 2a 1 [1 
£ 202 NAlfa )
22 
+ GXT T
(4)
+
where: the 1-st term is due to the phonon noise caused by the random energy 
exchange between the bolometer element and the heat sink through G at 
bolometer Tb, the 2-nd term is due to Johnson noise of HTS film resistance, 
the 3-rd component is due to excess current 1/f-noise of HTS film.
Excess 1/f-noise component of NEP is obtained from the empirical 
formula of Hooge [6], where aH is the film quality-dependent parameter for 
HTS film, N is the density of charge carriers in the film, set at 1021 cm-3 [7], 
A is the area and l is the thickness of the film, the coefficient a at f is close to 
1. Usually, the Hooge parameter aH in the normal state is used for the noise 
characterization of HTS films.
It should also be noted that according to “(4)” NEPR and NEP1/f depend 
on the thermal time constant T, but not Te as for SV “(3)”. This factor is 
explained by taking into account the effect of ETF on Johnson and flicker 
noise contributions. In case of CVM operation Pb can be larger than for CCM 
operation, so according to “(4)” Johnson contribution is suppressed with an 
increasing Pb.
Figure2. Calculated noise performance of different HTS bolometers.a) The detectivity D* 
of GdBaCuO bolometer on YSZ/Si membrane versus frequency for various Hooge-parameter 
aH [2, 8]. b) The NEP of YBaCuO bolometers on SrTiO3 substrates versus frequency for 
various aH (a1 = 2-1°-3, a2 = 2-1°"6) [1°]: 1-membrane bolometer, A = 50x5° gm2,
Rb = 20° Q, G = 4'1°-5 W/K, T = 62 gs; 2-microbolometer on solid substrate, A = 1x1° gm2, 
Rb = 25 Q, G = 1.6T°-4 W/K, t = °.25 gs.

100
Modeling of noise parameters of HTS bolometers of various designs was 
reported in [3-5, 8-11]. The calculated analysis of the noise behavior of 
GdBaCuO bolometer on YSZ/Si membrane [2] at f-range of1 Hz - 10 kHz 
was carried out using the experimental data on G and aH = 0.043-43 [8].
Fig. 2a shows that with increasing aH and, thus, degrading film quality, 
D*-value decreases. At the maximum, the achievable D* will be about 80% 
of the possible phonon noise limit of 5-109 cmHz1/2/W for Hooge-parameter 
of HTS film at the transition midpoint of aH = 1-2, and the optical 
absorption e = 0.26 [2].
Fig. 1b shows an estimate of NEP for bolometers using YBaCuO on 
SrTiO3 substrates having a record-low aH [10]. For slow membrane 
bolometer, a NEP value, which is limited only by phonon noise, can be 
achieved at low modulating frequencies < 0.01 Hz (aH = 240-6). At high f > 
104 Hz the increase of NEP is explained by the effect of the Johnson noise. 
The fast microbolometer on solid substrate with a higher G operates at a 
higher bias current, therefore the excess 1/f-noise begins to dominate at f< 
0.1 Hz (aH = 2x10-6). Thus, at aH = 2x10-6 the microbolometer will operate 
at the phonon limit in frequency region of 0.1 Hz-10 MHz.
3. 
Excess 1/f-Noise in HTS films for Bolometers
The problem of noise in the HTS material prospective for new 
microelectronic devices, operating at 77 K, was first discussed in the review 
[7]. Here we consider the results of 1/f-noise study in HTS films prepared on 
substrates of various materials suitable for bolometric application. Noise 
characteristics of the test HTS film samples of meander-type (m) and bridge­
type (b), fabricated by magnetron sputtering (M) or laser ablation (L), are 
presented in Tab. 1. All film structure changes should be attributed only to 
the two main sources: (i) the change of the substrate material, (ii) the 
difference in substrate quality (mosaic spread). The last source is obvious- 
the better the mosaic spread of substrate, the better epitaxial HTS film may 
be manufactured. This effect is especially distinct for substrates with good 
coincidence site lattice conditions (SrTiO3, NdGaO3) with Affi smaller than 
0.3 deg. for which its mosaic spread is negligible.
Typical behavior of 1/f noise for epitaxial YBaCuO films is shown in Fig. 
3 [12]. The study of critical current and noise behavior showed the films 
with high structural perfection had the most and sharpest critical current 
density jc(T), low 1/f-noise in normal state and the absence of magneto­
dependent peak noise in the transition “tail” region [12].

101
Table 1. Noise characteristics of HTS films using for bolometers.
No., 
Ref.
Substrate, 
deposition method
Film size, 
mmXmmXLim
RN,
<>
Aw, 
deg.
P,
K-1
aN
at RN
112
SrTiO3,
L
0.31x0.02x0.2,
b
55
0.3
0.7
3-10-4
212
NdGaO3,
L
0.33x0.010x0.2,
b
86
0.2
1.5
2-10-4
312
MgO,
L
0.51x0.047x0.2,
b
21
0.6
0.7
0.014
412
Al2O3,
L
0.52x0.037x0.2,
b
64
1.7
0.7
0.09
610
SrTiO3,
L
0.5x0.006x0.2,
b
252
0.1
5.8
2-10-6
78
*YSZ/Si,
M
10x0.05x0.05,
m
9700
0.6
0.01
93
*YSZ/Si/SiN,
M
17x0.025x0.06,
m
20000
5.8
1.0
In Table: *GdBaCuO film, others-YBaCuO films, RN is the resistance in the normal state, Aw 
is the half of film (005) rocking curve from X-ray measurements.. The critical temperatures of 
superconducting transition were in the region of 85-92 K.
A few models were proposed to interpret the origin of the noise peak. 
These include the vortex motion [13], thermodynamic phase transition of the 
vortex state [14] and critical current fluctuations of weak links [15]. 
Investigation of critical current behavior in YBaCuO films allows one to 
think that the factor, due to vortex motion, dominates in structural perfect 
films. The factor of weak links dominates in films of granular type. In most 
cases the experimenters deal with films of average quality and then both 
factors affect simultaneously.
A percolation model of 1/f-noise in superconductors was proposed to 
describe the noise behavior in a wide temperature region from normal state 
down to superconducting state [7]. In this model the superconductors are 
considered as a resistance network whose elements are grain boundary 
junctions. The total network resistance is a function of the fraction of 
superconducting junctions p and the resistance fluctuations arise from 
random switching of the junctions (p-noise). Noise behavior of granular and 
epitaxial films is in good agreement with that percolation model. The 
percolation also explains the noise peak as a 3D/2D-crossover of the 
percolation.
There is a confidence, that the excess 1/f-noise in the normal phase is 
caused by the structural fluctuation processes in the vicinity of the extended 
structural defects. The intrinsic deformation fluctuations <e>, due to the 
matching of the substrate and HTS film with the lattice parameters and the 
temperature expansion coefficient, lead to the relaxation of substrate 
disorder and 1/f-noise in the normal phase [16].

102
Figure 3. Noise voltage Vn and resistance R/RN versus temperature for YBaCuO films on 
various substrates. 1 - A12O3, j = 1.4-105 A/cm2, 2 - MgO, j = 1.1-105 A/cm2, 3+ - NdGaO3, 
j = 1.1-106 A/cm2, 3 - NdGaO3, j = 1.1 -104 A/cm2, 4 - SrTiO3, j = 1.1 -104 A/cm2 [12].
4. 
Experimental Noise Study of HTS Bolometers
4.1. 
Noise of bolometers on micromachined silicon technology
At present, HTS bolometers fabricated by micromachined silicon 
membrane technology are considered as the most prospective high 
performance infrared detectors [1-4, 8-9, 11-12, 17]. However, in spite of 
large advantages of this technology there is a problem of the excess flicker 
noise in HTS films on silicon substrates.
The structural quality of films is affected by some mechanisms: (i) 
through the large lattice mismatch between the buffer layer and the HTS film 
on top, (ii) through the large difference of the temperature dependent 
expansion coefficients within the layer system, (iii) through the 
interdiffusion along grain boundaries and the resulting chemical reactions. 
Thus, during thermal cycling, microcracks formation is observed in the 
system. It may result in affecting the bolometer parameters, especially, 
noise. The influence of microcracks formation in GdBaCuO film on Si- 
membrane on noise and degradation of characteristics had been investigated 
in [8]. The results of SEM image and noise spectral measuring, showed in 
Fig. 4a, confirm it.
Fig. 4a shows that at f < 10 Hz flicker noise is dominant and the Vn2 line 
strictly follows the 1/f-dependence, with Vn2 ~ f-(0.8-1.0). The Vn2 measured at 

103
operating T, where the bolometric signal is maximum, typically revealed a 
plateau at 10 < f < 200 Hz, due to phonon noise. At frequencies > 10 Hz 1/f- 
noise decreases, while the phonon noise is invariable up to 200 Hz. Further 
the phonon noise begins to decrease as Vn2 ~ 1/f 2, i.e., more than flicker 
noise. As result, the noise at high frequencies is due to the Johnson noise. 
Such behavior of noise agrees with calculation [8].
Figure. 4. a) Noise spectrum Vn2(f) of GdBaCuO bolometers on YSZ/Si membrane in CCM 
operation [2, 8]. Virgin sample No. 1: 1 - Ib = 0.24 mA, T = 300 K, 2 - Ib =1.1 mA, 
Rb = 0.001RN; virgin sample No. 2 (data of No. 2 are shown in Tab. 2): 4 — Ib = 0.24 mA, Rb 
= 0.3RN; aged sample No. 2: 3 - Ib = 0.24 mA, Rb=0.5RN. b) Noise spectrum of one from 
GdBaCuO bolometers on YSZ/Si/Si3N4 membrane at T = 89.5 K [3]. The phonon noise was 
calculated using following parameters: Ib = 17.8 |1A, Rb = 1.9 kQ, P = 5.8 1/K, G = 18 |1W/K, 
L0 = 0.19, Te = 95 ms, SV = 8.4 kV/W (electrical one at e = 1) at f = 1/2nTe.
Fig. 4b shows a frequency dependence of Vn (f) of GdBaCuO bolometer 
on an YSZ/Si/Si3N4 membrane. The bolometer differs from the previous Si- 
membrane bolometer by a low thermal conductance and, accordingly, low 
response time, but higher responsivity (see Tab. 2, No. 3). It can be seen that 
between 0.2 and 3 Hz the measured spectrum is also fully due to the 
calculated phonon noise. Note, the samples No. 2 [17] and No. 4 [9] show 
the possibility of manufacturing HTS microbolometer arrays with high 
performance.
Table 2. Noise characteristics of HTS bolometers based on Si-micromachined technology.
No
Ref
Membrane
A/t, 
|lm2/|lm
Rb, 
Q
aH
G, 
mW/K
T, 
ms
SV, 
kV/W
NEP, 
pW/Hz1/2
D*, 
cmHz1/2/W
12
*YSZ/Si
72-104/1
6400
0.01 0.3
0.58
0.85
22.0
3.8-109
217
YSZ
8000/0.07 8000
3.6
8.5-10-5 110
32
1.5
8-109
33
*YSZ/Si/SiN 95-104/1
3600
1.0
1.5-10-2 115
4.76
5.5
1.8-1010
49
CeO2/YSZ
104/0.08
-
-
6.2-10-4 0.56
12
4.0
2.5-109
In Table: * - GdBaCuO films, others-YBaCuO film; t is the thickness of the membrane; SV, 
NEP and D* are obtained from optical measurements.

104
4.2. 
Noise of antenna-couple HTS microbolometers
One of the prospective applications of HTS films is the antenna-couple 
microbolometers, operating in far infrared and submillimeter wavelength 
regions [1, 4, 12, 18-22]. In such detectors, an HTS microbridge, connected 
to the output of receiving metal film antenna, is used as a thermal converter 
of high-frequency power generated by the antenna into a comparatively low- 
frequency output signal. The small size of HTS element of about some pm2 
provides a fast response and, when operating at high frequencies, allows one 
to operate near to phonon noise limit [12, 19, 22]. However, because of the 
element contact with substrate having high thermal conductivity, high bias 
current density is used in these microbolometers. Thus, current 1/f-noise has 
a stronger effect on their NEP at low operating frequencies (see Fig. 6).
In addition to their very small size, the local defects can influence the 
noise properties of such detectors, therefore, very narrow temperature­
dependent noise peaks at transition tail would be observed in the 
microbolometers [20]. Fig. 5a shows that the intensity of narrow peak noise 
in the range of T << Tc for YBaCuO microbolometer is very sensitive to 
small variations of magnetic field. Noise spectra (Fig. 5b) at the maximum 
(a) and (b) are of Vn2 ~ 1/f 2 type, while at the minimum (c) the frequency 
noise dependence is close to the Lorentzian form with frequency cut-off 
fcut-off ~ 5 kHz. However, the noise peak, proportional to dR/dT has a typical 
Vn2 ~ 1/f dependence.
Using the LTSEM technique, the noise origin of the single peak for 
YBaCuO meander film on MgO substrate was localized, and it was 
established that the noise peak was related to a single weak link on a 
microcrack blocking the path of current percolation [23]. This noise has the 
character of random telegraph signals and may arise from the Abrikosov 
vortex motion resulting in the fluctuations of the phase difference across the 
weak link which leads to the fluctuations of its critical current [23].
Figure 5. Noise characteristics of YBaCuO microbolometer (3x35x0.15 pm3) on YSZ 
substrate [20]. a) Temperature dependencies of noise Vn (1, 2) at f = 10 Hz , I = 0.98 mA and 
resistance (3) for at various magnetic fields: 1 -B = 0; 2 - B (±) = 8 mT. b) Noise spectrum 
Vn2 (f): 1 - T = 83.5 K, B = 0; 2 - T = 87.6 K, dfl/dT(max), B = 0; 3 - T = 84.1 K, B = 0.

105
Note that for microbolometers 1/f-noise at T < Tc is less dangerous than 
the noise peak proportional to dR/dT in the transition middle, which has been 
observed for YBaCuO microbolometer on YSZ substrate [20].
Tab. 3 and Fig. 6 show the results of experimental investigation of 
antenna-couple YBaCuO microbolometers on various substrates [12, 21, 22]. 
Fig. 6 shows the noise characteristics of the microbolometer on a NdGaO3 
substrate (No. 3, Tab. 3) that was patterned and provided by an Au bow-tie 
antenna. The noise and microbolometer response in a high frequency range 
have similar temperature dependencies in the transition region. The noise 
voltage in the maximum is close to that calculated from a phonon noise, 
furthermore, its coincidence with the signal dependence confirms that the 
observed noise is a phonon one. Nevertheless, the excess noise restricts the 
sensitivity of a detector up to ~1 kHz, which is seen on Fig. 6 [12].
Figure 6. a) Frequency dependence of the noise voltage Vn for YBaCuO microbolometer on a 
NdGaO3 substrate (No. 3, Tab. 3). Solid line is the calculated phonon noise. b) Experimental 
frequency dependencies of the electrical responsivity Se and noise equivalent power NEPe.
The frequency dependence of the experimental noise and calculated 
phonon noise beyond 10 kHz also agree. It is seen that the best antenna 
microbolometers have electrical NEPe, limited only by phonon noise, within 
the frequency range of (0.001-3) MHz for NdGaO3 substrate and 100 Hz- 
30MHz for LaAlO3 substrate. Note that the optical NEP and D* depend on 
the efficiency of film antenna and the wavelength of radiation [18].
Table 3. Noise characteristics of antenna-coupled YBaCuO microbolometers
No., 
Ref.
Substrate 
material
YBaCuO 
film size,pm2
Rb, 
Q
an
G, 
mW/K
T, 
ns
Se , 
kV/W
NEPe , 
pW/Hz1/2
120
YSZ
13x6
40
0.4
0.036 2-104
0.48
4.5
219
YSZ membr.
10X5
75
0.13
0.003
104
*2.9
*9
312
NdGaO3
14x2
24
2-10-2
0.3
3102
0.24
16
418
LaAlO3
1X0.7
20
1.4-10-4 0.005
30
1.7
1.5
in Table: * - measured optical S and NEP.

106
References
[1] P. L. Richards, Bolometers for infrared and millimeter waves, J. Appl. 
Phys. 76 (1994) 1-24.
[2] H. Neff, J. Laukemper, I. A. Khrebtov et al, Sensitive high-Tc 
transition edge bolometer on micromachined silicon membrane, Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 66 (1995) 2421-2423.
[3] de M. J. M. E Nivelle, M. P. Bruijn, de R. Vries et al, Low noise high- 
Tc superconducting bolometers on silicon nitride membranes for far- 
infrared detection, J. Appl. Phys. 82 (1997) 4719-4726.
[4] I.A. Khrebtov, Noise properties of high temperature superconducting 
bolometers. Fluctuation and Noise Letters, 2 No.2 (2002) R51-R70.
[5] A. T. Lee, J. M. Gildemeister, S-F. Lee and P. L. Richards, Voltage- 
biased high-Tc superconducting infrared bolometers with strong 
electrothermal feedback, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 7 (1997) 
2378-2381.
[6] F. N. Hooge, T. G. Kleinpenning and L. K. Vandamme, Experimental 
studies of 1/f noise, Rep. Prog. Phys. 44 (1981) 479-532.
[7] L. B. Kiss and P. Svedlindh, Noise in high Tc superconductors, IEEE 
Trans. Electron. Devices 41 (1994) 2112-2122.
[8] H. Neff, I. A. Khrebtov, A. D. Tkachenko et al, Noise bolometric 
performance and aging of thin high Tc superconducting films on 
silicon membranes, Thin Solid Films 324 (1998) 230-238.
[9] L. Mechin, J. Villegier and D. Bloyet, Suspended epitaxial YBaCuO 
microbolometers fabricated by silicon micromachining: Modeling and 
measurements, J. Appl. Phys. 81 (1997) 7039-7047.
[10] I. A. Khrebtov, B. Dam, A. D. Tkachenko et al, YBCO films on 
SrTiO3 substrates with recordly low 1/f noise for bolometer 
applications, Proc. of 4th European Workshop on Low Temperature 
Electronics, ESA WPP-171 (2000) 335-339.
[11] S. Verghese, P. L. Richards, K. Char et al, Feasibility of infrared 
imaging arrays using high-Tc superconducting bolometers, J. Appl. 
Phys. 71 (1992) 2491-2498.
[12] I. A. Khrebtov, V. N. Leonov, A. D. Tkachenko et al, Noise of high-Tc 
superconducting films and bolometers, J. Phys. IV France 8Pr3 
(1998) 293-296.
[13] G. Jung, M. Bonaldi, S. Vitale and J. Konopka, One the origin of low 
frequency noise in HTSC thin films, Physica C 180 (1991) 276-279.

107
[14] D. G. Steel, D. H. Kim, K. E. Gray et al, Electrical-noise signatures of 
possible vortex transitions in epitaxial YBa2Cu3O7 thin films, Physica 
C 248 (1995) 55-60.
[15] D. V. Shantsev, A. V. Bobyl, M. E. Gaevskii et al, Noise properties of 
inhomogeneous non-linear medium: application to high-Tc 
superconductors, in Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f Fluctuations, 
Proc. 14th Int. Conf., eds. C. Clayes and E. Simoen, Leuven (1997), 
321-324.
[16] A. V. Bobyl, M. E. Gaevskii, S. F. Karmanenko et al, Intrinsic 
microstrains and normal-phase flicker noise in YBa2Cu3O7 epitaxial 
films grown on various substrates, J. Appl. Phys. 82 (1997) 
1274-1280
[17] B. R. Johnson, M. C. Foote, H. A. Marsh and B. D. Hunt, Epitaxial 
YBa2Cu3O7 superconducting infrared microbolometers on silicon, 
Proc. SPIE 2267 (1994) 24-30.
[18] V. N. Leonov and I. A. Khrebtov, Antenna-coupled thermal radiation 
detectors (Review), Instr. Exp. Techn. 36 (1993) 501-520.
[19] M. Nahum, Q. Hu, P. L. Richards et al, Fabrication and measurement 
of a high-Tc superconducting microbolometer, IEEE Trans. Magn. 
MAG-27 (1991) 3081-3085.
[20] V. N. Leonov and I. A. Khrebtov, Noise of YBaCuO 
microbolometers, Superconductivity: Phys. Chem. Techn. 4 (1991) 
1260-1266.
[21] I. R. Rice, E. N. Grossman and D. A. Rudman, Antenna-coupled 
high-Tc air bridge microbolometer on silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 65 
(1994) 773-775.
[22] S. F. Karmanenko, A. A. Semenov, I. A. Khrebtov et al, Fabrication 
process and noise properties of antenna-coupled microbolometers 
based on superconducting YBCO films, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 13 
(2000) 273-286.
[23] A. V. Bobyl, M. E. Gaevski, S. F. Karmanenko et al, Magneto­
depending noise of a single latent weak link in YBa2Cu3O7-x film, 
Physica C 266 (1996) 32-40.

1/f NOISE IN MOSTs: FASTER IS NOISIER
L.K.J. Vandamme
Eindhoven University of Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering EH 9.13 
5600MB Eindhoven
The Netherlands
L.K.J.Vandamme@tue.nl
Abstract Circuit-simulation-oriented equations (SPICE and BSIM3) for the 1/f noise
are discussed and their fitting parameters are translated in the 1/f noise 
parameter a. The effect of scaling down on the 1/f noise is studied in the 
ohmic region as well as in saturation and sub-threshold. A prospective for 
scaling down is given for channel length L < 0.12 nm where velocity 
saturation becomes dominant. A relation is proposed between the 1/f noise 
corner frequency fc, where the 1/f noise is equal to the thermal noise, and the 
unit current gain frequency fI. Faster devices (with higher fT ) are inherently 
noisier considering fc . Approximately holds, 10-4 fT < fc < 10-3 fT.
Keywords: 
MOST, 1/f noise, thermal noise, fT, unit current gain frequency, SPICE, BSIM
1. Introduction
The majority of 1/f noise results obtained on homogeneous 
semiconductors and p-MOSTs can be described by Hooge’s empirical 
relation [1] considering the 1/f noise [2-4] as a volume effect
SI 
SV 
SR 
SG a
I 2 V 2 R2 G2 Nf
(1)
a, the 1/f noise parameter is not a constant [2] but volume and device­
length independent [3, 5] with values between 10-6 and 10-3 for metals and 
semiconductors. A systematic study [4, 5] of flicker noise in CMOSTs 
shows that for modern p-and n-channel devices holds 10-6< a <10-4. N is the 
total number of free charge carriers in a homogeneous sample with perfect 
contacts. N must be replaced by a well-defined reduced number in samples 
submitted to non-homogeneous fields [6] as is often the case in contacts. 
Often technology recipes are described to achieve low 1/f noise devices
109
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (109 - 120) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands. 

110
without being specific about what is low. For sake of comparison the a- 
parameter can be used. a is a quantitative figure of merit for the 1/f noise. 
The usefulness of Eq. (1) lays in the fact that a comparison in 1/f noise in a- 
values is made independent of bias, frequency and size of the device. It 
expresses the relative noise in the conductivity for one carrier at 1 Hz in a 
single very specific value. The larger the amount of carriers in the sample 
the lower is the amount of relative noise in the resistance. The misuse of the 
empirical relation (1) to calculate a values from experimental results by 
overlooking either noisy series resistances or the non-uniform current 
densities on a microscopic scale, e.g., by replacing 1/N by qi.iR/L2, always 
leads to overestimation in terms of apparent a-values [2, 3, 6, 7] The 
equation 1/N = qtiR/L2 with q the elementary charge, id. the mobility, R the 
sample resistance and L the length between the contacts, only holds for 
homogeneous fields in homogeneous samples. The 1/f noise of n-MOSTs 
has been described successfully by carrier-number fluctuations JN, which 
are thought to be caused by tunnelling of free-charge carriers into oxide traps 
close to the Si-SiO2 interface [7]. Classical arguments in favour of the 
McWhorter model are the observed proportionality between trap density and 
1/f noise [8, 9]. In chapter 2, we discuss the geometry and bias dependence 
of 1/f noise in MOSFETs. Table 1 shows some 1/f noise relations for 
MOSFETs based on the empirical relation. Table 2 shows some circuit­
simulation-oriented equations (SPICE and BSIM3) for the 1/f noise in 
MOSTs with the fitting parameters translated in a-values. In chapter 3 we 
demonstrate that faster devices are inherently noisier. In Table 3 the relations 
for thermal noise and corner frequency are shown. In Table 4 the calculated 
1/f noise, thermal noise and fc, fT is shown for 5 devices from 3 different 
technologies.
2. Geometry-, and Bias-Dependence in a- and SPICE­
parameters
The study of geometry and bias dependence of the 1/f noise in sub­
micron MOSTs is a powerful diagnostic tool to discriminate between 
channel and series resistances noise [10, 11]. Only if series resistance 
contributions can be ignored, the straightforward circuit-simulation-oriented 
equations can be applied. The 1/f noise parameter a is used in our analysis as 
a figure of merit. Its value is gate-length independent at least if the channel 
length is larger than the mean free path of carriers [5]. For the sake of 
simplicity we assume no series resistance or edge current problems. This 
results in a generally accepted dependence between the 1/f noise in MOSTs 
and the channel area [7, 8]; however, the dependence on oxide thickness is 

111
still under discussion. We start from the empirical relation (1) and suggest 
that even in the MOSTFET the 1/f noise is a bulk phenomenon with Ap 
fluctuations due to electron-lattice interactions in the bulk. If experimental 
results are at variance with this hypothesis, which is sometimes the case for 
surface-channel n-MOSTs, we find « ^ 1/VG for kT/q < VG* <1V. Then all 
derived equations are still applicable. In Table 1 a number of simple 
equations is described in order to be able to analyze and compare 
experimental results expressed in different ways in literature.
Table 1. 1/f noise relations for MOSFETs, based on the empirical relation, geometry and bias 
dependencies [5] [7] [9] [12] [14]
Bias condition
Equations
Ohmic
(below saturation)
V * VG
Vg= Vg - Vt > 0
SI _ aquR _ aq^VD _ 
aq
I2 l2f 
Il2f 
CoxVG*Wlf
S = aq,V I = aq,2 < V V W
I 
l2f 
fl3
*
S = aqVG
Veq 0 
WlCoxf
Saturation
V * V'G
a) vd < vsat
2aIS aq,2 < V W
SI = 
=
IS 
Nf 
2fl3
S (I) J20q^1/2IR
IS s 
W1/2Co1x/2fl3/2
*
S (V *) = aqV
Ve^ 
2WlCxf
S 
(I ) = 
aqIs1/2
q 
T2(WCox )3/2(lA)1/2 f
b) vd = vsat 
(l < 0.15pm)
2
S = OWCoxVGvsat
*
SV- = CoxWlf
Weak inversion 
Sub threshold [12]
SIsub 
a 
a 
aq2
—-— =-------------^------=------------
IU 
(N + No)f 
N 0 f 
kTCoxWlf
With N = CoxVG*WL/q withVG* = VGS - VT and the simple current-voltage

112
Eq. (2) (3), we find the 1/f noise relations [7, 12]. Ignoring the a dependence 
on scattering others than lattice scattering we find in Table 1 the relations for 
the ohmic, saturation and sub-threshold region [5, 7, 9, 12]. At fixed VG* 
compared to the ohmic region (Vd ^ 0) we find in saturation a reduced free 
carrier number. For the thermal current noise holds in first approximation a 
factor 2/3 between the current noise of a MOST biased in saturation and in 
ohmic region at the same gate voltage [13]. For the 1/f noise holds a factor 2 
[14]. For the ratio between the relative 1/f noise in the saturation and in the 
ohmic region at the same gate voltage holds (SIsat / Isat2) / (SI / I2) = 2. 
Ignoring the series resistance, velocity saturation and body effect, we expect 
for the saturation current and transconductance in first order approximation
Is = (W/L)hC0XVg /2 and ■ 
= dIs IdV*G =(W/L'JCOXV* = 2Is IV^I)
For deep sub-micron (L < 0.12 ,//m) the simple equations (2) for current and 
transconductance are no more valid when the devices are biased at drain and 
gate voltages of about 1 V. Current density is given by J = qnvd and under 
velocity saturation conditions the drift velocity vd has to be replaced by a 
field independent saturation velocity rv ~ 107cm/s for silicon. For a 2­
dimensional description J is in A/cm and n is the concentration of carriers 
per unit area (cm-2). Hence the current and the transconductance become:
Isat = WC0xVG*vsat and gm = WC0xvsat = Is/VG* 
(3)
The 1/f fluctuations and the a-value under hot carrier conditions at velocity 
saturation are reduced compared to the values at low fields [1].
Table 2. HSPICE level: 0, 1, 2, 3 and BSIM3-parameters translated in q-values [5] [7]
______ 
SPICE
Saturation-^- = withN = WlCjC / q Vd > Vi
_ 0 
-» t r 
OX Lr -i 
(IS 
Lr
Is Nf
NLEV=0
s _ KFOlJ 
cj2f
AF=l-,KF0 = aqVjiCox 
AF=3/2; KF0 = aq(2/uCJ/Wj2
NLEV=1
s KFUf 
' CJWf
AF = 1; KFl = aqVjiCJW/r) 
AF=3/2; KF1 = aq(J(Cox (W / Z))1/2
NLEV=2, 3 
BSIM3v2
KF2g2m 
kJ T -
’ CJWf
KF2 = aqVj2
In Table 2 we show some pragmatic circuit-simulation oriented noise 
equations in order to be able to calculate a-values from results in literature 
given in KF0, KF1, KF2 values. The fourth column in Table 2, bridge the 

113
gap between the parameters used by circuit designers and the «-value 
characterizing the relative 1/f noise at 1Hz per carrier. The disadvantage of 
the K-values is that they often are geometry and bias dependent except for 
KF2, applied to surface-channel n- MOSTs if a VG is constant.
3. The Faster the MOSFET, the Higher the 1/f Noise
The corner frequency, fc , where the 1/f noise equals the thermal noise is 
a figure of merit for the low frequency noise, while the unit current gain 
frequency or the so-called transition frequency, fT, is used as a 
characterization of the high frequency behaviour of MOSTs. In Table 3 a 
new relation shows that the higher fT will be, the higher fc will be, or faster is 
noisier. In order to calculate the intersection between thermal and 1/f noise 
we need the expressions for 1/f and thermal noise of MOSFETs [7, 9, 13, 
14]. The thermal noise and fc are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3. Thermal noise SI , SVeq and frequency fc, geometry and bias dependence [9]
Bias 
condition
Thermal noise equations: 
SI. ; SVeqh versus VG* and Is
fc (VG*), fc (Is)
Ohmic 
u = VD / VG 
u<1
_ 4kTR0 f1-u + u2/3 
SVeqth = u2 [ 1 -u/2 J 
c _4kT [ 1 -u + u2 13
aqu2 (1 - u / 2)2^VG* 
4kTl 2 (1 -u+u2 / 3)
= fc
Ith 
R0 
1 -u/2 J
VD ^ VG
u=1
SI. (>'G)= 24kTWWZC„|VG|
e 
C*C 2 4 kT _ 2 
4 kTl
SVeqth (VG )= 
=
*2
f = 3aqVG ^ 
c 
16 kTl1
qth 
3 gms 3 -, 
VG
r w 
Y12
SIth (Is) =Y8kT[-^ CoxIsat)
S (I ) =^^ 
4kTl1/2
SVeqth (Is ) = 3 
1/2 
1/2 
1/2 1/2
3 W ^ Cox 1 sat
f = 3aqIs 
7c 8 kTWlCox
The equivalent input noise SVeqth counting for the Brownian motion of the 
carriers in the channel in Table 3 is obtained from SI / gm2s and expressed 
as a function of VG* or Is. For u^ 0, by VD 0, gm 0, the SVeqth becomes 

114
divergent. This has no physical meaning. The thermal equivalent input 
voltage noise is proportional to l /W and1/VG* , and SIs has the opposite 
dependence. For the 1/f noise SVeqth and SIs holds that both increase with bias, 
but with different dependencies (see Table 1). The corner frequency fc is 
obtained from Sth = S1/f and is the same for the equivalent input noise voltage 
or the current noise. Now we calculate in Table 4, as a function of geometry 
and bias, fc, fT, fc / fT and SVeq and SIs, together with the integrated noise 
represented by < A Veq > and < AIS2 > , respectively. From the expressions in 
Tables 1 and 3 we obtain for MOSTs biased in saturation fc (VG* ) and fc (Is) 
respectively [9].
* *v*\ — 3aqVG A 
c G 16kTl2
3aqVG gms f f (I ) 3aqIs 
16kTWlC an* 7 c< S 8 kTWlC
fc = 3noqVG 
fT 
8 kT
At room temperature, with a = 2x10-5 and VG =1V holds that fc = 10-3fT. The 
ratio is independent of geometry. The a- values are technology dependent, 
with high values (10-4) for oxide implanted substrates or other lattice damage 
in the current path of the inversion layer. fc and fT increase withVG; ; however, 
for n-channel MOSFETs sometimes holds that a VG- is constant and thenfc /fT 
is even independent of bias.
The integrated noise (variance in a bandwidth fh-fl) also is considered as a 
figure of merit. SVeq (f) , < AVe2q > andSI (f) , < AIS2 > can be written as:
ox 
ox
(4)
We must emphasize that fc is a relative figure of merit and not an absolute 
one. A low value for fc does not mean a low value for the integrated noise in 
the device. Comparing two devices with the same channel length l, bias 
voltage VG at the same temperature, but with different widths (W/l ratios) 
will show the same fc value, but the widest device will have the lowest 1/f 
and thermal noise expressed in SVeq .
The unit current gain frequency fT of a MOSFET is defined as: 
f = 
gms 
= AVG ^ AG
Jt 
2nCoxlW 
2nl2 ~ l2
(5)
The highest frequency for applications is about fh = fT /5 . Both frequencies 
fc and fT are proportional to 1/l2; hence the ratio fc /fT becomes independent of 
channel length as can be seen in the ratio:
(6)

115
Sveq (f) = a + b / f and < AV^ >= a(fh - fL)+ b ln(fh I fL), (7)
SIs (f) = c + d 1 f and <A I2 >= c (fh - fL ) + d ln( fh / fL ),
where a and c represent the thermal noise contributions as given in Table 3 
and b and d represent the 1/f part of the spectrum with values as given in 
Table 1. The following simple relations hold between a, b, c and d:
fc = bIa = dIc and gm2s = cIa = d Ib (8)
The integrated 1/f noise (fL=1 Hz) can be ignored compared to the integrated 
thermal noise if fc/fT < 10-2, which is often the case in broadband 
applications. The condition for an integrated thermal noise equal to the 
variance of the 1/f noise contribution leads to:
a(fh - fL)=bln(fhIfL) or (fh - fL)= fCln(fhIfL) (9)
For fh >> fL and taking into account that the highest frequency applied in the 
MOST is related to fT as fh = fT/p (often withp ~ 5), we find for Eq. (9):
— = fc ln(fT / pfL ) or f^ = p ln(fT I pfL) 
(10)
p 
fC
At room temperature, even with p < 5 (as in broadband applications) and a < 
10-4 (healthy technology), we find that < AVe2q > or < AIS2 > always are 
dominated by the thermal noise contribution. For fh = fT and fL << fh we find 
the surprising result that < AVe2q > is independent of bias and mobility and 
inversely proportional to the total gate capacitance. Smaller is noisier.
< AVe2q
A V2 >=-^T-
eqth 
3nWlCox ’
(11)
The spectral value SVeq and fT are proportioned to 1IVG* andVG* , 
respectively. The result in Eq. (11) is similar to the variance of the thermal 
noise across a resistor in parallel with a capacitance C, there too we 
have < AV 2 >= kTIC . In order to illustrate the complex trade off between 
device size, current density, power consumption, low integrated noise and 
speed in advanced submicron technologies, five simulation examples are 
shown in Table 4 and in Fig. 1a in SVeq (f) and Fig. 1b inSI (f) values .

116
Table 4. Calculated fT, Sreq (f), Sj if, < ISV >^“ and < A/^ >^“(with f, = fTl5) and current density (I/W) for different technologies, 
geometries and bias conditions. Devices I, II, IV belong to a 0.15 pm technology with /OI=3nm, Device II is a 1.5 //m technology with /OI=30nm and 
device V a 15 //m technology with tox = 300nm. All devices have and a = 10'5 and are at T= 320 K and devices I, II, III, IV have a //= 300 cm2/Vs and 
device V a //= 600 cnr^Vs.
No
W/l
|im/ j-im
*
1'G
(V)
Is/W
(A/ gm)
h
(A)
Sms
(AAZ)
f
(Hz)
fr
(Hz)
S3
N 
II
+
| Cf
<A(',2 >2
(V)
SL = c+-
Is f
<a7hz)
1
<A/j >2
(A)
fe/fr-
I
1/0.15
0.466
2.5x10"
2.5x10"
1.1x10"
1.96x10’
9.9xlO10
l.lxl0"’+2.16xl0"°/f 4.7x10"
1.3xl0"3+2.5xl0"7f
5x10"
2x10"
II
10/1.5
0.093
10"
10"
2.15x10"
7.9xl03
2x10s
5.5xl0"’+4.3xl0"7f
4.7x10"
2.5xl0"4+2xl0"°/f
10"
4x10"
III
10/1.5
0.294
10"
10"
6.77x10"
7.9xl04
6.3x10s
1.7xl0"6+1.36xl0“/f
1.5x10"
7.97xl0"’+6.2xl0"°/f
10"
1.2x10"
IV
10/1.5
0.466
2.5x10"
2.5x10"
1.1x10"
1.97xl05
9.9x10s
l.lxl0"’+2.1xl0"7f
4.7x10"
1.3xl0"3+2.5xl0"7f
5x10"
2x10"
V
10715
2
9.2x10"
9.2x10"
9.2x10"
7.25xl04
8.4x10’
1.3xl0"’+9.27xl0"7f
1.5x10"
LlxlO"3+7.8xlO"7f
1.35x10"
8.6x10"

117
10-10 l I SV eq [V2/HZ]
10-11
10—12
10-13
10-14
10-15
10-16
10-17
--------- I
—fB—. II
--------- III
—□— IV
—■—■ V
100 
102 
104 
106 
108 
1010
f [Hz] ■
■■■■ixiiiii
Figure. 1a. Calculated spectra of 5 different devices from 3 different technologies as given 
in Table 4 and calculated with equations from Table 1 and 3 for 1 Hz < f < fT /5
Device I is the shortest, fastest, noisiest and smallest one. Device II has the 
same W/l ratio as device I but an area that is 102 times larger. Device II is 
slower and is weakly biased to have a low current density in the channel in 
order to have the lowest 1/f noise. Device III has the same area, current 
density and W/l ratio as device II, but it is an older technology (1.5pm 
technology with tox = 30nm in stead of tox = 3nm for I, II and IV). Device IV 
can be compared to I, same technology, same W/l and bias, same 
transconductance, but channel length and width are 10 times higher. This 
shows the benefits of a low noise design by increasing dimensions in an 
advanced submicron technology at the expense of lower fT. Lower 1/f and 
thermal noise is possible at the expense of a larger channel area and a lower 
fT, e.g., comparing device I and IV. Device V is a 35-year-old technology 
with L = 15 pm, tox = 300nm and p = 600cm2/Vs.
High mobility MOSFETs are realized in Si/SiGe. Such devices will show 
compared to a reference device with lower mobility, and the same a, for the 

118
same effective bias condition (VG) and the same W and l a higher gm, fT and 
fc but the same ratio fc/fT and a lower SVeqth. However, the integrated noise 
over the full bandwidth remains constant (see Eq. 11).
1015
1017
k i Sis [A2/HZ]
E V Is 
V
■ X
r X 
E 
V
\IV \
k\ \
■ w \
------ I
-a- II
-o- III
------ IV 
v
io19
io-23
io-21
f [Hz]
io25
.J.UUl£-LJJLUri_IUJlHLl_Umi.-LJJlud_ILlUHLl_LlUlL-LJJllld_ILLll»riLuLllllL-LUlll
100 
1 02 
1 04 
1 06 
1 08 
io10
Figure 1b. Calculated spectra of 5 different devices from 3 different technologies as given 
in Table 4 and calculated with equations from Table 1 and 3 for 1 Hz < f < fT /5
4. 
Conclusions, a-values, and tox dependence
Geometry dependence is well understood; there is debate only on the tox 
dependence. The width, length and VG* dependence can be used as a 
diagnostic tool to trace series resistance and edge current contributions in 
sub-micron devices.
The 1 /f noise parameter « is a perfect figure of merit to describe the 1 /f noise 
in a comparative study of CMOS transistors [4, 5]. In this way we better can 
compare different technologies in a quantitative way and study the change in 
noise source through degradation independent of geometry, frequency and 
current passed through the sample. A review over several technologies 
shows:
(i) The a-parameter scatters over the usual 2-orders of magnitude just like in 
bulk semiconductors (10-6 < a < 10-4). We observed « ~ 3x10-7 which is 

119
among the lowest values ever observed for bulk p-MOSTs, while for n- 
MOSTs holds 3x10-5V<a VG *<3x10-4V, with a^VG *-1 [8]. This means that for 
n-MOSTs a at VG* = 1V is between 3x10-5 < a < 3x10-4 and the 
proportionality a < VG *-1 often holds for 0.1 V < VG * < 1 V.
(ii) High quality wafers with epitaxial layers on top and in situ doping 
instead of implanting and buried channels are the right precautions to reduce 
a-values and to realize ultra low 1/f noise MOSFETs. Not well-annealed 
implantations leave some crystal damage in the current path and will 
probably cause a generation-recombination noise on top of the 1/f noise. If 
there is a single trap at the Fermi level positions and N < 1/a [15] it becomes 
an RTS contribution on top of the 1/f noise.
(iii) The recent [16] and old results [9] show SVeq ^ tox and not SVeq ^ t2ox as 
expected from the AN model. The a-values are at least not a function of tox2 
or tox and SVeq ^ tox for 2nm < tox < 600nm is an indication against the AN 
origin for the 1/f noise in MOSFETs. The devices with tox=600nm are 
designed as sensors for ionising radiation.
The difference between n- and p-MOSTs expressed in a becomes smaller if: 
n-MOSTs are compared with surface channel p-MOSTs (p+ polysilicon gate) 
or bulk n-MOSTs are compared with bulk p-type MOSFETs. Surface 
channel n-MOSTs are easier to interpret in the straightforward AN 
formalism, while low-noise p-MOSTs follow the straightforward At.i 
formalism.
The equations in Table 2 show that the simulation oriented parameters are 
geometry and bias dependent at least for p-type MOSFETs that make the 
noise prediction rather difficult. Considering the typical a ^ 1/VG 
proportionality for surface n-MOSFETs, NLEV2, 3 is very useful, because 
the KF2 is geometry independent. For p-type MOSFETs, a-values are in 
general VG* independent.
Acknowledgements
The NATO Project Science for Peace (SfP-973799) has financially 
supported part of this work
References
[1] F.N.Hooge, T.G.M.Kleinpenning, and L.K.J.Vandamme, Experimental 
studies on 1/f noise, Rep. on Prog. in Phys. 44 (1981) 479-532.
[2] L.K.J. Vandamme, Is the 1/fnoise parameter a a constant?, Proc. 7th 
Int. Conf. on Noise in Physical Systems May 17-20 (1983) Montpellier. 
eds. Savelli M et. al. (1983) 183-192 Elsevier

120
[3] L.K.J. Vandamme, Noise as a Diagnostic Tool for Quality and 
Reliability of Electronic Devices, IEEE Trans. Elect. Dev. 41 (1994) 
2176-2187.
[4] J. Chang, A.A. Abidi, and C.R. Viswanathan, Flicker noise in CMOS 
transistors from sub threshold to strong inversion at various 
temperatures, IEEE Trans. Elect. Dev. 41 (1994) 1965-1971.
[5] L.K.J. Vandamme, 1/f noise in CMOS transistors, Proc. 10th Inter. 
Conf. on Noise in Physical Systems, Budapest Aug. 21 - 25 (1989) ed. 
Ambrozy A. pp. 491-494, 1990 Akademiai Kiado. Budapest.
[6] E.P. Vandamme and L.K.J. Vandamme, Current crowding and its 
effect on 1/f noise and 3rd-harmonic distortion, Microelectronics and 
Reliability 40 (2000) 1847-1853.
[7] L.K.J. Vandamme, X. Li, and D. Rigaud, 1/f noise in MOS devices, 
mobility or number fluctuations? IEEE Trans. Elect. Dev. 41 (1994) 
1936-1945.
[8] F.M. Klaassen, Characterization of low 1/f noise in MOS transistors 
IEEE Trans. Elect. Dev. ED-18 (1971) 887-891.
[9] L.K.J. Vandamme and R.G.M. Penning de Vries, Correlation between 
MOST 1/f noise and CCD transfer inefficiency, Solid-State Electr. 28 
(1985) 1049-1056.
[10] X. Li and L.K.J. Vandamme, 1/f noise in series resistance of LDD 
MOSTs, Solid-State Electr. 35 (1992) 1471-1475.
[11] X. Li and L.K.J. Vandamme, 1/f noise in MOSFET as a diagnostic 
tool,Solid-State Electr. 35 (1992) 1477-1481.
[12] E.P. Vandamme and L.K.J. Vandamme, Unsolved Problems on 1/f 
Noise in MOSFETs and Possible Solutions, Proc. of the 2nd Inter. 
Conf. on Unsolved Problems of Noise and Fluctuations (UPoN '99) in 
Adelaide, 11th - 15th July 1999 ed. Abbott D (1999) 481-486
[13] A.G. Jordan and N.A. Jordan, Theory of noise in metal oxide semi - 
conductor devices, IEEE Trans. Elect. Dev. ED-12 (1965) 148-156.
[14] L.K.J. Vandamme and H.M.M. de Werd, 1/f noise model for MOSTs 
biased in nonohmic region, Solid-State Electr. 23 (1980) 325-329.
[15] L.K.J. Vandamme, D. Sodini, and Z. Gingl, On the anomalous 
behaviour of the relative amplitude of RTS noise, Solid-State Electr. 42 
(1998) 901-905.
[16] P. Fantini, L. Vendrame, and D. Riccardi, Low frequency noise in 
CMOS transistors: an experimental and comparative study on different 
technologies, FNL 1 (2001) L233-L238

EXPERIMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF QUANTUM 
EFFECTS IN THE LOW-FREQUENCY NOISE AND 
RTS OF DEEP SUBMICRON MOSFETs
E. Simoen1 and A. Mercha
IMEC
Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven
Belgium
C. Claeys
E.E. Dept
KU Leuven
Belgium
1simoen@imec.be
Abstract The down-scaling of MOSFETs brings about inversion-layer quantization. 
Another consequence is the enhancement of the direct tunneling current 
through the gate, which is a source of parasitic leakage and noise. While these 
effects are accounted for in the DC characteristics, so far, little attention has 
been paid to the impact on the low-frequency noise. In this work, the focus 
will be on the assessment of these quantum noise effects. It is shown that 
appropriate test structures are required, while more detailed information can 
be obtained by changing the vertical field, i.e., through a change in the bulk 
bias. It will also be pointed out that beside experimental data, there is a 
growing need for accurate noise models, which go beyond the generally 
accepted correlated mobility fluctuations approach.
Keywords: 
Low-frequency noise; silicon MOSFETs; quantum effects
1. Introduction
One of the consequences of technology scaling is that several types of 
quantum effects need to be considered in the charge transport through a 
silicon MOSFET. For present-day commercial technologies in the 90-130 
nm node, one can still use the classical graded-channel approach in the 
lateral direction, if proper account is made for the short channel effects. This
121
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (121 - 128) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

122
is, however, no longer true for the vertical direction, where both the 
shrinking of the physical gate dielectric thickness (tox) and the increase of the 
substrate doping density Nsub contribute to an increase of the transverse 
electric field Fs. This has two serious effects: one, the inversion layer 
becomes quantized and behaves like a two-dimensional electron (or hole) 
gas (2DEG). This is schematically represented in Fig. 1. Second, when tox 
becomes smaller than the direct tunneling limit of ~ 3 nm, carriers can tunnel 
from gate to substrate, thereby generating a non-negligible gate leakage 
current IG.
Figure 1. Schematic description of the Si/SiO2 system showing the discrete energy levels 
and the spatial extent of the inversion layer in both cases of a quantized inversion layer (2-D) 
and a classical one (3-D).
These quantum effects (QEs) have a strong impact on the steady-state 
transport characteristics of deep submicron MOSFETs. However, it is only 
recently that one recognizes that also the fluctuations, giving rise to low- 
frequency (LF) noise are subjected to QEs [1-7]. Note that this was already 
the case before in III-V heterojunction devices, relying on conduction in a 
2DEG [8]. Here, a brief overview will be given on the impact of QEs on the 
DC and LF noise behavior of deep submicron silicon MOSFETs and how 
these should be experimentally assessed.

123
2. 
Impact of quantization on the static characteristics
As sketched in Fig. 1, the high vertical electric field generates a splitting 
of the inversion layer into subbands, with energies E0, E0‘, E1, E2,... In 
addition, an offset AEc is generated in the conduction band minimum (ECS) at 
the surface, which affects the intrinsic carrier concentration. Moreover, the 
density of states changes from a 3-dimensional (3-D) bulk one to a 2­
dimensional (2-D) distribution. As a result, the carrier density and current in 
the 2DEG becomes smaller than in the classical case [9, 10]. Another 
consequence, illustrated in Fig. 1 is that the carrier distribution drastically 
changes. Inversion-layer quantization results in a peaked profile, with a 
maximum occurring at a distance zav from the interface, which is determined 
by Fs. The calculated offset for n- and p-MOSFETs, belonging to a 0.13 pm 
CMOS technology with a physical tox=2 nm is shown in Fig. 2a [9, 10]. Due 
to this inversion-layer offset, the electrical or effective oxide thickness toxeff 
becomes larger than the physical one and can be approximated by:
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) Charge centroid mean position for both holes and electrons taking into account 
or neglecting the impact of polysilicon gate depletion. (b) Calculated gate capacitance ratio 
and the cross section ratio versus the absolute value of the gate bias VG for n- and p-channel 
devices belonging to a 0.13 pm CMOS technology, with tox=2 nm (after [9, 10]).

124
This becomes clear when measuring the capacitance-voltage (C-V) 
characteristics of a thin-gate MOS capacitor, from which an empirical value 
for toxeff can be derived [9, 10]. In fact, combining C-V characteristics with a 
1-D quantum-mechanical (QM) numerical fitting procedure provides the 
necessary input for a QM-based device modeling. As shown in Fig. 2b, the 
measured capacitance density Coxeff is considerably smaller than the one 
based on the physical tox. This has also consequences for the interpretation of 
1/f noise in deep submicron MOSFETs, which is discussed below.
3. 
Impact of quantization on RTS
Historically, QEs have first been assessed experimentally for so-called 
Random Telegraph Signals (RTSs) [3-5], which are believed to be one of the 
fundamental components of 1/f noise in MOSFETs. This is not so surprising 
since RTSs can be considered as local probes for the microscopic charge 
environment at the Si/SiO2 interface, lending themselves for the fundamental 
study of the physics of carrier-trap interactions [6]. One of the fingerprints of 
QEs is the sensitivity of the RTS parameters (amplitude, characteristic time 
constant t) on the applied vertical electric field, which is illustrated by 
Fig. 3. The latter can easily be varied at constant drain current ID by 
changing the substrate bias, in case of a bulk transistor. The inversion-layer 
charge density, the charge centroid position and the vertical electric field in 
Fig. 3 have been calculated from the analytical model reported in [11]. Using 
these parameters enables to derive the Coulomb blockade energy AE of the 
charged oxide trap from the measured capture time constant (tc), according 
to [3]:
AE = kT ln(rcC„ns). 
(2)
In Eq. (2), k is Boltzmann’s constant, T the absolute temperature, ns the 
volume carrier density and Cn the capture coefficient, defined as the product 
of the trap capture cross section and the carrier thermal velocity. In this 
respect, it should be remarked that an RTS can also be viewed as a kind of 
natural single electron capacitor existing at the Si/SiO2 interface [12]. The 
charging of the trap by a carrier will locally enhance the Fermi level EF by 
Coulombic repulsion with an amount AE. It is clear from Eq. (2) that for a 
proper derivation of AE, one should derive ns from the 2DEG density of 
states and not from the classical one, if inversion-layer quantization prevails 
[3-5]. In the assumption that RTS is a fundamental component of the 1/f 
noise found inevitably in large-are transistors, one is led to the conclusion 
that QEs will also appear in its behavior.

125
Figure 3. Inversion-layer carrier density ns (a), Coulomb repulsion energy AE (b), average 
charge centroid (zc) (c) and vertical electric field Fs (d) as a function of the substrate bias 
UBS, for an RTS in an L=0.55 Um and tox=7 nm n-MOSFET. The transistor is operated in 
the linear regime. A constant drain current of 1.3 LlA was applied (after [3]).
4. 
Impact of quantization on 1/f noise
Although for a long time, the fundamental origin of 1/f noise has been 
and still is a matter of strong debate, in the engineering community a 
concensus has grown that the experimental behavior in silicon MOSFETs 
can be described on the basis of the so-called correlated mobility fluctuations 
model [13, 14], whereby the origin of the fluctuations is ascribed to 
interactions of channel carriers with traps residing in the vicinity of the 
Si/SiO2 interface. In that framework, the input-referred noise is often 
approximated by:
„ 
_ q2 tnot
^ VG = 
't
VG 
WLCo2x f
(3)
an expression that is valid in weak inversion and ohmic operation. In Eq. (3), 
Not is the density of oxide traps, generating the number fluctuations, WL is 
the transistor area, Cox=eox/tox is the capacitance density (eox the permittivity 
of SiO2) and k is a tunneling parameter on the order of 0.1 nm. Based on 
Eq.(3), a density of oxide traps can be extracted, which is often considered a 
figure of merit of the gate dielectric.

126
From the foregoing, it is immediately clear that in order to calculate a 
meaningful trap density, one should replace Cox by Coxeff in Eq. (3) when 
inversion-layer quantization takes place [9, 10]. Neglecting this will result in 
an overestimation of Not, which amounts to 50 % (see Fig. 2b). Another 
modeling problem becomes obvious when considering the gate voltage 
dependence of SVG in the linear regime [9, 10]. Standard correlated mobility 
fluctuations theory predicts a quadratic dependence [13, 14], wherefrom a 
scattering coefficient can be derived. However, a much stronger variation 
with | VG | is often found for deep submicron MOSFETs that cannot be 
explained by this engineering approach. Considering, on the other hand, the 
impact of inversion-layer quantization on the 2-D capture cross section (g2d) 
of oxide traps, depicted in Fig. 2b, reveals a similar strong variation with 
| VG | or with the vertical field. The calculation of the g2dIg3d ratio, with 
g3d the constant 3-D capture cross section, includes the band offset and the 
density of states in the 2DEG, following the approach proposed in [11]. 
Based on these results, an improved semi-empirical expression has been 
developed, replacing Eq. (3) for the case of a quantized inversion layer by 
[9, 10]:
q kTANotff2D I &3D
SVG
WLCo2xeff f
(4)
In Eq. (4), all quantities can be extracted from combined C-V and noise 
measurements, the only fitting parameter being Not. Using this approach, 
reasonable trap densities have been extracted from the noise data in weak 
inversion [9, 10].
5. 
Impact of gate tunneling current
Gate leakage and the associated LF noise is of concern for state-of-the- 
art deep submicron devices [7]. Beside the direct gate tunneling current, a 
second leakage component can be generated at a sufficiently large VG, which 
is related to the so-called Electron Valence-Band (EVB) tunneling [10]. 
EVB tunneling not only increases the gate current but also generates a flow 
of majority carriers in the bulk of the transistor. For Silicon-on-Insulator 
(SOI) transistors operating with a floating body, this will induce a kink effect 
in the linear drain current ID [10]. As a result, a second peak in the 
transconductance gm versus VG curve will be observed like in Fig. 4, 
obtained for a bulk p-MOSFET with a 10 GQ resistor connected to the well 
contact. The latter simulates a floating substrate. Contrary to the case of SOI, 
no strong increase in the LF noise, due to an excess Lorentzian, is observed.

127
Only a shift of the 1/f noise is found, which reflects the second gm
maximum.
Drain Current -ID (A)
Figure 4. Input referred noise spectral density at 1 Hz for a L=10 Um p-MOSFET versus 
drain current, with and without a 10 Gt2 series resistance connected to the substrate. The 
third set of curves corresponds to a substrate bias of +0.5 V.
Acknowledgements
The Authors would like to acknowledge stimulating discussions with 
many Colleagues, in particular with N. Lukyanchikova.
References
[1] A. Palma, A. Godoy, J.A. Jimenez-Tejada, J.E. Carceller and J.A. 
Lopez-Villanueva, Quantum two-dimensional calculation of time 
constants of random telegraph signals in metal-oxide-semiconductor 
structures, Phys. Rev. B 56 (1997) 9565-9574.
[2] A. Pacelli, S. Villa, A.L. Lacaita and L. M. Perron, Quantum effects 
on the extraction of MOS oxide traps by 1/f noise measurements, 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 46 (1999) 1029-1035.
[3] N.B. Lukyanchikova, M.V. Petrichuk, N.P. Garbar, E. Simoen and C. 
Claeys, Influence of the substrate voltage on the random telegraph 
signal parameters in submicron n-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor 
field-effect transistors under a constant inversion charge density, 
Appl. Phys. A 70 (2000) 345-353.

128
[4] Z. Celik-Butler and F. Wang, Effects of quantization on random 
telegraph signals observed in deep-submicron MOSFETs, 
Microelectron. Reliab. 40 (2000) 1823-1831.
[5] N.V. Amarasinghe, Z. Celik-Butler and A. Keshavarz, Extraction of 
oxide trap properties using temperature dependence of random 
telegraph signals in submicron metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect 
transistors, J. Appl. Phys. 89 (2001) 5526-5532.
[6] E. Simoen and C. Claeys, Random Telegraph Signal: a local probe for 
single point defect studies in solid-state devices, Mat. Sci. Eng. B91- 
92 (2002) 136-143.
[7] J. Lee, G. Bosman, K.R. Green and D. Ladwig, Model and analysis of 
gate leakage current in ultrathin nitrided oxide MOSFETs, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices 49 (2002) 1232-1241.
[8] M.A. Py and H.-J. Buehlmann, Evidence for screening effects on the 
1/f current noise in GaAs/AlGaAs modulation doped field effect 
transistors, J. Appl. Phys. 80 (1996) 1583-1593.
[9] A. Mercha, E. Simoen, G. Richardson and C. Claeys, Inversion layer 
quantization impact on the interpretation of 1/f noise in deep 
submicron CMOS transistors, In: Proc. 32nd ESSDERC, Eds G. 
Baccarani, E. Gnani and M. Rudan, University of Bologna (Italy) 
(2002) 79-82.
[10] A. Mercha, E. Simoen and C. Claeys, Impact of the high vertical 
electric field on low frequency noise in deep submicron MOSFETs, 
accepted for publication in IEEE Trans. Electron Devices.
[11] R.R. Siergiej, M.H. White and N.S. Saks, Theory and measurement of 
quantization effects on Si-SiO2 interface trap modeling, Solid-St.
Electron. 35 (1992) 843-854.
[12] M. Schulz, Coulomb energy of traps in semiconductor space-charge 
regions, J. Appl. Phys. 74 (1993) 2649-2657.
[13] G. Ghibaudo, O. Roux, Ch. Nguyen-Duc, F. Balestra and J. Brini, 
Improved analysis of low frequency noise in field-effect MOS 
transistors, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 124 (1991) 571-581.
[14] K.K. Hung, P.K. Ko, C. Hu and Y.C. Cheng, A physics-based 
MOSFET noise model for circuit simulators, IEEE Trans. Electron 
Devices 37 (1990) 1323-1333.

NOISE AND TUNNELING THROUGH THE 2.5 nm 
GATE OXIDE IN SOI MOSFETs
N. Lukyanchikova1
Institute of Semiconductor Physics
Prospect Nauki 45, 03028 Kiev 
Ukraine
E. Simoen2 and A. Mercha
IMEC
Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven
Belgium
C. Claeys
E.E. Dept
KU Leuven
Belgium
1 natali@isp.kiev.ua ; 2 simoen@imec.be
Abstract It is shown that some peculiar features are typical for the drain current noise 
spectra of SOI MOSFETs with 2.5 nm gate oxide. In the frequency range 0.7 
Hz<f<50 Hz a drain current spectral density is observed which follows a 1/f1'7 
law for a broad range of operation conditions. It is demonstrated that this 
noise is only found in the front-channel current and is observed both in SOI 
and bulk MOSFETs. The model proposed considers this noise as being 
generated by carriers tunneling between the front channel and traps associated 
with the polysilicon gate/oxide interface and situated sufficiently close to the 
channel in the case of an ultra-thin gate oxide.
When the absolute value of the gate voltage is equal or higher than 1 V, a 
Lorentzian component appears in the noise spectra measured in the linear 
regime. It is shown that the Lorentzian amplitude SI(0) can be described by 
the formula SI(0)=BT(VDS)2/L3 where B is a coefficient, T is the Lorentzian 
time constant that decreases exponentially with increasing gate voltage, VDS is 
the drain voltage and L is the channel length. The mechanism proposed for 
this noise is based on the idea that it originates from the filtered shot noise 
induced by majority carriers which are injected in the floating body of the 
transistor by electron valence-band tunneling across the ultra-thin gate oxide. 
Therefore, the appearance of both noise components can be regarded as thin- 
oxide noise effects.
Keywords: 
SOI, ultra-thin gate oxide, low-frequency noise, Lorentzian noise
129
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (129 - 136) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

130
1. Introduction
The paper considers two noise components connected with electron 
tunneling through the 2.5 nm gate oxide in SOI MOSFETs. The first one 
called “1/f1.7 noise” has been detected in the frequency range 0.7 Hz < f < 50 
Hz. For this component the noise power spectral density follows a 1/fn law 
with n~1.7 for a broad range of operation conditions [1, 2]. The second one 
is the excess Lorentzian noise which appears in the noise spectra measured 
in the linear regime at 1 V<| VG |<1.5 V where VG is the gate voltage [3]. 
The typical behavior of these noise components and the models proposed are 
described below.
2. Experimental
The SOI MOSFETs studied have been fabricated in a 0.1 pm technology 
on UNIBOND wafers. The gate stack consists of a 2.5 nm nitrided oxide and 
a 150 nm polysilicon layer. The devices come from two wafer splits, one 
without HALO and another with a high-dose HALO implantation. The 
channel width Z was 10 pm while the channel length L varied from 10 pm to 
0.22 pm. The noise spectra SI(f) of the drain current I were measured in the 
frequency (f) range from 0.7 Hz to 100 kHz. The measurements were carried 
out at low drain voltage VDS corresponding to the linear regime.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. The 1/f1.7 noise
The main properties of the 1/f1.7 noise are the following. First of all, it has 
been found that only the front-channel current shows the 1/f1.7 noise (Fig. 1a) 
whereas such a noise is absent in the back-channel current (Fig. 1b).
Figure 1. Noise spectra of the front-channel (a) and back-channel (b) current 
measured in the same nMOSFET at different overdrive voltages VG*=VG-Vth where 
Vth is the threshold voltage

131
This noise is also absent in the gate current [1, 2]. Therefore, the 1/f1.7 noise 
is a peculiar feature of the front-channel current.
Secondly, the 1/f1.7 behavior has also been observed in a split batch of 
bulk devices processed simultaneously with the SOI devices and having the 
same gate oxide (Fig. 2a). Moreover, the dependences SI(VG*), with VG* the 
gate overdrive voltage, for the 1/f1.7 noise measured at a given f in the bulk 
and SOI devices fall on a single line (Fig. 2b). Therefore, the 1/f1.7 noise is 
not SOI related.
Figure 2. The 1/f1.7 component in the noise spectra of the bulk nMOSFET (a) and the 
dependences of SI on VG* measured at f=1 Hz and f=10 Hz in the bulk and SOI nMOSFETs (b)
Thirdly, the 1/f1.7 noise is not observed in devices with a 3.5 nm gate 
oxide [4]. This suggests that the 1/f1.7 noise decreases with increasing oxide 
thickness.
Fourthly, the dependences of the 1/f1.7 noise level on VG and L are 
typical for the McWhorter (surface) noise, namely: (i) SI increases with 
increasing gate voltage in weak inversion and saturates in strong inversion; 
(ii) in weak inversion SI/I2 is independent of VG* and decreases as L-1 with 
increasing L; (iii) in strong inversion SI=SIsat~L-3 where SIsat is the value of SI 
measured in saturation; (iv) the equivalent gate voltage noise SVG does not 
depend on VG* and decreases as L-1 with increasing L so that the value of 
(SVGL) is constant for devices of different L and at different VG*. This 
suggests that the 1/f1.7 noise is of a surface origin.
The following model has been proposed for the 1/f1.7 noise [1, 2]. The 
traps responsible for this noise are associated with the polysilicon gate/oxide 
interface and show a steep concentration profile over a small depth range 
(Fig. 3a). Some properties of such traps are described in [5]. The 1/f1.7 noise 
considered is determined by electron tunneling between these traps and the 
channel. As is seen from Fig. 3a, the corresponding concentration Ntg is 
supposed to be much higher than the concentration of the slow oxide traps 
Nto (responsible for the 1/f noise observed at f>50 Hz) up to some distance 
xg from the polysilicon gate/oxide interface while Ntg decreases steeply with 
increasing distance x from that interface at x>xg. This distribution can be

132
described as follows: Nt=Nto at x>xg+Ax and Nt=Ntg+Nto~ Ntg >>Nto at x<xg 
where the distance Ax is sufficiently small. Therefore, a sharp increase of Nt 
with increasing distance from the Si/SiO2 interface takes place near x=xg. 
The energy levels of the gate-related traps are considered to be distributed 
homogeneously over the oxide band gap.
Distance from gate into gate oxide
Figure 3. Distribution of the trap concentration in the gate oxide considered in the model 
of the 1/f1.7 noise (a) and the shape of the noise spectrum corresponding to such traps 
distribution (b); x=0 corresponds with the polysilicon gate
By introducing such a distribution Nt(x) into Eqs. (11) and (4) of [6], the 
conclusion can be drawn that the corresponding noise spectrum is of the 
following shape (Fig. 3b). It consists of the 1/f portion at f<f0 =(2nT)-1 
followed by the 1/fn portion at f>f0 where 1<n<2 and f0 is the turn-over 
frequency determined by the relaxation time T of charge fluctuations at the 
gate-related traps located at x=xg. The case n=2 should be observed if the 
decrease of Ntg with increasing x in the region Ax is sufficiently steep. The 
case n<2 (for example, n=1.7 as in our experiments) will occur if some tail 
in the distribution Nt(x) takes place at x>xg so that the decrease of Nt with 
increasing x at x>xg is not ideally sharp. The “high-frequency” 1/f noise 
shown in Fig. 3b is due to slow oxide traps of concentration Nto. The 
following formulae have been derived for the case where n=2:
SIsat (f > f0 ) =
2 
222
q kTNtgxgZPn,pVDS
L3-:2-f) t a
(1)
SVG (f > f0)
q2kTNt x2 
gg
(2)
LZC0-(2:f t a
T = T0exp[(a(tox-Xg+Zc)] 
(3)
where q is the electron charge, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the 
temperature, Ntg is the density of the gate/oxide traps in units cm-3(eV)-1 , pn.p 
is the charge carrier mobility in the inversion channel, a=108cm-1 is a 
tunneling parameter [6], C0 is the oxide capacitance per cm2 , T0=10-10s is the 
minimal trapping time for tunneling exchange of the oxide traps with the 
channel [6] and ZC is the distance of the centroid of the inversion layer from 

133
the Si/SiO2 interface due to the inversion-layer quantization [7]. From Eq. 
(3) follows that the value of T decreases with decreasing tox. Therefore, the 
level of the noise described by Eqs. (1) and (2) increases very rapidly with 
decreasing tox.
When applying Eqs (1) and (2) to the experimental results, the following 
values of Ntg and xghave been found [2]: xg<1.36 nm, Ntg>2x1020cm-3(eV)-1. 
Note that the values Nto<3x1018 cm-3(eV)-1 and Nto<2.5x1019 cm-3(eV)-1 have 
been found for the concentrations of the slow traps responsible for the 1/f 
noise in sub-micron n-channel and p-channel MOSFETs with nitrided gate 
oxide, respectively [8]. Therefore the Ntg obtained here satisfies the 
inequality Ntg>Nto which is of basic importance for the model proposed.
3.2. The Lorentzian noise at |VG|>1 V
The Lorentzian noise observed at VG>1 V in the linear regime shows the 
following features. It has been found that SI(0)~T and SI(0)~1/L3 at L>0.5 
pm where SI(0) corresponds to the low-frequency plateau of a Lorentzian 
spectrum and T is the Lorentzian time constant which decreases 
exponentially with increasing |vg| [9].
Figures 4a and 4b show the behaviour of the Lorentzian noise 
parameters with changing VDS. As is seen from Fig. 4a, curves 1 and 2, an 
increase of T and SI(0) with increasing drain voltage takes place in the linear 
regime. As a result, the low-frequency Lorentzian plateau in the noise 
spectra becomes shorter and higher (Fig. 4b). However, the value of 
SI(0)/T(VDS)2 does not change with changing VDS (Fig. 4a, curve 
3).Therefore, SI(0) can be described by the formula SI(0)=BT(VDS)2/L3 where 
B is a coefficient.
VDS, mV
Figure 4. 
Influence of the drain voltage on Lorentzian noise parameters in a linear regime (a) and
the noise spectra measured at Vg=-1.3 V and 10 mV<VDS|<100 mV in the PD pMOSFET
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
100 101 102 103 104 105
f, Hz

134
The value of B appears to be different in devices of different types. This 
is shown in Fig. 5. As is seen, the PD nMOSFETs are characterized by 
higher values of B than the PD pMOSFETs and Fully Depleted (FD) 
nMOSFETs, namely: (Bn)pD=(2 to 3)x10-25 S2cm3; (Bp)pD=1x10-25 S2cm3 
(Fig. 5a) and (Bn)FD=(0.7 to 2)x10-25 S2cm3(Fig. 5b). It is also derived from 
Fig. 5b that for FD devices, B increases when applying an accumulation 
back-gate voltage.
Gate Overdrive Voltage |VG*|, V
Figure 5. 
Coefficient B in function of VG* for PD n- and pMOSFETs (a) and FD
nMOSFETs (b)
10-23
10-24
10-25
FD nMOSFETs
(b)
L,|im V(a5,V 
5 
0
1 
0
0.22 0 
1 
-25
1 
+12.5
1 
+25
0.8 -24.5 
0.22 -24.5
10-26
10 0.50.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.31.4
Gate Overdrive Voltage VG*, V
It has been revealed that the overdrive voltage is the important factor 
determining the value of T. The dependences of T on VG can be 
experimentally described by T~exp(-Y|VG |) where Y=(12 to 14) V-1. This is 
demonstrated in Fig. 6. It follows from Fig. 6 that another important feature 
of T is that its values measured at a given overdrive voltage in the different 
device types are different, namely: (Tn)PD~(Tn)FD>[(Tn)FD]ac>.(Tp)PD where 
[(Tn)FD]ac refers to FD nMOSFETs with the back interface in accumulation.
Gate Overdrive Voltage |VG*|, V
Figure 6. 
Lorentzian time constant T vs overdrive voltage for the PD n- and
pMOSFETs (a) and FD nMOSFETs (b)
Gate Overdrive Voltage VG*, V
From the above it can be concluded that the Lorentzian noise considered 
correlates very well with the linear kink effect (LKE) in the 
transconductance [3]. Both effects occur in the same gate voltage range and 

135
are more pronounced in PD than in FD devices where both effects are 
enhanced by an accumulation voltage at the back gate. Such a correlation 
suggests that the electron valence-band (EVB) tunneling through the thin 
gate oxide starting at VG I ~1 V and giving rise to a majority carrier current 
IT into the silicon film is responsible for both the LKE and the Lorentzian 
noise considered.
In the model proposed it is assumed that the shot noise associated with 
the injection of majority carriers in the body generates fluctuations in the 
body potential VBS across the dynamic resistance of the forward biased 
source-body junction [9]. This will in turn lead to fluctuations in the 
threshold voltage and finally in the channel current, by taking account of the 
transconductance. In other words: SI=(dI/dVth)2(dVth/dVBS)2SVBS=(gmP)2SVBS 
where P=dVth/dVBS and SVBS is the spectral density of the body potential 
fluctuations. Due to the impedance of the source-body junction, the resulting 
spectrum of the shot noise is Lorentzian with a time constant T determined 
by the parallel connection of the differential resistance rj of the source-body 
junction and the equivalent capacitance C of the order of the gate 
capacitance: T=rjC where rj=(mkT/qIT), C=ZLC0, IT=WLjT where m is the 
ideality factor of the gated source-film junction, jT is the density of current 
due to the EVB tunneling through the gate oxide. Combining this, one has:
T=(mkT/qjr)Co 
(4)
S22 
2 
22 
2 
2 
3
i(0)=2qlT('j) p (gm) =2TnkTCoZ(Pn,p) p (VDS) mg /L 
(5)
where gm= mg[^n,pZC0VDS/L] is used where the coefficient mg>1 is 
introduced to take into account the linear kink effect.
Since jT enhances with increasing gate voltage, the value of T described 
by Eq. (4) has to decrease with increasing VG |. Exactly such a behaviour of 
T with VG | is observed in our experiments.
As is seen, Eq. (5) explains the dependences of SI(0) on T, L and VDS 
observed experimentally. It can also be shown that the values of SI(0) 
predicted by Eq. (5) are in reasonable agreement with the experimental data 
observed in PD MOSFETs. Therefore, the model based on EVB tunneling 
through the thin gate oxide gives a good explanation of the main 
experimental results.
4. Conclusions
The reason for both noise components considered above is the ultra­
small thickness of the gate oxide. The fact that in such a case the traps 
associated with the polysilicon gate/oxide interface are sufficiently close to 
the channel (so that electron tunneling between those traps and the channel is 
effective) is responsible for the low-frequency 1/f1.7 noise component. EVB 

136
tunneling through an ultra-thin gate oxide gives rise to a Lorentzian noise 
component. Therefore, the 1/f1.7 noise and the Lorentzian noise described 
can be regarded as thin-oxide noise effects.
References
[1] N. Lukyanchikova, M. Petrichuk, N. Garbar, E. Simoen, A. Mercha, 
H. van Meer, K. De Meyer and C. Claeys, On the origin of the 
1/f1.7noise in deep submicron partially depleted SOI transistors, Proc. 
ESSDERC 2002, eds. G. Baccarani, E. Gnani and M. Rudan, The 
University of Bologna (Italy) (2002) 75-78.
[2] N. Lukyanchikova, M. Petrichuk, N. Garbar, E. Simoen, A. Mercha, 
C. Claeys, H. van Meer and K. De Meyer, The 1/f1.7 noise in 
submicron SOI MOSFETs with 2.5 nm nitrided gate oxide, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices 49 (2002) 2367-2370.
[3] A. Mercha, J. M. Rafi, E. Simoen, C. Claeys, N. Lukyanchikova, M. 
Petrichuk, N. Garbar, Evidence for a “linear kink effect” in ultra-thin 
gate oxide SOI n-MOSFETs, in Proc. of the Eleventh Int. Symposium 
on Silicon-on-Insulator Technology and Devices XI, Eds S.
Cristoloveanu, G. K. Celler, J. G. Fossum, F. Gamiz, K. Izumi and Y.- 
W. Kim, The Electrochem. Soc. Ser. PV 2003-05 (2003) 319-324.
[4] E. Simoen, M. Da Rold, C. Claeys, N. Lukyanchikova, M. Petrichuk 
and N. Garbar, Flicker noise in submicron MOSFETs with 3.5 nm 
nitrided gate oxide, in Proc. ICNF ’2001, Ed. G. Bosman, World 
Scientific (Singapore) (2001) 177-180.
[5] K. M. Chang, Y. H. Chung, T. C. Lee and Y. L. Sun, A method to 
characterize n+-polysilicon/oxide interface traps in ultrathin oxides, 
Electrochem. and Solid-State Letters 4 (2001) G47-G49.
[6] R. Jayaraman and C. G. Sodini, A 1/f noise technique to extract the 
oxide trap density near the conduction band edge of silicon, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices 36 (1989) 1773-1782.
[7] R. R. Siergiej, M. H. White, and N. S. Saks, Theory and measurement 
of quantization effects on Si-SiO2 interface trap modeling, Solid-St. 
Electron., 35 (1992) 843-854.
[8] E. Simoen and C. Claeys, On the flicker noise in submicron silicon 
MOSFETs, Solid-St.Electron. 43 (1999) 865-882.
[9] N. B. Lukyanchikova, M. V. Petrichuk, N. Garbar, A. Mercha, E. 
Simoen and C. Claeys, Electron Valence Band tunneling-induced 
Lorentzian noise in deep submicron Silicon-on-Insulator Metal-Oxide- 
Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistors, J. Appl. Phys., 94 (2003) 
4461-4469.

LOW FREQUENCY NOISE STUDIES OF Si NANO­
CRYSTAL EFFECTS IN MOS TRANSISTORS AND 
CAPACITORS
S. Ferraton1, L. Montes, I. lonica and J. Zimmermann
Institut de Microelectronique Electromagnetisme et Photonique,
UMR CNRS 5130, ENSERG-INPG,
23 rue des Martyrs, BP 257, 38016 Grenoble Cedex 1
France
J. A. Chroboczek2
DTS/LETI CEA-Grenoble,
17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9
France
1 
ferraton@enserg.fr
2 
Jan.chroboczek@cea.fr
Abstract Recent developments in the novel generation of Non Volatile Memories 
(NVM) containing a plane of Si nano-crystals (Si-nc), embedded in the gate 
oxide MOS transistors, created a need for a better understanding of the basic 
physics of the charge/release phenomena on the Si-nc’s. Such studies are also 
important because the expected retention time is interesting for practical 
memory applications. Here, for the first time to our knowledge, low frequency 
noise (LFN) studies on MOS capacitors and transistors with the Si-nc’s are 
presented. The results obtained in the structures with and without Si-nc’s are 
compared. The implication of the Si-nc’s in the LFN generation and charge 
dynamics in the devices are discussed.
Keywords: 
Non Volatile Memory, MOS Transistors, Si Nano-Crystals, LF noise
1. Introduction
Physical limitations for the scaling of CMOS devices below 10 nm 
create a need for research on novel structures of even smaller dimensions. 
The single electron transistor, SET, is one example of such devices. In this
137
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (137 - 144) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

138
paper we discuss MOS transistors and capacitors with oxides containing a 
2D layer of silicon nano-crystals, Si-nc’s, acting as nodes for charge 
retention in the non volatile memory, NVM, devices [1]. The objective of 
this work is to use low frequency noise, LFN, technique for studying the 
dynamics of electric charge/release phenomena on Si-nc’s. Although these 
devices have already been studied [2,3], to our knowledge, no results on 
their LFN properties have been reported.
2. 
Devices
The devices studied are MOS capacitors and FETs with a 2D layer of Si- 
nc’s in the dielectric. Control samples without Si-nc are also used as a 
reference. The devices have been fabricated in the framework of the PLATO 
technological platform at the LETI-CEA in Grenoble. The Si-nc’s were 
fabricated by Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) over a 
variety of thin, tunnel thermal oxides (0.8 to 2.5 nm thick), grown on B- 
doped (3-4x1017cm-3) substrates. The Si-nc layer were then encapsulated 
with a non-annealed LPCVD High Thermal Oxide (HTO). An N+ poly-Si 
gate was then deposited over the HTO. The typical size of the Si-nc’s was 
5nm (with a dispersion of 1 nm) and their density about 4x1011cm-2 [1].
3. 
Studies of MOS Capacitors
3.1. 
Experiments
In the case of the capacitors, the power spectral densities, PSD, of 
fluctuations in the current, I, passing across the capacitor (leakage current) 
was measured with an HP 35665A analyzer. The measurements were carried 
out at the room temperature. In order to obtain an evaluation of the average 
quadratic current fluctuations <AI2> in the capacitor, we integrated the PSD 
in the frequency range used, and then normalized the result by dividing it by 
I2. The number of noise generating centers, N, active in the frequency range 
involved, is then
I2
N =-----5“
<AI2 >
(1)
3.2. 
Results and discussion
The measurements were carried out on the devices with and without Si- 
nc’s and compared. An example of such a comparison is shown in Fig. 1. 
The fluctuations measured on the capacitor leakage current was analysed in a 
rather low frequency range, 0.0625Hz< f<25 Hz. The PSD spectra follow the

139
1/f with 0.65<a<0.75 in the structures with Si-nc’s, whereas in the 
structures without Si-nc 1.03<a<1.36. Figure 1 shows that, at sufficiently 
high currents, the PSD of current fluctuations varies as I2.
Figure 1. Comparison of average quadratic noise current fluctuations in capacitors with 
(squares) and without (triangles) Si-nc’s. Device area is 0.24 mm2.
The 1/f general behaviour revealed in the spectra and the proportionality of 
the PSD to I2 imply that the noise is generated by a large number of evenly 
distributed centres with rather slow response times. At f=100Hz or higher, 
depending on the current, the measured PSD was observed to deviate from 
the 1/f-type dependence. This issue is still under study. Supposing that the 
active centres are independent of each other, the number of the active centres 
in the frequency range of interest, can be calculated using Eq. (1). The result 
is shown in Fig. 2, as a function of I.
Density of active noise centers in capacitors with (squares) and without (triangles)
Figure 2. 
Si-nc’s.
The difference between the results obtained on control devices and those 
with Si-nc’s is significant. In fact, the large number of noise centres is 

140
attributed to high density of traps present in the non-annealed HTO layer and 
at the interface between the thermal oxide and the HTO. The presence of Si- 
nc’s at this interface increases the number of traps by a factor of 5 to 10.
As the fluctuations are analyzed in a leakage current flowing through 
both oxides and the Si-nc’s, the response incorporates all the effects of all 
the traps present, including the contributions due to Si-nc’s. However, the 
main contribution comes from the traps located in the HTO cap layer.
4. 
Studies of NMOS Transistors
4.1. 
Experiments
We studied MOSFETs with the gate area (LxW)=1x10 pm2 and 0.8nm - 
thick tunnel thermal oxide, T1, using the frequency range between 1Hz and 
5kHz. The PSD of the drain current, Id, fluctuations was measured at 
VD=50mV, as a function of the gate voltage, Vg. In this study, experiments 
were performed on devices with and without Si-nc’s, using an automatic 
LFN measuring system [4].
4.2. 
Results and discussion
The PSD of Id fluctuations was found to follow the 1/f dependence in 
both types of devices. In Fig. 3 we plot the PSD extracted at 10Hz, 
normalized by Id2 versus Id. The data for both types of devices could be 
interpreted using Eq. (2) based on McWhorter [5] approach. The term in 
parentheses is derived assuming that the charge fluctuation in the insulator 
can also induce a fluctuation in the mobility of the inversion layer carriers 
and thus a fluctuation of the drain current (correlated LFN).
S id
Id2
( 
id A2 g 1
1 + «.A, COT— I 
SVB
v 
gm J Id
(2)
The parameters ac and SvFB are adjusted to fit of the experimental data. 
SvFB contains the bulk density of the active noise centers, Nt. Using the 
McWhorter’s expression for SvFB and the tunneling constant A=0.1nm, we 
calculate the Nt values for both types of devices. We find 
Nt1=1.2x1018/eV/cm3 for devices with Si-nc’s and Nt2=4.8x1017/eV/cm3 for 
devices without the Si-nc’s. The surface density of the Si-nc’s is then of the 
order of magnitude of (Nt1)2/3-(Nt2)2/3= 5x1011/eV/cm2. This value is in a 
good agreement with those estimated previously by the SEM (Scanning 
Electrical Microscopy) and electrical measurements [2,3].

141
Figure 3. Comparisons theory-experiment: Sid/Id2 vs. Id for devices with and without Si- 
nc’s (experiment: circles, theory: crosses), T1=0.8nm
5. 
1/f“ noise dependence (a >1.2) for “Si-nc devices”
with a higher tunnel oxide thickness
5.1. 
Results and discussions
Experiments similar to those described in §4 were carried out on devices 
with a tunnel thermal oxide thickness of 1.5nm. Figure 4 shows the PSD of 
the drain current measured on devices with and without Si-nc’s for Id = 
60^A.
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 4. PSD of the drain current for devices without Si-nc’s (left) and with Si-nc’s (right) 
T1=1.5nm; Id=60pA
Sid
f
Frequency (Hz)

142
In the devices without Si-nc’s, the PSD varies like 1/f in the frequency 
range defined above, whereas for the devices with Si-nc’s a significant 
deviation from 1/f behavior is observed. In the structure with Si-nc’s, the 
PSD behaves like 1/f“ with a=1.3. For this reason, the analysis involving the 
Mc Whorter’s formalism was not possible. We also observed an increase of 
SId/Id2, extracted at 10Hz for higher drain current values (see Fig. 5). 
Similarly, in devices with Si-nc’s, deposited on a 2nm thick thermal oxide, 
we observed that PSD followed the 1/f1’5 dependence for 1Hz >f >100Hz at 
comparable Id values. For higher frequencies, up to 5kHz, PSD decreased as 
1/f. On the other hand, all reference samples showed the 1/f behavior in the 
entire frequency range explored.
Figure 5. Sid/Id2 vs. Id for devices with (squares) and without (circles) Si-nc’s; T1=1.5nm
6. 
Discussion
In this work we studied devices with Si-nc’s located at a relatively small 
distance form the interface, 0.8nm and larger, 1.5 nm. For the former, a 
standard approach, assuming a uniform distribution of background traps and 
Si-nc was possible and the results were interpreted in terms of the 
McWhorter theory [5]. The Si-nc’s densities thus estimated were close to the 
values obtained from the SEM observations. However, when the thermal 
oxide separating the channel from the Si-nc’s layer was thicker, we observed 
1/fa dependence, with a>1.2. One can propose various explanations for such 
a behavior, related to the non-uniform volume or energy distribution of noise 
generating centers. For instance, the size dispersion of the Si-nc’s, estimated 
to be 1 nm (around 5 nm) affects the energy level structure inside the Si-nc’s 
that may lead to a non-uniform energy distribution, in which case, the

143
resulting LF noise PSD would behave like 1/f“ [6]. A non-uniform energy 
distribution may also originate from a random crystallographic orientation of 
the Si-nc’s. Furthermore, as the Si-nc’s are not uniformly distributed in the 
oxide, having an almost planar distribution, deviations from the 1/f type 
spectral dependence are expected [7]. For example, the 1/f“ dependence is 
obtained, with 1<a<2, when the trap density increases exponentially with the 
distance from the interface. In the devices without Si-nc, the traps 
responsible for the LF noise should have a more uniform energy and spatial 
distribution. In that case LF noise PSD would be closer to 1/f ; this is what 
we observed. As a matter of fact, special models need to be developed. A 
possible starting point for tackling the problem is illustrated in Fig. 6.
Figure 6. Cross sectional schematic view of a TMOS containing 2D layer of Si-nc’s and 
the associated equivalent electrical circuit.
Gate
Gate 
oxide
Si-nc
Tunnel 
oxide
F2 - F1 = f
dQf 
ox
-=J = J 1(F1) - J2(F2)
dt
////////
Source-drain channel
The set of the two equations in Fig. 6, (Gauss’s law and current 
continuity) is now commonly used in the domain of floating gate memory 
analysis [8]. The charging/release of the Si-nc’s by electrons flowing from/to 
the substrate generate the fluctuations in the current J1, inducing fluctuations 
in Id. A closer examination of time recordings of Id at various gate voltages 
lead us to the conclusion that the signal is stationary. Therefore, the time 
derivative in Fig. 6 vanishes for the average current density, but not for the 
fluctuations. As J1 is a tunnel current and thus depends exponentially on the 
electric field in the oxide and on the oxide thickness, it may induce 
significant fluctuations of the flat band voltage. However, more work is 
needed to develop this approach in detail.
In conclusion, comparing the LF noise data taken on MOS transistors 
and capacitors, with and without Si-nc’s, we could identify the features 
originating from the presence of the Si-nc’s in the structures. This study, 
being the first in this domain, is rather qualitative. More data, on improved 
structures (annealed HTO, and devices with varied Si-nc’s densities) should 
provide a better understanding of the physics of the charging/release 

144
phenomena on Si-nc’s and lead to a more qualitative description of the 
device functioning.
Acknowledgements
This research was carried at the Centre de Projets en Microelectronique 
Avancee located at PLATO-LETI, CEA of Grenoble. Financial support from 
the Region Rhone-Alpes is also acknowledged.
References
[1] T. Baron, F. Martin, P. Mur, C. Wyon and M. Dupuis, Silicon 
Quantum Dot Nucleation on Si3N4, SiO2 and SiOxNy Substrates for 
Nanoelectronic Devices, J. Crystal Growth, 290 (2000) 1004-1008.
[2] S. Ferraton, L. Montes, J. Zimmermann and A. Souifi, Evidence of 
charging effect in silicon nano-crystals using a feedback charge 
method with metal oxide-semiconductor capacitors, Nanotechnology 
14 (2003) 633-636.
[3] S. Ferraton, L. Montes, A. Souifi and J. Zimmermann, Evidence of 
Room Temperature Charging Effects in Discrete Floating Gate Single 
Electron Memory Using the Feedback Charge Method, 
Microelectronic Engineering 67-68 (2003) 858-864.
[4] J.A. Chroboczek, Automatic, Wafer-level, Low Frequency Noise 
Measurements for the Interface Slow Trap Density Evaluation, in 
ICMTS-2003 Technical Digest p. 95, IEEE. No. 03CH37417.
[5] A. L. McWhorter, in 1/f noise and Ge Surface Properties, R.H. 
Kingston, Edit. (1957), p. 207ff.
[6] Z. Celik-Butler and T.Y. Hsiang, Spectral Dependence of 1/fY Noise 
On Gate Bias in N-MOSFET, Solid-State Electronics, 30 (4) (1987) 
419-423.
[7] F. Berz, Theory of Low Frequency Noise In Si MOST’S, Solid-State 
Electronics, 13 (1969) 631-647
[8] B. De Salvo, G. Ghibaudo, G. Pananakakis, P. Masson, T. Baron, N. 
Buffet, A. Fernandes, B. Guillaumot, Experimental and theoretical 
investigation of nano-crystal and nitride-trap memory devices, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices, 48 (2001) 1789-1799.

NOISE MODELLING IN LOW DIMENSIONAL 
ELECTRONIC STRUCTURES
L. REGGIANI
INFM - NNL, Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’ Innovazione
Universita di Lecce, Via Arnesano s/n, 73100 Lecce
Italy
lino.reggiani@unile.it
V.Ya ALESHKIN
Department Semiconductor Physics, Institute for Physics of Microstructures
603950, Nizhny Novgorod, GSP-105
Russia
aleshkin@ipm.sci-nnov.ru
A. REKLAITIS
Semiconductor Physics Institute 
Goshtauto 11, LT2600 Vilnius 
Lithuania
reklaitis@uj.pfi.lt
Abstract We investigate electron transport and shot noise in single and double barrier
GaAs/GaAlAs semiconductor structures. Both structures evidence shot noise 
enhancement and suppression. The enhanced mechanism is due solely to the 
positive feedback between tunneling and space charge, and it is a precursor of 
current instability. Concerning the suppression mechanism, the standard sequen­
tial tunneling model does not explain a suppression with a Fano factor below 
0.5, which is found in several experiments. By contrast the coherent tunnel­
ing model predicts shot noise suppression below 0.5 because of Pauli principle 
and/or Coulomb interaction in agreement with experiments. We conclude that 
shot noise suppression below one-half of the full Poissonian value is a signature 
of coherent tunnelling against sequential tunneling in double barrier resonant 
diodes.
Keywords: Coherent tunneling, Fano factor, heterostructure, mesoscopic, Monte Carlo, res-
onant tunneling, shot noise.
145
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (145 - 152) 
©2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

146
1. 
Introduction
Shot-noise is the electrical fluctuation due to the discreteness of the charge 
that provides direct information on the correlation of different current pulses 
crossing a device. As such, its determination is of basic complement to a cur­
rent voltage (I-V) measurement. A convenient analysis of shot-noise is usually 
performed through the Fano factor 7 > 0 defined as y = SI(0)/(2qI), SI(0) 
being the spectral density of current fluctuations at low frequency, and q the 
elementary quantum of charge determining I (For a recent review see Ref. [1]. 
In the absence of correlation between current pulses it is y =1, and this case
Figure 1. Lifetime plane of different transport regimes and shot-noise behaviors of a two 
terminal device with current controlled by number of particles in it under high voltages when 
g2 =0. I0 is the emitter injection current.
corresponds to full shot-noise. Deviations from this ideal case is a signature 
of existing correlations between different pulses and the two possibilities of 
suppressed (i.e. y<1) and enhanced (i.e. y>1) shot-noise are possible, 
as confirmed by experiments. Here we present recent theoretical investigations 
concerning shot noise suppression and enhancement in single and multiple bar­
rier diodes made by semiconductor heterostructures [2, 3, 4, ?, 6]. The results 
are obtained by different approaches based on sequential and coherent tunnel­
ing models as well as Monte Carlo (MC) simulations.
2. 
Sequential tunneling approach
In this approach the steady current is governed by four rates, denoted as 
g1,2 , r1,2, describing the income or generation (outcome or recombination) of

147
carriers from the contacts into (out) the active region of the device under test 
(DUT) as (henceforth CGS system and unit contact area is used):
I = -q(g1 - r1) = -q(r2 - g2)
(1)
From the above four rates, two differential rates, denoted as v 1,2, can be con­
structed. These describe the decay of the carrier number fluctuations in the 
DUT through the contact interfaces 1 and 2. We note that the g , r are positive 
definite quantities, while the v can be positive (damping of fluctuation) or neg­
ative (enhancement of fluctuation). The spectral density of current fluctuations 
at low frequency takes the form:
SI =2q2 v22(g1 + r1) + v1
2(g2 + r2)
(v1 + v2)2
(2)
When the applied voltage is high enough to neglect g2 , so that shot noise 
regime is achievable, by defining a = v2/(v2 + v 1), the Fano factor becomes:
Y = 1 - 2 a + 2 a2 — 
r2
(3)
The scenario for the values of the Fano factor is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Figure 2. 
Sketch of the band diagram of the single barrier structure considered here. Contact
resistance at the terminals is neglected for simplicity.
Let us consider a single barrier structure, as depicted in Fig. 2. The the­
ory concerns with a model material (GaAs like) of static dielectric constant 
k = 12.95 and parabolic conduction band with effective mass m = 0.067. 
For a given temperature T and voltage V the theory is based on three param­
eters, respectively the contact carrier concentration nb , the probability of non­
scattering p associated with the motion of ballistic particles from the emitter, 
and the length of the DUT L.

148
Figure 3. Left part (lp) - Current voltage characteristics and Fano factors for the barrier 
structure in Fig. 3 for different nb (a) and different U (b). Right part (rp) - Current voltage 
characteristics and Fano factors for the barrier structure in Fig. 3 for different ft (a) and for 
different T (b).
Voltage (V)
Bias voltage (V)
Figure 4. Fano factor vs bias voltage for the diode in Fig. 3. Continous (dashed) curves 
refer to a dynamic (static) Poisson solver simulation.
The typical I-V characteristic and the corresponding Fano factor is presented 
in Fig. 3. The current exhibits a strong super-Ohmic behavior due to tunnel­
ing processes and saturates at the injected value. Concerning the Fano fac­
tor, enhanced shot noise is related to v2 < 0, while suppressed shot noise to 
the condition v 1 = v2 > 0. The realistic modelling of enhanced shot noise 
was provided by MC simulations performed on a structure consisting of: a 
GaAs emitter and collector (n-doped with nb = 5 x 1018 cm-3), a GaAs well 

149
(50 nm long and n-doped with n =10 16 cm-3), an Al(0.25)Ga(0.75)As bar­
rier (50 nm long and undoped), and a GaAs layer (10 nm long and n-doped 
with n = 1016 cm-3). Figure 4 reports the Fano factor as a function of the 
applied voltage. To analyze the effects of the space-charge on tunneling, calcu­
lations are performed with a dynamic (static) Poisson solver and are reported 
as continuous and circles (dashed and squares) curves. For the dynamic case, 
we found that at low voltages (0.7 <U<1 V ), being the barrier trans­
parency D C 1, very few carriers can tunnel the barrier thus the tunneling 
space-charge feedback is negligible and y ^ 1 as expected by simple partition 
noise. At intermediate voltages (1 <U <2 V ) the positive feedback between 
space-charge and tunneling provides a systematic enhancement of shot-noise 
up to a maximum of y — 7 at a bias of 1.5 V.
For the standard symmetric double well we consider the structure reported 
in Fig. 5. As typical values we take the thickness of each barrier d = 100 A, the 
energy of the resonant level as measured from the center of the potential well 
er = 50 meV with the partial width of the resonant level due to the tunnelling 
through the left and right barriers r = rL + rR = 5 meV. The case of a low 
temperature of 4.2 K is reported in Figs. 6. Figure 6(lp) shows the current and 
Fig. (6rp) the Fano factor as function of the applied voltage. Practically, in the 
whole region of applied voltages the current is found to be determined by the 
flow of injected particle from the emitter, g1 . Concerning the Fano factor, we 
find that at the lowest voltages (qV/kBT < 1) the transition from thermal to 
shot noise is evidenced. Then, at increasing voltages (qV/kBT > 1) we find 
two separate regions of shot noise suppression matched by a region of full shot 
noise, and one region of shot noise enhancement just before. the instability 
condition. In Figs. 6(rp) we present a detailed analysis of the different param-
Figure 5. Sketch of the band profile of the double barrier structure considered here under 
typical operation conditions. Here Fe, FQW, Fe are the electrochemical potential in the emitter, 
the quantum well and the collector regions.

150
eters entering the definition of 7. Figure 6 (rpa) reports a and the normalized 
current I/(qg1) vs the applied voltage. Figure 6 (rpb) reports the dependen­
cies of v 1,2 on voltage. We can see that v 1 exhibits a complicate structure at 
increasing voltages with two positive peaks in the positive differential conduc­
tance (PDC) region and one negative peak in the bistable region. By contrast, 
v2 is constant at almost all voltages implying that sooner or later tunneling 
from the resonant state to the collector will occur. At the smallest voltages, v2 
decreases due to Pauli principle. At increasing voltages, the condition v1 = v2 
gives y = 0.5 in analogy with the general model of two equal resistors with 
shot noise sources in series. From Fig. 6(rpa) we argue that all peculiarities of 
the Fano factor in essence are controlled by the behavior of v1.
3. 
Coherent tunneling approach
The structure here investigated is the same double well reported in Fig. 5 
with the double barrier transparency D(ez) given by:
_ s 
r2/4
D(ez) = (ez - er + qu)2 +r2/4 
(4)
where ez,± are the energies for electron motion perpendicular and along barri­
ers. For the steady current it is:
I = -T-h’' fo dezde±D(ez)[fL (£) - fR (£) 
(5)
with fL,R the electron distribution in the emitter (L) and collector (R) contacts, 
respectively. For the spectral density of current fluctuations we found:
q2 m 
. 
o.
£/ = n2^3 
de±dez{D[q + fL(1 — fR)+ q—fR(1 — fL)] — D (fL — fR) }
n 0 
(6)
with q± taking values in the range ±rc the dimensionless effective charge 
accounting for the self-consistent potential.
Figure 7 reports the current (Fig. 7(a)) and the Fano factor (Fig. 7(b)) at 
T = 0 as function of dimensionless voltage £ = 2(qu — er)/r for different 
values of dimensionless chemical potential f = 2FL/r. Curves labelled 1, 2, 
and 3 correspond to f = 1, 15 and rc respectively. The current exhibits the 
well known peaked behavior reducing to zero at the highest voltages because 
we neglect resonant states above thefirst one. Of interest is the behavior of the 
Fano factor. The common features of all curves is the presence of a minimum 
of y near to the current peak and the evidence of full shot noise in regions 
where the current becomes relatively small. Remarkably, the minimum value 
of the Fano factor is found to be always less than 0.5, taking the value 0.391

151
Voltage (V)
Figure 6. Left part (lp) - Current (a) and Fano factor (b) as functions of the applied voltage 
at T = 4.2 K and n =5 X 1016 cm-3 for the barrier structure in Fig. 5. Right part (rp) 
- Normalized rate a and normalized current (a), and v 1 and v2 (b) as functions of the applied 
voltage at T =4.2 K and n =5 X 116 cm-3 for the barrier structure in Fig. 5.
(b)
_ _ 
_ 12
-2.0x1012-
----------V1
_ 
_ 12
-4.0x10-
0.00 
0.04 
0.08 
0.12 
0.16
Voltage (V)
at £ = — 0.801 for f = <x and being systematically lower than this value at 
decreasing value of f .
4. 
Conclusions
We have presented a theoretical analysis of electron transport and shot noise 
in ultra-short single and double barrier semiconductor structures. The mech­
anism of suppression can be due to Pauli principle and/or to Coulomb corre­
lation. The mechanism of enhancement is due solely to the positive feedback 
between tunneling and space charge.
For coherent tunneling, we have found that around zero temperature shot 
noise is suppressed because of Pauli principle alone with a Fano factor mini­
mum of 0.391 near the current peak in agreement with experiments. This giant 
suppression is also confirmed at 77 and 300 K. Thus, shot noise suppression 
below one-half of the full Poissonian value is taken as a signature of coherent 
tunneling against sequential tunneling in double barrier resonant diodes.

152
Figure 7. Dependence of current (a) and Fano factor (b) on applied voltage in a typical 
symmetric DBRD at zero temperature. For convenience dimensionless current and voltages 
are used. Here 10 = qmrLrR/(2n2h3) and . £ = 2/(qu — Er)r. Curves labelled as 1, 2, 
3 correspond to values of the dimensionless electrochemical potentials: f = 1, 15, <x (f = 
2FL /r) respectively.
Acknowledgments
Partial support from the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs through the Volta 
Landau Center (the fellowship of V.Ya.A.), and the SPOT-NOSED project IST- 
2001-38899 of the EC is gratefully acknowledged.
References
[1] 
Y. M. Blanter and M. Biittiker, Phys. Rep. 336, 1-161 (2000).
[2] A. Reklaitis and L. Reggiani, Phys. Rev. B60, 11683-11693 (1999).
[3] V. Aleshkin, L. Reggiani and A. Reklaitis, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 15, 
1045-1048 (2000).
[4] A. Reklaitis and L. Reggiani, Phys. Rev. B62, 16773-16776 (2000).
[5] V. Aleshkin, L. Reggiani and A. Reklaitis, Phys. Rev. B63, 085302 1-11 
(2001).
[6] V. Ya. Aleshkin and L. Reggiani, Phys. Rev. B64, 245333 1-11 (2001).

CORRELATION NOISE MEASUREMENTS AND
MODELING OF NANOSCALE MOSFETs
J. Lee and G. Bosman
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida 
585 NEB Gainesville, FL 32611
USA
bosman@ece.ufl.edu
Abstract A detailed study of low frequency noise drain-gate correlation in the presence 
of significant gate leakage current will be presented for ultrathin oxide 
MOSFETs. Measurements and a physical model for the correlation coefficient 
will be discussed. The correlation coefficient between the drain and the gate is 
derived on the basis of partition noise theory and the BSIM4 gate leakage 
current model with source-drain partition, and is in good agreement with 
correlation noise measurements as a function of the gate to the drain current 
ratio.
Keywords: 
MOSFET, noise correlation, low frequency
1. Introduction
Correlation noise measurements at low frequencies have been previously 
presented for bipolar transistors [1], and the influence of the gate leakage 
current on the high frequency noise performance was investigated for 
MESFET’s and MODFETs [2]. To date, no detailed study of low frequency 
correlation and noise performance in the presence of gate leakage current has 
been given for ultrathin oxide MOSFETs.
In this paper, a comprehensive noise characterization at low frequencies 
is presented. The correlation coefficient is derived on the basis of partition 
noise theory [3] and the BSIM4 gate leakage current model with the source­
drain partition [4], and is compared with correlation noise measurements 
carried out as a function of the gate to drain current ratio. It is shown that 
accurate modeling and understanding of the physical noise sources at low 
frequencies are indispensable for optimum designs of ultrathin oxide MOS 
devices and circuits.
153
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (153 - 160)
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

154
2. 
Theory
In a direct tunneling gate oxide MOSFET, a gate leakage current 
component Ig exists besides the drain current component Id. The ratio of gate 
leakage current to drain current, Ig/Id, decreases approximately in proportion 
to the square of channel length, L2 and typically lies between 1 and 10-6, 
depending on channel length [5]. As shown in Fig. 1, the source current Is 
is partitioned into Id flowing to the drain with a partition factor k, and Ig 
flowing to the gate with a partition factor (1- X). The average value of the 
partition factor k represents the probability that electrons arrive at the drain. 
The drain current noise SILF (f ) , the gate leakage current noise SILF (f ) and 
the cross noise spectrum SILFI (f ) at low frequencies are given by [3]
1
1+K j
2
—1 
1+■•■)
with
SILdF(f)=
SILgF (f) =
SL--(f)=(1+Ip)
• S? (f) +
• sL (f)+
• sL (f) +
• sLF (f)
• SILgF (f)
• SILgF(f)
lFF l 
1 ^p [<’ LF l /] lLF z z\l 
g 
g% 1 ^
SIs (f) = 1-^ [SId (f) - SIg (f)] 
^P = “ ^^
(1a)
(1b)
(1c)
(2)
--.
1+K j
2
1
A
1+*p J
*p
2
1
1 + *p J
where SILF ( f ) is the source current noise before partitioning into the drain 
and the gate.
The cross correlation coefficient at low frequencies between the drain 
and the gate current noise is defined as
CLF(f)=
SILdFIg(f)
LF 
LF
Sid (J ) ^ Sig (J )
(3)

155
Figure 1. Noise current components in an ultrathin oxide MOSFET. Is is partitioned into Id 
with a partition factor X, and into Ig with a partition factor (1- X).
For the evaluation of the correlation function at low frequencies, it is 
necessary to obtain a physical model for the spectral densities. Under the 
assumption that at low frequencies both the drain and gate noise are caused 
by a random trapping-detrapping of carriers in localized trap states near the 
Si-SiO2 interface, we can use the Klaassen’s formula for the 1/f Y noise 
current generator at y and y’ along the channel [6]
I2
ASL (y,y,f) = Hd,g(y)■——-------S(y-y) for i = 0,1 
(4)
d,g 
f Yd,gg (Vi (y)) 
where 8(y) is a delta function, H(y) the local noise source modeling the trap 
efficiency, g(Vi) the channel conductance per unit length at y, V0(y) the 
channel voltage at y, and V1(y) the perturbation voltage induced by the gate 
leakage current ( V0(y) >> V1(y) ). If the noise source is distributed 
uniformly over the range 0 < y < y1, the noise spectrum ratio may be 
represented by

156
sig (f) 
sL (f)
■yr Joy1 Joy 1 H (y) r g—73( y - y) dydy 
L2 J0 j0 
f Ygg (V1( y))________
-y f 1 I" 1 Hd(y)------ -d-------8(y — y )dydy
L 
fYdg(Vo(y))
I2 
Id
(5)
where L is the effective channel length. Assuming Hg(y) = Hd(y) and 
carrying out the integration [7],
SL(f) 2 
V1(y 1) f y—Yg)
SL (f) 
p Vo(y 1)
(6)
3. 
Measurements
The MOS transistors studied were fabricated using a manufacturable 
remote plasma nitrided oxide (RPNO) process. About 2.0 - 2.5 nm of gate 
oxide was grown with rapid-thermal based processes. N2-plasma nitridation 
was performed at room-temperature by exposing the gate oxide to a remote 
helicon-based nitrogen discharge, and then followed by post-nitridation 
annealing. Devices were fabricated with standard processing techniques on 
p-Si substrate with n+ poly-Si gates, using LOCOS isolation to define the 
active regions. A 270 nm undoped poly-Si gate layer was deposited and P 
was implanted (5.0X1015 cm-2, 45 keV) for n+ gates.
Prior to noise correlation measurements, all devices were examined for 
the drain and gate leakage current by measurements of I-V characteristics. 
The gate leakage current in the direct tunneling regime is not negligible, and 
the ratio of gate current to drain current ranges from ~ 10-4 to ~ 10-2 for 
nMOSFETs with W = 10 pm, L = 10 pm, and tox = 2.2 nm.
Noise correlation measurements were performed using a HP3582A 
double channel spectrum analyzer in the frequency range 1 Hz to 25 kHz. 
Brookdeal 5004 low-noise voltage amplifiers were used for both the drain 
and gate current noise measurement. The voltage noise at the gate and the 
drain of MOS transistors in a common-source configuration are 
simultaneously obtained, allowing cross correlation noise acquisition. The 
drain current noise sI (f) and gate current noise sI (f ) are directly 
measured at the drain and gate of the device, and the cross noise spectrum 
sI I (f) is determined from the cross correlation coefficient and noise 
measurements. Fig. 2 shows a typical drain, gate, and their cross noise 
spectrum measured at Id = 9.0X10-5 A and Ig = 6.5X10-7A.

157
10-16
10-18
10-20
10-22
10-24
100
I =9.0x10-5A, I =6.5x10-7A 
d 
’ g
• Sd
■ SdIg 
Sg
101
102 
103
Frequency, f (Hz)
104
105
Figure 2. Measured drain, gate, and their cross noise spectrum as a function of frequency f 
for a nMOSFET with W = 10 pm, L = 10 pm, and tox = 2.2 nm
The noise spectra clearly show a 1f frequency dependence with the 
spectral power factor Y close to unity. As shown in Fig. 3, we observe that a 
partial correlation between the drain and the gate current noise sources exists 
and varies with the current ratio. In the 10 Hz — 1 kHz frequency range, the 
existence of correlation effects is probably caused by common noise sources 
which, we assume, are the occupancy fluctuations of the slow trap states 
available for trap-assisted tunneling.
4. 
Simulation Results
The variations of measured noise ratio SI (f )/SI (f ) and correlation 
coefficient CLF (f) with current ratio Ig /Id are plotted in Fig. 4 and 5, 
respectively. These values are compared with those calculated for a 
nMOSFETs biased at Vgs = 0.8 - 2.0 V and V.. = 0.3 V with W = 10 pm, L = 
10 pm, tox = 2.2 nm, p = 300 cm2/V-s, m = 1.2, Vt = 0.2 V, 0b = 3.1 eV, and 
mox = 0.4 m0, and Yd —Yg = 0.5, where Yd and Yg are the spectral density 
frequency exponents of the drain and gate low frequency noise, respectively 
and other symbols have their usual meaning. Good agreement is obtained for 
the noise ratio at f = 100 Hz and for the correlation coefficient at f = 10 Hz 
andf = 100 Hz.

158
0.5
0.45
0.4
• 
• I /Id=2.7x10-4
▲ 
▲ Ig/Id=2.1x10-3
■ 
■ Ig/Id=7.2x10—3
£ 0.35 
O
5
10
Frequency, f (Hz)
Figure 3. Measured correlation coefficient between drain and gate as a function of 
frequency f for a nMOSFETs with W = 10 |lm, L = 10 |lm, and tox = 2.2 nm
Current Ratio, Ig/Id
Figure 4. Comparison of measured data and simulation results of the noise ratio between 
the gate and the drain ( f = 100 Hz ) as a function of current ratio Ig/Id for a nMOSFETs 
biased at Vgs= 0.8 - 2.0 V and Vds= 0.3 V.

159
Current Ratio, Ig/Id
Figure 5. Comparison of measured data and simulation results of the correlation coefficient 
as a function of current ratio Ig/Id for nMOSFETs biased at Vgs= 0.8 - 2.0 V and Vds= 0.3 V.
5. 
Conclusions
Measurements and compact model simulations of the low frequency 
noise performance of ultrathin gate oxide MOSFETs were presented. For a 
comprehensive evaluation of noise performance, the compact model was 
formulated accounting for the gate leakage current and the cross correlation 
between the drain and the gate low frequency noise. For the physical 
modeling of the correlation coefficient at low frequencies, intrinsic noise 
sources were taken into account, with the help of partition noise theory and 
the BSIM4 partition current model. The correlation characteristics were 
verified by correlation noise measurements.
Acknowledgements
This research was sponsored by the Semiconductor Research 
Corporation.

160
References
[1] Y.Mourier, S.Jarrix, C.Delseny, F.Pascal, A.Penarier, D.Gasquet. 
Characterization of polysilicon bipolar transistors by low-frequency 
noise and correlation noise measurements. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 
2001; 16: 233-238.
[2] L.K.J.Vandamme, D.Rigaud, J.M.Peransin. Coherence between gate- 
and drain-current fluctuations in MESFET’s and MODFET’s biased in 
the ohmic region. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1992; 39(10): 2377­
2382.
[3] D.Rigaud, M.Valenza. Correlation measurement of carrier 
multiplication noise sources in MOS transistors at low frequencies. 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1994; 41(11): 2076-2081.
[4] K.M.Cao, W.C.Lee, W.Liu, X.Jin, 
, S.K.H.Fung, J.X.An, B.Yu, 
C.Hu. BSIM4 gate leakage model including source-drain partition. 
IEDM Tech. Dig. 2000; 815-818.
P.Su
[5] H.S.Momose, M.Ono, T.Yoshitomi, T.Ohguro, S.Nakamura, M.Saito, 
H.Iwai. A study of flicker noise in n- and p-MOSFETs with ultrathin 
gate oxide in the direct-tunneling regime. IEDM Tech. Dig. 1998; 
923-926.
[6] F.M.Klaassen. Characterization of low 1/f noise in MOS transistors. 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1971; 18(10): 887-891.
[7] J. - H. Lee, Comprehensive compact noise modeling of nanoscale 
CMOS devices, Ph. D. Dissertation, University of Florida, 2003.

TUNNELING EFFECTS AND LOW FREQUENCY 
NOISE OF GaN/GaAlN HFETs
M. Levinshtein1
Solid State Electronics Division,
The Ioffe Physical-Technical Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences, 
194021, ul. Politekhnichskaya 26, St. Petersburg,
Russia
S. Rumyantsev and M. S. Shur2
Department of ECSE and Broadband, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA 
110 8-th Street, Troy, New York 12180-3590
USA
1 melev@nimis.ioffe.rssi.ru
2 shurm@rpi.edu
Abstract Attempts to explain the nature of the 1/f noise in AlGaN/GaN HFETs have 
involved three different mechanisms: occupancy fluctuations of the tail states 
near the band edges, fluctuations in the space charge regions surrounding 
dislocations, and electron tunneling from the 2D gas into adjacent GaN or 
AlGaN layers. Our experimental data favor the third mechanism. Three main 
arguments support this tunneling mechanism: (i) the observed temperature 
dependence of noise in the doped channel of AlGaN/GaN HFETs, which is 
explained by the tunneling model, (ii) a very weak temperature dependence of 
the 1/f noise in the temperature interval from 8 K to 300 K, (iii) the 
concentration dependence of the Hooge parameter typical for noise caused by 
the electron tunneling..
Keywords: 
1/f noise, GaN/GaAlN HFETs, tunneling
1. Introduction
Gallium nitride and gallium-aluminum nitride based electronic devices, 
especially AlGaN/GaN HFETs, are now in the forefront of the 
semiconductor research. They have excellent potential for high power, high 
frequency, and radiation hard applications. The level of the low frequency
161
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (161 - 168) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

162
noise (in the frequency range 100 Hz - 104 Hz) is one of the most important 
characteristics of devices used in microwave (109 Hz - 1012 Hz) and optical 
(1013 Hz - 1015 Hz) communication systems. The low-frequency noise level 
upconverts into phase noise that limits performance of oscillators, mixers, 
and other electronic systems.
The level of the 1/f noise in HFETs is much smaller than that in GaN 
epi-layers. The low frequency noise level in thin (~ 0.1 - 3 pm) n-GaN epi­
layers is characterized by the Hooge constant, a, ranging from ~10-3 to 10 
[1]. As usual, the level of noise is strongly correlated with the structural 
imperfection of the samples. Unlike GaN films, GaN/GaAlN HFETs are 
characterized by a rather low level of the 1/f noise with a values of ~10-4 
^10’5 [2]. (These values of a are comparable with those for GaAs/GaAlAs 
HFETs.) Hence, it is obvious that the mechanism responsible for 1/f noise in 
thin GaN layers is suppressed in the GaN/GaAlN HFETs. In contrast, GaAs 
epi-layers of average quality have the values of a within the range 10-4 < a 
<10-5 (comparable to the values of a for AlGaAs/GaAs HFETs.
Two mechanisms of the 1/f noise suppression in the HFETs channels 
have been discussed. In Ref. [3], it was suggested that the 1/f noise in the 
HFETs channels is caused by the fluctuations of the occupancy of the tail 
states near the band edges. Then, for degenerate semiconductors, the noise 
caused by the tail states decreases with an increase in the degeneracy as 
exp ((EF -Ec)/kT) [4]. Hence, a high degree of degeneracy in GaN/GaAlN 
HFET channels might explain this drastic noise reduction.
Another mechanism links the 1/f noise in GaN films and GaN/GaAlN 
HFETs to the fluctuations in the space charge regions surrounding the 
dislocations [5]. This mechanism relates a high level of the 1/f noise in GaN 
films to a very large dislocation density in thin GaN layers (~ 108-1010 cm-2). 
The suppression of the 1/f noise in the GaN/GaAlN HFET channels is 
explained by effective screening of the dislocations by the 2D gas. 
(Reference [5] gives only qualitative discussion of this mechanism).
We believe that both these mechanisms of the 1/f noise (or at least the 
dominant on) are suppressed due to the large sheet density of the 2D gas.
Our experimental data show that in the channels of GaN/GaAlN HFETs, 
tunneling from the 2D gas into the traps in the adjacent GaN or AlGaN 
layers becomes the main source of the 1/f noise.
2. Experimental Details
The sample fabrication was described in detail in References [6,7]. The 
AlGaN/GaN heterostructures were grown by low-pressure MOCVD on SiC 
substrates. A 150nm AlN layer grown on SiC substrate was followed by the 
deposition of a 1 pm nominally undoped GaN layer. In some cases, a 50 nm 

163
n-GaN layer with estimated doping level of 2x1017 cm-3 was introduced 
between undoped GaN layer and 15 - 40 nm AlxGa1-xN barrier layer with 
0.15 < x < 0.2. The Hall measurements yield 2D electron sheet concentration 
ns in the range from ~1.0x1013cm-2 to ~1.3x1013cm-2and Hall electron 
mobility 1000 - 1500 cm2/Vs. The HFETs with gate lengths Lg from 1 pm to 
100 pm have been used for measurements. The gate widths W ranged from 
50 to 200 pm. The devices were wire-bonded and placed into the chamber of 
a closed cycle Helium cryostat. A low frequency noise was measured in the 
frequency range from 1 Hz to 10 kHz in the temperature interval from 8 K to 
300K. The drain voltage fluctuations were measured in common source 
configuration in linear and saturated regimes.
3. Results and discussion
The measurements of the current - voltage characteristics showed that 
the threshold voltage in AlGaN/GaN HFETs is only weakly dependent on 
temperature across the entire temperature range 8-300 K. The electron sheet 
concentration also changed little with temperature. The channel resistance 
under the gate at Vg = 0 (extracted from the current-voltage characteristics) 
decreased monotonically with temperature manifesting a mobility increase. 
The electron mobility increased approximately three times with temperature 
decrease from 330 to 8 K.
Measurements of noise on TLM structures using the technique described 
in Ref. [6] showed that contacts did not contribute much to output noise.
Fig. 1 shows the temperature dependencies of noise at different 
frequencies in the sample with Si-doped GaN layer. Within the temperature 
range from 50 K to 150 K, broad maxima were observed in the noise 
temperature dependencies [7]. Although these temperature dependencies 
look somewhat similar to those typical for GR noise, the observed noise 
cannot be attributed to the simple GR noise for two main reasons: (I) the 
position of the maxima practically does not depend on frequency, (II) the 
frequency dependence of noise at all temperatures T > 50K is close to that 
typical for the 1/f noise.
The model, which explains the observed temperature dependence of 
noise by the electron tunneling from the 2D electron gas AlGaN/GaN 
HFETs, has been developed in Reference [7]. This McWorter-like model 
predicts the 1/f spectrum with the amplitude and the position of the noise 
maximum in the noise temperature dependence in good agreement with the 
experiment data (Fig. 2).

164
10-10
10
f=2.2 Hz
4 Hz
10
10
10
0
10 Hz
20 Hz
40 Hz
100 Hz 
200 Hz
400 Hz 
1 kHz 
2 kHz
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300
10
Temperature T (K)
Figure1 
. Temperature dependencies of noise at different frequencies. The sample 
with Si-doped layer between AlGaN barrier and undoped GaN layer. Linear regime [7].
2x10-12
2x10-12
n"
5x10-13
1x10-12
0
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300
Temperature T (K)
Figure 2. Experimental (solid line) and calculated (dashed line) temperature dependencies 
of noise at frequency f = 100Hz. Dashed curve has been calculated in the frame of the phonon 
assisted tunneling model [7].
Fig. 3 shows the noise spectra at three temperatures for the transistor 
with undoped GaN layer. As seen from the figure, these dependencies have 
the form of the 1/fY noise with the exponent y being close to unity and only 
weakly dependent on temperature. The noise amplitude also depends on 
temperature rather weakly [8]. A weak temperature dependence of the 
measured noise is a signature of the tunneling mechanism of noise.

165
Figure 3. The frequency dependencies of the relative short circuit drain current fluctuations 
at temperatures 8 K, 85 K, and 300 K. Gate voltage Vg = 0. Linear regime [8].
Fig. 4 shows concentration dependencies of the 1/f noise in the channel 
of AlGaN/GaN HFETs [7,9].
As seen, at low channel concentrations, when the channel under the gate 
makes the main contribution to noise, a decreases with the increase of ns as 
a ~ 1/ns. The dependence a ~ 1/ns is often observed in n-channel Si 
MOSFETs. It is generally accepted that the most probable mechanism for 
such dependence is the electron tunneling from the channel to the oxide 
(McWhorter mechanism). According to this mechanism, the spectral noise 
density of number of carrier fluctuations depends only on the trap density 
near the Fermi level and does not depend on the electron concentration in the 
channel. In this case, the Hooge parameter a ~ 1/ns [10]. Since we found the 
same behavior for in AlGaN/GaN HFETs, the noise observed might be 
linked to the similar noise mechanism: electron tunneling from the 2D gas 
into the traps in GaN or AlGaN.
The dependencies shown in Fig. 4 have been extracted from the noise 
dependencies on the normalized gate voltage Vgn = (Vg - Vth )/|Vth\ [11]. 
Such dependencies were studied in the temperature range from 8 K to 300 K 
in Ref [8] (Fig. 5).

166
Figure 4. The dependencies of the Hooge parameter a on 2D sheet channel concentration ns 
for A and B GaN/GaAlN HFETs. Different symbols represent the data for different samples 
[9].
Figure 5. The dependencies of the relative spectral noise density SId/Id2 on reduced gate 
voltage Vgn at three temperatures: the highest temperature T = 300 K, the lowest T = 8 K, and 
T = 90 K. Linear regime. Frequency of analysis f = 1 Hz [8].
As seen, from Fig. 5, at small values Vgn (large negative gate voltage 
close to the threshold voltage), the spectral noise density SI/I2 decreases with 
Vgn approximately asVg-n2 at all temperatures. In accordance with the analysis 
presented in Refs. [9,11], it means that Hooge constant aH is inversely 
proportional to the sheet carrier concentration in the channel (See Fig. 4).

167
The slope of SId/Id2(Vgn) dependencies is nearly the same for all temperatures. 
Moreover, the value of the relative spectral noise density depends on 
temperature very slightly: the change in background 1/f noise magnitude 
does not exceed a factor of three with temperature variation from 8 K to 300 
K. Such weak temperature dependence of the noise provides an additional 
argument in favor of the tunneling mechanism of the 1/f noise in the channel 
of GaN/AlGaN HFETs.
4. Conclusion
Our experimental data on the temperature dependence of noise in the 
doped channel of AlGaN/GaN HFETs in the temperature interval from 50 K 
to 150 K, a very weak temperature dependence of the 1/f noise level in wide 
temperature region, and the concentration dependence of the Hooge 
parameter, show that the 1/f noise in the channel of AlGaN/GaN might be 
linked to the electron tunneling from the 2D gas into the traps in GaN or 
AlGaN.
Acknowledgements
The work at RPI was supported by the Office of Naval Research (Project 
Monitor Dr. Harry Dietrich). The work at Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute 
was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant N 02-02­
17619).
References
[1] M. E. Levinshtein, S. L. Rumyantsev, M. S. Shur, R. Gaska, and M. 
Asif Khan, Low frequency and 1/f noise in wide gap 
semiconductors: Silicon Carbide and Gallium Nitride" IEE 
Proceedings Circuits, Devices and Systems (Special Issue "Selected 
Topics on noise in semiconductor devices”) 149 (2002) 32-39.
[2] M. E. Levinshtein, A. A. Balandin, S. L. Rumyantsev, and M. S. 
Shur, Low-frequency noise in GaN-based Field Effect Transistors, 
in: "Noise and Fluctuations Control in Electronic Devices", A. 
Balandin, ed., American Scientific Publishers (2002)
[3] M. E. Levinshtein, F. Pascal, S. Contreras, W. Knap, S. L. 
Rumyantsev, R. Gaska, J. W. Yang, and M. S. Shur, Low-frequency 
noise in GaN/GaAlN heterojunctions, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72 (1998) 
3053-3055

168
[4] A. P. Dmitriev, E. Borovitskaya, M. E. Levinshtein, S. L. 
Rumyantsev, and M. S. Shur, Low Frequency Noise in Degenerate 
Semiconductors J. Appl. Phys. 90 (2001) 301-305
[5] J. A. Garrido, B. E. Foutz, J. A Smart, J. R. Shealy, M. J. Murphy, 
W. J. Schaff, and L. F. Eastman, Low-frequency noise and mobility 
fluctuations in AlGaN/GaN heterostructure field-effect transistors 
Appl. Phys. Lett, 76 (2000) 3442-3444
[6] S. L. Rumyantsev,; N. Pala,; M. S. Shur,; R. Gaska,; M. E. 
Levinshtein, M. A. Khan, G. Simin,; X Hu, and J. Yang, Low 
frequency noise in GaN metal semiconductor and metal oxide 
semiconductor field effect transistors. J. Appl. Phys., 90 (2001) 310­
314
[7] S. L. Rumyantsev, Y. Deng, E. Borovitskaya, A. Dmitriev, W. Knap, 
N. Pala, M. S. Shur, M. E. Levinshtein, M. Asif Khan, G. Simin, J. 
Yang, and X. Hu, Low-frequency noise in GaN/AlGaN 
heterostructure field-effect transistors at cryogenic temperatures, J. 
Appl. Phys. 92 (2002) 4726-4730
[8] S. L. Rumyantsev, Y. Deng, M. S. Shur, M. E. Levinshtein, M. Asif 
Khan, G. Simin, J. Yang, X. Hu and R. Gaska, On the Low 
Frequency Noise Mechanisms in GaN/AlGaN HFETs Semicond. 
Sci. Techn.18 (2003) 589-593
[9] S. L. Rumyantsev, N. Pala, M. S. Shur, R. Gaska, M. E. Levinshtein, 
P. A. Ivanov, M. Asif Khan, G. Simin, X. Hu, and J. Yang, 
Concentration dependence of the 1/f noise in AlGaN/GaN 
Heterostructure Field Effect Transistors, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 17 
(2002) 476-479
[10] L. K. J. Vandamme and R.G.M. Penning de Vries, Correlation 
between MOST 1/f noise and CCD transfer inefficiency", Solid State 
Electron., 28 (1985) 1049-1056
[11] J-M. Peransin, P. Vignaud, D. Rigaud and L K J Vandamme, 1/f 
noise in MODFETs at low drain bias, IEEE Trans Electron Devices 
37 (1990) 2250-2253

HIGH FREQUENCY NOISE SOURCES
EXTRACTION IN NANOMETIQUE MOSFETs
F. Danneville, G. Pailloncy and G. Dambrine
IEMN, UMR CNRS 8520
Cite Scientifique, Avenue Poincare, BP 69
59652 Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex
France
Francois.danneville@iemn.univ-lille1.fr
Abstract The continuing down-scaling of MOSFET’s make their noise properties to be 
more and more fundamentals, for some difficulties may happen when 
considering high frequency applications. Indeed, though the intrinsic noise 
performances of MOSFET's are very promising, the technological process 
inherent to such devices when the device is scaling down makes de facto 
parasitic elements (such overlap capacitances, gate resistances) to limit greatly 
the fmax (maximum oscillation frequency) and then the noise performances of 
the device. Also, potential mismatch in Low Noise Amplifiers (LNA) along 
with the use of high losses Silicon Substrate may increase greatly the noise 
figure of the LNA, that will be much higher than the minimum noise figure of 
the stand alone device. As a general trend, the decrease of device’s 
dimensions along with the decrease of the DC supply voltage will require in 
the future to have the availability of more and more accurate thermal (and 
related diffusion) noise models. These noise models can be issued from device 
physics models but also can be extracted from experimental noise 
measurements ; in such a case, one wants to perform accurate measurements 
of the noise parameters Fmn, Rn and r,p, of the Device Under Test (DUT). A 
lot of methods are available in the literature, we will focus here upon the one 
used in routine in our laboratory, which is based on noise figure 
measurements in a 50 Q environment and physical considerations. The 
presentation of the NF50 method will be re-called prior describing the 
problems related to an accurate extraction of the noise sources. These 
problems will address, by the use of a physical noise modeling, a discussion 
related to the theoretical assumption (uncorrelated noise sources) made to 
extract the four noise parameters from the NF50 data versus frequency. Due to 
the low resistivity silicon wafers used for such characterization, we will also 
pay attention towards the specific de-embedding noise procedure which needs 
to be used.
Keywords: 
NF50 Method, MOSFET's, High Frequency Noise
169
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (169 - 176) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

170
1. 
The NF50 Method
This method was first developed for III-V devices [1] prior being used in 
MOSFET's. The method lies upon the physical noise behavior of 
MOSFET's, using a current-current representation (Fig. 1), taking into 
account of the frequency variation of the noise sources.
Figure. 1. Noise representation of a Two-Ports MOSFET's using a current-current 
representation
Let's get interest in the expression of the noise figure when a particular 
conductance Gs = G0 = 20 mS associated to the noise source is presented to 
the device. The expression of the noise figure in such a case is called NF50 :
NF50 =(1 + RnG 0 ) + R f 2 G 0 G^ +|}^|2
G 0
(1)
In this expression, Rn is the equivalent noisy resistance, 
Yopt (= Gopt + j Bopt) the optimum noise admittance and Fmin the minimum 
noise figure. In a first step, we will describe the frequency variations of each 
element involved in (1), starting with Rn expressed by:
2 
id
Rn 
2
4 kT0 |y212 Af
(2)
Rn depends on the drain noise source id2 which is frequency independent 
(“white noise”). The modulus of Y21 (strongly related to the 
transconductance) is also frequency independent over a wide frequency 
range, leading the extrinsic value of Rn to be not sensitive to the frequency, 

171
as long as a gate inductor Lg may be neglected (which holds in the case of 
on-wafer measurements).
Secondly, let us consider the expression of the noise correlation 
conductance Gcor :
G cor =* Y11
* * * A
igid Y
— Y21
id 
)
(3)
In this equation, <ig.id*> is essentially imaginary while Y21 is essentially 
real, leading Gcor to be close to the real part of Y11. As a consequence, Gcor 
presents a linear dependence as a function of the square frequency :
Gcor - G11 - RiCgs ^2 
(4)
Finally, we can discuss about the term |Yo;2Z| which is given by the 
following expression :
Yopt2=
1
4 kT0 Rn Af
2
ig + Y11
Y21
2
id2 - 2^1 Y idig*
\ Y 21
(5)
with :
id2 and Rn frequency independent
.2
ig square frequency dependent 
ig .id* linear versus frequency
|Yn | almost linear versus frequency 
|Y211 almost frequency independent
From (5), we deduce that |YopJ is proportional to the square frequency. 
Let us consider again NF50 (1) which has a frequency independent term 
R.„ 
.. ................ Rn 
. |„ I2 •
(1+Rn.G0) while the other one ---- 2.G0.Gcor + Y J is varying as a
G0 k 
0 cor 
)
function of the square frequency. 
One can conclude that the noise
figure with a source impedance equal to 50 Q is linear as a function of the 
square frequency. From the above analysis, it is clear that the equivalent 
noise resistance Rn or id 2 can be determined accurately using a simple 
extrapolation of NF50 at zero frequency. Since Gcor is known, the modulus of 
Yopt can be deduced also from the variations of NF50 versus frequency.

172
Obviously, the NF50 measured data are fluctuating due to uncertainties 
measurements and, to determine Rn and the modulus of Yopt, a linear 
regression using the NF50 data (plotted versus the square frequency) is 
required. At this step, one may highlight that, due to the specific nature of a 
MOSFET (e.g. the particular frequency variations of the noise sources ig2 ,
id2 and their correlation ig .id* and of the Y parameters), only one
information is missing in order to obtain the four noise parameters (for 
Fmin = 1+2.Rn.(Gopt+Gcor)) using the NF50 data versus frequency. To obtain 
this information, we consider using a representation with an input gate noise 
voltage and an output drain noise current (Fig. 2), the noise sources to be
uncorrelated [2]. This is equivalent to have, in a current-current
representation 
*
C = 
ig -id
yji2 2.id 2.
(Fig. 1), to have the correlation coefficient
[=T 
—
ig 
2
. Thus, Rn provides id ; introducing the 
id2
j.
Y21
Y11
expression of ig .id* (from C) in (5) provides ig 2 which yields ig .id* . From 
the knowledge of id2 , ig2 , ig .id* and of the Y parameters, the four noise 
parameters are readily obtained. Note that an alternative consists in working 
directly with a voltage-current representation, in such a case, Tin, the input 
noise temperature is set to the room temperature and Tout, the output noise 
temperature, is the only temperature to extract [2].
Figure. 2. Noise representation of a Two-Ports Device using a voltage-current representation
The method has been widely used in order to perform noise sources 
extraction of MOSFETs and some results can be found in [3]. We will pay 
more attention in the following to several critical points related to the 
method. The first point is related to the fact that the noise sources extraction 
method lies on physical considerations, e.g. the fact that in a voltage-current 

173
representation, the noise sources are uncorrelated. The second point is 
related to the high frequency noise measurements, performed in a 50 Q 
environment, on low resistivity silicon wafers. Such environment requires 
the use of specific calibrations and de-embedding procedure. We will 
address these points in the following section.
2. 
Discussion
2.1. 
Voltage-Current noise representation : uncorrelated sources
In order to evaluate the assumption made for the extractions, we have 
used a physical noise modeling. The approach uses a active line (Fig. 3) to 
represent the MOSFET's channel under the oxide and allows basically to 
perform the calculation of the noise correlation matrix in any representation. 
The results issued from this noise modeling are widely described in [4], for
Figure 3. MOS SOI Channel in active line representation.
We will focus mainly on a representation corresponding to an input noise 
voltage and an output noise current (Fig. 2), for which we have assumed the 
noise sources to be uncorrelated in Section 1. In Fig. 4 are plotted the real 
and imaginary part of the complex correlation coefficient 
'*
< eg.id >
C' = 
. It is found that the imaginary part is almost equal to
zero while the real part is not strictly equal to zero, but is very small (lower 
that 0.2 over the all range of biasing conditions, from small to strong 
inversion). This result confirms the specific noise behavior of MOSFET's 

174
and of FET's in general [2], and justifies the usefulness of NF50 method to 
extract the noise source correlation matrix of such devices.
Figure. 4. Variations of the real and imaginary parts of the correlation coefficient using a 
voltage-current representation
2.2. 
Noise Figure in 50 Q environment on low resistivity 
Silicon Wafers
2.2.1. Determination of Y parameters of the MOSFET (YDUT)
As shown in part 1, the noise extraction requires an accurate knowledge 
of the Y parameters, and in the microwave range, it is obvious that one will 
measure the scattering parameters S. A standard procedure is first used to 
determine the S parameters of Quad 1 and Quad 2 (Fig. 5), which are 
required to make later the appropriate de-embedding (both to determine the 
S parameters of the DUT -SDUT- but also to obtain the noise figure of the 
DUT).
Once Quad 1 and Quad 2 are perfectly known, then we can perform the 
measurement of the SDUT. We proceed first by making an Off-Wafer LRM 
Calibration (Ref Planes are probe tips) using a standard kit on Alumine. 
Then, we proceed to a specific On-Wafer de-embedding procedure using an 
Open Structure, that is associated to each transistor present of the Si Wafer 
(same geometry). The method lies first in the measurement of the S 
parameters of the DUT, that will provide a first set of [Y] parameters ([Y1]). 
Then, it is followed by S parameters measurement of the Open Structure, 

175
that will provide a second set of [Y] parameters ([Y2]). Finally, the right 
admittance parameters of the DUT are simply given by : [YDUT]= [Y1]- [Y2].
Quad 1 A B Quad 2
Figure 5. Schematic of the measurement bench to perform the S parameters measurement of 
the DUT
2.2.2. Problems related to shielded pad
In a 50 Q low resistivity Si Wafer environment, other problems 
may occur. In fact, all transistors are inserted between two 50 Q TFMS 
lines of 70 pm long each (minus the finger width of the transistor) added to 
the shielded pads (around 400 pm for the whole structure). This shielded pad 
may present strong capacitance value (up to 150 fF) which will modify 
strongly the impedance presented to the transistor (e.g. the impedance is no 
longer equal to 50 Q). So the measured noise figure will be given by :
N =(1 + RnG 0) + R [2 GcorG 0 + |iq2 + a2 Cpad2 + 2a . B.. 1 
(6)
(j 0
The noise parameters Rn, |Yopt|2 and Bopt correspond to the intrinsic 
ones and their frequency variations have been previously described. 
From (6), it is clear that the expression of NF50 keeps on varying as a 
function of the square frequency, when taking account of the shielding 
capacitance Cpad and consequently, the above experimental extraction 
procedure is still valid, providing the adequate de-embedding is made.

176
References
[1] G. Dambrine, H. Happy, F. Danneville, A. Cappy, « A New Method 
for on Wafer Noise Measurement », IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 41, n. 3, pp. 375-381, March 1993
[2] M. W. Pospieszalski, "Modeling of noise parameters of MESFET's 
and MODFET's and their frequency and temperature dependence", 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Techn. Theory, Vol. 37, pp. 1340-1350, 
1989.
[3] G.Dambrine, C. Raynaud, M. Vanmackelberg, F. Danneville, S. 
Lepilliet, "Impact of down scaling on high frequency noise 
performance of bulk and SOI MOSFETs", SPIE, Fluctuations and 
Noise Conference, Santa Fe, June 2003, Vol. 5113-08, pp. 178-193.
[4] Pailloncy G., G. Dambrine, F. Danneville, B. Iniguez, J.P. Raskin 
"Noise Modelling in 0.25 pm Fully Depleted SOI MOSFETs", 17th 
International Conference on Noise and Fluctuations, August 2003, 
18-22, Prague.

INFORMATIVE “PASSPORT DATA” OF SURFACE 
NANO- AND MICROSTRUCTURES
S. F. Timashev1
L.Ya. Karpov Institute of Physical Chemistry,
Vorontsovo pole Street 10, Moscow, 105064
Russia
2
A. B. Solovieva
N.N. Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Science, 
Kosygina Street 4, Moscow, 119991
Russia
G. V. Vstovsky3
N.N. Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Science, 
Kosygina Street 4, Moscow, 119991
Russia
1 
serget@mail.ru
2 
anna@polymer.chph.ras.ru
3 
vstovsky@polymer.chph.ras.ru
Abstract A general phenomenological approach - Flicker Noise Spectroscopy (FNS)- 
for revelation of information valuable parameters characterizing the arbitrary 
chaotic surfaces was developed to distinguish their patterns and describe 
quantitatively their functional properties. The method developed was applied 
to revelation of effects of a shungit filling agent in polypropylen matrix on the 
composite properties, revelation of hydrogen treatment effects on the cleavage 
surfaces of LiF monocrystals after their dissolution in water with quantitative 
evaluations of their anisotropy, analysis of activity of vacuum deposited 
porphyrins layers in a photosensibilized generation of singlet oxygen into 
gaseous phase. The approach elaborated can be used for developing the new 
control tools for processing scanning probe microscopy (SPM) data in 
nanotechnologies, microelectronics, production of polymeric materials with 
specific surface properties, and others.
Keywords: 
Atomic Force Microscopy, roughness profiles, digitized data processing,
structure irregularities, Flicker-Noise Spectroscopy, polymeric composites, 
dissolution surfaces, deposited layers.
177
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (177 - 186) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

178
1. Introduction
Usually, scanning probe microscopy (SPM) based analysis of surface 
structure uses the methods of processing digitized “roughness profiles” 
obtained by scanning the studied surface fragment with characteristic 
sizes from several nm to tens of ^m. As a rule, the results are presented 
in the form of images of individual surface fragments (for example, of 
molecular aggregates) or the images of general surface morphology 
under the conditions of “model enlightening”. The view of obtained 
images can essentially depend on the localization of model enlightening, 
and very different images of the same surface fragment for different 
enlightening chosen by an operator can be obtained. So far there exist no 
standard and conventional method of digitized data processing to obtain 
cumulative parameters characterizing the features of a surface under 
study in general. The pure statistical processing methods giving the mean 
roughness values with corresponding dispersion and cumulants are not 
used in practice as they do not give information about a very important 
property of the structures to be self-correlated in their space fragments 
organization on different space scales. The use of Flicker-Noise 
Spectroscopy (FNS) on the base of concept of information essence of real 
structure irregularities on different space scales gives new opportunities 
in quantitative description of real chaotic surfaces [1-6]. The main 
parameters of FNS methodology used in this work are introduced below.
2. Main equations
In accordance with FNS method, the main information hidden in chaotic 
signals is formed by irregularities of the chaotic series under consideration. 
They can be considered as the only markers of the evolution process. The 
FNS method [4-6] with reference to handling the temporal and spatial series 
(as the digitized sequences of numbers with an equal pitch on temporal or 
spatial coordinate) consists in an evaluation of the so-called structural 
functions (difference moments) and Fourier power spectra which are 
parameterized then on the basis of nonlinear trends (parametrically specified 
curves). The Fourier spectra were calculated as usual with a reference to 
surfaces profiles with a zero medial <h'(x,y)>=0, h'(x,y)=h(x,y)-<h(x,y)>, 
where h(x,y) is a reference altitude of a profile. For example, for a profile 
specified discretely in heights h'i at the points xi = iAx (Ax is a sampling 
pitch) along coordinate x the power spectra were calculated by the formulas

179
S(k)=U2(k)+V2(k),
(1)
1 N -1 
1 N -1
U(k) = T7 Zh'icos(xi+I2n), V(k) = T7 Zh'i sin(xi+12nk), 
N i=0 
N i=0
where the magnitude of a wave vector k varies within the limits [1/(NAx), 
1/(2Ax)], N = 1000, for example, - number of points. In Refs. [4-6] it is 
proposed to approximate the power spectrum by a model
S(k) =
1 + (Lo-k)n
+ D0 .
(2a)
An automatic choice of parameters of this model is a nontrivial problem. As 
the calculations were carried out for wave numbers satisfying a condition 
(L0k)n>> 1, in this work a simplified model was used
S(k) =
(Lo-k)n
(2b)
where parameter L0 to be calculated by formula
L
- ( S o V/ 
k 1 IS (k 1) J
(3)
using other parameters determined by the processed data. Though such way 
of calculation of parameter L0 does not give true value of correlation length. 
Parameters S0 were calculated by special algorithm for the same values of 
maximal and minimum k1 harmonics for all the profiles processed (see 
below). Parameter n was calculated by least square method as a declination 
in double logarithmic coordinates.
The difference moment of the pth order
0 (p )(A) = { |h (x) - h (x + A) p) 
(4)
[the brackets mean an average, immediate, over all series h(x)] in 
accordance with Refs. [1, 2] was approximated by formula
0 (p) (A) - G1 (p) - ap - [1 - r(H, A / L1)/ r(H)]p, 
(5)
where r(a) and r(a, s) are gamma function and incomplete gamma function 
(the first one), respectively; G1(p) is a numerical coefficient (for the second 
order moment, p=2, its theoretical value is G1(2)=2), a is the standard 
deviation of the chaotic series under consideration. For the small values of 
difference moments lag, i.e. A/L1<<1, we have:

180
* (p)(A) -
Hp
(A )
(6)
Linear regression in the double logarithmic axes of the *(p)(A) 
dependence, i.e. the ln[*(p)(A)] - ln[A], for a small number of the first points, 
for example, three, gives declination value pH. Determing this declination 
and deviding it by the structural function order p, we obtain the Hurst 
parameter H. Usually, the structural functions of the 2nd order were 
calculated. The parameter L1 was calculated by a special algorithm.
For a quantitative description of surfaces the following parameters were 
used: the average height of a surface roughness h, and corresponding 
standard deviation G lengths of correlation L0 and L1, for the most sharp 
types of surface irregularities - “spikes” and “jumps”, respectively [1-6], and 
also dimensionless parameters n and H. Correlation lengths describe the 
presence of some memory in the sequences of “spikes (bursts)” and “jumps” 
modeling surface roughness, n and H describe the extent of memory loss in 
these sequences. In Fig. 1 the calculated curves and selected parameters are 
schematically shown. The specificity of “two dimensional” objects, such as 
surface relief, is that they consist of a great number of series in two (as a 
minimum) independent directions. For handling such objects the original 
procedure was developed [4, 5] which is as follows.
Figure 1. Scheme of parameterization of the power spectra and difference moments.
A given number (for example, 100) of profiles in a given direction was 
randomly picked up from each relief. Their parameterization was carried out 
through averaging their parameters that was conducted in two ways, Fig. 2. 
The average parameters of profiles in two perpendicular directions may be 

181
essentially different. When number of picked up profiles increased from 20 
up to 100 the values of obtained parameters varied by 2-5%. This value can 
be accepted as an estimation error of the obtained parameters.
Figure 2. Two ways of parameters averaging.
All calculations were carried out using a specially designed program 
FNSTV for Windows 95 and higher environment for the same “cutting” 
parameters for the spectra and difference moments. The program can process 
the data in sm2 format (up to 1024x1024 points, Scanning Probe Microscope 
«Solver P-47», NT-MDT Corporation, Zelenograd City), reformat the data 
in sf2 format for a faster loading, draw the relief views at different view 
angles and save the pictures on the disk, draw individual profiles and the 
double logarithmic plots of power spectra and difference moments of 
required order (from one to ten) of the individual profiles in required 
direction and the curves averaged over the required number of picked up 
profiles for set cutting parameters (maximum and minimum spectral 
harmonics, maximum and minimum delay, smoothing parameters of power 
spectra, etc.), save the plots on the disk, accumulate the parameters of fitted 
(interpolated) curves via the formulas (2)-(6) in figure tables on the screen, 
process the relief by a list of file names at identical “cuttings” parameters of 
spectrums and difference moments, accumulate the calculated averaged (in 
two ways by the choice) parameters into text file of tables for further 
processing by text and electronic tables editors.

182
3. Effects of shungit filling agent in polypropylene 
matrix on the composite properties
In recent years, ground shungite rocks came into use as fillers in electro- 
and thermoconducting polymeric composites. The major components of 
shungites are amorphous carbon and silicon dioxide. Their ratio varies in a 
wide range. The characteristic properties of the structure of filled 
polypropylene (PP) can manifest themselves in the special features of the 
surface of the samples which, like a bulk volume, exhibits characteristic 
heterogeneity on various spatial scales. We present results of a quantitative 
analysis of the micro-roughness of the surfaces of PPS samples revealed in 
studying the corresponding relief obtained by atomic-force microscopy [4] 
where experimental conditions are described in details. For shungites-1 and - 
3, the size of surface regions was 7x7 mcm, and for PP and composite 
mixtures, this size was 50 x 50 mcm. For each sample, 3-4 such regions were 
analyzed. Their analysis allowed to extract information about the surfaces. 
The obtained parameters additionally averaged over regions are listed in 
Tab. 1.
Table 1. Structural-dynamic parameters of initial components and PP-shungite-1 composites 
obtained by FNS processing of atomic-force spectroscopy scans (I and II are for 5 and 30 vol 
% shungite-1 in PP, respectively)
Parameter
Schungite-1
Schungite-3
PP
I
n
1
2
3
4
5
6
H, mcm
1.15
0.78
0.12
0.32
0.75
C,nm
293
280
32
60
278
S0, nm2 mcm
256
84
213
370
2216
n
1.82
1.82
2.54
2.45
1.95
L0, mcm
0.44
0.36
3.57
3.54
3.97
GI
2.79
3.52
2.65
2.51
4.20
H
0.96
0.97
0.94
0.93
0.90
L 1, mcm
1.15
1.38
3.33
3.55
12.64
As follows from the data obtained, the most of the parameters are 
sensitive to the presence of the shungite phase, and some of them (h, G, S0, n, 
and L1) are sensitive to its concentration. PPS system is characterized by 
more “correlated” structural-dynamic parameters (that is, by a greater degree 
of long-range order) than both its components. The formation of such a 
structure with a high degree of internal organization is evidence of the 
important role played by interphase interactions in PPS melts during 
composite preparation. This conclusion corresponds to the earlier observed 
phenomenon of an increase in the degree of crystallinity of shungite-filled 
PP as compared with the initial isotactic PP sample.

183
4. Formation of anisotropic fractal structures during 
dissolution of LiF monocrystals
The LiF monocrystals are of broad applications as detectors in different 
radiometric devices and are used in other areas of physics, chemistry and 
materials science. To study dissolution surface structure [5] the AFM 
patterns of an identical size 50x50 mcm (1000x1000 points) were taken out. 
Each specimen was presented by 3-5 patterns. The values of calculated 
parameters after an additional averaging over AFM patterns are given in the 
Tab. 2 for different dissolution temperatures. The numerals X and Y indicate 
perpendicular directions on dissolution surfaces: X is for profiles 
predominantly perpendicularly to “stairs\crests”, Y is lengthways. In Tab. 2 
the differences (between these directions) of correlation lengths and 
parameters reflecting the correlations loss rates (the lg-lg power spectrums 
declinations n and Hurst parameters H) are given also.
Table 2. Flicker-noise parameters of reference specimens, averaged by the first way, see 
Figure 2.
T, °C
X/Y
h, 
mcm
O-, 
mcm
50, 
nm^mcm
n
L 0, 
mcm
H
L1, 
mcm
25
X
0,29
0,10
399
3,62
1,13
0,93
1,08
Y
0,29
0,09
532
2,56
1,25
0,62
1,43
|X-Y|
1,06
0,12
0,31
0,35
30
X
0,33
0,08
299
3,62
1,14
0,93
0,99
Y
0,32
0,10
385
2,61
1,28
0,68
2,43
|X-Y|
1,02
0,14
0,25
1,44
40
X
0,31
0,10
432
3,73
1,18
0,94
0,86
Y
0,31
0,11
640
2,38
1,33
0,60
2,06
|X-Y|
1,35
0,16
0,35
1,20
The dissolution surfaces have greater correlation lengths along local 
band structure as contrasted to ones across band structure. The formation of 
local band structure can be explained by the presence of dislocations 
introduced in a monocrystal when cracking the bar into tablets and cracking 
the tablets into pair with mirror surfaces. Though in a described model case 
an anisotropy origin is due to dislocations, the proposed approach can be 
used for detection of anisotropy of random surfaces, when the anisotropy 
origin is unknown beforehand. The authors do not know the standard 
methods which would allow to reflect the presence of anisotropy of random 
surfaces quantitatively. The FNS method together with atomic-force 
microscopy gives a unique opportunity to do this that can find applications 
in different engineering technologies.

184
5. Effect of porphyrin supramolecular structure on 
singlet oxygen photogeneration
The new abilities of nanotechnologies can be related to the 
polymolecular layers formed in the conditions of self-assembly when 
supramolecular organization of such layers on the scales from nm to 
fractions of gm is determined by the structure of corresponding molecules 
and their intermolecular interactions. Here the results of investigations of the 
vacuum deposited tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP) layers structure by the AFM 
method are described for their surface concentration range Ntot ~ 10 -11-10 —9 
mol/cm2 [6]. Such layers turned out to be active in singlet oxygen 1O2 
generation into gas phase under photosensitized excitation of adsorbed 
molecular oxygen 3O2, the generation rate being dependent on the 
parameters of deposited layers structure on the scales up to the fractions of 
gm.
It was shown [6] that there is a downfall of the observed singlet oxygen 
generation rate into gas phase for Ntot grows in the range 10-10-10 -9 mol/cm2.
The analysis of AFM-images of deposited TPP layers surfaces by using 
Solver-P47 (NT-MDT, Zelenograd) instrument, shows that their reliefs are 
changing as the deposited porphyrin concentration grows. The values of the 
parameters obtained are given in Tab. 3.
Tab. 3 shows how the parameters L1 and n depend on the overall 
porphyrin surface concentration Ntot. The parameters characterize on 
nanometer scales the structural organization of porphyrin molecular crystals 
formed due to deposition on a quartz support. In particular, decrease in 
correlation length L1 as well as increase in the parameter n due to increase in 
Ntot in the range of “solidness” of porphyrin layers reflect a loss of 
correlation links in the structure of the layers when porphyrin surface 
concentration increases. This circumstance can be the reason for the drop of 
the singlet oxygen generation rate in the range of high surface concentrations 
Ntot>10 -9 mol/cm2.
Table 3. FNS parameters of deposited TPP layers investigated by AFM method.
Ntot, mol/cm2
L1, mcm
n
h, mcm
5.2-10—11
0.33
2.8
0.018
1.3-10-9
0.19
2.9
0.024
2.4-10-9
0.06
3.3
0.032

185
6. Conclusion
Recently, nanotechnologies have been developed on the base of 
molecular assemblies of functional systems. The devices elaborated by now 
enable not only to view the structures appearing on the atomic and 
subatomic scale, but to transfer and localize the molecules on a solid surface. 
These abilities are due to elaboration of SPM and its different types: 
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), AFM, scanning magnetic 
microscopy (SMM), and others. The FNS method of chaotic surfaces 
parameterization offers a new quantitative tool to control the 
nanotechnological structures and processes.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research 
Grants (No.01-05-64379; 02-05-64340).
References
[1] S.F. Timashev, Flicker-Noise spectroscopy as a tool for analysis of 
fluctuations in physical systems. In: G. Bosman, Ed. Noise in Physical 
Systems and 1/f Fluctuations - ICNF 2001. World Scientific. New 
Jersey-London. 2001. P.775-778.
[2] S.F. Timashev and G.V. Vstovsky, Flicker-noise spectroscopy for 
analyzing chaotic time series of dynamic variables: problem of signal- 
to-noise relation, Russian Journal of Electrochemistry, 39(2003) 141­
153.
[3] S.F. Timashev, D.G. Bessarabov, R.D. Sanderson, S. Marais, S.G. 
Lakeev, Description of non-regular membrane structures: a novel 
phenomenological approach, Journal of Membrane Science, 170(2000) 
191-197
[4] G.V. Vstovsky, A.B. Solovieva, N.F. Kedrina, V.A. Timofeeva, Yu.K. 
Kalinin, N.N. Rozhkova, An atomic-force microscopy in the analysis 
of composites structure, Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry, 
75(2001) 1963-1967
[5] A.F. Letnikova, G.V. Vstovsky, S.F. Timashev, Formation of 
Anisotropic Fractal Structures During Dissolution of LiF 
Monocrystals, Materials Science (Kaunas), 7(2001) 98-103

186
[6] A.B. Solovieva, S.L. Kotova, P.S. Timashev, S.A. Zav’yalov, N.N.
Glagolev, G.V. Vstovsky, Photosensitized singlet oxygen generation 
by deposited tetraporphyrin layers, Russian Journal of Physical
Chemistry, 77(2003) 104-112

III. NOISE MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE

NOISE MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
L.K.J. Vandamme
Eindhoven University of Technology/ Department of El .Engineering (EH 9.13) 
5600 MB Eindhoven
The Netherlands
L.K.J.Vandamme@tue.nl
Abstract The following topics will be considered:
Noise characterisation of voltage amplifiers in series.
Noise measuring set-up with dc excitation and single ended ac-amplifier or 
differential amplifier in a bridge configuration. Bias and sample criteria to 
observe 1/f noise in homogeneous samples submitted to homogeneous fields. 
Criteria for highest SV value and highest corner frequency fc between 1/f and 
thermal noise.
Eddy current shielding (on wafer level measurements).
Calculation of SR from SV or current spectra SI in different bias circuits. 
Contact noise reduction in a four probe configuration, by good sample design 
Noise correlation measurements
Keywords: 
Equivalent noise resistance, Shielding, short-circuited current noise, Open­
circuit voltage noise, Resistance noise, Correlation measurement, Coherence
1. Noise characteristics of preamplifiers in series
Here voltage amplifiers in series will be discussed where the internal 
noise of each amplifier can be represented by an external voltage noise 
source at the input of a noise free amplifier. An input-referred noise of 2 
nV^/HZ or less at 1 kHz means that the amplifier with a voltage gain G and 
its input shortened shows 5,. = G2(2x10-9V/ JHz)2 = G2(4x10-18V2/Hz) at 
the output. It also means that the thermal noise of a source resistance at the 
input of the amplifier at 290 K of (2nV^/Hz)2 /4kT = 250 Q will double 
the SV-value at the output of the amplifier at least if that resistance is much 
smaller than the input resistance of the amplifier. Hence, the noise of an 
amplifier is often expressed in terms of an equivalent noise resistance.
189
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (189 - 202)
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

190
The equivalent noise resistance and noise source of the voltage amplifier is 
defined from the voltage noise at the output SV with a short-circuited input:
S . . 
-r-
. (f) = voutput and e 2 = 4 kTR 
(1)
eq G 2 4kT n 
eq
4kT is often taken as 0.1 eV = 1.6x10-20 joule, which corresponds to an 
ambient temperature of 290 K.
What happens with the overall noise characteristics of an ultra low noise 
amplifier in series with a second low noise amplifier? The ultra low noise 
amplifier A is characterised by its equivalent input noise resistance ReqA and 
gain-factor A. The low noise amplifier B is characterised by ReqB and its gain 
B. The two amplifiers are in series as shown in Fig.1 and with a short- 
circuited input we obtain at the output of amplifier B a noise signal in 
spectral values (V2/Hz) given by
Svab = 4kT(A 2 • ReqA + ReqB )B 2 
(2)
Figure 1. The equivalent input noise source of two amplifiers A and B in series with 
2
equivalent noise resistance ReqAB = ReqA + ReqB / A .
For the two amplifiers in series a new overall equivalent input noise 
resistance can be defined as ReqAB at the input of a new amplifier with a gain 
AB. Hence Req = SV / A2B2 4kT becomes:
ReqAB = (ReqA + ReqB । A2) w* ' 
• = 4kT(ReqA + ReqB I A 2) (3)

191
The gain of the second amplifier is not important considering the 
worsening of the overall noise. Only the noise of the second amplifier 
divided by the gain squared of the first amplifier must be kept lower than the 
noise contribution of the first amplifier. The criterion to select first amplifier 
A followed by amplifier B for the lowest total noise is fulfilled when:
ReqA(1-1/B2)<ReqB(1-1/A2) 
(4)
If the first amplifier A is a buffer amplifier (A=1) the above criterion is 
never fulfilled, and ReqAB = ReqA + ReqB .
Low noise amplifiers in general suffer from 1/f noise and white noise. The 
equivalent input noise resistance is given by an empirical expression
Req = Req- (1 + fC I f) 
(5)
The values often are in between 10 Q < Req^ < 10 kQ and 3 Hz < fc <3 
KHz. A transformer amplifier can have a Req^ as low as 0.5Q, but the input 
impedance is strongly depending on frequency and the transfer function 
depends on source impedance and frequency [1]. The 1If noise of the 
amplifier often makes an analysis at f<fc in critical conditions useless.
2. Noise measuring set-up, bias criteria and shielding
The block diagram of a straightforward electrical measuring set-up with 
one sample and a low noise voltage amplifier is given in Fig.2
Figure 2. Diagram of a conventional noise measurement set-up (analogue or FFT)
A noise free current I is passed through the sample R derived from a 
fresh lead acid battery (I > 30 mA) or dry cells in series (I < 30 mA) with a 
quality metal film resistor Rv free from resistance fluctuations. Quality 
resistors are wire-wounded or metal film but certainly not carbon 

192
composition resistors. For Rv >> R the so-called open circuit voltage noise is 
measured with an ac coupled low noise voltage amplifier. By replacing the 
sample with a wire-wound resistor of the same value as the sample 
resistance, it can be checked whether or not the current is noiseless. The 
amplified noise is then passed through a real time spectrum analyser, which 
consists of a set of band-pass filter with the inputs in parallel and a constant 
relative bandwidth between 0.1 and 1 in order to reduce measuring time. 
Nowadays a digital Fast Fourier Transform ( FFT ) analyser is used more 
often. The central frequency f0 often is in the range of 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The 
investigations with f0 < 1Hz become time consuming and often cumbersome 
because for a long observation time we need a stable sample, constant 
temperature and stable current supply over a long period of time.
For a homogeneous ohmic resistor with length l and R >> Req holds a 
corner frequency at which the 1/f noise equals the thermal noise [2].
22 
f _ aqpV _ aqpEL 
f^ 4 kTl 
4 kT
(6)
a is a 1/f noise parameter often between 3x10-7 and 3x10-4, q elementary 
charge, p mobility, V is the average voltage across the sample, E = V/ £ 
is the electric field, £ is the distance between contacts, T temperature and k 
the Boltzmann constant. The criterion to observe 1/f noise at f < fc is 
expressed in power density as:
pJ2 > 4kTfn / a 
(7)
with p, J and n: the resistivity, the current density and the free carrier 
concentration, respectively. Eq. (6) and (7) are independent of sample 
dimensions and total number of carriers N. Due to the low mobility in 
dielectrics, the 1/f noise is hard to detect for f > 1 Hz at an electrical field 
below breakdown (6).
For homogeneous samples with a resistance R larger than Req holds a rule of 
thumb for detecting 1/f fluctuations above thermal noise under reasonable 
bias conditions, the total number of free carriers in the sample N, must be 
less than 1014. This criterion is calculated from Eq. (7) by multiplying both 
sides of the equation with the volume of the sample which results in 
N< aP 
4kf
(8)
where P is the power dissipation in the sample and f is the frequency at 
which the 1/f noise must be detectable. For real laboratory conditions with P 
= 200 mW, a = 10-3, f = 102 Hz, and 4kT = 1.6x10-2° Joule, it holds that 

193
N < 1014. For modern sub-micron MOS transistors biased in saturation fc is 
beyond 1 MHz and given by [3]
fc =
*2
3aq^VG 
16 kTl1
(9)
where VG* is the effective gate voltage. For U = 200 cm2/Vs, a=10-6, 4kT/q 
= 0.1 V, V* = 1 V and I = 0.12 pm, we find fc ~ 107 Hz. For a thin metal 
film holds a maximum power dissipation density of 108 watt/cm3 in order to 
avoid damage. From Eq. (7) follows that at room temperature with a =10-4 , 
metals will display 1/f noise only for f< 250 Hz.
The measuring set-up shown in Fig. 3 is less sensitive to fluctuations in 
environment variables such as temperature and supply voltage and 50 Hz 
pick up, than the set-up in Fig. 2 due to a good common mode rejection of 
the balanced bridge and the differential amplifier.
Figure 3. Balanced bridge measurement set up suppresses common mode disturbances 
stemming from temperature fluctuation affecting all elements of the bridge [4, 5, 6]
For sample impedance below 10 Q a transformer amplifier can be used in a 
balanced bridge without coupling capacitors at A, B in Fig. 3. An ac 
balanced bridge technique for measuring low frequency resistance 
fluctuation spectra can improve the sensitivity over dc methods, avoiding the 
1/f noise range of the amplifier by using a carrier frequency above fc of Req 
(f). The low frequency fluctuations at e.g., fL in the sample resistances Rs1 
and Rs2 are transformed into voltage fluctuations at fcarrier ±fL which can be 
chosen away from the 1/f noise range of the amplifier and its low pass 

194
cut-off frequency. Between the output of the amplifier and the FFT analyser 
a lock-in amplifier is used as a demodulator of the amplitude modulated 
carrier (IacAR) [6].
Does it help to put n samples with R and SR given by SR /R2 =C/ f in series 
or in parallel in order to improve the fc value? The answer is no! Using a 
perfect current source Im for samples in series, or nIm for n samples in 
parallel will result in a corner frequency fc between 1/f and thermal noise 
floor, given by (R>>Req):
fc =Im2RC/4kT. 
(10)
This holds for one single resistance, n samples in series, or n in parallel 
provided that each resistor is submitted to a power dissipation of Im2 R. For 
two samples in a half bridge as in Fig. 3 with RV >> RS also holds Eq. (10). 
Samples in parallel connection result in a lower thermal noise floor and 
needs higher supply current levels. The series connection will increase the 
thermal noise and the needed voltage supply U. The best strategy is the bias 
condition for which the total sample impedance is well above the equivalent 
noise resistance of the preamplifier.
The dotted lines in Figs. 2 and 3 represent the cage of Faraday. It is a 
shielding case to keep out 50 Hz magnetic field disturbances and other 
unwanted and spurious signals. For eddy current shielding the attenuation of 
the incoming wave improves with wall thickness d, the radius r of the cage, 
and is inversely proportional to the skin depth 8 of the material used.
A rule of thumb for a good eddy current shielding is derived from [4]
r ■ d > 82 with 8 = (2p/rnp.0idr )1/2 
(11)
r is the radius of the shielding sphere, p is the resistivity, ^r the relative 
permeability of the shielding material (//,. = 5000 for transformer steel) and 
L10 = 4nx10-7 H/m the magnetic permeability of vacuum. The 50 Hz magnetic 
field disturbances are much better shielded by high permeability material 
like transformer steel than by the often used copper or aluminium boxes.
Rules of thumb for a reliable noise measurement even on wafer level:
• 
Short shielded coax cables; no loops for magnetically induced pick-up
• 
Bias from battery and metal film resistors for a noise free current
• 
Sample (with probe station); bias box; and preamplifier inside iron cage 
of Faraday at earth potential.
• 
Spectrum analyzer and monitor oscilloscope outside cage of Faraday.
• 
Avoid currents induced by man-made fields: power supply transformers 
are magnetic field radiators, and are placed at distance outside the cage.

195
• 
Low noise current amplifiers in series with high impedance samples are 
less sensitive for oscillations and EMC.
• 
Ultra low impedances with very low noise are better measured in a 
bridge circuit, with a low noise transformer voltage amplifier at the 
detector side, in order to reduce spurious common mode “noise” due to 
temperature and bias drift as shown in Fig.3.
• 
The main noise source in a three- terminal device is found easier by a 
coherence measurement.
• 
Make the correct choice of low noise amplifiers. Current amplifier if R is 
comparable to the input impedance of the voltage amplifier. When using 
a voltage amplifier choose a reasonable bandwidth and Req < Rs . A 
double channel coherence measurement is the best choice for Req > Rs
3. 
Calculated spectra SR from measured SV or SI
Figure 4. Bias circuit for measuring the spectrum of resistance fluctuation SR of R with an 
ideal noise free voltage amplifier B and an ideal noise free current amplifier A.
Consider a sample with fluctuating resistance R = R + 8R(t) with two 
contacts only in a circuit as in Fig. 4 and biased by a noise free battery U and 
a series resistance Rv that has thermal noise only. We observe the voltage 
noise Sv by an ideal voltage amplifier B and the current noise SI by an ideal 
current amplifier A in series with the sample. The influence of input 
resistance of the voltage and current amplifiers can be ignored. Hence, 
I = U /(R+Rv) and V = IR = UR /(R + Rv) . Sample resistance fluctuations 
result in opposite (fully correlated with different sign) fluctuations in current 
and voltage as given by relative values

196
dI 
I
dR
R + Rv
dV dR
and---- = +-----
VR
(r+r.
(12)
These relations hold for quasi-static changes in R around its average value, 
but also in the frequency domain after band-pass filtering, squaring and 
averaging. Hence, for the spectral values of dR(t) , di(t) and dV(t) holds:
SI
I2
SR- Lr_ 1
R2 R + Rv j
SV 
and =
V2
SR- 
' 
]
R2 R + Rv j
(13)
If Rv tends to zero the highest value for SI is observed and Sv tends to zero. 
This is in the so-called short circuit limit and only current fluctuations can be 
observed. For Rv ^ ^ and keeping U/(R + Rv) constant (Rv >> R), SI ^ 0, 
then we are in the so-called open circuit limit. Only voltage fluctuations are 
observed. Hence we have for short circuit or open circuit, respectively:
SI
I2
SR
R2
Sv 
or —= =
V2
SR
R2
(14)
The maximum value for Sv at fixed battery voltageis calculated from:
U2R2 
. - 
-
SV =^R—R~)SSR and dSv/ dRv = 0 for Rv = R
(15)
For the calculated relative resistance noise from measured SV holds:
SR
R2
S (2+—+—1
U2 
R 
RV)
(16)
The thermal noise of the bias resistor Rv and the sample R will always be the 
dominant source at higher frequencies. Hence for calibration purposes we 
must find:
SVth
4kTRvR 
R + Rv
and SI
4 kT
R + Rv
(17)
The corner frequency for the voltage amplifier, fcV, and the current amplifier 
fcI are different. The values are calculated as:
f = U2 RvRC 
f = 
U2 R2 C
c^ (R + Rv)34kT an c^ (R + Rv)3 4kT
(18)
The maximum values for fcV occurs for dfc /dRv = 0 which results in a 
bias condition ofRv = R/2. This results in a corner frequency fcVmax, which 

197
is a factor 32/27 higher than fcV for Rv = R leading to the highest SV. With Rv 
= 0 in Fig. 4 and a current amplifier only it follows that an ideal current 
amplifier is always a better choice then an ideal voltage amplifier to study 
conductance noise considering the value of fc
fcV4kT/U2C=RVR/(RV +R)3 < fcI4kT/U2C=1/R (19)
Ideal current amplifiers always have a corner frequency of at least 27/4 times 
higher than the ideal voltage amplifier solution. Current amplifiers are in 
general the best choice when the sample resistance is of the same order of 
magnitude or larger than the input impedance of the voltage amplifier.
The input resistance of the voltage amplifier cannot always be ignored. Then 
the observed voltage noise in Fig. 4 due to resistance fluctuations will be:
SV
12 Sr
(1 + R / Ri + R / Rv )2
(20)
The maximum for SV will be reached not for R v= R, but for RV < R given 
by:
RV =R
1
1 + R / Ri
(21)
The thermal noise will be given by SVth = 4kT(Rv //R//Ri) where 
(Rv //R//Ri ) represents the equivalent resistor of Rv, R and Ri in parallel.
For the balanced bridge measurement set-up as shown in Fig. 3 we assume 
samples which are equal in average value and in statistical properties. Hence, 
Rs 1 ~ Rs2 = Rs and SR, ~ SR2 ~ SR • We assume a constant current through 
the samples (Rv 1 ~ Rv2 = Rv >> Rs). This results in a thermal noise at the 
contacts AB ofSV = 4kT(2Rs) . The voltage noise SVAB stemming from 
uncorrelated fluctuations in Rs1 andRs2 is given by:
SVAB
2I2 
S
sample ° R
(22)
If the balanced bridge contains n (1 < n < 4) fluctuating resistances R with 
noise SR and (4-n) bias resistors RV = R with SRv = 0 then the noise between 
A and B in Fig. 3 becomes:

198
S , = —I
VAB 41
2 
sample ■ Sr
(23)
4. 
How to suppress contact noise
The noise is often contaminated by an excess noise contribution at the 
contacts while we are interested in the bulk noise. The contact noise at the 
driver contacts [7] can be suppressed in a sample provided with a pair of 
current contacts and a pair of voltage sensing contacts if placed at side arms 
on a rectangular bar in a field free area [8]. Only then the network as in Fig. 
5 is applicable. If the input resistance of the amplifier Ri >>R//(Rv+r1 +r2) , and 
defining Rt = Rv + r1 + r2 + R we find:
SV
12 Sr 
+ 
12 Sr 1 
+ 
12 Sr 2
(1 + R/(Rt -R))2 
(1 + (Rt -R)/R)2 
(1 + (Rt -R)/R)2
(24)
2
f Rl
SV
V2
R2
Rt
+ Sr1 + Sr2
Rt2 
Rt2
(25)
S
R
SR represents the resistance fluctuations between the sensing contacts Q1 
and Q2, Sr1 and Sr2 is the uncorrelated contact noise between the driver and 
sensor contacts D1Q1 and D2Q2 respectively. Normally we wish to suppress 
Sr1 and Sr2. In the variable Rv -method we keep the same current I and 
increase the supply voltage U and Rv . Then the contact contributions can be 
reduced (24) (25). However, this does not mean that a noise contribution of 
the sensor contacts Q1 and Q2 is excluded! Although the sensor contacts Q1, 
Q2 do not pass an external current towards the amplifier in Fig. 5, there can 
be a current through this contact entering and leaving at the rims and not 
going external. This contact noise cannot be suppressed by a four-point 
probe analysis with the variable RV -method. The best way to avoid noise

199
Figure 5. A four-probe configuration with a pair of noisy driver (D1 D2) and a pair of sensor 
contacts (Q1 Q2).
contributions from the contacts D1, D2, Q1, Q2 is to put Q1, Q2 in a field and 
current density free area of the sample and not in a current path. A cross­
shaped sample as shown in [8] or a rectangular sample with side arms are a 
nice compromise between a good suppression of the contact noise at D1, D2, 
and Q1, Q2 and an increase of thermal noise at the sensors by too long 
contact arms.
5. 
Noise measurement of levels lower than the 
amplifier background-noise
How to measure sample noise buried in the noise of the amplifier? Noise 
measurements are not only used to characterise devices but can also be used 
as an effective reliability screening tool [9]. Abnormal high amounts tend to 
indicate defects in the material. Making noise measurements with a dual 
channel system outlined in Fig. 6, offers the advantage of an increased 
sensitivity down to a factor 40 below Req of one single amplifier.

200
Figure 6. Analogue correlation measurement set-up
The following conditions are important. The cross talk between the 
amplifiers and the filters must be low. There is only an equivalent voltage 
noise source at the input of the amplifiers (no current noise source) in the 
considered frequency range. The multiplication and the integration in an 
analogue system have no dc offset and are drift free. The DUT noise feeds 
into similar channel A and B. Each channel output consists of both amplified 
DUT noise and amplifier noise. We can write NDUT (t) + NA (t) and NDUT (t) 
+ NB (t) for channel A and B, respectively. After band-pass filtering 
multiplying and averaging we obtain in the ideal case the cross spectral 
density SAB (f) = AB SDUT (f). Uncorrelated fluctuations of amplifier A and B 
are after multiplying as often positive as negative and the correlated 
contribution in both channels stemming from DUT are after multiplying 
always positive and can dominate over the uncorrelated contributions after 
long integration times.
The most convenient way to calibrate the system is by measuring the thermal 
noise of the DUT or a calibration network. With the T-network shown in 
Fig. 7, the correlation system can be calibrated on the thermal noise of R1, R2 
and R3. At amplifier A and B, we will observe a noise referred to the input as 
(ReqA + R1 + R3) and (ReqB + R2 + R3) , respectively. The cross correlation 
spectrum of the noise common to both channels is proportional to R3. The 
coherence function Y is defined by:
Y2 = Sv2AB
SvA • SvB
R32
(26)
(ReqA+R1+R3)(ReqB+R2+R3)

201
If we are facing a situation where the noise is 40 times lower than the 
background noise of the two identical amplifiers then Y ~ 5.95x10-4. For a 
reliable result in SvAB with a dual channel FFT analyser, averaging over a 
minimum number of time blocks is needed. This is given by [10]:
NA ^ 1/ Y2 
(27)
This means that for a noise level that is 40 times lower than the 
background, (Y ~ 5.95x10-4), Nav ~ 1700. For a spectrum starting at 1Hz 
with a resolution of 1Hz the measuring time is at least half an hour. Another 
limiting factor is the cross talk between the channels. The cross talk between 
channels is often given by a factor x. If channel A and B are excited by the 
noise signals a and b which are completely uncorrelated then the minimum 
valve Y2 is calculated for the signals (a + bx) in channel A and (b + ax) in 
channel B. The minimum value of Y is often 5x10-4 depending on the cross 
talk value x which means that we need at least 2x103 averages to detect this 
floor. A higher amount of averages will not improve the results for situations 
where the hidden noise is a factor 50 or more below the background noise.
Acknowledgements
The NATO programme Science for Peace (SfP 973799) financially 
supported part of this work.

202
References
[1] 
Suppliers of low noise amplifiers:
EG&G Instruments / Princeton Applied Research.www. egginc.com
NF circuit design LTD. www. Nfcorp.co.jp/english/cprofile.html
DL Instruments, LLC.www.dlinstruments.com
Stanford Research System, Inc. www.srsys.com
[2] 
L.K.J. Vandamme and G. Trefan, “1/f noise in homogeneous and 
inhomogeneous media”, IEE Proc.-Circuits Devices Syst. 149 (2002) 
3-12
[3] 
L.K.J. Vandamme and R.G.M. Penning de Vries, Correlation between 
MOST 1/f noise and CCD transfer inefficiency, Solid-State Electr. 28 
(1985) 1049-1056
[4] 
F.M. Tesche, M.V. Ianoz and T. Karlsson, EMC analysis methods and 
computational Models J. Wiley & Sons Inc. (1997)
[5] 
H. Kaden, Wirbelstrome und Schirmung in der Nachrichten Technik 
2nd ed. Berlin Springer-Verlag (1959) 85-87
[6] 
J.H. Scofield: Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58 (1987) 985
[7] 
J.J. Brophy, Physical Review 106 (1957) 675-678
[8] 
L.K.J. Vandamme and A.H. de Kuijper, Conductance noise 
investigations on symmetrical planar resistors with finite contacts, 
Solid-State Electronics 22 (1979) 981-986
[9] 
L.K.J. Vandamme, Noise as a Diagnostic Tool for Quality and 
Reliability of Electronic Devices , IEEE Trans on Electron Devices 41 
(1994) 2176-2187
[10] 
J. Briaire and L.K.J. Vandamme, J. Appl. Phys. 84 (1998) 4370-4373

TECHNIQUES FOR HIGH-SENSITIVITY
MEASUREMENTS OF SHOT NOISE
IN NANOSTRUCTURES
B. Pellegrini, G. Basso, M. Macucci
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Universita degli Studi di Pisa
Via Diotisalvi, 2 I-56122 Pisa
Italy
b.pellegrini@iet.unipi.it
Abstract Recent theoretical and experimental findings have raised interest in the issue of 
shot noise suppression and enhancement in nanostructures. Several theoretical 
predictions have already been confirmed by means of sophisticated experiments, 
but further work is needed to improve the achievable sensitivity of noise mea­
surements.
We have been working on the integration of several different noise reduction 
techniques, with the objective of being able to measure the shot noise levels 
associated with currents of less than a picoampere. We combine the usage of 
correlation amplifiers, cryogenic cooling of the active elements and feedback 
resistors, correction techniques based on the substitution impedance method, 
and the precise evaluation of the transfer function of the amplifiers.
Keywords: Shot noise, noise amplifier, correlation amplifier, nanostructures.
1. Introduction
In the last decade shot noise suppression and enhancement in nanostruc­
tures has received growing attention, in the wake of pioneering theoretical pre­
dictions that have then found experimental confirmation. Shot noise deviates 
from the predictions of Schottky’s theorem, i.e. a power spectral density equal 
to 2qI, where q is the electron charge and I is the average value of the cur­
rent, whenever the charge carriers do not cross the device with a Poissonian 
distribution (i.e. independently from one another). Negative correlations be­
tween charge transfer events lead to shot noise suppression, while positive cor­
relations lead to shot noise enhancement. Therefore shot noise measurements
203
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (203 - 210) 
@2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

204
can provide a deeper insight into device behavior and physics than standard 
transport measurements. Currents in nanostructures are often very small, of 
the order of nanoamperes or picoamperes, thus it is necessary to develop spe­
cific equipment for performing reliable measurements of the shot noise power 
spectral density. In this contribution we present the most recent version of a 
cryogenic correlation amplifier that we have been developing specifically for 
the investigation of noise in nanoscale devices.
2. 
Noise reduction techniques
When performing shot noise measurements, a limit to the minimum mea­
surable noise level is given, in conventional instrumentation, by the amplifier 
noise contribution, which has to be kept lower than the noise to be measured 
by at least a factor of 10. Thus a transimpedance amplifier (see Fig. 1) with 
a feedback resistor in the gigaohm range, will have a sensitivity limited by 
the thermal noise of such a resistor, and, even if implemented with an opera­
tional amplifier with negligible noise contribution, will allow measurement of 
the shot noise power spectral density associated to currents no smaller than a 
few hundreds of picoamperes. A partial solution to such a problem consists 
in lowering the temperature of the feedback resistor: for instance by means of 
liquid nitrogen, thus achieving a minimum measurable power spectral density 
which is lower by about a factor of four with respect to room temperature. 
A better improvement can be achieved if the feedback resistor is operated at 
liquid helium temperature.
2
Figure 1. Transimpedance amplifier (a) and schematics of the measurement procedure for 
the evaluation of the amplifier transimpedance (b).
One further improvement may consist in the subtraction of the power spec­
tral density due to the system (i.e. the one due to the amplifier, to its power 
supply, and to the bias network) from the result of the measurement. To this 
purpose, it is necessary to know the value of such a spurious noise power spec­
tral density with great accuracy, in the actual measurement conditions: this 

205
means that its dependence on the differential impedance of the device under 
test (DUT) has to be taken into account. Therefore a correction procedure can 
be put into practice, consisting in the evaluation of the system noise by substi­
tuting the DUT with a proper impedance, equivalent (in both the real and the 
imaginary parts) to the one of the DUT itself in the measurement conditions 
(bias, temperature, etc.) and with a known noise behavior. A new measure­
ment is performed and the subtraction of the known noise of the impedance 
from the obtained result yields the contribution from stray sources, that can in 
turn be subtracted from the result of the measurement on the DUT.
Further improvement of the sensitivity can be achieved by means of the 
accurate measurement of the amplifier transimpedance with respect to the input 
current noise source, evaluated in the actual measurement configuration, rather 
than simply relying on a standard measurement of its transfer function. This 
can be accomplished by means of the circuit arrangement sketched in Fig. 1(b).
The noise amplifier is provided with a test impedance ZT which can be ei­
ther connected in parallel to the amplifier input (switch S in position 1) or used 
in order to drive the amplifier with a known noise generator Vt . With S in po­
sition 1 the total noise power spectrum So at the amplifier output is measured; 
then with S in position 2 the frequency response F (f) between the signal 
source Vt and the amplifier output is measured. Finally, by means of simple 
calculations [1], it is possible to obtain the current noise power spectrum SI as
S _ So
SI IF|2ZT '
(1)
The impedance ZT can, in principle, be of any type: we have chosen a ca­
pacitor CT as test impedance, because it does not contribute to the system 
noise and, in addition, has a quasi-ideal behavior over a wide frequency range. 
As apparent from Eq. (1), it is necessary to know the exact value of the test 
impedance ZT ; for this reason CT has to be chosen large enough with respect 
to other (stray) capacitances which could affect the result of the evaluation of 
Eq. (1).
Such a procedure can be automated using a programmable signal analyzer, 
which performs both the measurements (So and F(f)) and the calculations 
finally leading to the current power spectrum SI . The above described proce­
dures were used in conjunction [2], allowing an over 10 dB improvement in 
sensitivity.
The system noise can be further reduced by making use of two noise am­
plifiers, with the application of cross correlation techniques. The principle of 
operation is conceptually simple (see Fig. 2): the same current noise SIn is 
fed into the two noise amplifiers, and the cross-correlation of the two output 
signals is evaluated. Since the noise contributions due to the equivalent input 
current noise sources of the amplifiers are uncorrelated, they are averaged out

206
Figure 2. Correlation amplifier
Vol
in the procedure: in this way only contributions from the noise source SIn and 
from the sum of the power spectral densities associated with the equivalent in­
put voltage noise sources are present in the final result [3]. If the contribution 
of the equivalent input voltage noise sources is negligible (as in the case of a 
DUT impedance much larger than the input impedance of the amplifiers), the 
result of the procedure is substantially coincident with the device noise power 
spectral density, with the spurious contributions removed.
3. 
Correlation amplifier
In order to take advantage of such noise reduction and measurement tech­
niques, a correlation noise amplifier, to be operated with DUT and feedback 
resistors at liquid nitrogen or helium temperature, has been designed, realized 
and tested.
2 
2
Figure 3. Schematic of the correlation noise amplifier.
The schematic diagram of the correlation amplifier is shown in Fig. 3. It 
is based on a TLC072 dual operational amplifier, characterized by a very 
low input current noise (0.6 fA/vHz at 1 kHz) and an input voltage noise 
of 7 nV/VHz at 1 kHz and beyond (12 nV at 100 Hz).
Due to the requirements of short wiring to the sample and of low-temperature 
operation the whole amplifier must be located inside a stainless steel pipe with 
a diameter of about 30 mm, which, in turn, has to be fitted to a dewar vessel 
containing the cryogenic liquid. For this reason, the amplifier components (the 

207
op-amps, the feedback resistors, the test capacitance CT ) had to be arranged in 
such a way as to minimize space occupancy.
Moreover, since proper operation of the op-amps is not guaranteed at very 
low temperatures, they must be kept at a distance from the cryogenic liquid, 
whereas the DUT and the feedback resistors have to be kept close to the liquid 
itself, to warrant the lowest possible temperature. For such reasons, the printed 
circuit board containing the two operational amplifiers can be moved up to 
about 50 cm away from the one supporting the feedback resistors, the test 
capacitances and the device under test.
In addition, particular care has to be taken in preventing the sample holder 
from coming into contact with the surface of the cryogenic liquid, as its ebul­
lition introduces additional noise, particularly at low frequencies.
Figure 4. Calibration procedure.
The DUT can be biased by means of a voltage VB , applied between the 
noninverting inputs of the two operational amplifiers. In many cases (for in­
stance, when measuring shot noise) one is interested in knowing with very 
good accuracy the value of the current through the device under test: this can 
be achieved by measuring the DC voltage Vo2 at the output of one of the two 
op-amps. However, especially for very low current levels, such a measurement 
may be affected by sources of nonideality, such as the operational amplifier 
bias current and offset voltage: a calibration procedure is therefore necessary. 
To perform such a calibration (Fig. 4), one of the two operational amplifiers is 
disconnected, the DUT is biased and the current flowing through it is directly 
measured by means of a picoammeter for several values of the bias voltage 
VP . Then a calibration chart is obtained, listing the values of the output volt­
age Vo2 as a function of the measured current through the device. This chart 
is then used during noise measurements (when both operational amplifiers are 
connected and the current cannot be directly measured), to obtain the value of 
the bias current from the measurement of the output voltage.

208
4. 
Measurement procedure and experimental results
4.1. 
Thermal noise
In order to test the correlation amplifier, it was first used for thermal noise 
measurements on several resistor as DUTs; the value of the feedback resistors 
has been raised up to 3 GQ, which allows higher sensitivity of the amplifier 
with respect to previous versions [4].
The procedure for thermal noise measurements requires, first of all, the eval­
uation of the cross spectrum Sv1v2 of the voltage outputs of the amplifiers. 
Such a result is obtained by means of a two-channel digital signal analyzer 
(SR785) by Stanford Research Systems.
Then the same instrument allows the measurement of the transimpedance of 
the amplifier with respect to the two output ports. For this purpose, a known 
signal vs (see Fig. 2) is injected into one of the two amplifiers, and an opposite 
signal -vs, obtained from the first by means of a unit gain inverting amplifier, 
into the other one. With such a setup, the transfer function A1 (f) from the 
input vs to the output vo1 is measured. Then the input signals are interchanged 
and the second transfer function, A2(f) from the input vs to the output vo2 is 
measured.
Finally, the noise current power spectral density is obtained as
S 
Sv 1V 2 
_ - 4 Sv 1 v 2 n2 f2 CT
I (f) = A i( f) A( (f) Zt = A i( f) A ((f)
(2)
where A((f) is the complex conjugate of A2(f). The relationship in Eq. (2) 
represents the extension of Eq. (1) for the correlation amplifier.
As an example, the result obtained for a resistor R =3GQas a DUT and 
(as it has already been stated) with 3 GQ feedback resistors, is shown in Fig. 5; 
the measurement was performed at a temperature T = 92.4K. The theoretical 
value is indicated with a thin line, for comparison.
It is worth noting that, in order to obtain the best results from the correlation 
technique, it is necessary to average the cross spectrum over a large number of 
measurements. Due to the fact that the narrower the measurement frequency 
band, the longer the time necessary for for the time record acquisition is, such 
a result requires a total data acquisition time of a few hours.
4.2. 
Shot noise in p-n junctions
Further tests on the correlation amplifier were performed by means of shot 
noise measurements on a Ga-As p-n junction. In this case, a bias voltage VB 
for the DUT has to be applied between the noninverting inputs of the opera­
tional amplifiers (Fig. 3).

209
Figure 5. Thermal noise power spectrum for a resistor R = 3 GQ at T = 92.4 K: measured 
value (thick line) and theoretical value (thin line).
After performing the previously described calibration procedure, the actual 
bias current through the device can be inferred from a measurement of the 
output DC voltage Vo2. The same feedback resistors RF = 3 GQ as before 
were used in this case, in order to obtain the highest possible sensitivity.
The measurement procedure requires, also for shot noise measurements, 
first the evaluation of the cross spectrum Sv1v2 , then the measurement of the 
two transfer functions A1(f) and A2(f), and finally the calculation of the noise 
current power spectral density, by means of Eq. (2).
In Fig. 6 results obtained from such measurements are reported. In particu­
lar, the power spectral densities for the bias currents IB =5pA, IB = 800 fA 
and IB = 190 fA (thick lines) are shown and compared to theoretical values 
(thin lines).
Figure 6. Measured shot noise power spectra at currents IB =5pA (upper thick line), 
IB = 800 fA, and IB = 190 fA (lower thick line), compared with theoretical values (thin 
lines).

210
5. 
Conclusions
We have presented results obtained with a cryogenic correlation amplifier 
for measurements of thermal noise and of shot noise at very low current lev­
els. Thanks to the application of the correlation technique, of a procedure for 
the precise evaluation of the transimpedance, and of cryogenic cooling of the 
feedback resistors, it has been possible to measure reliably the shot noise power 
spectral density associated with a current of 0.19 pA. We plan further improve­
ments, consisting in the reduction of stray capacitances in order to increase the 
bandwidth over which measurements can be performed and in further suppres­
sion of mechanical noise on the sample holder, with the aim of reaching an 
even better sensitivity.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Italian CNR (Na­
tional Research Council) through the “5% Nanotecnologie” project and from 
the cofunding program of the University of Pisa.
References
[1] M. Macucci and B. Pellegrini, Very Sensitive Measurement Method of 
Electron Device Current Noise, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 40 (1991) 
7-12.
[2] G. Lombardi, M. Macucci, R. Giannetti, and B. Pellegrini, Cryogenic am­
plification system for ultra-low noise measurements, J. Phys. IV France 
8, (1998) Pr3-185-188.
[3] M. Sampietro, L. Fasoli, and G. Ferrari, Spectrum analyzer with noise 
reduction by cross-correlation technique on two channels, Rev. Sci. In­
strum. 70 (1999) 2520-2525. 2520 (1999).
[4] G. Basso, M. Macucci, M. Casarin, and B. Pellegrini, Ultra low-noise 
cryogenic correlation amplifier for shot noise measurements, Proc. of 
the 16th International Conference on “Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f 
Fluctuations” (2001) 697-700.

CORRELATION SPECTRUM ANALYZER: 
PRINCIPLES AND LIMITS IN NOISE 
MEASUREMENTS
G. Ferrari and M. Sampietro
Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione, Politecnico di Milano
P.za L. da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano
Italy
Marco.Sampietro@polimi.it
Abstract The paper describes the principles of operation and the expected performance 
of correlation spectrum analyzers in the detection and measurement of 
stationary noise produced by passive or active devices under test (DUT). It is 
shown that a sensitivity of few pVNHz in voltage noise measurements and of 
few fA/VHz in current noise measurements may be reached with a properly 
long measurement time rarely exceeding few hours. The paper highlights the 
role of the DUT impedance and of the amplifiers noise sources in setting the 
sensitivity limit of the instrument as given by the generation of spurious 
correlated signals that feed both channels.
Keywords: Spectrum analyzer, Noise measurements, Correlation technique, High 
sensitivity measurements
1. Introduction
Beside setting the performance of newly conceived devices, noise has 
revealed itself to be an extraordinarily powerful tool to investigate the 
properties of transport phenomena at a very basic level. Single carrier 
trapping and detrapping, carriers diffusion in solids, fractionally charged 
quasiparticles in quantum Hall systems or many others, have all found a 
clear explanation through a noise approach [1-4]. Very recently, also new 
field of research, like protein dynamics and molecular transport, are posing 
new important questions that may find an answer from noise measurements. 
The challenge for the experimenter is to track this evolution and to conceive
211
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (211 - 218) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

212
measuring tools with constantly better sensitivity and flexibility to adapt to 
an increasingly vast field of applications.
When the noise to be measured is stationary, the cross-correlation 
technique has proven to be effective to overcome the limitations imposed by 
the electronic noise of the instrument amplifier and to extend the sensitivity 
of noise measurements to very good values. An instrument using this 
technique, which we call a correlation spectrum analyzer, is based on the 
processing of signals from two independent channels operated in parallel and 
takes advantage of the uncorrelated properties of the noises of the two input 
stages. This class of analyzers is effectively becoming more and more 
popular in the research activities as the need of very low noise measurements 
is increasing [5-8].
2. 
Description of the instrument
2.1. 
Principles of operation
Fig. 1 shows a basic scheme of the Correlation Spectrum Analyzer 
[9,10]. The signal from the DUT is fed to two distinct and independent input 
amplifiers operated in parallel, followed by a frequency selector circuit and a 
correlation stage that multiplies each component of the two channels. An 
integrator stage averages with time the result. Besides the input amplifiers, 
the other functions may be performed by a digital processor using sampled 
values of the two input amplifiers outputs.
Figure 1. Schematics of the building blocks of the Correlation Spectrum Analyzer.

213
The signal to be measured from the DUT is therefore processed in phase 
by the two channels and multiplied frequency by frequency to give at the 
output a signal with mean value proportional to the DUT input signal at each 
selected frequency. In the case of DUT noise measurements, this will 
produce the DUT noise power density. The noise components of the two 
input amplifiers, instead, are uncorrelated each other (out of phase) and give 
at the output of the multiplier a signal with zero mean value and standard 
deviation equal to the input amplifier noise power density at each frequency.
The standard deviation OS of the fluctuations around the DUT power
SDUT
density value at the output of the instrument can be written [9] as 
OS SDUT
■ • .
72 • RBW T Tm
(1)
where RBW is the resolution bandwidth of the spectrum. In the case of N 
samples taken at a sampling frequency fs, the resolution bandwidth is equal 
to RBW=fs/N. Equation (1) gives the equivalent input noise of the 
instrument after a measuring time Tm. Few minutes measuring time are in 
general sufficient to improve sensitivity by an order of magnitude, and few 
days give another factor of ten.
The time needed to obtain a given sensitivity can be traded with the 
resolution bandwidth RBW, as indicated by Eq.(1): a frequency resolution 
relaxed by a factor of 10 would need 10 times faster measurement for the 
same noise sensitivity. This, of course, implies that the low frequency 
section of a DUT spectrum would require a proportionally long 
measurement time.
2.2. 
Effect of channel non-uniformity
The instrument is relatively insensitive to nonuniformity in gain and 
phase between the two channels. A phase difference A<p between the two 
channels results in a product between correlated signals reduced by a factor 
cos(A9), while leaving unaffected the uncorrelated noise components. The 
consequence of a phase difference is therefore to reduce the useful output 
signal (gain) without modifying the superimposed uncorrelated noise and 
can be recovered by a slight extension of the measuring time. Different gains 
in the two channels affect correlated and uncorrelated signals in the same 
way and therefore do not play any role in setting the instrument sensitivity. 
The precision in the calculation of the system gain and of its frequency 
response will set the accuracy of the measurement.

214
2.3. 
Quantisation noise
The peculiarity of the Correlation Spectrum Analyzer to measure DUT 
signals much smaller than the instrument noise implies that the dynamic 
range of the A/D converters should be set in accordance to the instrument 
noise and that the DUT signal may, in some cases, be comparable to the least 
significant bit (LSB). This extreme situation does not introduce, however, 
quantisation errors nor prevent the measurement to be performed correctly. 
This is because the small DUT signal is summed in the same direction to 
both the large uncorrelated instrumental noises of the two channels. The 
large instrumental noise shifts the small DUT signal randomly across almost 
the full dynamic range of the A/D converter. The correlation procedure 
performed by the instrument sorts out the small DUT signal common to both 
channels. In addition, thanks to the random sweep across the ADC dinamics, 
the differential nonlinearities of the converter are averaged down by the 
number of quantisation levels covered by the instrumental noise [11] and do 
not produce spurious effects.
3. 
Limits in noise measurements
The level of fluctuation given by Eq.(1) defines the minimum DUT 
signal that can be ideally measured. In practice, the ultimate performance of 
the instrument in term of sensitivity is set by the amount of correlated 
spurious signals generated by those sources of noise in the input 
preamplifiers that produce a signal exactly in parallel to the one produced 
directly by the DUT. Fig. 2 shows the noise sources and the electrical 
connections that are responsible for these correlated spurious signals in the 
case of a current sensitive set-up (Fig.2a) and of a voltage sensitive set-up 
(Fig.2b). These correlated components are read by the two channels of the 
instrument the same way as the DUT component and can therefore not be 
removed.
3.1. 
Current sensitive set-up
For what concerns current noise measurements with the set-up of Fig.2a, 
the correlated component is produced by the noise voltage sources en2 and 
sets the minimum DUT signal that can be measured by the instrument as:
(2)

215
(a) 
(b)
Figure 2. Schematics of instrument input stage for the case of a current sensitive set-up (a) 
and of a voltage sensitive set-up (b). Main noise sources, parasitic capacitances and DUT 
impedance are indicated to help in the evaluation of the spurious correlated signal that set a 
lower limit in the instrument sensitivity.
where RD and CD are the equivalent resistance and capacitance of the DUT 
and Cstray is the stray capacitance of the connection. We have assumed that 
both amplifiers and connections are exactly equal. The limits predicted by 
Eq.(2) are function of the frequency and of the impedance of the DUT.
Note that at low frequencies the 1/f noise component of en2 may be the 
limiting factor. Special care should therefore be taken when designing the 
transimpedance amplifier by choosing low 1/f noise components for the 
input stage.
At high frequencies, the second term in Eq.(2) increases and becomes 
the limiting factor when the impedance of the DUT is particularly large. This 
is unavoidable and practically sets the effective bandwidth of the instrument, 
when measuring very low noise levels, to less than 1MHz. It is evident from 
Eq.(2) that a DUT with a large resistance RD and a small capacitance CD 
would fully exploit the capability of the instrument reaching noise levels 
well below the femtoAmperesA;Hz.

216
3.2. 
Voltage sensitive set-up
For what concerns voltage noise measurements with the set-up of Fig.2b, 
the correlated noise can be summarized by the equivalent voltage noise 
source, vc2orr whose value
2 
22 
222
vcorr = 2 ' in RD +2 ' en® RD (CD + Cstray + Ci )Ci 
(3)
can be directly compared to the noise vD2 UT produced by the DUT. The first 
term in the sum reduces to a negligible value thanks to the very small value 
of in2 of amplifiers with a JFET input transistor. The second term, which 
increases with frequency, becomes significant only when the DUT resistance 
is high, in our instrument for example only when RD is higher than about 
100Q.
4. 
Current versus voltage measurements
As most of the primary physical noise sources in electronic devices are 
in the form of current, the current-sensitive scheme is often preferred as 
closer to physical intuition. It has practical advantages in term of simplicity 
of connection and biasing of the device directly through the instrument and, 
by avoiding voltage conversion, often simplifies the measuring set-up 
leading to an improvement of the overall performance. Nevertheless, the 
clue to make the choice between current-sensitive or voltage-sensitive set-up 
stands on the DUT impedance.
To compare the sensitivity of the voltage and the current scheme, we can 
refer to Fig. 3 where the noise temperature of the instruments is reported as a 
function of the DUT resistance. The dashed lines indicate the sensitivity 
limit in the measurement of devices with no bias applied. The Current 
correlation scheme should be chosen whenever the DUT resistance is larger 
then about 300kQ.
The range of applicability of the current scheme extends further to lower 
DUT resistances when a bias is applied to the DUT. The continuous curves 
in Fig. 3 report the instrument best performance in the case of a biasing 
network of 100kQ resistance, showing that the current scheme is already 
advantageous at 10kQ DUT resistance.
With a commercial single-channel spectrum analyzers, the performance 
of the measurement would be the one indicated by the dots.

217
Figure 3. Comparison between the current-sensitive scheme and the voltage-sensitive 
scheme in term of Noise temperature of the correlation spectrum analyzer. The dashed line 
indicates the sensitivity without bias applied, whereas the continuous line reports the case 
with bias. The dots indicate the sensitivity of a traditional single channel analyzer
5. 
Comparison with standard spectrum analyzer
In a comparison with a standard spectrum analyzer, a correlation-based 
instrument shows not only a significant advantage in term of sensitivity, but 
also advantages in term of dynamic range, bandwidth and immunity to stray 
capacitance. To understand this point consider for example the current 
sensitive set-up of Fig. 2a in which the feedback resistance RF of the 
transimpedance amplifier may be chosen low enough to manage the standing 
current from the DUT and/or to extend the bandwidth of the instrument 
(inversely proportional to RF) as required (or imposed) by the application. 
The sensitivity of the measurement would not be affected by this reduction 
of RF as long as a correspondingly longer measuring time is used. 
Conversely, if only one transimpedance amplifier is used, as it is the case in 
a standard analyzer, the reduction of RF to satisfy dynamic range or 
bandwidth would reduce sensitivity correspondingly.
By considering the effect of a stray capacitance, in a standard analyzer 
the signal produced by the input voltage noise through the stray input 
capacitance sums directly to the DUT signal and reduces the instrument 
sensitivity. In a correlated instrument, the signal generated on the stray 
capacitance tends to flow on a single channel (depending on the DUT 
impedance) and therefore may be reduced by proper averaging time. Only 

218
the fraction that flows trough the DUT is correlated on the two channels and 
sets the sensitivity limit of the instrument.
Acknowledgements
Authors would like to thank E.Gatti and D.Natali for the many 
interesting discussions. Work supported by italian CNR and INFN.
References
[1] Noise and Fluctuations Control in Electronic Devices, edited by A.A.
Balandin, Los Angeles, USA: American Scientific Publishers, 2002.
[2] L. K. J. Vandamme, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 41 (1994), 2176.
[3] J.Sikula and L. Stourac, Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. on Microelectronics 
(2002), 767.
[4] G. Gomila and L. Reggiani, Phys. Rev. B 62 (2000), 8068.
[5] L.Saminadayar, D.C.Gattli, Y.Jin and B.Etienne, Phys.Rev.Lett.79 
(1997), 2526.
[6] D.C.Gattli, P.Jacques, A.Kumar, P.Pari and L.Saminadayar, 
J.Appl.Phys. 81 (1997), 7350.
[7] G.Basso, M.Casarin, M.Macucci, B.Pellegrini, in Proceedings of the 
16th ICNF 2001 (2001), 697.
[8] M.Sampietro, G.Ferrari and G.Bertuccio, J.Appl.Phys., 87 (2000), 
7583.
[9] M.Sampietro, L.Fasoli and G.Ferrari, Rev.Sci. Instrum. 70 (1999), 
2520.
[10] G.Ferrari and M.Sampietro, Rev. Sci. Instr. 73 (2002), 2717.
[11] C. Cottini, E. Gatti, V. Svelto. Nucl. Instr. And Meth. 24 (1963), 241.

MEASUREMENT AND ANALYSIS METHODS FOR 
RANDOM TELEGRAPH SIGNALS
Z. Qelik-Butler
University of Texas at Arlington, Electrical Engineering Department / Nanofab
Box 19072, Arlington, TX 76019
USA
zbutler@uta.edu
Abstract Large-area device noise models are based on ensemble averaging techniques. 
Typically, the physical mechanisms leading to fluctuations of microscopic 
entities, such as charge carrier number or mobility can be modeled by 
connecting these fluctuations to noise in a measurable device parameter, such 
as voltage or current. In the process, ensemble averaging of independent (or 
some times dependent) fluctuators is done to obtain an “average” power 
spectral density function that agrees with the experimentally measured one. 
This procedure breaks down in small area devices where the observed noise is 
basically a single electron phenomenon. Small devices can be manufactured 
with a single defect which in time domain show only two level switching 
signals known as burst noise and/or Random Telegraph Signal (RTS) noise. 
The RTS noise in sub-micron MOSFETs usually dominates over all the other 
noise sources and becomes a major noise generator for low frequency region 
of spectrum. With usual oxide and interface trap densities in the order of 1010 
eV cm-2, active traps being located only within a few kBT around the Fermi 
level, a sub-micron MOSFET of 1.0*0.15 Um dimensions will have only 78% 
chance of having an active electron trapping site. Therefore, it will be a hit or 
miss situation to observe RTS in the signal. It is essential to be able to perform 
accurate measurements of RTS both in time and frequency domains, not only 
to be able to understand, analyze and model the noise in these advanced 
devices, but also to use RTS measurements as a characterization tool for the 
interface and bulk traps responsible for these RTS events.
Keywords: 
Random Telegraph Signals, Noise, MOSFETs, Noise Measurements
1. Introduction
RTS or Random Telegraph Signals are fluctuations in the current or 
voltage with random discrete pulses of equal heights. RTS due to several
219
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (219 - 226) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

220
trapping centers can produce multi-level amplitude fluctuations 
superimposed on each other, thus provide a complicated noise behavior. A 
simple two level RTS can be seen in various types of semiconductor devices 
such as bipolar junction transistors (BJT), and metal-oxide-semiconductor 
field effect transistors (MOSFET). A systematic analysis of two level RTS 
can be made to obtain information about the physical location and energy of 
the defect center causing the RTS. There are hundreds of active traps in large 
area devices causing superposition of single RTS’s leading to Lorentzian or 
1/f noise spectra depending on the distribution of the capture and emission 
time constants associated with these traps. It is expected that as the devices 
continue to scale down, there will be an increased need to understand and 
model the role of RTS in noise.
In this workshop, we present the methods of measurement and analysis 
for RTS. The experimental setups are described. Two RTS measurement 
methods, time and frequency domains, are explained. The techniques 
presented here would be applicable to any nanoscale device exhibiting two- 
level RTS. In the last section, we discuss the method of analysis to obtain the 
RTS characteristics, capture and emission times and RTS amplitude using 
both time and frequency domain data.
In addition to simple two-level RTS, there also have been reports of 
complex RTS showing three or more levels, rapidly switching RTS 
modulated by an envelope of the same amplitude as well as RTS with 
various anomalous behavior. Although a complete physical explanation of 
these complex switching phenomena has not been made yet, plausible 
hypotheses have been offered, involving trapping configurations that exist in 
two or more metastable states and multi-electron trapping by the same site. 
Explanation of complex RTS is perhaps the single most outstanding issue in 
switching phenomena observed in microstructures.
Through careful time and frequency domain analysis, the effect of each 
trap on complex RTS can be de-coupled.
2. 
Measurement Methods
The RTS obtained at different biasing conditions can be analyzed in 
time domain and frequency domain. In time domain analysis, we use the 
data obtained from a digital oscilloscope as shown in Fig. 1. The frequency 
domain analysis is done using the data obtained from a signal analyzer. The 
noise power spectrum shows a Lorentzian form due to the RTS with two 
level switching. As an example, the voltage noise power spectrum of a 
MOSFET as a function of frequency obtained at Vgs=1.3 V and Vds=0.05 V 
is shown in Fig. 2 with a Lorentzian fitting.

221
Figure 1. A sample RTS in time domain, showing two-level switching.
In a MOSFET, if T1 is the mean-time that the drain voltage spends in 
state 1 and T0 is the mean-time in state 0, then it can be shown that the 
probability of a transition from 0 to 1 is given by 1/ T0, and the probability 
of a transition from 1 to 0 is given by 1/T1 [1]. Depending on the type of 
the trap involved (acceptor or donor) and the type of the carrier, the states 1 
and 0 can be identified as capture Tc and emission Te of the carrier from 
and to the relevant band by the trap.
Figure 2. RTS in frequency domain with Lorentzian fitting.
2.1. 
Time Domain Measurements and Analysis
In time domain, the RTS data is obtained from a digital oscilloscope, 
preferably interfaced to a computer. Window size of the sampled data is an 
important aspect of the time domain observations. There are two factors that 

222
need to be considered: resolution and number of transitions. Fast sampling 
rate (or high resolution) is desired so that no transitions (pulses) are missed 
in the data. However, a large enough window is also needed that contains at 
least 200 transitions for a meaningful statistical average. Defining a voltage 
level between the maximum and minimum voltage levels in the RTS time 
domain data, one can compute times that wave form spends above and below 
that defined level and hence calculate Tc and Te.
If there are sufficient number of transitions between those two levels, 
using Poisson analysis, more accurate values for Tc and Te can be obtained. 
According to Kirton and Uren [1], in order to have a less than 10% error, 
there must be at least 200 transitions within at least 20,000 data points. Here 
Tc and Te are obtained by fitting a curve to the distribution of capture and 
emission times separately. Using the noise data obtained from a digitizing 
oscilloscope, mean capture and emission times can be calculated by a 
graphical method. In this method, we define a voltage level in between the 
minimum and maximum voltage levels in the graph of drain voltage noise 
versus time as shown in Fig. 1. Every voltage above this defined level is 
classified as a “1” and every voltage equal to or below this level is classified 
as a “0”. A single set of time domain data contains about 20,000 data points. 
Multiplying the “1”s and “0”s by sampling rate and averaging, the mean 
value of the time spent above the level which is called T1, and the mean time 
spent below the level which is called T0 can be obtained. This method works 
best when there are only two discrete voltage levels, a clear “1” and “0”. If it 
becomes difficult to determine such a level without getting false readings, 
e.g. a “1” mistakenly classified as a “0” and vice versa, it is better to rely on 
an alternate method of analysis such as the spectral analysis, or the Poisson 
analysis.
The amount of time spent in either the “1” or “0” state follows a Poisson 
distribution. If there are enough transitions with well-distributed capture and 
emission times, we can use the Poisson method of analysis and expect 
reasonable values for T1 and T0. In this method, the total time is broken into 
small intervals, and then the number of pulses in each interval that have a 
width that falls into each time interval is counted. A plot of the frequency of 
pulses for each time width should follow a Poisson distribution, p0e-t0(t). As 
an example, this distribution obtained from our actual data is shown in 
Fig. 3. T1 and T0 are then calculated using the equation:
T1/0 =
Z (t,) p 0 e - t0( ti) 
i_______________
Z p 0 e - t0( ti)
i
(1)

223
The parameter t0 and p0 can be obtained as fitting parameters. If the 
values for T1 and T0 calculated from the Poisson analysis are close to those 
calculated from the time analysis, then this indicates a good data set with a 
Poisson distribution and enough transitions for minimal error.
Poisson Distribution for emission time, Vds=0.2 V, Vds=0.55V
time (s)
Time distribution
------ Poisson fitting
Figure 3. Distribution of emission times for a RTS with a Poisson distribution fitting.
The amplitude is another important parameter in RTS. Based on the 
correlation theory of 1/f noise where current (or voltage) fluctuation due to a 
single electron capture and emission by a defect at or near the semiconductor 
- dielectric interface can be interpreted mathematically in terms of number 
and mobility fluctuations as [1]:
f .1N ± 1 U
W x L N dNt u dNt
AZ d 
1
Id
(2)
where, Nt is the number of occupied traps per unit area, N is the number of 
carriers per unit area, W is the channel width, L is the channel length, and u 
is the carrier mobility. The expression above is written for the drain current 
of a MOSFET. Similar expressions can be written for other advanced 
devices. The sign in front of the mobility term depends on the trap type, 
accepter or donor. The term 3N / 3Nt is approximately equal to -1 when the 
number of carriers per unit area, N, is greater than 1011 cm-2. According to 
Matthiessen’s rule as 1/u = 1/un +1/uox = 1/un + aNt. Here, a is the carrier 
scattering coefficient, uox is the mobility limited by oxide charge scattering.

224
fin is the mobility limited by other scattering mechanisms. Therefore, Eq. (2) 
can be rewritten as:
AZ d
1 
( 1 +± a/i
Id 
W x L IN
(3)
This is the basic expression for drain current fluctuation due to RTS in 
small scale MOSFETs. In deep sub-micron devices, as the device 
dimensions approach to electron mean free path, quantum effects become 
more significant. In highly doped deep sub-micron MOSFETs, a triangular 
potential well can be created with a high enough electric field in the 
inversion layer. If the width of this potential well is small compared to the 
wavelength of the carriers, the conduction band is quantized into discrete 
energy levels. Although RTS have been studied extensively, the quantization 
effect on the main parameters of RTS: capture and emission times and the 
RTS amplitude, has not been fully understood.
Histogram
Figure 4. Histogram of the time-domain data. The distance between the two maxima 
corresponds to the RTS amplitude.
The RTS amplitude can be calculated by the noise data obtained in the 
time domain. In order to do this, statistical methods can be used either 
numerically or graphically. In both schemes, the voltage (or current) vs. 
time data is used. In order to extract the value for RTS amplitude 
numerically, a voltage between higher and lower voltage levels is selected 
and the hence average upper and lower voltage levels are statistically 
calculated. In graphical scheme, the time domain data is displayed in a 
histogram as shown in the Fig. 4. The distance between two maxima 
provides the RTS amplitude.

225
2.2. 
Frequency Domain Measurements and Analysis:
A typical frequency domain measurement system consists of biasing 
circuitry, device under test (DUT), a pre-amplifier in AC mode (preferably 
differential), and a signal analyzer. In the case of a voltage noise spectral 
density measurement, the resistance in series with the DUT is made large 
enough to minimize the contribution to fluctuations from the circuitry. The 
biasing circuit is preferably battery operated to avoid ac/line pick-up at 60 
(or 50) Hz and its harmonics. For the same reason, a shielded room or at 
least an enclosure is required, made of a high-permeability metal that will 
shield against planar and magnetic waves down to low frequencies. Metal­
film or wire-wound resistors and potentiometers are used. The background 
noise of the system is measured separately and subtracted from the total 
noise measured with the device biased.
The voltage power spectral density of an RTS is given by [2]:
SV(f)=
(T1 + T0 )•
4A V
(4)
+ (2nf )2
where AVds is the RTS amplitude, in other words, the average drain voltage 
difference between the level 1and 0. Let
and
then
1 
1
— + — 
T =
T0 
T1
T0T1
T0 + T1
f =_L k = 4T2 A Vds1
J 0 
’ k = _ , _
2nT 
T0 + Ti
2 
_2t 2 A Vds2
T 0/1 = 
,
1± 1
k
tA Vds1
(5)
(6)
(7)
1
T
These T0 and T1 are distinguished by the + or - sign in Eq. (7) and they 
correspond to mean capture and emission times of the RTS depending on the 
trap type, acceptor or donor. One can use Eqs. (6) and (7) to rewrite the Eq. 
(4) as:
SV(f)=
k
1 + (f / fo)2
(8)
Using curve fitting tools, the knee frequency f0 and the corresponding power 
spectral value k can be calculated (Fig. 2). From k, f0, and AV (calculated 

226
from time domain analysis), T1 and T0 can be obtained utilizing Eq. (7). 
Since, in most cases, we can find more than one trap active close to the 
interface in a certain gate voltage range, better fitting can be obtained if we 
sum up contributions of different traps.
3. 
Summary
A brief description of experimental techniques has been provided for 
analysis and measurements of random telegraph signals. Unlike most other 
noise measurements systems, where a frequency domain analysis such as 
power spectral density is sufficient, RTS requires both time and frequency 
domain measurements and analysis.
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of my post-doctoral associates 
and students over the years to this research.
References
[1] M. J. Kirton and M. J. Uren, Noise in Solid-State Microstructures: A 
New Perspective on Individual Defects, Interface States, and Low- 
Frequency Noise, Advances in Phys., 38 (1989) 367
[2] K. K. Hung, P. K. Ko, C. Hu and Y. C. Cheng, Random Telegraph 
Noise of Deep Submicrometer MOSFETs, IEEE Tran. Electron 
Devices Letters, 11 (1990) 90.

RTS IN QUANTUM DOTS AND MOSFETS: 
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP WITH LONG-TIME 
STABILITY AND MAGNETIC FIELD 
COMPENSATION
J. Sikula1 and J. Pavelka
Czech Noise Research Laboratory, Brno University of Technology 
Technicka 8, 616 00 Brno
CzechRepublic
M. Tacano*, S. Hashiguchi** and M. Toita***
*Department of Electrical Engineering, Meisei University, Hino 191 8506, Toky, Japan
**Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Yamanashi,Kofu 400 851, Japan
***Asahi Kasei, Nobeoka, Miyazak, Japan
1 sikula@feec.vutbr.cz
Abstract 
This paper investigates the emission and capture kinetics of random
telegraph signals (RTS) in Quantum dots and submicron MOSFET structures. 
Emphasis is laid on the signals showing a capture process which deviates from 
the standard Shockley-Read-Hall kinetics. The proposed model distinguishes 
between primary processes consisting in quantum transitions of electrons 
between traps and the conduction or valence band and secondary processes, 
consisting in current modulation. If the RTS noise sources are quantum 
transitions of electrons between a shallow trap and the conduction band then 
the primary process is one-dimensional and it coincides with the secondary 
process - current modulation. For deep traps the primary process is a two 
dimensional g - r process. It is shown in this paper how to distinguish 
experimentally between the one or two-dimensional primary processes by 
measuring the probability density of the occupation time in both current states. 
These long-time measurements require a very stable power source and active 
shielding of low frequency magnetic fields.
Keywords: 
RTS noise, Burst noise, Quantum Dots, MOSFETs, Noise measurements
1. Introduction
Quantum dot (QD) structures have attracted much attention because of 
interest in not only the relevance of low-dimensional electron gas physics
227
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (227 - 236) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

228
but also of future applications. RTS as being observed in short- and narrow­
channel FETs makes direct evidence of a single charge capture and 
emission. Awano et al. [2] fabricated an AlGaAs/InGaAs heterojunction 
field-effect transistor (FET) memory cell in a tetrahedral-shaped recess 
(TSR) structure.
An analysis of RTS presented in their paper explains quantitatively the 
details of hole trapping processes in the TSR QD. RTS was observed in the 
saturated current region and the RTS signal showed pure Lorentzian power 
spectrum. This process is thermally activated with the activation energy of 
hole capture and emission as 260 and 190 meV, respectively, as is shown in 
Fig. 1.
Figure 1. Temperature dependence of average hole capture and emission time
From experiments carried out on submicron MOSFETs it is known that 
the capture and emission rates are thermally activated [3, 4]. Taking account 
of the exhaustive published data, it is rather unlikely that there exists a 
universal type of RTS behaviour and consequently a model.
Nevertheless some interesting properties have been revealed, which 
extend the insight in the mechanisms underlying the interaction between 
traps and free carriers. It has been proved that Coulomb interaction might 
play an important role in the capture and emission processes. In some 
devices the capture time Tc is inversely proportional to the square of the drain 
current ID (see Fig. 2). We suppose that the standard Shockley-Read-Hall 
theory and Machlup model [1] are acceptable to describe RTS noise in 
special cases only.

229
Figure 2. Capture Tc and emission Te time constants of a submicron Si n-MOSFET
2. Primary and secondary processes
There are more mechanisms, which are the sources of bistable RTS 
current fluctuation. We will distinguish the primary processes as an 
ensemble of quantum transitions of electrons between the trap and the 
conduction or valence band from the secondary process, which is the current 
modulation. The primary process can be a one or more dimensional 
stochastic Markowian process. If the RTS noise sources are quantum 
transitions of electrons between shallow traps and the conduction band then 
we can describe this primary process by means of a one dimensional 
stochastic process and in this case the secondary process - current 
modulation - will coincide with the primary process. Such model was 
described by Machlup [1]. For deep traps there are possible quantum 
transitions of electrons between the trap and the conduction or valence band. 
In this case the primary process X(t) is in general a two dimensional g - r 
process. The respective secondary process Y(t) is represented by the current 
modulation. It is a one-dimensional stochastic process featuring two discrete 
states (a, 0). In this case, two states of the X(t) process are transformed into 
one state of the measurable secondary Y(t) process. It is possible to 
distinguish experimentally between the two or three state primary processes 
by measuring the probability density and the dispersion time in the 0 state. 
These long-time measurements however have to use a highly stable power 
source and active shielding of low frequency magnetic fields to decrease the 
background noise level.
3. Transition probability intensities
This model supposes for the system: (i) to be Markowian, (ii) to be near 
equilibrium, (iii) generation and recombination processes may take place 
between the interface trap energy level and one band only. We assume that 

230
(1)
the process of the trap occupation has two states, being stationary with a 
constant transition probability intensity pij defined by
pij(s,t)
*’ = lim
where pij is the transition probability at time s from the i-state to the j-state 
at time t. There are two measurable quantities: the pulse duration in the 
lower and the upper states. They are inversely proportional to the transition 
probability intensities p,j. In terms of the Shockley-Read-Hall model, one 
gets the matrix elements of transition probability intensities:
^10 = Cnn = 1/Tc
(2)
and
^■01= Cnni = 1/Te 
(3)
where p01 is the transition probability intensity for the carrier emission and 
p.10 - for capture.
4. 
One dimensional G-R process
In the special case, where the source of RTS noise are quantum 
transitions of electrons between a shallow trap and conduction band, we can 
describe this primary process by one dimensional stochastic process, which 
coincides with the secondary process - current modulation [4]. This model is 
the same as that of Machlup [1] and we will follow this derivation to show 
how the more general two-dimensional process can be described.
The probabilities pij(t) of the transition from the state i into the state j is 
found by solving the Kolmogorov differential equations
dp (t)/ = E ^kPki( t), 
dt 
ke I
(4)
for I = (0, 1), i,j = 0, 1, with the conditions pii (0) = 1,pij (0) = 0, for i ± j.
The absolute probability distribution ni is given by solving Kolmogorov 
equation in the form
Z n i^ = o, 
(5)
ieI
We have
n=w+/v 
=fpt 
(6)
and
n=1/(1+Ao/=f
(7)

231
The absolute probability distributions n0 and n1 correspond in 
thermodynamic equilibrium to Fermi - Dirac statistics for the trap to be free 
and occupied by an electron, respectively.
The dispersion of the current modulation process is then
D{Y (t)} = A 2n 0n1 = AI2 x /(1 + x)2. 
(8)
t /s
Figure 3. RTS noise in time domain
The correlation function is
BY (t) = D {Y (t )}exp( - p.t) 
(9)
where p = ^ + ^10
Similarly, we find the spectral density
SY (a) = 2 D {Y (t)} 
t
------------------------- --------------- :—— .
n 1 + ar
(10)
where t = 1/n
The RTS noise current spectral density as a function of frequency f is 
given by SI(f)=2n.SI(a) and then we have
SI (f) = 4^
Experimental results obtained for a submicron MOSFET made by Asahi 
Kasei are shown in Fig. 4.
The probability density of the occupation time in state a is given by
ga = — exp(- VTa )>
Ta
(12)
where Ta corresponds to the emission or capture constant. The 
probability density distribution (see Fig.5) is exponential with the resultant 
time constant t = 0.52 ms, which is in good agreement with the time

232
constant corresponding to the cut-off frequency of the Lorentzian type 
spectral density (see Fig. 4).
Figure 4. The current noise spectral 
density vs. frequency for sample N32
Figure 5. Histogram of Tc and Te for 
sample N32
In this case the one-dimensional process or the model of Machlup [1] can 
be used to describe RTS noise kinetics. It applies to shallow traps, low 
temperatures and traps located near the silicon-oxide interface.
Figure 6. Histogram of Tc and Te for 
sample N32 with 7x105 pulses
Figure 7. Histogram of Tc and Te for 
sample N32 with 15x106 pulses
Long-time measurements on submicron MOSFETs show that the 
probability density of occupation time for emission is given by a 
superposition of two exponential dependencies given by
gp = A exp(- t/Ti ) + B exp(- tlT2 ) 
(13)
Histograms for submicron MOSFET made by Asahi Kasei sample N31 
at temperature 256 K and drain current 2.6 pA are in Fig. 6. for 7x105 
pulses and in Fig. 7. for 15x106 pulses. It is important that capture time 
constant does not depend on the number of the pulses being measured.
To obtain more accurate information on the role of quantum transitions 
of charge carries in the kinetics of RTS process, the measuring set-up must 

233
be able to guarantee stable conditions (temperature, voltage supply and 
magnetic field) for long-time data acquisition.
5. Fully computer-controlled battery power source
Many of the rectified power sources could supply current or voltage 
through the software program, but they do not always come without minute 
residual line noise. This becomes a serious problem in highly sensitive low- 
signal devices working in the pV/nV ranges [5].
An automated power system was reported recently by Jonker and 
Vandamme [7] for low frequency noise measurements of low-Ohmic 
samples and magnetic sensors. They used a fixed battery and relayed fixed 
resistors to control the current through the DUT to obtain an equivalent noise 
resistance Req of 10 Ohm using two pre-amplifiers connected in parallel.
We describe here a fully computer-controlled battery power source with 
following features: it is able to measure the resistance of the DUT, set the 
current through or the voltage across the DUT, communicate with the 
computer through optical TX/RX interfaces and reject circuit noise by 
switching off the power of the internal circuit when starting the 
measurement, and charge up the battery automatically when low. This power 
source makes therefore the ultimate quiescent power source without any line 
noise.
The block diagram of the new fully automated power supply system, 
which consists of a personal computer, an interface controller, a battery 
power source system, the DUT and measuring instruments, is shown in Fig. 
8. The personal computer and the interface controller are connected through 
the control signal line enabling either parallel or serial two-way 
communication. Personal-computer-controlled microcomputer units (MCUs) 
and an AD converter installed in a shielding box together with batteries and 

234
optical connection from outside make it possible to set automatically the DC 
power source for low-frequency noise measurements without any spurious 
line noise. After the resistance of the device under test is measured 
automatically at 1 mA, the voltage across or the current through the sample 
is set to equal the required value given by the external PC. The power 
sources for the MCU and the AD converter in the shielding box are 
automatically switched off in order to minimize the noise induced from the 
electronic circuit. This power source substantially improves the low- 
frequency noise measurement technology. Low-frequency noise 
measurements and noise figure measurements of the devices are the most 
sensitive cases where the superimposed line noise must be entirely 
eliminated from the measuring set-up. This power source substantially 
improves the low-frequency noise measurement technology.
6. Active shielding for low-frequency magnetic field
When handling very low noise signals at low frequencies, magnetically 
induced noise is sometimes difficult to avoid by conventional shielding. The 
main sources of such interfering magnetic noise fields are the commercial 
power lines and apparatuses utilizing motors and transformers. The noise 
voltage induced in a one-turn coil of 1cm2 cross-section by such a field 
sometimes becomes about 0.1 pV/Hz, which corresponds to a magnetic field 
of 3 pWb/m2 at 50 Hz. We report here a method to reduce such interfering 
magnetic fields by applying an inverted magnetic field generated by a 
negative feedback system [6].
The configuration of the system is shown in Fig. 9. The system consists 
of a pickup coil Lp, two low-noise pre-amplifiers (Ap1, Ap2), two driving 
amplifiers (Ad1, Ad2), and a driving coil Ld. This symmetrical push-pull 
configuration is adopted to reject the interference through capacitive 
coupling. The voltage induced in the pickup coil by the interfering magnetic 
field is amplified and fed to the driving coil. The driving coil is arranged so 
as to cancel the existing magnetic field. The system is designed to reduce the 
50 Hz magnetic field of around 1pWb/m2 by 40 dB.
The spectra of the inducing magnetic field before and after the 
application of the negative feedback system are shown in Fig. 10. where 0 
dB of the vertical axis corresponds to a magnetic field induction of 8 
mWb/m2. The upper trace is an example of the induced magnetic field in a 
laboratory room. In addition to spikes at harmonic frequencies of 50 Hz, 
there is a spike at 20 Hz. The lower trace shows the magnetic field when the 
negative feedback system is applied. The spike at 50 Hz is reduced by 35 dB 
and the most of the other spikes are suppressed to the background level 
(-165 dB/Hz).

235
Gain:46db
AP
Faraday Shield
Ld 
800Tct
Figure 9. Magnetic negative feedback system
LP 
400Tct
Figure 10. Effect of magnetic negative feedback. Upper trace: original field, lower trace: 
reduced field.
7. Conclusion
The standard Shockley-Read-Hall theory and the model of Machlup [1] 
are acceptable in describing the RTS kinetics in special cases only, where the 
RTS noise sources are quantum transitions of electrons between shallow 
traps and the conduction or valence band only. If there are possible quantum 
transition of electrons between the trap and the conduction or valence band, 
the primary process X(t) is in general a two dimensional g - r process. A 
secondary process Y(t) is represented by the current modulation. It is a one­
dimensional stochastic process with two discrete states (a, 0). In this case 
two states of the X(t) process are transformed into one state of the 
measurable secondary Y(t) process. It is possible to distinguish 
experimentally between the one or two-dimensional primary processes by 
measuring the probability density and the dispersion time in the 0 state. To 

236
obtain more accurate information on the role of quantum transitions of 
charge carries in the kinetics of RTS process, the measuring set-up must be 
able to guarantee stable conditions (temperature, voltage supply and 
magnetic field) for long-time data acquisition.
References
[1] S. Machlup, J. appl. Phys., 25, 341, (1954)
[2] Y.Awano, M. Shima, Y. Sakuma, Y. Sugiyama, N. Yokoyama and M. 
Tacano, Temperature controlled RTS noise from a single InGaAs 
quantum dot, Proc. of the Int. Conf. "Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f 
Fluctuations", ed. by G. Bosman, Gainesville, FL, USA (2001) p.359
[3] M. J. Kirton and M. J. Uren, Noise in Solid-State Microstructures: A 
New Perspective on Individual Defects, Interface States, and Low- 
Frequency Noise, Advances in Phys., 38 (1989) 367
[3] Z. Celik - Butler and N.V. Amarasinnghe, Random Telegraph Signals 
in Deep Submicron Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect 
Transistors,Noise and Fluctuation Control in Electronic Devices, ed. by 
A. A. Balandin pp.187 - 199, American Scientific Publisher (2002)
[4] J.Sikula , M. Sikulova , P. Vasina , B. Koktavy : Burst Noise in Diodes. 
Proc. of the 6th Int. Conf. on Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f 
Fluctuations, eds.by P. H. E. Meijer, R. D. Mountain and R.J.Soulen, 
pp. 100 - 104, NBS Washington DC, (1981)
[5] S.Yokokura, N. Tanuma, M. Tacano,S. Hashiguchi and J. Sikula, Fully 
computer-controlled battery power source for low-frequency noise 
measurements, Proc. of the Int. Conf. "Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f 
Fluctuations", ed. by G. Bosman, Gainesville, FL, USA (2001) p.
[6] S. Hashiguchi, C. Taki, A. Kitahara, M. Ohki, M. Tacano and J. Sikula, 
Active shielding for low frequency magnetic field, Proc. of 
Int.Workshop Noise and Non-Linearity Testing of Modern Electronic 
Components, September 12 - 13, 2001,Brno, Czech Republic (2001) 
pp. 44-47.
[7] R.J.W. Jonker, J. Briaire and L.K.J. Vandamme: “Automated System 
for Noise-Measurements on Low-Ohmic Samples and Magnetic 
Sensors”, IEEE Trans. IM, 48(1999) 730.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION OF LOW-NOISE AMPLIFIERS IN 
VERY LOW FREQUENCY REGION
J. Sikula1
Czech Noise Research Laboratory, Brno University of Technology 
Technicka 8, 616 00 Brno
CzechRepublic
S. Hashiguchi2 and M. Ohki
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Yamanashi, 
Kofu 400 8511
Japan
3
M. Tacano3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Meisei University
Hino 191 8506, Tokyo
Japan
1 
sikula@feec.vutbr.cz
2 
has@es.yamanashi.ac.jp
3 
tacano@ee.meisei-u.ac.jp
Abstract Important points in designing a low noise amplifier in very low frequency 
region such as around 1mHz are to avoid the coupling capacitor at the front 
end, and to suppress the thermal drift. Practical examples are described.
Keywords: 
very low frequency, low noise amplifier, thermal feedback
1. Introduction
The fundamental requirement on the amplifier for noise measurements is 
that the noise level referred to the input should be below the noise to be 
measured by more than 20 db. This requirement is not difficult to fulfill in 
audio frequency region, and it is possible to make the white noise level of 
the system referred to the input less than -190 dbV/Hz. In the very low
237
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (237 - 244) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

238
frequency range extending to sub-milli-Hz there are several difficulties. 
Those are the problems concerning to the coupling capacitors, the excess 
noise in amplifying devices, the effects of the ambient temperature variation, 
and so on.
The capacitance necessary for the lower cutoff frequency of 0.1 mHz is 
16 mF for the input resistance of 100 kQ. The electrolytic capacitors are the 
exclusive selection for such a value of capacitance, and the electrolytic 
capacitors accompany a considerable amount of leakage current causing 
additional noise. In addition, the coupling capacitor presents high signal 
source impedance for the amplifying device. For example, the impedance of 
16 mF is 10 kQ at 1 mHz, and this enhances the contribution of the input 
current noise of active devices. The coupling capacitor also causes the long 
transient when the power supply of the amplifier is switched on.
The active devices for the first stage amplifiers are selected by checking 
the values of the equivalent input noise level and the trans-conductance. The 
offset voltage and its drift are serious in a direct-coupled amplifier. The 
offset is cancelled by inserting a combination of small batteries, and the drift 
is suppressed by the thermal feedback stabilization. As the measurements are 
performed over a long time, for a week for example, the power supply 
voltage should be stable enough over this duration.
2. 
The First Stage
2.1. 
Amplifying device
A junction FET is better for the first stage device than a bipolar 
transistor because the gate biasing circuit is simpler. The device should be 
selected by checking the input equivalent noise voltage at 10 Hz in the 
catalogue data. One of the best devices at present is 2SK369 JFET (supplied 
by Toshiba[1]) whose equivalent input noise is -175 dbV/Hz (typ.) at 10 Hz 
for the drain current ID=3 mA.
A bipolar transistor is preferable when the impedance Rg of the signal 
source (sample under test) is low. The bipolar transistor pair 
2SA1316/2SC3329 is recommended for such cases. Its input noise voltage is 
-177.5 dbV/Hz for the collector current IC=10 mA as indicated in Table 1 [1].
Table 1. Equivalent input noise of 2SA1316/2SC3329
IC(mA)
NF(db)
Rs(Q)
Sn(10Hz)(dbV/Hz)
0.1
8
100
-170.5
1
8
30
-175.8
10
8
20
-177.5

239
The values in Table 1 are computed with Eq.(1) using the data from the 
catalogue which says that NF=8 db for R g=100 Q at Ic=0.1 mA, for 30 Q at 
1mA, and for 20 Q at 10 mA, respectively.
NF
Sn = 10 log< en2 >= 10log4kTRg + 10log(10^° -1)
NF
=-197.8+10logRg +10log(10 10 -1) @300K
(1)
Parallel connection of n pieces of FETs and n pieces of the load resistors, 
shown in Fig.1, reduces the input noise voltage to 1/Jn , maintaining the 
voltage amplification unchanged, as shown in Eq.(2).
eGn
eNn
gm e Gn
°
vo
Figure 1. Noise equivalent circuit of paralleled JFET.
R n 
n e +R i
Vo =- gmRD Z (es + eN + RGiNi ) = - gmRD (Ss + Z ^ + 
)
ni 
i 
n
2 
22
< vo2 >=(gmRD)2{<es2 >+n<eN >+n2RG <iN >} 
n2
2 
22
=(gmRD)2{<es2>+<eN >+RG <iN >}, 
n
if
2 
2 
22
< eN1 >=< eN2 >=   
=< eNn >=< eN > 
(2)
and
2 
2 
22
< iN1 >=< iN2 >=   
=< iNn >=< iN > .
2.2. 
Circuit configuration
The first stage FET is to operate at zero bias (0 ~ -50 mV) in the 
common source configuration as shown in Fig.2. This is to obtain the lower 

240
gate noise voltage at the higher drain current, and to avoid noise generated in 
the resistors for biasing. The operating point of FETs with higher IDSS is less 
sensitive for the variation in the gate bias of 50 mV. The sample under test 
and the gate of the FET is directly connected when the dc voltage VS of the 
SUT output is between 0 and -50 mV, else a bank of batteries of VBC(V) is 
inserted between the output of SUT and the gate of the first stage FET as 
shown in Fig.3 to make the gate voltage between 0 and -50 mV. The bank of 
batteries consists of series connection, in forward and reverse direction, of 
such batteries as shown in Table 2. The obtainable value of VBC is with a step 
of 50 mV.
The voltage gain A1 of the first stage must be higher than the ratio of the 
input noise of the second stage to that of the first stage. One of the best 
candidates for the second stage is a low noise linear IC amplifier such as 
p.PC815C (NEC)[2]. As the input noise level of |1PC815C is -171 dbV/Hz 
at 10 Hz, A1 must be higher than 10 db. and A1 = 30 db is reasonable.
Table 2 Small-sized batteries
type
voltage(V)
NiMH
1.2
PR
1.4
LR
1.5
SR
1.55
CR
3.0
ER
3.6
Figure 2. First stage circuit
2.3 
Passive suppression of temperature fluctuation
Temperature fluctuation is reduced by applying thermal insulation to the 
FET and/or by attaching heat sinks to the FET. Fig. 3 shows the effects of 
thermal insulation [3]. The upper trace is the noise output of a FET (2SK117) 
when it is bare, while the lower trace is that when it is thermally insulated 
with an enclosure of a few millimeter thick foam polystyrene. This thermal 
insulation is effective below 0.5 Hz, and the fluctuation level is reduced by 
30 db below 0.1 Hz.
Fig. 4 shows the effect of attaching heat sinks. The shapes and the sizes 
of the heat sinks are shown in Fig.5, and the thermal parameters are shown 
in Table 3. The thermal resistance is computed from the measured values of 
thermal time constants. As is seen in Fig.3 the heat sinks #2 and #3, both 
attached to the leads of the FET, are very effective below 0.3 Hz. The humps 
at 0.05 Hz on the traces (c) and (d) are smoothed out by additional heat sink 
#1 to the head (plastic part) of the FET. The thermal time constants of such 
thermal insulation and heat sinks are limited by the size of the amplifier and 
may not be so effective below 0.01Hz.

241
Figure 3. Effect of thermal insulation
0.05 
0.1 
0.3 0 5 
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 4. Effect of heat sinks
heat sink #1
Aluminum 71 gwt 
for attaching to the head
heat sink #2 
Lead 1.9gwt 2pcs 
for attaching to the legs
heat sink #3 
Brass 140gwt 2pcs 
for attaching to the feet
Figure 5. Heat sinks
Table 3 Thermal parameters of heat sinks
name
time constant 
(s)
heat capasity 
(J/K)
thermal resistance 
(Ks/J)
#1(2parts)
1200
62.4
19.2
#2(2pcs)
12
0.48
25
#3(2pcs)
1300
104
12.5

242
2.4 Active suppression of temperature fluctuation
Temperature fluctuation below 0.01 Hz is reduced by the local 
temperature stabilization applied to the first stage devices [4]. The system 
consists of two amplifying paths with identical circuit configuration as 
shown in Fig.6. The amplifier with less noise is put in the signal amplifier, 
and the other is in the feedback path for stabilizer. The first stage FETs in 
both paths are thermally coupled to the collector plate of the heater transistor, 
which generates heat to set the FETs at some raised temperature about 320 K. 
The voltage across the heater transistor is controlled by the offset voltage of 
the feedback path so as to maintain the temperature of the FETs at the 
assigned value around 320 K.
Figure 6. Circuit configuration of the thermal feedback system
Fig. 7 shows the static characteristics of the thermal feedback system. 
The suppression effect is more than 40 db. The temperature sensitivity is 
reduced from 36.5 pV/K to 0.36 pV/K.
Fig. 8 shows the dynamic response of the system. The upper and lower 
traces are the spectra of the offset voltage when the ambient temperature 
varies stepwise with the period of 3600 s (0.28 mHz) and 1800 s (0.56 mHz), 
respectively. It is seen that the system is effective below 1 mHz. The span of 
the effective frequency range can be extended by reducing the heat capacity 

243
of the assemble consisting of the heater transistor and the FETs. It is also 
extended by reducing the distance from the heat generating portion to the 
pellets of FETs.
Figure 7. Stabilizing effect of thermal feedback system
Figure 8. Dynamic characteristics of the thermal feedback system

244
2.5 Power supply
Lead-acid batteries are good selection for low noise power supply when 
they are fresh and fully charged. The ambient temperature of the batteries 
should be stabilized at around 300 K, for example. In order to reject the 
effect of terminal voltage drop according to discharge, multiple units of large 
sized cells are connected in parallel. Voltage stabilizers consist of low noise 
transistors are, in some cases, inserted between the batteries and the circuit.
3. Conclusion
Practically important points are described to realize a noise measuring 
system in mHz and sub-mHz regions. The most important and difficult point 
is to reduce the effect of temperature fluctuation.
References
[1] 
 
D.pdf
http://www.semicon.toshiba.co.jp/ja/bucat_3/bucat_0/bucat_4/td_24/T
[2] http://www.ic.nec.co.jp/image/IC-2120A.pdf
[3] S. Hashiguchi, F.Ito, K.Kurita, Low Frequency Fluctuation in FETs, 
Res. Rpt., Faculty of Engineering, Yamanashi Univ., 35(1984), 93-96, 
(in Japanese)
[4] S. Iino, T. Sanada, S. Hashiguchi, A Low-Drift dc Amplifier Utilizing 
Thermal Feedback, Trans. IECEJ, J69-C(1986),1031-1038, (in 
Japanese)

MEASUREMENTS OF LOW FREQUENCY NOISE 
IN NANO-GRAINED RuO2+GLASS FILMS BELOW 
1 K
A. Kolek
Department of Electronics Fundamentals, Rzeszow University of Technology
Wincentego Pola 2, 35-959 Rzeszow
Poland
akoleknd@prz.rzeszow.pl
Abstract Measurements of low-frequency noise in RuO2+glass thick films at subkelvin 
temperatures are presented. Films were prepared by a standard “high 
temperature” process: 20 nm sized crystalline RuO2 powder was mixed with 
0.5 Llm granular lead-borosilikate glass and organic solvent to give a paste, 
which was screen printed onto alumina substrates (with pre-fired AuPd 
contacts) and fired in a tunnel furnace. Noise measurements reveal that below 
liquid helium temperature and for low biasing voltages the low frequency 
excess noise is a pure resistance noise. At larger voltages its power spectral 
density depends sublinearly on voltage square. In the liner regime noise 
increases with decreasing temperature, approximately as T-2.3. Up to 4 T no 
dependence of noise intensity on magnetic field has been observed. These 
effects are discussed in terms of possible conduction mechanisms in the 
RuO2+glass thick films: hopping, thermally activated tunneling and weak 
localization.
Keywords: 
Ruthenium based thick films, 1/f noise, thick film resistors
1. Introduction
One of the possible applications of RuO2+glass films is cryogenic 
thermometry. This is because they exhibit large temperature sensitivity and 
very low magnetoresistance at low temperatures. Very few papers report on 
noise versus temperature measurements [1-3] in such films. So far, noise 
properties below liquid helium temperature have not been the subject of any 
research. Our measurements show that as T ^ 0 the noise level of 
RuO2+glass films increases significantly and noise becomes a factor limiting
245
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (245 - 252) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

246
the resolution of these temperature sensors. The data presented in this paper 
are also important for studies of conduction mechanism in RuO2+glass thick 
films which is still unknown (see e.g. ref. [4-6]).
2. 
Experimental
RuO2+glass thick films are prepared by screen-printing of a suitable 
paste onto a ceramic substrate and firing at approximately 850° C. The paste 
is composed of ruthenium dioxide and glass powders and organic solvent. 
RuO2 powder we have used had grains as small as 13.7 nm (X-ray peaks 
broadening) or 25 nm (BET or electron microscope). The glass frit consisted 
of 65% PbO, 10% B2O3, 25% SiO2 by weight. Pastes of volume fraction u = 
0.10, 0.12, and 0.16 of conducting component (RuO2) were prepared. After 
firing the average thickness of the films was 10 pm. The samples were 1 mm 
wide and 6 mm long with two side contacts (2 mm apart) along one of its 
edges. A pair of such samples was used in ac noise measurements setup [7]. 
The total volume involved in noise detection was 8 x 10-11 m3. The room 
temperature sheet resistances of the films were 3.82, 2.86 and 0.48 kQ for u 
= 0.10, 0.12, and 0.16, respectively.
Noise measurements were made with ac technique with a carrier 
frequency of 325 Hz [8, 9]. A pair of specimens with approximately equal 
resistance = %R was placed in bottom arms of the bridge and biased through 
ballast resistors of resistance = %RB (RB »R). The signal from bridge 
diagonal was amplified and demodulated in 5105 lock-in amplifier. Power 
spectral densities SV were calculated in HP 35660A signal analyzer in a 
frequency range of 0 - 25 Hz for several ac voltages across the sample. For V 
= 0 the spectrum SV=0 (background noise) was flat in the whole frequency 
range. In Fig. 1a SV=0 averaged (()) over the band Af = 0.0625-3 Hz is 
plotted versus temperature T. After initial decreasing with decreasing 
temperature, SV=0 increases for T below 2 K. The explanation of this unusual 
behavior is easy. The films under measurements are kept at temperature T 
whereas the ballast resistors are at 300 K. For RB »R we shall have
2
I R i
SV=0 = 4kTR + 4k(300 K)RB I —— I + Samp . 
(1)
k R + RB )
where Samp is the preamplifier’s noise. Experimental data in Fig. 1a follow 
the theoretical lines of Eq. (1) very closely. This agreement makes us sure 
that measurement setup was thoroughly calibrated.
At low temperatures the second component in Eq. (1), which comes 
from Johnson's noise of the ballast resistors increases due to the increasing 
resistance R of the RuO2+glass film (see Fig. 1b). Fortunately, the 

247
contribution of this component can be dumped by increasing RB. It is 
demonstrated in Fig. 2a, where data for two different RB's are shown. This 
experiment shows, however, that low temperatures make requirements for 
the ratio RB/R much stronger. Usually RB/R > 10 is recommended to make 
contact noise and fluctuations of biasing voltage sufficiently suppressed. It 
follows from Fig. 2a that to make the contribution of the second term in 
Eq. (1) unimportant (i.e. « Samp), even RB /R = 100 could be too small.
Figure 1. a) Background noise measured for sample U = 0.12 with two different values of 
RB (1 MO - circles, 4 MO - squares) and for sample U = 0.16 (triangles) measured with RB = 
0.2 MO. Solid lines are drawn according to Eq. (1). Dashed line shows preamplifier’s noise, 
Samp b) Resistance versus temperature for the samples U = 0.10, 0.12 and 0.16.
3. 
Results
Spectra of excess noise SVex=SV - SV=0 were measured at selected 
temperatures. As it is shown in Fig. 2a, they behave in 1/f manner. So, 
/ SVex) was used as a measure of noise intensity. Squared voltage scaling of 
/ SVex) was found only in V ^ 0 limit. Fig. 2b shows that at low temperature 
and above a certain voltage the dependence of SV on V2 becomes sub-linear. 
This nonlinearity is associated only with very small curvature on I-V 
characteristic and cannot be explained as resulting from selfheating of the 
films by the driving current. The current densities used at the lowest 
temperatures were smaller than 10-2 A/cm2 and the total dissipated power 
was less than 100 nW. These values indeed lead to a small drop in the 
resistance but the drop in noise intensity is too large to be interpreted as 
caused by the increase of either lattice or the electron temperature [10]. This 
is clearly evident in Fig. 3a where relative noise versus resistance follows 
different traces depending on whether R is changed by temperature or 
voltage. In Fig. 3b the normalized resistance noise S = f• SVex)/V2 measured 
in the limit V ^ 0 is plotted versus temperature. One can see that below 4 K

248
S increases significantly with decreasing temperature. This is new 
observation, since other studies explore different temperature range [1-3].
Figure 2. a) Power spectral densities of excess noise SVex measured at T = 0.51 K for 
several voltages V across the sample U = 0.12 b) Dependence of noise intensity fSVex) on 
voltage at selected temperatures measured for sample U = 0.12. Dashed line has the slope of 2.
(a) 
Te , K
1,87 
0,85 
0,51 
0,36
10
T= 0.44 K
. 
: 
T = 
. K<7/
o 1 
T = 0'7K?
x : T = 0.8 
° 
/ T =0.38K
zi : 
„ ■ o ;
- 
: T = 0.51 K
- 
T = 1 K :
. tfp ; 
■
T = 1.51 K: 
:
0,1
100
10
1
0,1
0,01
30 
40 
50 
60
R, kQ
110100 
T, K
Figure 3. a) Normalized noise plotted as a function of resistance (or electron temperature) 
for sample U = 0.12 at different (lattice) temperatures. For subsequent series the resistance 
drops a little due to selfheating caused by the increasing voltage. b) Normalized noise at V ^ 
0 plotted as a function of temperature. Filled and empty symbols for U = 0.12 series refer to 
different values of RB used in the measurements (contact noise eliminated). The inset shows 
how at fixed temperature S depends on magnetic field B. Dashed lines are drawn according to 
Eq. (6).
Measurements in magnetic field were performed for samples U = 0.12 
and U = 0.16 [9]. They are illustrated in Fig. 3b inset. As one can see, S does 
not depend on magnetic field B. This conclusion holds at least in the range 
from -4 T to +1 T, in which the measurements were performed. It should be 
noted for completeness that the whole SV versus V dependencies, including 
nonlinear effects at larger voltages are independent of B.

249
4. 
Discussion and summary
Since conduction mechanism in RuO2+glass films is still unknown, we 
start discussion from qualifying the samples as either metallic or insulating. 
R(T) and S(T) dependencies are insufficient to distinguish between those two 
because both weak localization and hopping predict increase of resistance 
and relative noise as the temperature is lowered [11-15]. Weak localization, 
however, requires ^ noise suppression by the magnetic field [11]. As it is 
not the case, our samples are on insulating side of MIT. As for the hopping, 
the theories are not consistent [12-15]. For those which predict increase of 
noise with lowering temperature, the expected dependence is either 
exponential [12] or of power law, S ~ T-a, with a = 3.4 for Efros-Shklovskii 
hopping or a = 1.7 for Mott hopping in 3D [13, 14]. The divergence in 
Fig. 3b is weaker than exponential. The exponent a = 2.3 found for our films 
is different from both the above values. The possible interpretation is that the 
samples are in the crossover region and/or percolation-like morphology of 
the films changes exponents. In such a case one has to argue about common 
objection arising when scaling lnR vs (T0/T)1/n for RuO2+glass films, namely 
that the quantities extracted from T0 are unphysical and temperature range 
does not satisfy the condition T « T0 [6]. Leaving these questions open we 
propose another scenario which takes into account the specific granular 
nature of our films.
For granular metals and thin films it is believed that conduction is due 
thermally activated tunneling between neighboring metallic grains. Inter­
grain resistances are
rij = r0exp(2sij /a + Eij/kT), 
(2)
where sij is the intergrain separation, a is the localization length and Eij is the 
charging energy. These resistors form a regular network through which 
current flows along a variable, temperature dependent path. For RuO2+glass 
films the typical values of Eij extracted from Arrhenius plots (from few p.eV 
to several hundreds p.eV) are too small to be interpreted as arising from 
charging the grains. On the other hand the well-known fact is that Ru (RuO2) 
diffuses into the glass and large density of dopants exists in the barrier 
insulator [5, 16]. Eij may then have the meaning of energy required to 
activate a trap-assisted-tunneling channel. A slightly different approach 
gives a graded barrier model of ref. [6]. Here the conduction in RuO2+glass 
films results from parallel flow of tunneling currents and thermally activated 
emissions over graded (i.e. of variable heights) barriers between neighboring 
grains. Yet another picture can be adopted from the model proposed recently 
by Meir [17]: transport between nanometer grains occurs via quantum point 
contacts, each characterized by its energy Eij. Those with Eij > id. l is the 
chemical potential, are insulating and for them rij ~ exp(Eij/kT). In any of the 

250
above cases at low temperatures resistances rij that build up the network take 
on values from an exponentially wide range. The total resistance of such a 
network is described by the critical resistance Rc
R = Rc = R oexp(£) ~ R oexp( Ec (T)/kT). 
(3)
For 3D regular network the correlation length Lc and relative noise S scale as 
Lc ~ (pc)v ~ Inv(R/R0), and
5 ~ LX ~ ^ S, m = 3v, 
(4)
where v = 0.9 is the percolation correlation length exponent and Sc is the 
relative noise of critical resistance [18]. Assuming that two-level systems 
(TLS) couples to Rc via barrier height fluctuations we get
< SRc} = Rc (SEc}/(kT)2~ Rc nNs(kT)2, 
(5)
where nTLS is the density of TLS. As nTLS ~ kT we eventually get
S ~ y [ln(R / R0)]m, m = 2.7 in 3D. 
(6)
In Fig. 3b the dependence of Eq. (6) is drawn assuming R0 = R(300 K). The 
only adjusting parameter was scaling coefficient of 1.3 x 10-11 for u = 0.12, 
4.8 x 10-11 for u = 0.10, and 5.4 x 10-13 for u = 0.16. The agreement is quite 
good justifying that assumptions in our picture were quite reasonable. The 
result of Eq. (6) agrees qualitatively with numerical simulations of ref. [19] 
where the increase of noise at low temperatures was also found in 2D 
network of resistances described by Eq. (2). It could also refer to 
experimental data of refs. [20, 21] where the increase of noise with 
decreasing temperature as well as sublinear S vs V 2 dependence at large 
voltages were found for granular metals.
The picture above can be extended further assuming that the heights of 
intergrain barriers depend on the electric field applied to the junctions, Eij = 
Eij(eV). The critical barrier Ec is then also field dependent Ec = Ec(kT, eV). 
Assuming that the fluctuation SEc1 caused by the change of state of a single 
TLS is homogeneous function of both variables SEc 1 = A pkT/A, eV/AP) the 
relative noise can be described by the following scaling form
S ~-^[ln( R / R 0)]m O( eV /(kT)P). 
(7)
kT
Exponent p = 0 was found from scaling S in V ^ 0 limit. Exponent P = 1.6 
was found from the scaling plot of Fig. 4.

251
100
0,1
1
10
■ e 0.1
□ 0.445 K
O 2.2 K
• 1.7 K
V 0.38 K
□
---- 0 0.6 K - 
★ 
0.51 K
A 1.51 K
■ 
1.0 K
* 0.8 K
■ ■ ■ ■____ 1 ■ ■■■■■■
____ ■ ■
1 till__________I_____ I___ I__ 1 11111__________I_____ I___ I__ 1 1 1 1 11___
104 
105 
106
eV/(kT)1.6
Figure 4. Scaling plot of Eq. (7) made for sample U = 0.12 (eV and kT on horizontal axis 
are in eV). Symbols refer to different temperatures. Line shows the shape of function <£.
In summary measurements of low-frequency noise in nano-grained 
RuO2+glass films can be interpreted as arising from the fluctuations of 
voltage dependent barriers in thermally activated transitions between 
neighboring RuO2 grains.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by Rzeszow Univ. Technol. projects U- 
6180/BW and U-6179/DS. NATO is gratefully thanked for reimbursing the 
costs of author's attendance at ARW in Brno.
References
[1] A. Masoero et al, Excess noise and its temperature dependence in 
thick-film resistors, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 16 (1983) 669-674.
[2] T. M. Chen, S. F. Su, D. Smith: 1/f noise in Ru-based thick-film 
resistors, Solid State Electronics 25 (1982) 821-827.
[3] B. Pellegrini, 1/f noise in thick film resistors as an effect of tunnel and 
thermally activated emissions, from measures versus frequency and 
temperature, Phys. Rev. B 27 (1983) 1233-1243.
[4] M. Affronte et al, Low temperature electronic transport in RuO2-based 
cermet resistors, J. Low Temp. Phys. 109 (1997) 461-475.
[5] G. E. Pike and C. H. Seager, Electrical properties and conduction 
mechanisms of Ru-based thick-film (cermet) resistors, J. Appl. Phys. 
48 (1977) 5152-5169.

252
[6] K. Flachbart et al, Conduction mechanism in RuO2-based thick films, 
Phys. Stat. Solidi (b) 205 (1998) 399-404.
[7] J. H. Scofield, ac method for measuring low-frequency resistance 
fluctuation spectra, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58 (1987) 985-993.
[8] A. Kolek et al, Low temperature nonlinear 1/f noise in RuO2 based 
thick film resistors, Proc. 25th Int. Spring Sem. on Electronics 
Technol., ISSE 2002, Prague, Czech Rep. (2002) 142-146.
[9] P. Ptak et al, 1/f noise versus magnetic field in RuO2 based thick film 
resistors, Proc. 26th Int. Spring Sem. on Electronics Technol., ISSE 
2003, Stara Lesna, Slovak Rep. (2003) 196-201.
[10] D. McCammon et al, 1/f noise and hot electron effects in variable 
range hopping conduction, Phys. Stat. Solidi (b) 230 (2002) 197-204.
[11] N. Birge, B. Golding, W. Haemmerle, Electron quantum interference 
and 1/f noise in bismuth, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989) 195-198.
[12] B. I. Shklovskii, 1/f noise in variable range hopping conduction, Phys. 
Rev. B 67 (2003) 045201 1-6.
[13] V. I. Kozub, Low-frequency noise due to site energy fluctuations in 
hopping conductivity, Solid St. Comm. 97 (1996) 843-846.
[14] V. Ya. Pokrovskii et al, Modulation origin of 1/f noise in two­
dimensional hopping, Phys. Rev. B 64 (2001) 201318 1-4.
[15] K. Shtengel, C. C. Yu, 1/f noise in Coulomb glass, Phys. Rev. B 67 
(2003) 165106 1-8.
[16] T. Yamaguchi, Y. Nakamura, Sol-gel processing and conduction 
mechanism of RuO2-glass thick film resistors, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 78 
(1995) 1372-1374.
[17] Y. Meir, Percolation-type description of metal-insulator transition in 
two-dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 3506-3509.
[18] A. Kolek, A. A. Snarskii, A. Morozovskii, Structure of the percolation 
cluster and excess 1/f noise in systems with an exponentially broad 
spectrum of resistances, Sov. JETP 81 (1995) 490-495.
[19] D. Lubin, I. Goldhirsch, Y Gefen, Temperature dependence of 
resistance noise in metal-insulator mixtures below the percolation 
threshold, Phys. Rev. B 38 (1988) 5899-5905.
[20] J. V. Mantese et al, Excess low frequency conduction noise in 
granular composite, Solid St. Comm. 37 (1981) 353-357.
[21] J. V. Mantese, W. Webb, 1/f noise of granular metal-insulator 
composites, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55 (1985) 2212-2215.

TECHNIQUE FOR INVESTIGATION OF 
NON-GAUSSIAN AND NON-STATIONARY 
PROPERTIES OF LF NOISE IN NANOSCALE 
SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
A. Yakimov, A. Belyakov, S. Medvedev, A. Moryashin and M. Perov
Nizhni Novgorod State University, Radiophysics Faculty
Gagarin Avenue 23, Nizhni Novgorod 603950
Russia
yakimov@rf.unn.ru
Abstract We investigated known methods of the LF (1/f) noise Gaussianity test. These 
are measurements of: (a) high order semi-invariants, (b) the histogram as the 
estimate of the probability density function, (c) the accuracy in the 
measurement of the noise intensity at the output of bandpass filter, (d) the 
correlation between intensities of the noise at outputs of non-overlapped 
filters, and (e) the complex bispectrum of the noise. These methods are 
sensitive to the non-stationarity of the noise as well. A special computer- 
aided setup was designed for these measurements. Tests were performed for 
quantum well laser diodes manufactured in Nizhni Novgorod State University. 
We have found that the voltage noise in the diodes is non-Gaussian and seems 
to be non-stationary. Our results may be used for the check of radiation 
defects in semiconductor devices and for the investigation of the 1/f noise 
nature.
Keywords: 
Semiconductors, nanoscale devices, 1/f noise, non-Gaussianity, bispectrum,
non-stationarity
1. 
Introduction
The research of the 1/f noise non-Gaussian and non-stationary 
behaviors may give a new information on its nature and, thus, to find new 
ways for improving of semiconductor devices. M.B.Weissman [1] published 
in 1988 the comprehensive review on the non-Gaussianity problem and 
results obtained, some investigations were made later (see, e.g., [2]). But the 
problem is open for discussions until now. The problem of the noise non- 
stationarity detection is not investigated in detail as yet.
253
J.Sikula and M.Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (253 - 260) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

254
We report results of the investigation of the LF (1/f) voltage noise in 
laser diodes on In0.2Ga0.8As/GaAs/InGaP quantum well. The diodes were 
manufactured in Nizhni Novgorod State University (Dr. B.Zvonkov's 
laboratory). Both “traditional” tests and a new one were used. A special 
computer-aided setup was designed for these measurements [3]. We have 
done all measurements in the laboratory by Prof. L.K.J.Vandamme 
(Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands).
High-order semi-invariants, and the histogram as the estimate of the 
probability density function were measured. The accuracy in the 
measurement of the noise intensity at the bandpass filter output (accuracy 
test), and the correlation between intensities of the noise at outputs of non­
overlapped filters (correlation test) were estimated experimentally as well. 
These so called “traditional” tests were supported by the standard spectral 
analysis.
It seems, the complex bispectrum of the 1/f noise was measured and 
investigated for the first time. It is quite surprising because the use of the 
bispectrum for the noise analysis is well described [4, 5].
Methods tested here have different sensitivity to the non-Gaussianity, 
and are sensitive to the non-stationarity of the noise. We have found that the 
voltage noise in the diodes is non-Gaussian and seems to be non-stationary.
Our results may be used for the check of radiation defects in 
semiconductor devices and for the investigation of the 1/f noise nature.
2. 
Experimental results
Amplified voltage noise was sampled (N=106 points for every selected 
current Id through the laser diode) and recorded onto hard disk of PC as the 
binary file. We have used the analogue input/output 24-bit module 
ADS224x48 (Instrumental Systems Corporation, Moscow, Russia) with 
sampling frequency 48 kHz. Each record takes nearly 21 sec. Such records 
were used for further noise analysis.
The voltage noise spectrum from one of lasers is shown in Fig. 1a for 
different currents. The lowest curve shows the noise floor of the measuring 
setup. Three first spectra (from the top) correspond to Id= 0.47, 0.85, 2.4 
mA. That is a “dark” mode, without light emission. Spontaneous light 
emission (SE) starts at 4.2 mA in this diode. The following three spectra 
correspond to SE-mode, Id= 12, 45, 208 mA. These spectra have the 1/f 
type, and are characterized by the Hooge’s parameter of the order a ~10-3. 
The laser emission (LE) starts at Id >290 mA. That yields considerable 
flattening of the spectrum, see last three curves obtained at Id= 410, 540, 610 
mA. We have no explanation for this effect as yet.

255
In Fig. 1b the dependences on the current at two frequencies are shown. 
The behavior in the “dark” mode may be explained by the noise in the 
leakage current. It should be noted that the leakage was seen in the I-V 
characteristic only at currents less than 104 A. The noise in SE-mode, and at 
the beginning of LE-mode, corresponds to the Kleinpenning’s approach for 
ordinary p-n diodes [6].
Figure 1. The voltage noise spectrum for laser #8. (a) The frequency dependence at 
different currents through the diode. (b) The current dependence at two different frequencies.
2.1. 
One-dimensional statistical characteristics
Semi-invariants and pdf being one-dimensional statistical characteristics
were measured at the first. Results are presented in Fig. 2.
Figure 2. One-dimensional statistical characteristics for laser #8. (a) The dependence of 
asymmetry and kurtosis on the current through the diode. (b) The pdf at Id =208 mA.

256
To estimate the asymmetry Y and kurtosis Y4 we have measured the 
standard c together with the third and fourth semi-invariants k3,4. Then we 
calculated y3=K3/c3, and Y-=K4/c4. This procedure is characterized by large 
statistical error, but is useful due to its simplicity. Fig. 2a shows the 
dependence of Y and Y4 on the current Id. Large excursions are obviously 
seen in the kurtosis while the asymmetry is close to the zero as it should be 
for the Gaussian noise. Perhaps, such a sharp dependence of Y4 on Id may be 
explained rather by the non-stationarity than the non-Gaussianity of the 
noise.
The pdf of the noise at current 208 mA is shown in Fig. 2b. The 
Gaussian reference frame is used here. This function was calculated on the 
usual way, pdf =AN/N. Here AN= AN(v) is the quantity of data points that 
falls into the discriminator interval [v; v+A v ]. The relative error for the pdf is 
£pdf =1/VAN. It is of the order 1% at the peak and reaches 100% at the tails. It 
can be concluded that the shown pdf corresponds to the Gauss law.
2.2. 
The accuracy test
The researched noise is subjected to the Fast Fourier Transform. Then 
the sum of intensities of spectral components, which fall into selected 
interval of frequencies, is calculated. The number of samples NFFT for used 
FFT is previously set. The total quantity Na=N/NFFT of intensity estimates 
for the filtered noise is obtained in this way. The estimate with number na 
(here na <Na) is calculated by the averaging of na accumulated data. The 
array of obtained intensity estimates is used for the experimental evaluation 
of current accuracy of the measurement £exp=£exp (na). Certainly, the value £exp 
is random; therefore a confidence interval is to be determined for it.
The aim of the present investigation is the check of so-called “zero 
hypothesis” (ZH) on the Gaussianity and stationarity of the noise. The 
calculation of the confidence interval for ZH is made, for example, in [2] for 
the probability to fall into the interval being Pc=95%. If approximately 5% of 
the data are outside of the interval, ZH is fulfilled. Otherwise, at least, one 
condition is not true - the Gaussianity, or stationarity of the noise.
With accuracy sufficient for experiments it is possible to take the half­
width of the confidence interval equal AHa~4.3£th, where £th=1/V(t-Afa). 
Here t is the duration of a treated part of the noise record, t<21sec; Afa - 
effective width of the filtered noise spectrum.
Fig. 3a shows results of the accuracy test for laser #8 at current Id=208 
mA. Here the total number of estimates is Na=106/2048=488, that yields the 
theoretical accuracy £th~0.9%. The shadow region shows the 95% 
confidence interval. It is seen that 54% of the estimates are out of the 
interval. Thus, the ZH is not fulfilled here. Note, that one-dimensional 

257
statistical characteristics did not reveal any remarkable deviation from the 
zero hypothesis for the noise at this current, see Fig. 2. The trend of data in 
Fig. 3 a suggests that the noise is non-stationary.
Relative amount of estimated accuracies found outside of the confidence 
interval, versus the current through the diode, is presented in Fig. 3b. As it 
can be seen the ZH is not fulfilled for most currents.
(Eexp/£th -1)/AHfl 
Accuracy test
Laser #8
2
1
0
-1
3-|
0100200 300 400 500
na
a)
80
60
40
20
Pout, %
100-
Laser #8
Zero-hypothesis is NOT valid •
Accuracy test 
Band:200-800 Hz
NFFT=2048
0.1Id, A1
0
10-
nnj—i i miii|—i i 11ini|—i i 11mi|
4 
10-3 
0.01
b)
Figure 3. Accuracy test for laser #8. (a) Data as compared with 95% confidence interval at 
Id =208 mA. (b) Amount of accuracies found outside of the confidence interval, versus Id .
2.3. 
The correlation test
The procedure of array of intensity estimates obtaining is similar to that 
one used in the accuracy test. The difference is two non-overlapped filters 
were used. Another difference is less NFFT was used for the correlation test. 
It was made so because the accuracy of this test is ER =1/V nR. Here nR, similar 
to na, is the number of the record treated piece, nR < NR = N/NFFT.
The correlation factor R=R(nR) between intensities of the noise at outputs 
of the filters was measured. If these intensities are fully correlated, then R=1. 
In the case of stationary Gaussian input noise R=0. The ZH 95% confidence 
interval half-width is AHR - 2er .
Fig. 4a shows results of the correlation test for laser #8 at current Id=208 
mA. Here the total number of estimates is NR =106/512-1953, that yields 
AHR -4.5%. It is seen that nearly half of the estimates are out of the interval. 
Thus, the ZH is not fulfilled here. The same trend of data as in Fig. 3a 
suggests that the noise is non-stationary.
Dependence of the correlation factor on the current through the diode at 
different treated lengths nR is presented in Fig. 4b. It again can be seen the 
ZH is not fulfilled for most currents.

258
Figure 4. Correlation test for laser #8. (a) Data as compared with 95% confidence interval 
at Id =208 mA. Magnitudes of nR are marked, which are used in Fig. 4b. 
(b) Inter-channel correlation versus Id at different nR.
3. 
The bispectrum
The bispectrum Bv(f1, f2) being a complex function determined on the 
frequency plain 0f1 f2 is estimated as follows.
1 NB
Bv(f, f 2) = — EXn(f)%„( f 2XJ1 + f2). 
(1)
In the difference with the estimation of the spectrum Sv(f) the product of 
three Fourier transforms Xn(f) of noise v(t) is used here. Each transform is 
calculated over the time block [ts +(n-1)TB; ts + nTB], ne [1; NB]. Value ts is 
the time of the recording start, product NB■ TB is the total duration of the 
analyzed noise record, while treating it is divided onto NB =N/NFFT pieces.
Fig. 5a shows estimates of the bispectrum absolute value measured along 
the bisector of the frequency plain. The same currents as in Fig. 1a are 
selected. It should be noted that the effect of the “whitening” of the noise in 
LE-mode obtained from the spectrum is much more pronounced here. In 
other words, the laser light emission yields the increase of the non- 
Gaussianity of the voltage noise.
In Fig. 5b the dependence of the bispectrum absolute value at the point 
(375Hz, 375Hz) versus the current through the diode is shown. Two smooth 
lines present limits of 95% confidence interval for the zero hypothesis. To 
determine this interval we have used relation found from [5] for the variance 
of the complex bispectrum at the bisector of frequency plain. That yields the 

259
following result for the variance 02 of single component (real or imaginary) 
of the bispectrum estimate in point (f,f):
„2_ SV2(f) ■ Sv(2f)
O1 =---------------- 2
NB ■ Tb ■ (Af)2
(2)
In our experiment NB ■ TB =21 sec, and frequency resolution Af=93.75Hz. 
If the input noise is Gaussian (the ZH is fulfilled) then, due to the Central 
Limit Theorem, estimates of real and imaginary parts of the bispectrum may 
be considered to be Gaussian, with the zero mean value, and variance (2). 
This yields the distribution of the bispectrum absolute value of the Reyleigh 
type with the maximum at o\. To find the 95% confidence interval we take 
the probabilities of excursions out of the bottom and top limits to be equal to 
2.5% each. Results obtained are drawn in Fig. 5b by smooth lines. It is 
obviously seen that the most part of estimates lay over the confidence 
interval. Thus, we can conclude that the noise is non-Gaussian.
Figure 5. The bispectrum absolute value at the bisector for laser #8. (a) The frequency 
dependence at different currents through the diode. (b) Data as compared with 95% 
confidence interval versus Id .
4. 
Conclusions
In addition to “traditional” methods of the Gaussianity check the 
bispectrum Bv(f1, f2) of the 1/f voltage noise in laser diodes on 
In0.2Ga0.8As/GaAs/InGaP quantum wells was measured for the first time. 
This method may be considered as an additional one for the investigation of 
the 1/f noise nature.

260
The estimates of asymmetry and kurtosis suggest that the noise is non- 
stationary. The same result follows from accuracy and correlation tests.
If results of our measurements are reliable, we can conclude that the 1/f 
noise in investigated laser diodes is non-Gaussian random process. It also 
seems that the noise is non-stationary, but to prove this feature additional 
investigations are necessary.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NATO in the framework of the 
“Science for Peace” Project SfP-973799 “Semiconductors” with the 
universities of Eindhoven (co-director Prof. L.K.J.Vandamme) and Nizhni 
Novgorod (co-director Prof. A.Yakimov) as partners. The work was also 
supported by grants of RFBR 01-02-16666, 02-02-06298, and 
NSh-1729.2003.2 (Scientific School).
References
[1] M. B. Weissman, 1/f Noise and other slow, nonexponentional kinetics 
in condensed matter, Rev. Mod. Phys. 60 (1988) 537-571.
[2] A. V. Yakimov, and F. N. Hooge, A simple test of the Gaussian 
character of noise, Physica B 291 (2000) 97-104.
[3] A. A. Andronov, A. V. Belyakov, V. A. Guryev, and A. V. Yakimov, 
The interactive visual development of applications of automation 
scientific and industrial measuring and control systems by means of 
LabVIEW 6i National Instruments, Proc. NATO Project SfP-973799 
Semiconductors 2nd Workshop “Design of radiation-hard 
semiconductor devices for communication systems and precision 
measurements using noise analysis”, TALAM-Press, Nizhni 
Novgorod, 2002, 38-46; 
.
http://www.rf.unn.ru/NATO/index.html
[4] C. L. Nikias and M. R. Raghuveer, Bispectrum estimation: a digital 
signal processing framework, Proc. IEEE 75 (1987) 869-891.
[5] G. N. Bochkov, K. V. Gorokhov, and I. R. Konnov, On the accuracy 
of spectral and bispectral measurements, Techn. Phys. Lett. 20 (1994) 
319-321.
[6] T. G. M. Kleinpenning, 1/f noise in p-n diodes, Physica 98B+C (1980) 
289-299.

THE NOISE BACKGROUND SUPPRESSION OF 
NOISE MEASURING SET-UP
P. Hruska1
Brno University of Technology, Department of Physics 
Technicka 8, 616 00 Brno
Czech Republic
K. Hajek2
Military Academy, Department of Electronics
Kounicova 65, 612 00 Brno
Czech Republic
1 
hruskap@feec.vutbr.cz
2 
karel.hajek@vabo.cz
Abstract Preamplifier noise reduction in the view of varying source impedance, as in 
AE sensors, is discussed. First, the relation of the preamplifier noise and the 
source resistor is treated. Further, the input capacitance and the internal source 
capacitance influence are discussed. Eventually, the influence of preamplifier 
AC coupling on the noise is shown and analyzed.
Keywords: 
Low noise, dynamic range, current noise, voltage noise, charge amplifier.
1. Introduction
The noise background of a preamplifier is mainly determined by the 
preamplifier actual noise. Nevertheless, the output noise of the preamplifier 
is an involved phenomenon, which depends on several terms. The basic 
noise properties of the preamplifier are given by its circuit design, by the 
source output parameters and the way of the preamplifier - source circuit 
connection. The optimum solution of this complex problem lies in the 
preamplifier - source impedance matching.
261
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (261- 270) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

262
The basic model of the signal source and the preamplifier connection is 
shown in Fig. 1. In the model analysis we have to take into consideration:
- 
noise properties of preamplifier
- 
input impedance of preamplifier
- 
output impedance of source
- 
total gain
- 
AC coupling (if necessary)
These model parameters are mutually connected and therefore the solution is 
not elementary.
Figure 1. A simple noise and impedance model of the connection of a signal source and a 
preamplifier.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
2. Equivalent input noise of the preamplifier
The basic noise model of a preamplifier is shown in Fig. 2. We can see 
several sources of the noise. The external resistors Ri are sources of thermal 
noise. Their values VnRi are related to the internal resistance of the signal 
source. The equivalent voltage noise and two input current sources of the 
preamplifier are also indicated. Considering the case A>>1 (A= - R2/R1 or 
A= 1+ R2/R1), the equivalent output noise can be expressed as
V aAV — A IV 2 + V2 + V2 + V2 + V2 / A2 + V2 
V nOUT = AVneq = A\ Vn + VIn + + VIn - + VnR 1 + VnR 2/ A + VnR
where particular noise sources can be expressed as:
VIn+ =In+R3
VIn- =In-(R1//R2)
VnR 1 =J 4 kTBRi
VnR 2 =V 4 kTBR 2

263
VR3 ^14kTBR3 
(6)
with B = Af, the frequency range
Figure 2. A basic noise model of the preamplifier.
The discussion of equations (1-6) offers the following practical 
conclusions from the point of view of resistors (or impedances) values:
Vneq 
(In±R)2 + 4kTBR [Vneq 
(In±Z)2 + 4kTBR ) 
(7)
thermal noise - Vneq ~J~R 
(8)
current noise - Vneq ~ R (resp. Vneq ~ Z) 
(9)
Accordingly, the equivalent input noise is determined by the voltage 
noise source Vn for low resistor values and by the current noise sources In+ 
and In- for high resistor (or impedance) values, respectively. It is necessary to 
consider a generation of voltage noise by multiplying the current noise In by 
the impedance Z. For example, the capacitive internal impedance of source 
generates noise by the current noise action.
The influence of both noise sources is shown in Fig. 3. The thermal 
noise of the resistor is expressed by line "thermal noise of R". The growth of 
the preamplifier actual noise is caused by the voltage noise - for low value of 
R, and by the current noise - for high value of R, resp. The voltage noise can 
be expressed in terms of the equivalent noise resistor Rneq. Typical value of 
R neq for a good amplifier with bipolar input is approximately 100 Q. As we 
can see, the minimum of a noise rise in comparison with thermal resistor 
noise is in the middle of the curve, approximately for the value 10 kQ.
We have two practical possibilities of the preamplifier realization, one 
with bipolar transistor input and the other with unipolar transistor input. 
Since the current noise dominates in the bipolar input (approximately 
1 pA WHz, 1 iiVNlIz), while the voltage noise prevails in the unipolar input 

264
(approximately 10 fA /VHz, 10 nVNlIz), we can choose the type of 
realization according to the rule:
- 
for R<<10 kQ the bipolar transistor input is used
- 
for R>>10 kQ the unipolar transistor input is used
- 
for R is about 10 kQ both the transistors can be used
Figure 3. The equivalent amplifier voltage noise as a function of equivalent source 
resistance (solid line - bipolar input, dashed line - unipolar input).
This solution is optimum for the medium frequency, where the spectral 
density of the voltage and the current noise are frequency-independent, as in 
the case of thermal noise. We have to consider growth of the noise for both 
types of inputs for lower frequencies. Typical examples of these 
dependencies are shown in Fig. 4.
Vn '.Hz 
In/^Hz
unipolar 
input
100 
Hz
f
Figure 4. 
Examples of the voltage and current spectral density of amplifiers with bipolar
transistor input and unipolar transistor input.

265
The above-mentioned conclusions show that the solution of the 
preamplifier design for an arbitrary value of the input resistance is very 
difficult. One way, how to solve the problem, is the use of the special input 
unipolar transistors with low Vn. Nevertheless, this transistor has 
disadvantage of a higher input capacitance, which is a limiting factor for 
high impedance sources at higher frequencies.
3. 
Input capacitance influence
Previous text introduces the question of input capacitance. It is 
connected with the noise through the signal/noise ratio. Therefore its 
analysis is very important for the practical use of preamplifiers, particularly 
for high source resistance. The basic model of this effect is shown in Fig. 5. 
The total transfer function can be expressed as
H=rS+Zna ,
(10)
where Zin is the parallel combination of RIN and CIN. Solving (10), we obtain 
the cut-off frequency
fC 
2nRCIN
(11)
where R is the parallel combination of RS and RIN. This effect is very strong 
for high source resistance. Typical example is illustrated in Fig. 5. The 
solution of this problem consists in minimization of the input capacitance 
CIN. One may use low input resistance (using the resistive divider RS/RIN as 
shown in Fig. 5, case b) with a consequent decrease of gain and, 
unfortunately, with a lowering of the signal/noise ratio.
for: 
Gain
a) 0.5 A 
ideal
US
a)
b)
RS= RIN= 1MQ
CIN= 10 pF
Rin= 0.1MQ
CIN= 10 pF
b) 0.05 A
32 kHz 320 kHz f
Figure 5. 
Basic model and example for input capacitance effect. The magnitude response
for resistive dividing is shown for two values of input resistance.

266
4. 
Influence of output source impedance
Let us consider the case of capacitive impedance of the output source. 
The impedance of AE sensors is a typical example. Two types of amplifiers 
can be used in this case, see Fig. 6. Beyond a typical voltage amplifier, we 
can use the charge amplifier. We have to divide this problem into two basic 
cases before we make comparison of the solutions. The main criterion is the 
operating frequency range. Consider the following ranges:
a) low frequency - fs < 1 kHz
b) high frequency -fs > 100 kHz
c) medium frequency - 1 kHz < fs < 100 kHz
Nevertheless, in all cases, these amplifiers work as high-pas filters of 
cutoff frequency fc as shown in Fig. 7.a.
Figure 6. 
Preamplifiers for source with capacitive output impedance a) basic model of
voltage preamplifier, b) basic model of charge preamplifier.
US
charge 
ampl.
A = CS/ CI
b) 
fc 
2.tRC
The first case, the low frequency region, opens a basic problem of the 
cutoff frequency minimization by the use of maximum resistance RI (RIN). It 
is necessary to consider this factor in the noise analysis. The noise signal is 
generated in two major ways. First, let us focus attention on the thermal 
noise of resistors RIN and RI. The voltage amplifier exhibits higher noise, 
since the thermal noise of the resistor RIN is amplified (with gain A), while 
the charge amplifier doesn’t amplify that of RI. On the other hand, the gain A 
and the same cutoff frequency requires lower value of capacitance CI and 
higher value of RI, which rises the value of the noise by in root of A, see 
Fig. 7.b.
The current noise is higher than the thermal noise of resistor RIN or RI. 
Therefore it is necessary to compare the impedance of equivalent input 
circuit for both types of amplifiers and to compare the transfer of the 
mentioned noise into the amplifier output.

267
At first glance, the impedance is approximately unchanged. The voltage 
amplifier transfer of the current noise In*Z to output is A times higher. 
Nevertheless, if we consider the same cut-off frequency, obtained by A times 
higher RI value, the output noise is the same in both cases. Therefore, we can 
use (in this frequency range) both types of amplifier without any substantial 
difference, see Fig. 7.c.
thermal noise, fc<1 kHz
VnOUT 
nV A/Hz
VnOUT■ 
nV A/Hz
c)
b)
charge 
ampl.
fc
voltage 
ampl.
basic 
voltage 
noise
------- ► 
f
VnOUT‘ 
nV A/Hz
VnA
d) n
current noise In, fc<1 kHz
charge RI=A RIN 
(fc'= fc)
voltage | 
ampl.
charge R^=R 
ampl. (fc'= A fc)
fc
voltage noise Vn, fc<1 kHz
A
A
/charge
ampl.
fc
voltage 
ampl.
f
Figure 7. Properties of the voltage and charge amplifiers form Fig. 6: a) basic transfer 
function; Voltage spectral density b) for low frequency and thermal noise, c) for low 
frequency and current noise, d) for high frequency and voltage noise.
The voltage noise is the dominant noise effect in the second case, the 
higher frequency region. The voltage amplifier transfers the voltage noise of 
the amplifier with gain A without any frequency distortion:
VnOUT = Vneq A
On the other hand, the charge amplifier introduces an output 
( 
r A 1
s A+1+CN I+_L_
I 
CS ) ciRi
1
s+ CiRi
(12)
noise
(13)
sCS+CIN+CI + 
1
VnOUT = Vneq-------------^= Vneq
s+
CIRI
which brings unit gain for the low frequency region and a slightly higher 
gain for the frequency region up to the cut-off frequency, compared to the 

268
voltage amplifier, see Fig. 7.d. If we consider typically attenuated noise band 
below the cutoff frequency by next ordered high-pass filter, the charge 
amplifier has usually higher output noise in comparison with the voltage 
amplifier in this frequency region.
In the case of the mid frequency band (approximately 1 kHz - 100 kHz), 
it is necessary to consider simultaneously the effect of the current and 
voltage noise of the amplifier. As we can see, the use of the charge 
preamplifiers for the AE sensors is debatable, with a need of more criterions. 
We believe, that the voltage amplifier and the charge amplifier have 
practically very similar noise properties in the low frequency region. At this 
point, we would like to point out, that the above statement is not a widely 
known piece of information.
5. 
AC coupling influence
We have to consider this effect in the case of AC coupling with DC 
source, see Fig. 8. In the case of high input resistance of RIN of universal 
preamplifier A and low internal resistance RS of the source, we observe an 
effect of the noise growth in the frequency range below f2. The frequencies 
can be expressed as
f_ = 1/(2nRinCc ), 
(14)
f2 = 1/(2nRsCc ). 
(15)
It is caused by time constants CCRIN, CCRS and corresponding RIN thermal 
noise. The use of the maximum value of coupling capacity CC in this case 
can minimize this effect. The use of high-pass filter in the next stage is not 
entire solution of this problem because it brings the same problem as in 
previous case. The voltage spectral density for current noise effect brings the 
same frequency dependence, but in the power value. Therefore it is more
Figure 8. Preamplifiers with capacitive coupling of source: a) basic model, b) noise spectral 
density response.

269
Conclusions
The paper deals with selected problems of the preamplifier noise 
background minimization. As we have seen, the solutions under 
consideration are not unambiguous and the need of more conditions 
discussion arises. Therefore, the design and application of the versatile 
preamplifiers is rather a complicated problem.
In general, it is advisable to consider the following basic 
recommendations:
■ 
choose the optimum type of the input preamplifier (unipolar or bipolar), 
depending on the magnitude of the source resistance,
■ 
minimize the noise by standard classical ways (parallel connection of 
preamplifiers, etc.)
■ 
minimize the amplifier input capacitance for high values of the source 
resistance
■ 
in the case of capacitive impedance of sensors:
- 
use an HP filter in the subsequent block
- recall, that in the higher frequency range (f > 100 kHz), the voltage 
amplifier has rather low noise
- use freely either voltage or charge amplifier in the lower frequency 
range
■ in the case of AC coupling use maximum value of coupling capacitance 
CC.
Acknowledgement
This paper is based on the research supported by the project MSM 
262200022 and by the grant GACR 102/03/1811.
References
[1] 
K. Hajek, J. Sikula. M. Tacano, S. Hashiguchi: Signal to Noise Ratio 
and Preamplifier Noise of AE Measuring Systems. Proc. of 
EWGAE’02, Prague, August 2002, p. 111-118.
[2] 
K. Hajek, J. Sikula: Electrical Filters for AE Ultra-Low Noise 
Amplifier. Proc. of ECNDT’02, Barcelona, June 2002. p. 246.

270
[3] Analog Devices,: Datasheets, 
.
http://www.analog.com
[4] Linear Technology: Datasheets, 
. 
numbered.
http://www.linear-tech.com

ACCURACY OF NOISE MEASUREMENTS FOR 1/f 
AND GR NOISE
I. Slaidins
Riga Technical University, Faculty of Electronics and Telecommunications, 
Department of Radio Systems
Azenes 12, LV-1048, Riga
Latvia
slaidins@rsf.rtu.lv
Abstract High accuracy of an experimental investigation of noise features of 
semiconductor devices and materials in low frequency region is very 
important for reaching deep understanding of noise features It will enable 
precise extracting of essential noise parameters and modelling noise behaviour 
of real devices.
In this paper measurement accuracy of 1/f and GR noise in semiconductor 
devices, as well as data processing for parameter extraction will be discussed. 
Theory of random process parameter estimation gives us a basis for evaluation 
of measurement errors. General analysis of statistical accuracy of noise 
measurement is made. From this analysis practical recommendations and 
formulas for accuracy evaluation are derived. Differences in 1/f and GR noise 
characteristics must be taken into account in measurement. Choice of the most 
appropriate measurement conditions for particular kind of noise is discussed.
Another source of measurement error could be contribution of other 
interfering signal sources. As a rule 1/f and GR noise are present 
simultaneously and a task is to evaluate their parameters separately. In the 
measurement and data processing process discrimination of particular noise 
sources and subtraction of other background noise sources must be provided.
Keywords: 
Noise measurement, 1/f and GR noise, measurement accuracy
1. 
Introduction
Semiconductor device technology has reached a very high level of 
sophistication but low frequency noise parameters still can not be 
theoretically predicted with a needed accuracy. Only very focused and
271
J.Sikula and M.Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (271 - 278) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

272
accurate experimental research can lead to deeper understanding of noise 
features in real devices.
Current and voltage fluctuations in semiconductor devices are random 
processes. Measurement methodology of noise source parameters is based 
on estimation theory of parameters of random processes and is well 
developed. Less attention is devoted to evaluation of measurement accuracy 
from the statistics point of view. Insight in this problem and basic analysis 
was given already in [1].
There are several noise sources in every device and we are observing a 
combined contribution of all these sources at the output. Research interest is 
to discriminate contribution of particular source enabling extraction 
particular parameters [2].
High measurement accuracy and appropriate data processing 
methodology is needed for precise extracting of essential noise parameters. 
Detailed analysis of device model with location of noise source, appropriate 
choice of measurement circuit configuration and measurement conditions, as 
well as appropriate data processing and subtraction of background are all 
important procedures to obtain high accuracy of results.
In this paper main focus is on statistical accuracy of noise measurement. 
Other aspects of measurement and data processing accuracy will be just 
shortly discussed and are treated in more detail elsewhere [3].
2. 
Statistical Accuracy of Noise Measurement
Theory of random process parameter estimation gives us a basis for 
evaluation of measurement errors. Let us consider that both 1/f and GR noise 
are measured in a limited frequency band and are ergodic stationary 
stochastic processes with Gaussian probability density function and zero 
mean. Based on these assumptions general analysis of statistical accuracy of 
noise measurement is made.
2.1. 
Analog measurement
Noise is usually measured as a power estimate of random process or 
estimate of variance Ox2. For stationary ergodic process x(t) with zero mean 
we can use following algorithm for measurement of the estimate of variance 
as a time-average
\ 
1 T .
O = - fx (t)dt, 
(1)
T0
where
T - measurement time.

273
According to Eq. (1) instantaneous values of time function of noise have 
to be squared (square-law detector) and then applied to integrator circuit. 
Linear detector is also often used for noise measurement. Measurement 
accuracy analysis and, in particular, for linear detector is presented in [1].
To obtain good accuracy measurement time T must be much larger than 
correlation time tk of random process x2(t). Correlation time is a parameter 
derived from the autocorrelation function Kx( T)
1 7 
,
Tk = — f Kx(T )dT . 
(2)
T x 0
Variance of the estimate of variance could be determined by formula [4]
D(CTx ) = 4 jK2 (T)dT = 4Tl V.- 
(3)
T0 
T
Statistical error of measurement could be determined as a relative 
variation of the estimate of variance
A
£ 2 _ D (q-x) _ 4Tk 
tX 
t
(4)
We can not determine accuracy of each particular measurement. Just we 
can state that with confidence probability 0.68 relative variation of estimate 
of variance will be in limits ± £ 2. Result could be expressed in percents as 
well.
Width of autocorrelation function and accordingly tk depends on how 
rapidly are changing instantaneous values of the process. To determine T 
analytically autocorrelation function must be absolutely integrable that is not 
always a case. As temporal and spectral characteristics are inter-linked it is 
reasonable to use spectral characteristics in the cases when appropriate.
Let us use power spectral density (PSD) of the process in the following 
format:
7
Gx (f) = 2(f) = 2 JKx (T)exp(- 2njfT)dT. 
(5)
-7
Then applying Parssevals‘s theorem we can obtain following equality 
between temporal and spectral characteristics:
JKx2 (t)dT = 4}g2 (f)df. 
(6)
0 
40
Using Eq. (2) to substitute left part of Eq. (6) we will arrive at

274
1 
" ,z x
Tk = X J G2 (f )df.
^Xx 0
(7)
Finally, we will obtain formula for calculation of relative variation of the 
estimate of variance from PSD:
£ 2
1"
V J GX ( f ) df
T -"
r 
-12
"
J Gx (f) df
_ 0 
_
(8)
If we consider that measurement system has a filtering ability with 
frequency response H(f) then noise spectral and temporal characteristics will 
be affected. It must be taken into account in evaluation of measurement 
accuracy as well.
2.2. Measurement with discrete sampling
Previous analysis was based on consideration that noise is measured 
with analog measurement devices. The same analysis could be transformed 
to case of discrete sampling. Considering N independent samples xi of 
ergodic stationary stochastic process with Gaussian probability density 
function and zero mean, unbiased estimate of variance could be determined 
by well known formula
a 
1 N
21 
2
x~ N-1 11*i .
(9)
Estimate of variance is a random value and has Pierson's probability 
distribution with V = N — 1 states of freedom. For such case variance of the 
estimate of variance according to [5] is
D (a) = N (//;
N—3
N—1
(10)
where ^4 - is a 4th central moment.
For N > 30 Pierson's distribution is converging to Gaussian distribution 
with U4 = 3X4 and it leads to simpler version of Eq. (10)
A2
D (Xx2) = —
(11)

275
Statistical error of discrete sample measurement as before could be 
determined as a relative variation of the estimate of variance:
£2 = —. 
(12)
N-1
As we see from (12) statistical accuracy is steadily improving with 
increasing number of independent samples. To determine conditions when 
samples could be considered statistically independent we can compare Eq. 
(4) and (12) to get formula for calculation of equivalent number of 
independent samples N in noise time function of length T:
N = T +1, 
(13)
From (13) we can easily determine a minimum sampling interval Ts for 
maintaining statistically independent samples:
Ts = T. 
(14)
Formula looks similar to Nyquist sampling interval in digital signal 
processing which state that sampling rate must be 2 times higher than the 
highest frequency in the time function. Still correlation time tk have no 
relation to the highest frequency, but to low frequency components of 
random time function.
2.3. 
Practical examples
Combining different noise varieties existing in semiconductor device we 
obtain complex PSD
GN
G(f) = GE + T + ^W ’ 
<15’
where GE - PSD of thermal and/or shot noise component, GF - 1/ fY noise 
PSD value at f = 1 Hz, Gi - PSD value of GR noise components, Y - 
parameter of 1/f noise (usually / = 1).
Analysis of this complex PSD shows that there are 3 typical frequency 
dependencies. One is representing thermal noise, shot noise and low 
frequency part of GR noise. This is an even PSD with frequency non­
dependent constant value. Another component is representing 1/ fY noise 
with corresponding frequency dependence. For simplicity let us assume Y = 1 
for this part of PSD. The third typical part is another 1/ f Y but with Y = 2. It 
is typical for GR noise.

276
Analysis of measurement accuracy can be provided for these 3 typical
parts of spectra using the same equation at 3 different values of Y = 0; 1; 2
G (f) = G±. 
(16)
For limited frequency band f1 < f < f 2 and Y = 0 from Eq. (8) we can 
obtain
£ 2 = 
1 
, = —,
T (f2 - f.) TB
(17)
where B = f2 - f1 .
This well-known formula is valid for evaluation of noise measurement 
accuracy in even part of PSD using an ideal rectangular band-pass filter. 
Accuracy will increase as measurement time and/or bandwidth increases.
Combining Eq. (4) and (17) we can get relation between B and 
correlation time TK
1
Tk = 4 B
(18)
Taking into account (18) from (14) we can get formula for calculation of 
sampling intervals for discrete measurement
T = —
s 2B
For 1/ f Y noise with Y = 1 from Eq. (8) we will get
11
-
£ 2 = f. f2 .
T ln2 f2
f1
(19)
(20)
Measurement accuracy again depends on the measurement time in the 
same way as before, but dependence on filter bandwidth is complex. On 
decreasing the bandwidth the formula (20) is converging to the same result 
as Eg. (17). Increasing the bandwidth in 1/ fY variance measurement first 
leads to improvement of accuracy but after reaching some optimum point 
accuracy is again decreasing with further increase of bandwidth. The 
optimum ratio of frequencies for the best accuracy is

277
( -f \ 
JT J
=4.92.
(21)
Optimum frequency ratio is quite large. For example, it could be 
frequency range from 400 Hz up to 2000 Hz. Then we can get e2 = 0.0077 or 
8.8% for measurement time T = 0.1 sec. At the same time if, as usually, we 
choose bandwidth of 100 Hz around 1 kHz, then calculation gives e2 = 0.1 or 
32% for the same measurement time.
Optimum bandwidth measurement could be successfully applied in 
automated low frequency noise testers for semiconductor device production, 
but could not be used for experimental determination of noise PSD for 
research purposes. Then we must use higher spectral resolution and large 
measurement time.
3. 
Noise Parameter Extraction
Noise power spectral density at the output of semiconductor device 
contains contributions of all noise sources with different weight depending 
on circuit transfer function. Total PSD presented by Eq. (15) contains several 
coefficients. Still each one of these coefficients could be representing several 
noise sources. For example, GE is representing total contribution of all 
thermal and shot noise sources in the device. Task is to extract parameters of 
one particular noise source from such complex measurement data. As 1/f and 
GR noises are present simultaneously then a task could be to evaluate their 
parameters separately.
From analysis of noise source location in the model of the device we can 
determine the most appropriate measurement circuit configuration. Then the 
most appropriate measurement conditions in terms of DC bias, temperature 
and frequency must be chosen to enhance contribution of wanted noise 
source in total PSD. For discrimination of 1/f and GR noise sources different 
behaviour of noise parameters versus frequency and temperature could be 
used.
Important stage in determination of noise parameters is processing of 
measured raw data. Data processing include:
■ 
Filtering of measured noise power spectral density to avoid such 
interfering components as 50 Hz with harmonics and other.
■ 
Subtraction of unwanted noise spectra components (for example, 
thermal and shot noise).
■ 
Determination of specific parameters in noise model, for example, 
GF, and Y for 1/f noise.

278
All these procedures introduce some error and can lead to false 
interpretation of results. Therefore it is reasonable to simulate noise 
measurement/extraction for different measurement circuits and different 
complexity of transistor model and evaluate possible errors [3].
4. 
Conclusion
Evaluation of measurement accuracy is important to obtain confident 
experimental evidence on values of noise parameters. Formulas are obtained 
for calculation of statistical accuracy of low frequency noise parameter 
measurement and practical recommendations given. Both temporal 
(autocorrelation function) and spectral (PSD) noise characteristics could be 
used for accuracy evaluation. Minimum sampling interval in discrete 
measurement is determined to provide statisticaly independent samples.
Extraction of noise parameters from measurement data is a complex task 
because other noise sources contribute to the output noise of the device 
being tested. The most appropriate configuration of measurement circuit and 
measurement conditions must be chosen to enhance contribution of wanted 
noise source in measured value. For discrimination of 1/f and GR noise 
sources different behavior of noise parameters versus frequency and 
temperature could be used.
References
[1] I. Slaidins, J. Sikula and P. Vasina, Noise Measurement: Technique 
and Accuracy, Elektrotechn. Casopis, 43 (1992) 299-303.
[2] M. Heiningen., E. Vandamme, L. Deferm and L. Vandamme, 
Modeling 1/f Noise and Extraction of the Spice Noise Parameters 
Using a New Extraction Procedure,
http://www.imec.be/design/pdf/mixsig/essderc98_heijningen%5B1%5 
D.pdf
[3] M. Zeltins and I. Slaidins. Measurement Circuits and Data Processing 
for Transistor 1/f Noise Parameter Extraction, Sc. Proc. of RTU, 
Series 7, Telecommunications and Electronics, 2 (2002) 17-22.
http://www.rsf.rtu.lv/Anglu%20lapa/proceedings/proc_.htm
[4] V. S. Pugachev. Theory of Random Functions and its Applications, 
Fizmatgiz, Moscow, (1962). (In Russian)
[5] G. A. Korn and T. M. Korn, Mathematical Handbook for Scientists 
and Engineers, McGraw-Hill (1968).

RADIOFREQUENCY AND MICROWAVE
NOISE METROLOGY
E. Rubiola* V. Giordano *
* Universite Henri Poincare - ESSTIN & LPMIA
2 r. Jean Lamour, F-54519 Nancy, France
Laboratoire de Physique et Metrologie des Oscillateurs 
32 av. de I’Observatoire, F-25044 Besangon, France 
rubiola@esstin.uhp-nancy.fr 
giordano@lpmo.edu
Abstract The radiofrequency interferometer, as compared to other methods for the mea­
surement of amplitude noise and phase noise, shows higher sensitivity. In fa- 
vorble onditions the background noise can be as low as -180 dB[rad2]/Hz 
at f =1Hz off the carrier, up to microwaves (10 GHz) for real-time mea­
surements. Exploiting correlation and averaging, a white noise floor of -204 
dB[rad2]/Hz has been observed, not limited by the thermal energy kBT0 re­
ferred to the carroer power P0 . This article reports on the method, on the recent 
developments, and on the measurement of low-noise hard-to-measure devices.
Keywords: Phase noise, amplitude noise, parametric noise, low-noise oscillators.
1. Basic Interferometric Measurements
The output signal of a two-port device under test (DUT) crossed by a sinu­
soidal signal can be represented as
x(t) = V0[1 + a(t)] cos[w01 + <p(t)] 
(1)
where ^ (t) and a (t) are the random phase and the random normalized am­
plitude fluctuation of the DUT, respectively. AM and PM noise is usually 
described in term of the cross spectrum densities Sv(f) and Sa(f). We find 
more useful the Cartesian representation
x(t) = V0 cos(w0t) + nc(t) cos(w0t) - ns(t) sin(w0t) . 
(2)
279
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (279 - 286) 
@2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

280
Figure 1. Interferometric measurement system.
In low-noise conditions, (2) is equivalent to (1) with
nc(t) 
ns(t)
a(t) = 
and 
y(t) = 
. 
(3)
V0 
V0
Figure 1 shows the interferometric system used to measure nc(t) and ns(t), 
thus a(t) and ^(t) and their spectra. The scheme derives from [1, 2]. Recent 
applications [3] have been reported, and [4] provides insight and design rules.
The instrument works as an impedance-matched null bridge followed by 
a synchronous detector. AM and PM noise reside entirely in the sidebands, 
hence advantages arise from removing the carrier signal and detecting the noise 
alone. Accordingly, £ and 7' are adjusted for the carrier to be suppressed ad the 
amplifier input (A output of the interferometer). The detector can be regarded 
as a part of lock-in amplifier [5] or of a phase-coherent receiver [6, 7]. By 
inspection on Fig. 1, we find the output voltage
v (t)=7gRP0 a (t) 
or 
v (t)=7gRP0 * (t), 
(4)
V 2 ^m 
2 
2 '-m
depending on the phase 7". g is the amplifier power gain, R0 is the character­
istic impedance of the whole ciruit, P0 is the power at the DUT output, and £m 
is the single sideband (SSB) loss of the mixer. The background white noise is 
S.. 0 = Sa 0 =
2 FkB T0 
P0
(5)
where F is the amplifier noise figure and kBT0 the thermal energy at room 
temperature. Eq. (5) derives from the equivalent noise FkBT0 at the amplifier 
input, processed in the same way as the DUT noise.
The interferometer shows advantages versus the saturated mixer, which is 
the common approach, namely:
■ Low noise floor. The noise floor is due to FkbT0 at the amplifier input. 
The noise of a saturated mixer is higher because saturation takes place 
at the input, before converting.

281
■ Low flicker. The amplifier can not flicker around the carrier frequency 
because there is no sufficient power to up-convert the near-dc noise 
by nonlinearity. The passive components of the interferometer are less 
noisy than the amplifier, while detection takes place after amplification.
■ Low sensitivity to ac magnetic fields. Amplification takes place at the 
carrier frequency, where ac magnetic fields from the mains have little or 
no effect.
■ Wide power range. The interferometer works at low P0 (10_3 to 10_6 
W, or less). In the same condition a saturated mixer would require am­
plification, which flickers. The interferometer performs well at high P0 
(1 W or more), where the noise floor (5) is not limited by saturation.
Finally, the real-time measure of ^ (t) makes possible to correct the noise of an 
oscillator, or to lock an oscillator to a frequency discriminator (dashed path of 
Fig. 1, inserting a discriminator as the DUT).
2. 
Vector Detection Interferometer
The vector detection interferometer [8] is shown in Fig. 2. The multistage 
carrier suppression provides low background flicker, while correlation and av­
eraging reduces the noise floor.
The matrix R = BG processes the signal at the I-Q output. G corrects 
the orthogonality error and the amplitude asymmetry of the I-Q detector. It 
is obtained with the Gram-Schmidt process. B rotates the detection frame of 
the I-Q. It can be set for w 1(t) = ka(t) and w 1(t) = k<p(t), where k is the 
instrument gain, or for any desired combination of a(t) and ^(t) at the output. 
The phase of the I-Q pump signal can be let arbitrary.
The I-Q modulator provides automatic suppression of the carrier through a 
dual integrator and the matrix D . The system works in Cartesian coordinates 
on the phasor plane. The diagonalization matrix D turns the system into two 
separate subsistems. It compensates for the arbitrary LO phase of the I-Q de­
tector and of the I-Q modulator, and corrects the amplitude and orthogonality 
error of both.
2.1. 
Reduction of the Background Flicker
Common sense suggests that the flicker noise of the interferometer is due the 
mechanical instability of the variable elements £ and y and of their contacts, 
rather than to the instability of the semirigid cables, connectors, couplers, etc. 
Of course, lower flicker is expected from by-step attenuators and phase shifters, 
and even lower flicker is expected if these components can be of a fixed value. 
Thus we use by-step or fixed-value components in the inner interferometer, and

282
channel b (optional)
Figure S. Interferom
etric m
easurem
ent system
.

283
we add an interpolating signal [9]. Due to the low weight of the latter, higher 
noise can be tolerated.
2.2. 
Correlation
In the traditional mode, theFFT anlyzer measures the cross spectrum Sv (f), 
or Sa (f), correlating the output of the two radiofrequency channels. The ma­
trices B are set for the two channel frames to be parallel, thus w 1 (t) = k'nc (t) 
and w2(t) = k'ns(t), with k' a constant. Let n 1(t) and n2(t) the input signals 
of the coupler CP4, and a = (n2 + n 1)/a/2 and b = (n2 — n 1)/\/2 the output 
signals. CP4 sees an impedance equal to R0 at both inputs. In the presence 
of thermal noise only, the cross spectrum is Sab(f) = | [Sn2 (f) — Sn2 (f)], 
which means Sab(f) = 0 if temperature is uniform. Consequently, the instru­
ment rejects the thermal noise. The DUT noise present in the two channels is 
fully correlated, hence it is measured. The correlation enhancement of sensitiv­
ity is of common use in radioastronomy [10], radiometry [11], and thermom­
etry [12]. It was introduced in phase noise metrology long time ago [13, 14], 
but the rejection of thermal noise was understood only recently [15].
In the ±45° mode, FFT anlyzer measures the cross spectrum of the two 
ouputs of a single radiofrquency channel; the other channel is not used. The 
matrix B is set for the instrument to detect at +45° and —45° off the carrier 
phase. With random noise, nc(t) and ns (t) of Eq. (2) are uncorrelated, thus 
the cross spectrum is zero. Based on this property, the instrument rejects ther­
mal noise and the noise of the amplifier, despite a single amplifier is shared. 
The assumption of temperature uniformity is not needed. The measured cross 
spectrum is proportional to Sa(f) — Sv(f). Fortunately, parametric noise phe­
nomena tend to privilege PM noise or AM noise, which can be measured. Of 
course, the a-priori knowledge of the DUT physics is needed. This method was 
invented to measure the resistance fluctuations of metal films at low frequen­
cies [16], and then introduced in phase noise metrology [17].
3. 
Experimental Results
Figure 3 summarizes the sensitivity obtained with the different processing 
methods, compared the saturated mixer. The white noise floor is limited by the 
averaging capability (m = 215) of the available FFT analyzer; it is expectd to 
be lower as m increases. The interferometric instruments have been used to 
measure the 1/f noise of low-noise devices, as shown below.
Variable attenuators and delay lines (100 MHz and 9 GHz). A few de­
vices have been tested at P0 « 10 dBm. Phase noise was of —145 to —165

284
Figure 3. Sensitivity of the interferometric measurement instruments.
dBrad2/Hz at f =1Hz. Using a microwave delay line at 100 MHz instead of 
a VHF device hoping for lower noise proved to be useless.
Precision by-step attenuators (100 MHz). Four devices have been tested, at 
P0 = 14 dBm. In all cases the flicker noise is close to -170 dB[rad]2/Hz, with 
little or no difference between amplitude and phase noise.
Amplifier in low-power conditions (100 MHz). Some amplifiers have been 
tested P0 = 0 dBm; the devices are specified for a compression point P1 dB > 
14 dBm. Flicker phase noise is of some -140 dBrad2/Hz at f =1Hz. Inter­
estingly, if the amplifier is used at higher power there is little or no difference 
in 1/f noise.
Hybrid junctions (5-100 MHz). Four devices have been tested, at P0 ~ 15 
dBm. Flicker noise is close to -170 dBrad2/Hz at f =1Hz, with a difference 
between amplitude and phase noise within 3 dB. The 1/f noise originates in 
the magnetic core of the internal transformers. For the highest sensitivity we 
built our own hybrid junctions, based on X/4 coaxial lines. The 1 /f noise of 
these custom devices is lower than the background noise, which is of -180 
dBrad2/Hz.

285
Microwave Circulators (9 GHz). Six devices have been tested in isola­
tion mode, at P0 = 19 dBm. The 1 Hz flicker is between -160 and -172 
dB[rad]2/Hz, with a maximum difference of 5.5 dB between AM and PM [18]. 
Noise is clearly of magnetic origin, through some mechanism still not under­
stood.
Quartz Resonators (10 MHz). Six high-stability resonators have been mea­
sured at a dissipated power Pd from -25 to -7 dBm [19]. The 1/f phase 
noise, turned into a fluctuation of the resonant frequency, has been further 
converted into the two-sample (Allan) deviation ay (t) of the fractional fre­
quency y. Flicker of phase turns into a floor of ay. The observed ay is between 
7.5 x 10-14 and 3.5 x10-13, depending on the resonator and on Pd. The instru­
ment noise is of 6x10-14 to 1x10-14, depending on Pd and on the resonator 
merit factor Q.
Noise Corrected Oscillator. The interferometer has been used to improve the 
stability ofa mirowave oscillator through the reduction of the 1/f noise of the 
amplifier in closed loop. A stability improvement of 40 dB has been achieved, 
still limted by the control loop. Two room-temperature prototypes have been 
implemented, and the extension to cryogenic oscillators is in progress.
References
[1] K. H. Sann, The measurement of near-carrier noise in microwave ampli­
fiers, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 9 (1968), 761-766.
[2] F. Labaar, New discriminator boosts phase noise testing, Microwaves 21 
(1982), no. 3, 65-69.
[3] E. N. Ivanov, M. E. Tobar, and R. A. Woode, Microwave interferometry: 
Application to precision measurements and noise reduction techniques, 
IEEE Trans. Ultras. Ferroel. and Freq. Contr. 45 (1998), no. 6, 1526­
1535.
[4] E. Rubiola, V. Giordano, and J. Groslambert, Very high frequency and 
microwave interferometric PM and AM noise measurements, Rev. Sci. 
Instr. 70 (1999), no. 1, 220-225.
[5] M. L. Meade, Lock-in amplifiers: Principle and applications, IEE, Lon­
don, 1983.
[6] W. C. Lindsey and M. K. Simon, Telecommunication systems engineer­
ing, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1973, (Reprinted by Dover 
Publications, 1991).
[7] A. J. Viterbi, Principles of coherent communication, McGraw Hill, New 
York, 1966.

286
[8] E. Rubiola and V. Giordano, Advanced interferometric phase and ampli­
tude noise measurements, Rev. Sci. Instr. 73 (2002), no. 6, 2445-2457.
[9] , A low-flicker scheme for the real-time measurement of phase 
noise, IEEE Trans. Ultras. Ferroel. and Freq. Contr. 49 (2002), no. 4, 
501-507.
[10] R. Hanbury Brown, R. C. Jennison, and M. K. Das Gupta, Apparent an­
gular sizes of discrete radio sources, Nature 170 (1952), no. 4338, 1061­
1063.
[11] C. M. Allred, A precision noise spectral density comparator, J. Res. NBS 
66C (1962), 323-330.
[12] D. R. White, R. Galleano, A. Actis, H. Brixy, M. De Groot, J. Dubbel­
dam, A. L. Reesink, F. Edler, H. Sakurai, R. L. Shepard, and G. J. C., The 
status of Johnson noise thermometry, Metrologia 33 (1996), 325-335.
[13] R. F. C. Vessot, R. F. Mueller, and J. Vanier, A cross-correlation technique 
for measuring the short-term properties of stable oscillators, Proc. IEEE- 
NASA Symposium on Short Term Frequency Stability (Greenbelt, MD, 
USA), November 23-24 1964, pp. 111-118.
[14] F. L. Walls, S. R. Stain, J. E. Gray, and D. J. Glaze, Design considera­
tions in state-of-the-art signal processing and phase noise measurement 
systems, Proc. Freq. Contr. Symp. (Atlantic City, NJ, USA), EIA, Wash­
ington, DC, 1965, June 2-4 1976, pp. 269-274.
[15] E. Rubiola and V. Giordano, Correlation-based phase noise measure­
ments, Rev. Sci. Instr. 71 (2000), no. 8, 3085-3091.
[16] A. H. Verbruggen, H. Stoll, K. Heeck, and R. H. Koch, A novel technique 
for measuring resistance fluctuations independently of background noise, 
Applied Physics A 48 (1989), 233-236.
[17] E. Rubiola, V. Giordano, and H. Stoll, The ±45° interferometer as a 
means to measure phase noise of parametric origin, IEEE Trans. Instrum. 
Meas. 52 (2003), no. 1, 182-188.
[18] E. Rubiola, Y. Gruson, and V. Giordano, The measurement of the flicker 
noise of circulators, Proc. 17th European Frequency and Time Forum / 
2003 Frequency Control Symposium (Tampa, FL, USA), May 5-8, 2003, 
In print.
[19] E. Rubiola, J. Groslambert, M. Brunet, and V. Giordano, Flicker noise 
measurement of HF quartz resonators, IEEE Trans. Ultras. Ferroel. and 
Freq. Contr. 47 (2000), no. 2, 361-368.

TREATMENT OF NOISE DATA IN LAPLACE 
PLANE
B. M.Grafov
A.N.Frumkin, Institute of Electrochemistry of Russian Academy of Sciences
31 Leninskii prospekt, Bld. 5, Moscow 119071
Russia
vek@elchem.ac.ru
Abstract It is shown that there is a wavelet technique that allows one to estimate the 
power spectral density of random noise in Laplace plane.
Keywords: 
Noise spectral density, Laplace plane.
1. 
Introduction
Spectral analysis is a powerful and elegant tool for investigation of noise 
processes and random time series [1-3]. Windowed Fourier transforms unite 
wavelet and Fourier analysis. However, physical interpretation of the 
wavelet spectral density is still open to question [4]. We found [5-7] that the 
Laguerre wavelet spectral density of the noise process possesses quite a clear 
physical interpretation. The above quantity coincides with the Laplace 
transform of covariance function and can be called the operational power 
spectral density. In the case of random discrete time series the Meixner 
wavelet transforms [8] play role of the Laguerre wavelet transforms.
The aim of this report is to give a short review of the basic results in the 
field of the operational analysis of random noise processes.
2. 
Notations
We use the notations as follows: y(t) is zero mean stationary random 
process, t is time, y(t) = e(t) for voltage noise, y(t) = i(t) for current 
noise, < y(0)y(t) > is covariance function, < y2 > is power spectral
287
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (287 - 292)
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

288
density, 0.) is frequency of the Fourier analysis, hE (t) is voltage linear 
response function, h1 (t) is current linear response function, Zo is small­
signal impedance, G0 is small-signal admittance, Zp is small-signal 
operational impedance, Gp is small-signal operational admittance, p is the 
Laplace frequency, the angular brackets <...> denote averaging over 
ensemble of realizations, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature.
3. 
Operational Power Spectral Density
It is well known that there exist the following relationships between the 
linear response functions hE(t) and hI (t) and linear impedance Z0 and 
linear admittance G0 :
Zo = j dt exp( - j o t) hE (t), G o = j dt exp( - j o t) h1 (t) 
(1)
00
where j is imaginary unit. The definition of operational impedance and 
operational admittance is given in following equations:
Zp = f dt exp(-pt) hE (t), Gp = j dt exp( - pt) h1 (t) 
(2)
00
Eqs. (2) show clearly the way for definition of the operational power spectral 
density of random process:
X
< y p > /4 = f dt exp( - pt) < y (0) y (t) > 
(3)
where the Laplace frequency p is a positive value. If the Laplace frequency 
has an imaginary part (p = G + jO ; G > 0) the definition of the operational 
power spectral density is slightly changed:
X
< y 2P > /4 = Re f dt exp( - pt) < y (0) y (t) > 
(4)
In the case of equilibrium systems one can use the Nyquist fluctuation­
dissipation theorem in the following form:
< e(0)e(t) > = kBThE(t); < i(0)i(t) > = kBThI(t) 
(5)

289
On this basis it is possible to write for equilibrium operational power 
spectral density:
<e2p>=4kBTrp, <ip2 > =4kBTgp 
(6)
where rp= ReZp and gp= Re Gp.Therefore for the equilibrium RCL- 
circuit one can predict the following equation for the voltage operational 
power spectral density:
< e2p > /(4kBT) = R + cC-1/(c2 + 02) + aL 
(7)
It is seen that capacitance as well inductance makes a source of the 
operational noise.
Let us consider the linear (in kinetic relation) system showing the 
voltage flicker noise behavior [1,2]:
< el > = A / f 
(8)
where f = 0) / 2n and A is a constant with respect to frequency f. Use of 
the electrochemical 1/ f noise model [9] allows one to predict the 
following operational power spectral density expression:
< ep > /4 = aRe'np'") 
(9)
pp
where 0 0 is the frequency that characterizes the diffusion-like inner 
relaxation process.
4. 
Wavelet Transforms Providing the Operational 
Power Spectral Density
4.1. 
The Laplace transform
It is possible to show that one can calculate the operational power 
spectral density by using following equation (with p > 0):
< ypp>/4=p<Ypp> 
(10)
where Yp stands for the Laplace transform of the stationary random process:
Y 
p = j dt exp( - pt) y (t) 
(11)
0

290
For complex Laplace frequency (p = G + j 0)) one can use Eq. (12) instead 
of Eq. (10):
< y2p > /4 = G< YpYp> 
(12)
where the asterisk denotes a complex conjugate quantity.
4.2. 
The Laguerre transforms
It is an interesting fact that there exists an ensemble of the wavelet 
transforms each of which delivers the operational power spectral density in 
line with following equation:
< y2p > /4 = G< Yn)Yp n)*> 
(13)
where Yp(n) is the Laguerre transform of the random process y(t):
<x>
Y n) = j dt exp(-pt )L n (2g t) y(t) 
(14)
0
In Eq. (14) symbol Ln(x) stands for the Laguerre polynomial in x of the 
n -th order. It is suitable to remind that
L0(x) = 1 ; L1(x)=1-x; L2(x) =1-2x + x2 /2 
(15)
It is seen from Eq. (13) that it is possible to organize the multi-channel 
estimator of the operational power spectral density. Input of each channel is 
random process y(t). Output of each channel is operational power spectral 
density <y 2p >.
It should be noted that multi-channel estimator of the operational power 
spectral density was successfully applied to the analysis of micro-seismic 
low-frequency noise [10].
5. 
Conclusions
1. Operational power spectral density (i.e. the Laplace transform of the 
covariance function) may be introduced for the treatment of stationary 
noise.
2. Due to fast decay of the exponential function the finite time interval of 
realization can be considered infinite.

291
3. The estimation of the operational power spectral density can be 
performed by direct way without prior estimation of the covariance 
function as a function of time.
4. It is possible to create a multi-channel estimator of the operational power 
spectral density.
5. In the case of continuous time each Laguerre wavelet transform can be 
used for constructing the operational power spectral density estimator.
6. In the case of discrete random time series each Meixner wavelet 
transform can be used for the construction of the discrete operational 
power spectral density estimator.
7. Analysis of an 1/ f noise system in Laplace plane allows one to estimate 
the inner frequency of the diffusion-like random process.
8. Capacitance as well inductance is the source of the operational noise.
9. The operational power spectral density technique was successfully 
applied inside the micro-seismic low-frequency noise method for 
searching oil and gas deposits.
10.It is of importance to be aware of the opportunity to use the high order 
operational spectrum technique.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research 
(project No.02-03-32114).
References
[1] Sh.Kogan, Electronic Noise and Fluctuations in Solids, Cambridge 
University Press, London, 1996
[2] M.B.Weissman, 1/ f noise and other slow, non-exponential kinetics 
in condensed matter, Reviews Modern Physics 60 (1988) 537-671.
[3] M.B.Priestley, Spectral Analysis and Time Series, Academic Press, 
London, 1996.
[4] M.B.Priestley,Wavelets and time-dependent spectral analysis, J. Time 
Series Analysis 17 (1996) 85-103.
[5] B.M.Grafov, The Laplace transformation for description of noise 
signals from electrochemical sensors, Russian J. Electrochemistry 29 
(1993) 1290-1291.
[6] B.M.Grafov, I.B.Grafova, Theory of the wavelet analysis for 
electrochemical noise by use of Laguerre functions, Electrochemistry 
Communications 2 (2000) 386-389.

292
[7] B.M.Grafov, I.B.Grafova, Discrete Laplace transformation as a 
wavelet tool to analyse the electrochemical random time series, J. 
Electroanalytical Chemistry 502 (2001) 47-50.
[8] I.B.Grafova, B.M.Grafov, Meixner wavelet transform: a tool for 
studying stationary discrete-time stochastic processes, Russian J. 
Electrochemistry 39 (2003) 130-133.
[9] B.M.Grafov, Flicker noise in the Laplace space, Russian J. 
Electrochemistry 34 (1998) 1149-1153.
[10] Yu.V.Sirotinskii, S.L.Arutyunov, B.M.Grafov, A.E.Suntsov, 
Comparative calibration of electrochemical geophones in the acoustic 
low-frequency oil and gas prospecting, Russian J. Electrochemistry 35 
(1999) 596-598.

MEASUREMENT OF NOISE PARAMETER SET IN 
THE LOW FREQUENCY RANGE: REQUIREMENTS 
AND INSTRUMENTATION
L. Hasse
Gdansk University of Technology, Department of Measuring Instrumentation
Narutowicza str. 11/12, 80-952 Gdansk
Poland
lhasse@pg.gda.pl
Abstract Two basic metrological noise models of a two-port: with noise sources at the 
input and with noise short-circuit currents, have been described. Noise 
parameters describing the models including a correlation between currents 
and/or voltages are measured using indirect and direct methods. Some noise 
reduction techniques are reported. Two-channel noise measurement system 
with computer-controlled biasing of a measured device using the LabVIEW 
software and noise signal processing procedures has been presented.
Keywords: 
noise parameter set, noise measurement, instrumentation
1. 
Introduction
Low frequency noise measurement and modelling is a useful tool for the 
evaluation of the production process, localization and analysis of phenomena 
mechanisms and the characterization of the device quality and reliability. 
The investigation of the most frequent failure mechanisms by noise 
measurements seems to be especially advantageous for the ultra large scale 
integrated circuits and nanoscopic devices - noise level scales inversely with 
the size of the elements containing noise sources. Besides, in scaled devices 
fluctuations are often comparable to the dc currents or voltages.
Noise characterization of a Two-port Under Test (TUT), eg. a bipolar or 
field effect transistor, can be accomplished by the measurement of four noise 
parameter set fully describing its noise properties. The relationship between 
measured input and/or output noise parameters is expressed by the 
correlation factor or the coherence function. To accurate measure the noise 
parameters having often very low values the appropriate system is necessary.
293
J.Sikula and M.Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (293 - 302)
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

294
2. 
Metrological Noise Models of a Two-port
The equivalent noise sources may be located at different sites on a noise- 
free two-port. Two uncontrolled noise generators (not independent 
generally) are required to characterize a two-port noise and their relationship 
may be expressed by the complex correlation factor c(f ) between them (by 
two data). Therefore there is four parameter set characterizing noise 
properties of a linear two-port.
Two basic noise representations are commonly used: in terms of spectral 
densities of equivalent input voltage SE(f )and current SI (f ) noise sources 
(Fig. 1a) or in terms of spectral densities of input SI (f )and output SI (f ) 
short-circuit current noise sources (Fig. 1b).
(a)
c(f)=
SEI*(f)
VSe (f )Si (f)
c(f)=
SIiI*o(f)
VSii (f )Sio (f )
Figure 1. Equivalent circuits of a Two-port Under Test (TUT) with two noise sources at 
input port (a) and with noise current sources at each port (b)
2.1. 
Measurement of input equivalent noise sources
A measurement of noise parameters from Fig. 1a requires an usage of 
multi-impedance measurement technique - the noise measurement at the 
output of TUT at several input terminal loads and then the data processing to 
estimate the noise parameters. It is a more general method and is commonly 
used in the high frequency range, however very sophisticated statistical 
procedures should be used to estimate four noise parameter set with an 
appropriate accuracy [1].
2.2. 
Measurement of input and output noise current sources
Using the direct technique one can measure the short-circuit input and 
output current noise spectra and their correlation (Fig. 1b) directly at the 
TUT input and output. An input port load does not change during noise 
waveforms acquisition, therefore the measurement process is much faster 
and can be easily remote controlled during the data acquisition.

295
Instead of the correlation factor it is often sufficient to calculate the 
2,. 
Siii* (f)2
magnitude-squared coherence Y (f ) =—4-4--- L^_. The correlated
Si, (f )• Sio (f )
spectrum in the nominator is calculated through a multiplication in the 
frequency domain between the complex Fourier transforms of two measured 
independently noise signals. The coherence Y2 (f ) supply in a very efficient 
and accurate way a good estimation of the output noise signal energy entity 
exclusively due to the input noise.
The measurement technique can be based on the measurement of noise 
voltages across series resistors RS and RL (for a bipolar transistor in the 
emitter or base along with the collector terminal) in the input and output 
circuits of a TUT, respectively (Fig. 2). However, the current noise Si (f) 
and Sio (f) can be also measured directly for a wide range of source 
resistance RS using transimpedance amplifiers Ti and To as the impedance 
of the measured TUT is larger than input impedance of the current amplifiers 
Ti and To . This enables measurements of both current noise simultaneously 
and also direct calculation of the coherence between noise currents. The 
influence of inherent noise of a measurement system is much more critical 
for the direct method.
Figure 2. Simplified setup for short-circuit input (base, gate) and output (collector, drain) 
noise currents measurement
3. 
Two-Channel Noise Measurement System
The sensitivity of noise measurement system depends on the inherent 
noise of the measurement system, mainly on its first stages (preamplifiers). 
Depending on TUT and on direct or indirect measurement method used, 

296
different types of low-noise voltage and transimpedance preamplifiers can be 
included in the front-end part of the system [2].
3.1. 
Low-noise preamplifiers
For ultra-low noise voltage preamplifiers parallel connection of several 
low-noise devices decreasing the noise optimal resistance RS0 is preferable. 
For low values of RS the dominant influence on noise level have an 
equivalent input noise voltage of used devices and for N devices it enables to 
increase signal-to-noise ratio Nn times. For example, three pairs of low- 
noise transistors MAT-03 PMI lowers the equivalent input noise voltage 
SE(f) of the preamplifier to = 0.32 nVM/Hz at 1 kHz at rather high 
collector currents (IC = 2 mA ) reducing shot noise components. A little 
better result confirmed by the simulation analysis in NOISE program has 
been achieved for eight LT1028AM/AC Linear Technology op-amps.
In transimpedance amplifiers the main noise contribution usually comes 
from the high value feedback resistor. For low noise transimpedance 
amplifiers the op-amps with very low equivalent input current noise should 
be selected. However, a high value of the feedback resistor can easier 
saturate the output for dc coupling the TUT and limit the bandwidth (parallel 
to parasitic capacitance). Using differential connection of the TUT with the 
inputs of two identical transimpedance amplifiers (so called dual sensing 
structure) an equivalent reduction of a factor 2 can be obtained in the level 
of background noise of a system [3].
For example, FETs noise measurements in the gate channel require an 
ultra low-noise I/V converter with the appropriate conversion factor (the gate 
current noise level for MESFETs equals often only a few nA). For the OP 
128 as the transimpedance amplifier the equivalent input noise current is 
equal Ini ~ 41 fA Hz for the feedback resistor of the converter having 
the resistance 10 MQ The results of the noise analysis were confirmed also 
using the PSICE simulator and were verified experimentally.
Other type of transimpedance amplifiers facilitates internal voltage bias 
of TUT with a high resolution and can be easily controlled by a computer. 
However these internal noise sources induce much higher noise level into the 
measurement setup. External voltage sources (in biasing circuits) with 
variable alternate current impedances realized on batteries enables a higher 
amplification factor of transimpedance amplifiers (they do not need to sink 
the direct current).

297
3.2. 
Block diagram of the two-channel system
General block diagram of the whole measurement system with two data 
acquisition channels controlled by LabVIEW software is shown in Fig. 3.
Figure 3. 
General block diagram of two-channel measurement system
The antialiasing filters (software-controlled input channels with the 
software-selectable cut-off frequency fa = 100/m kHz , where m is an 
integer - m > 4) give an output signal range ±5 V. The low noise Dynamic 
Signal Acquisition Board PCI-4452) simultaneously digitises input signals 
(within the range from ±10 mV to ±42.4 V) by means of a 16-bit resolution, 
64-times oversampling, delta-sigma ADC over a bandwidth 95 kHz. The 
data can be next processed on-line or stored on a disk as time series with a 
required number of samples according to the accuracy of noise parameters 
and characteristics estimation. In the calibration phase the inherent noise and 
the main electrical parameters of the particular sub-assemblies of the system 
can be measured and subtracted from the results of the noise measurements. 
External interferences should be reduced or completely removed by proper 
shielding and grounding.

298
3.3. 
Measurement of coherence
The measurement of the coherence between the input and output noise 
currents of a TUT operating as an amplifier is a critical task - all noise 
sources associated with the input amplifier Ti can give a significant 
contribution to the output noise current and hence to the coherence [4]. To 
improve accuracy for low values of source resistance RS (when the 
measured coherence between SI (f ) and SI (f ) is systematically too low) 
the low noise voltage preamplifier with passive input can be used in the 
additional step of the measurement (with sufficiently high value of RS ) 
mainly to accurately calculate the coherence [5]. It is especially 
recommended for the bipolar transistors.
Two-channel noise measurements enables to localize noise sources in 
measured devices and to verify mechanisms of noise generation [Jon]. Very 
often a common noise source causes both 1/f noise in the base current and in 
the emitter series resistance but as experiments showed these two noise 
sources are not fully correlated.
In Fig. 4 the coherence measured of GaAs MESFET [6] is shown. The 
maximum of coherence function y2 occurs at the frequency f ~ 700 Hz 
and is associated with the presence of a generation-recombination trap (g-r 
noise component appearing in the spectrum SI (f )). The traps were 
identified by the presence of Lorentzians in the measured noise spectra and 
also by the higher value of the coherence function at some frequency ranges.
Figure 4. Coherence function of measured GaAs MESFET
The obtained results suggest that for the measured transistor the most 
influential noise source at the output is related to the surface leakage 
between gate and source [7]. This fact can be associated with the existence 
of g-r centre and very noisy processes in this region. Thus a coherence 

299
measurement can be used as an additional diagnostic tool for MESFET and 
MODFET reliability studies.
3.4. 
System noise reduction techniques
To measure properly all noise parameters directly with transimpedance 
amplifiers the input voltage noise source of the Ti should be separated from 
the input of TUT without degradation of the Ti noise properties and not 
introducing an attenuation into the ultra low level stage of the measurement 
system. These requirements can be fulfilled by insertion a low noise buffer 
amplifier B (Fig. 3) with a very small reverse gain between the Ti and the 
input port of TUT. It can be the buffer with a common base bipolar junction 
transistor with properly selected bias conditions (a compromise between the 
lowest output noise of the buffer amplifier B and the as low small-signal 
input impedance as possible). Its noise properties have no major effects on 
the system noise background but it effectively isolates the Ti input voltage 
noise source from the TUT input.
To evaluate and subtract the background noise of the system some 
correlation method can be used enabling the estimation of the TUT noise 
power spectral density much lower than the inherent noise of the 
measurement system.
3.5. 
Computer-controlled biasing system
A low noise programmable computer-controlled biasing system make it 
possible automated noise measurements. The fraction of the system for 
automatic polarisation of the measured devices consists of (Fig. 5): CPU 
(gP), ADC, DAC1 up to 10.24V and DAC2 up to 5.12 V enclosed in the 
very carefully shielded and grounded mechanical modules [8].
All major system functions are programmable and executed by means of 
the local controller. Coupling to gP effects of stray capacitance were 
minimised by keeping digital lines far from analog components. Two 
separate modules for the gate (base) bias DAC1 and for the drain (collector) 
bias DAC2 on PCM1702P Burr-Brown (20 bits, ultra low distortion plus 
noise: -96 dB with a full-scale output) were implemented. Suitable filtering 
of the inherent system noise at the output (giving only -140 dB of 
background noise) for biasing separately the base (gate) and the collector 
(drain) of the measured transistor was provided. The resolution of biasing 
current setting of 10 points per decade in the range 10-9^10-5 A for base or 
gate current and 10-7^10-2 A for collector or drain current brings a complete 
flexibility and automation for the required polarisation. To minimise 

300
interference separate batteries for all main modules and optoisolation 
between analogue and digital part of the system have been provided
Figure 5. Automatic setting of TUT polarisation controlled under the LabVIEW
4. 
Noise Parameter Estimation Procedures
A special attention should be paid for the appropriate averaging 
procedures during coherence estimation to achieve a low value of the 
random component of mean square error. The precision and resolution of the 
spectral estimate depends on the choice of the number of data samples and 
the window size, respectively.
A LabVIEW virtual instrument provides the computation and display of 
coherence function in conjunction with the output noise power spectrum to 
allow an efficient comparison between the coherence function variations and 
the related base (gate) and collector (drain) noise spectra components. The 
estimator of coherence uses the cross spectrum function with an adequate 
level of linear averaging. If k is the number of records used (often 
k = 124 + 516), a signal to noise ratio improvement equals 10 ■ lg(k)[dB].
Values of Y (f) are less than 1 if both noise signal are uncorrelated, 
exists additional noise source in the input noise signal (e.g. not negligible 
inherent noise of Ti), TUT should be treated as non-linear [9] or error 
leakage is not reduced with windowing during data processing (resolution 
bias errors are present in the spectral estimates). The variance of the 
coherence function can be used as a measure of the accuracy of the spectral 
analysis. For different amounts of window overlap (referring to segmented 
spectral analysis) the variance of the coherence function is reduced as more 
averages are taken. A suitable value for overlap can be around 60%.

301
5. 
Conclusions
The measurement system with transimpedance amplifiers can be used to 
measure directly noise parameters of two-ports (transistors) including the 
coherence function. To improve the accuracy of coherence measurement an 
additional voltage preamplifier can be used at the input terminal of the 
measured transistor. Another way to achieve a reduction of inherent noise 
influence is to separate the input transimpedance amplifier from the 
measured TUT by means of the buffer amplifier reducing the Ti noise 
influence on the output of measured transistor.
From the coherence measurement for different source resistance 
a dominant noise source in a transistor can be established.
References
[1] 
J. Cichosz, L. Hasse, L. Spiralski, D. Godyn., A genetic algorithm 
application for the estimation of four noise parameter set of a linear 
twoport, Kleinheubacher Berichte 40 (1996) 566-568.
[2] 
L. Hasse, L. Spiralski, J. Sikula, Noise magnitudes for twoports and 
the accuracy of their measurement and estimation, XI Inter. Conf. 
Brno, Czech Republic, 1999, Sec. C2, 99-102.
[3] 
R. M. Howard, Dual sensing receiver structure for halving the 
amplifier contribution to the input equivalent noise of an opto­
electronic receiver, IEE Proc.-Optoelectron. 146 (1999) 189-200
[4] 
L. Hasse, Measurement of coherence function between noise currents 
of transistors, 12th IMEKO TC4 Inter. Symposium: Electrical Measur. 
and Instrum., Zagreb, Croatia, 2002, 29-32.
[5] 
S. Bruce, L. K. J. Vandamme, A. Rydberg, Improved correlation 
measurements using voltage and transimpedance amplifiers in low- 
frequency noise characterization of bipolar transistors, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices 47 (2000) 1772-1773.
[6] 
A. Konczakowska, J. Cichosz, L. Hasse et al., The 1/f noise in GaAs 
MESFET transistors, Proc. 14th ICNF, Loeuven, Belgium, 1997, 59­
62.
[7] 
B. K. Jones, C. Graham, A. Konczakowska, L. Hasse, The coherence 
of the gate and drain noise in stressed AlGaAs-InAlGaAs PHEMTs, 
Microelectronics and Reliability 41 (2001) 87-97.

302
[8] 
A. Konczakowska, L. Hasse, L. Spiralski, Ultra-low noise two 
-channel noise measurement system, XVI IMEKO World Congress, 
Vienna, Austria, 2000, vol. 4, 161-165.
[9] 
L. Hasse, Frequency domain analysis of nonlinear twoport using two 
-channel noise measurements. Kleinheubacher Berichte 43 (2000) 67­
73.

TECHNIQUES OF INTERFERENCE REDUCTION 
IN PROBE SYSTEM FOR WAFER LEVEL NOISE 
MEASUREMENTS OF SUBMICRON 
SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
L. Spiralski, A. Szewczyk and L. Hasse
Gdansk University of Technology, Department of Measuring Instrumentation 
Narutowicza str. 11/12, 80-952 Gdansk
Poland
lhasse@pg.gda.pl
Abstract A probe system for wafer level noise measurements of submicron structures 
has been briefly presented. Significant influences on probe measurement have 
interference and inherent noise of the system, especially high level 
interference introduced by probes (contact resistance probe to wafer area 
fluctuations caused by vibrations and mechanical shocks in the measurement 
environment) and electromagnetic (EM) surroundings. Periodical interference 
caused by vibrations and EM fields can be separated from measured noise. 
The waveforms are recorded as a sequence of time series with duration being 
the multiple of the interference period and coherently summed up and finally 
subtracted from the registered data. It enables to analyse random and 
periodical components of the signal separately.
Keywords: 
wafer level noise, system for noise measurement, interference reduction
1. Introduction
The measurements on semiconductor device structures are often curried 
out in order to evaluate the quality of material composition and technology 
processes. Nowadays the point-probe measurements are also used to 
determine the device noise level.
Usually the inherent noise level of polarised submicron microelectronic 
devices is comparable with the thermal noise level and sometimes even 
lower than the noise level of the measurement system. For this reason the 
measurement system requires the special protection against disturbances 
originating in the system environment.
303
J.Sikula and M.Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (303 - 309) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

2.
Point-probe noise measurement system
The schematic diagram of the measurement set-up containing a 
transimpedance amplifier for current noise in of bipolar transistor 
measurement is shown in Fig. 1. The whole system with a point-probe 
station is presented in Fig. 2.
Figure 1. The schematic diagram of the measurement set-up for transistor base current noise 
measurement
PC
Figure 2. The computer-controlled measurement system with the point-probe station
3. 
Disturbances in point-probe measurements
Disturbances in the system for point-probe noise measurement on 
microelectronic devices originate both from external, as vibrations and 
electromagnetic interference, and internal sources (Fig. 3). Vibrations and 
shocks cause fluctuation of the contact resistance between a probe and 
a contact pad. In those fluctuations one can observe both periodical and 
random components, often having high values [1]. The effective 
minimisation of the shocks and vibration influence on measurement results 
can be obtained by using the heavyweight measurement stations.

305
EMI
vibrations
Figure 3. Interference sources in-point probe measurements (EMI - Electromagnetic 
Interference)
Using the appropriate shield and ground systems one can reduce 
unwanted influence of the EM field. It’s worth to mention that shielding is 
very effective method of system protection but applied shields change 
electrical parameters of the object (change the electrical capacitance between 
the shielded components, induct the high capacitance between the measured 
object and the shield, decrease the effective induction, increase losses and 
attenuation - thus the effective frequency bandwidth of the protected object 
is decreased). Shields increase also the cost of the total system.
The proper grounding of the system has a significant influence on 
decreasing of the EMI. For noise measurement in the low frequency range, a 
single point-parallel grounding system should be used for signal lines. 
The conducted disturbances can be significantly reduced by separation of the 
measured noise signal, digital circuitry and power lines.
In low-level measurements, the measured signal should be conducted to 
the transimpedance preamplifier (I/V converter, Fig. 1) with the possible 
shortest cable. Moreover, it should be carefully selected low-noise cables 
with reduced triboelectric effect.
The analog part of the system (mainly preamplifier) often introduces 
non-negligible contribution caused by its inherent noise. The predominant 
noise source of transimpedance amplifier is the thermal noise of the back 
-loop resistance Rf. For the high Rf values, the thermal noise level can be 
even higher than the noise level of measured current noise. For example, for 
Rf = 100 MQ the power spectral density of thermal noise is equal 
En = 1.29x10-6 V2/Hz (current noise of op-amp used in the system is 
In2 = 1,66x10-28 A2/Hz) for T = 300 K.

306
However, using lower-value resistance of Rf in order to reduce its 
thermal noise influence on measurement data, results in decreasing of the 
current to voltage amplification of the I/V converter and requires the greater 
amplification (sensitivity) of the next stage in the system.
Calculating the noise level of the transimpedance preamplifier 
(I/V converter), one has to take into consideration the noise level of the 
operational amplifier used in the converter circuit. In low-level 
measurements the amplifier noise is usually significantly lower than the 
thermal noise level of the Rf resistance, which value should be enough high 
to ensure the proper I/V conversion value. However for low Rf values, when 
its thermal noise and the preamplifier noise are comparable, the measured 
signal is sufficiently high to take no account the influence of both those 
disturbances. For example, the power spectral density of current noise for 
operational amplifier OPA128 is In = 0.12 fA/vHz, thus two decades below 
the thermal noise of the resistance 108 Q.
In noise measurements with the transimpedance preamplifier (I/V 
converter) its frequency bandwidth should be considered. The frequency 
characteristic of the preamplifier depends mainly on the value of capacitance 
connected to the input of the operational amplifier, the parasitic capacitance 
of the resistor Rf and the parasitic capacity between input and output of the 
amplifier. There capacitance and the resistance Rf form the low-pass RC 
filter with the filter time-constant T = RfCp, where Cp is the effective 
equivalent capacitance connected to the output of the amplifier.
In order to decrease the filter time constant the Cp value should be 
minimised by using the shortest possible connection cables. Decreasing the 
Rf value leads to decreasing the system amplification, thus the measurement 
accuracy.
The most important in data acquisition with the A/D converter is the 
proper value of sampling frequency and the proper number of samples to be 
stored. They determine the frequency bandwidth of the estimated power 
spectral density and the intervals between spectrum bars. When the signal is 
sampled with the frequency lower than twice the maximum frequency of 
signal components, the aliasing effect occurs. Using the low-pass filter with 
the cut-off frequency set accordingly to the usable frequency band in the 
measured signal can reduce the aliasing. In modern A/D converter cards the 
anti-aliasing filter cut-off frequency is set automatically, as at least half of 
the sampling frequency (the 3dB frequency of the filter in NI PCI 4452 card 
is 0.5 of sampling frequency and the attenuation is 100dB).

307
4. 
The method of random and periodic components 
separation
Disturbances are often not completely eliminated from the measured 
noise and a processed signal comprises unwanted components, in particular 
having periodic character (Fig. 4). The latter originates from the power lines 
(usually 50Hz and harmonics) and computer electronics used for the 
measurement system control (e.g. screen frame trigger frequencies). The 
periodic components usually appear as narrow lines at respective frequencies 
in the power spectral density characteristic. The level of periodic 
components can be higher than that of the random component and this may 
results in a degradation of the accuracy of the noise measurement.
Signal with 
periodic and 
random 
components
Periodic component 
of the signal
Random component 
of the signal
Figure 4. The model of measured signal components: random and periodic, before and after 
separation
In order to eliminate the impact of the periodic signal on the noise 
measurement accuracy, the efficient method of separation the noise and 
periodic components [2,3] can be implemented into the measurement 
algorithm. The digitised signal ux(m) is split into K sub-records ux1(n), ..., 
uxK(n) each having an equal number of samples. For facilitating the further 
procedures, each sub-record should start with the sample corresponded to the 
same phase of the periodic component. That requires choosing the 
appropriate sampling frequency value, corresponding with the frequency of 
the component, that will be removed before the noise analysis. Next the 
mean-value record uh(n) is calculated by coherent adding of sub-records and 
dividing the result by K. The uh(n) represents the periodic component of the 
measurement signal. Subsequently, the uh(n) is subtracted from the 
individual sub-records uxk(n). The result is the random component of the 
measurement signal, which can be used for further analyses.
The algorithm synopsis for the method is shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 shows 
the digital processing procedures.

308
Figure 5. The algorithm for periodic and random signal components separation
Figure 6. The procedure and illustration of random and periodic components separation
iA(n)
A A , -
V" u i 
n
Ux2(n) 
;
A A\ (-
Ux2(i) \v^ n
K uxK(n) 
: >
f Uh(n)
‘ u Upk(n) 
i
i Upk(i) 
n

309
It’s worth to mention, that such a procedure is appropriate when the 
level of the periodic component in the measured signal is comparable or 
higher than that of the analysed noise component and assuming that these 
signals are in the same frequency range.
5. 
Conclusions
The accuracy of noise measurements in submicron semiconductor 
structures depends mainly on the transimpedance preamplifier used in the 
system. The preamplifier noise and bandwidth are mainly determined by the 
resistance value in back-loop of the operational amplifier, especially in low 
-level signal measurements when its high value is required. Its influence on 
measurement results can be significant. The great importance for the 
measurement accuracy in point-probe measurement has also proper isolation 
of the system from the external interference sources, both mechanical and 
electromagnetic.
Applying additional methods for reduction of disturbances on the 
noise measurement results requires of increasing costs for measurement set­
up modification. However these costs could be minimised by using the 
software methods, not requiring the intervention in the hardware part of the 
measurement system.
References
[1] 
A. Szewczyk and L. Spiralski, The method of distortion reduction in 
low frequency noise measurements on wafer-level. Proc. Polish 
Metrology Congress KKM 2001, 24-27 June 2001, Warsaw, vol. 2 
321-324.
[2] 
B. Palczynska, L. Spiralski and J. Turczynski, The new method of 
interference assessment in low-voltage power supply lines. Proc. 11th 
IMEKO TC-4 Symposium, 13-14 Sept. 2001, Lisbon, 130-134.
[3] 
B. Palczynska, J. Turczynski, A. Konczakowska and L. Spiralski, 
Method of parasitic signal measurement in low voltage supply lines in 
the low and high frequency range, particularly in ship lines, Polish 
Patent Office, Patent Application No. 140152 (2000).

HOOGE MOBILITY FLUCTUATIONS IN n-InSb 
MAGNETORESISTORS AS A REFERENCE FOR 
ACCESS RESISTANCE LF-NOISE MEASURE­
MENTS OF SiGe METAMORPHIC HMOS FETs
S. Durov1, O.A. Mironov2, M. Myronov and T.E. Whall
Department of Physics, University of Warwick
Gibbet Hill Rd, Coventry CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
V.T. Igumenov, V.M. Konstantinov and V.V. Paramonov
Institute for Electronic Materials
248001 Kaluga
Russia
1 S.Durov@warwick.ac.uk
2 O.A.Mironov@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract For the first time, to verify the origin of LF-noise (LFN) in the access 
resistance of metamorphic SiGe HMOS FETs, we used a thin film n-InSb 
magnetoresistor (MR) as a reference control. Hybrid MRs were fabricated on 
NiOxFe2O3 ferrite substrates from Sn-doped MBE-grown n-InSb/i-GaAs 
heterostructures. The thickness of the InSb epilayers lie in the range 1.0-2.0 
Llm giving a room-temperature Hall mobilities of Ll = 5.5x104 cm2/Vs at a 
carrier densities of 5x1016 cm-3. The device resistance could be changed by up 
to 500% in a magnetic field of B = 325 mT. LFN spectra were measured at 
B = 0 and 31mT. Results show that the current dependence of the PSD for this 
MR is described by the Hooge mobility fluctuation model, according to SI /I2 
= SR /R2 =aH xii (eR / fl? ). A simple design for a calibrated noise reference is 
proposed.
Keywords: 
LF-noise, Magnetoresistor, SiGe MOSFET
311
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (311 - 318) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

312
1. 
Introduction
The origin of 1/f noise in the bulk semiconductors [1, 2], thin films / 
heterostructures [3], and MOSFET devices [4,5,6] is still an open question 
despite numerous papers published to date and intensive research still in 
progress. The main question is still whether the noise originates from low 
frequency (LF) carrier number fluctuations (CNF) or from carrier mobility 
fluctuations (CMF). Relatively LF noise (LFN) measurements of magnetic 
effects in thin film n-GaAs [7-9] and bulk n-InSb [10] magnetoresistors 
(MRs), of various geometries, most authors concluded that the observed 1/f 
type noise was due to CNF. This is because, a magnetic field dependence in 
the reduced voltage noise for GaAs MRs has not been experimentally 
observed, and they used assumption that the Hooge parameter is magnetic 
field independent.
Here, we study the noise for a custom made n-InSb thin film MR [11] in 
order to confirm the Hooge dependence [12,13] of the drive current noise 
power spectral density (PSD) on current, presented by expression (1) below. 
We suggest this is an important result in understanding the origin of LFN in 
the heavily doped contact areas of Si, SiGe MOSFETs. Such an n-InSb 
epitaxial MR was chosen because its value can be easily controlled over a 
wide range (197-95 8Q) by simple changing the distance between the MR 
and a small permanent magnet of 325 mT. It is worth mention that almost 
500% change of resistance was achieved without affecting the structural 
properties of the n-InSb epilayer.
The influence of magnetic field on the 1/f noise in the n-InSb epilayer
-0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Magnetic field B (T)
Figure 1. 
Magnetoresistance for n-InSB MR fabricated on NiOxFe2O3 ferrite substrate.
Ferrite saturation field is at Bsat ~ 0.1T.

313
&
§
<D 
O 
C 
re
'</> 
2 o
a> c 
o> 
ra
-100 -80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100
Magnetic field B (mT)
Figure 2. Reduced differential magnetoresistance for n-InSb MR.
has also been studied. The magnetic field dependence of reduced 1/f noise 
measured in our n-InSb MR can not be explained by the carrier number and 
mobility fluctuation models published in ref. [7-9]. Unlike the case of n- 
GaAs, there are no published evidence of deep D(X)-like centres in n-InSb, 
influencing transport properties at room temperature (RT) T=293K and 
normal atmospheric pressure [14], which is important for suppression of the 
CNF component in 1/f noise. Additionally, our n-InSb epilayer was three 
times over-doped (in comparison with extrinsic concentration at RT) to 
minimise the temperature fluctuations of carrier concentration. For this 
reason, we are sure that the CNF mechanism is not responsible for 1/f noise 
in our n-InSb MR and propose an alternative to [7-9] model for the LFN 
magnetic field dependence.
2. 
Samples and experimental setup
n-InSb/i-GaAs Sn-doped heterostructures were grown using a vacuum 
epitaxy method with e-beam evaporators [11]. The thickness of the InSb 
epilayer lies in the range 1.0-2.0 pm giving a RT Hall mobility of 5.5x104 
cm2/Vs at a carrier density of 5x1016 cm-3. MRs were fabricated by wet 
etching of a special shaped stripe with metal shorts. The total stripe length 
and width were respectively Ltot = 5.4 mm and W = 140 pm. The 20 pm 
length of metal covered parts is equal to the length of metal-free n-InSb. The 
total n-InSb effective length of MR-device is L = Ltot /2 
= 135 x 20 pm = 2700 pm. The effective MR width to length ratio is 

314
W / L = 7, which is similar to a Corbino disk geometry with strong shorting 
of the Hall voltage by the metal contact pads. An integrated sandwich was 
fabricated by placing the MR between two ferrite HH-1000 (NiO * Fe 2 O 3) 
concentrators with sizes 1*1*0.5 mm and 2.7*2.7*0.5 mm.
A SiGe MOSFET, with gate length 1 |tm and gate width 50pm, was 
fabricated using reduced thermal budget processing at 650 oC on multilayer 
SiGe heterostructures grown by solid-source MBE [6]. Source and drain 
contacts were fabricated by BF2+ implantation at 40keV, with a dose of 
4x1015cm’2 and activated at 650 oC for 30 sec. The Al gate and Ti/Pt/Au 
contact metallisation were evaporated at the end of the fabrication process.
The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics were measured using an 
“Agilent” 4156C semiconductor parameter analyser. Magnetoresistance 
(Fig. 1,2) was measured using a Keithley based DC-kit. LFN was measured 
with a help of an HP 35670A dynamic signal analyser and a custom-made 
preamplifier containing LT1028 (Linear Technology) operational amplifier 
in the first stage [15]. Noise spectra for n-InSb MR were extracted from 
measured data by subtraction of the preamplifier background noise due to 
the relatively small absolute level of the measured noise signal.
3. 
Low frequency noise measurements
3.1. 
Noise of n-InSb magnetoresistor
LF noise spectra were measured without magnetic field and at an 
external field of Bext = 31 mT (Fig. 3), which is close to the maximum of the 
normalized differential MR (Fig. 2) (uB ~ 1, where B ~ 5.8xBext is the 
magnetic field on the n-InSb epilayer surface). It was found that the 
dependence of current noise PSD on current, described by the Hooge 
relation (Fig. 4) [13]
SI SR 
1 
ueR
— = —R^ = a  = a —— 
12 R 2 H Nf HL
(1)
where aH is the Hooge parameter, N is the total number of carriers in the 
sample, ^ is the carrier mobility, e is the electron charge and R is the sample 
resistance.
The noise reduced mobility aH*ti [16], which acts as a “material 
fingerprint”, is equal to 4.1*102 cm2V-1s-1. The Hooge parameter is 
a H = 7*10-3, which is comparable to bulk n-InSb (4*10-3) [2] and the same 
order of magnitude as in 2DEG InAs quantum wells [3].
If the reduced PSD SI /I 2 dependence on magnetic field described by the 
CNF model to satisfy the empirical Hooge relation (1) [7,9]:

315
Figure 3.
10-17
10-18
10-21
10
■ i ■ i■■■■]—rmnn|—mnn|—rmnn|—rm™
R = 3140, B = 0.031T 
:
1// 
'
10-19
Q 
W
I = 0.159, 0.318, 0.478, 0.955
1.91, 2.55, 2.87 mA
10-20
J_LLUul.................. I
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105
Frequency f (Hz)
Current noise spectra for n-InSb MR at different drive currents in an external
magnetic field of 31 mT.
SN
N2
SI 
1
12 
H Nf
(2)
where the Hooge parameter aH is independent of carrier number and 
magnetic field. The total number of carriers N in the device is also 
independent of magnetic field. So, the reduced current noise should show no 
magnetic field dependence.
If the 1/f noise is caused by CMF, then the effect of magnetoresistance 
observable in the 1/f spectrum and current spectrum equation can be written 
as [7,17]
SI
I2
2
f 1 - a2B2 Y S^ 
1 + a2 b 2) A
2
1 - A B2 
eR
—- I a„ a—r
1 + A B 2) 
fL2
(3)
Here the reduced current noise should decrease with magnetic field for the 
CMF model, if SA /a2 is suggested to be magnetic field independent.
However, the results presented in Fig. 4 can be described neither by the 
CNF nor by the CMF models due to the increase of SI /I 2 with magnetic 
field.
If one could suggest that the mobility fluctuation spectrum and Hooge 
parameter are functions of magnetic field, then:
H( ( B ) = (1 + a2 B2
1 - A2B2
2
I H( (0)
(4)

316
10-15
10-16
10-17
10-18
10-19
10-20
CURRENT I (mA)
N 
X
<<"
N 
XT-
IS
Figure 4. LF-noise power spectral density (PSD) and normalized PSD (NPSD) at f = 1Hz 
and T = 293K versus DC current through hybrid n-InSb MR. PSD current dependence also 
shown for SiGe p-MOSFET (stars) at f= 1Hz and T= 293K.
SI
I2
2
1 - A B 2
—^~A I A
1 + A B 2 )
2
1 + A B2
1 - A2B2)
tne eR 
eR eR
aH (0) -xr = AXaH (0Hr (5) 
fL 
fL ( )
The form of expression (5) is very similar to the CNF model, but in fact 
represents a CMF model.
3.2. Access resistance noise of short channel SiGe p-MOSFETs 
in strong inversion
The drain current noise was measured for 1pm gate length 
Si0.3Ge0.7/Si0.6Ge0.4 p-MOSFET [6] from subthreshold region to strong 
inversion at a fixed drain-source voltage VDS. The current dependence of 
PSD is described by a CNF model due to flat band voltage fluctuations at 
low currents (low gate-overdrive voltages). However, at high currents (high 
gate-overdrive voltages), the PSD dependence on current can be described 
neither by the CNF nor by the carrier number with correlated mobility 
fluctuations or Hooge mobility fluctuations of effective mobility in the 
channel. Access resistance (through heavily Boron doped contact areas) for 
SiGe MOSFETs was extracted from the DC characterictics of p-MOSFETs 
with different gate lengths [18] and found to be comparable with the channel 
resistance for a 1pm gate length MOSFET in strong inversion. Figure 4 
shows that the PSD for SiGe MOSFETs at high currents has the same 
current dependence (~ I 2) as for n-InSb MR. Hence, we can conclude that 

317
drain current noise in p-MOSFETs, with short gate lengths and in strong 
inversion, is associated with access resistance fluctuations and can be 
described by the empirical Hooge relation (1).
The normalised noise PSD generated in access resistance of SiGe 
MOSFET is SI /12R = 8*10-14 Q-1Hz-1/2. If we estimate the Hooge parameter 
using LSD ~ 5pm and USD ~ 10-100 cm2V-1s-1, then we obtain the reasonable 
value a H ~ 10-2-10-3.
4. 
Conclusions
It was found that LF noise for n-InSb MR can be described by Hooge 
mobility fluctuations, with the parameter paH = 4.1x102 cm2V—s-1.
We propose a precision noise reference based on n-InSb MR. This noise 
reference has an extremely wide dynamic range, which is easily controlled 
by the simple adjustment of a permanent magnet position over the distance 
of a few millimetres. The current noise value can be easily recalculated from 
the measured MR value.
The drain current noise of p-MOSFETs, with short gate lengths in strong 
inversion, is associated with access resistance fluctuations and can be 
described by an empirical Hooge relation [13].
The question about the origin of magnetic field influence on 1/f noise in 
semiconductors still requires further investigation.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge M. Levinshtein, F. Hooge and L.K.J. Vandamme for 
fruitful discussion and useful notes during the NATO Workshop “Advanced 
Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices” 
(Brno, Czech Republic, July 2003). We are also thankful to Adrian Lovejoy 
and John Reed for technical support and J. Routoure for comments.
References
[1] 
A.L. McWhorter. 1/f noise and germanium surface properties. In R. H. 
Kingston, editor, Semiconductor Surface Physics, University of 
Pennsylvania Press, Philadephia, 1957.
[2] 
L.K.J. Vandamme, 1/f noise in homogeneous single crystals of III-V 
compounds, Physics Letters 49A (1974) 233-234.
[3] 
M. Tacano, M. Ando, I. Shibasaki, S. Hashiguchi, J. Sikula, T.
Matsui, Dependence of Hooge parameter of InAs heterostructure on 
temperature, Microelectronics Reliability 40 (2000) 1921-1924.

318
[4] 
L.K.J. Vandamme, L.B. Kiss, O.L.J. Stoelinga, Anomalous behaviour 
of the current noise in long-narrow channel MOSFETS and its 
interpretation, Solid-State Electronics. 43 (1999) 697-700.
[5] 
G. Ghibaudo, T. Boutchcha, Electrical noise and RTS fluctuations in 
advanced CMOS devices, Microelectronics Reliability, 42 (2002) 
573-582.
[6] 
M. Myronov, S. Durov, O.A. Mironov, T.E. Whall, E.H.C. Parker, 
Low-frequency noise analysis for buried SiGe channel metamorphic 
p-MOSFETS with high Ge content, ICNF-17 Proceedings, Prague, 
2003, p. 343-346
[7] 
M.E. Levinshtein and S.L. Rumyantsev, Noise of the 1/f type under 
conditions of a strong geometric magnetoresistance, Soviet Physics - 
Semiconductors 17 (1983) 1167-1169.
[8] 
M. Song and H.S. Min, Influence of magnetic field on 1/f noise in 
GaAs Corbino disks, J. Appl. Phys. 58 (1985) 4221-4224.
[9] 
M.H. Song, A.N.Birbas, A. van der Ziel and A.D. van Rheenen, 
Influence of magnetic field on 1/f noise in GaAs resistors without 
surface effects, J. Appl. Phys. 64 (1988) 727-728.
[10] P. Vande Voorde, W.F. Love, Magnetic effects on 1/f noise in n-InSb, 
Physical Review B 24 (1981) 4781-4786.
[11] O.A. Mironov et al, The sub-micrometer thickness n-InSb/i-GaAs 
epilayers for magnetoresistor applications at room temperatures of 
operation, Abstracts NGS-11 Buffalo New York, USA, (June 16-20, 
2003) TuP-16.
[12] F. Hooge, 1/f noise, Physica B, 83 (1976) 14
[13] F.N. Hooge, T.G. Kleinpenning and L.K.J. Vandamme, Experimental 
studies on 1/f noise, Rep. Prog. Phys. 44 (1981) 479-532.
[14] Z. Wasileski, R.A. Stradling, Magneto-optical investigation of a deep 
centre in n-InSb, Solid State Communications 57 (1986) 123-127.
[15] S. Durov, O.A. Mironov, Optimised preamplifier for LF-noise 
MOSFET characterization, in this Proceedings
[16] M.M. Jevtic, Z. Stanimirovic, I. Stanimirovic, Evaluation of thick-film 
resistor structural parameters based on noise index measurements, 
Microelectronics Reliability 41 (2001) 59.
[17] H.M.J. Vaes and T.G.M. Kleinpenning, Hall-effect noise in 
semiconductors, J. Appl. Phys. 48 (1977) 5131-5134.
[18] D. K. Schroder, Semiconductor material and device characterization, 
Second Edition, A Wiley-Interscience publication, 1998, p. 223-234.

OPTIMISED PREAMPLIFIER FOR LF-NOISE
MOSFET CHARACTERIZATION
S. Durov1 and O.A. Mironov2
Department of Physics, University of Warwick 
Gibbet Hill Rd, Coventry CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
1 S.Durov@warwick.ac.uk
2 O.A.Mironov@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract A modular design of preamplifier for low frequency noise measurements with 
interchangeable first stage was chosen to improve reliability and to reduce the 
influence of connection cables on measurement results. In this communication 
we present the optimised preamplifier modules as the first stages for 
MOSFETs gate leakage and drain current noise measurements with input 
impedance 50 £2 - 108 £2 in the frequency range 1.0 Hz - 105 Hz. The best 
available commercial operational amplifiers (OPA’s) AD549, OPA637 and 
LT1028A were used for the first stage module at each of the three chosen 
impedance ranges. The noise characteristics of different OPA’s, which have 
been tested, are also presented.
Keywords: 
LF noise, ultra-low noise preamplifier, preamplifier optimisation
1. 
Introduction
Conventional MOSFET characterisation techniques, such as the 
combination of I-V (current-voltage) and C-V (capacitance-voltage) 
measurements, are very problematic as device sizes decrease down to the 
deep sub-pm (DS-pm) scale. “Average per square” characteristic parameters 
obtained from large-scale devices cannot be suitable for DS-pm MOSFET 
analysis due to statistical uncertainties in the fabrication technology together 
with the importance of mesoscopic quantum effects. Low frequency noise 
measurements could be a powerful diagnostic technique for DS-pm 
MOSFET characterization in a wide range of device operation regimes [1]. 
Unfortunately, the commercially available current preamplifiers such as
319
J.Sikula and M.Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (319 - 326) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

320
ITHACO-1211 [2], SR-570 [3], EG&G-181 [4] have been optimised only 
for limited ranges of device input impedance and their conventional “all-in- 
one” desktop design also introduces extra problems when long cables are 
used to connect to the sample test fixture. To overcome all the above 
problems we present in this communication optimised preamplifier modules 
as the first stages for gate leakage and drain current noise measurements of 
MOSFETs with input impedance 50Q-108Q in the frequency range 1.0 Hz- 
105 Hz.
2. 
Low frequency noise of current-preamplifier
Background equivalent noise of the amplifier is defined by the 
equivalent noise of the first stage. Electrical noise of the first stage was 
described earlier by Hung et al [5] and more thoroughly analysed by 
Vandamme et al [6] for the particular case of common-emitter amplifier with 
BJT input. However, the individual current source introduces additional 
noise in system, and the first stage here was also used as a current source for 
device under test (DUT). The equivalent scheme for the first stage of such a 
preamplifier is shown on Fig. 1.
Figure 1. Equivalent scheme for the first stage of the current preamplifier. Sources of current 
and voltage noise are shown.

321
According to Fig. 1, output voltage fluctuations of the first stage could 
be presented as:
22 
u0 =Rf
•2 , -2 
4 kT , 
2
ix + in + “ + un
R
1 
R+gd
(1)
where in - equivalent input current noise of OP A, un - equivalent input 
voltage noise of OPA, ix - drain current noise of DUT, Rf - feedback 
resistance value, gd - DUT conductance (gd = 1/Rtot in linear regime). At low 
frequencies (below 105Hz), a feedback resistor can introduce extra 1/f noise, 
which depends on the quality of resistor material and is not described here.
Drain current MOSFET noise could be measured if background noise 
from the preamplifier is less than (unmasked by) noise from our device:
2
2 > i2 + 4kBT + u 2 
xn 
n
Rf
1 
R+gd
(2)
The condition for reduced drain current noise can be rewritten as:
2
r R
2 i2R2 
xxto 
2V2 
DDS
4kT I Rf+—+1
V2 V2 
d D S DDS \ Rf 
)
(3)
2 +—B 
n R
4kTR 
B tot
V2
DS
We can get optimal resistance and device impedance for each OPA or 
optimal OPA for defined device impedance, if we could compare 
preamplifier noise with DUT thermal noise i2/ID = 4kBTRot/vDS and 
minimise the functional (4) by Rtot and Rf variation:
F (R,„ , Rf) = [[ in + 4RT 'I f+V f Ro1-+1 
f 
Rf ) VDS 
VDS < Rf 
)
dF (Rtat, Rf)
-------- ------------=0 = 0 
dRtot
(4)
Rtot = 
Rfun
ijRRf + 4kBTRf - u2
(6)

322
If an OPA is used as a current source for a DUT, current through the 
DUT is limited by supply voltage Vbat of OPA and feedback resistance value 
Rf :
VV 
V
' 
^_^a_ >'_™ _ r > r dds_
max 
to 
tot f -T7-
Rf 
R
tot Vbat
(7)
So, the choice of feedback resistance and selection of OPA is restricted by 
the DUT impedance range [6,7]. The optimal feedback resistance for the 
selected OPA can be chosen using the condition Rf in ~ un. The choice of Rf 
is also depends on stability of the module designed and maximum input 
current, which limits the minimum allowed DUT resistance for 
measurements at fixed drain-source voltage VDS.
3. 
Preamplifier design
Thorough analysis of currently available commercial OPAs was carried 
out. Average values and frequency dependence at frequency range 100-105 
Hz of equivalent input current in and voltage un noise were determined from 
datasheets and measurements of available samples. The AD549, OPA637 
and LT1028A OPAs were chosen to use in the first stage modules at three 
impedance ranges to obtain the lowest noise at each range. Feedback 
resistance Rf and in , un values for used OPA are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Parameters of operational amplifiers (OPAs) used for preamplifier modules
OPA
Input noise at f = 1 Hz
Input noise at f = 10 kHz
in
(fAxHz-1/2)
un
(nVxHz-1/2)
in
(fAxHz-1/2)
un
(nVxHz-1/2)
LT1028
9000
1.6
1000
0.85
OPA637
2.5
50
2.0
3.7
AD549
0.7
200
0.15
35
OPA
Rf
(Q)
DUT resistance
(Q)
Gain-Bandwidth product 
(MHz)
LT1028
1x104
(0.05-5) x103
75
OPA637
1x105
(0.05-5) x105
80
AD549
1x107
(0.05-9) x107
1

323
Functional F(Rtot ,Rf ) for selected OPAs are shown on Fig. 2. Thermal 
noise of the DUT could be measured, if F(Rtot,Rf )<1, while 1/f noise could 
be measured at low frequency (1-10Hz) even if F(Rtot ,Rf )>1.
The feedback resistor was chosen of wired or metal film type to keep 
preamplifier stability and bandwidth and to reduce 1/f noise introduced by it. 
Each preamplifier module was placed in a separate small shielded metal box 
with coaxial connectors. A digital oscilloscope (Tektronix 24678) and 
dynamic spectral analyser (HP35670A) were used to adjust and calibrate the 
preamplifier. A modular design was chosen to increase reliability of the 
amplifier and reduce the influence of connection cables on measurement 
results. The schematic amplifier circuit diagram is shown on Fig. 3. 
Preamplifier modules A, B and C can be used for drain current noise 
measurements (connectors 1,2,3). Module C with AD549 OPA is also 
suitable for gate leakage current noise measurements (connectors 1,2,4).
10-8 
10-7 
10-6 
10-5 
10-4 
10-3 
10-2 
10-1
Drain-source conductance 1/Rot (Q-1)
Figure 2. Preamplifier modules background noise normalised on thermal noise of DUT for 
OPAs AD549 with Rf = 10 MQ, OPA637 with Rf = 100 kQ and LT1028 with Rf = 10 kQ at f
= 10 kHz (thick lines) and f = 1 Hz (thin lines).

324
Figure 3. Schematic circuit diagram of the current preamplifier with modular design and 
interchangeable first stages A, B and C for LF-noise measurements.
Three preamplifier modules, a follower with two-pass LF noise filter, a 
general amplifier module with gain of G = 100, Pb-acid batteries and a test 
fixture or cryostat with DUT were used for further measurements. The 
preamplifier modules’ background noise mixed together with MOSFET’s 
noise measured at f = 1Hz and f = 100kHz versus DUT conductance are 
shown on Fig. 4. Normalised drain current power spectral density (NPSD) 
for MOSFETs at f = 100kHz agree with preamplifier noise together with 
thermal noise NPSD predicted and measured on set of metal film resistors at 
low and high DUT conductance. Increased values of NPSD for MOSFETs at 
f = 100kHz at intermediate DUT conductance range correspond to 1/f noise. 
NPSD for MOSFETs at f=1Hz are almost several orders of magnitude higher 
than preamplifier background noise at chosen conductance ranges.
4. 
Conclusions
The preamplifier must be specially designed or carefully fitted for 
measurements of low frequency noise on MOSFETs due to the extremely 
wide range of its input and output impedances. A modular design with 
separate first stage should be used to overcome problems with extra noise, 
extra inductance and capacitance introduced by cables. Individual 
operational amplifiers (OPA’s) must be used for each impedance range or

325
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
co
10-9
CO
10-10
10-11
10-12
10-13
10-14
LW*4kT/gd
L=1um
V = -50mV
AD549
R=10MO
OPA637
R=1C0kO
LT1028
R=10ko
10-9
10-8 10-7
10-6 10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1
N
§
t
o
Drain-source conductance ID/VDS (Q-1)
Figure 4. 
Normalised drain current noise of measured MOSFETs (filled symbols at
f = 1 Hz and unfilled symbols at f = 100 kHz) and background noise of built preamplifier 
modules at f = 10 kHz (solid lines). Thermal noise of devices is also shown for comparison 
(dotted line).
regime of MOSFET operation. Currently available commercial OPA’s could 
be used for gate leakage and drain current noise measurements of MOSFETs 
with input impedance 50Q-108Q in the frequency range 1.0 Hz-105 Hz. The 
AD549, OPA637 and LT1028A OPA’s are recommended for use in the first 
stage modules at each of the three chosen impedance ranges to improve 
measurement system.
Acknowledgements
SD acknowledges E.H.C. Parker and T.E. Whall for support during his 
PhD study at Warwick University. We are thankful to Adrian Lovejoy and 
John Reed for fruitful consultations, useful notes and technical support. We 
would like to acknowledge also „Analog Devices®“ for free OPA samples 
used during this research. We thank Bruno Guillet and Jean Routoure for 
discussion and useful comments.
References
[1] G. Ghibaudo, T. Boutchcha, Electrical noise and RTS fluctuations in 
advanced CMOS devices, Microelectronics Reliability, 42 (2002) 573­
582.

326
[2] http://www.dlinstruments.com/products/index.html
[3] http://www.srsys.com/html/sr570.html
[4] http://www. si gnalrecovery. com/181 detai .htm
[5] K. Hung, P. Ko, C. Hu, Y. Cheng, A physics-based MOSFET noise 
model for circuit simulators, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 
37 (1990) 1323-1333
[6] L.K.J. Vandamme, Gy. Trefan, A review of 1/f noise in terms of 
mobility fluctuations and white noise in modern submicron bipolar 
transistors - BJTs and HBTs, Fluctuations and Noise Letters, 1 (2001) 
R175-R199
[7] LT®1115 datasheet (
 )
http://www.linear.com/pdf/lt1115fa.pdf

NET OF YBCO AND LSMO THERMOMETERS FOR 
BOLOMETRIC APPLICATIONS
B. Guillet1, L Mechin, F. Yang, J.M. Routoure, G. Le Dem, 
C. Gunther and D. Robbes
GREYC (UMR 6072),ENSICAEN & University of Caen,
6 Bd Marechal Juin, 14050 CAEN cedex, 
France
R.A. Chakalov
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham B15 2TT
United Kingdom
1 bguillet@greyc.ismra.fr
Abstract In this work, two types of perovskite oxide materials with high temperature 
coefficients have been chosen as thermometers for use in bolometric 
applications: superconducting 
YBa2C'u3O--„ (YBCO) and colossal
magnetoresistive La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (LSMO) thin films. Two different 
temperature ranges are concerned: around 90 K for YBCO, since they were 
operated at the superconducting-metal transition and around the room 
temperature for LSMO. The temperature coefficient ratio and the noise were 
carefully measured. Best NET values of 3x10-8 K.Hz-1/2 at 1 Hz, 90 K and 
5 mA current bias for YBCO and 1.3x10—6 K.Hz-1/2 at 1 Hz, 300 K and 1.5 mA 
current bias for LSMO were obtained. Results are compared to literature and, 
in the case of room temperature applications, to other types of materials such 
as semiconductors (a-Si, a-Si:H, a-Ge, poly SiGe) and other oxide materials 
(semiconducting YBCO, VOx, other manganite compounds). Finally, the 
possible use of these thermometers with such low NET characteristics for the 
fabrication of both membrane-type bolometers for mid-infrared detection and 
antenna coupled bolometers for THz applications is discussed.
Keywords: 
Low frequency noise, oxide thin film, bolometer
32-
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (32- - 336) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

328
1. Performances of a bolometer
The basic physics and performances of a bolometer with a resistive 
thermometer are well established [1]. The detector consists of a radiation 
absorber of absorptivity n (black metal, antenna, cavity, fedhorn, etc...) and 
a thermometer that are connected to the heat sink via a heat link of thermal 
conductance G [W4<-1]. The temperature coefficient ratio a = (1/R) X 
(dR/dT) in [K-1], the dimensionless slope A = dln(R)/dln(T) and the Noise 
Equivalent Temperature NET in [K-Hz"1/2], which represents the noise over 
thermometer sensitivity ratio, are usually used to characterize the 
performance of the resistive thermometer of real impedance R [Q], In order 
to compare thermometers operated at different temperatures T we will use 
the following expression of the NET:
NET(f) = R X ATX 4P 
Sv (f) + 4kBTR + e2
2A (f) 
(1)
where Sv (f ), 4kBTR and e2 (f ) are the low frequency excess noise, the 
Johnson noise of the thermometer and the noise of the amplifying 
electronics, respectively and Pel is the electrical Joule power dissipated in the 
thermometer. The main figures of merit of bolometers are the Noise 
Equivalent Power NEP [W4Iz-1'2] and the specific detectivity D* 
[cm-Hz1/2-W1], which is the area normalized NEP. In the case the photon 
and the phonon noise 4kBT2G are negligible, the NEP can be written as the 
ratio of the voltage noise over the voltage sensitivity, which gives:
NEP(f) = NET(f) X n-1 X Geff x(1 + j2nfTeff) 
(2)
where Geff is the effective thermal conductance [W-K’1] and Teff = C / Geff is 
the effective thermal constant [s], with C the heat capacity [J4<-1]. The 
specific detectivity D* [cm^IIz12AV-1] is convenient for comparing 
bolometers with different areas S [cm2] and will be used hereafter:
1/2
D = 
/NPP 
(3)
A rapid examination of Eq. (1) shows that low NET could be obtained if 
T and noise are low and A, R and Pel are high. T and A are often fixed by the 
choice of the material. It has to be noted that high A is often related to a 
narrow operating temperature window and that there is an upper limit in the 
choice of Pel in order to avoid parasitic self heating. Moreover the electrical 
Joule power Pel combined with A induces electrothermal feedback (ETF) [2, 
3]. If A>0, as in LSMO and YBCO cases, and in the Constant Current Mode 
(CCM) we have Geff=|a|Pel. For stable operation, the feedback coefficient 

329
L, defined as L=\o\Pei/G is limited to be around 0.3 (<1) to avoid thermal 
runaway (positive ETF). In the Constant Voltage Mode (CVM), the negative 
ETF would allow a less restrictive L range. In this case and with a positive, 
there would be no limit for the bias voltage, so the bolometer could operate 
in a strong ETF mode, which additionally decrease the time constant as 
Teff=T(1+L). Active negative electrothermal feedback mode made with an 
analog electronic feedback control would improve bolometer performances 
too [4].
The background fluctuations noise-limited D*BLIP (Background Limited 
Infrared Photodetector) for an ideal bolometer having an emissivity of unity 
and viewing an angle of 2n steradians is independant of the receiving area 
but related to (Tbg5+T5)-1/2 with Tbg the background temperature [K]. The 
highest possible D*BLIP to be expected from a thermal detector operated at 
room temperature or at 90 K and viewing a background at the same 
temperature is 1.8*101° cm^Hz1/2^W-1 and 3.7*1011 cm^Hz1/2^W-1, 
respectively. If the field of view is reduced by cold shielding and the 
receiving area remains background limited, the D*BLIP value would inversely 
depend upon the noise of the half angle of 3, where 3 is the included angle of 
the cold shield [5].
The studied thermometers are envisaged to be used in membrane-type 
bolometers for detection in the infrared to mid-infrared wavelength range 
and in antenna-coupled bolometers on membranes for detection around the 
100 pm wavelength. In the first case we have to take care of the low 
frequency noise of the device since the operating frequency can be quite low 
because of the relatively big volume of the detecting area (tens of microns). 
At higher wavelength (around 100pm). the active volume is the load of the 
antenna that has to be much smaller. It can be of nanometric size, thus 
leading to small C and consequently small T. The limiting noise would then 
be the Johnson noise. It has to be noted that in the membrane case because 
the thermal conductance G is low, the phonon noise 4kBT2G can be 
neglected. However further investigations will have to be made in order to 
clarify whether the noise in nanometric sample scales with classical models.
In the present work we chosed two types of materials with high 
temperature coefficients as thermometers for bolometric applications: 
superconducting YBa2Cu3O7-5 (YBCO) and colossal magnetoresistive 
La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (LSMO) thin films. Both 200 nm thick layers were deposited 
by KrF pulsed laser deposition from a stoichiometric target onto (100) 
SrTiO3 substrates at 700°C and at 780°C in oxygen pressure, respectively. In 
case of YBCO the use of the very sharp drop of the resistance at the normal 
to superconducting transition requires operating temperatures close to 90 K 
whereas LSMO that has a Curie temperature of 350 K, can be operated 
around room temperature.

330
Sections 2 and 3 summarize the NET values we obtained for LSMO and 
YBCO thermometers, respectively. Section 4 gives a short analysis of the 
results compared to literature and makes an evaluation of the performances 
of both membrane-type bolometers for mid-infrared detection and antenna 
coupled bolometers for THz applications fabricated with these materials.
2. NET of the LSMO thin films
LSMO bridges with 3 different geometries (large: 400^mx96^m; 
medium: 660^mx35^m and narrow: 660^mx6^m) were patterned by 
standard UV photolithography. A four-probe noise measurement setup with 
a voltage white noise level of 1.6 nV^Hz-1/2 was used in order to reduce the 
influence of the contact resistance noise. R(T) characteristics of the LSMO 
films are reported in figure 1 for all the geometries. At 300 K the resistivity 
of the 200 nm thick layer was in the 5-20 p.Q^m range and the a value was in 
the 1.2^10—2 - 1.4x10-2 K-1 range, thus giving A values in the 3.6 - 4.2 range.
The noise properties were described more precisely earlier [6]. The 
sample voltage noise principally consisted of two parts: a white noise part 
that corresponds to the Johnson noise of the thermometer expressed by 
4kBTR and a 1/f a noise part with 0.7<a<1.2. In normal metals the following 
Hooge empirical relation is used:
Sv (f) = Y 
R212 n Q f
(4)
where % n, Q and f are the dimensionless Hooge parameter, the charge 
carrier density [m-3], the sample volume [m3] and the measuring frequency 
[Hz], respectively.
Figure 1. Resistance versus temperature characteristics of LSMO thin films for all the 
geometries [6]

331
Figure 2. NET at 30Hz and 1.5 mA bias current versus T. Inset shows the normalized 
SV/V2 voltage noise spectral density at 1 Hz as a function of temperature[6]
In our LSMO films we observed that the low frequency noise increased 
as Ib with b ~ 1.7, which does not fully satisfy Eq. (4). A more 
comprehensive study is in progress in order to measure the dependence of 
the 1/f noise on the volume of the sample. However in order to compare the 
noise level with other materials we assumed that Eq. (4) is valid and we 
deduced the normalized Hooge parameter Yn in the 10-30-10-29 m3 range in 
the whole measured temperature range for all the geometries. These values 
are among the lowest reported for LSMO thin films [7]. Fig. 2 shows the 
evolution of the NET value at 30 Hz and 1.5 mA as a function of the 
temperature. At 300 K the lowest measured value was of 2.3X10-7 K^Hz-1/2 at 
30 Hz and 1.3x10 6 KO Iz' at 1 Hz.
3. NET of the YBCO thin films
The R(T) characteristics of the 660 pmx40 pm YBCO bridges with a a 
coefficient at 90 K of 1.7 K-1 (A~160) are shown in Fig. 3. A dedicated read­
out electronics was developed for the noise measurements of these low 
impedance resistive thermometers (<10 kQ) [8]. The system consists in a 
highly stable square modulated current source, a low-noise preamplifier and 
an integrated lock-in amplifier coupled to an optimized analog PID 
controller. This system was originally designed to monitor an active cavity 
radiometer operating at 90 K in a liquid nitrogen bath but it is also essential 
for measurements of YBCO excess noise in the transition region. A high 
performance temperature controller is indeed required since the resistance 

332
changes drastically as a function of the temperature. The temperature 
dependence of the excess noise of an YBCO sample in the superconducting 
transition could then be monitored as a function of the current bias [9].
Y'BCO thermometer A 
fBCO thermometer B
Figure 3. R(T) characteristics of the YBCO thin films[8]
In order to optimize the temperature measurements in our control system, the 
NET has been calculated for each bias current at the temperature where the 
derivative of the resistance versus temperature is maximum. It decreases 
with increasing bias current (noise decreases and responsivity increases) (see 
Fig. 4). At large current bias, the voltage noise spectral density should reach 
the Johnson noise. A NET value of 3x10-8 K^Hz-1/2 at 1 Hz, 90 K and 5 mA 
was measured in our YBCO films. These values are among the lowest 
reported for YBCO thin films [10-11]. It is a very attractive value for our 
temperature control [8].
Fiure 4. Measured NET (closed symbols) and calculated NET taking into account the 
Johnson noise only (open symbols) at 1Hz for the YBCO sample versus current bias [8]

333
4. Analysis and perspectives of application
Several reviews of heat-sensitive thin-film materials for room 
temperature thermometers have been published [12-13]. Representative 
examples for detection in the infrared wavelenght are listed hereafter. 
Amorphous silicon and amorphous hydrogenated silicon bolometers have 
shown a value of D* of 3.2 x 108 cm^Hz1/2^W-1 for a 70 x 70 pm2 detecting 
area and 1.6 x 108 cm^Hz1/2W-1 for a 40 x 40 pm2 detecting area, 
respectively. Amorphous germanium have also been used with D*=4.7 x 108 
cm4 Izl2AV-1 for a 70 x 70 pm2 detecting area. Polycrystalline SiGe 
bolometers with optimal geometry are expected to present a specific 
detectivity of 1.5 x 1010 cm/Hz1/2^W-1 for a 75 x 75 pm2 detecting area [14]. 
The development of VOx bolometers have expanded and specific 
detectivities of 1.9 x 108 cm^Hz1/2W-1 at 30 Hz have been obtained for a 
linear array of eight 10 x 100 pm2 elements [15]. Semiconducting YBCO 
thin film bolometers are also attractive since D* as high as 1.3 x 108 
cm4Iz12AV-1 at 30 Hz was estimated for a 50 x 50 pm2 suspended detector 
area [16]. Compared to manganites the main disadvantages of the above 
materials are the large excess 1/f noise they present. With a low NET value 
of 2.3X10-7 I<4Iz-1'2 at 30 Hz and using the same membrane type geometry as 
we previously fabricated [17], we could expect D* around 109 cm4Iz12AV-1 
at 300 K and 30 Hz, which is among the best reported results for manganite 
bolometers [18, 19]. We could also expect D* around 1010 cm^Hz1/2^W-1 at 
90 K and 30 Hz with our YBCO films, coherently to literature data [20]. 
YBCO thermometers obviously showed better performances but they require 
nitrogen cooling systems and obviously present a narrow operating window. 
Room temperature LSMO thermometers are indeed less sensitive but offers 
smaller sizes, mass and power requirements than cooled YBCO devices.
In case of a detection around or above the 100 pm wavelength, the 
electromagnetic coupling is made through a metallic antenna (antenna 
coupled composite bolometers). The incident power of the input wave is 
then partly transferred to the microload of the antenna, the design of which 
requiring both a high frequency matching to the antenna impedance and a 
low frequency matching for the heat exchanges between the microload and 
its surroundings. The main advantages of these antenna coupled bolometers 
lies in the heated volume which may be made very small, allowing, in the 
advanced devices, very large bandwidth, or even mixing properties for THz 
frequencies. An important drawback is associated to losses in the dielectric 
and metallic parts of the device, reducing the coupling efficiency to about 
20%. This problem can be reduced by membrane technology that minimize 
dielectric losses and ensure a good thermal insulation of the microload. In 

334
the best case, that is assuming a good high frequency matching between the 
antenna and the microload, rough estimations of the overall performances 
would lead to further improvement of the D* value at a frequency higher 
than 1 kHz.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, the presented LSMO and YBCO thin films deposited onto 
(100) SrTiO3 have shown remarkable low 1/f noise, which could potentially 
enable the fabrication of high detectivity bolometers at room temperature 
and 90 K, respectively. YBCO thermometers obviously showed better 
performances but they require cooling. At last, antenna coupled bolometers 
are envisaged for wavelength around 100 pm. Further investigations on the 
noise properties of the nanodevices will have to be made because it is not 
clear whether its evolution is related to volume according to classical 
models.
References
[1] P.L. Richards, Bolometers for infrared and millimeters waves, 
J.Appl. Phys. 76 (1) (1994) 1-24.
[2] K.D. Irwin, An application of electrothermal feedback for high 
resolution particle detection, Appl. Phys. Lett. 66 (15) (1995) 1998­
2000
[3] G.B. Brandao, L.A.L. de Almeida, G.S. Deep, A.M.N. Lima, H. 
Neff, Stability conditions, nonlinear dynamics, and thermal 
runaway in microbolometers, J. Appl. Phys. 90 (4) (2001) 1999­
2008
[4] I.A. Khrebtov, A.D. Tkachenko, K.V. Ivanov, W. Michalke, 
Influence of an active electrothermal feedback on noise properties 
of high-Tc bolometers, to be published in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. On 
Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f fluctuations (2003), Prague
[5] P. Kruse, Uncooled Thermal Imaging: Arrays, Systems, and 
Applications, Vol. TT51, SPIE Press (June 2001)
[6] F. Yang, L. Mechin, J.M. Routoure, S. Flament, D. Robbes, R.A. 
Chakalov, Low 1/f noise in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 thin films on (100) 
SrTiO3, to be published in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. On Noise in 
Physical Systems and 1/f fluctuations (2003), Prague

335
[7] P. Reutler, A. Bensaid, F. Herbstritt, C. Hofener, A. Marx, R. 
Gross, Local magnetic order in manganite thin films studied by 1/f 
noise measurements, Phys. Rev. B 62 (17) (2000) 11619-11625
[8] B. Guillet, D. Robbes, L. Mechin, Low noise temperature control: 
application to an active cavity radiometer, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 74 (1) 
(2003) 243-249
[9] B. Guillet, L. Mechin, D. Robbes, High performance temperature 
controller: application to the excess noise of YBCO thermometers 
in the transition region, to be published in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. On 
Noise in Physical Systems and 1/f fluctuations (2003), Prague
[10] H. Neff, I.A. Khrebtov, A.D. Tkatchenko, E. Steinbeiss, W. 
Michalke, O.K. Semchinova, T. Heidenblut, J. Laukemper, Noise, 
bolometric performances and aging of thin high Tc superconducting 
films on silicon membranes,Thin Solid Films 324 (1998) 230-238
[11] D.G Mc Donald, R.J. Phelan, L.R. Vale, R.H. Ono, D.A. Rudman, 
Passivation, transition width, and noise for YBCO bolometers on 
silicon, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 9 (2) (1997) 3087-3090
[12] V.Y. Zerov. and V.G. Malyarov, Heat-sensitive materials for 
uncooled microbolometers arrays, J. Opt. Technol. 68 (12) (2001) 
939-948.
[13] V.G. Malyarov, Uncooled thermal IR arrays, J. Opt. Technol. 69 
(10) (2002) 750-760
[14] S. Sedky, P. Fiorini, K. Baert, L. Hermans, R. Mertens, 
Characterization and optimization of infrared poly SiGe bolometers, 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev. 46 (4) (1999) 675-682
[15] C. Chen, X. Yi, J. Zhang, X. Zhao, Linear uncooled 
microbolometer array based on VOx thin films, Infrared Phys. 
Technol. 42 (2001) 87-90
[16] M. Almasri, Z. Celik-Butler. D.P. Butler, A. Yaradanakul, 
A. Yildiz, Uncooled multimirror broad-band infrared 
microbolometers, J. Microelectromech. Syst. 11 (5) (2002) 528-535
[17] L. Mechin, J.C. Villegier, G. Rolland, F. Laugier, Double CeO2 / 
YSZ buffer layer for the epitaxial growth of YBa2Cu3O7.s films on 
Si (100) substrates, Physica C, 269 (1996) 124-130
[18] J.H. Kim, S.I. Khartsev, A.M. Grishin, Epitaxial colossal 
magnetoresistive La0.67(Sr,Ca)0.33MnO3 films on Si, Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 82 (24) (2003) 4295-4297

336
[19] A. Lisauskas, S.I. Khartsev, A. Grishin, Tailoring the colossal 
magnetoresistivity: La0.7(Pb0.63Sr0.37)0.3MnO3 thin-film uncooled 
bolometer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77 (5) (2000) 756-758
[20] I.A. Khrebtov, Noise properties of high temperature 
superconducting bolometers, Fluctuations and Noise Letters, 2 (2) 
(2002) R51-R70

DIAGNOSTICS OF GaAs LIGHT EMITTING DIODE 
PN JUNCTIONS
P. Koktavy and B. Koktavy
Brno University of Technology, Fakulty of Electrical Engineering and Communication
Department of Physics
Technicka 8, 616 00 Brno
CzechRrepublic
koktavy@feec.vutbr.cz
Abstract Tracing the bi-stable mechanism of reverse-biased junction conductivity can 
be used as an efficient tool to study PN junction inhomegeneities. This 
conductivity mechanism is usually accounted for in terms of crystalline lattice 
imperfections, dislocations, or metallic precipitates in the PN junction region. 
Two methods have been suggested for practical application: first, a tentative 
method to distinguish between the bi-stable and the multi-stable conductivity 
mechanism, and, second, a noise current rms value versus DC current plot 
based method.
Keywords:
1. Introduction
The bi-stable mechanism of reverse-biased junction conductivity appears 
due to crystalline lattice imperfections, dislocations, or metallic precipitates 
in the PN junction region. Local avalanche breakdowns will thus take place 
in the neighbourhood of such a defect (microplasma region) at reverse 
voltages below those required for an avalanche breakdown in a defect-free 
region of the junction. In consequence of voltage fluctuations across the 
microplasma region, the electric field intensity may drop below the 
discharge hold range. The respective current conductivity mechanism would 
vanish in this case.
337
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (337 - 344)
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

338
2. 
Microplasma noise vs. time behaviour
Let us consider a diode having a single microplasma region in the PN 
junction. If the reverse voltage is low, the diode is in a stable state, there are 
no avalanche breakdowns and the diode current is constant. When the diode 
voltage is increased, very-low-frequency short-time current impulses will 
start appearing. Further voltage increase results in increasing both the 
impulse frequency and width (Fig. 1). After a certain voltage is exceeded, 
the plasma will be ionized steadily and the diode will be in a stable state 
again. If there are several microplasma regions in the diode, the above 
process may occur several times if the voltage is further increased.
Some diodes may feature several microplasma regions, whose bi-stable 
conductivity mode voltage intervals overlap each other. Multi-level noise 
(Fig 2) would result in this case.
Figure 1. Example of a two-level noise 
vs. time plot
Figure 2. Example of a multi-level noise 
vs. time plot
3. 
Diode screening on the basis of microplasma noise 
vs. time plots
The reverse-biased bi-stable current PN junction characteristics depend 
on the diode load impedance. Whereas high-accuracy measurements require 
a load resistance in the order of magnitude of 102 Q, resistances around 103 
Q are sufficient for the diode screening process. We used RL = 1,8 kQ in our 
apparatus. Thus it appeared to be possible to dispense with using any low- 
noise preamplifier when employing a millivolt input range oscilloscope. 
Otherwise, amplification of the noise voltage by a factor of 101 is 
recommended. Fig. 3 shows a block diagram of the measuring apparatus 
designed to this purpose.

339
Figure 3. Block diagram of the diode screening device.
A controllable constant-current source is supplying the diode D under 
test with reverse voltages from 0 to URB. Being generated by the diode, the 
noise current produces a noise voltage across the load resistor RL. This noise 
voltage is amplified by a pre-amplifier PZ, to be fed into the input of a 
sampling oscilloscope VO. In the bi-stable behaviour region, the 
oscilloscope displays random rectangular impulses pertaining to either one 
or several regions of reverse voltages UR.
To verify the designed method, we employed following hardware: A BS 
554 stabilized power supply 0 to 30 V, C = 22 nF, R L = 1,8 kQ, a wide-band 
pre-amplifier with a voltage gain of 10 and, finally, an HP 54645A 
oscilloscope.
4. 
Microplasma noise vs. current behaviour
Reverse biased diodes having no microplasma are expected to generate 
homogeneous-breakdown avalanche process induced noise only, whereas 
microplasma diodes will show at lower voltages an additional noise 
component, corresponding to the bi-stable conductivity due to the individual 
microplasma regions. The block diagram of the measuring apparatus and the 
diode measuring circuit is in Fig. 4.
A noise voltage uN(t) appears across the load resistance RL through 
which the noise current iN(t) is flowing. Being amplified by a narrow-band 
amplifier and rectified by a full-wave rectifier, the noise voltage is converted 
into a voltage, whose time average is proportional to the r.m.s. value of UN 
in the given frequency band. In this frequency band, the noise current r.m.s. 
value is
I
_ U N 
N R L
(1)

340
DA - D/A converter 
PZ - pre-amplifier
SZ - selective nanovoltmeter 
DV1, DV2 - digital voltmeters
Figure 4. 
Apparatus to measure reverse biased diode noise power spectral density.
The set-point values of the diode reverse current being adjusted by 
means of a PC-controlled D/A converter, the diagram IN = f(IR) shows an IN 
versus IR plot, IN = f(IR). Typical plots for M3 diode specimen are shown in 
Fig. 5 for various band-centre frequencies of Unipan 237 narrow-band 
frequency filter at a selectivity of 25 dB/oct. Either microplasma region 
corresponds to a peak, whereas the third region of the curve corresponds to 
the avalanche breakdown of the junction homogeneous region.
Figure 5. Example of r.m.s. value of noise current IN versus DC current, specimen M3.
The IN versus filter band-centre frequency plot has not appeared to be 
pronounced very much. Therefore, we have chosen f = 400 Hz for further 
measurements.

341
Under such circumstances, the power spectral density is directly 
proportional to IN2 , or UN2 , and inversely proportional to the filter frequency 
band equivalent noise band width.
Fig. 6 shows the IN = f(IR) plots for a diode with microplasma processes 
at various temperatures. It can be seen that the noise current r.m.s. value is
IR / p A
Figure 6. Noise current IN r.m.s. value versus DC current plot for various temperatures, 
specimen M3.
Figure 7. 
Avalanche breakdown induced noise for diode specimen P1 (with no
microplasma).
For the sake of comparison, let us show Fig. 7, in which the noise 
current IN vs. DC current plots, IN = f(IR), for both the diodes showing bi-

342
stable current conductivity and the diodes showing homogeneous 
breakdown, are illustrated. It is seen that only homogeneous junction 
avalanche breakdown induced noise is present in the characteristic in the 
latter case.
5. 
Measuring apparatus to study the microplasma noise 
vs. current behaviour
Fig. 8 shows the block diagram of the measuring apparatus designed to 
study the noise current (voltage) r.m.s value versus reverse current plots in a 
given frequency range.
Figure 8. Apparatus to measure reverse biased diode noise current (voltage) spectral density
A dedicated power supply comprising TESLA BM 572 D/A converter is 
providing a ramp voltage, which is powering the diode D connected in series 
with a load resistor R L = 1,8 kQ. The noise voltage is amplified by a low- 
noise pre-amplifier featuring an input resistance of about 105 Q and a voltage 
gain of 10. Further amplification is provided by a narrow-band amplifier 
with a band centre frequency of 390 Hz and an effective bandwidth of 
Afe = 14.13 Hz. The narrow-band signal is fed, via an insulating amplifier, 
OZ, into a rectifier whose DC output voltage is measured by an M1T 330 
digital voltmeter DV2 (M1T 330). The latter’s output is processed in a 
process-control PC, calculating the r.m.s. value of the noise current IN 
passing through the load resistor RL. The other quantity to be processed is 
the time-mean value of the impulse noise voltage across the load resistance 
RL, which is picked up by another M1T 330 digital voltmeter DV1, from 
which the mean value of the current IR is derived.

343
The noise analyzer shown in Fig. 8 is assembled from functional blocks 
which have been designed and produced at the Department of Physics 
especially for noise diagnostics of electronic devices and materials. As an
I R / |1 A
Figure 9. 
Noise current versus DC current plot for M3 diode.
To demonstrate the results obtained from the above-mentioned 
measuring apparatus, reverse-biased M3 diode noise is shown. The IN versus 
DC current plot is shown in Fig. 9. It can be seen to coincide in shape with 
that presented in Fig. 6. The deviation in the value of IN results from 
different bandwidth values of the narrow-band filter. Therefore, we have 
calculated the measuring set bandwidths for the case of a Unipan 237 
selective nanovoltmeter with a band-centre frequency of 400 Hz and the 
narrow-band amplifier SZ (made by the Department of Physics) with a band­
centre frequency of 390 Hz. The frequency response curves of both 
apparatuses are shown in Fig. 10. We have calculated the effective band­
widths, Af., for both apparatuses (Fig. 1). This being done, the noise current 
power spectral density may be calculated from the following formula:
I2
Si (IR) = _N_ 
4fe
(2)
The Unipan selective nanovoltmeter features effective noise bandwidths 
of 49.0 Hz and 9.7 Hz for selectivity settings of 25 dB/octave and 40 
dB/octave, respectively, whereas the narrow-band amplifier made by the 
Physics Department features Afe = 14.1 Hz.

344
f / Hz
Figure 10. Frequency response curves for Unipan nanovoltmeter and the narrow-band 
amplifier made by the Department of Physics.
6. Conclusion
The first suggested method for diodes screening is based on tracing the 
microplasma noise current vs. time behaviour. The reverse-biased bi-stable 
current PN junction characteristics depend on the reverse voltage, the diode 
load impedance and the temperature. In the bi-stable behaviour region, the 
oscilloscope displays random rectangular impulses pertaining to either one 
or several regions of reverse voltages UR.
The second method is based on tracing the noise current (voltage) r.m.s 
value versus reverse current plots. Reverse biased diodes having no 
microplasma are expected to generate homogeneous-breakdown avalanche 
process induced noise only. Microplasma diodes will show at lower voltages 
an additional noise component, corresponding to the bi-stable conductivity 
due to the individual microplasma regions.
References
[1] K. G. McKay, Avalanche Breakdown in Silicon, Phys. Rev. 94 (1954) 
878-884.
[2] Keith S. Champlain, Microplasma Fluctuations in Silicon, J. Appl. 
Phys. 30 (1959) 1039-1050.

NEW TOOLS FOR FAST AND SENSITIVE NOISE 
MEASUREMENTS
J. Sikula1
Brno University of Technology, Fakulty of Electrical Engineering and Communication 
Technicka 8, 616 00 Brno
Czech Republic
M. Tacano2 and S. Yokokura
Meisei University,
Hino, Tokyo,
Japan
S. Hashiguchi3
Yamanasi University,
Kofu, Yamanashi,
Japan
1 
sikula@feec.vutbr.cz
2 
tacano@ee.meisei-u.ac.jp
3 
has@es.yamanashi.ac.jp
Abstract An instrument to improve power spectrum density (PSD) measurements, a 
highly sensitive preamplifier and a data acquisition unit are designed as well 
as a programmable power battery source. The preamplifier has 8 junction 
field effect transistor (JFET) inputs in parallel resulting in an input noise 
equivalent power of -186 dBV2/Hz. The data acquisition system consists of a 
low-pass filter, an A/D converter and a RAM, which transfer the data to the 
connected PC. The FFT or other signal processing is carried out within the 
PC. The battery power source is controlled by the PC, enabling us to obtain 
the device-under-test (DUT) bias DC required by the program.
This measuring system works well at room temperature where the DUT and 
the power source could be put into a magnetic shielding box to reject spurious 
line noises. In the case where the DUT is placed in a cryostat to measure the 
temperature dependence of noise properties, however, the shielding of the 
DUT from the power line becomes a serious problem. Particularly in order to 
use a compressor cooling system, spurious noises come into the measuring 
system through the power lines of the compressor. In such a case the 
preamplifier must be placed as close as possible to the DUT, and the power 
line to the compressor is sometimes disconnected from the system.
345
J. Sikula and M. Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (345 - 354)
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

346
Keywords: 
High sensitive preamplifier, programmable battery, power source
1. Introduction
PSD measurements have been carried out using a preamplifier and an 
FFT analyser together with a battery source and a PC usually to control the 
FFT as shown in Fig. 1. This measuring system works well at room 
temperature where the DUT and the power source could be put into a
Figure 1. Block Diagram of New Tool 
for Fast Sensitive Noise Measurements
magnetic shielding box to reject spurious line noises. In the case where the 
DUT is placed in a cryostat to measure the temperature dependence of noise 
properties, however, the shielding of the DUT from the power line becomes 
a serious problem. Particularly in order to use a compressor cooling system, 
spurious noises come into the measuring system through the power lines of 
the compressor. In such a case the preamplifier must be put as close as 
possible to the DUT, and the power line to the compressor is sometimes 
disconnected from the system.
In order to reject the spurious noise to improve the measuring 
circumstances, we have developed a new set up with a highly sensitive 
preamplifier and a data acquisition system instead of the FFT, together with 
a programmable battery power source system.

347
Figure 2. Flow of New Measuring System
An amplifier with an input noise power of below -186 dBV2/Hz is 
fabricated by connecting 8 JFETs in parallel followed by operational ampli 
fiers. The output of the amplifier is connected to the data acquisition system 
which transfers the time-sequential noise signals to digitized signals through 
the 16-bit A/D converter and a low-pass filter (LPF). Without using a 
comer- cially available large instru-ment, we could do the equi-valent work 
in one simple board, and could attach or install the instrument within a 
cryogenic system altogether. The data from this acquisition system is 
transferred to a PC through a USB (Universal Serial Bus) interface, which 
enables us to connect to every computer without additional cost.
2. PSD measuring system
A block diagram of this new PSD measuring system is shown in Fig. 2. 
A detailed block diagram of the measuring system is shown in Fig. 3.
The PSD is further amplified by a gain-controlling amplifier, via the 8th 
LPF (clock sweepable cauer filter) swept by the PC, quantized by a 16-bit 
A/D converter and stored in the installed RAM.

348
The data is transferred between the measuring system and PC using the full­
speed transfer mode of USB Interface Version 1.1. We do not need any other 
interface hardware since most PCs have this interface.
USB Interface
Noise Signal 
Optical Control Signal
Figure 3. Detailed Block Diagram 
of Measuring System
Figure 4. Low-Pass Filter Characteristics

349
The dynamic range of the system is limited by the anti-aliasing LPF and 
the A/D. The frequency dependence of this filter is shown in Fig. 4, which 
shows the dynamic range of the system to be more than 90 dB and the data 
quantumized by the 16-bit A/D converter. The sampling frequency of the 
A/D converter is set to be equal to just 4 times that for the LPF set cutoff 
frequency.
Q2 
2SK370
Q5 
2SK370
R5 51
INPUT
<HH
ID=-5mA
R3
100k
Q1 
2SA1316
Q7 
2SC3329
Q3 
2SA1316
+3.6V
2SJ108 R6 15
-3.6V
<HI—
lrC6h0-i>
UPC815C
6
2 
C2
+ ,0U
+7.2V
OUTPUT
-7.2V
I 10U
, +
Figure 5. 
Low-Noise Preamplifier Structure
Figure 6. Low-Noise Preamplifier Circuit
In order to measure the frequency range between 100 to 1 kHz, for 
instance, the cutoff frequency of the LPF and the resolution are set to 1 KHz 
and 80 per decade, respectively. The sampling frequency of the AD 
converter is set to 4 KHz, and a word data maximum of 2560 is stored and

350
transferred to the PC, and undergoes further data transformation, either FFT 
or real-time RTS analyses. The dynamic range of this system is 
approximately 90 dB.
3. 
Preamplifier
We used low-noise JFET devices to reduce the input noise of the 
amplifier, and also used transistors as the 2nd amplifier and operational 
amplifiers in the 3rd section. The actual circuit is shown in Fig. 5. Eight 
JFETs are used in parallel to reduce the input noise of the amplifier, and 
transistors are also used for the 2nd amplifier and operational amplifiers in 
the 3rd section. The schematic diagram of the preamplifier is shown in Fig. 
6. The 1st and 2nd stages reached an amplification of 30 dB, and the 3rd stage 
was designed to reach 30 dB in order to obtain the total gain of 60 dB.
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 7. 
Sensitivity of Completed Amplifier
Figure 7 shows the noise equivalent power of the amplifier with the 
shorted input. The single JFET amplifier had a maximum sensitivity of -175 
dBV2/Hz, and the 8 devices in parallel had a maximum sensitivity of -186 
dBV2/Hz.
4. 
Programmable Battery Power Source
A fully automatic battery power source is proposed1) to replace the 
manually controlled power source. Figure 8 shows the block diagram of the 

351
power source system, consisting of a personal computer, an interface 
controller and a battery power source circuit.
Figure 8. 
Block Diagram of Programmable Battery
Power Source
The personal computer and the interface controller (IFC) are connected 
via the RS232C control line enabling parallel or serial two-way 
communication, while the IFC and the battery power source circuit are 
connected via optical fibers. The IFC transforms the electrical signal from 
the personal computer into an optical signal and transfers it to the battery 
power source circuit, while transforming the optical signal from the battery 
power source circuit and transmitting the corresponding electrical signal to 
the personal computer. The IFC entirely rejects the line noise superposed on 
the personal computer and on the battery power source circuit. The personal 
computer determines the battery voltage and the series resistance calculated 
for the measured DUT resistance, and transmits the control signal via IFC to 
the microcomputer within the battery power source circuit. The battery 
power source circuit measures the DUT resistance, and supplies the required 
DC power to the DUT while transmitting the control signal to the measuring 
instruments and receiving the results from them. While the instruments 
execute the measurements, the microcomputer is switched off in order to 
minimize the induced noise. The voltage of each battery can be monitored 
and the batteries are charged if its voltage drops below a threshold. All of 
these functions are performed by the microcomputer installed in the battery 
power source circuit. Figure 9 shows the completed power source.

352
Figure 9. Programmable Battery Power Source
5. 
Results
The new system, as well as the signal processing, was PC-controlled by 
Visual Basic ver. 6 of Microsoft.
Figure 10. Noise Equivalent Power of New System

353
The noise equivalent power of the new system with the shorted input 
terminal is obtained as shown in Fig. 10, indicating the expected maximum 
sensitivity of -186 dB2/Hz. The real time signal is also obtained as shown in 
Fig. 11. The input square wave of 1 kHz 10 nV PP was picked up through 
the A/D converter with a sampling frequency of 400 kHz and the cut off 
frequency of the LPF was 100 kHz.
The maximum data transfer rate of our system is about 128 kbyte and is 
limited by the USB protocol-PC system signal processing time.
These results may certify that the developed system com-pletely works 
both as a transient analyser and as an FFT analyser.
6. 
Conclusion
Due to recent advanced signal pro-cessing tools we are able to obtain the 
noise PSD of devices without using conventional commercial FFTs. It is 
also possible to fabri-cate a programmable battery power source due to the 
improved new batteries.
We proposed here a new low-cost instrument for low-frequency noise 
measurements. Further improvements of the system can be achieved by 
minimizing the preamplifier and by replacing the digital circuits with a field 
programmable gate array (FPGA) as well as upgrading the USB to the 
version 2 interface which will enable the maximum transfer rate of 1 M 
Word (16 bits/word) at a transfer rate of 5 Mbits. This makes it possible to 
realize the virtual on-line recording of the RTS signal.
15
10
5 5
<d on 
cd 
0
-10
-15 00.5 
1 
1.5 
22.5
Time (ms)
Figure 11. Real time signal trace

354
References
[1] S. Yokokura et al: Fully Computer-Controlled Battery Power Source 
for Low Frequency Noise Measurements, Proc. of ICNF p.721, 
Gainesville (2001)

USING A NOVEL, COMPUTER CONTROLLED 
AUTOMATIC SYSTEM FOR LF NOISE 
MEASUREMENTS UNDER POINT PROBES
J.A. Chroboczek1
CEA-DRT-LETI/DTS-CEA
17, rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9
France
2
S. Ferraton2
IMEP, UMR CNRS 5130 ENSERG
23, rue des Martyrs, 38016 Grenoble
France
G. Piantino
Synergie-Concept,
7, rue de Pres, 38243 Meylan
France
1 Jan.chroboczek@cea.fr
2 ferraton@enserg.fr
Abstract A system for automatic, wafer-level, low frequency, LF, fluctuation 
measurements on semiconductor devices, involving a novel, programmable 
biasing amplifier, PBA, is presented. The PBA is computer-controlled and can 
remotely bias device terminals and measure currents flowing through them to 
the common ground. Its inputs are traxial with the appropriate guard potentials 
applied to their inner shields. The system is designed specifically for LF noise 
measurements on microelectronics structures. It can operate in manual and 
automatic modes. In the latter, the biasing voltage ranges and their increments 
are programmable. The program execution is carried out by step-wise biasing 
voltage variations, followed by measurements of appropriate currents and 
their fluctuations, with Fourier analysis, completed by the data storage. The 
program is written in LabView graphical language for a personal computer, 
equipped with a digital I/O and a data acquisition cards. No additional 
electronics is needed for the system operation. The system calibration by 
thermal noise of resistances is proposed. Some measurement results on the 
state-of-the-art microelectronics devices are discussed.
Keywords: 
Low frequency noise, microelectronics, current amplifier
355
J.Sikula and M.Levinshtein (eds.),
Advanced Experimental Methods for Noise Research in Nanoscale Electronic Devices (355 - 362) 
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publisher. Printed in the Netherlands.

356
1. 
Introduction
One of the negative consequences of the size reduction of 
microelectronics devices is the increase in their low frequency noise, LFN. 
Standard, static characterization of the state-of-the-art microelectronics 
devices is no longer sufficient and even the most rudimentary device 
simulation programs, such as SPICE, provide the LFN parameters. 
Measurements of LFN are delicate and time consuming; that is why the 
LFN characterization techniques are not more widely used in the electrical 
characterization and test laboratories, let alone the on-line testing stations. 
The cutting of the measuring time is only possible if a computer-controlled 
system is used, both for device biasing and for the LFN measurements. Such 
a system must not generate electrical noise and be immune to electrical pick­
up from the wafer-handling equipment, where the devices are contacted by 
point probes. This work should be considered as a step towards a realization 
of an automatic LFN measuring system, capable to operate in the industrial 
environment.
We present a programmable point-probe noise measuring system, 
3PNMS, which, as the name implies, is computer-controlled and can 
function with point-probe stations. We have not yet approached the problem 
of automatic wafer handling, nor optimized the measurement speed, both 
presenting separate engineering problems. However, as compared to the 
manual procedures, the measurements have been dramatically accelerated. 
The use of simple and reliable electronics eliminated expensive spectrum 
analyzers, never used in their full capacity in LFN characterization systems. 
The essential element of the system, the programmable biasing amplifier, 
PBA, was designed for biasing each individual contacting probe and for 
measuring the resulting current, passing through it and the device contact 
pad, to the system common ground [1]. It requires using coaxial probes 
(here Cascade Microtech are employed), connected to PBA by traixial leads. 
Their inner shields are driven, by PBA, at the input potentials, for reducing 
the leakage currents and suppressing the effective capacitances of the leads.
The PBA and the entire biasing and data acquisition/storage procedure is 
controlled by a PC, via a program named NOISYS, written in the LabView 
graphical language, with commands/controls accessible for the user by 
screen panels of virtual instruments, vi. Digital input/output cards are used 
for controlling the PBA and the data acquisition procedure. The latter can be 
run automatically, after inputting the measurement parameters into 
appropriate vi screen panels. One of such panels is shown in Fig. 1.

357
Figure 1. Controls Panel of PBA2, a virtual instrument of the NOISYS program for static 
and noise measurements for a MOSFET. Bottom part is for the inputting the storage 
information.
2. 
The Programmable Biasing Amplifier
We shall discuss here standard LFN measurements on MOSFETs, where 
the device is biased (drain at Vd and gate at Vg) and just the drain current, Id, 
measured. The PBA2, a compact version of the amplifier, is then used. It 
provides the drain and gate biasing, together with the Id read-out. Its 
schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 2. The biasing is provided by stabilized, 
battery-powered voltage supplies, with digital potentiometers, commanded 
by TTC signals from a computer, via NOISYS software. The DC gain of the 
current amplifier is Rf (V/A). The gain values can be changed by NOISYS, 
by switching an appropriate Rf in the amplifier feed-back loop (cf. Fig. 2).
As known, the voltage generated at the current amplifier output by the 
current Id in the input is
Vout= - IdRf 
(1)
One of the functions of NOISYS software is the maintaining Vout 
below the operational amplifier’s saturation voltage. The Vout and the 
corresponding gain are subsequently stored, as couples, for data processing.

358
Figure 2. A 2-terminal version of the Programmable Biasing Amplifier, with a single 
current read-out. The amplifier DC gain is Rf (V/A). Here the device under test, DUT, is a 
MOSFET
Some characteristics of PBA are listed in Table 1, in particular the open­
input Vout values at various gains and the corresponding input referred noise. 
Such values are often referred to as the system noise. The cut off frequencies 
at various gains are also provided.
Table 1. Some characteristics of the programmable biasing amplifier, PBA
Range [V/A]
Mean output
Input referred PSD
Pass band
logGAc/logGDc
voltage amplitude 
[gVrmWHz]
amplitude |pAITnNHz|
fmax [kHz]
8/7
6.5
0.065
35
7/6
4.5
0.45
60
6/5
4.0
4
>100
5/4
2.5
25
>100
4/3
2.5
250
>100
3/2
2.5
2500
>100
3. 
The System Calibration with Resistances
One of the initial steps the user takes after setting up the LFN measuring 
system, is the determination of the system noise and the calibration of the 
system, if possible. Thermal noise sources are commonly used for that 
purpose. Connecting various load resistance Rg in the Input 1 of PBA, we 
measured the mean output voltage, Vout, for various Rf connected in the 
feedback-loop. The Vout values can be calculated by summing up the 
thermal noise contribution of Rg, amplified by the operational amplifier and 
the thermal rms voltage of the Rf resistor. We obtain,
Vout=^[4kT\GAc2(1/Rf+1/Rg)], [V-ms'Hz] 
(2) 

359
where GAC is the AC gain (here GAC = 10GDC). For a more rigorous 
derivation of Eq. (2) see refs [2] and [3]. The resulting Vout is compared in 
Fig. 3 with the data. The calculation (surface) and the data (mesh), obtained 
for a set of Rf and Rg values, both ranging from 102Q to 107Q, by decade 
steps, are seen to account for the measured Vout, above the system noise 
plateau, situated at about -105(±5)dbV/^Hz (or 5 (±1) gV/^Hz). Figure 3 
shows that the absolute system calibration by thermal noise of load 
resistances Rg, is correct in a certain range of Rg and Rf values, where the 
output noise significantly exceeds the system noise. Note that the system 
noise plateau in Fig. 3, corresponds to the values listed in Table 1.
Figure 3. Measured (mesh) and calculated (shaded surface) output voltage of the 
Programmable Biasing Amplifier, PBA2, plotted on axis Z, for Rf (axis X) and Rg (axis Y) 
values equal to 102, 103,104, 106, 107Q, corresponding to numbers 0 to 5, at the axes. Above 
the system noise, situated at about -100dbV/rHz (~5gV/rHz), the calculation is seen to 
account for the data.
4. 
Examples of LFN measurements on MOSFETs
In Fig. 4 we show some results of measurements on a 0.75gm2 Si 
MOSFET. In part (A) the values directly measured at the PBA output are 
shown, with the vertical lines separating Vg regions, where a particular AC 
gain, GAC, was used. The upper curve was taken with the current 
(Vd=50mV), the middle, with no current (Vd=0) and the bottom curve 
represents the calculated (using Eq. 2) thermal noise of the system. Note 
that at Vd=0 the output voltage PSD contains the system thermal noise and

360
other unknown contributions, probably generated by electronics. For that 
reason these data lie above the calculated thermal results. The 1/f component 
of interest is extracted from the difference of the appropriate values given by 
the upper and the middle curve. An example of such analysis is shown in 
part (B) of Fig. 4. As seen, the curves corrected for the system noise, and 
not, become undistinguishable starting from the threshold voltage of the 
transistor, where the current becomes easily measurable, i.e. at about 10-9A.
Id (A)
AB
Figure 4. (A) The output voltage VACout [Vrms/^Hz] measured at Vd=50mv (upper curve) 
and Vd=0 (middle), vs Vg at various AC gain values, GAC, appropriate for the currents 
measured (regions of the same GAC are separated by vertical dotted lines). The thermal noise 
contributions of the channel/amplifier system, is presented by the bottom curve. It has been 
calculated form Eq. (2) with Rd=Vd/Id replacing Rg. (B) The data from (A) converted to ^SId 
by multiplying by GAC is shown by the lower set of curves; the upper show the PSD data, SId, 
normalized by Id2. At Id<10-9A the curves representing the total PSD and the 1/f component 
diverge, indicating that the combined thermal and system noise is non-negligible.
In Fig. 5 we present some data taken on novel devices, with Si- 
nanocrystals, Si-nc, imbedded in the gate dielectric of MOSFETs, and on 
control MOSFETs, without the Si-nc’s. The results will be discussed in 
some detail at this Conference [6]. Figure 5 shows the spectra taken in both 
types of devices using 3PNMS in the automatic data acquisition mode. Note 
a conspicuous absence of parasitic lines and the smoothness of the ensemble 
of the data points, plotted as a function of frequency.
The data of Fig. 4 have been shown to be dominated by the number 
fluctuation LNF and were analyzed as discussed before, cf. [5]. More 
examples of such analysis is discussed in [2]. We should add at this point, 
that the set of the data files needed for extracting such parameters as the 
interface density of noise-generating traps, requiring some 20 spectra, takes 

361
on the average 30 min. A competent operator can, therefore analyze a dozen 
of devices in a day, an amount impossible to handle if the data were to be 
taken by traditional equipment. As mentioned, the optimization of the speed 
of 3PNMS is on the way.
Figure 5. 
PSD versus frequency measured in the drain current of MOSFETs devices with
Si-nanocrystals (right) and without (left), where pure 1/f noise is observed, cf. ref [6].
5. 
Conclusions
We presented in this contribution some details on the use of a 
programmable point probe noise measuring system, 3PNMS, designed for 
the data acquisition on microelectronics devices, on wafer level. The 
system’s performance has been carefully analyzed and a simple method of 
its absolute calibration by thermal noise of resistances has been proposed 
and tested. We also discussed some examples of the system functioning on 
small MOSFETs. It should be emphasized that the system is modular and 
can be readily adapted for studies on other types of devices and modified to 
meet novel research requirements.

362
References
[1] J.A. Chroboczek and G. Piantino, Patent No. 15075, France. 
Registered in November 1999.
[2] J.A. Chroboczek, G. Reimbold, A. Szewczyk, and G. Piantino, 
accepted for presentation at the 17th ICNF, Prague, August 18th, 2003.
[3] Zhong Yuan Chang and W. M. C. Sansen, “Low-noise, Wide-band 
Amplifiers in Bipolar and CMOS Technologies”, Kluver, 1991.
[4] A. L. McWhorter, 1/f Noise and Ge Surf. Properties, p. 207 in 
Semicond. Surface Phys. R.H. Kingston, Edit., Univ. Penn. , 1957.
[5] G. Ghibaudo, Phys. Status Solidi (a) 113, 223 (1989).
[6] S. Ferraton, L. Montes, I. lonica, J.A.Chroboczek, and
J. Zimmermann, this Conference.

AUTHOR INDEX
Hooge, F.N., 3
A
Hruska, P., 261
Alabedra, R., 71
Aleshkin, V.Ya, 145
I
Iannaccone, G., 45
B
Igumenov, V.T., 311
Basso, G., 45, 203
Belyakov, A., 253
Blanter, Ya. M., 53
Bosman, G., 153
Ionica, I., 137
K
Khrebtov, I.A., 97
Koktavy, B., 337
C
Koktavy, P., 337
(elik Butler, Z., 219
Chakalov, R.A., 327 
Chroboczek, J. A., 137,355
Claeys, C., 121, 129
Kolek, A., 245
Konstantinov, V.M., 311
Kumicak, J., 61
L
D
Le Dem, G., 327
Dambrine, G., 169
Danneville, F., 169
Durov, S., 311, 319
Lee, J., 153
Levinshtein, M., 161
Lukyanchikova, N., 129
F
M
Ferrari, G., 211
Ferraton, S., 137, 355
Macucci, M., 45, 203
Marconcini, P., 45
Matukas, J., 79
G
Matulionis, A., 89
Mechin, L, 327
Gattobigio, M., 45
Giordano, V., 279
Grafov, B. M., 287
Guillet, B., 327
Gunther, C., 327
Medvedev, S., 253
Mercha, A., 121, 129
Mihaila, M. N., 19
Mironov, O.A., 311, 319
Myronov, M., 311
Montes, L., 137
H
Moryashin, A., 253
Hajek, K., 261
Hartler, G., 29
Hashiguchi, S., 227, 237, 345
Hasse, L., 293,303
O
Ohki, M., 237
363

364
P
Slaidins, I., 271
Pailloncy, G., 169
Palenskis, V., 79
Paramonov, V.V., 311
Pavelka, J., 227
Pellegrini, B., 45, 203
Perov, M., 253
Piantino, G., 355
Planat, M., 37
Pralgauskaite, S., 79
Solovieva, A. B., 177
Spiralski, L., 303
Szewczyk, A., 303
T
Tacano, M., 227, 237, 345
Timashev, S. F., 177
Toita, M., 227
V
R
Vandamme, L.K.J., 109, 189
Reggiani, L., 145
Vstovsky, G. V., 177
Reklaitis, A., 145
Robbes, D., 327
Rosu, H., 37
Routoure, J.M., 327
Rubiola, E., 279
Rumyantsev, S., 11, 161
W
Whall, T.E., 311
Y
Yakimov, A., 253
S
Yang, F., 327
Yokokura, S., 345
Sampietro, M., 211
Shur, M. S., 161
Sikula, J., 227, 237, 345
Simoen, E., 121, 129
Z
Zimmermann, J., 137

SUBJECT INDEX
A
AlGaAs/GaAs, 23, 162
AlGaN/GaN, 16, 18, 89, 97, 161, 169
AlN/GaN, 89, 97
B
Bispectrum, 253, 261
Bolometer, 97, 327, 337
BSIM, 109
Burst noise, 62, 219, 227
C
Charge accumulation, 53
Charge amplifier, 261
Coherence, 162, 299
Coherent tunneling, 146
Correlation, 76, 84, 90, 122, 153, 162,
169, 180, 201, 205, 211, 261, 273, 283
amplifier, 203
factor, 84
measurement, 162
technique, 211
Coulomb blockade, 53, 124
Coulomb interaction, 146
Current amplifier, 77, 195, 295, 355
Current crowding, 122
Current noise, 112, 129, 154, 196, 205,
211, 238, 261, 287, 294, 303, 312, 319
D
Deposited layers, 177
Digitized data processing, 177
Diode, 338
Discontinuities, 29
Dissolution surfaces, 177
Drift, 243
Dynamic range, 215, 219, 261, 315, 347
E
Electrical noise, 71, 79, 89, 356
Equivalent noise resistance, 172, 189
F
Fano factor, 46, 53, 146
Fast and ultrafast processes, 89
Film, 101
Flicker noise, 122, 136, 284, 292
Flicker-Noise Spectroscopy, 177
Fluctuation in the mobility, 3, 140
G
GaAlN HFETs, 161
GaN, 11, 89, 97, 161, 169
Generation-recombination noise, 11, 121,
271
H
Heterostructure, 18, 91, 169
High frequency noise, 169
High sensitivity measurements, 211
High temperature superconductivity, 97
Hooge parameter, 16, 99, 161, 312, 331
Hot electrons, 89, 97
Hot phonons, 89, 97
Hot-electron noise, 90, 97
I
Instrumentation, 293, 303
Interference reduction, 303
K
Kinetic theory of fluctuations, 97
365

366
L
Langevin, 58
Langevin sources, 58
Laplace plane, 287
Lasers, 71, 79, 91
LF noise, 122, 137, 253, 311, 319, 355
Lifetime, 147
Lorentz spectrum, 21
Lorentzian noise, 89, 129
Low frequency noise, 11, 19, 47, 80, 89, 
121, 129, 161, 169, 236, 239, 245, 
254, 291, 293, 313, 319, 327, 351, 355
Low noise, 108, 191, 261, 280, 336
amplifier, 190, 238
oscillators, 279
M
Magnetoresistor, 311
Measurement accuracy, 271, 307
Microelectronics, 122, 220, 302, 315, 324
Microwave noise, 89, 97
Mobility, 6, 20
fluctuations, 6
Models of noises, 61
Monte Carlo simulation, 53, 94, 97, 146
MOS devices, 122, 153
MOS Transistors, 24, 122, 129, 137, 144,
157, 162, 193
MOSFET, 17, 21, 110, 121, 129, 140, 
145, 153, 161, 169, 219, 227, 238, 
311, 319, 357
MOST, 3, 109, 122, 145, 169, 201
N
Nanomaterials, 29
Nanoscale devices, 204, 253
Nanostructures, 29, 46
Nanotechnology, 145
Nitride heterostructures, 89
Noise
amplifier, 80, 190, 203
correlation, 86, 153, 171
measurement, 6, 12, 19, 61, 79, 91, 
127, 145, 161, 169, 191, 203, 219, 
227, 237, 245, 271, 293, 303, 319, 
330, 351, 355
reduction, 204
sources, 3, 11, 30, 71, 97, 153, 161, 
169, 205, 211, 219, 229, 262, 271, 
293
spectral density, 16, 43, 47, 54, 63, 76, 
81, 128, 129, 147, 159, 200, 203, 
219, 227, 245, 264, 273, 287, 299, 
306, 312, 323, 332, 340
spectroscopy, 18, 187
spectrum, 104
temperature, 219
Non volatile memory, 137
Nonequilibrium phonons, 97
Number fluctuations, 3, 20, 84, 110, 122, 
148, 311
Numerical simulation, 46, 63
O
1/f noise, 3, 11, 19, 29, 37, 45, 62, 71, 84, 
101, 109, 121, 129, 145, 161, 169, 
189, 217, 220, 231, 237, 245, 254, 
263, 271, 283, 298, 311, 321, 332, 361
1/f noise parameter, 109, 121, 192
1/f-like noise, 27
Open- circuit voltage noise, 189
Optical noise, 8, 71, 79, 80
Optoelectronic, 71
P
Parameter set, 293
Parametric noise, 279
Phase entanglement, 37
Phase locking, 37, 45
Phase noise, 279
Phonons, 97
Photodiodes, 71, 79
Point contact, 5
Polymeric composites, 177
Preamplifier optimisation, 319
Q
Quantum dots, 227
Quantum effects, 121, 319
Quantum phase noise, 37
Quantum well, 11, 55, 61, 81, 91, 150,
253, 263, 313
R
Random variance, 29
Recombination noise, 13
Reliability, 91, 122, 202, 302, 315, 324
Resistance noise, 189, 245, 255, 314, 330
Resonant tunneling, 61, 146
Roughness profiles, 177

367
RTS noise, 19, 31, 37, 123, 219, 228, 239
Ruthenium based thick films, 245
S
Scaling, 254
Semiconductor laser, 80
Semiconductors, 18, 169, 264, 316
Shielding, 177, 189, 227, 237, 298, 305,
329, 345
Shockley-Read-Hall, 227
Short-circuited current noise, 189
Shot noise, 46, 53, 61, 72, 129, 146, 203,
275, 296
enhancement, 46, 61
suppression, 46
Si Nano-Crystals, 137
SiC substrate, 11, 163
SiGe MOSFET, 311
Silicon MOSFETs, 121, 136
SOI, 127, 129, 174, 177
SOI MOSFETs, 129, 177
Spectrum analyzer, 195, 210, 211
SPICE, 109, 356
Stochastic model, 61
Structure irregularities, 177
Suppression, 46, 54, 146, 162, 199, 203,
240, 251, 261, 281, 312
System for noise measurement, 303
T
Thermal feedback, 238
Thermal noise, 114, 208, 323, 358
Thick film resistor, 231, 245, 254
Tunneling, 17, 27, 46, 53, 61, 121, 129, 
141, 146, 153, 161, 187, 245
Two-dimensional electron gas channels, 
89
U
Ultra-low noise preamplifier, 319
Ultra-thin gate oxide, 129
Umklapp phonons, 26
V
Voltage noise, 76, 115, 131, 157, 189, 
206, 211, 220, 253, 261, 287, 299, 
312, 320, 328
W
Wafer level noise, 303

