Engineering Materials
Emilio I. Alarcon
May Griffith
Klas I. Udekwu    Editors
Silver 
Nanoparticle 
Applications
In the Fabrication and Design of Medical 
and Biosensing Devices

Engineering Materials

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/4288

Emilio I. Alarcon · May Griffith  
Klas I. Udekwu 
Editors
1 3
Silver Nanoparticle 
Applications
In the Fabrication and Design of Medical  
and Biosensing Devices

Editors
Emilio I. Alarcon
Bio-nanomaterials Chemistry  
and Engineering Laboratory,  
Cardiac Surgery Research 
University of Ottawa Heart Institute 
Ottawa 
Canada
May Griffith
Integrative Regenerative Medicine Centre 
Linköping University 
Linköping 
Sweden
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission  
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or  
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this  
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt  
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this  
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the  
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained  
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland is part of Springer Science+Business Media  
(www.springer.com)
ISSN  1612-1317	
ISSN  1868-1212  (electronic)
Engineering Materials
ISBN 978-3-319-11261-9	
ISBN 978-3-319-11262-6  (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015930508
Klas I. Udekwu
Swedish Medical Nanoscience Center 
Karolinska Institutet 
Stockholm 
Sweden

To Alonso for not giving up and Madleen  
for her love; and in memory of Alexander Y.N.
To Malcolm, Meagan, Marisa,  
Pip and Button; and in memory  
of little Rowley
To Ruth, Sofia, Ben, Lena and chi’m

vii
Nanomaterials bear the promise of revolutionizing the development of biomate-
rials for the medical sciences and biosensing. However, prior to safe and effica-
cious translational applications of such materials in the clinic, comprehension of 
the nature of nanoparticles and the properties they impart to the materials that they 
are incorporated into them, is necessary. Hence, multidisciplinary collaboration 
amongst biologists, chemists, engineers, physicists, and clinicians is critical for 
designing the next generation of nanomaterials with improved biological activity 
and regenerative properties, and for moving these along the translational pipeline 
from “bench to bedside.”
Silver nanoparticles, in particular, have a special, almost unique, place among 
nano-sized materials. This is due to their unique and multi-functional properties 
that include their archetypical antimicrobial activity, excellent thermoplasmonic 
capabilities, and superior surface Raman properties. This book, authored by active 
researchers, reviews the latest research on silver nanoparticles and nanomateri-
als around the globe. We provide an overview of the current knowledge on the 
synthesis, uses, and applications of nanoparticulate silver. In short, students and 
researchers in the field will gain an up-to-date understanding of what silver nano-
particles are, their current uses, and future challenges and horizons of these nano-
materials in the development of new materials with improved properties.
Emilio I. Alarcon
May Griffith
Klas I. Udekwu
Preface

ix
The editors would like to express their gratitude to the authors of this book; 
­without their valuable contribution this endeavor would not have been possible. 
Also, the editors would like to express their thankfulness to Dr. Rashmi Tiwari-
Pandey at the Division of Cardiac Surgery—Biomaterials and Regeneration 
Program, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, for her help during the final stages 
of formatting and proofreading of the book.	
Emilio I. Alarcon
May Griffith
Klas I. Udekwu
Acknowledgments

xi
Contents
Silver Nanoparticles: From Bulk Material to Colloidal Nanoparticles. .  . 	
1
Kevin Stamplecoskie
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation of Silver Nanoparticles. .  .  .  .  . . . . . 	
13
Natalia L. Pacioni, Claudio D. Borsarelli, Valentina Rey  
and Alicia V. Veglia
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles. .  .  . . 	
47
Altaf Khetani, Ali Momenpour, Vidhu S. Tiwari and Hanan Anis
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis. .  . . 	
71
María González-Béjar
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: From Roman  
Wine Cups to Biomedical Devices. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
93
Hasitha de Alwis Weerasekera, May Griffith and Emilio I. Alarcon
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 	 127
May Griffith, Klas I. Udekwu, Spyridon Gkotzis, Thien-Fah Mah  
and Emilio I. Alarcon

xiii
Contributors
Emilio I. Alarcon  Bio-nanomaterials Chemistry and Engineering Laboratory, Division 
of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Canada; Centre for 
Catalysis Research and Innovation, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Hasitha de Alwis Weerasekera  Department of Chemistry and Centre for Catalysis 
Research and Innovation, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Hanan Anis  School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Claudio D. Borsarelli  Laboratorio de Cinética y Fotoquímica (LACIFO), Centro de 
­Investigaciones y Transferencia de Santiago del Estero (CITSE-CONICET), ­Universidad 
Nacional de Santiago del Estero (UNSE), Santiago del Estero, Argentina
Spyridon Gkotzis  Swedish Medical Nanoscience Centre, Department of Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
María González-Béjar  Instituto de Ciencia Molecular (ICMol)/Departamento de 
Química Orgánica, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Paterna, Spain
May Griffith  Integrative Regenerative Medicine Centre, Department of Clinical 
and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden; Swedish 
Medical Nanoscience Centre, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinksa Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden
Altaf Khetani  School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Thien-Fah Mah  Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Ali Momenpour  School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada

Contributors
xiv
Natalia L. Pacioni  INFIQC, CONICET and Departamento de Química 
­Orgánica-­Facultad de Ciencias Químicas-Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, 
­Ciudad ­Universitaria, Córdoba, Argentina
Valentina Rey  Laboratorio de Cinética y Fotoquímica (LACIFO), Centro de Inves-
tigaciones y Transferencia de Santiago del Estero (CITSE-CONICET), ­Universidad 
Nacional de Santiago del Estero (UNSE), Santiago del Estero, Argentina
Kevin Stamplecoskie  Radiation Laboratory, University of Notre Dame, South 
Bend, IN, USA
Vidhu S. Tiwari  SRM University, Sonepat–Kundli Urban Complex Sonepat, Haryana, 
India
Klas I. Udekwu  Swedish Medical Nanoscience Centre, Department of Neuroscience, 
Karolinksa Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Alicia V. Veglia  INFIQC, CONICET and Departamento de Química Orgánica-
Facultad de Ciencias Químicas-Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universi-
taria, Córdoba, Argentina

1
Silver Nanoparticles: From Bulk Material 
to Colloidal Nanoparticles
Kevin Stamplecoskie
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
E.I. Alarcon et al. (eds.), Silver Nanoparticle Applications, Engineering Materials, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6_1
Abstract  Metals exhibit interesting optical properties, especially in comparison 
to molecules and semiconductors. In contrast to molecules and semiconductors, 
metals support plasmons, which are a collective oscillation of many electrons in 
the material. When the size of these metal nanoparticles is small (<100 nm), these 
plasmon absorbances occur in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
giving rise to colored solutions. One of the unique characteristics of plasmon exci-
tation is the conversion of light energy into extreme and highly localized heating 
at the surface of these particles. Excitation of plasmons by both pulsed (i.e. lasers) 
and continuous (i.e. sunlight) excitation and the effects of plasmon excitation on 
the surrounding material are discussed in this chapter. The potential for using these 
materials in photothermal therapy for ailments such as cancer is also discussed in 
terms of the unique properties of these metals, related to plasmon excitation.
Keywords  Nanomaterials  ·  Silver nanoparticles  ·  Plasmon
1  Introduction
The existence of metal nanoparticles is not new; they have been around since 
ancient times. The most famous example is the Lycurgus Cup, made in the 4th 
century AD. The glass used is colored with gold nanoparticles and appears red 
when lit from behind (light through it) and green when lit from the front [1]. The 
fact that gold nanoparticles and their plasmon absorption were responsible for the 
pretty colors in this stained glass was certainly not understood, but nevertheless 
nanoparticle synthesis has a very ancient and rich history. Similarly, while the past 
few decades have experienced the resurgence in the use of silver nanoparticles 
K. Stamplecoskie (*) 
Radiation Laboratory, University of Notre Dame, South Bend, IN, USA
e-mail: kstamp4069@gmail.com

2
K. Stamplecoskie
(AgNP) in biomedical applications, silver also has an ancient history for medici-
nal purposes. The medicinal effects of silver date back to when ancient Romans 
and Phoenicians stored drinking water in containers made of silver [2]. Silver has, 
throughout history been continually used in medicine for its antibacterial proper-
ties. It now finds applications embedded in clothing and fabrics, surgical grade 
steel, deodorants, toothpaste, toys, humidifiers and much more; used to slow the 
growth of unwanted bacteria [3]. Interestingly, for so many years silver has been 
used without a clear understanding of the mechanism of antibacterial activity. 
Only recently has there been further understanding into how AgNP act as anti-
bacterial agents (see Chap. “Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of 
Silver”).
Metal nanoparticles such as gold, silver and copper also display unique and 
interesting optical and electronic properties. These physical properties are the 
main topic of this chapter. Everyone is familiar with the color of metals such as 
gold, silver and copper, but the colors of these metals are very different when the 
particle diameter becomes very small (<100 nm). Solutions of nanoparticles, par-
ticles embedded in transparent matrices (i.e. glass) or nanoparticles supported on 
other solids absorb visible wavelengths of light, giving rise to colors that can span 
the visible spectrum. These colors and absorption properties of metals are due to 
plasmon excitation.
The interesting optical properties of metal nanostructures have driven a surge 
of research interest over the past couple of decades for applications in molecu-
lar sensing [4], creating ultrafast optoelectronics [5] and biomedicine for targeting 
and killing cancer cells [6]. The remainder of this chapter will focus on how some 
common metal nanostructures can be excited by light, with an emphasis on AgNP. 
We will discuss the unique relaxation processes that follow plasmon excitation as 
well as ways in which the optical properties of metals have been exploited in bio-
medical application.
2  Excitation of Metal Nanoparticles
Undergraduate courses have educated chemists and physicists, developing an in 
depth understanding of the optical excitation and relaxation of most materials. The 
electronic and vibrational motions of molecules are treated separately and stud-
ied spectroscopy with characteristics such as vibrational and electronic energy 
levels. Excitation of molecules and semiconductors with electromagnetic radiation 
is due to excitation of electrons to higher energy levels. There is a defined time-
scale for the average lifetime of the excited state that is governed by the combi-
nation of radiative and non-radiative processes e.g. intersystem crossing, internal 
conversion, fluorescence, etc. [7]. This theory breaks down when discussing mate-
rials like metals that have a relatively high number of electrons close in energy 
to a large number of available empty states, where electrons can freely transfer 
between states at room temperature [8]. In other words, materials with many 

3
Silver Nanoparticles: From  Bulk Material …
available electronic states directly above the Fermi level, display properties such 
as the high conductivity seen for metals.
Mie theory was developed to explain the unique optical properties of light scat-
tering and absorption displayed by metals. It provides an understanding that explains 
the optical properties of metal nanoparticles in a fundamentally different way from 
conventional molecular photophysics [9]. According to Mie theory, the choice 
of metal, as well as size, shape, surrounding matrix, surface bound molecules and 
degree of aggregation of the particles determines the energy range (frequency) of 
light that can excite plasmons. For example, the major (dipole) absorption of spheri-
cal nanoparticles is predicted by Mie theory to be approximately 400  nm. Lager 
AgNP and those with different shapes, however, absorb different wavelengths of 
light due to other absorption modes [10]. Colloidal solutions of spherical copper and 
gold nanoparticles, however, are orange and red because their plasmon absorption 
maxima occur at approximately and 530 nm and 580 nm, respectively.
So what is a plasmon or plasmon absorption, really? To answer this ques-
tion we will begin by discussing the properties of bulk metals, that also support 
plasmons. A large, flat piece of metal can be viewed as an infinite, periodically 
arranged positive charges (nuclei) with loosely bound cloud of electrons held by 
a coulombic attraction. When light of an appropriate frequency interacts with the 
surface of a metal, the electric field component of light couples with the electrons 
in the metal causing an instantaneous displacement of the electron density. The 
light is absorbed forming a periodic fluctuation of positive and negative charges 
called ‘surface plasmon polaritons’, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The nuclei serve as a 
restoring force on the electrons, where the magnitude of this restoring force is a 
function of the exact nuclei (the type of metal used). There is a strong local elec-
tromagnetic field produced by these rapid, and coherent oscillating electrons that 
extends into the metal and surrounding medium. For this reason, the frequency 
that can be used to excite plasmon absorptions is a function of both the metal and 
the dielectric medium surrounding it. On a bulk metal, these surface plasmons 
propagate along the surface for a particular distance. For typical metals used as 
waveguides and sensors, these surface plasmon excitations occur in the infra-
red region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The rest of the light is reflected (not 
absorbed into plasmon excitations). For this reason, metals are reflective, which is 
why silver is used for mirrors, and why pieces of these metals appear shiny.
Fig. 1   Schematic illustration 
of propogating surface 
plasmon polaritons in a bulk 
metal as well as the resultant 
electromagnetic field in both 
the dielectric (surroundings) 
and metal

4
K. Stamplecoskie
So how is this relevant to silver nanoparticles? In the bulk metal example, the 
surface of the metal is a flat plain and the size of the metal was also infinite with 
respect to the light wave. Metal nanoparticles, however, can be viewed as small 
metal slabs that are now smaller than the wavelength of light used to excite them. 
This has two dramatic differences with bulk metals; (1) all of the loosely bound 
electrons in nanoparticles are instantaneously excited by light, and (2) the surface 
curvature of a nanoparticle is no longer flat with respect to the wavelength of light. 
For this reason, the plasmon absorptions of nanoparticles occur in the visible region 
of the electromagnetic spectrum, giving rise to the multitude of colors displayed 
by metal nanoparticles. Also, the plasmons of nanoparticles cannot propagate since 
they are confined to the particle. For this reason, nanoparticle plasmons are com-
monly referred to as ‘localized surface plasmons’ (LSP), depicted in Fig. 2b.
AgNP (like other metals) can support many different plasmon modes, especially 
for different shapes of nanoparticles, where the isotropy of the particle is broken. 
Fig. 2a shows a typical absorption spectrum for spherical ~3.3 nm colloidal AgNP 
as well as an image of a solution of these particles, showing the yellow color due 
to the ~400 nm dipolar plasmon absorption. The absorption spectrum can be tuned 
by simply controlling the shape of the crystals, giving absorption maxima that span 
the full visible spectrum and colloidal solutions of many different colours. For dif-
ferent shapes and sizes, the plasmons absorptions are still localized to the particle, 
however, the higher order modes involved for these different particles have more 
complex electron distributions than the simple oscillating linear dipole mode for 
spheres [10].
Density of states diagrams are commonly used by materials scientists to describe 
the distribution of electrons and electronic states of materials. The overlap of many 
electronic states is called a ‘band’. For example, Fig. 3 shows the 4d and 5sp bands 
for silver, which represent the many overlapping 4d and hybridized 5sp orbitals, 
respectively.
The band structure for metals has a direct effect on the way these metals 
interact with light. Semiconductors have a large energy gap between electronic 
Fig. 2   a Absorption spectrum of an aqueous solution of spherical AgNP as well as an image of this 
colloidal solution (inset). b Schematic illustration of plasmon excitation causing an instantaneous 
collective oscillation of electrons

5
Silver Nanoparticles: From  Bulk Material …
states that are occupied by electrons and ones that are not. The energy separation 
between the filled ‘valence’ band and the empty ‘conduction’ band in semiconduc-
tors is called the ‘band gap’. Metals, like silver, however, have no band gap. Filled 
electronic states of the 5sp band overlap in energy with unfilled states of the same 
band. Therefore, the instantaneous displacement of electrons in plasmon absorp-
tion is physical (as depicted in Fig. 2b) but can also be described as a ­collective 
excitation of many electrons to slightly higher energy, as depicted in the density 
of states scheme in Fig.  3a. In addition to plasmon excitation, AgNP it is also 
possible to have electronic excitation as depicted by the ‘interband transitions’ in 
Fig. 3c, where individual electrons can be excited to higher energy levels. While 
this electronic excitation overlaps with plasmon excitation for metals such as gold 
and copper, electronic excitations for silver occur at higher energies than plasmon 
excitation (less than 320 nm), as illustrated in Fig. 3b [11].
From Mie theory we find that the ability of a material to support plasmon 
absorptions (polarizability) is given by Eq. 1;
where, α is the polarizability, ε0 is the permittivity of a vacuum, V is the volume 
of the particle, ε is the permittivity of the material, and εm is the permittivity of 
the medium surrounding the particle. From the numerator in Eq. 1, a maximum 
­polarizability occurs when the permittivity of the material is approximately  
−2 times the permittivity of the medium. Since the permittivity of most materi-
als and gases is positive and approximately unity, this means that the permittivity 
of the material that supports a plasmon must be negative. In short, metals have a 
negative permittivity, and this is the reason we see plasmon absorption for metals.
Also important to note is that metals are not all created equal. One of the 
­particular advantages of using AgNP over other metals like gold and copper 
(1)
α = 3ε0V ε −εm
ε −2εm
Fig. 3   Schematic illustration of the density of states of silver under plasmon excitation where a 
collection of electrons are excited (a) and electronic excitation where a single electron is excited (b)

6
K. Stamplecoskie
is that AgNP have a higher cross section for absorption than the others. This 
has to do with the relative permittivity of the metals where silver has a more 
negative real part of the permittivity than Au, for instance. As an example, the 
extinction coefficient for plasmon absorption for a 20 nm AgNP has been experi-
mentally determined to be 4.75 × 109 M−1 cm−1, whereas for AuNP the value 
is 1  ×  109  M−1  cm−1 [12]. The absorption cross-section for Ag plasmons is 
almost five times that of Au. For this reason AgNP are often chosen over other 
metals in applications when plasmon excitation is important, such as surface 
enhanced Raman spectroscopy and photothermal therapy. To further highlight 
the absorption properties of AgNP, dye extinction coefficients are on the order of 
~104–5 M−1 cm−1, whereas the plasmon absorption of AgNP is several orders of 
magnitude higher, depending on particle size.
The oscillating displacement of electrons with respect to positively charged 
nuclei that occurs upon plasmon excitation, has the effect of generating a strong 
electric field very close to the surface of the particles. The implications of the 
strong oscillating dipole are further discussed with respect to enhancing biochemi-
cal sensing and photochemical reactions in Chap.  “Surface Enhanced Raman 
Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles”.
Furthermore, metals have many electrons as compared to molecules, which 
means that the cross-section for exciting metal nanoparticles with either linear 
or multi-photon excitation is very high [8]. This is important for many applica-
tions where intense light can damage the biological systems, since lower light 
intensities can be used to excite metal nanoparticles without directly damaging 
the cells or biological material of interest. In addition to single photon absorption, 
plasmons have extremely high cross-section for multi-photon absorbance. This 
non-linear process occurs when multiple low energy photons are simultaneously 
absorbed. For example, you can excite AgNP with 400 nm light, but they can also 
be excited by simultaneous absorption of two 800 nm photons. The advantages of 
being able to excite metal nanoparticles with near infrared light for imaging, sens-
ing and photodynamic therapy are discussed further at the end of this chapter.
3  Relaxation Processes Following Nanoparticle Excitation
In the previous section, the excitation of metal nanoparticles with EM radiation 
(light) was discussed. Understanding the effects of excitation on the nanoparticle 
and its surroundings is of utmost importance, especially when incorporating nano-
materials into biologically relevant systems. The relaxation dynamics in excited 
metals are extremely fast in comparison to molecules. This is also a result of the 
small energy separation between excited electrons and the ground state. Kasha’s 
rule is an important foundation in molecular photochemistry, and it states that the 
rate of an electronic relaxation is inversely proportional to the difference in energy 
between energy states [7]. This means that, for metals with overlapping filled and 
unfilled orbitals at the Fermi level energy (EF in Fig. 3), the rate of relaxation must 

7
Silver Nanoparticles: From  Bulk Material …
be very fast. Only with the recent advances in ultrafast lasers has it been possible 
to experimentally probe the excited state lifetime and relaxation dynamics for met-
als. What follows is a description of the processes involved in relaxation of plas-
mons in chronological order following excitation. The processes are summarized 
in the illustrations in Fig. 4.
Plasmon excitation causes many electrons to rapidly oscillate, in phase with 
each other, at the same frequency as the light used to excite them. These oscillat-
ing electrons (with respect to positively charged atomic nuclei) generate a strong 
oscillating electric dipole. During this time, electronic and vibrational transitions 
are enhanced for molecules within the electric field of the excited particles. The 
enhanced field is responsible for the well-known surface enhanced Raman scat-
tering (SERS) and surface enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRS) 
effects. Any electronic or vibrational transition involving a transition dipole can 
be enhanced in the induce electric field of an excited plasmon. While SERS and 
SEIRS have become commonly observed effects, plasmon enhanced electronic 
transitions like absorption and fluorescence also occur [13].
The coherent oscillating electrons collide with one another causing the elec-
trons to rapidly go out of phase with one another. This ‘electron dephasing’ (1) 
causes a non-Fermi distribution of electrons and it occurs within the ~10 fs of 
excitation. The excited electrons further scatter with each other eventually leading 
to a more randomized hot electron distribution. The ‘electron-electron’ scattering 
(2) occurs within the first ~100 fs after excitation. Most spectroscopic techniques 
use lasers with greater than 100 fs pulse widths, so these first electron relaxation 
steps are very rarely observed experimentally.
Hot electrons collide with and transfer vibrational energy (in the form of pho-
nons) to nuclei in a so-called ‘electron-phonon’ decay (3). The timescale for this 
electron-phonon decay depends strongly on the excitation wavelength and intensity. 
A nanoparticle under higher intensity excitation (photon density) has to dissipate 
more energy from hot electrons into phonons, and so this process is longer-lived for 
more excited particles but generally occurs on the timescale of ~1 ps. The lifetime 
Fig. 4   Illustration of the processes involved in relaxation after plasmon excited of metal nanoparticles 
including (1) dephasing of coherent electron oscillation, (2) e−—e− scattering, (3) e−—phonon scat-
tering, (4) heat transfer to the medium

8
K. Stamplecoskie
of electron-phonon decays can be easily determined using ultrafast transient 
absorption techniques with femtosecond lasers of ~100  fs pulse durations. This 
dependence of the hot electron lifetime with excitation intensity is one property that 
is very different from molecules. Changing the excitation intensity in molecular 
studies is analogous to controlling the concentration of molecules that are in the 
excited state, but every excited molecule behaves in the same way as it decays and 
so the lifetime of this process is independent of excitation power. Plasmon excita-
tion, on the other hand, at varied excitation powers, is like an energy scale where 
more or less energy is put into each particle. For this reason, dissipation of energy 
into heat takes longer for more excited particles.
Temperature is a measure of the energy in that system in the form of vibration 
of nuclei. Put simply, electron-phonon decay is the transfer of electronic energy to 
vibrational motion. Therefore, excited metal nanoparticles become very hot within 
~1 ps of excitation. In fact, metals display no observable emission, with ~100 % of 
the absorbed energy converted to heat. The high cross-section for plasmon excita-
tion was already discussed. This strong ability to absorb light combined with the 
almost perfect conversion of this light to heat makes nanoparticles a great source 
for delivering a lot of localized heating.
The final process in plasmon relaxation is the transfer of heat to the surroundings 
(4). The heat transfer depends strongly on excitation intensity (how hot the nano-
particle is) as well as the thermal conductivity of the medium. Heat transfer to the 
surroundings occurs in hundreds of picoseconds to nanoseconds, following excita-
tion. The ability to absorb a lot of light, and release that energy locally in a short 
amount of time (<1 ns), is a unique property of metal nanoparticles.
When investigating the effects of plasmon excitation, particles are often under 
continuous (not pulsed) excitation. For example, nanoparticles incorporated in a 
topical cream for a patient are under continuous excitation from sunlight or lights 
in a room. In laboratory studies, imaging with nanoparticles incorporated into tis-
sues or cells is often done under continuous lamp irradiation or with continuous 
wave lasers. The above discussion of the timescales of the different relaxation 
processes is predicated on the use of pulsed excitation. That is, these processes 
have finite lifetimes when one can use a short excitation pulse, and monitor the 
nanoparticle relaxation with ultrafast spectroscopy. When the nanoparticles are 
under continuous excitation, however, the notion of ‘lifetimes’ for these pro-
cesses is lost. It is important to understand that, when using continuous excitation, 
nanoparticles are constantly being excited and continually going through various 
stages of the relaxation process. This means that there is a continuous electro-
magnetic field generated around nanoparticles that can enhance optical and vibra-
tional transitions in neighbouring molecules. Furthermore, these nanoparticles 
under constant irradiation are continually converting that absorbed light to heat. 
The nanoparticles effectively act as a point source of intense and continuous heat-
ing to their surroundings. Figure 5 illustrates the differences between continuous 
wave (CW) and laser pulsed excitation with respect to the temporal and spatial 
profiles of heating near an excited nanoparticle. There are many factors such as 
light intensity, pulse duration, choice and size/shape of the nanoparticle, that all 

9
Silver Nanoparticles: From  Bulk Material …
affect the exact temperatures in Fig. 5c, d. For simplicity, Fig. 5 simply illustrates 
the general trend in differences between CW and pulsed excitation. For further 
reading and to mathematically solve exact temperatures as a function of time and 
distance, readers are referred to the work of Baffou and Quidant [14] and Baffou 
and Rigneault [15].
In the illustration in Fig. 5, we assume that the nanoparticle is under the same 
overall power, e.g. 1 mW/cm2, whether that power is compressed into a 100 fs pulse 
or spread out over the entire second. The near perfect quantum efficiency of conver-
sion of absorbed light to heat was discussed above. With this in mind, and since 
energy is always conserved, the area under each of the curves in either Fig. 5c or d 
is the same for both illumination conditions. Figure 5d has been normalized to the 
maximum temperature at the surface only to allow both decay curves to be observa-
ble on the same scale. It is not surprising that, when excited with an intense pulse of 
light, nanoparticles initially experience a high temperature that dissipates, whereas 
nanoparticles excited with the same power evenly spread out in time equilibrate at a 
constant, elevated temperature (Fig. 5c). What may be more surprising is that, when 
excited with a short laser pulse, the medium near the nanoparticle surface experi-
ences and extreme heating that is not transferred to long distances in the medium 
when compared with continuous irradiation (Fig. 5d). Overall, pulsed excitation can 
be viewed as a method for delivering heat with high temporal and spatial control.
Under both CW or laser pulsed excitation conditions, it is perfectly valid 
to think of nanoparticles as point sources for enhanced EM fields and extreme 
Fig. 5   Schematic illustration of plasmon excitation by either CW illumination a or femtosecond 
laser pulse excitation. b The temperature of a nanoparticle versus time c as well as the temperature 
of the surrounding medium with distance from the nanoparticle surface normalized to the maximum 
temperature at the surface d when excited with equivalent power of either laser pulsed excitation or 
CW illumination

10
K. Stamplecoskie
heating. In the following section, some examples of utilizing the extreme heating 
and unique properties of metals, for photothermal and photodynamic therapy, are 
discussed.
4  Photothermal Therapy with ‘Hot’ Nanoparticles
Photothermal therapy using metal nanoparticles exploits the extreme light to 
heat conversion of metal nanoparticles for selective destruction of tumours. Over 
the past several decades there has been significant progress in the synthesis of 
nanoscale materials with excellent control over size and composition and surface 
functionality. This progress has lead to a deeper understanding of the size and 
composition dependent optical properties of these materials [16]. Furthermore, 
the advances in synthesizing materials with tailored surface functionality has 
been pivotal to incorporating nanoparticles into tissues, cells and biomimetics for 
­various medicinal purposes.
The advancement of lasers of the past few decades has lead to a better under-
standing of the excited state dynamics of excited plasmons, but it has also lead to 
the development of many other fields of research. Photothermal therapy for can-
cer treatment is one such area. Conventional photothermal therapy uses dye mol-
ecules. These dyes can be selectively excited by lasers and release the absorbed 
energy as heat, which subsequently damages and destroys tumours. Most pho-
tothermal therapies using lasers rely on invasive endoscopes and catheters that 
deliver fiber optic cables to tumour cells. An alternative approach is to use immu-
notargeting, where the absorbing species is made to concentrate due to uptake 
selective uptake through molecular recognition. In this second approach, large 
areas of tissues can be irradiated with light that causes them no particular damage, 
except where the target molecules are located on tumour cells. This approach uses 
absorbing species that have specificity for tumour cells.
Controlling the surface functionalization of nanoparticles, they too can be 
­tailored to accumulate in tumor cells. Furthermore, the optical properties of silver 
nanoparticles, with their high absorption cross-section and almost perfect conver-
sion of absorbed light into heat, make them a prime candidate for photothermal 
therapy. This new strategy of using plasmonic nanostructures for delivering highly 
localized heating and destruction of tumour cells is called plasmonic photothermal 
therapy (PPTT) [17].
Nanoparticles can be functionalized with tumor-targeting molecules and selec-
tively accumulate in tumors. For example, some malignant tumors like breast 
cancer tumors, over-express epithelial growth factor receptors (EGFR). Metal nan-
oparticles can be functionalized with anti-EGFR antibodies, and when mixed with 
malignant cells, the antibody-receptor interactions, concentrates nanoparticles on 
tumor cells. Subsequent plasmon excitation from laser irradiation has been shown 
to be very effective in selectively killing malignant tumors in this way. Figure 6 
shows a schematic illustration of PPTT [17].

11
Silver Nanoparticles: From  Bulk Material …
Most photothermal therapy strategies currently use gold nanoparticles due to 
their superior stability under many different conditions, in biological relevant 
mediums. Biomolecule conjugated AgNP synthesis, with good stability, is rapidly 
developing and opening the door to using AgNP in more PPTT strategies [3, 18]. 
The superior optical properties of AgNP in comparison to gold make it even more 
attractive for higher efficiencies of light to heat conversion in PPTT.
Most people have either put a flashlight in their mouth or behind their hand. 
What you see is a red glow of light that passes through the tissue. This is because 
red light has a longer penetrating depth than blue light, so that some of the red light 
makes it through your skin or mouth tissue. In photothermal therapy, the wave-
length of excitation is an important factor then, since only red light can penetrate 
deep into tissue to excite the absorbing species (that subsequently releases heat). 
It was briefly mentioned in the previous section, that the multi-photon cross-sec-
tion for metal nanoparticles is very high in comparison to dyes. This becomes even 
more relevant in PPTT treatments when it is desirable to use near infrared laser 
excitation. Metal nanoparticles are particularly effective at absorbing NIR light, 
and converting that light to heat.
5  Concluding Remarks
The optical properties of AgNP are very different from molecules that are more 
commonly understood. The different interaction that light has with AgNP opens 
many opportunities for using these particles. Molecular sensing strategies using 
the enhanced electromagnetic fields around particles, fast optoelectronics that use 
the ultrafast plasmon collective oscillations (~10 fs lifetime) and applications like 
chemical catalysis and photothermal cancer therapy that exploit the extreme and 
localized heating of AgNP, are only a few examples of how the unique optical 
properties of AgNP can be used.
Fig. 6   PPTT scheme including selective concentration of nanoparticles functionalized with anti-
bodies onto tumour cells through antibody-receptor interaction followed by laser plasmon excita-
tion for extreme heating causing cell death

12
K. Stamplecoskie
References
	 1.	Goesmann, H., Feldmann, C.: Nanoparticulate functional materials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
49, 2–36 (2010)
	 2.	Alexander, J.W.: History of the medical use of silver. Surg. Infec. 10(3), 289–292 (2009)
	 3.	Alarcon, et al.: The biocompatibility and antibacterial properties of collagen-stabilized, pho-
tochemically prepared silver nanoparticles. Biomaterials 33(19), 4947–4956 (2012)
	 4.	Rosi, N.L., Mirkin, C.A.: Nanostructures in Biodiagnostics. Chem. Rev. 105(4), 1547–1562 
(2005)
	 5.	Stockman, M.I.: The spaser as a nanoscale quantum generator and ultrafast amplifier. J. Opt. 
12, 024004 (2010)
	 6.	Lewinski, N., Colvin, V., Drezek, R.: Cytotoxicity of nanoparticles. Small 4(1), 26–49 (2008)
	 7.	Turro, N.J., Ramamurthy,V., Scaiano, J.C.: Modern molecular photochemistry of organic 
molecules, University Science Books, 1100 (2009)
	 8.	Hartland, G.V.: Optical studies of dynamics in noble metal nanostructures. Chem. Rev. 
111(6), 3858–3887 (2011)
	 9.	Kelly, K.L., et al.: The optical properties of metal nanoparticles: the influence of size, shape, 
and dielectric environment. J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 668–677 (2003)
	10.	Stamplecoskie, K.S., Scaiano, J.C.: Light emitting diode irradiation can control the morphology 
and optical properties of silver nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132(6), 1825–1827 (2010)
	11.	Henglein, A.: Physichochemical properties of small metal particles in solution: 
“Microelectrode” reactions, chemisorption, composite metal particles, and the atom-to-metal 
transition. J. Phys. Chem. US 97(21), 5457–5471 (1993)
	12.	Link, S., Wang, Z.L., El-Sayed, M.A.: Alloy formation of gold-silver nanoparticles and the 
dependence of the plasmon absorption on their composition. J. Phys. Chem. B 103(18), 
3529–3533 (1999)
	13.	Anger, P., Bharadwaj, P., Novotny, L.: Enhancement and quenching of single-molecule 
­fluorescence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96(11), 113002 (2006)
	14.	Baffou, G., Quidant, R.: Nanoplasmonics for chemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43(11), 3898 
(2014)
	15.	Baffou, G., Rigneault, H.: Femtosecond-pulsed optical heating of gold nanoparticles. Phys. 
Rev. B 84(3), 13 (2011)
	16.	Mohamed, M.B., et al.: Hot electron and phonon dynamics of gold nanoparticles embedded 
in a gel matrix. Chem. Phys. Lett. 343(1–2), 55–63 (2001)
	17.	El-Sayed, I., Huang, X., El-Sayed, M.: Selective laser photo-thermal therapy of epithelial 
carcinoma using anti-EGFR antibody conjugated gold nanoparticles. Cancer Lett. 239(1), 
129–135 (2006)
	18.	Alarcon, et al.: Human serum albumin as protecting agent of silver nanoparticles: role of the 
protein conformation and amine groups in the nanoparticle stabilization. J. Nanopart. Res 15 
1–14 (2013)

13
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation  
of Silver Nanoparticles
A Mechanistic Perspective
Natalia L. Pacioni, Claudio D. Borsarelli, Valentina Rey and Alicia V. Veglia
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
E.I. Alarcon et al. (eds.), Silver Nanoparticle Applications, Engineering Materials, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6_2
Abstract  In this chapter, we revise some of the most relevant and widely used syn-
thetic routes available for the preparation of metallic silver nanoparticles. Particular 
emphasis has been focused in the rationale involved in the formation of the nanostruc-
tures, from the early metallic silver atoms formation, passing by atoms nucleation and 
concluding in the growth of silver nanostructures. We hope the reader will find in this 
chapter a valuable tool to better understand the relevance of the experimental condi-
tions in the resulting silver nanoparticle size, shape and overall properties.
1  Introduction
Silver nanoparticles (AgNP) are already part of our daily life, being present in 
clothes (e.g. in socks); household and personal care products, mainly due to their 
antimicrobial properties [1, 2], see Chaps. “Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: 
From Roman Wine Cups to Biomedical Devices” and “Anti-microbiological and 
Antiinfective Activities of Silver”.
Furthermore, as discussed in the previous chapter, their unique physical and elec-
tronic properties make them excellent candidates for different applications e.g. Surface 
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) [3–9]. The optical properties of AgNP depend 
N.L. Pacioni (*) · A.V. Veglia 
INFIQC, CONICET and Departamento de Química Orgánica-Facultad de Ciencias 
Químicas-Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universitaria, Edificio Ciencias II, 
Haya de la Torre y Medina Allende s/n, X5000HUA Córdoba, Argentina
e-mail: nataliap@fcq.unc.edu.ar
C.D. Borsarelli (*) · V. Rey 
Laboratorio de Cinética y Fotoquímica (LACIFO), Centro de Investigaciones  
y Transferencia de Santiago del Estero (CITSE-CONICET), Universidad Nacional de 
Santiago del Estero (UNSE), RN9, Km 1125. Villa El Zanjón,  
CP 4206 Santiago del Estero, Argentina
e-mail: cdborsarelli@gmail.com

14
N.L. Pacioni et al.
on characteristics such as size, shape and capping-coating. Synthetic approaches for 
the preparation of AgNP continue to grow as evidenced from the quasi-exponential 
increase in the number of articles published over the last two decades (Fig. 1).
Generally, the methods used for the preparation of metal nanoparticles can be 
grouped into two different categories Top-down or Bottom-up. Breaking a wall 
down into its components–the bricks, represents the Top-down approach, Fig. 2. 
While building up “the brick” from clay-bearing soil, sand, lime and water would 
represent Bottom-up, Fig. 2. Thus, in nanosciences Top-down involves the use of 
bulk materials and reduce them into nanoparticles by way of physical, chemical 
or mechanical processes whereas Bottom-up requires starting from molecules or 
atoms to obtain nanoparticles [10].
Top-down fabrication of nanomaterials usually comprise mechanical-energy, 
high energy lasers, thermal and lithographic methods. Examples of these cat-
egories include, but are not limited to, Atomization, Annealing, Arc discharge, 
Laser ablation, Electron beam evaporation, Radio Frequency (RF) sputtering and 
Focused ion beam lithography [10].
Fig.  1   Representation of the number of research articles published in the period 1992–2014 
according to Scopus® containing the term “synthesis of silver nanoparticles” as keyword. Inset 
numbers indicate (from left to right) the amount of articles published in 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997 
and 1998. The asterisk indicates that this result is partial (January–April 2014)
Fig. 2   Illustration of the concepts of Bottom-up and Top-down methods

15
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
Bottom-up production of nanomaterials is divided into the following categories: 
gaseous phase, liquid phase, solid phase, and biological methods. Among others, 
chemical vapor deposition and atomic layer deposition belong to the gas-phase 
methods whereas reduction of metal salts, sol-gel processes, templated synthesis, 
and electrodeposition correspond to liquid-phase methods [10].
Due to the numerous scientific articles published in the field of synthesis of sil-
ver nanoparticles; in this chapter we have focused on providing a rationalized view 
of some of the available synthetic methods to obtain silver nanoparticles, mostly 
bottom-up, in liquid phase, excluding biological and microbiological synthesis as 
reported elsewhere [11, 12].
The main aim of this contribution is to provide guidance when choosing a 
synthetic method to prepare AgNP for a giving application. Mechanistic insights 
to understand why some factors would affect the synthetic outcome are also dis-
cussed in this chapter.
Although some reviews on synthetic procedures for the preparation of AgNP are 
reported in literature [13–15], only a few have focused on mechanistic features. In 
this chapter, we present a systematic review of the mechanism(s) involved in the 
synthesis of AgNP in the hope “to light up the black box.” Further, in the end of this 
chapter, we have included a summary and a table containing the most commonly 
used characterization techniques and the information obtained from them.
2  Chemical Reduction
Reduction of the corresponding metal cation represents a straightforward reaction 
to obtain metal nanoparticles. The key relays on selecting the right parameters that 
permits control over the synthesis outcome, and so a good understanding on the 
mechanism is required.
Generally, these reactions are carried out in solution and the product has colloidal 
characteristics. For this reason, the common term used for the overall phenomenon 
is co-precipitation, that involves the concurrence of different phenomena; reduction, 
nucleation, growth, coarsening, and/or agglomeration [16]. The way these processes 
take place is, in fact, the mechanism of the synthesis.
As for any redox reaction, the values of the standard reduction potentials (E0) 
determine the pairs of reactants required for successful chemical conversion. This 
means that the free energy change in the reaction, ΔG0, must be negative, or what 
is equivalent ΔE0 > 0. Thus, in the case of silver, the relatively large electroposi-
tive reduction potential of Ag+ → Ag0 in water (E0 = +0.799 V, [17]) permits 
the use of several reducing agents e.g., sodium citrate (E0  =  −0.180 V, [18]), 
sodium borohydride (E0 = −0.481 V, [17]), hydrazine (E0 = −0.230 V, [16]) and 
hydroquinone (E0 = −0.699 V, [19]). Next, we will look at a few examples more 
in detail.

16
N.L. Pacioni et al.
2.1  Reduction by Citrate Anion
In 1951, Turkevich [20] reported the synthesis of gold nanoparticles in aqueous 
solution at boiling temperature using sodium citrate to reduce AuCl4−. Since then, 
this methodology, known as the Turkevich’s method, has been extended to other 
metals such as the case of silver [3, 21].
Lee and Meisel [3] prepared AgNP in water, for SERS applications, using the 
described method but in that particular case no insight into the mechanism or full 
characterization of the AgNP (size and shape) was given. Nevertheless, a few 
years later, researchers became more interested on elucidating the actual mech-
anism involved in the whole process in order to gain more knowledge on what 
parameters really matter and how it will be possible to achieve better reproducibil-
ity between batches, and also size and shape control.
From the pioneering studies [3, 20], it is now known that citrate acted both 
to reduce the metal cation and stabilize the resulting nanoparticles. Also, it was 
believed that this reactant played a role on determining the growth of the particles. 
Pillai and Kamat [21] investigated the action of citrate on controlling the size and 
shape of AgNP. They found that by using the boiling method at different citrate 
concentrations, AgNP with plasmon maximum absorbance at 420 nm were pro-
duced. By increasing the relative concentration of sodium citrate to silver cation 
i.e. [Citrate]/[Ag+] from 1 to 5 times, the elapsed time for formation of AgNP was 
reduced from 40 to 20 min, respectively, indicating that under equimolar condi-
tions a fraction of the Ag+ was not reduced.
In order to learn more about the function of citrate as stabilizer, SiO2@AgNP 
were synthesized using NaBH4 and after the addition of sodium citrate, where the 
formation of SiO2-Ag-citrate complex with an association constant of 220 M−1 
between citrate and the silver colloids was confirmed [21].
In addition, synthesis studies of AgNP by reduction with pulse radiolysis proved 
that citrate anions act at early stages by complexing Ag2+ dimers, and so modulating 
the particle growth [21]. In fact, the absorbance maximum of the plasmon obtained 
with this method was found ≈400 nm, a 20 nm blue shifting of the value observed 
for the AgNP obtained by classical Turkevich’s method, indicating that different 
mechanism of growth particle is operating depending on the reduction method. This 
interaction had also been observed earlier by Henglein and Giersig [22] in their 
work on the capping effect of citrate on AgNP prepared by radiolytic reduction.
As a consequence of the slow rate in the citrate reduction method, there is an evi-
dent contribution of this reactant to obtain larger AgNP (50–100 nm) [21]. In other 
words, once the first particle seeds are formed from the Ag+ reduction by citrate, the 
remaining anion can complex to the metal surface decreasing the total amount of 
citrate available in the bulk to further reduce more Ag+. Thus, fewer new seeds are 
formed and the initial particles begin to grow via Ostwald ripening, in which the larger 
particles grow at expense of the smaller ones. Therefore, more time is needed to com-
plete the reduction reaction when using this method. Figure 3 illustrates this process.
Addition of glycerol (40 % V/V), a highly viscous solvent (η ≈ 1,400 cp [23]), 
to the aqueous medium reduced polydispersity (≈5 %) and permitted size control 

17
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
(30 nm) without affecting the spherical shape [24]. Reduction and/or nucleation 
rates are slower as evidenced by the delayed appearance of the characteristic yel-
low colour for AgNP, accordingly with expected for diffusion processes in viscous 
solvents. Although the effect of glycerol on the AgNP synthesis is not fully under-
stood, it is believed that glycerol protects the AgNP against further ripening [24].
The presence of different amounts of NaOH during the synthesis by citrate reduc-
tion was found to redirect the reaction to the production of crystalline silver nanow-
ires [25]. These Ag nanostructures were characterized by TEM (observing wires up to 
12 μ long), X-ray energy dispersive microanalysis and UV-vis spectroscopy in which 
a sharp absorption at 370 nm corresponding to the transverse plasmon was observed. 
The effect of NaOH in the outcome of the synthesis was attributed to interference of 
hydroxide with the association and capping ability of citrate with silver [25].
2.2  Reduction by NaBH4
First attempts to elucidate the mechanism of AgNP synthesis using sodium borohy-
dride (Eq. 1) as the reducing agent were made by Van Hyning and Zukoski [26]. 
Following the reaction progress ‘in-situ’ by UV-vis spectroscopy and ‘ex-situ’ by 
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) they were able to infer that the nucleation 
and growth mechanisms for these nanoparticles do not follow the La Mer’s model 
[27, 28] (Fig. 4), rather it was dependent on colloidal interactions [26]. Recently, 
Polte et al. [29] proposed a better description of the AgNP formation pathway and 
the relevant factors to obtain size-controlled AgNP based on a rational design [29].
From time-resolved synchrotron small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and 
UV-vis spectroscopy measurements combined with TEM characterization, a four-
step growth mechanism for the AgNP synthesis by reduction with NaBH4 was pro-
posed (Fig. 5) [29].
(1)
Mn+ + n BH−
4 →M0 + n B(OH)3 + n 3.5 H2
Fig. 3   Representation of the nucleation and growth mechanisms for AgNP obtained by the cit-
rate method according to Ref. [21]

18
N.L. Pacioni et al.
The first step involves reduction (<200 ms) of Ag+ to Ag0 atoms. These atoms 
form dimers, trimers, etc. clusters. In a second stage (≈5 s) the clusters coalesce 
to generate small particles with a radius of 2–3 nm. This step is followed by a 
metastable state, where the particles maintain a constant size for around 5–10 min. 
After this period, a second and last coalescence phase takes place (within 30–60 s) 
to render the final AgNP with an average size of 5–8 nm (Fig. 5) [29]. A detailed 
study of the metastable state and final coalescence phase by time-resolved SAXS 
showed that colloidal stability during the intermediate state is enough to prevent 
further growth due to particle aggregation [30]. Note that each coalescence process 
implies an aggregation process as a consequence of a decrease in particle stability. 
Then, it was proposed that the total consumption of BH4− is a triggering event 
for the initiation of the second coalescence phase due to loss of stability plausible 
by oxidation of the metal surface [30]. Although the reaction stoichiometry with 
Ag+ is usually 1:1, BH4− is added in excess. Therefore, the extra borohydride 
anion remains in solution helping to stabilize the formed nanoparticles (electro-
static stabilization), but it will also begin to hydrolyze according to the following 
simplified Eq. (2), decreasing the available borohydride ion. Hydrolysis is slower 
compared to the reductive reaction, becoming the dominant process once all the 
metal ­cations are reduced.
(2)
BH−
4 + 4 H2O →B(OH)−
4 + 4 H2
Fig. 4   Representation of La 
Mer´s model for nucleation 
and growth [27, 28]. Cs, 
Cmin and Cmax are solubility 
concentration, minimum and 
maximum concentration to 
start nucleation, respectively
Fig. 5   Illustration of the 
growth mechanism for AgNP 
synthesized using NaBH4 as 
proposed by Polte et al. [29]

19
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
Another phenomenon that takes place is the partial oxidation of the metal nano-
particle surface forming silver oxides. The presence of these oxides decreases the 
electrostatic stabilization of the AgNP provoking in consequence their aggregation. 
When there is still BH4− left in solution, the oxidation of the particle surface can be 
reversed, avoiding the aggregation process but once all BH4− is consumed, there is 
green light to start the final coalescence stage until the stable size is obtained [30].
The addition of a bulky stabilizing agent such as polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) 
to the reaction medium does not change the growth mechanism (the final size 
is indeed the same as without PVP) but affects the duration of each step and 
decreases the polydispersity (15–20 %) [29].
Based on a better understanding of the growth mechanism, Wuithschick et al. 
[30] were able to obtain reproducible sizes (between 4 and 8 nm) between differ-
ent batches by controlling the BH4−/B(OH)4− ratio, without the addition of any 
external stabilizing agent. It was found that a proportion of 32.5 % BH4− at the 
beginning is similar to start the synthesis from the metastable state (Fig. 5), and 
so the four-step mechanism is reduced to a two-step. Consequently, as the growth 
mechanism is simplified a good control over the final size is gained.
In summary, using a strong reductant, like NaBH4 (E0
red = −0.481 V, [17]), 
results in a faster reduction of Ag+ than the growth process. The growth mecha-
nism is governed by coalescence closely related to the electrostatic stabilization 
of the nanopartices. Classical models for nucleation and growth processes (like La 
Mer´s) do not apply in this case.
2.3  Reduction by Hydroquinone
Oxidation of Hydroquinone (HQ, Scheme 1) involves a two-electron transfer and 
loss of two protons producing p-benzoquinone [19]. According to the above-men-
tioned redox potential, HQ is able to reduce Ag+ to obtain AgNP.
Nucleation and growth of AgNP obtained using HQ have been studied by 
UV-spectroscopy combined with TEM and titration microcalorimetry [31, 32]. 
Pérez et al. [31] observed a strong dependence on the size and morphology of AgNP 
with the concentration of HQ at early stages of reaction. A high local ­concentration 
of HQ induces more nucleation sites whereas a low local concentration of the 
­reducing agent favors growth over nucleation. Consequently, a protocol involving 
addition of a concentrated solution of HQ to the reaction medium yields AgNP with 
smaller sizes (10–30 nm). On the other hand, a protocol in which a diluted solution 
Scheme 1   Two-electron 
oxidation of Hidroquinone to 
p-Benzoquinone

20
N.L. Pacioni et al.
of HQ is added to the reaction yields larger and more polydisperse AgNP with sizes 
up to 200 nm. The previous observations are valid for AgNO3 as precursor, where 
it can be assumed that Ag+ is completely solvated in solution. Nevertheless, when 
Ag+ is complexed as in [Ag(NH3)2]+ with the presence of counter ions as Cl−, the 
growth is arrested independent on the protocol followed, monodispersity raises and 
small quasi spherical particles of ~14 nm are predominantly obtained. This effect 
has been attributed to an unfavorable adsorption of the metallic precursor onto the 
metal surface, then the growth by further reduction of Ag+ on the AgNP surface is 
quenched [31].
Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) studies on the formation of AgNP, start-
ing from AgNO3 and hydroquinone in the presence of sodium citrate as stabilizer, 
reports that the growth mechanism follows a three-step mechanism (Fig. 6). First, 
reduction of Ag+ by HQ to get silver clusters (~2.6  nm, λmax  =  439  nm) takes 
place. This nucleation phase is an exothermic (favorable) process that is followed 
by a growth phase of endothermic nature to reach sizes of ~4.1 nm (λmax = 445 nm) 
and finally, if aggregation of AgNP occurs the process is again exothermic with 
final nanostructures around 11 nm in size (λmax = 465 nm) [32]. This latter process 
occurs with further addition of HQ that is likely to be replacing citrate from the NP 
surface and thus, decreasing stabilization due to electrostatic repulsion.
2.4  Reduction by Gallic Acid
Reduction of Ag+ in water at room temperature can also be accomplished 
using gallic acid (GA) whose oxidation potential is 0.5 V (Scheme 2). Besides 
the redox potential value, the presence of hydroxyl groups in the benzoic acid 
structure at determined positions plays an important role in the synthesis of 
metal nanoparticles. For example, the generation of nanoparticles was not suc-
cessful when using benzoic acid derivatives substituted by hydroxyl groups at 
meta positions but are obtained when the hydroxyls are located at orto- and 
Fig. 6   Illustration of the growth mechanism for AgNP synthesized using HQ at room tempera-
ture as proposed in Ref. [32]. Change color in NP shell indicates HQ replaced citrate as capping 
agent

21
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
para  positions [33]. Note that the hydroxyls are the reactive part (Scheme  2) 
and the carboxylic group acts as the stabilizing part (Fig. 7). The need of ­having 
hydroxyls at the mentioned positions can be explained by the formation of a net-
work of the capping molecules around the particle, held by hydrogen bonding 
interactions between the surface molecules (Fig. 7), that increases the colloidal 
stability (zeta potential; ξ = −45 mV) [33]. Moreover, addition of NaOH is nec-
essary to obtain the silver colloids [33]. Then, the silver species reacting could 
be Ag2O that has been recently reported as a good AgNP precursor by thermal 
decomposition [34].
2.5  Synthesis of AgNP in Organic Solvents
Most reported examples of AgNP obtained by chemical reduction are performed 
in aqueous media [35–37]. A post-synthesis transfer to an organic solvent is usu-
ally difficult due to aggregation processes. Nevertheless, the synthesis of metal 
nanoparticles in organic solvents has some advantages such as high yield and 
narrower size distribution, with the additional advantage that in some cases the 
­solvent itself can act as reducing agent to obtain AgNP [14].
For example, Pastoriza-Santos and Liz-Marzan [38] proposed a synthetic route 
to obtain AgNP spheres (≈6–20  nm) from the spontaneous reduction of silver 
Scheme 2   Two-electron 
oxidation of gallic acid to the 
quinone form [33]
Fig. 7   Illustration of the 
stabilized capped-AgNP 
synthesized using GA as 
proposed in Ref. [33]

22
N.L. Pacioni et al.
nitrate by dimethylformamide (DMF) and using 3-(aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane 
(APS) to stabilize the particles. The overall reaction displayed in Eq. 3 shows the 
formation of a carbamic acid that together with the resulting acidic environment 
promote the deposition of silica shells onto the formed particles [38]:
Reaction rate, size and monodispersity of the nanostructures can be controlled by 
variation of temperature from room to boiling temperature. Increasing the temper-
ature accelerates the silver reduction favoring silica polymerization directly onto 
the APS-coated silver particles surface. Thus, at 156 °C APS-capped AgNP around 
19 nm are obtained [38]. Replacing the stabilizing agent APS by polyvinylpyrro-
lidone (PVP) favors the formation of nanoprisms by choosing the right experimen-
tal conditions (concentration of reactants and reflux time) [39].
Another reported synthetic route was performed in dimethyl sulfoxide 
(DMSO) at room temperature. Quasi-spherical AgNP (4.4 nm) were obtained 
from the spontaneous reduction of silver 2-ethylhexanoate [Ag(ethex)] by 
DMSO [40]. Increasing the temperature accelerates the reaction. Based on 
experimental data and ab initio calculations a mechanism for this reaction 
has been proposed and it is shown as follows (R is—(C2H5)CH(CH2)3CH3 in 
Eqs. 4–7):
The overall reaction can be written as follows (Eq. 8).
Note that in the first step (Eq. 4) the formation of a complex between Ag(ethex) 
and DMSO is proposed which was supported by testing that the reaction does not 
occur with other silver salts such as AgNO3 and AgClO4 otherwise 2-ethylhex-
anoate is present in the reaction medium. In addition to that, ab initio calculations 
showed that the complex [Ag(DMSO)ethex] has an adequate LUMO energy and 
low energy difference between HOMO-LUMO gap what is consistent with a good 
precursor for reduction [40].
In order to overcome the instability of the synthesized AgNP dispersions 
by this way, it is necessary to use capping molecules to gain stability. The best 
­capping agent used was sodium citrate (see Sect. 1).
(3)
HCON(CH3)2 + 2 Ag+ + H2O →2 Ag0 + (CH3)2NCOOH + 2 H+
(4)

AgOOCR

+ DMSO ⇋

AgOOCR • DMSO

(5)

AgOOCR • DMSO

→Ag0 +

DMSO•+ + [: OOCR]−
(6)

AgOOCR

+

DMSO•+ →Ag0 + [: OOCR]−+ [DMSO]2+
(7)
[DMSO]2+ + H2O →DMSO2 + 2H+
(8)
2

AgOOCR

+ DMSO + H2O →2Ag0 + DMSO + [: OOCR]−

23
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
A deeper analysis of the synthesis of AgNP in organic solvents with focus on 
rationalizing the nucleation process to engineer the final outcome can be found in 
a tutorial review by Sun [14].
2.6  Polyol Method and Shape-Controlled Synthesis
Although the polyol method can also be considered as a case of synthesis in organic 
solvents [14, 41, 42], the versatility that provides to obtain AgNP with different 
morphologies makes this method relevant to be analyzed separately.
Briefly, polyol synthesis involves the reduction of a metal salt used as pre-
cursor by a polyol, usually ethylene glycol (EG) at an elevated temperature 
(≈160  °C for EG), and in order to prevent agglomeration of the particles a 
capping agent commonly used is PVP [4, 43–45]. EG (as other polyols) prob-
ably oxidizes to aldehyde species with an oxidation potential of 1.65 eV [46]. 
Reduction power of EG is markedly dependent on the temperature, giving the 
ability to control the nucleation and growth processes by choosing the reaction 
temperature [47]. Another advantage is that the polyol can serve as both solvent 
and reducing agent.
Before analyzing the reasons for shape control during the synthesis by the polyol 
method, it is important to note the critical role of PVP in the stability, size and shape 
uniformity of AgNP. From infrared (IR) and X-ray photolectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
it was inferred that the oxygen and nitrogen atoms of PVP can promote the adsorp-
tion of this polymer chains onto the metal surface [36]. In addition, PVP interacts 
more strongly with silver atoms located in the {100} facets than those on the {111} 
(lower energy facets) [42].
La Mer’s model (Fig. 4) seems to explain at some extent the nucleation and 
growth mechanisms [14, 36], taking place in the polyol method though it still 
represents an oversimplified view of the nucleation process [14]. That said, we 
now summarize different examples of shape control: nanocubes, nanowires and 
nanospheres.
TEM studies performed on small silver nanoparticles demonstrated that there 
is a good probability that morphology fluctuates between the kinetically sta-
ble single crystal (sc) and the thermodynamically stable twinned (tw) particles 
­during ­earlier stages of growth [44]. This fact supports a model where morphology 
in small particles (<5 nm) is exchanged between sc and tw induced by thermal 

24
N.L. Pacioni et al.
fluctuations, with multiply twinned decahedra (MTP) being the most abundant 
shape. Thus, it is understood that a common NP synthesis outcome results to be a 
mixture of single crystals and twinned particles as shown in Fig. 8 [44]. It also has 
been proposed that sc seeds lead to obtaining truncated cubes and tetrahedrons as 
final shapes while tw seeds conducts to rods, wires and spheres depending on the 
reaction conditions [47].
Experimental conditions that favor fast nucleation and fast growth like a high 
AgNO3 concentration (0.125–0.25 M) and low PVP to Ag+ ratio (≈1.5), promote the 
formation of nanocubes as the possibilities to get twinned particles diminished. Then, 
the most abundant structures between the pristine particles are single crystals that fol-
low their growth assisted by PVP to reach the final shape of truncated cube. Figure 9 
Fig. 8   TEM images showing a mixture of single crystal and twinned morphologies after 2 h 
reaction for AgNP synthesized by the polyol method. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [44]. 
Copyright © 2004 American Chemical Society
Fig. 9   a X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern obtained from silver nanocubes, synthesized by the 
polyol method from AgNO3 (0.25  M) with a PVP to Ag+ ratio of 1.5, deposited on a glass 
substrate. Peaks are assigned to diffraction from the {111}, {200} and {220} planes of silver. 
Inset shows the drawing of one cube indicating the corresponding crystallographic planes. b 
SEM image of the same silver nanocubes showing the slightly truncated corners and edges of 
each cube. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [47]. Copyright © 2005 WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH&Co. KGaA, Weinheim

25
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
Fig. 10   a Representation of the evolution of a nanorod from a decahedral silver particle with the 
assistance of PVP by the polyol method. The ends of this nanorod are terminated by {111} fac-
ets, and the side surfaces are bounded by {100} facets. The green color indicates the preferential 
adsorption of PVP on the {100} facets, and the pinkish color stands for the weaker interaction 
with the {111} facets. The red lines on the end surfaces represent the twin boundaries that can 
serve as active sites for the addition of silver atoms. The plane marked in blue shows one of the 
five twin planes that can serve as the internal confinement for the evolution of nanorods from 
MTP. b Representation of the diffusion of silver atoms toward the two ends of a nanorod, with 
the side surfaces completely passivated by PVP. This drawing shows a projection perpendicular 
to one of the five side facets of a nanorod, and the arrows represent the diffusion fluxes of silver 
atoms. c SEM image of silver nanowires obtained by the polyol method. The red arrows indicate 
cross-sections of the nanowires showing pentagonal cross-sections. a–c were adapted with per-
mission from Ref. [42]. Copyright © 2003 American Chemical Society

26
N.L. Pacioni et al.
shows the silver truncated nanocubes (average edge length: 175 nm) obtained by the 
described polyol method from AgNO3 (0.25 M) [47].
On the other hand, if the AgNO3 concentration is reduced to 0.085 M while the 
PVP:Ag+ ratio is kept constant (1.5) and the reaction temperature is above 110 °C 
the resulting particles are nanowires. The most accepted explanation for this result 
is that these conditions promote a high yield in MTP (decahedral) during early 
growth stages. Then, new Ag0 are more likely to crystallize on the highly reac-
tive twin defects of the decahedral. In the presence of PVP, the {100} sides are 
passivate due to its preferentially adsorption on this facets. For that reason, fur-
ther growth takes place in the {111} direction to reach the final nanowires shape 
(Fig. 10) [42, 46, 47].
In order to overcome the growth in a particular direction due to passivation of a 
specific facet, it is necessary to increase the PVP:Ag+ molar ratio more than three 
times. In that way, the entire particle surface is covered by PVP and seeds are 
prone to follow an isotropic growth to end as mostly spherical in shape [47].
3  Light-Assisted Methods
The first reports on the effect of light on the transformation of some metal salts 
were written in the 18th century, when the German scientist Johnann Schulze 
(1687–1744) discovered that silver salts darken by irradiation of light, initiating 
the development of photography, although the concept of nanomaterials had to 
wait almost 200 years.
In the last decades, light-assisted methods for NP preparation have been largely 
developed as well, basically due to the versatility and selectivity of photochemical 
reactions to generate in situ the reducing species with high spatial resolution and 
almost no modification of the surrounding media. The fundamentals and applications 
of different light mediated methodologies have been recently reviewed [13, 15, 48]. 
As we mentioned in a general manner in the introduction, photo-induced ­synthetic 
strategies can be also categorized into top-down (photophysical methods) and 
­bottom-up (photochemical methods) approaches.
3.1  Photophysical Methods
AgNP are prepared via subdivision of bulk silver metal usually by laser ­ablation 
methods [49–51]. As example, the influence of anionic surfactant molecules 
CnH2n+1SO4Na (n = 8, 10, 12, 16) on the stability of AgNP produced by laser ­ablation 
of a metal silver plate with a pulsed Nd-YAG laser operating at 532 nm (10 ns full 
width at half maximum (fwhm), <90 mJ/pulse, 10 Hz) [49]. The stability of the AgNP 
capped with the anionic surfactant was modulated by the surfactant coverage and 
the charge state on the nanoparticle surface. The AgNP tend to aggregate when the 

27
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
coverage degree is less than unity, while they are very stable when the particle sur-
face is covered with a double layer of the surfactant due to the electrostatic repulsion 
forces. Moreover, more efficient stabilization was obtained by surfactant with a longer 
hydrocarbon chain due to larger hydrophobic interactions between them [49].
Additionally, the effect of sodium chloride (NaCl) on the morphology and 
stability of AgNP generated by laser ablation (Nd:YAG 1,064 nm) was analyzed 
[50, 51]. The increment in NaCl concentration up to 5 mM in aqueous solutions 
produced AgNP with average size of ~26 nm, but with a continuous decrease of 
the full with at the half maximum (fwhm) of the plasmon absorbance band cen-
tered at 400 nm, together with the simultaneous increase of the absorbance sig-
nal. However, above that NaCl concentration the absorbance of the plasmon was 
smaller and the fwhm value slightly increased. The salt effect was inherent with 
the growth phase of the AgNP during the ablation of the bulk silver surface, since 
no effect on the plasmon band was observed when NaCl was added to AgNP in 
water previously prepared by laser-ablation. It was concluded that the presence 
of Cl− ions provides reduction of nanoparticles size and increases the efficiency 
of formation of AgNP by laser irradiation of the silver target immersed in water. 
However, the long-term stability (i.e. >20 days) of the AgNP was reduced by the 
Cl− ions [50].
In another case, stable suspensions of AgNP were prepared by laser-abla-
tion of a highly pure (99.99  %) silicon (Si) target immersed in aqueous solu-
tion of AgNO3 as silver source [52]. The third-harmonic (λ = 355 nm) beam of 
a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser was focused on the Si target and the effects of the 
salt concentration and irradiation time were evaluated. The maximum plasmon 
absorbance at 400 nm was obtained using 0.125 mM AgNO3 solutions, with the 
formation of spherical AgNP with average diameter of ~11 nm. Above this con-
centration, the plasmon absorbance was less intense, red-shifted and broader indi-
cating that under these salt concentrations AgNP with larger diameter and a broad 
size distribution were formed [52].
3.2  Photochemical Methods
Regarding to the photochemical methods for metal NP preparation (bottom-up 
approach), they are based on the reduction of the metal cation Mn+ to M0 either by 
direct or indirect (photosensitized) photolysis.
Direct photoreduction has been established as an important technique for metal 
NP synthesis, where M0 is formed through the direct excitation of a metal source, 
normally a salt. Due to the advantage of being free from reducing agents, it has 
been widely employed in the various mediums including polymer films, glasses, 
cells, etc. [15].
Direct photoreduction of silver perchlorate (AgClO4) in aqueous and alcoholic 
solutions by irradiation with UV-light at 254 nm was investigated in the 70s by 
Hada et al. [53]. The photoreduction mechanism is based on the electron-transfer 

28
N.L. Pacioni et al.
from a solvent molecule to the electronically excited state of Ag+ to form Ag0 
(Eqs. 9–12):
The reactivity, and therefore the quantum yield of formation of AgNP, was 
strongly increased in the presence of α-alcohols, due to the easier abstraction of 
the labile α-hydrogen. The formed radical also reduced Ag+ (Eq. 11) accelerating 
the production of AgNP [53].
Long term stable (~6  months) AgNP were obtained by photoreduction of 
[Ag(NH3)2]+ aqueous solution with PVP as both reducing and stabilizing agent 
[54]. Following the increment in the surface plasmon absorption maxima at 
420  nm the formation of AgNP was monitored. It was found that the plasmon 
absorption intensity increased with PVP concentration as well as the maximum 
absorption wavelength (λmax) was blue shifted. Transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) showed the resultant particles were 4–6 nm in size with uniform particle 
size distribution. Huang et al. [55] also reported the synthesis of AgNP employing 
the photoreduction of AgNO3 solutions with 254 nm UV irradiation in the pres-
ence of PVP as protecting agent.
Finally, a marked interest in UV photoreduction of silver salts embedded in 
polymeric films and/or inorganic hydrogels for in situ generation of AgNP exists 
[56–58]. Fast generation of AgNP was observed when fibers of polymer blends of 
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) crosslinked with DMSO 
were irradiated with 350  nm light. Initially, small AgNP clusters were formed, 
which were stable in the dark but transformed into larger metal particles upon fur-
ther illumination [56]. The formation of AgNP by UV photoreduction of AgNO3 
in layered laponite suspensions without any addition of reduction agent or heat 
treatment. Relatively larger sized (40–110  nm) AgNP were obtained, but with 
extremely long-term stability, opening the application of the hydrogel as antibacte-
rial agent [57].
Thin films of PAA embedded with AgNP prepared by UV photoreduction exhib-
ited cyclically changeable optical absorbance properties (spectral shift) during 
variation of pH of aqueous medium [58]. The phenomenon was attributed to con-
formational changes in the polymer matrix induced by pH changes, which leads to 
variation in the 3D configuration of the AgNP ensemble by reversible modification 
of the inter-particle distance during swelling and shrinking processes within the 
PAA matrix (Fig. 11). These changes result in the reversible blue-red shifting of the 
(9)
Ag+ + H2O
hv
→Ag0 + H+ + HO•
(10)
Ag+ + RCH2OH
hv
→Ag0 + H+ + R
•
C HOH
(11)
Ag+ + R
•
C HOH
hv
→Ag0 + H+ + RCHO
(12)
nAg0 →AgNP

29
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
plasmon band absorption maximum, with the possibility of using this “molecular 
memory” in the development of optoelectronic devices and sensors [58].
As despited above, the general mechanism of NP formation by direct photore-
duction of the metal cation is usually by a solvent-assisted disproportionation pro-
cess that depends on the nature of the precursor metal. However, in most cases, 
the use of UV excitation source is necessary in direct photoreduction since most 
of metal cations and/or metal salts only absorbs in this spectral region. This issue 
can represent a very important experimental limitation, since UV-light sources are 
more expensive and not always easily available. Moreover, many molecules used 
as stabilizing agents can also absorb in the UV, acting as inner filter of the excita-
tion beam.
Nevertheless, this limitation can be overcome by photosensitized synthesis of 
NP. In this case a sensitizer molecule (organic dye, aromatic ketones, polyatomic 
anions) that can absorb UVA-visible light (320–700 nm) generates reducing inter-
mediates (free radicals, anions, solvated electrons, etc.) that react with the Mn+ co-
existing in the solution to form the M0 [15].
Fig.  11   a Electronic absorption spectra of AgNP obtained by direct photoreduction in PAA 
hydrogel film wet with 0.1 M H2SO4 (swelled system) and with deionized water (shrunk system). 
b Absorbance spectrum peak positions after 10 cycles of alternating immersion where red and 
blue squares indicate the swelled and shrunk systems, respectively. (c–d) Models of the shrunken 
(c) and swollen (d) states of the PAA hydrogel containing AgNP. Adapted with permission from 
Ref. [58]. Copyright © 2012 CSIRO Publishing dx

30
N.L. Pacioni et al.
Photosensitized methods are based either on the formation of reactive excited 
states or the photogeneration of organic radical species from the sensitizer mole-
cule [15]. In this chapter we will focus on the photosensitized generation of AgNP 
mainly by ketyl radical formation either by hydrogen abstraction or bond cleavage 
as a very useful strategy for AgNP preparation by indirect photolysis [15, 59].
Typically, in the former case, an aliphatic or aromatic ketone, such as ace-
tone, acetophenone or benzophenone, is excited with UVA/UVB light (300  <  λ 
(nm) < 360) to the singlet excited state, in which by efficient intersystems crossing 
decays to the long-lived triplet state. Due to the n,π* character of the ketone triplet 
excited state it becomes an excellent hydrogen abstractor from appropriated donors 
(e.g. alcohols, benzylic and allylic hydrogens, some hydrocarbons, etc.) to produce 
the respective ketyl radical. In the case of alcohols, which in many cases can be used 
as solvent or co-solvent, the ketyl radical and the radical derived from the alcohol 
are formed, which are able to reduce the metal cations to generate the NP.
According to Scheme 3, after the formation reaction of M0, the ketone is regen-
erated and a new photosensitization cycle can be initiated by absorption of a UV 
photon, a significant issue to consider when polyvalent metal cations are reduced 
since ketyl radicals are one-electron reducing species. Note that the global reaction 
also produces H+, and therefore in non-buffered solutions the solution pH decreases 
to acidic values (pH ~ 3) [59]. Both Majima´s [15] and Scaiano’s [59] groups have 
extensively explored the use of ketone photosensitization process for AgNP synthe-
sis under different conditions and applications. As example, since the primary pre-
cursor is the excited triplet state of the ketone, the effect of magnetic field on the 
formation of AgNP was evaluated [60]. In this case, photoreduction of benzophe-
none in sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) micellar solutions in the presence of Ag+ 
produced a very rapid and efficient formation of AgNP, and the process was modu-
lated by external magnetic field by splitting of triplet sublevels as a result of Zeeman 
effect, even under weak and mild field intensities (up to 120 mT). The amount of 
AgNP produced was increased with the intensity of the magnetic field with slight 
modifications in the plasmon absorbance band position and increment of the average 
particle size from ~4 to 8 nm. Therefore, it was concluded that weak magnetic fields, 
such as those produced by magnetic stirring bars (<10 mT), can modulate the forma-
tion of AgNP by benzophenone photoreduction [60].
Scheme 3   Sensitization mechanism of ketone/hydrogen donor system used for nanoparticle for-
mation. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [15]. Copyright © 2009 Elsevier

31
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
Other source of ketyl radical for metal reduction is given by photoinduced 
bond cleavage reactions of α-hydroxy ketones (benzoins), such as the water-sol-
uble 2-hydroxy-4′-(2-hydroxy-ethoxy)-2-methyl-propiophenone (Irgacure-2959®, 
I-2959, Scheme 4).
The photochemistry of α-hydroxy ketones has been well characterized and the 
homolytic rupture of the α-cleavage bond favored by alkylation of the 2-hydroxy 
group occurs in the picosecond time scale after excitation [62]. The case of I-2959 
is remarkable since is commercially available, water-soluble, and produces ketyl 
radicals with a quantum yield of 0.29 in fast photocleavage from a triplet state 
with a lifetime of just 11  ns [62]. Scaiano’s group, principally, has extensively 
established the use of this compound as photosensitizer for AgNP preparation in 
water and organic solvents [48, 61, 63–66]. The methodology is clean, fast, and 
also allows real-time kinetics monitoring by UV-vis spectroscopy using modular 
CCD spectrometer devices, as shown in Fig. 12 for the formation of AgNP upon 
steady-state irradiation at 320 (±10 nm) of 0.2 mM AgNO3 and 0.2 mM I-2959 
in the presence of 1 mM sodium citrate aqueous solutions, together with the TEM 
image of the final AgNP (average diameter ~10 nm) and the yellowish color of 
the solution due to the strong plasmon absorbance at 404 nm (courtesy of V. Rey, 
Universidad Nacional de Santiago del Estero).
Finally, it should be noticed that the final fate of the substituted benzoyl radi-
cal formed after homolytic bond scission in the first reaction of Scheme 4, is the 
formation of the corresponding carboxylic acid 4-(2-hydroxyethoxy) benzoic acid 
(HEBA) that, through mild binding, contributes to the stability of “naked” (with-
out extra stabilizers) metal nanoparticles [48].
At this point, it is worth commenting on the noticeable effect of light on the 
morphology of the AgNP during the growth stage of Ag0 seeds [13, 36, 51, 64, 
67, 68]. In general terms, the observed effect is that depending on the excitation 
wavelength (~400–700  nm) from lasers, lamps or light emitting diodes (LEDs) 
illumination sources during the ripening of small spherical AgNP (<5 nm) seeds, 
Scheme 4   Mechanism for 
AgNP formation starting 
from the photoinduced bond 
cleavage of Irgacure-2959. 
Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [61]. Copyright © 
2013 Springer

32
N.L. Pacioni et al.
different nanostructures with shape and size control, including larger spheres, 
dodecahedra, nanoplates, and nanorods are photogenerated (Fig. 13).
This striking size and shape control on AgNP formation is associated with 
the fact that the electromagnetic (EM) field generated in the vicinity of AgNP is 
extremely high in comparison with other metals.
In summary, light-assisted preparation of AgNP is a very promising field 
because of the large versatility, selectivity and relatively easier control on shape 
and size of matured AgNP without need of harsh reaction conditions, such as boil-
ing temperature, etc. These mild reaction conditions also allow NP preparation 
300
400
500
600
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
Absorbance
 (nm)
Photolysis 
time
Abs@404
Photolysis time (min)
= 3.8 min
Fig. 12   Absorption spectra of AgNP produced by using I-2959 as photosensitizer showing the 
formation kinetics. Inset shows the absorbance dependence over photolysis time monitored at 
404 nm together with a TEM image and regular photograph of the final AgNP solution. Reaction 
performed with continuous UV light irradiation in the presence of citrate anions as stabilizer. 
Courtesy of Dr. Valentina Rey, LACIFO-UNSE, Argentina
Fig. 13   Representation 
of the photoinduced 
aggregation/coalescence 
mechanism that leads to 
morphology transformation 
of AgNP seeds according to 
Ref. [68]
hν
405 nm
455 nm
505 nm
590 nm/
627 nm
720 nm

33
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
with different labile or biological protecting agents, such as proteins. The current 
commercial availability of UVA-vis high power LEDs can allow inexpensive prep-
aration of matured AgNP with modulated shape and size for different desirable 
applications.
4  Electrochemical Methods
Considering that the primary step for AgNP preparation is the one-electron 
­reduction of Ag+ cation, electrochemical reduction to generate metallic particles 
seems to be a suitable choice method [69–79].
Synthesis of AgNP by electrochemical reduction was presented by Rodríguez-
Sánchez et  al. [69], based on the dissolution of a sacrificial silver sheet as the 
anode (counter electrode), and a sized platinum (Pt) or aluminum sheet was used 
as cathode (working electrode) and containing tetrabutylammonium salts (TBA 
bromide or TBA acetate) in acetonitrile as inert solvent. However, AgNP were 
only obtained using Pt as working electrode. The spherical particles were further 
characterized by TEM and UV-vis spectroscopy. The increment of the current den-
sity was analyzed, observing a size reduction of AgNP from ~7 to 2 nm accompa-
nied by a red shift of the broad plasmon absorption band from 422 to 445 nm. It 
was observed an oscillatory behaviour by studying various electrochemical param-
eters and reaction conditions. Characterization by UV-vis spectroscopy showed 
that the absorption bandwidth of the plasmon band depends heavily on the size 
and interaction with the surrounding medium, and an autocatalytic stage in the 
synthesis mechanism was proposed.
Electrochemical synthesis of spherical AgNP (<7 nm) in aqueous media were 
obtained by using a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surface modified 
with a 4-aminophenyl monolayer as counter electrode (Fig.  14) [70]. Changing 
experimental conditions, such as immersion times, immersion period, and pulse 
potential time, controlled both the size and number density of AgNP.
Electroreduction of 5 mM AgNO3 aqueous solutions using a rotating platinum 
cathode and PVP as stabilizer produces nanospheres with narrow size distribution 
(~20 nm, SD: 14 nm) which is improved by addition of a surfactant like sodium 
dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) (~10  nm, SD: 2  nm) [73]. The dual role of 
PVP in promoting metal nucleation and circumventing agglomeration of metallic 
particles allows the formation of small sized metal nanoparticles. Furthermore, by 
using a rotating platinum cathode, the effective transferring of the electrochem-
ically synthesized NP from the cathode vicinity to the bulk solution is favored, 
avoiding the occurrence of flocculates in the vicinity of the cathode, and ensuring 
the monodispersity of the particles [73].
Silver colloidal nanospheres have also been synthesized electrochemically 
assisted with ultrasonication at 45 °C in a complex media consisting of cyclohexane 
(100 μL), acetone (100 μL), tetraoctylammonium bromide (0.02 g), hexadecyltri-
methylammonium bromide (0.1 g), and ultra-pure water (10 ml) [75]. The average 

34
N.L. Pacioni et al.
diameter of the AgNP synthesized in this way is about 12 nm, as determined by 
TEM. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of fresh prepared AgNP showed a sharp 
absorption band at 410 nm. However, after some hours of aging of the solution, a 
second absorption maximum at 470 nm was noticed indicating particle aggregation 
and clustering. These two absorption bands were assigned to the transverse and lon-
gitudinal surface plasmon resonance, respectively. These authors also analyzed the 
fluorescence emission of the sample as a function of the excitation wavelength, and 
a continuous red-shift of the emission maximum from 540 to 565 m was observed 
when the excitation wavelength changes from 380 to 440 nm. Conversely, UV exci-
tation between 230 and 280 nm, yielded emission spectra with maxima fixed about 
315 nm. These results suggest that these electrochemically generated AgNP show 
dual fluorescence emission, where the shorter emission at 315 nm is due to local 
field enhancement by relaxation of the excited electron and recombination of elec-
trons and holes, while the longer wavelength red shifting bands with the increasing 
excitation wavelength results from electron interband transitions, see Chap. “Silver 
Nanoparticles: From Bulk Material to Colloidal Nanoparticles”.
Size and shape control of AgNP has been shown by Ueda et  al. and Plieth 
et al. [72, 80] using a double pulse electroreduction method, which is based on 
an extremely short nucleation pulse of high cathodic polarization followed by a 
much longer growth pulse at low cathodic over-voltage (Fig. 15). The ideal model 
situation is where nucleation only occurs within the first pulse and exclusive par-
ticle growth in the second pulse. The high cathodic amplitude of the first pulse is 
necessary in order to initiate nucleation. Using this method, the conflict between 
both optimal conditions for nucleation and growth is partially defused. This is due 
to the amount of small seeds additionally nucleated at the higher polarization and 
HOPG
HOPG
0,1 M AgNO3
120 s
KNO3, 
potential step
-0,50 V, 100 ms
HOPG
reduction
HOPG
Protonic
solution
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
H2N
NH2
N
NH2
Ag
Ag
H2
NO2
N2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
H
Ag
Fig.  14   Illustration of the electrochemical preparation of AgNP on 4-aminophenyl modified 
HOPG surface as described in Ref. [70]

35
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
resolved as soon as the potential is switched over to the lower polarization of the 
growth pulse [72].
A deposit consisting of AgNP has been obtained by both potentiostatic and gal-
vanostatic methods in non-aqueous solution of NaNO3 in ethanol (C2H5OH) as 
investigated by cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry [76]. The proposed 
mechanism assumes that both anodic dissolution of Ag0 and its reduction to metal-
lic state proceed during polarization in ethanol according to the following mecha-
nism (Eqs. 13–17) initiated by the Ag0 one-electron reaction at the surface of the 
working electrode and solubilization of Ag+ by C2H5OH,
which rapidly decomposes to Ag2O and ethyl ether (Eq. 14).
The formation and deposition of Ag2O can partially block the anode. However, at 
E > 0.6 V, the oxidation of ethanol occurs forming ethanal (CH3CHO)
In turn, the aldehyde reduces Ag2O easily forming Ag atoms (Eq.  16) and the 
Ag(C2H5OH)+ is reduced in parallel on the cathode (Eq. 17).
The described process is simple, eco-friendly, requires no expensive instruments, 
and neither surfactants nor additional reducing agents are needed [76].
(13)
Ag0 + C2H5OH →

Ag(C2H5OH)
+ + e−
E > 0.4 V
(14)
2

Ag(C2H5OH)
+ →Ag2O + C2H5OC2H5
(15)
C2H5OH →CH3CHO + 2H+ + 2e−
(16)
CH3CHO + Ag2O →2Ag0+ CH3COOH
(17)
Ag(C2H5OH)+ + e−→Ag0 + C2H5OH
Fig. 15   Representation  
of the potentiostatic double-
pulse method as described  
in Ref. [72]
EQUILIBRATION PERIOD
OCP AFTER DEPOSITION
GROWTH PULSE
E0
E2
E1
Time
ECONT
t1
t2
NUCLEATION PULSE
Overpotential
0
Cathodic
Anodic

36
N.L. Pacioni et al.
Recently, environmentally friendly synthesis of AgNP was also achieved 
by electroreduction of Ag+ using PVA as an adequate capping agent [79]. The 
obtained AgNP were spherical, with a mean diameter of ~15 nm as determined 
by TEM analysis. The use of PVA presents advantages to be considered; low cost, 
non-toxic, water-soluble, biocompatible and biodegradable. Moreover, the regular 
linear structure of PVA with a large number of side hydroxyl groups on the main 
chain suggests excellent hydrophilicity and reactivity. In fact, cyclic voltammetry 
and FT-IR spectroscopy confirmed that the hydroxyl groups from PVA molecules 
coordinated with the AgNP, making them more stable during a prolonged period. 
Thus, AgNP/PVA colloidal dispersions could be utilized for the production of 
Ag/PVA hydrogels in different forms (thin films, discs and sheets), which could be 
used for biomedical applications as antimicrobial treatments [79].
Electrochemical methods has been also useful to produce AgNP of different 
shapes, like nanorods [71], nanoflakes and nanowires [74]. Silver nanorods have 
been prepared by electroreduction of aqueous solution of AgNO3 in the presence 
of polyethylene glycol (PEG) as capping material and further characterized by 
TEM, X-ray and UV-vis spectroscopy [71]. The results shown that both the con-
centration of AgNO3 and PEG can affect the formation of the nanorods.
Nanowires and nanoflakes were prepared by potentiostatic reduction of Ag+ on 
HOPG electrode in acetonitrile solution containing mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) 
[74]. MPA is immediately adsorbed on the deposited silver and affects further 
growth of the metal. Due to differences in adsorption of thiol molecules onto the 
various crystallographic facets of silver, some directions of growth are favored and 
some are inhibited. In consequence, the deposited silver forms rod and flake-like 
structures which are distributed on the HOPG surface [74].
In summary, most traditional electrochemical methods for production of AgNP 
have been proven to present some additional advantages over chemical methods in 
the synthesis of size-selective or shape-controlled highly pure metal nanomaterials, 
by simple adjusting the current density, solvent conditions, capping agents, etc.
4.1  Sonoelectrochemistry
Combination of ultrasound irradiation and electrochemistry processes date back to 
the 1930s but in the last decade the expansion of this methodology has become 
increasingly important. Sonoelectrochemistry is an alternative method, simple 
and cost effective to obtain AgNP [81]. The diversity of induced effects on elec-
trochemistry processes by ultrasound waves can be attributed to the generation, 
growth and collapse of microbubbles within the electrolyte [82].
A number of different instrumental setups have been used for the incorporation 
of the ultrasound irradiation into the electrochemical systems. The first and simplest 
setup used was the immersion of a conventional electrochemistry cell at a fixed posi-
tion in an ultrasounic bath. One of the most adequate systems was first described 
by Reisse et  al. [83] (Fig.  16). This system used the simplest configuration of a 

37
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
two-electrode cell because the process is under galvanostatic conditions. However, 
undesirable secondary reactions were observed, and so an adaptation was made. The 
replacement of the two-electrode configuration (cathode and anode) by a three-elec-
trode configuration (working, reference and auxiliary electrodes) in the sonoelectro-
chemistry system was performed with the aim of applying a controlled potential to 
the sonoelectrode to obtain better control over the process.
The fundamental basis of the pulsed sonoelectrochemical technique for the 
production of nanopowders is massive nucleation. At the cathode, a pulse of cur-
rent (or potential) reduces a number of cations, depositing a high density of metal 
nuclei on the sonoelectrode surface, and the titanium horn works only as an elec-
trode during this time (TON). After this short electrochemical pulse, a short ultra-
sound pulse of high intensity (TUS) removes the metal particles from the cathode 
surface and replenishes the double layer with metal cations by stirring the solu-
tion. Sometimes, a rest time (TOFF) without current or ultrasonic vibrations fol-
lows the two previous pulses and it is useful to restore the initial conditions close 
to the sonoelectrode surface. Figure  17 shows the pulse distribution with time. 
Electrochemical and ultrasound pulses typically ranges between 100 and 500 ms 
and the rest time lasts no more than 1 s.
Silver nanoparticles have been synthesized using different electrolytes and sta-
bilizers by the pulsed sonoelectrochemistry method. AgNP with different mor-
phology including spheres, rods and dendrites were prepared from an aqueous 
solution of AgNO3 in the presence of nitriloacetate (NTA) [84].
Jiang et al. [85] reported the synthesis of silver nanoparticles with a face-centered 
cubic (fcc) structure in a saturated solution of silver citrate in the presence of PVP. 
Potensiost
WE   RE   CE
Pulse
driver
Ultrasonic
generator
Thermocouple
Fig. 16   Sonoelectrochemistry set-up used in the production of nanopowders (WE working, RE 
reference and CE auxiliary electrode) according to Ref. [81]

38
N.L. Pacioni et al.
Under the experimental conditions used spherical AgNP were prepared with an aver-
age diameter of 20–25 nm.
Some of the advantages of this method are: acceleration of mass transport, clean-
ing and degassing of the electrode surface, and an increased reaction rate [86].
Process yield and particle size are affected by various factors such as the ultra-
sound pulse time and the current density. In general, decreasing temperature, 
shorten pulse duration, high current density and high ultrasound intensity will lead 
to a reduction in crystal size. These parameters need to be optimized in order to 
maximize the nanoparticles production yield and to obtain the smaller size of the 
products depending of their applications.
In addition, undesirable side effects like aggregation can be reduced by control-
ling reactions parameters such as electrodeposition and ultrasound conditions, and 
by using a suitable stabilizer.
5  Characterization Techniques: What Information  
Do They Give Us?
Characterizing metallic nanoparticles as AgNP implies determination of their size, 
shape, chemical composition, and for some applications also their bulk concentra-
tion. Next, we summarize the most common techniques used to characterize the 
synthesized metal nanoparticles including AgNP.
Traditionally, chemical characterization of AgNP has been done using transmis-
sion or scanning electron microscopy (TEM/SEM) followed by energy-dispersive 
X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Also, size exclusion and 
ion chromatography (SEC and IC) with multi-element detection (inductively-
coupled plasma mass spectrometry and optical emission spectroscopy, ICP-MS 
and ICP-OES, respectively) have been applied because of the intrinsic limitations 
of Electron Microscopy. Other disadvantages of EM are charging effects (caused 
Fig. 17   Representation 
of ultrasound and current 
pulse distribution with time 
according to Ref. [69].  
(TON current pulse time,  
TUS ultrasound pulse time 
and TOFF rest time)
TUS
TOFF
TON
time
Ultrasound
intensity
Current
density

39
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
Table 1   Common analytical methods for AgNP characterization
Method
Information
Advantages
Limitations
Turbidimetry/Nephelometry
Concentration with standards
Sample preparation
Low sensitivity (mg/L)
Non invasive and
Non destructive
Sample artifacts
Laser-induced breakdown detection 
(LIBD)
Concentration size
High sensitivity (μg/L)
Dilute solutions
Research-grade Instrumentation
External calibrations
No elemental information
UV-vis spectroscopy
Concentration
Non invasive
Interferences from turbidity
Some structural information
Non destructive
Inductively-coupled plasma atomic 
emission spectroscopy and mass 
spectrometry ICP-AES/ICP-MS
Elemental composition
Simultaneous elemental composition
Requires acid digestion
Very sensitive (μg/L)
Destructive
Selectivity: MS > AES
Expensive instrumentation
MS requires expensive 
instrumentation
Near field scanning optical micros-
copy (NSOM)
Optical image
Non destructive
Low resolution (diffraction limit of 
light/size of nanoparticles)
Size and shape (30 nm level)
Scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM)
Size and shape (1–1 μm)
High resolution
Destructive
Charge effects
Incompatible with wet or liquid 
samples
Transmission EM (TEM)/Scanning 
TEM (STEM)
Size
Very high-resolution
Destructive
Shape
Charge effects
Structural information (up to 
0.1 nm)
Incompatible with wet or liquid 
samples
Expensive instrumentation
(continued)

40
N.L. Pacioni et al.
Table 1   (continued)
Method
Information
Advantages
Limitations
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
Height
Provides 3D surface plots at sub-nm 
resolution with adequate instrumen-
tation (type of tip, scanner, excellent 
signal to noise ratio)
Affected by tip coating and loading
Topography (Resolution < 0.1 nm)
Overestimation of lateral dimensions
Dynamic light scattering (DLS)
Hydrodynamic diameter (>3 nm)
Simple and rapid analysis
Limited capability for polydisperse 
samples
Electrophoretic mobility (EM)
Zeta potential (ξ)
Simple and rapid analysis
Interpretation in terms of nanoparticle 
surface

41
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
by  accumulation of static electric fields),  ~10  % of uncertainties in quantitative 
analysis and to operate under vacuum conditions [87, 88].
Imaging in fluid solutions is possible using atomic force microscopy (AFM), 
in which 3D surface profiles can be achieved with height resolutions of ~0.5 nm. 
The main limitation of AFM is that the geometry of the tip is often larger than the 
particles being probed and this leads to errors in the onset and offset of particle 
topography on a scan, resulting in overestimations of the lateral dimensions of the 
nanoparticles [88].
The spectral response of AgNP in the visible and infrared region of the electro-
magnetic spectrum has attracted even more attention. The phenomenon known as 
the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is localized on the surface of the nanostructure 
[89]. These resonances stem from the collective oscillation of surface conduction 
electrons driven by the incident electromagnetic field. The SPR properties of metal 
nanoparticles are strongly size and shape dependent in addition to capping effects 
and dielectric constant of the medium, see Chap. “Silver Nanoparticles: From Bulk 
Material to Colloidal Nanoparticles”. Thus, control over the size and shape of metal 
nanoparticles is of considerable importance. In a UV-Vis spectrum, the average par-
ticle size is associated with the maximum absorption wavelength, while the particle 
dispersion is related with the full width at half maximum (fwhm) [87].
Scattering techniques like static (SLS) and dynamic light scattering (DLS), or 
neutron scattering, such as small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) are also use-
ful for nanoparticle characterization. For example, DLS is particularly employed 
for sizing nanoparticles and determining their state of aggregation in suspensions 
[90]. Other laser-based techniques include Raman spectroscopy and laser-induced 
fluorescence (LIF) allowing a better understanding of physical properties [90].
Thermogravimetry and differential thermo analysis (TG–DTA) are useful for 
investigating the thermal stability and decomposition, dehydration, oxidation, as 
well as the determination of volatile content and other compositional analysis. TG 
in combination with a mass spectrometer can be used for surface analysis [90]. 
Properties of dispersed particles are also studied by electrophoresis in particular, for 
measuring the zeta potential that informs about the overall charge of a particle and 
gives an indication of the stability of a colloidal system against agglomeration [90].
In Table 1 are summarized the main methods available for the analysis of AgNP 
ordered by the information obtained [87, 88, 90].
6  Concluding Remarks
Silver nanoparticles can be obtained by either a top-down or bottom-up approach. 
Hundreds of research articles reporting different synthetic methods for AgNP are 
published every year. Throughout this chapter we have reviewed only some of the 
most relevant works, dealing mostly with bottom-up: chemical reduction, photo-
chemical and electrochemical methods. The particle formation mechanisms were 
discussed as a key to understand (and predict) the outcome of any synthetic method.

42
N.L. Pacioni et al.
Depending on the AgNP application, the choice of the synthetic route is not a 
trivial decision as the product (e.g. size and shape) depends on the metal precur-
sor, capping selection, reaction temperature, etc. Nucleation and growth mecha-
nisms do not always follow classical models (La Mer´s) as it has been described, 
for example, in the case of chemical reduction using sodium borohydride, and this 
affects mainly the final size together with polidispersity. For its part, the polyol 
method represents a chemical alternative to modulate the shape by selecting the 
adequate PVP/Ag+ concentration ratio.
Light-assisted methods for AgNP are attractive due to their high versatility, 
selectivity and possibility to have control over the final particles shape and size. 
Electrochemical methods also permit selection of shape and size by adjusting 
parameters like current density, solvent conditions, pulse duration, etc.
Finally, we expect this chapter to be helpful on deciding the most appropriate 
method to synthesize AgNP to accomplish the readers’ purposes.
Acknowledgments  We want to thank to all the researchers whose work has been cited 
in here. C.D.B thanks the Agencia de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica (ANPCyT) 
and  Universidad Nacional de Santiago del Estero  (UNSE) for combined financial support 
(PICTO-UNSE-2012-0013). N.L.P and A.V.V would like to thank funding support from 
CONICET, ANPCyT-PICT 2011-0106, SECYT-UNC and Mincyt-Córdoba. N.P., A.V., V.R., and 
C.D.B. are research members of the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
(CONICET) of Argentina.
References
	 1.	Rogers, K.R., et al.: Alterations in physical state of silver nanoparticles exposed to synthetic 
human stomach fluid. Sci. Total Environ. 420, 334–339 (2012)
	 2.	Alarcon, E.I., et al.: The biocompatibility and antibacterial properties of collagen-stabilized, 
photochemically prepared silver nanoparticles. Biomaterials 33(19), 4947–4956 (2012)
	 3.	Lee, P.C., Meisel, D.: Adsorption and surface-enhanced raman of dyes on silver and gold sol. 
J. Phys. Chem. 86, 3391–3395 (1982)
	 4.	Li, W., et al.: Dimers of silver nanospheres: facile synthesis and their use as hot spots for 
surface-enhanced raman scattering. Nano Lett. 9, 485–490 (2009)
	 5.	Alvarez-Puebla, R.A., Aroca, R.F.: Synthesis of silver nanoparticles with controllable surface 
charge and their application to surface-enhanced raman scattering. Anal. Chem. 81, 2280–
2285 (2009)
	 6.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., Scaiano, J.: Optimal size of silver nanoparticles for surface-enhanced 
raman spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. C 115, 1403–1409 (2011)
	 7.	Marsich, L., et al.: Poly-l-lysine-coated silver nanoparticles as positively charged substrates 
for surface-enhanced raman scattering. Langmuir 28, 13166–13171 (2012)
	 8.	Li, J.M., et al.: Detecting trace melamine in solution by SERS using Ag nanoparticle coated 
poly(styrene-co-acrylic acid) nanospheres as novel active substrates. Langmuir 27(23), 
14539–14544 (2011)
	 9.	Wang, B., Zhang, L., Zhou, X.: Synthesis of silver nanocubes as a SERS substrate for the 
determination of pesticide paraoxon and thiram. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. 
Spectrosc. 121, 63–69 (2014)
	10.	Hornyak, G.L., et al.: Introduction to Nanosciences. CRC Press. Taylor & Francis Group, 
Boca Raton (2008)

43
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
	11.	Narayanan, K.B., Sakthivel, N.: Biological synthesis of metal nanoparticles by microbes. 
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 156(1–2), 1–13 (2010)
	12.	Hebbalalu, D., et al.: Greener techniques for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles using plant 
extracts, enzymes, bacteria, biodegradable polymers, and microwaves. ACS Sustain. Chem. 
Eng. 1(7), 703–712 (2013)
	13.	Rycenga, M., et al.: Controlling the synthesis and assembly of silver nanostructures for plas-
monic applications. Chem. Rev. 111(6), 3669–3712 (2011)
	14.	Sun, Y.: Controlled synthesis of colloidal silver nanoparticles in organic solutions: empirical 
rules for nucleation engineering. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 2497–2511 (2013)
	15.	Sakamoto, M., Fujistuka, M., Majima, T.: Light as a construction tool of metal nanoparticles: 
synthesis and mechanism. J. Photochem. Photobiol. C 10(1), 33–56 (2009)
	16.	Cushing, B.L., Kolesnichenko, V.L., Oconnor, C.J.: Recent advances in the liquid-phase syn-
theses of inorganic nanoparticles. Chem. Rev. 104, 3893–3946 (2004)
	17.	Vanysek, P.: Electrochemical series. In: Lide, D.R. (ed) CRC Handbook of Chemistry and 
Physics, p. 8.21–8.31. CRC Press, LLC (2003–2004)
	18.	Hoonacker, A.V., Englebienne, P.: Revisiting silver nanoparticle chemical synthesis and sta-
bility by optical spectroscopy. Curr. Nanosci. 2, 359–371 (2006)
	19.	Hudnall, P.M.: Hydroquinone. In: Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry. Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, KGaA (2000)
	20.	Turkevich, J., Stevenson, P.C., Hillier, J.: A study of the nucleation and growth processes in 
the synthesis of colloidal gold. Discuss. Faraday Soc. 55–75, (1951)
	21.	Pillai, Z.S., Kamat, P.V.: What factors control the size and shape of silver nanoparticles in the 
citrate ion reduction method? J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 945–951 (2004)
	22.	Henglein, A., Giersig, M.: Formation of colloidal silver nanoparticles: capping action of cit-
rate. J. Phys. Chem. B 103, 9533–9539 (1999)
	23.	Segur, J.B., Oberstar, H.E.: Viscosity of glycerol and its aqueous solutions. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
43(9), 2117–2120 (1951)
	24.	Steinigeweg, D., Schlücker, S.: Monodispersity and size control in the synthesis of 
20–100 nm quasi-spherical silver nanoparticles by citrate and ascorbic acid reduction in glyc-
erol–water mixtures. Chem. Commun. 48(69), 8682–8684 (2012)
	25.	Caswell, K.K., Bender, C.M., Murphy, C.J.: Seedless, surfactantless wet chemical synthesis 
of silver nanowires. Nano Lett. 3(5), 667–669 (2003)
	26.	Van Hyning, D.L., Zukoski, C.F.: Formation mechanisms and aggregation behavior of boro-
hydride reduced silver particles. Langmuir 14, 7034–7040 (1998)
	27.	Viswanatha, R., Sarma, D.: Growth of nanocrystals in solution. In: Rao, C.N.R., Müller, 
A. Cheetham A.K. (eds.) Nanomaterials Chemistry, p. 139–170. WILEY-VCH, Weinheim 
(2007)
	28.	La Mer, V.K., Dinegar, R.H.: Theory, production and mechanism of formation of monodis-
perse hydrosols. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 72, 4847–4854 (1950)
	29.	Polte, J., et al.: Formation mechanism of colloidal silver nanoparticles: analogies and differ-
ences to the growth of gold nanoparticles. ACS Nano 6(7), 5791–5802 (2012)
	30.	Wuithschick, M., et al.: Size-controlled synthesis of colloidal silver nanoparticles based on 
mechanistic understanding. Chem. Mater. 25, 4679–4689 (2013)
	31.	Perez, M.A., et al.: Hydroquinone synthesis of silver nanoparticles: a simple model reaction 
to understand the factors that determine their nucleation and growth. Cryst. Growth Des. 8, 
1377–1383 (2008)
	32.	Patakfalvi, R., Dekany, I.: Nucleation and growth of silver nanoparticles monitored by titra-
tion microcalorimetry. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 79, 587–594 (2005)
	33.	Yoosaf, K., et al.: In situ synthesis of metal nanoparticles and selective naked-eye detection 
of lead ions from aqueous media. J. Phys. Chem. C 111, 12839–12847 (2007)
	34.	Gallardo, O., et al.: Silver oxide particles/silver nanoparticles interconversion: susceptibility 
of forward/backward reactions to the chemical environment at room temperature. RSC Adv. 
2(7), 2923 (2012)

44
N.L. Pacioni et al.
	35.	Wan, Y., et al.: Quasi-spherical silver nanoparticles: Aqueous synthesis and size control by 
the seed-mediated Lee-Meisel method. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 394, 263–268 (2013)
	36.	Wiley, B., Sun, Y., Xia, Y.: Synthesis of silver nanostructures with controlled shapes and 
properties. Acc. Chem. Res. 40(10), 1067–1076 (2007)
	37.	Burda, C., et al.: Chemistry and properties of nanocrystals of different shapes. Chem. Rev. 
105(4), 1025–1102 (2005)
	38.	Pastoriza-Santos, I., Liz-Marzán, L.M.: Formation and stabilization of silver nanoparticles 
through reduction by N,N-Dimethylformamide. Langmuir 15, 948–951 (1999)
	39.	Pastoriza-Santos, I., Liz-Marzán, L.M.: Synthesis of silver nanoprisms in DMF. Nano Lett. 
2(8), 903–905 (2002)
	40.	Rodríguez-Gattorno, G., et al.: Metallic nanoparticles from spontaneous reduction of silver(I) 
in DMSO. Interaction between nitric oxide and silver nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. B 106, 
2482–2487 (2002)
	41.	Sun, Y., Xia, Y.: Shape-controlled synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles. Science 
298(5601), 2176–2179 (2002)
	42.	Sun, Y., et al.: Polyol synthesis of uniform silver nanowires: a plausible growth mechanism 
and the supporting evidence. Nano Lett. 3(7), 955–960 (2003)
	43.	Sun, Y., et al.: Uniform silver nanowires synthesis by reducing AgNO3 with ethylene glycol 
in the presence of seeds and poly(Vinyl Pyrrolidone). Chem. Mater. 14, 4736–4745 (2002)
	44.	Wiley, B., et  al.: Polyol synthesis of silver nanoparticles: use of chloride and oxygen to 
promote the formation of single-crystal, truncated cubes and tetrahedrons. Nano Lett. 4(9), 
1733–1739 (2004)
	45.	Lin, J.-Y., Hsueh, Y.-L., Huang, J.-J.: The concentration effect of capping agent for synthesis 
of silver nanowire by using the polyol method. J. Solid State Chem. (2014)
	46.	Tao, A., Habas, S., Yang, P.: Shape control of colloidal metal nanocrystals. Small 4(3), 310–
325 (2008)
	47.	Wiley, B., et  al.: Shape-controlled synthesis of metal nanostructures: the case of silver. 
Chem. Eur. J. 11(2), 454–463 (2005)
	48.	Stamplecoskie, K., Scaiano, J.: Silver as an example of the applications of photochemistry to 
the synthesis and uses of nanomaterials. Photochem. Photobiol. 88(4), 762–768 (2012)
	49.	Mafuné, F., et al.: Structure and stability of silver nanoparticles in aqueous solution produced 
by laser ablation. J. Phys. Chem. B 104(35), 8333–8337 (2000)
	50.	Bae, C.H., Nam, S.H., Park, S.M.: Formation of silver nanoparticles by laser ablation of a 
silver target in NaCl solution. Appl. Surf. Sci. 197–198, 628–634 (2002)
	51.	Tsuji, T., Okazaki, Y., Tsuji, M.: Photo-induced morphological conversions of silver nano-
particles prepared using laser ablation in water—Enhanced morphological conversions using 
halogen etching. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A 194(2–3), 247–253 (2008)
	52.	Jiménez, E., et al.: A novel method of nanocrystal fabrication based on laser ablation in liq-
uid environment. Superlattices Microstruct. 43(5–6), 487–493 (2008)
	53.	Hada, H., et al.: Photoreduction of silver ion in aqueous and alcoholic solutions. J. Phys. 
Chem. 80(25), 2728–2731 (1976)
	54.	Guang-Nian, X., et al.: Preparation and characterization of stable monodisperse silver nano-
particles via photoreduction. Colloids Surf. A 320(1–3), 222–226 (2008)
	55.	Huang, H.H., et al.: Photochemical formation of silver nanoparticles in poly(N-vinylpyrro-
lidone). Langmuir 12(4), 909–912 (1996)
	56.	Gaddy, G.A., et al.: Photogeneration of silver particles in PVA fibers and films. J. Clust. Sci. 
12(3), 457–471 (2001)
	57.	Huang, H.T., Yang, Y.: Preparation of silver nanoparticles in inorganic clay suspensions. 
Compos. Sci. Technol. 68(14), 2948–2953 (2008)
	58.	Chegel, V., et al.: Ag nanoparticle-poly(acrylic acid) composite film with dynamic plasmonic 
properties. Aust. J. Chem. 65(9), 1223–1227 (2012)
	59.	Scaiano, J.C., et al.: Photochemical routes to silver and gold nanoparticles. Pure Appl. Chem. 
81(4), 635–647 (2009)

45
Synthetic Routes for the Preparation …
	60.	Scaiano, J.C., et al.: Magnetic field control of photoinduced silver nanoparticle formation. J. 
Phys. Chem. B 110(26), 12856–12859 (2006)
	61.	Alarcon, E., et al.: Human serum albumin as protecting agent of silver nanoparticles: role 
of the protein conformation and amine groups in the nanoparticle stabilization. J. Nanopart. 
Res. 15(1), 1374 (2013)
	62.	Jockusch, S., et  al.: Photochemistry and photophysics of α-Hydroxy ketones. 
Macromolecules 34(6), 1619–1626 (2001)
	63.	Gonzalez, C.M., Liu, Y., Scaiano, J.C.: Photochemical strategies for the facile synthesis of 
gold-silver alloy and core-shell bimetallic nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. C 113(27), 11861–
11867 (2009)
	64.	McGilvray, K.L., et al.: Photochemical strategies for the seed-mediated growth of gold and 
gold—silver nanoparticles. Langmuir 28(46), 16148–16155 (2012)
	65.	Maretti, L., et al.: Facile photochemical synthesis and characterization of highly fluorescent 
silver nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131(39), 13972–13980 (2009)
	66.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., Scaiano, J.: Kinetics of the formation of silver dimers: early stages in 
the formation of silver nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133(11), 3913–3920 (2011)
	67.	Callegari, A., Tonti, D., Chergui, M.: Photochemically grown silver nanoparticles with wave-
length-controlled size and shape. Nano Lett. 3(11), 1565–1568 (2003)
	68.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., Scaiano, J.: Light emitting diode irradiation can control the morphology 
and optical properties of silver nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132(6), 1825–1827 (2010)
	69.	Rodríguez-Sánchez, L., Blanco, M.C., Lopez-Quintela, M.: Electrochemical synthesis of sil-
ver nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. B 104(41), 9683–9688 (2000)
	70.	Tang, Z., et al.: Electrochemical synthesis of Ag nanoparticles on functional carbon surfaces. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 502(1–2), 146–151 (2001)
	71.	Zhu, J.-J., et  al.: Preparation of silver nanorods by electrochemical methods. Mater. Lett. 
49(2), 91–95 (2001)
	72.	Ueda, M., et al.: Double-pulse technique as an electrochemical tool for controlling the prepa-
ration of metallic nanoparticles. Electrochim. Acta 48(4), 377–386 (2002)
	73.	Ma, H., et al.: Synthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles by a novel electrochemical method. 
Chem. Phys. Chem. 5(1), 68–75 (2004)
	74.	Mazur, M.: Electrochemically prepared silver nanoflakes and nanowires. Electrochemi. 
Commun. 6(4), 400–403 (2004)
	75.	Jian, Z., Xiang, Z., Yongchang, W.: Electrochemical synthesis and fluorescence spectrum 
properties of silver nanospheres. Microelectron. Eng. 77(1), 58–62 (2005)
	76.	Starowicz, M., Stypuła, B., Banas´, J.: Electrochemical synthesis of silver nanoparticles. 
Electrochem. Commun. 8(2), 227–230 (2006)
	77.	Hu, M.Z., Easterly, C.E.: A novel thermal electrochemical synthesis method for production 
of stable colloids of “naked” metal (Ag) nanocrystals. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 29(3), 726–736 
(2009)
	78.	Khaydarov, R., et  al.: Electrochemical method for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles. J. 
Nanopartic. Res. 11(5), 1193–1200 (2009)
	79.	Surudzic, R., et al.: Electrochemical synthesis of silver nanoparticles in poly(vinyl alcohol) 
solution. J. Serb. Chem. Soc. 78(12), 2087–2098 (2013)
	80.	Plieth, W., et al.: Electrochemical preparation of silver and gold nanoparticles: characteri-
zation by confocal and surface enhanced Raman microscopy. Surf. Sci. 597(1–3), 119–126 
(2005)
	81.	Sáez, V., Mason, T.: Sonoelectrochemical synthesis of nanoparticles. Molecules 14(10), 
4284–4299 (2009)
	82.	Compton, R.G., Eklund, J.C., Marken, F.: Sonoelectrochemical processes: a review. 
Electroanal 9(7), 509–522 (1997)
	83.	Reisse, J., et al.: Sonoelectrochemistry in aqueous electrolyte: a new type of sonoelectroreac-
tor. Electrochim. Acta 39(1), 37–39 (1994)

46
N.L. Pacioni et al.
	84.	Zhu, J., et al.: Shape-controlled synthesis of silver nanoparticles by pulse sonoelectrochemi-
cal methods. Langmuir 16, 6396–6399 (2000)
	85.	Jiang, L.-P., et al.: A novel route for the preparation of monodisperse silver nanoparticles via 
a pulsed sonoelectrochemical technique. Inorg. Chem. Commun. 7(4), 506–509 (2004)
	86.	Mason, T.J., Lorimer, J.P., Walton, D.J.: Sonoelectrochemistry. Ultrasonics 28(5), 333–337 
(1990)
	87.	Liu, J., et al.: Methods for separation, identification, characterization and quantification of 
silver nanoparticles. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 33, 95–106 (2012)
	88.	Ferreira da Silva, B., et al.: Analytical chemistry of metallic nanoparticles in natural environ-
ments. TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 30(3), 528–540 (2011)
	89.	Zheng, X., et al.: Photochemical formation of silver nanodecahedra: structural selection by 
the excitation wavelength. Langmuir 25, 3802–3807 (2009)
	90.	Tiede, K., et al.: Detection and characterization of engineered nanoparticles in food and the 
environment. Food Addit. Contam. 25, 795–821 (2008)

47
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering 
(SERS) Using Nanoparticles
Altaf Khetani, Ali Momenpour, Vidhu S. Tiwari and Hanan Anis
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
E.I. Alarcon et al. (eds.), Silver Nanoparticle Applications, Engineering Materials, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6_3
Abstract  Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is one of the most 
promising label-free techniques for molecular sensing. In this chapter, we review 
the fundamental concepts of Raman spectroscopy and the need for SERS. We then 
discuss the fundamentals of SERS and focus on silver nanoparticles. This is fol-
lowed by reviewing recent progress and applications of SERS. Finally, we discuss 
methods for further enhancing SERS signal using hollow core fibers.
1  Introduction
Raman spectroscopy is an effective analytical technique used to obtain opti-
cal ‘fingerprints’ of molecules. Raman spectra usually contain many sharp peaks 
that correspond to specific molecular vibrational frequencies, and these can pro-
vide a clear signature defining the presence of specific molecules in a sample. 
Accordingly, Raman spectra can be used to qualitatively and quantitatively dis-
criminate between chemical species in materials [1]. Despite these capabilities, a 
key limitation of the Raman effect is its extremely weak signal, which means that 
high power lasers and longer acquisition times are required. This in turn can lead 
to sample damage and thus limit biological application. Bypassing this shortcom-
ing is achieved by surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) [2].
A. Khetani · A. Momenpour · H. Anis (*) 
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,  
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada
e-mail: hanis@uottawa.ca
V.S. Tiwari 
SRM University, Sonepat–Kundli Urban Complex Sonepat,  
Haryana 131029, India

48
A. Khetani et al.
SERS, used for extremely low concentrations of molecules overcomes the low 
Raman cross-section barrier by exploiting the large field enhancement caused 
by electromagnetic coupling between the nanoparticles. Under such conditions, 
the Raman signal of the target molecule is enhanced by several orders of mag-
nitude, enabling detection down to a single molecule [3–6]. In general, SERS is 
performed on a gold (Au), silver (Ag) or copper (Cu) colloidal or substrate. The 
majority of SERS experiments utilizes Au and Ag, as they are air stable and the 
absorbance is mostly in visible and near IR wavelengths. Over the years, research-
ers have strived to optimize the structure, shape, volume-ratio and configuration to 
obtain maximum enhancement of SERS signals.
For highly optimized configurations, enhancement of the Raman signal in the 
order of 106–108 has been obtained. There are basically two main reasons for the 
amplified Raman signal. One is the strong enhancement of the electromagnetic 
field by the localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of metallic nanostructures, 
which is considered the main contributor to the SERS enhancement factor. The 
other reason is the surface chemical enhancement mechanism [7, 8].
SERS has been predominantly used as an analytical technique in the fields of 
biochemistry, forensics, food safety, threat detection and medical diagnostics [4, 
9–11]. The reasons for the popularity of SERS are that it offers: (i) molecular fin-
gerprints down to the level of single molecule detection, (ii) label-free detection 
as opposed to fluorescence spectroscopy, (iii) multiplex detection, (iv) minimal 
sample requirements, and (v) in situ and in vitro characterization of biological 
samples.
‘Multivariate analysis’ has played an important role in SERS spectroscopy as 
it is used for quantitative analysis, particularly when there is an overlap of the 
Raman bands of interest with those of the sampling media (e.g. serum, blood). It 
provides a simple calibration curve between the Raman signal intensity and the 
sample concentration. Multivariate methods, such as Partial Least Squares (PLS) 
perform the quantitative spectral data analysis by constructing models in which 
the response Y-variable (analytical data) depends on more than one explanatory 
X-variable (Raman shift wave number). During the formulation of the calibration 
model, linear combinations of only X-variables that are related to the response 
‘Y-variable’ are considered. Thus, PLS has been successfully applied to quanti-
tatively and qualitatively identify components in complex mixtures, tissues and 
cells [12].
The increasing interest in SERS can be seen by the growth in the number of 
publications shown in Fig. 1, where SERS had been used in the past two to three 
decades. Although different metallic nanoparticles have been used in SERS stud-
ies, this chapter mainly focuses on SERS and its applications using silver nano-
particles (AgNP). Section 2 in this chapter revises the theory and principles behind 
SERS, and in Sect. 3 we outline the use of AgNP in SERS applications. In Sects. 4 
and 5, we summarize recent progress and applications in the SERS field. Finally, 
in Sect. 6, recent advances in the use of AgNP for SERS mediated analysis of bio-
molecules (rhodamine, adenosine) with novel photonic crystal fiber is presented.

49
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
2  Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
2.1  Fundamentals of SERS
Raman scattering is an inelastic phenomenon that occurs when a sample is illumi-
nated by a laser light, as first demonstrated by Raman and Krishnan in 1928 [13]. 
Most of the photons emitted after scattering have the same frequency as the inci-
dent photons (Rayleigh scattering) while a relatively small number of the scattered 
photons (approximately 1 in 106–1010 photons [14, 15]) have shifted frequencies. 
The downshift or upshift in frequency is designated as stokes or anti-stokes Raman 
scattering, and provides information about vibrational transition in molecules. 
Since only a few photons are Raman scattered, there has been considerable interest 
in how to increase the weak Raman signal.
SERS is a method widely used to enhance the intensity of the Raman signal. 
First observed by Fleischmann in 1974 [16], SERS relies on adsorption of the ana-
lyte onto the surface of metal structures (typically silver, gold or copper). Raman 
intensity of molecules adsorbed on the surface of specific metals can be 106–108 
times stronger than the normal Raman intensity of that molecule. This illustrates 
the importance of SERS and its association with metal structures, the subject mat-
ter of this chapter and discussed in the following sections.
Raman is proportional to the square of the electric dipole moment of the mole-
cule (p = αE). The polarizability (α) or electric fields (E) are two possible reasons 
for this enhancement. The enhancement due to polarizability is called chemi-
cal enhancement, and that due to electric fields is called electromagnetic (EM) 
mechanism. In EM enhancement, the mechanism of SERS is described by the 
electromagnetic model, which considers a small amount of illuminated metal in 
an electromagnetic field. According to the EM mechanism, the electric field near 
a metal particle is enhanced because of surface plasmon excitation. The surface 
plasmon is a confined excitation of electron gas near the surface of the metal. This 
enhancement in the local electric field causes more intense electronic transition in 
Fig. 1   Representation of 
the number of research 
articles published in the 
period 1979–2014 showing 
the popularity of the surface 
enhanced Raman technique. 
Data obtained from Web of 
Science search using the term 
“surface enhanced Raman” 
accessed on May 26th, 2014

50
A. Khetani et al.
the analyte adsorbed at the metal surface, and leads to an enhanced Raman signal 
[17]. In this model, it is assumed that the metal diameter is much smaller than the 
wavelength of the exciting light.
The other enhancement mechanism via a chemical route can manifest in three 
different ways [18, 19]. Figure 2 shows the different types of enhancement mecha-
nisms, with the highest occupied molecular orbit (HOMO) and the lowest unoc-
cupied molecular orbit (LUMO) indicated. The first chemical mechanism, known 
as ground state chemical enhancement, is the simplest case. It can occur when the 
adsorbate does not bind covalently to the metal. In this case, enhancement takes 
place due to ground state chemical interactions between the molecule and nano-
particles that are not associated with any excitations of the nanoparticle-molecule 
system. The presence of the metal perturbs the electronic structure of the analyte, 
causing a ‘mild’ change in its electronic distribution. In this case, the charge trans-
fer (CT) is not required.
The Second, resonance Raman enhancement, involves the presence of the 
nanoparticle surface-molecule complex, either by direct (covalent) binding to the 
metal or by indirect binding with the help of an electrolyte ion (typically chloride). 
This surface complex changes the intrinsic polarizability of the molecule. The sur-
face complex can also create a new electronic state that is explicitly in resonance, 
or close to being in resonance with the laser, thus contributing to the enhancement 
of a resonant Raman type.
Lastly, charge-transfer resonance, the last of the chemical phenomena, and 
this is a more sophisticated version of resonance Raman enhancement, involving 
charge transfer between the analyte and the metal. This can occur when the differ-
ence between the Fermi level (EF) of the metal and the HOMO or LUMO energies 
of the molecule is matched by the laser, and the excitation wavelength resonates 
with the nanoparticle–molecule charge transfer transitions.
Overall, the relative contribution of the different mechanisms depends on the 
experimental conditions but understanding the chemical enhancement contributions 
Fig.  2   Illustration of the different types of enhancement mechanism in SERS. Adapted from 
Ref. [19]. Royal Society of Chemistry® 2008

51
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
to SERS is complex, and requires very accurate electronic structure calculations of 
the molecule-metal system.
The contribution of the chemical mechanism to the overall enhancement 
of SERS is much less than that of the EM mechanism. The enhancement fac-
tor (EF), a parameter used to evaluate the SERS, shows that SERS that is due to 
the EM mechanism, is approximately 106, as compared to it is 10–100 for the 
chemical mechanism. The overall enhancement of SERS, by the superposition of 
EM enhancement and CT enhancement, can thus be in the 106–108 range [20]. 
Essentially, it has been shown that the use of stronger electromagnetic fields leads 
to higher enhancement factors.
2.2  Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance
As discussed in the previous section, enhancement resultant from the EM is 
due to surface plasmon resonance or SPR that is produced near the nanoparti-
cle and the studied molecule. Free electron charges on the metallic nanoparticles 
respond to external electromagnetic fields (laser light), and oscillate at resonance 
wavelengths.
Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) depends strongly on the optical 
properties of metallic nanoparticles, which is described by a complex dielectric 
constant (ϵ) or a complex refractive index (m = √ϵ):
where n is the refractive index, and k is the absorption coefficient of nanoparticles. 
The LSPR depends on the wavelength of incident light due to the wavelength-
dependency of the dielectric constant of nanoparticles. For a metallic sphere in the 
presence of an external field show that LSPR can be observed when the nanopar-
ticle diameter, d, is far smaller than the laser light (d ≪ λ). In this circumstance, 
the electric field of the light can be considered uniform, and electrostatic equations 
can be solved [21]. The solution of Maxwell’s equations for a spheroid metallic 
particle, leads to an expression for the extinction E(λ) (the sum of absorption and 
scattering) of a nanoparticle:
This relation shows that the electric field depends on the dielectric constants of 
nanoparticles. The different metals (silver, gold and copper) and their diverse 
optical constants represent different enhancement. For example, AgNP provide 
10–100 times higher efficiency than gold nanoparticles [21]. The other parame-
ter, known as the shape factor (χ), describes the deviation from spherical particle 
(1)
∈() = ∈r () + i ∈i ()
(2)
m = n + ik
(3)
E() ∝
∈i ()
(∈r () + χ ∈med)2+ ∈i ()2

52
A. Khetani et al.
geometrics into higher aspect ratio structures. This relation shows that the extinc-
tion of nanoparticles is strongly dependent on particle shape, and Fig. 3 depicts 
the dependency of plasmon resonance on particle shape. The major to minor axis 
ratio, r, varies from 10 to 1. Figure 3 shows the red shift in the peak as the particle 
becomes more oblate [22].
The red shift also appears when the nanoparticle size is increased. SERS increases 
with particle size because the enhancement of electromagnetic field intensity depends 
upon the number of atoms that are excited and the volume of the nanostructure [3]. 
This effect on surface plasmon is not limited to spherical particles. To illustrate this, 
the SERS of silver nanorods with an aspect ratio of 10, is 10–100 times higher than 
that of a sphere, and this is simply due to shape [23]. For nanoparticles with sharper 
corners and edges producing higher SERS enhancement [24] and metal with a rough 
surface causes more SERS, due to more localized surface plasmon and stronger field 
gradients [10]. Specific roughness causes some activity in the surface plasmon, and 
changes the resonant frequency which enables more scattering [25].
The laser wavelength is more critical when the surface plasmon absorption 
spectrum is relatively narrow. In this case, the wavelength dependence is very 
critical, because for SERS the surface plasmon is excited by laser light. The 
broadening of surface plasmon absorption, which depends on the aggregation 
where higher aggregation means broader plasmon that is accompanied by a hyp-
sochromic shift [22]. In other words, if the plasmon peak is at λ1, when aggre-
gating occurs it shifts to λ2, where λ2 > λ1. Making the nanoparticles less stable 
and forcing them to aggregate creates a collection of different absorption bands. 
However, enhancement depends on the degree of overlap of the excitation wave-
length with the plasmon frequency, which as discussed above is shifted during 
nanoparticle aggregation. Further, calculations show that the EM enhancement is 
strongly (i.e. the inverse twelfth power) dependent on the metal-molecule distance. 
With increasing distance, the EF decreases due to the declining intensity of the 
dipole moment. Notably, however, this does not mean that enhancement requires 
direct contact of the metal surface and the molecule [26].
Fig. 3   The extinction spectra 
of different spheroids, with 
the same equivalent volume, 
corresponding to a sphere 
radius of 80 nm. Reprinted 
with permission from Ref. 
[22]. Copyright (2002) 
American Chemical Society

53
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
3  Recent Progress in SERS
SERS can provide orders of magnitude increases in Raman intensity, thereby 
overcoming the traditional drawback of Raman scattering: its inherent weakness. 
Over the last decade, various approaches to enhance the Raman signal have been 
attempted, with a wide range of analytes.
Recently, a great deal of attention has been paid to sensitivity. Some research-
ers have applied SERS for the detection of biologically relevant small molecules. 
Rapid and accurate detection of bioagents was the aim of Van Duyne’s group, who 
used SERS to detect anthrax biomarkers [27]. They described a procedure for 
the rapid extraction of CaDPA from B. subtilis spores, simulants for B. anthracis 
spores, followed by SERS detection on reproducible and stable silver film over a 
nanosphere substrate. They used silver film over nanosphere (AgFON) as a SERS 
substrate, and measured the spore concentration range down to 10−14 M. A group 
from the University of Georgia at Athens (UGA) placed rows of silver nanorods 
on a slide, and detected biological agents or pathogen at attomolar (10−18 M)  
levels [28]. Other research related to highly sensitive SERS detection was per-
formed by Hongyan Liang et  al., who prepared monodispersed “flower-like” 
AgNP [29]. These nanoparticles have a rough surface and they were used for mal-
achite green isothiocyanate (MGITC) molecules detection, at concentrations down 
to 10−10 molar. By comparing the intensity of molecular peaks, they demonstrated 
that the sensitivity of this type of nanoparticles is 106–108 times higher than that 
of normal Raman scattering.
One of the main challenges of SERS is long-term stability and reproducibility. 
The well-ordered metal nanostructure approach is one of the promising ways to cre-
ate a stable and reproducible spectrum. In this SERS substrate, the periodic nano-
structure of the substrate is covered by the exciting laser. Because the spot of the 
exciting beam is usually in the range of microns, the entire SERS substrate is excited 
homogenously. Baia et al., reported the use of a corrugated gold film onto highly 
ordered polystyrene nanospheres, as SERS-active substrates. SERS experiments for 
the detection of R6G were efficient to detect discrete molecules adsorbed onto the 
surface [30]. Zhang et al. investigated and developed a SERS substrate by physical 
vapour deposition of silver nanolayers onto different types of paper. They demon-
strated the detection of analyte concentration down to 10−10 M [31], which presents 
an important advance toward the development of a low cost SERS sensor.
4  SERS: Applications
In this section, we revise four relevant SERS applications. The first is based on 
AgNP for DNA and tumorigenic cells detection. The second deals detection of 
toxic substances and the third is the application of SERS for forensic applications. 
Lastly, we discuss the value of SERS in single molecule detection.

54
A. Khetani et al.
4.1  SERS for Biomedical Sensing Applications
SERS has become a widely used technique in the detection of biological sub-
stances including biomolecules (DNA and proteins) and cancer cells [32–42]. 
AgNP based SERS has been used to detect nasopharyngeal cancer [34], gastric 
cancer [35, 36], hepatocellular carcinoma [37], esophageal cancer [35], oral can-
cer [39] and breast cancer [40]. In some of these studies, AgNP was mixed with 
whole blood to detect circulating cancer cells. Feng et al. developed simple blood 
plasma biochemical analysis for non-invasive nasopharyngeal cancer detection 
[34]. Statistical techniques, such as principal component analysis (PCA) com-
bined with linear discriminate analysis (LDA), were applied to the SERS spectra 
to test the accuracy of the results in differentiating cancer from normal tissues; see 
Fig. 4 [34]. In another study, Lin et al. used AgNP based SERS technology to ana-
lyze and classify human blood plasma, in order to develop a simple and label-free 
blood test for esophageal cancer detection [35].
SERS based DNA sensors are gaining importance, as the existing fluorescence 
methods can be affected by dye photobleaching, and other interferences like back-
ground scattering. Thus, due to its unique characteristics, including, narrow spec-
tral band (<1 nm, half-widths), and reduced susceptibility to both photobleaching 
and self-quenching of the dye, AgNP based SERS has also been explored for DNA 
sensing (see [41–46]).
Figure  5 shows the color change in aggregated NPs when mixed with DNA 
bases, as well their spectra [43]. Wang et al., demonstrated a proof-of-principle 
concept, in which an AgNP based SERS nanoprobe was used for early microbial 
detection in patients [47]. As a model for the approach, the nanoprobe was used 
Fig.  4   a TEM micrograph of Ag colloidal surface with UV/visible absorption curve of 
the pure Ag colloid. b (A) SERS spectrum of the blood plasma sample from a patient with 
­nasopharyngeal cancer, obtained by mixing the plasma with Ag colloid, (B) the regular Raman 
spectrum of the same plasma sample without the silver sol, and (C) the background Raman  
signal of the anticoagulant agent EDTA mixed with Ag colloid. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref. [34]. Copyright (2010) with permission from Elsevier

55
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
to detect the human radical S-adenosyl methionine domain containing 2 (RSAD2) 
RNA. The human RSAD2 gene is known to be a host-response biomarker for 
respiratory viral infections. The method is essentially a SERS effect modulation 
approach, associated with AgNP and Raman dye-labeled DNA hairpin probes. 
Hybridization with the target sequences opens the hairpin and spatially separates 
the Raman label from the silver surface, thus reducing the SERS signal of the 
label. The process is shown in Fig. 6.
Fig.  5   Photographs of colloidal silver nanoparticles (a, yellow–green) and their aggregates 
induced by thymine (b, yellow), adenine (c, orange), guanine (d, reddish–green), and cytosine 
(e, blue–green) measured 3 min after the addition fig normalized (to 1,307 cm−1) SERS spectra 
of 10−7 M RB for different DNA base-induced silver aggregates (c–f), normal Raman spectra of 
silver colloid (a), and blank RB at 10–7 M (b). Reprinted with permission Ref. [43]. Copyright 
(2008) with permission from Elsevier
Fig. 6   Detection scheme of the molecular sentinel (MS) nanoprobes. Fig B.SERS spectra of the 
RSAD2-MS nanoprobes. Upper spectrum blank (no target DNA present). Middle spectrum in the 
presence of 100 nM non-complementary DNA (negative control). Lower spectrum in the pres-
ence of 100 nM complementary target DNA. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [47]. Copy-
right (2013) with permission from Elsevier

56
A. Khetani et al.
4.2  SERS for Detection of Toxic Substances
Another important application of SERS is to detect highly toxic molecules, such 
as chemical warfare agents and toxic industrial chemicals [48]. The key challenge 
here is to increase the binding affinity of the molecule with the nanoparticles, in 
order to observe SERS. Yan et al. reported SERS detection of nerve agent simu-
lants such as methyl parathion, other chemical warfare simulants such as dime-
thyl methylphosphonate, pinacolyl methylphosphonate, diethyl phosphoramidate 
and 2-chloroethyl ethylsulfide, and bacteria such as Bacillus globigii, Erwinia 
herbicola, and Bacillus thuringiensis, which are simulants for biological warfare 
agents [49]. The high sensitivity of SERS, as well as its ease of operation and fast 
response, makes it highly suitable for environmental analysis. The recent progress 
of SERS in this area has highlighted the detection of organic pollutants, heavy 
metal ions and pathogens. A good, recent example of SERS pesticide detection is 
the work published by Yuan et al., who demonstrated SERS potential for sensitive 
and rapid detection of dithiocarbamate chemicals, detecting thiram at 0.024 ppm. 
This is much lower than the maximal residue limit (MRL) of 7 ppm in fruit pre-
scribed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [50].
The high sensitivity of SERS has also been demonstrated by several research 
groups in their work on the detection of pathogenic bacteria, such as Salmonella 
and Listeria. Recently, Zhou et al. synthesised Ag NPs on the cell walls of bac-
teria for label-free SERS detection of bacteria such as E. coli and S. epidermidis 
in drinking water [51]. Cowcher et al. reported using SERS for the detection of 
Bacillus [52]. In their study, silver colloidal substrates were used to detect Bacillus 
spores at 5 ppb, which is a highly desirable safety level in the food manufacturing 
industry. Melamine, a contaminant found in milk and toddler formula, was also 
detected by several groups using AgNP and SERS (for examples see [53–55]).
4.3  SERS for Forensic Applications
SERS has become technique ubiquitously used in forensic studies for various 
reasons, including its non-invasive nature, small sample size requirements and 
minimal sample preparation. SERS application for forensic analysis was first dem-
onstrated by Seifar et al. in 2001 [56]. In their study, thirteen blue and thirteen 
black ink lines were distinguishable based on their Raman frequencies, spectral 
band shapes and relative band intensities, using silver colloid and poly-l-lysine 
as an aggregator with a 685 nm laser. The results correlated well with standard 
thin layer chromatography (TLC) used to distinguish inks. In another study, Leona 
et al., used a two-step methodology in which a methacrylate gel bead saturated 
with extracting solvents, such as dimethylformamide and ethylenediaminetet-
raacetic acid, was used to extract dye from coloured components. The extracted 
dye was then treated with SERS active AgNP for SERS analysis [57].

57
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
4.4  SERS for Single Molecule Detection
Single molecule identification and detection arguably represents the ultimate limit 
in biochemical analyses. As a single molecule tool, SERS offers exciting possi-
bilities, as compared to traditional fluorescence, which is often encountered in 
single molecule study. The main drawbacks of using fluorescence for single mol-
ecule detection is that it does not provide detailed molecular information, and pho-
tobleaching often limits the number of photons obtainable from a single molecule. 
Due to the high structural information content of a Raman spectrum, SERS is an 
adequate technique for simultaneously detecting single molecules and identifying 
its chemical structure.
In 1997, two independent groups (Kneipp et al. and Nie et al.) reported sin-
gle molecule detection using SERS. In her pioneering work, Kneipp achieved 
single molecule detection using AgNP for the first time [58]. The research demon-
strated that by using extremely large, effective cross-sections available from sur-
face-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and aggregating nanoparticles, a single 
crystal violet molecule in aqueous colloidal silver solution can be detected. The 
results showed the expected Poisson distribution for actually measuring 0, 1, 2 or 
3 molecules when the scattering volume is 30 pl. Also in 1997, Nie and Emory 
demonstrated single R6G molecules adsorbed on citrate-reduced AgNP that were 
electrostatically immobilized on glass in an ambient environment by exploiting 
the surface enhanced Raman and resonance enhancement effects [59]. The argu-
ment presented for single molecule SERS is that the number of colloidal particles 
far exceeds the number of analyte molecules. Assuming a random Poisson distri-
bution, the probability of finding more than one molecule on a single particle is 
extremely small. Thus, the surface-enhanced Raman signals observed from a sin-
gle nanoparticle should correspond to a single analyte molecule [60].
One of the greatest potential applications of single molecule SERS is in the 
rapid sequencing of DNA at the single molecule level. Sun et al., synthesized a 
controllable AgNP aggregate system by using ethanol and cetyltrimethylam-
monium bromide (CTAB) capped AgNP [42]. The technique was used to detect 
two common probe molecules, R6G and 4-aminothiophenol (4-ATP) at the sin-
gle molecule level. In another study, Braun et al. demonstrated a single molecule 
SERS sensing technique for the detection of RNA and DNA, in which AgNP were 
assembled on an Ag film via the complementary target DNA strand, creating a 
strongly enhanced Raman signal [61]. Over the last decade, there has been consid-
erable interest in SERS single molecule detection of biomolecules such as hemo-
globin, glucose, cancer genes, pathogens, biological toxins and viruses [62–66]. In 
one application of SERS single molecule detection, Xu et al. were able to distin-
guish single hemoglobin (Hb) protein molecules attached to isolated and immobi-
lized AgNP. In their work, AgNP were prepared by a citrate reduction method at a 
concentration of 35 pM. The colloidal solution was incubated with a 10 pM solu-
tion of human adult met-Hb, which renders an average of 0.3 Hb molecules per Ag 
particle [62].

58
A. Khetani et al.
5  SERS Based Micro-Devices
SERS measurements are generally performed by exciting a sample in a cuvette with 
a monochromatic laser light. Cuvettes may be circular, square or rectangular, and are 
usually made of Quartz as it will transmit both incident and emitted Raman light. In 
cuvette based geometry, the free-space laser beam is tightly focused on the sample 
by an objective lens, resulting in a high intensity near the focal point within the sam-
ple-containing cuvette (Fig. 7). As the effective cross-sectional area is smaller (or 
has a higher focused intensity), a shorter effective interaction length Leff is achieved 
and the two properties counterbalance one other. Accordingly, cuvette geometry, 
which is diffraction-limited for tighter focus of laser beam, is inefficient for increas-
ing the effect of matter-light interaction [67, 68].
Researchers have used dielectric capillaries, or metal-coated tubes, to increase the 
effective interaction length [69]. Lee et al. demonstrated an Ag-coated capillary by 
synthesizing Ag sol through the reaction of AgNO3 with poly-(ethylenimine) (PEI), 
toluene and benzenethiol (BT) [70]. The mixture was passed through a glass capil-
lary to obtain a SERS-active Ag film-coated glass capillary. The group reported a 
detection limit of 1.0 × 10−7 M, and an S/N ratio of 3. In another study, Li et al. 
demonstrated using silver coated capillaries to reach a detection limit in the range of 
nM [71]. Using capillaries increases the effective interaction length, but a key disad-
vantage is their high propagation losses, as shown in Fig. 8 [72].
Fig. 7   Cuvette based geometry with Leff limited by the Rayleigh length in a focused free-space laser
Fig. 8   Capillary based geometry with high propagation losses

59
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
An ideal configuration for effective interactions requires a diffraction-free, loss-
less, single-mode waveguide, with a core diameter equal to the focused laser beam 
waist. HC-PCF comes close to accomplishing this [73].
5.1  SERS Using HCPCF
The hollow core photonic crystal fiber (HC-PCF) is a novel type of optical wave-
guide that allows the target sample and nanoparticles to be infiltrated into the hol-
low core and cladding. HC-PCF provides an increase in interaction length with 
very low losses compared to cuvettes or capillaries, achieving high spatial confine-
ment of the target molecules, with respect to nanomaterials. The light guidance in 
HC-PCF occurs via a photonic band gap, which delivers strong light-matter inter-
action and enhancement of the Raman signal.
HC-PCF has several major advantages over conventional sample cells [73–76], 
as follows:
• Low-waveguide losses of a few dB/m allow the use of long optical-path lengths 
and greatly enhance the effective light-matter interaction, as shown in Fig. 9.
• A sample under analysis typically uses at least a milliliter of volume when 
examined with test tube or cuvette. In contrast, HC-PCF uses samples in the 
nano- to picoliter range, significantly decreasing the sample consumption rate.
• The small required sample volume and large overlap of the propagating laser 
mode field with the sample in HC-PCF provide the potential to develop sim-
ple, compact and sensitive biosensors. At comparable input power, the intensity 
in the hollow core is five orders of magnitude higher than with cuvette-based 
approaches.
• PCFs are easily fabricated from chemically inert, high-quality silica glass, with 
negligible scattering, absorbance or fluorescence.
• Finally, PCF can demonstrate the potential of non-invasive and label free detec-
tion of biomolecules
Fig. 9   HC-PCF guiding mechanism where high interaction length can be obtained due to the 
photonic bandgap that confines the light to propagate inside the core, thereby limiting loss

60
A. Khetani et al.
Over the last decade, there have been a number of publications that support the 
strong sensing platform offered by HC-PCF and SERS. As shown in Fig.  10, 
SERS in HC-PCF can be achieved in two ways [77–83]. The first is to fill only 
the core while sealing off the cladding holes (i.e. the selective filling approach), 
as demonstrated by Zhang et al. using a test molecule, R6G [84]. This was mixed 
with a AgNP colloidal solution, and a 10 mM concentration of NaCl was added 
to aggregate the nanoparticles for optimal SERS performance. With a 10 cm HC-
PCF an enhancement of ~100 times was reported in the SERS experiment, with a 
lowest detectable concentration of 10−5 M.
In another demonstration, HC-PCFs were used as a SERS probe by coating 
AgNP on the inner wall of core and cladding, while non-selectively filling sample 
into HC-PCFs [82]. Han et al. showed SERS measurement in HC-PCF by func-
tionalizing AgNP only in the core region, while sealing off the cladding holes [85]. 
In their work, light propagated in the sample filled core region through total inter-
nal reflection (index guided), and thereby generated the SERS signal of the sam-
ple. In another demonstration, Irizar et al., selectively filled the core of HC-PCF, 
and obtained enhancement in the Raman signal for studying different stages in the 
synthesis nanoparticles [86]. In the selective filling approach, the light is guided 
by total internal reflection (TIR) rather than the photonic bandgap effect, which 
does not use the full light guiding potential of photonic bandgap property of HC-
PCF for. This method is quite cumbersome.
The second method of using HC-PCF for characterizing samples is to fill all the 
holes non-selectively. HC-PCF guiding at 800 nm (empty) was used by Yang et al. 
to guide a laser at 785 nm wavelength when filled with the sample [87]. In this 
case, the photonic band gap (or transmission wavelength) of the sample filled HC-
PCF shifted significantly compared to the empty HC-PCF, and the shifted trans-
mission wavelength of HC-PCF did not match the excitation wavelength. Thus, 
the light is only weakly guided into the HC-PCF and not tightly confined in the 
sample-filled core region, resulting in weak light-matter interaction; once again 
the photonic band gap is not preserved.
There is a method that does preserve the photonic bandgap and this also 
uses the non-selective filling approach [88–90]. By matching the excitation 
Fig. 10   Cross-sectional view of HC-PCF when a empty; b selectively filled; and c non-selec-
tively filled

61
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
wavelength (785 nm) with that of the shifted transmission band maxima of the 
sample filled HC-PCF this is achieved. The interaction of the light and the sam-
ple is extremely strong, and results in a substantial enhancement of the Raman 
signal from the analyte. The light-guiding property of non-selectively filled HC-
PCF changes in a manner that is dependent on the refractive index of the filled 
sample. In this case, although the guiding principle is still due to the bandgap 
effect, the transmission band supported by the fiber is shifted. The shift in the 
transmission wavelength of HC-PCF can be determined using the equation by 
Antonopoulos et al. [78]. This approach was also used by Gu’s group to dem-
onstrate various samples, such as R6G, human insulin and tryptophan, at the 
lowest detectable concentration of 10−10 M [88]. Dinish et al., demonstrated a 
practical approach for detecting cancer cells, using an ultrasensitive platform for 
the multiplex detection of cancer biomarkers by combining the SERS technique 
with a hollow-core photonic crystal fiber (HCPCF) [89]. The biomarkers were 
immobilized in the HCPCF using antibody-conjugated SERS-active nanoparti-
cles (SERS nanotags). As a proof-of-concept for targeted multiplex detection, 
simultaneous detection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) biomarkers, alpha 
fetoprotein (AFP) and alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) using HC-PCF and SERS was 
successfully demonstrated.
5.2  Silver Nanoparticles in HC-PCF for SERS
This section describes recent work on the determination of the maximum sens-
ing potential of a SERS based HC-PCF platform [90–92]. The study evaluates 
the contribution of HC-PCF and nanoparticles to the overall enhancement of the 
Raman signal of different biomolecules. It builds on previous work that estab-
lished the role of HC-PCF as a Raman signal ‘enhancer’ due to its photonic band 
gap property [76, 77].
5.3  HC-PCF Selection
The light guiding property of non-selectively filled HC-PCF, changes depending 
on the refractive index of the filled sample. In this case, though the guiding princi-
ple is still due to the bandgap effect, the transmission band supported by the fiber 
is shifted. The shift in the transmission wavelength of HC-PCF can be determined 
from the following equation by Antonopoulos et al. [78]:
(5)
′ = 0


1 −
 nliq
nsil
2
1 −

nair
nsil
2


1/2

62
A. Khetani et al.
where λ0 is the wavelength of the fiber when empty, λ′ is the shifted wavelength 
of the fiber when filled with the sample, nliq is the refractive index of the liquid 
sample, nair is the refractive index of the air, and nsil is the refractive index of the 
silica. Thus, depending on the excitation wavelength, fiber that could guide this 
wavelength when filled can be determined. With an excitation source of 785 nm, 
HC-1550 fiber is able to support the photonic bangap when filled with biological 
samples (nliq ~ 1.33–1.37).
5.4  Enhancement of Raman Signal in HC-PCF  
with Rhodamine as a Test Molecule
This work focused on recording the Raman spectrum of a pure (R6G) solution 
filled into the HC-PCF [93]. For comparison, sample power in bulk (cuvette) solu-
tion was kept same as that in micro-litre (HC-PCF) solution. While comparing 
the Raman spectrum of the sample solution (R6G) in both these cases, one can 
draw the effective contribution of HC-PCF towards enhancing Raman signal of 
R6G. Figure 11 shows that the Raman signal of R6G obtained from HC-PCF is 
enhanced compared to that from the cuvette. The HC-PCFs are known to enhance 
the Raman signal, as it supports strong modal field overlap with the sample due to 
its photonic band gap property. The significance of this experiment was to deter-
mine the factor by which HC-PCF alone enhances the Raman signal, which we 
found to be ~90. Figure 11 shows the prominent Raman bands of R6G in the spec-
tral range of 900–1,600 cm−1 and this study used the SERS peak at 1,365 cm−1 
(aromatic C–C stretching) to evaluate the various enhancement factors that cor-
responded to nanoparticles and HC-PCF (see [94] for detailed assignment with 
respect to different vibrational modes).
Fig. 11   Raman spectrum 
of pure R6G in HC-
PCF and cuvette. R6G 
concentration was 10−3 M. 
All measurements were 
carried out in water at room 
temperature. Adapted from 
Ref. [93]

63
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
5.5  Optimal Size of AgNP for Maximum SERS Signal 
Enhancement
In order to determine the optimal size of AgNP, which will maximize the resulting 
SERS signal of R6G in HC-PCF, seven sample sets were prepared with identical 
volume ratios of NP and R6G, and varying AgNP diameters of 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 
70 and 80 nm.
Figure  12 shows that the EF HC-PCF values gradually increased with the 
increase of the AgNP size, and reached the maximum for AgNP at a diame-
ter ~60 nm. When the AgNP size was increased beyond 60 nm, the EF HC-PCF 
decreased almost exponentially. Figure 12 also indicates that the error bar values 
for particles whose diameter was greater than 40  nm are relatively higher with 
an accuracy of 2–4 % compare to particles with diameter smaller than or equal 
to 40 nm. This is mainly due to higher scattering of light by bigger sized AgNP, 
thereby affecting the light guidance within HC-PCF. The optimal range of AgNP 
size for maximum SERS signal for bulk samples (cuvette) was 60 nm, which is 
consistent with our previous report [95].
5.6  SERS Enhancement in HC-PCF with Adenosine  
as a Test Molecule
Adenosine is considered a key molecule in clinical environments, owing to its role 
in regulating extra-cellular physiological activity. Monitoring adenosine is vitally 
important, due to its impact on pro inflammatory and tissue-destruction during 
bronchoconstriction in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) [96]. In this work, we explored an alternative method for monitor-
ing adenosine that exploits surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) within hol-
low core photonic crystal fibers (HC-PCF).
Initially, the core and cladding holes of the HCPCF were filled with a sample 
solution of adenosine, and the SERS spectrum of adenosine and nanoparticles in 
the HC-PCF was recorded. It was then compared with the SERS spectrum of the 
Fig. 12   Enhancement 
factor versus AgNP size 
as measured in HC-PCF 
and cuvette. Spherical 
shaped AgNP of different 
diameters were purchased 
from NanoComposix Inc. 
The silver concentration was 
0.02 mg/ml in all cases. The 
sample volume ratio of AgNP 
and R6G was 1:2. Adapted 
from Ref. [93]

64
A. Khetani et al.
same sample mixture in a cuvette, and further compared with the normal Raman 
spectrum of adenosine in a cuvette, as shown in Fig. 13.
The results suggest that the HC-PCF mediates strong light-sample interaction 
via the photonic bandgap property, which results in enhancement of the Raman 
signal of adenosine by a factor of ~90, compared to that in a cuvette. Thus, HC-
PCF clearly acted as a “Raman signal enhancer”. When the SERS spectrum of the 
mix of adenosine and nanoparticles is compared with that of the normal Raman 
spectrum of pure adenosine in a cuvette, the contribution of nanoparticles to the 
enhanced Raman signal of adenosine was found to be ~20 times. Thus, our SERS 
based HC-PCF detection scheme yielded an overall enhancement of the Raman 
signal of adenosine by a factor of ~2,700 at 733 cm−1, as shown in Fig. 13 [97].
To summarize, both nanoparticles and HC-PCF independently contribute to 
amplification of the Raman signal of adenosine. Hence, SERS and HC-PCF based 
sensing platforms have the potential to detect extremely low concentration of mol-
ecules of interest.
6  SERS Future and Challenges
6.1  Future
As discussed in this chapter, significant advances have been made in the use of 
SERS over the last 35 years. Single molecule SERS has been demonstrated for 
some biomolecules, and its potential to compete with fluorescence continues to be 
of great interest to researchers. There is also substantial effort to enhance SERS 
with Resonant Raman, by using tunable lasers as well as tuning the properties of 
the nanoparticles [43]. Investigation of new plasmonic materials, such as graphene 
semiconductors, is another promising area of future research [98–100].
The likelihood of using SERS to detect various chemicals has prompted explo-
ration of its commercialization potential. A number of portable Raman spectrom-
eters are now available, such as ReporteR, TruScan and Tellspec, and this has 
Fig. 13   Comparison of 
SERS spectrum of adenosine 
in HC-PCF and cuvette. 
Adenosine concentration of 
25 mM was prepared in water 
at room temperature. Adapted 
from Ref. [93]

65
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
increased interest in developing commercial nanoparticle vials and substrates 
for SERS. Here, we present one example, the Portable SERS Analyzer (PSA), 
a Raman instrument that uses Real Time Analyzer’s (RTA) patented SERS vials 
[101, 102]. This tool has been designed and optimized for trace chemical analy-
sis, and in addition to SERS applications it can perform normal Raman measure-
ments of unknown liquids and solids. Figure 14 shows a sample vial coated with a 
patented SERS-active sol-gel, as well as SERS Microplates. A solution containing 
the chemical of interest is simply injected into the vial, which is then placed in a 
Raman spectrometer sample compartment, and the instrument records the spec-
trum of the analyte. Other commercial products based on Ag nanoparticles for 
SERS applications are provided by nanoComposix, Sigma Aldrich, ThermoFisher, 
EnSpectr SERS Silmoco and VivNano.
6.2  Challenges
Though excellent results have been achieved with SERS its implementation does 
present some challenges, the greatest being the requirement of a high degree of 
reproducibility in the morphology and roughness of the metallic nanoparticles. 
This is problematic due to a number of factors, including temperature, time, con-
centration of the precursors, agitation speeding, dust and contamination [103], 
which can make SERS enhancements inconsistent and generally irreproducible. 
Another challenge is the tendency of metallic nanoparticles, including silver, to 
change their physiochemical properties (e.g. size and aggregation state, surface 
charge, surface chemistry, optical property) when they come in contact with com-
plex biological fluids.
Acknowledgments  This work was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada (NSERC), Ontario Centre of Excellence (OCE), and The Technology Transfer 
and Business Enterprise (TTBE) at University of Ottawa.
Fig. 14   Portable SERS 
Analyzer from Real Time 
Analyzer Inc. Reproduced 
with permission Real Time 
Analyzer Inc.® 2014

66
A. Khetani et al.
References
	 1.	Motz, J.T., et al.: In vivo Raman spectral pathology of human atherosclerosis and vulnerable 
plaque. J. Biomed. Opt. 11(2), 021003–021003 (2006)
	 2.	Campion, A., Kambhampati, P.: Surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
27(4), 241–250 (1998)
	 3.	Abalde-Cela, S., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman scattering biomedical applications of plas-
monic colloidal particles. J. R. Soc. Interface 7(Suppl 4), S435–S450 (2010)
	 4.	Qian, X.M., Nie, S.M.: Single-molecule and single-nanoparticle SERS: from fundamental 
mechanisms to biomedical applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 37(5), 912–920 (2008)
	 5.	Oh, Y.J., et al.: Beyond the SERS: Raman enhancement of small molecules using nanoflu-
idic channels with localized surface plasmon resonance. Small 7(2), 184–188 (2011)
	 6.	Choi, C.J., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman nanodomes. Nanotech. 21(41), 415301–415307 
(2010)
	 7.	Schatz, G.C., Van Duyne, R.P.: Electromagnetic mechanism of surface-enhanced spectros-
copy. In: Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York (2006)
	 8.	Faulds, K., et al.: Comparison of surface-enhanced resonance Raman scattering from unag-
gregated and aggregated nanoparticles. Anal. Chem. 76(3), 592–598 (2004)
	 9.	McHugh, C.J., et al.: Selective functionalisation of TNT for sensitive detection by SERRS. 
Chem. Commun. 6, 580–581 (2002)
	 10.	McNay, G., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and surface-enhanced reso-
nance Raman scattering (SERRS): a review of applications. Appl. Spectrosc. 65(8), 825–
837 (2011)
	 11.	Graham, D., Goodacre, R.: Chemical and bioanalytical applications of surface enhanced 
Raman scattering spectroscopy. Chem. Soc. Rev. 37(5), 883–884 (2008)
	 12.	Esbensen, K.H. (ed.): An introduction to multivariate data analysis and experimental design. 
In: Multivariate Data Analysis–In Practice, 5th edn. Camo Inc., Oslo (2004)
	 13.	Raman, C.V., Krishnan, K.S.: A new type of secondary radiation. Nature 121, 501–502 
(1928)
	 14.	McCreery, R.L., Chemical analysis. In: Raman spectroscopy for chemical analysis, p. 448. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York (2000)
	 15.	Singh, R.: C. V. Raman and the discovery of the Raman effect. Phys. Perspect. 4(4), 399–
420 (2002)
	 16.	Fleischmann, M., Hendra, P.J., McQuillan, A.J.: Raman spectra of pyridine adsorbed at a 
silver electrode. Chem. Phys. Lett. 26(2), 163–166 (1974)
	 17.	Moskovits, M.: Surface-enhanced spectroscopy. Rev. Mod. Phys. 57(3), 783–826 (1985)
	 18.	Morton, S.M., Jensen, L.: Understanding the molecule-surface chemical coupling in SERS. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131(11), 4090–4098 (2009)
	 19.	Jensen, L., Aikens, C.M., Schatz, G.C.: Electronic structure methods for studying surface-
enhanced Raman scattering. Chem. Soc. Rev. 37(5), 1061–1073 (2008)
	 20.	Stiles, P.L., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Ann. Rev. Anal. Chem. 1(1), 601–
626 (2008)
	 21.	Stewart, M.E., et  al.: Nanostructured plasmonic sensors. Chem. Rev. 108(2), 494–521 
(2008)
	 22.	Kelly, K.L., et al.: The optical properties of metal nanoparticles: the influence of size, shape, 
and dielectric environment. J. Phys. Chem. B. 107(3), 668–677 (2002)
	 23.	Orendorff, C.J., et al.: Aspect ratio dependence on surface enhanced Raman scattering using 
silver and gold nanorod substrates. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8(1), 165–170 (2006)
	 24.	Orendorff, C.J., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy of self-assembled monolay-
ers: sandwich architecture and nanoparticle shape dependence. Anal. Chem. 77(10), 3261–
3266 (2005)
	 25.	Schatz, G., Van Duyne, R.: Electromagnetic mechanism of surface enhanced spectroscopy. 
In: Chalmers, J.M. (ed.) Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy. Wiley, Chichester (2002)

67
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
	 26.	Baker, G.A., Moore, D.S.: Progress in plasmonic engineering of surface-enhanced Raman-
scattering substrates toward ultra-trace analysis. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 382(8), 1751–1770 
(2005)
	 27.	Zhang, X., et al.: Rapid detection of an anthrax biomarker by surface-enhanced raman spec-
troscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127(12), 4484–4489 (2005)
	 28.	Bogue, R.: Nanosensors: a review of recent progress. Sensor Rev. 28(1), 12–17 (2008)
	 29.	Liang, H., et al.: Highly surface-roughened “Flower-like” silver nanoparticles for extremely 
sensitive substrates of surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Adv. Mater. 21(45), 4614–4618 
(2009)
	 30.	Baia, M., Baia, L., Astilean, S.: Gold nanostructured films deposited on polystyrene colloi-
dal crystal templates for surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Chem. Phys. Lett. 404(1–
3), 3–8 (2005)
	 31.	Zhang, R., et  al.: Highly efficient SERS test strips. Chem. Commun. 48(47), 5913–5915 
(2012)
	 32.	El-Ansary, A., Faddah, L.M.: Nanoparticles as biochemical sensors. Nanotechnol. Sci. Appl. 
3, 65–76 (2010)
	 33.	Sharma, B., et  al.: SERS: materials, applications, and the future. Mater. Today 15(1–2), 
16–25 (2012)
	 34.	Feng, S., et al.: Nasopharyngeal cancer detection based on blood plasma surface-enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy and multivariate analysis. Biosens. Bioelectron. 25(11), 2414–2419 
(2010)
	 35.	Lin, J., et al.: A novel blood plasma analysis technique combining membrane electrophore-
sis with silver nanoparticle-based SERS spectroscopy for potential applications in noninva-
sive cancer detection. Nanomedicine 7(5), 655–663 (2011)
	 36.	Feng, S., et al.: Study on gastric cancer blood plasma based on surface-enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy combined with multivariate analysis. Sci. China Life Sci. 54(9), 828–834 
(2011)
	 37.	Gong, J.-L., et al.: Ag/SiO2 core-shell nanoparticle-based surface-enhanced Raman probes 
for immunoassay of cancer marker using silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles as separation 
tools. Biosens. Bioelectron. 22(7), 1501–1507 (2007)
	 38.	Li, D., et al.: Label-free detection of blood plasma using silver nanoparticle based surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy for esophageal cancer screening. J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 
10(3), 478–484 (2014)
	 39.	Girish, C.M., et al.: Rapid detection of oral cancer using Ag-TiO2 nanostructured surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopic substrates. J. Mat. Chem. B. 2(8), 989–998 (2014)
	 40.	Yang, J., et al.: Distinguishing breast cancer cells using surface-enhanced Raman scattering. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 402(3), 1093–1100 (2012)
	 41.	Majumdar, D., et al.: DNA-mediated wirelike clusters of silver nanoparticles: an ultrasensi-
tive SERS substrate. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5(16), 7798–7807 (2013)
	 42.	Sun, L., et al.: Ethanol-induced formation of silver nanoparticle aggregates for highly active 
SERS substrates and application in DNA detection. J. Phys. Chem. C 112(5), 1415–1422 (2008)
	 43.	Basu, S., et  al.: Interaction of DNA bases with silver nanoparticles: assembly quantified 
through SPRS and SERS. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 321(2), 288–293 (2008)
	 44.	Harper, M.M., et al.: Detection of SERS active labelled DNA based on surface affinity to 
silver nanoparticles. Analyst 137(9), 2063–2068 (2012)
	 45.	Gao, F., Lei, J., Ju, H.: Label-free surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy for sensitive DNA detec-
tion by DNA-mediated silver nanoparticle growth. Anal. Chem. 85(24), 11788–11793 (2013)
	 46.	Murphy, S., Huang, L., Kamat, P.V.: Reduced graphene oxide-silver nanoparticle composite 
as an active SERS material. J. Phys. Chem. C 117(9), 4740–4747 (2013)
	 47.	Wang, H.-N., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman scattering molecular sentinel nanoprobes for 
viral infection diagnostics. Anal. Chim. Acta 786(1), 153–158 (2013)
	 48.	Pearman, W.F., Fountain, A.W.: Classification of chemical and biological warfare agent 
simulants by surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and multivariate statistical techniques. 
Appl. Spectrosc. 60(4), 356–365 (2006)

68
A. Khetani et al.
	 49.	Yan, F., Stokes, D.L., Wabuyele, M.B., Griffin, G.D., Vass, A.A., Vo-Dinh, T.: Surface-enhanced 
Raman scattering (SERS) detection for chemical and biological agents. In: Biomedical Optics 
2004 (pp. 302–308). International Society for Optics and Photonics, (2004)
	 50.	Yuan, C., et al.: Single clusters of self-assembled silver nanoparticles for surface-enhanced 
Raman scattering sensing of a dithiocarbamate fungicide. J. Mater. Chem. 21(40), 16264–
16270 (2011)
	 51.	Zhou, H., et al.: SERS detection of bacteria in water by in situ coating with Ag nanoparti-
cles. Anal. Chem. 86(3), 1525–1533 (2014)
	 52.	Cowcher, D.P., Xu, Y., Goodacre, R.: Portable, quantitative detection of bacillus bacterial 
spores using surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Anal. Chem. 85(6), 3297–3302 (2013)
	 53.	Ping, H., et al.: Visual detection of melamine in raw milk by label-free silver nanoparticles. 
Food Control 23(1), 191–197 (2012)
	 54.	Sun, F., et al.: Analytical methods and recent developments in the detection of melamine. 
TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 29(11), 1239–1249 (2010)
	 55.	Kim, A., et al.: Melamine sensing in milk products by using surface enhanced Raman scat-
tering. Anal. Chem. 84(21), 9303–9309 (2012)
	 56.	Seifar, R.M., et al.: Applicability of surface-enhanced resonance Raman scattering for the 
direct discrimination of ballpoint pen inks. Analyst 126(8), 1418–1422 (2001)
	 57.	Leona, M.: Microanalysis of organic pigments and glazes in polychrome works of art by 
surface-enhanced resonance Raman scattering. PNAS 106(35), 14757–14762 (2009)
	 58.	Kneipp, K., et  al.: Single molecule detection using surface-enhanced Raman scattering 
(SERS). Phys. Rev. Lett. 78(9), 1667–1670 (1997)
	 59.	Nie, S., Emory, S.: Probing single molecules and single nanoparticles by surface-enhanced 
Raman scattering. Science 275(5303), 1102–1106 (1997)
	 60.	Kneipp, K., Kneipp, H.: Single molecule Raman scattering. Appl. Spectrosc. 60(12), 
322A–334A (2006)
	 61.	Braun, G., et al.: Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy for DNA detection by nanoparticle 
assembly onto smooth metal films. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129(20), 6378–6379 (2007)
	 62.	Xu, H., et al.: Spectroscopy of single hemoglobin molecules by surface enhanced Raman 
scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83(21), 4357–4360 (1999)
	 63.	Chen, H., et al.: Investigation of the synthesis, SERS performance and application in glucose 
sensing of hierarchical 3D silver nanostructures. New J. Chem. 38(8), 3907–3916 (2014)
	 64.	Huh, Y., Chung, A., Erickson, D.: Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy and its application 
to molecular and cellular analysis. Microfluid. Nanofluid. 6(3), 285–297 (2009)
	 65.	Premasiri, W.R., et al.: Characterization of the surface enhanced raman scattering (SERS) of 
bacteria. J. Phys. Chem. B. 109(1), 312–320 (2005)
	 66.	Shanmukh, S., et al.: Rapid and sensitive detection of respiratory virus molecular signatures 
using a silver nanorod array SERS substrate. Nano Lett. 6(11), 2630–2636 (2006)
	 67.	Siesler, H.W., Ozaki, Y., Kawata, S., Heise, H.M.: Near-infrared spectroscopy: principles, 
instruments, applications, p. 361. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim
	 68.	Smith, E., Dent, G.: Modern Raman Spectroscopy—A Practical Approach. John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., San Francisco (2005)
	 69.	Marcatili, E., Schmeltzer, R.: Hollow metallic and dielectric waveguides for long distance 
optical transmission and lasers (long distance optical transmission in hollow dielectric and 
metal circular waveguides, examining normal mode propagation). Bell Syst. Tech. J. 43, 
1783–1809 (1964)
	 70.	Lee, J.W., et al.: Novel fabrication of silver-coated glass capillaries for ready SERS-based 
detection of dissolved chemical species. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 397(2), 557–562 (2010)
	 71.	Li, Y.S., Lee, A.S.: Silver-coated capillary tube for surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Vib. 
Spectros. 3(2), 115–120 (1992)
	 72.	Trutna, W.R., Byer, R.L.: Multiple-pass Raman gain cell. Appl. Opt. 19(2), 301–312 (1980)

69
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using Nanoparticles
	 73.	Thang, N.: Thesis: Stimulated Raman Scattering in Gas Filled Hollow-Core Photonic 
Crystal Fiber. Max Plack Institute, Germany (2013)
	 74.	Cox, F.M., Argyros, A., Large, M.C.J.: Liquid-filled hollow core microstructured polymer 
optical fiber. Opt. Express 14(9), 4135–4140 (2006)
	 75.	Khetani, A.: Thesis: Photonic Crystal Fiber as a Biosensor. University of Ottawa, Ottawa 
(2008)
	 76.	Khetani, A., et al.: Monitoring of heparin concentration in serum by Raman spectroscopy 
within hollow core photonic crystal fiber. Opt. Express 19(16), 15244–15254 (2011)
	 77.	Khetani, A., et  al.: A method for using photonic crystal fiber as a Raman biosensor. US 
Patent-2010/0014077, USA (2010)
	 78.	Antonopoulos, G., et al.: Experimental demonstration of the frequency shift of bandgaps 
in photonic crystal fibers due to refractive index scaling. Opt. Express 14(7), 3000–3006 
(2006)
	 79.	Yan, H., et al.: Hollow core photonic crystal fiber surface-enhanced Raman probe. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 89(20), 204101 (2006)
	 80.	Jensen, J.B., et al.: Photonic crystal fiber based evanescent-wave sensor for detection of bio-
molecules in aqueous solutions. Opt. Lett. 29(17), 1974–1976 (2004)
	 81.	Nielsen, K., et  al.: Selective filling of photonic crystal fibres. J. Opt. A. 7(8), L13–L20 
(2005)
	 82.	Shi, C., et al.: Inner wall coated hollow core waveguide sensor based on double substrate 
surface enhanced Raman scattering. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93(15), 153101–153101-3 (2008)
	 83.	Huang, Y., Xu, Y., Yariv, A.: Fabrication of functional microstructured optical fibers through 
a selective-filling technique. Appl. Phys. Lett. 85(22), 5182–5184 (2004)
	 84.	Zhang, Y., et al.: Liquid core photonic crystal fiber sensor based on surface enhanced Raman 
scattering. Appl. Phys. Lett. 90(19), 193504 (2007)
	 85.	Han, Y., et al.: Towards full-length accumulative surface-enhanced raman scattering-active 
photonic crystal fibers. Adv. Mater. 22(24), 2647–2651 (2010)
	 86.	Irizar, J., et al.: Raman spectroscopy of nanoparticles using hollow-core photonic crystal fib-
ers. IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quant. Electron. 14(4), 1214–1222 (2008)
	 87.	Yang, X., et al.: Photonics crystal fiber Raman sensors. In: SPIE-Information Optics and 
Optical Data Storage II. SPIE Proceedings, Beijing, China (2012)
	 88.	Yang, X., et al.: Hollow-core photonic crystal fibers for surface-enhanced Raman scattering 
probes. Int. J. Opt. 2011, 11 (2011)
	 89.	Dinish, U.S., et  al.: Sensitive multiplex detection of serological liver cancer biomark-
ers using SERS-active photonic crystal fiber probe. J. Biophotonics. doi:10.1002/j
bio.201300084 (2014)
	 90.	Khetani, A., et al.: Hollow core photonic crystal fiber as a reusable Raman biosensor. Opt. 
Express 21(10), 12340–12350 (2013)
	 91.	Tiwari, V.S., et al.: Detection of amino acid neurotransmitters by surface enhanced Raman 
scattering and hollow core photonic crystal fiber. In: Proceedings of SPIE 8233, Reporters, 
Markers, Dyes, Nanoparticles, and Molecular Probes for Biomedical Applications IV. San 
Francisco, California, USA (2012)
	 92.	Khetani, A., et  al. Monitoring of adenosine within hollow core photonic crystal fiber 
by surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). In: 2011 11th IEEE Conference on 
Nanotechnology (IEEE-NANO). Portland, OR (2011)
	 93.	Tiwari, V.S., et al.: Optimum size and volume of nanoparticles within hollow core photonic 
crystal fiber. IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron. 20(3), 205–212 (2014)
	 94.	Hildebrandt, P., Stockburger, M.: Surface-enhanced resonance Raman spectroscopy of 
Rhodamine 6G adsorbed on colloidal silver. J. Phys. Chem. 88(24), 5935–5944 (1984)
	 95.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., et  al.: Optimal size of silver nanoparticles for surface-enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. C 115(5), 1403–1409 (2011)
	 96.	Johnston, D.L., et al.: Pulmonary function monitoring during adenosine myocardial perfu-
sion scintigraphy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Mayo Clin. Proc. 
74(4), 339–346 (1999)

70
A. Khetani et al.
	 97.	Sanches-Cortes, S., Garcia-Ramos, J.V.: Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy of adeno-
sine and 5’AMP: evolution in time. 22, 819–824 (1991)
	 98.	Harper, M.M., McKeating, K.S., Faulds, K.: Recent developments and future directions in 
SERS for bioanalysis. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15(15), 5312–5328 (2013)
	 99.	Xu, W., Mao, N., Zhang, J.: Graphene: a platform for surface-enhanced Raman spectros-
copy. Small 9(8), 1206–1224 (2013)
	100.	Wang, X., et al.: Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) on transition metal and semi-
conductor nanostructures. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14(17), 5891–5901 (2012)
	101.	Real Time Analyzer Inc.: http://www.rta.biz/. Accessed 31 March 2009
	102.	Inscore, F.E., Gift, A.D., Maksymiuk, P., Farquharson, S.: Characterization of chemical war-
fare G-agent hydrolysis products by surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. In: Optics East 
(pp. 46–52). International Society for Optics and Photonics, (2004)
	103.	Kahraman, M., et al.: Reproducible surface-enhanced Raman scattering spectra of bacteria 
on aggregated silver nanoparticles. Appl. Spectrosc. 61(5), 479–485 (2007)

71
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous 
Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
María González-Béjar
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
E.I. Alarcon et al. (eds.), Silver Nanoparticle Applications, Engineering Materials, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6_4
Abstract  Metallic nanoparticles are considered a new class of heterogeneous 
photocatalysts due to their ability to absorb solar light and convert it into chemi-
cal energy. Here, we focus on the use of silver nanoparticles in light driven cata-
lytic processes. This chapter will start with a brief introduction to the currently 
available nanocomposites that contain silver nanoparticles. Then, the mechanisms 
behind the photocatalytic activity of those nanocomposites will be discussed.
Keywords  Photocatalysis  ·  Heterogeneous plasmon mediated catalysis  ·  Silver 
nanoparticles
1  Introduction
Light of the appropriate wavelength can selectively activate a desired photocatalyst 
to generate reactive species that can in turn initiate processes that cannot occur under 
thermal conditions or that require harsh reagents [1, 2]. Undoubtedly, solar light is con-
sidered the greenest reagent for catalytic processes (free and abundant). Photocatalysis 
is the acceleration of a chemical reaction or transformation produced thanks to the 
absorption of light by a photocatalyst.
Nowadays, photochemical and photophysical applications have become fun-
damental for our daily life products: information technology, nanotechnology, 
sustainable technologies (solar energy storage, waste water cleaning, photovolta-
ics), lighting (LEDs), etc. [3]. Specifically, photocatalytic applications include 
advanced oxidation processes (e.g. water decontamination of organic debris) [4, 
5], water splitting [6–11], self-cleaning surfaces [12–14], etc.
M. González-Béjar (*) 
Instituto de Ciencia Molecular (ICMol)/Departamento de Química Orgánica,  
Universidad de Valencia, C/Catedrático José Beltrán 2, 46980 Valencia, Paterna, Spain
e-mail: maria.gonzalez@uv.es

72
M. González-Béjar
Metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) possess unique optical, electrical, mechanical, 
and chemical properties. Thus, their use as photocatalysts to aid in the develop-
ment of green nanotechnology has attracted a great deal of interest [11, 15–17]. 
Size reduction increases the Fermi level of the nanoparticle leading to a lower 
reduction potential of the metal on its surface (see Chap. “Silver Nanoparticles: 
From Bulk Material to Colloidal Nanoparticles”). The total surface area in nano-
materials is considerably higher than the obtained in the bulk material at the same 
total concentration. This translates, for example, into higher catalytic performance 
[18], which is extremely important for catalytic and photocatalytic applications, 
since one nanoparticle can simultaneously interact with many reactants (compara-
tively, organic molecules or organometallic complexes only allow one to one inter-
actions) [19].
MNPs upon interaction with an electromagnetic wave give rise to an absorption 
band known as Surface Plasmon Band (SPB). See Chap. “Silver Nanoparticles: 
From Bulk Material to Colloidal Nanoparticles” for a detailed explanation. 
Mahmoud et al. [20]. found that the most active MNPs for catalysis are those with 
sharp edges, sharp corners, or rough surfaces. The shape of the MNP influences 
the nature of the surface (facet) exposed to reactants. This would change how reac-
tants and MNP interact and therefore, would influence the outcome of the catalytic 
processes [21].
This chapter focuses on the use of silver nanoparticles (AgNP) as catalysts. 
These NPs are also used for other applications such as surface enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy (Chap. “Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Using 
Nanoparticles ”), single-molecule spectroscopy [22–24], solar cells [25, 26] and 
biological uses [27] (Chap. “Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: From 
Roman Wine Cups to Biomedical Devices”). For AgNP, a shift in the plasmon 
absorption band from 400 to 670 nm is observed as the particle shape transitions 
from a sphere to a cube [11, 28] AgNP’ shapes have been found to affect the out-
come of the catalytic oxidation of styrene to styrene oxide [29, 30].
MNPs have recently started to be applied in photocatalysis (also called 
Plasmon Mediated Catalysis, PMC) [11, 31] The use of PMC in synthetic applica-
tions is fairly recent and considerable effort is being made to optimize photore-
actions promoted by localized plasmons [11, 15–17]. In other words, MNPs are 
used to transform the energy of light into chemical energy by the formation of 
short-lived energetic electrons and enhanced electric fields that are generated on 
the surface and/or in close proximity to the NPs surface [11]. Remarkably, very 
high-intensity fields have been found in the regions (termed ‘hot spots’) between 
plasmonic nanostructures [11].
MNPs interact with the reactant molecules on their surface. Simultaneously, the 
electrons at their surface can be excited by light. The reaction rate therefore, will 
depend not only on the number and energy of those electrons, but also on the number 
of reactant molecules on the NP surface dictated by the affinity between the MNP 
surface and the reactants [15–17]. Interestingly, plasmonic nanostructures effectively 
couple thermal and photonic stimuli to drive chemical transformations [32].

73
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
For a detailed summary of the essential features of the preparation methods of 
supported AgNP, the reader is directed to a recent review written by Wang et al. 
and the references cited therein [17].
Similar to gold nanoparticles, AgNP have optical properties and catalytic capa-
bilities that make them ideal for green photocatalysis (i.e. photocatalysis utilizing 
visible and ultraviolet light, a major part of the solar spectrum) [15–17]. An ideal 
green photocatalyst must absorb sunlight (since it is naturally available), must be 
stable under the reaction conditions (i.e. solvent, or, if there is no other choice, 
temperature and illumination), must be available, reusable, able to perform selec-
tive transformations, and have low toxicity [2].
Photocatalysis is currently used in two particularly beneficial albeit contrasting 
purposes; (i) pollutant reduction and the destruction of harmful organic pollutants 
in contaminated water and air using techniques collectively known as advanced 
oxidation processes (AOPs) [5], and (ii) the synthesis of chemical compounds, 
“positive photocatalysis”, whose aim is to generate new products [33–37].
Several organic compounds, organometallic complexes and semiconductors have 
been used as photocatalysts in both homogeneous and heterogeneous systems [1, 
2]. Colloidal heterogeneous nanocatalysis in particular, refers to those reactions that 
occur on the surface of nanoparticles [20]. The active site in heterogeneous catalytic 
reactions is a collection of surface atoms that adsorb reactants and facilitate chemi-
cal bond transformation [21]. The loading of nanoparticles on solid supports is a 
brilliant strategy that is broadening the way of thinking about heterogeneous ther-
mal catalysis and PMC. This chapter will focus on this strategy and its use in PMC.
There are several advantages in using heterogeneous PMC;
	(i)	 MNPs have much better affinity than solid supports to many reactants, espe-
cially organic molecules [15].
	(ii)	 MNPs are more resistant to degradation than organic photocatalysts.
(iii)	 Heterogeneous photocatalysts are easier to remove from the reaction mixture 
(filtration, centrifugation) than heterogeneous catalysts. This heterogeneity 
can favor the reaction of one kind of reactant in the presence of others by 
selective adsorption [1].
	(iv)	 The MNPs get energy from the irradiation source, resulting in high-energy 
active surface atoms, which is desirable for activating molecules for chemical 
reactions.
	(v)	 The predictable aggregation of the NPs is prevented by the interaction with 
the solid support [15].
There are several issues that need to be resolved for the successful application of PMC;
	 (i)	 Reshaping of the nanocatalyst during catalysis reaction [21].
	(ii)	 Reaction products deposited on the NP surface could decrease NP stability 
and limit their recycling.
(iii)	 The reaction rate may be adversely affected due to the different states of mat-
ter in the mixture, or inefficient reactant adsorption/desorption processes, on 
the solid photocatalysts.

74
M. González-Béjar
	(iv)	 Reduced availability of active surface area due to NP interaction with the 
solid support.
	(v.)	 The synthesis of MNPs usually involves reducing agents, organic cappings, 
and/or growth-directing molecules. Some of those compounds could end up 
attached to the particle, and thus affect the catalytic process itself [21].
	(vi)	 Particularly in the case of AgNP, it is difficult to prevent the oxidation of 
AgNP to silver oxide [38].
Despite the above unresolved issues, recent work has demonstrated a plasmonically 
active and self-regenerative Ag/AgOx nanostructure to be useful for catalytic reac-
tions and this may open up a new perspective in the field [39]. The support-free 
catalyst shows plentiful surface-adsorbed oxygen species along with excellent local-
ized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and measurable photoluminescence [39].
2  Heterogeneous Photocatalysts Based on AgNP
Semiconductors and insulator supports with surface-embedded metallic nanopar-
ticles for improved stability are being developed and tested. Interestingly, the sup-
port can also help in some cases to perform the photocatalytic process, thanks to a 
synergistic effect generated by the association between the support and the nano-
particle. Accordingly, a thorough understanding of the properties of the new mate-
rial is required in order to prepare the most efficient photocatalyst possible. Based 
on the above, research has been carried out on the photocatalytic activity of silver 
nanoparticles supported on titanium (AgNP@TiO2) [38, 40–44], and other metal 
oxides (e.g. ZrO2, SiO2 and graphene oxide), as well as zeolites [45]. Other metal–
semiconductor composite photocatalysts based on the Ag@AgX (X = Cl, Br, I) 
system have also been developed [17].
It is reasonable to expect different mechanisms for insulator supported AgNP 
and semiconductor-supported AgNP when applied to photocatalytic processes 
[15–17]. In this section, we describe these mechanisms in detail to afford the 
reader with a more in-depth understanding of the photophysical processes required 
to determine the appropriate strategy for their particular needs. While reviewing 
these mechanisms, the use of AgNP-based photocatalysis for advances oxidation 
processes will be briefly summarized and following that, a section focused on pos-
itive photocatalysis is presented.
2.1  Heterogeneous Photocatalysts Composed of AgNP  
and Semiconductors
Semiconductor photocatalysts based on TiO2 are widely studied for applications 
in environmental remediation and solar energy conversion [46–49]. Unfortunately, 

75
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
TiO2 can only be excited by ultraviolet (UV) light due to its relative wide band 
gap (3.2 eV). Various strategies have however been developed to make it sensitive 
to visible light [46–48, 50–57].
Upon illumination of a semiconductor with light, one electron from the conduction 
band (CB) is promoted to the valence band (VB), leaving behind a vacancy, com-
monly known as a hole, in the CB [6]. The energy carried by photons from the illu-
mination source has to be greater than the bandgap energy, Eg, (the ΔE between the 
CB and the VB) for this process to occur. These electron-hole pairs can recombine or 
be trapped and, most importantly, the photogenerated charge carriers can migrate to 
the photocatalyst surface and a redox process can take place, giving rise to the cor-
responding reduced and oxidized products. Some semiconductors respond to visible 
light (e.g. CdS), allowing scientists to use sunlight or indoor lighting to excite them 
[2, 58]. Admittedly, the use of photocatalysts based on heavy metals is not the ideal 
scenario for water and air purification. Thus, in order to overcome this impropriety, 
several metal-free quantum dots are being developed as potential photocatalysts [59].
A particularly effective strategy for narrowing the band gap of TiO2 is called 
defect engineering [55, 60–64]. Introducing oxygen vacancies into the lattice of 
TiO2, the light absorption of TiO2 can be extended to the visible or even infrared 
region [61, 65]. It is equally important to optimize the photogenerated electron/hole 
separation characteristics over the TiO2 surface. Notably, the addition of noble metals 
to TiO2 could reduce the photogenerated electron/hole recombination [50, 51, 66].
AgNP supported on TiO2 (AgNP@TiO2) have shown photocatalytic activity 
under UV and visible light and also antibacterial properties [38, 40–43, 67–73]. The 
ability of AgNP@TiO2 nanoparticles to degrade phenol [43, 74], methyl red [40], 
methyl orange (MO) [67] and methylene blue (MB) [38] has been evaluated. An elec-
tron transfer reaction takes place upon UV irradiation (Scheme 1) and, where spheri-
cal AgNP coated with TiO2 are concerned, a spectral shift of the plasmon resonance 
band to a shorter wavelength was detected and elucidated to be due to electron trap-
ping on the AgNP induced by the charge separation after the electron transfer process 
[40–42]. The interfacial charge transfer between TiO2 and silver could be enhanced 
by a negative shift in the Fermi level of the AgNP@TiO2 composite resulting from 
the accumulation of electrons produced by the surface plasmon resonance [16].
If an electron acceptor such as thionine dye or oxygen is present, the photogen-
erated electrons are scavenged and electrons fail to accumulate in the AgNP core [42]. 
Scheme 1   Proposed mechanism for UV excitation of the AgNP@TiO2 photocatalyts: a semi-
conductor excitation and electron transfer to AgNP [42, 43] and b photoinduced charge separa-
tion and charging of the AgNP [41]

76
M. González-Béjar
This is also the case for Ag@ZnO [75–79]. It is in fact possible to carry out a redox 
titration and obtain quantitative information about the stored electrons in the Ag@TiO2 
colloids [42]. The capacity of electron storage is determined by the size of the metal 
core and its ability to undergo charge equilibration with the TiO2 shell. Once this max-
imum storage limit is attained, electron-hole recombination in the TiO2 shell domi-
nates [42].
Electrons accumulated in AgNP can lead to generation of •O2− when react-
ing with O2, and finally to •OH. On the other hand, photogenerated holes in TiO2 
can be scavenged by OH− or H2O to generate •OH directly [4, 80]. Moreover, the 
pH value also dictates the amount of •OH generated [40] and the acidity of the 
hydroxyl groups on the TiO2 surface could be enhanced in the presence of AgNP 
(as described for gold nanoparticles [81]). Thus, AgNP reduce electron-hole pairs 
recombination and enhance the efficiency of photoreduction owing to the Fermi 
level equilibration, ultimately leading to a higher yield of •OH [40]. Indeed, due 
to the electronegativity of AgNP, their Fermi level can shift to negative potentials, 
resulting in charging effects or original chemical reactivity [82].
Unfortunately, the photo-oxidation of AgNP by O2 takes place under visible 
light irradiation of a Ag@TiO2 film [83] and the photogenerated holes residing 
on the electron-rich AgNP, drive dissolution of Ag atoms from the AgNP via Ag+ 
ejection [84–86]. This can be prevented by either the deposition of TiO2 made on 
AgNP, covered with a silica (SiO2) shell [38], or the preparation of Ag@TiO2 pho-
tocatalyst using Montmorillonite as a support [87]. Either approach effectively 
prevents the loss of the metal particles during the photocatalytic reaction.
Recently, metal-core@semiconductor-shell nanoparticles consisting of Ag@Cu2O 
core-shell were shown to have photocatalytic activity where degradation of MO was 
concerned. This activity is due to the presence of localized surface plasmon reso-
nance (LSPR) in the AgNP core [88]. This strategy avoids corrosion and dissolution 
of the metal particles and maximizes the metal—support interaction, thereby facili-
tating the plasmonic energy transfer processes. Lastly, the local electromagnetic field 
of the LSPR penetrates the shell, which can be used to tune the center wavelength of 
the LSPR by changing the shell thickness [88].
2.2  Heterogeneous Photocatalysts Composed of AgNP  
and Insulator Supports
In 2008, Awazu et al. demonstrated that the photolysis of methylene blue (organic 
dye) was promoted by a plasmonic effect when visible light was irradiated onto 
AgNP with a SiO2 layer placed inside a TiO2 layer whose plasmon resonance 
band was near the band edge of TiO2 [38].
Very recently, AgNP were loaded onto inert supports, which are photocatalyti-
cally inactive supports. In this scenario, the charge density is partially localized on 
the AgNP surface, and this localization is increased by charge separation derived 
from the LSPR effect [89].

77
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
Insulators have different properties than semiconductors since the forbidden 
band gap between the valence band and conduction band is larger in an insulator, 
and as a result to this, electrons cannot be promoted from the valence band to the 
conduction band, even by near UV light [15].
Consequently, when AgNP are deposited onto an insulating oxide, there is no 
electron transfer between the photo-excited AgNP and the insulator support, and 
hence, only the nanoparticles participate in the photocatalysis directly [17]. In this 
case, the photocatalytic activity of noble metal NPs is determined by two factors: 
the enhanced electromagnetic field of neighboring NPs and the direct interaction of 
the LSPR excited energetic electrons with reactants. A distinct feature of these sys-
tems is that both light absorption and activation of the reactants take place on the 
AgNP. Charge transfer between the AgNP and support is not required. The particles 
can be dispersed on an insulating solid (or a very wide band gap semiconductor, 
such as Al2O3 (band gap, 8.0 eV) [90], ZrO2 [45], SiO2 (band gap, 9.0 eV) [45, 91], 
SBA-15 [92], zeolite [45], etc.), which has large specific surface areas and porosity.
The energy of incoming photons is concentrated into small volumes surrounding 
the AgNP. In fact, a build-up of intense, spatially non-homogeneous oscillating elec-
tric fields takes place in the neighborhood of the nanoparticle in the AgNP@insulator 
nanostructure due to the localize plasmon resonance of AgNP [23, 25, 93]. Hot spots 
also display very high-intensity fields [94] and these enhanced electric fields play a 
key role in photocatalysis. Indeed, for nanoparticles smaller than 30 nm, surface plas-
mons lead to the formation of energetic charge carriers [93, 95], which can be trans-
ferred to the surroundings [96] or relaxed by locally heating the nanoparticle [26]. This 
mechanism is thus quite different from that which occurs in the presence of a semicon-
ductor, where electron transfer between the AgNP and the semiconductor takes place.
AgNP supported on zirconia, silica and Zeolite Y (Ag@ZrO2, Ag@SiO2 and 
Ag@Zeolite Y) are active photocatalysts for sulforhodamine-B (SRB) and phenol 
degradation [45]. The degradation of SRB by these photocatalysts increases pro-
portionally with silver content.
Also, Ag@SiO2 exhibited superior photocatalytic performance toward MB 
photodegradation [91]. Once AgNP are excited, the generation of photo-excited 
electrons and electron vacancies takes place and are responsible for MB degrada-
tion (Scheme 2).
Scheme 2   Schematic 
diagram illustrating a 
AgNP@SiO2 nanohybrid 
that display photocatalytic 
activity upon surface plasmon 
resonance (SPR) excitation 
and degrades methylene 
blue (MB). Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [91]. 
Copyright 2012 American 
Chemical Society

78
M. González-Béjar
Another interesting aspect of photocatalysts containing AgNP is the possible 
enhancement of the photocatalytic effect of an anchored molecule. For example, 
core–shell Ag@SiO2 nanoparticles with an anchored [Ru(bpy)3]2+ dye, showed an 
enhancement of the photo induced oxidation activity of the ruthenium(II) complex 
that was attributed to the surface plasmon resonance [97].
2.3  Heterogeneous Photocatalysts Composed  
of AgNP Ag@AgX (X = Cl, Br)
Silver halides such as AgCl and AgBr are another class of semiconductor sup-
ports, which have been extensively used in photographic films due to their 
photosensitivity. The band gaps, Eg, of AgCl and AgBr are 3.25 and 2.69  eV, 
respectively [26, 38, 98–100]. Silver halides have been mainly used to host AgNP. 
Although, the synthesis of silver halide nanostructures has not been as well stud-
ied as that of AgNP [101], the synthesis of heterogeneous photocatalysts com-
posed of AgNP Ag@AgX (X = Cl, Br, I) has been extensively investigated over 
the last decade.
The photocatalytic activity of Ag@AgCl nanoparticles fabricated with differ-
ent morphological structures was recently shown to extend to visible light due to 
the SPB of AgNP [102–113]. Various morphotypes of the same NPs have been 
explored including cubes [106, 109, 112, 113], cubic cages [114], wires [103] 
films [110] and other shapes [115, 116]. Cubic Ag@AgCl have higher specific sur-
face area, more active sites and facets as compared with spherical counterparts of 
similar size, all of which are favorable to the enhancement of photocatalytic activ-
ity [108]. However, enhanced photocatalytic activities have been reported when 
using red Ag@AgCl photocatalysts due to their even larger surface area [111].
AgNP supported on AgCl (Ag@AgCl) with high stability and high photocata-
lytic efficiency under illumination have been used to disinfect water and decom-
pose organic pollutants such as phenol, and the dyes; 2,4-dichlorophenol, methyl 
orange (MO) [103, 107, 109–114], orange 7 [109], rhodamine B and methylene 
Blue [106]. These nanocomposites also show reductive activities such as, conver-
sion of CO2 into liquid carbon fuels (methanol and ethanol) [111, 115] and reduc-
tion of CrVI to CrIII [111, 117].
Upon UV light excitation, a silver halide particle generates an electron-hole 
pair. The electrons migrate to the surface of the nanoparticle, while the holes 
migrate to the surface of the AgCl. Subsequently, the photogenerated electron 
combines with an Ag+ ion to form an Ag0 atom [107]. Meanwhile, the photogen-
erated holes within the silver halide photocatalysts are able to oxidize halide ions 
to halide atoms (i.e. Cl− ions to Cl0 atoms (radicals)), which are strongly oxidative 
for organic molecules, finally being reduced back to Cl− ions [107, 109].
The electrons would be trapped by O2 in solution to form superoxide ions and 
other reactive oxygen species (ROS) that could also promote the decomposition of 
dyes [4, 109, 118].

79
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
Another similar photocatalyst, AgNP supported on AgBr (Ag@AgBr), cata-
lyzed the decomposition of MO more efficiently than Ag@AgCl under visible 
light irradiation [116, 119, 120]. Also, reduction of CO2 to methanol has been 
observed by plasmon mediated catalysis with Ag@AgBr hexagonal nanoplates 
[115]. Note AgBr nanoparticles that have shown face-dependent photocatalytic 
properties for example in the degradation of MO [121]. In this chapter only those 
semiconductor halides containing AgNP are reviewed. We refer to other papers 
and the references cited therein for further details on AgX and AgX@semiconduc-
tor nanocomposites photocatalytic activity [111, 121].
The photocatalytic activity of Ag@AgI spherical nanoparticles has been recently 
studied and effectively show antibacterial activity against both E. coli and S. aureus 
[122]. In all three cases, Ag@AgCl, Ag@AgBr and Ag@AgI plasmon mediated 
catalysis, the surface of AgX nanoparticles is terminated by X− ions and therefore, 
is supposed to be negatively charged [107, 109, 119]. Consequently, AgNP on their 
surface should polarize the electron distribution such that the regions of its negative 
charges are far from the Ag/AgX interface, whereas the positive ones are close to 
it [109]. Then, under visible light illumination, where the SPB of AgNP absorbs, 
AgNP produce excited electrons and holes [107, 109, 119], thus promoting the 
photoinduced electron ejection from AgNP into the conduction band of AgX [111, 
119]. This is possible because the Fermi energy level of AgX is lower than that of 
AgNP. Therefore, electrons are transferred from AgNP to AgX until the two sys-
tems attain equilibrium and form the new Fermi level [119].
These photogenerated electrons in the conduction band, together with the 
injected SPR electrons from AgNP, could then initiate the catalytic reaction. 
Obviously, the interfacial junction between AgNP and AgX could facilitate the 
charge separation in SPR-excited AgNP and produce long lived charge carriers 
from the AgNP [119].
As explained above, the holes transferred to the AgX will combine with halide 
ions X− ions to form X0, which will oxidize organic molecules and then reduce back 
to X−. In the absence of organic pollutants, X0 can react with OH− to form •OH 
[109, 123]. The electrons would generate superoxide ions and other reactive oxygen 
species after reacting with O2 [111].
Scheme 3   Schematic 
diagram for the charge 
separation in a visible-light 
irradiated Ag/AgBr/TiO2 
system. Adapted from  
Ref. [124]

80
M. González-Béjar
2.3.1  Heterogeneous Photocatalysts Composed of AgNP Ag/AgX 
(X = Cl, Br, I) Loaded on Other Supports
Relevant studies based on this type of photocatalysis mechanism have been widely 
reported; examples include loaded Ag@AgX (X  =  halide) hybrid structures on 
TiO2 [98, 124–126], Al2O3 [100, 127], ZnO [128], BiOBr [129], WO3 [116], 
Ag3VO4 [130], and graphene (also sulphonated graphene [131] and graphene 
oxide (GO)) [101, 108, 132].
These nanohybrids have proven useful to degrade organic pollutants such as 
chlorophenols [100, 124, 127], MO [98, 124, 128, 129], rhodamine B [128, 130], 
acid orange 7 [124], azo-dyes [125], MB [130], volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
in the gas phase (benzene and acetone) [126] and also bacteria [116, 125, 133].
The mechanism that Ag@AgX nanoparticles loaded onto semiconductors 
undergo upon visible light irradiation is depicted in Scheme 3 (Br and TiO2 have 
been chosen as example) [98, 124]. The excited electron was transferred to the 
conduction band of TiO2, and a hole was subsequently recovered when the bro-
mide ion and bromide radical were formed.
As discussed above, the oxygen molecule can trap the electron injected into 
the conduction band of the TiO2, and form superoxide ions, which promoted the 
photooxidation reaction. Simultaneously, the highly active bromide radical decom-
posed the organic molecules near the particles [124].
In another recent contribution, AgNP were used to induce visible light photo-
catalytic reduction of GO leading to reduced graphene oxide (rGO) in the presence 
of an electron donor [134]. Indeed, AgNP have also been used as a bridge to con-
nect activated GO and Ag2Mo3O10 or Ag3PO4 [101, 135]. This strategy was also 
described using Ag@AgX nanoparticles [108, 136–138].
Both, GO or rGO can act as an electron acceptors to effectively suppress the 
charge recombination, resulting in more reactive species [139]. The advantages of 
their hybridization can be found in most silver halide and phosphate cases [135–
138, 140, 141]. When combined with semiconductors, the photoactivity enhance-
ment of semiconductors after hybridization with rGO or GO has been attributed to 
a 2D network with an electron sink to accept and shuttle electrons photogenerated 
in the semiconductors [142–144].
Thus, for Ag2Mo3O10, a reinforced charge transfer and a suppressed recom-
bination of electron hole pairs result from hybridization of Ag@AgX with GO 
nanosheets, and contribute to the enhanced photocatalytic activity in the degrada-
tion of methyl orange [108].
Silver molibdates such as Ag2Mo3O10 Ws can also generate an electron/hole pair 
and to reduce Ag+ ions to Ag0 particles under illumination, leading to a cluster of sil-
ver atoms on an Ag2Mo3O10 Ws backbone [101]. However, although they show lower 
photocatalytic activity than silver salt-based photocatalysts, Ag@Ag2Mo3O10@GO 
nanohybrids are able to photodegrade rhodamine B an 4-chlorophenol [101].
The proposed mechanism for the activity of Ag0 is as a solid-state elec-
tron mediator that accepts electrons from activated GO and Ag2Mo3O10 Ws 
(Scheme 4) [101].

81
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
Interestingly, Wang et al. [145] have just reported that Ag@rGO@TiO2 nano-
composites can act as photocatalysts to generate hydrogen and are also able 
to photodegrade RhB. The authors claim that in this system the photogenerated 
electron separation is improved. Different sizes of AgNP were tested. Small sized 
AgNP (2–5 nm) could store a photoexcited electron that was generated from TiO2 
leading to photocatalysis improvement; whereas, large sized AgNP were able to 
absorb visible light. Scheme 5 illustrates the two possible pathways for the photo-
catalytic process in these Ag@rGO@TiO2 composites.
3  Positive Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
Catalysis is helping to improve chemical conversion, energy production and pollu-
tion mitigation. However, most commercial heterogeneous catalytic reactions are 
being run at relatively high temperatures [90].
Scheme  4   Photocatalytic process of Ag@Ag2Mo3O10/activated graphene oxide composite 
through assistance of solar light. Adapted from reference [101]
Scheme 5   Proposed mechanism for the photodegradation of RhB and photocatalytic hydrogen 
production (in brackets) by Ag@rGO@TiO2 under a UV part and b visible part of the simulated 
sunlight irradiation. Adapted from from reference [145]

82
M. González-Béjar
Many interesting and useful PMC reactions have been reported using AgNP 
combined with supports and lower temperatures than their conventional reactions 
that use only thermal activation [90]. Up to now, water splitting [11], photopoly-
merization [146–149], isomerization [150], and synthesis of organic compounds 
[31] have been carried out. Regarding positive PMC, e.g. PMC to make or trans-
form chemicals without destroying them, only CO [90], NH3 [90] and alcohol oxi-
dations [45, 90, 151], epoxidations [90, 152] and coupling of p-aminobenzenethiol 
to 4,4'-dimercaptobenzene [112, 153–162] have been explored. Previous examples 
along this chapter illustrate that most efforts are being devoted to AOPs.
Similar mechanisms for PMC either with AuNPs or AgNP have been described 
under UV and/or visible light illumination. For AgNP there is an enhanced activ-
ity under UV irradiation as compared with visible irradiation, which is sometimes 
difficult, as explained before, due to the oxidation and/or dissolution of silver. In 
this chapter, only those examples that use AgNP are mentioned. It is important to 
remind that: (i) a linear dependence between the temperature and photocatalytic 
reaction rate at constant light intensity has been observed; (ii) photocatalytic reac-
tion rates on excited MNPs exhibit an intensity dependent transition from the lin-
ear to super-linear regime, which indicates an electron-driven chemical reaction 
[163]. Moreover, this super-linear power law dependence on light intensity takes 
place at significantly lower intensity than required for super-linear behavior on 
extended metal surfaces and; (iii) the photocatalytic reaction rate at a given tem-
perature can be obtained by subtracting the rate of the pure thermal process [32]. 
Readers are strongly recommended to get more insight about linear and super-lin-
ear dependences in references [32] and [163] and references cited therein.
After AgNP absorb light, heat is generated and an electron transfer to available 
adsorbate (reactant) states can occur, forming a negative ion species or a radical. 
This negative ion can, can either undergo a rapid reaction on the metal surface [90] 
often referred to as the transient negative ion (TNI) [11, 164–169]; or diffuse to 
the solution where it could react [45].
This process is very similar to the above-discussed electron injection from 
an excited AgNP with a nearby semiconductor (i.e. TiO2, AgX), except that the 
electron is injected in “adsorbate” states rather than in a semiconductor conduc-
tion band [11]. Note that, if the incident light is in the UV range, the formation of 
charged ion adsorbates could also be initiated by photon-induced interband transi-
tion in silver [45].
The interaction of excited plasmons with reactants will be affected by the spa-
tially non-homogeneous distribution of plasmons on the surface of nanoparticles. 
Therefore, hot spots might play a critical role [11].
Thus, if AgNP are illuminated in the presence of an adsorbate, for example 
oxygen, the O–O bond is activated at lower temperatures due to a photothermal 
(electron–phonon driven) elementary step [90]. Scheme 6 contains more detailed 
information of the formation and subsequent relaxation of the O2–TNI on the AgNP 
surface, leading to the dissociation of the adsorbed molecular O2 [11, 21, 32, 90].
Another mechanism, where a AgNP can transfer electron density to O2 either 
directly through chemical interface damping or indirectly through the decay of 

83
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
plasmons into energetic electron/hole pairs and subsequent transfer of the e− to 
O2 was proposed by Brus [23]. Irrespective of the mechanism, electrons can tran-
siently populate unoccupied states (orbitals) of adsorbed O2 and induce electron-
mediated O2 dissociation [23]. Thus, plasmon mediated electron transfer from 
AgNP to the O2 2π* orbital forms a transient negative O2− species [32, 170, 171].
Factors that influence the capacity of AgNP to drive photocatalytic transforma-
tions have been postulated to include:
• (i) temperature-dependent distribution of excited vibrational states, which sig-
nificantly affects the probability for the plasmon-mediated formation of TNI, 
and the probability that the TNI will gain sufficient energy to overcome the 
reaction barrier; and
• (ii) also, much lower activation barriers for chemical transformations on metals 
as opposed to semiconductors. This allows for lower adsorbate energy required 
to overcome the activation barrier. Remarkably, Linic et al. suggested that this 
is the main reason why fairly short-lived TNI on metals (on the order of a few 
femtoseconds) can induce chemical transformations [11].
AgNP supported on insulators such ZrO2, Al2O3 and SiO2 or Zeolite Y were found 
to be highly efficient photocatalysts under visible light for the selective oxidation 
of benzyl alcohol (Scheme 7, Table 1) [45]. Supports cannot absorb visible light, 
due to their wide band gaps and there is no electron transfer from the irradiated 
AgNP to the insulator supports.
Scheme  6   Proposed molecular mechanism in the linear regime. A single electron excitation 
deposits vibrational energy into the adsorbate by accelerating the molecule along the TNI poten-
tial energy surface (PES) for the lifetime, τe. If vibrational energy is not sufficient to overcome 
the activation barrier, Ea, the adsorbate returns to the thermally equilibrated state. Reprinted with 
permission from reference [32]. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited

84
M. González-Béjar
Ag@TiO2 with oxygen vacancies gave rise to benzaldehyde under visible 
light irradiation although better results were reported when using palladium 
nanoparticles instead of AgNP [51]. The SPB of Ag@TiO2 cannot be excited 
with UV. Therefore, upon UV illumination, AgNP on TiO2 trap the photoexcited 
electrons from the surface of TiO2, prolonging the lifetimes of holes and elec-
trons [151]. The holes remaining on the surface of TiO2 can oxidize absorbed 
methoxy coming from the thermal dissociation of methanol on TiO2 to HCHO 
and HCO. The residual methoxy couples with HCO to form methyl formate 
[151, 172].
Notably, AgX NPs are also promising materials to reduce CO2 under vis-
ible light irradiation due to the more negative conduction band (CB) edges than 
ϕΘ(CO2/CH3OH) and ϕΘ(CO2/C2H5OH) (0.38 and 0.085 eV vs. NHE) [111, 112, 
115].
Ag@Al2O3 nanocomposite has also proven to be an active photocatalyst under 
visible light irradiation for the selective oxidation (epoxidation) of ethylene to 
form ethylene oxide (EO), which is a commercially important reaction [32, 90]. 
The dependence of the photocatalytic rate on the light intensity confirmed that the 
energetic electrons excited by the LSPR effect of AgNP, directly participate in the 
photocatalytic process of this oxidation.
Plasmonic excitation of AgNP influences protonation on photoreactions of 
p-aminobenzenethiol (PATP) leading to its coupling reaction product, 4,4'-dimer-
captoazobenzene (DMAB) [153]. In the absence of O2 or H2, the plasmon-driven 
photocatalysis mechanism (hot electron—hole reactions) is the major reac-
tion channel. In the presence of O2 or H2, the plasmon-assisted surface catalysis 
mechanism (activated oxygen/hydrogen reactions) is the major one [154]. Since 
experimental and theoretical evidence on this surface catalyzed reaction of DMAB 
produced from PATP, assisted by AgNP in 2010 [173], a series of investigations 
have been reported to support, or further confirm the conclusions [112, 155–162].
Last but not least, plasmonic mediated water splitting caused by visible light 
and improvement of photovoltaic devices have attracted attention among scien-
tists [10, 11]. The reader can consult references [10, 11, 38, 174–179] to find more 
detailed information regarding this topic.
OH
O
Photocalyst
Scheme 7   Oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde
Table 1   Oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde
Photocatalyst
hν
t (h)
Gas
Conversion (%)
Yield (%)
Ag@Zeolite Y
UV
48
Air
11
62
Ag@Zeolite Y
UV
48
O2
4
100
Ag@TiO2
Vis
2
O2
12
12

85
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
4  Concluding Remarks
MNPs such as AgNP are currently contributing to the development of greener 
technologies that are based on light driven applications. In this chapter we 
reviewed several examples of AgNP-support composites that are being used for 
photocatalysis and plasmon mediated catalytic reactions. Many of them are reus-
able without losing activity and remain stable under the reaction conditions. 
Although much effort is being placed in advanced oxidation processes, it is rea-
sonable to assume that significant development will take place in the area of 
synthetic chemistry promoted by plasmon mediated catalysis. This will allow sci-
entists to utilize the full range of solar energy to activate this new class of pho-
tocatalysts for both synthetic and AOPs processes in the near future. This green 
approach would help to save energy and design more environmentally friendly 
photocatalytic processes.
Acknowledgments  Maria Gonzalez-Bejar thanks the University of Valencia and the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness for her Ramón y Cajal contract.
References
	 1.	Galian, R.E., Pérez-Prieto, J.: Catalytic processes activated by light. Energy Environ. Sci. 3, 
1488–1498 (2010)
	 2.	González-Béjar, M., Pérez-Prieto, J., Scaiano, J.C.: Light-driven catalysis. In:Luque, R. 
(ed.) Green Chemistry, pp. 71–105 Nova Science Publishers, Inc, New York (2012)
	 3.	Klán, P., Wirz, J.: Photochemistry of organic compounds: from concepts to practice. Wiley-
Blackwell, Chicester (2009)
	 4.	Hoffmann, M.R., et al.: Environmental applications of semiconductor photocatalysis. Chem. 
Rev. 95(1), 69–96 (1995)
	 5.	Khataee, A.R., Fathinia, M.: New and future developments in catalysis: nanoparticle catalysis 
by surface plasmon, In Sun, S.L. (ed.) Recent advances in photocatalytic processes by nano-
materials, pp. 267–288. Elsevier Science Ltd, United Kingdom (2013)
	 6.	Fujishima, A., Honda, K.: Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode. 
Nature 238, 37–38 (1972)
	 7.	Kudo, A., Miseki, Y.: Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 38(1), 253–278 (2009)
	 8.	Zou, Z., et al.: Direct splitting of water under visible light irradiation with an oxide semi-
conductor photocatalyst. Nature 414(6864), 625–627 (2001)
	 9.	Borgarello, E., et al.: Photochemical cleavage of water by photocatalysis. Nature 289(5794), 
158–160 (1981)
	 10.	Navarro Yerga, R.M., et al.: Water splitting on semiconductor catalysts under visible-light 
irradiation. ChemSusChem 2(6), 471–485, (2009)
	 11.	Linic, S., Christopher, P., Ingram, D.B.: Plasmonic-metal nanostructures for efficient con-
version of solar to chemical energy. Nat. Mater. 10(12), 911–921 (2011)
	 12.	Kafizas, A., et al.: Titanium dioxide and composite metal/metal oxide titania thin films on 
glass: a comparative study of photocatalytic activity. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem. 
204(2–3), 183–190 (2009)
	 13.	Giulio, S., et al.: Photo-catalytic coating of polystyrene for household cooling appliances 
with self cleaning surfaces. J. Appl. Electrochem. 39(11), 2265–2273 (2009)

86
M. González-Béjar
	 14.	Bozzi, A., Yuranova, T., Kiwi, J.: Self-cleaning of wool-polyamide and polyester textiles by 
TiO2-rutile modification under daylight irradiation at ambient temperature. J. Photochem. 
Photobiol. A: Chem. 172(1), 27–34 (2005)
	 15.	Sarina, S., Waclawik, E.R., Zhu, H.: Photocatalysis on supported gold and silver nanoparti-
cles under ultraviolet and visible light irradiation. Green Chem. 15(7), 1814–1833 (2013)
	 16.	Ueno, K., Misawa, H.: Surface plasmon-enhanced photochemical reactions. J. Photochem. 
Photobiolo. C: Photochem. Rev. 15, 31–52 (2013)
	 17.	Wang, P., et al.: Plasmonic photocatalysts: harvesting visible light with noble metal nano-
particles. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14(28), 9813–9825 (2012)
	 18.	Eppler, A., et al.: Model catalysts fabricated using electron beam lithography and pulsed 
laser deposition. J. Phys. Chem. B 101, 9973–9977 (1997)
	 19.	Goesmann, H., Feldmann, C.: Nanoparticulate functional materials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
49, 1362–1395 (2010)
	 20.	Mahmoud, M.A., Narayanan, R., El-Sayed, M.A.: Enhancing colloidal metallic nanocataly-
sis: sharp edges and corners for solid nanoparticles and cage effect for hollow ones. Acc. 
Chem. Res. 46(8), 1795–1805 (2013)
	 21.	Linic, S., et al.: Catalytic and photocatalytic transformations on metal nanoparticles with 
targeted geometric and plasmonic properties. Acc. Chem. Res. 46(8), 1890–1899 (2013)
	 22.	Nie, S., Emory, S.R.: Probing single molecules and single nanoparticles by surface- 
enhanced Raman scattering. Science 275, 1102–1106 (1997)
	 23.	Brus, L.: Noble metal nanocrystals: plasmon electron transfer photochemistry and single-
molecule Raman spectroscopy. Acc. Chem. Res. 41(12), 1742–1749 (2008)
	 24.	Jiang, et al.: Single molecule raman spectroscopy at the junctions of large Ag nanocrystals. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 107(37), 9964–9972 (2003)
	 25.	Kelly, K.L., et al.: The optical properties of metal nanoparticles: the influence of size, shape, 
and dielectric environment. J. Phys. Chem. B 107(3), 668–677 (2003)
	 26.	Atwater, H.A., Polman, A.: Plasmonics for improved photovoltaic devices. Nat. Mater. 9(3), 
205–213 (2010)
	 27.	Jain, P.K., et al.: Noble metals on the nanoscale: optical and photothermal properties and 
some applications in imaging, sensing, biology, and medicine. Acc. Chem. Res. 41(12), 
1578–1586 (2008)
	 28.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., Scaiano, J.C.: Light emitting diode irradiation can control the morphol-
ogy and optical properties of silver nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 1825–1827 (2010)
	 29.	Chimentão, R.J., et al.: Different morphologies of silver nanoparticles as catalysts for the 
selective oxidation of styrene in the gas phase. Chem. Commun. pp. 846–847 (2004)
	 30.	Xu, R., et al.: Shape-dependent catalytic activity of silver nanoparticles for the oxidation of 
styrene. Chem. Asian J. 1, 888–893 (2006)
	 31.	Sun, M., New and Future Developments in Catalysis: Nanoparticle Catalysis by Surface 
Plasmon, In: Sun, S.L. (ed.) Catalysis Nanoparticles, pp. 473–487 Elsevier Science Ltd, 
United Kingdom (2013)
	 32.	Christopher, P., et al.: Singular characteristics and unique chemical bond activation mechanisms 
of photocatalytic reactions on plasmonic nanostructures. Nat. Mater. 11(12), 1044–1050 (2012)
	 33.	Corma, A., et al.: Photoinduced electron transfer within zeolite cavities: cis-stilbene isomer-
ization photosensitized by 2,4,6-Triphenylpyrylium cation imprisoned inside zeolite Y. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 2276–2280 (1994)
	 34.	Corma, A., García, H.: Zeolite-based photocatalysts. Chem. Commun. 13, 1443–1459 (2004)
	 35.	Protti, S., Fagnoni, M.: The sunny side of chemistry: green synthesis by solar light. 
Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 8, 1499–1516 (2009)
	 36.	Palmisano, G., et al.: Photocatalysis: a promising route for 21st century organic chemistry. 
Chem. Commun. pp. 3425–3437 (2007)
	 37.	Esser, P., Pohlmann, B., Scharf, H.-D.: The photochemical synthesis of fine chemicals with 
sunlight. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 33, 2009–2023 (1994)
	 38.	Awazu, K., et al.: A Plasmonic photocatalyst consisting of silver nanoparticles embedded in 
titanium dioxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130(5), 1676–1680 (2008)

87
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
	 39.	Zhao, Z., Carpenter, M.A.: Support-free bimodal distribution of plasmonically active 
Ag/AgOx nanoparticle catalysts: attributes and plasmon enhanced surface chemistry. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 117(21), 11124–11132 (2013)
	 40.	Petronella, F., et  al.: Photocatalytic activity of nanocomposite catalyst films based on 
nanocrystalline metal/semiconductors. J. Phys. Chem. C 115(24), 12033–12040 (2011)
	 41.	Hirakawa, T., Kamat, P.V.: Photoinduced electron storage and surface plasmon modulation 
in Ag@TiO2 clusters. Langmuir 20, 5645–5647 (2004)
	 42.	Hirakawa, T., Kamat, P.V.: Charge separation and catalytic activity of Ag@TiO2 core-shell 
composite clusters under UV-irradiation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127(11), 3928–3934 (2005)
	 43.	Grabowska, E., et al.: Modification of titanium(IV) dioxide with small silver nanoparticles: 
application in photocatalysis. J. Phys. Chem. C 117(4), 1955–1962 (2013)
	 44.	Gong, D., et  al.: Silver decorated titanate/titania nanostructures for efficient solar driven 
photocatalysis. J. Solid State Chem. 189, 117–122 (2012)
	 45.	Chen, X., et  al.: Supported silver nanoparticles as photocatalysts under ultraviolet and 
­visible light irradiation. Green Chem. 12(3), 414–419 (2010)
	 46.	Chen, X., et al.: Increasing solar absorption for photocatalysis with black hydrogenated tita-
nium dioxide nanocrystals. Science 331, 746–750 (2011)
	 47.	Chen, X., Mao, S.S.: Titanium dioxide nanomaterials: synthesis, properties, modifications, 
and applications. Chem. Rev. 107, 2891–2959 (2007)
	 48.	Zhang, Y., et al.: TiO2 − graphene nanocomposites for gas-phase photocatalytic degradation 
of volatile aromatic pollutant: is TiO2 − graphene truly different from other TiO2 − carbon 
composite materials? ACS Nano 4, 7303–7314 (2010)
	 49.	Hoang, S., et  al.: enhancing visible light photo-oxidation of water with TiO2 nanowire 
arrays via cotreatment with H2 and NH3: synergistic effects between Ti3+ and N. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 134, 3659–3662 (2012)
	 50.	Zhang, N., et al.: Synthesis of M@TiO2 (M = Au, Pd, Pt) core − shell nanocomposites with 
tunable photoreactivity. J. Phys. Chem. C 115, 9136–9145 (2011)
	 51.	Pan, X., Xu, Y.-J.: Defect-mediated growth of noble-metal (Ag, Pt, and Pd) nanoparticles on 
TiO2 with oxygen vacancies for photocatalytic redox reactions under visible light. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 117(35), 17996–18005 (2013)
	 52.	Xu, Y.-J., Zhuang, Y., Fu, X.: New insight for enhanced photocatalytic activity of TiO2 
by doping carbon nanotubes: a case study on degradation of benzene and methyl orange.  
J. Phys. Chem. C 114, 2669–2676 (2010)
	 53.	Kumar, S.G., Devi, L.G.: Review on modified TiO2 photocatalysis under UV/visible light: 
selected results and related mechanisms on interfacial charge carrier transfer dynamics.  
J. Phys. Chem. A 115, 13211–13241 (2011)
	 54.	Li, R., Kobayashi, H., Guo, J.F., Fan, J.: Visible-Light-Driven Surface Reconstruction of 
Mesoporous TiO2: toward visible-light absorption and enhanced photocatalytic activities. 
Chem. Commun. 47, 8584–8586 (2011)
	 55.	Zuo, F., et al.: Self-Doped Ti3+ enhanced photocatalyst for hydrogen production under vis-
ible light. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 11856–11857 (2010)
	 56.	Zhang, N., et  al.: Constructing ternary CdS  −  Graphene  − TiO2 hybrids on the flatland 
of graphene oxide with enhanced visible-light photoactivity for selective transformation.  
J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 18023–18031 (2012)
	 57.	Zhang, Y., et  al.: Engineering the unique 2D mat of graphene to achieve graphene-TiO2 
nanocomposite for photocatalytic selective transformation: what advantage does graphene 
have over its forebear carbon nanotube? ACS Nano 5, 7426–7435 (2011)
	 58.	Kim, H.G., et al.: Photocatalytic nanodiodes for visible-light photocatalysis. Angew. Chem. 
Int. Ed. 44, 4585–4589 (2005)
	 59.	Ding, C., Zhu, A., Tian, Y.: Functional surface engineering of C-dots for fluorescent biosens-
ing and in vivo bioimaging. Acc. Chem. Res. 47(1), 20–30 (2014)
	 60.	Cronemeyer, D.C.: Infrared absorption of reduced rutile TiO2 single crystals. Phys. Rev. 
113, 1222–1226 (1959)
	 61.	Pan, X., et al.: Defective TiO2 with oxygen vacancies: synthesis, Properties and photocata-
lytic Applications. Nanoscale 5, 3601–3614 (2013)

88
M. González-Béjar
	 62.	Hoang, S., Guo, S., Mullins, C.B.: Coincorporation of N and Ta into TiO2 nanowires for vis-
ible light driven photoelectrochemical water oxidation. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 23283–23290 
(2012)
	 63.	Hoang, S., et  al.: Visible light driven photoelectrochemical water oxidation on nitrogen-
modified TiO2 nanowires. Nano Lett. 12, 26–32 (2011)
	 64.	Justicia, I., et al.: Designed self-doped titanium oxide thin films for efficient visible-light 
photocatalysis. Adv. Mater. 14, 1399–1402 (2002)
	 65.	Pan, X., et al.: Selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol over TiO2 nanosheets with exposed 001 
facets: catalyst deactivation and regeneration. Appl. Catal. A 453, 181–187 (2013)
	 66.	Ye, M., et al.: High-efficiency photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen generation enabled by palladium 
quantum dots-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 15720–15723 (2012)
	 67.	Arabatzis, I.M., et al.: Silver-modified titanium dioxide thin films for efficient photodegra-
dation of methyl orange. Appl. Catal. B- Environ. 42(2), 187–201 (2003)
	 68.	Ji, Z., et  al.: The role of silver nanoparticles on silver modified titanosilicate ETS-10 in 
­visible light photocatalysis. Appl. Catal. B: Environ. 102, 323–333 (2011)
	 69.	Stathatos, E., et al.: Photocatalytically deposited silver nanoparticles on mesoporous TiO2 
films. Langmuir 16(5), 2398–2400 (2000)
	 70.	Smirnova, N., et  al.: Photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic properties of mesoporous 
TiO2 films modified with silver and gold nanoparticles. Surf. Interface Anal. 42(6–7), 
1205–1208 (2010)
	 71.	Liu, S.X., et al.: A mechanism for enhanced photocatalytic activity of silver-loaded titanium 
dioxide. Catal. Today 93–95, 877–884 (2004)
	 72.	Messaoud, M., et al.: Photocatalytic generation of silver nanoparticles and application to 
the antibacterial functionalization of textile fabrics. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem. 215, 
147–156 (2010)
	 73.	Ingram, D.B., et  al.: Predictive model for the design of plasmonic metal/semiconductor 
composite photocatalysts. ACS Catal. 1(10), 1441–1447 (2011)
	 74.	Zheng, Z., et al.: Facile in situ synthesis of visible-light plasmonic photocatalysts M@TiO2 
(M = Au, Pt, Ag) and evaluation of their photocatalytic oxidation of benzene to phenol. J. 
Mater. Chem. 21, 9079–9087 (2011)
	 75.	Wood, A., Giersig, M., Mulvaney, P.: Fermi level equilibration in quantum dot-metal nano-
junctions. J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 8810–8815 (2001)
	 76.	Georgekutty, R., Seery, M.K., Pillai, S.C.: A highly efficient Ag-ZnO photocatalyst: synthe-
sis, properties, and mechanism. J. Phys. Chem. 112(35), 13563–13570 (2008)
	 77.	Zheng, Y., et al.: Ag/ZnO heterostructure nanocrystals: synthesis, characterization, and pho-
tocatalysis. Inorg. Chem. 46(17), 6980–6986 (2007)
	 78.	Zheng, Y., et al.: Photocatalytic activity of Ag/ZnO heterostructure nanocatalyst: correlation 
between structure and property. J. Phys. Chem. C 112(29), 10773–10777 (2008)
	 79.	Liu, H.R., et  al.: Worm-like Ag/ZnO core, shell heterostructural composites: fabrication, 
characterization, and photocatalysis. J. Phys. Chem. C 116(30), 16182–16190 (2012)
	 80.	Goto, H., et al.: Quantitative analysis of superoxide ion and hydrogen peroxide produced 
from molecular oxygen on photoirradiated TiO2 particles. J. Catal. 225, 223–229 (2004)
	 81.	Subramanian, V., Wolf, E., Kamat, P.V.: Semiconductor, àímetal composite nanostructures. 
to what extent do metal nanoparticles improve the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 films? J. 
Phys. Chem. B 105(46), 11439–11446 (2001)
	 82.	Henglein, A., Holzwarth, A., Mulvaney, P.: Fermi level equilibration between colloidal lead 
and silver particles in aqueous solution. J. Phys. Chem. 96(22), 8700–8702 (1992)
	 83.	Ohko, Y., et al.: Multicolour photochromism of TiO2 films loaded with silver nanoparticles. 
Nat. Mater. 2(1), 29–31 (2003)
	 84.	Kelly, K.L., Yamashita, K.: The optical properties of metal nanoparticles: the influence of 
size, shape, and dielectric environment. J. Phys. Chem. B 110, 7743–7749 (2006)
	 85.	Matsubara, K., et al.: Plasmon resonance-based photoelectrochemical tailoring of spectrum, 
morphology and orientation of Ag nanoparticles on TiO2 single crystals. J. Mater. Chem. 
19(31), 5526–5532 (2009)

89
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
	 86.	Matsubara, K., et al.: Effects of adsorbed water on plasmon-based dissolution, redeposition 
and resulting spectral changes of Ag nanoparticles on single-crystalline TiO2. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 10(16), 2263–2269 (2008)
	 87.	Wu, T.-S., et al.: Montmorillonite-supported Ag/TiO2 nanoparticles: an efficient visible-light 
bacteria photodegradation material. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2(2), 544–550 (2010)
	 88.	Li, J., et al.: Ag@Cu2O Core-shell nanoparticles as visible-light plasmonic photocatalysts. 
ACS Catal. 3(1), 47–51 (2013)
	 89.	Stepanov, A.L., Xiao, X., Ren, F., Kavetskyy, T., Osin, Y.N.: Catalytic and biological sen-
sitiviy of TiO2 and SiO2 matrices with silver nanoparticles created by ion implantation: a 
review. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 34, 107−122 (2013) 
	 90.	Christopher, P., Xin, H., Linic, S.: Visible-light-enhanced catalytic oxidation reactions on 
plasmonic silver nanostructures. Nat. Chem. 3(6), 467–472 (2011)
	 91.	Chen, K.-H., et  al.: Ag-Nanoparticle-decorated SiO2 nanospheres exhibiting remark-
able plasmon-mediated photocatalytic properties. J. Phys. Chem. C 116(35), 19039–19045 
(2012)
	 92.	Fuku, K., et al.: The synthesis of size- and color-controlled silver nanoparticles by using 
microwave heating and their enhanced catalytic activity by localized surface plasmon reso-
nance. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 52(29), 7446–7450 (2013)
	 93.	Burda, C., et al.: Chemistry and properties of nanocrystals of different shapes. Chem. Rev. 
105(4), 1025–1102 (2005)
	 94.	Gunnarsson, L., et  al.: Confined plasmons in nanofabricated single silver particle pairs: 
experimental observations of strong interparticle interactions. J. Phys. Chem. B 109(3), 
1079–1087 (2004)
	 95.	Evanoff, D.D., Chumanov, G.: Synthesis and optical properties of silver nanoparticles and 
arrays. ChemPhysChem 6(7), 1221–1231 (2005)
	 96.	Kamat, P.V.: Photophysical, photochemical and photocatalytic aspects of metal nanoparti-
cles. J. Phys. Chem. B 106(32), 7729–7744 (2002)
	 97.	Mori, K., et  al.: Enhancement of the photoinduced oxidation activity of a ruthenium(II) 
complex anchored on silica-coated silver nanoparticles by localized surface plasmon reso-
nance. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49(46), 8598–8601 (2010)
	 98.	Yu, J., Dai, G., Huang, B.: Fabrication and characterization of visible-light-driven plas-
monic photocatalyst Ag/AgCl/TiO2 nanotube arrays. J. Phys. Chem. C 113(37), 16394–
16401 (2009)
	 99.	Glaus, S., Calzaferri, G.: The band structures of the silver halides AgF, AgCl, and AgBr: a 
comparative study. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2, 398–401 (2003)
	100.	Hu, C., et  al.: Plasmon-induced photodegradation of toxic pollutants with Ag-AgI/Al2O3 
under visible-light irradiation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132(2), 857–862 (2010)
	101.	Zhang, K., et al.: Chemically modified graphene oxide-wrapped quasi-micro Ag decorated 
silver trimolybdate nanowires for photocatalytic applications. J. Phys. Chem. C 117(45), 
24023–24032 (2013)
	102.	Wang, P., et al.: Synthesis of highly efficient Ag@AgCl plasmonic photocatalysts with vari-
ous structures. Chem. - Eur. J. 16(2), 538–544 (2008)
	103.	Bi, Y., Ye, J.: In situ oxidation synthesis of Ag/AgCl core-shell nanowires and their photo-
catalytic properties. Chem. Commun. 43, 6551–6553 (2009)
	104.	Li, Y., Ding, Y.: Porous AgCl/Ag nanocomposites with enhanced visible light photocatalytic 
properties. J. Phys. Chem. C 114(7), 3175–3179 (2010)
	105.	Lou, Z., et al.: The synthesis of the near-spherical AgCl crystal for visible light photocata-
lytic applications. Dalton Trans. 40(16), 4104–4110 (2011)
	106.	An, C., Peng, S., Sun, Y.: Facile synthesis of sunlight-driven AgCl:Ag plasmonic nanopho-
tocatalyst. Adv. Mater. 22(23), 2570–2574 (2010)
	107.	Wang, P., et al.: Ag@AgCl: A highly efficient and stable photocatalyst active under visible 
light. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 47(41), 7931–7933 (2008)
	108.	Zhu, M., Chen, P., Liu, M.: Graphene oxide enwrapped Ag/AgX (X = Br, Cl) nanocomposite 
as a highly efficient visible-light plasmonic photocatalyst. ACS Nano 5(6), 4529–4536 (2011)

90
M. González-Béjar
	109.	Dong, R., et  al.: Ecofriendly synthesis and photocatalytic activity of uniform cubic 
Ag@AgCl plasmonic photocatalyst. J. Phys. Chem. C 117(1), 213–220 (2013)
	110.	Han, L., et al.: Facile synthesis of a free-standing Ag@AgCl film for a high performance 
photocatalyst and photodetector. Chem. Commun. 49(43), 4953–4955 (2013)
	111.	Cai, B., et al.: A distinctive red Ag/AgCl photocatalyst with efficient photocatalytic oxida-
tive and reductive activities. J. Mater. Chem. A 2(15), 5280–5286 (2014)
	112.	Wu, D.-Y., et al.: Photon-driven charge transfer and photocatalysis of p-aminothiophenol in 
metal nanogaps: a DFT study of SERS. Chem. Commun. 47(9), 2520–2522 (2011)
	113.	Han, L., et  al.: Facile solvothermal synthesis of cube-like Ag@AgCl: a highly efficient 
­visible light photocatalyst. Nanoscale 3(7), 2931–2935 (2011)
	114.	Tang, Y., et al.: Efficient Ag@AgCl cubic cage photocatalysts profit from ultrafast plasmon-
induced electron transfer processes. Adv. Funct. Mater. 23(23), 2932–2940 (2013)
	115.	An, C., et  al.: Strongly visible-light responsive plasmonic shaped AgX:Ag (X  =  Cl, Br) 
nanoparticles for reduction of CO2 to methanol. Nanoscale 4(18), 5646–5650 (2012)
	116.	Wang, P., et al.: Ag/AgBr/WO3·H2O: Visible-Light photocatalyst for bacteria destruction. 
Inorg. Chem. 48(22), 10697–10702 (2009)
	117.	Wang, P., et al.: Highly efficient visible light plasmonic photocatalysts Ag@Ag(Cl, Br) and 
Ag@AgCl-AgI. ChemCatChem 3(2), 360–364 (2011)
	118.	Soni, S.S., et al.: Visible-light photocatalysis in titania-based mesoporous thin films. Adv. 
Mater. 20(8), 1493–1498 (2008)
	119.	Jiang, J., Li, H., Zhang, L.: New insight into daylight photocatalysis of AgBr@Ag: synergis-
tic effect between semiconductor photocatalysis and plasmonic photocatalysis. Chem. - Eur. 
J. 18(20), 6360–6369 (2012)
	120.	Wang, H., et al.: Polyhedral AgBr microcrystals with an increased percentage of exposed 
111 facets as a highly efficient visible-light photocatalyst. Chem. - Eur. J. 18(15),  
4620–4626 (2012)
	121.	Wang, H., et  al.: Facet-dependent photocatalytic properties of AgBr nanocrystals. Small 
8(18), 2802–2806 (2012)
	122.	Ghosh, S., et al.: Ag@AgI, Core@Shell structure in agarose matrix as hybrid: synthesis, 
characterization, and antimicrobial activity. Langmuir 28(22), 8550–8561 (2012)
	123.	Lu, M.-C., Chen, J.-N., Chang, C.-P.: Effect of inorganic ions on the oxidation of dichlorvos 
insecticide with Fenton’s reagent. Chemosphere 35(10), 2285–2293 (1997)
	124.	Dong, R., et al.: AgBr@Ag/TiO2 core-shell composite with excellent visible light photo-
catalytic activity and hydrothermal stability. Catal. Commun. 38, 16–20 (2013)
	125.	Hu, C., et al.: Ag/AgBr/TiO2 Visible light photocatalyst for destruction of azodyes and bac-
teria. J. Phys. Chem. B 110(9), 4066–4072 (2006)
	126.	Zhang, Y., et al.: Nanocomposite of Ag-AgBr-TiO2 as a photoactive and durable catalyst for 
degradation of volatile organic compounds in the gas phase. Appl. Catal. B 106(3–4), 445–
452 (2011)
	127.	Zhou, X., et  al.: Plasmon-assisted degradation of toxic pollutants with Ag-AgBr/Al2O3 
under visible-light irradiation. J. Phys. Chem. C 114(6), 2746–2750 (2010)
	128.	Begum, G., Manna, J., Rana, R.K.: Controlled orientation in a bio-inspired assembly of 
Ag/AgCl/ZnO nanostructures enables enhancement in visible-light-induced photocatalytic 
performance. Chem. Eur. J. 18(22), 6847–6853 (2012)
	129.	Cheng, H., et al.: In situ ion exchange synthesis of the novel Ag/AgBr/BiOBr hybrid with 
highly efficient decontamination of pollutants. Chem. Commun. 47(25), 7054–7056 (2011)
	130.	Zhu, Q., et al.: Facile synthesis of the novel Ag3VO4/AgBr/Ag plasmonic photocatalyst with 
enhanced photocatalytic activity and stability. J. Phys. Chem. C 117(11), 5894–5900 (2013)
	131.	Cai, B., et  al.: Advanced visible-light-driven photocatalyst upon the incorporation of 
­sulfonated graphene. Nanoscale 5(5), 1910–1916 (2013)
	132.	Zhang, H., et  al.: Graphene sheets grafted Ag@AgCl hybrid with enhanced plasmonic 
­photocatalytic activity under visible light. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45(13), 5731–5736 (2011)
	133.	Wang, X., Lim, T.-T.: Highly efficient and stable Ag-AgBr/TiO2 composites for destruction 
of Escherichia coli under visible light irradiation. Water Res. 47(12), 4148–4158 (2013)

91
Silver Nanoparticles in Heterogeneous Plasmon Mediated Catalysis
	134.	Wu, T., et  al.: Surface plasmon resonance-induced visible light photocatalytic reduction 
of graphene oxide: Using Ag nanoparticles as a plasmonic photocatalyst. Nanoscale 3(5), 
2142–2144 (2011)
	135.	Jiang, B., et  al.: In situ fabrication of Ag/Ag3PO4/graphene triple heterostructure visible-
light photocatalyst through graphene-assisted reduction strategy. ChemCatChem 5(6), 
1359–1367 (2013)
	136.	Hou, Y., et  al.: Ag3PO4 Oxygen evolution photocatalyst employing synergistic action of 
Ag/AgBr nanoparticles and graphene sheets. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 20132–20139 (2012)
	137.	Min, Y., et al.: Self-assembled encapsulation of graphene oxide/Ag@AgCl as a Z-scheme 
photocatalytic system for pollutant removal. J. Mater. Chem. A 2(5), 1294–1301 (2014)
	138.	Luo, G., et al.: Facile fabrication and enhanced photocatalytic performance of Ag/AgCl/rGO 
heterostructure photocatalyst. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5(6), 2161–2168 (2013)
	139.	Ng, Y.H., et al.: To what extent do graphene scaffolds improve the photovoltaic and photocat-
alytic response of tio2 nanostructured films? J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 1(15), 2222–2227 (2010)
	140.	Liang, Q., et  al.: Enhanced photocatalytic activity and structural stability by hybridiz-
ing Ag3PO4 nanospheres with graphene oxide sheets. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14(45),  
15657–15665 (2012)
	141.	Liu, L., Liu, J., Sun, D.D.: Graphene oxide enwrapped Ag3PO4 composite: towards a highly 
efficient and stable visible-light-induced photocatalyst for water purification. Catal. Sci. 
Technol. 2(12), 2525–2532 (2013)
	142.	Xiang, Q., Yu, J., Jaroniec, M.: Graphene-based semiconductor photocatalysts. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 41(2), 782–796 (2012)
	143.	An, X., Yu, J.C.: Graphene-based photocatalytic composites. RSC Adv. 1(8), 1426–1434 (2011)
	144.	Ng, Y.H., Iwase, A., Bell, N.J., Kudo, A., Amal, R.:  Semiconductor/reduced graphene oxide 
nanocomposites derived from photocatalytic reactions. Cat. Today 164(1), 353–357 (2011)
	145.	Gao, W., et al.: One-pot synthesis of Ag/r-GO/TiO2 nanocomposites with high solar absorp-
tion and enhanced anti-recombination in photocatalytic applications. Nanoscale 6(10), 
5498–5508 (2014)
	146.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., et  al.: Plasmon-mediated photopolymerization maps plasmon fields 
for silver nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133(24), 9160–9163 (2011)
	147.	Deeb, C., et  al.: Plasmon-based free-radical photopolymerization: effect of diffusion on 
nanolithography processes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133(27), 10535–10542 (2011)
	148.	Stamplecoskie, K.G., Fasciani, C., Scaiano, J.C.: Dual-stage lithography from a light-driven, 
plasmon-assisted process: a hierarchical approach to subwavelength features. Langmuir 
28(30), 10957–10961 (2012)
	149.	Stamplecoskie, K.G. and J.C. Scaiano, Plasmon mediated polymerization on the sur-
face of silver nanoparticles for advancements in photolithographic patterning. Proc. SPIE, 
Advances in Resist Materials and Processing Technology XXIX, vol 8325, pp. 832527/1–
832527/6 (2012)
	150.	Hubert, C., et al.: Near-Field Photochemical Imaging of Noble Metal Nanostructures. Nano 
Lett. 5(4), 615–619 (2005)
	151.	Yang, X., et al.: Photocatalytic oxidation of methanol to methyl formate in liquid phase over 
supported silver catalysts. Catal. Commun. 43, 192–196 (2014)
	152.	Zhang, D.-H., et al.: One-pot synthesis of Ag-Fe3O4 nanocomposite: a magnetically recycla-
ble and efficient catalyst for epoxidation of styrene. Chem. Commun. 29, 3414–3416 (2008)
	153.	Duan, S., et  al.: Roles of plasmonic excitation and protonation on photoreactions of 
p-­aminobenzenethiol on Ag nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. C 118(13), 6893–6902 (2014)
	154.	Zhao, L.-B., et al.: Theoretical study of plasmon-enhanced surface catalytic coupling reac-
tions of aromatic amines and nitro compounds. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5(7), 1259–1266 (2014)
	155.	Huang, Y.-F., et al.: When the signal is not from the original molecule to be detected: chemi-
cal transformation of para-aminothiophenol on Ag during the SERS measurement. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 132(27), 9244–9246 (2010)
	156.	Sun, M., et al.: Activated vibrational modes and fermi resonance in tip-enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. E 87(2), 020401 (2013)

92
M. González-Béjar
	157.	Canpean, V., Iosin, M., Astilean, S.: Disentangling SERS signals from two molecular species: 
A new evidence for the production of p,p‚dimercaptoazobenzene by catalytic coupling reaction 
of p-aminothiophenol on metallic nanostructures. Chem. Phys. Lett. 500(4−6), 277–282 (2010)
	158.	Huang, Y., et al.: Can p, p,-Dimercaptoazobisbenzene be produced from p-Aminothiophenol 
by surface photochemistry reaction in the junctions of a Ag nanoparticle-molecule-Ag (or 
Au) Film? J. Phys. Chem. C 114(42), 18263–18269 (2010)
	159.	Xu, P., et al.,: Mechanistic understanding of surface plasmon assisted catalysis on a single 
particle: cyclic redox of 4-aminothiophenol. Sci. Rep.3 (2013)
	160.	Sun, M., et  al.: The pH-controlled plasmon-assisted surface photocatalysis reaction of 
4-Aminothiophenol to p,p´-Dimercaptoazobenzene on Au, Ag, and Cu colloids. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 115(19), 9629–9636 (2011)
	161.	Sun, M., et al.: Remote excitation polarization-dependent surface photochemical reaction by 
plasmonic waveguide. Plasmonics 6(4), 681–687 (2011)
	162.	Sun, M., Hou, Y., Xu, H.: Can information of chemical reaction propagate with plasmonic wave-
guide and be detected at remote terminal of nanowire? Nanoscale 3(10), 4114–4116 (2011)
	163.	Busch, D.G., Ho, W.: Direct observation of the crossover from single to multiple excitations 
in femtosecond surface photochemistry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1338–1341 (1996)
	164.	Bonn, M., et  al.: Phonon- versus electron-mediated desorption and oxidation of CO on 
Ru(0001). Science 285(5430), 1042–1045 (1999)
	165.	Denzler, D.N., et al.: Electronic excitation and dynamic promotion of a surface reaction. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 91(22), 226102 (2003)
	166.	Buntin, S.A., et al.: Optically driven surface reactions: evidence for the role of hot electrons. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 61(11), 1321–1324 (1988)
	167.	Olsen, T., Gavnholt, J., Schiøtz, J.: Hot-electron-mediated desorption rates calculated from 
excited-state potential energy surfaces. Phys. Rev. B 79(3), 035403 (2009)
	168.	Olsen, T., Schitøz, J.: Origin of power laws for reactions at metal surfaces mediated by hot 
electrons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103(23), 238301 (2009)
	169.	Wingreen, N.S., Jacobsen, K.W., Wilkins, J.W.: Inelastic scattering in resonant tunneling. 
Phys. Rev. B 40(17), 11834–11850 (1989)
	170.	Kim, K.H., et al.: Enhanced photoinduced desorption from metal nanoparticles by photo-
excitation of confined hot electrons using femtosecond laser pulses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 
047401 (2011)
	171.	Mulugeta, D., et al.: Size effects in thermal and photochemistry of (NO)2 on Ag nanoparti-
cles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 146103 (2008)
	172.	Phillips, K.R., et  al.: Sequential photo-oxidation of methanol to methyl formate on 
TiO2(110). J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 574–577 (2013)
	173.	Fang, Y., et  al.: Ascertaining p, p, Dimercaptoazobenzene produced from p-Aminothio-
phenol by selective catalytic coupling reaction on silver nanoparticles. Langmuir 26(11),  
7737–7746 (2010)
	174.	Ingram, D.B., Linic, S.: Water splitting on composite plasmonic-metal/semiconductor pho-
toelectrodes: evidence for selective plasmon-induced formation of charge carriers near the 
semiconductor surface. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133(14), 5202–5205 (2011)
	175.	Sun, T., et  al.: High photocatalytic activity of hydrogen production from water over Fe 
doped and Ag deposited anatase TiO2 catalyst synthesized by solvothermal method. Chem. 
Eng. J. 228, 896–906 (2013)
	176.	Wei, Y., et al.: Polydopamine-assisted decoration of ZnO nanorods with Ag nanoparticles: 
an improved photoelectrochemical anode. J. Mater. Chem. A 1(16), 5045–5052 (2013)
	177.	Solarska, R., Krolikowska, A., Augustynski, J.: Silver nanoparticle induced photocurrent 
enhancement at WO3 photoanodes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49(43), 7980–7983 (2010)
	178.	Chuang, H.-Y., Chen, D.-H.: Fabrication and photoelectrochemical study of Ag@TiO2 
­nanoparticle thin film electrode. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 36(16), 9487–9495 (2011)
	179.	Wei, Y., et  al.,: Enhanced photoelectrochemical water-splitting effect with a bent ZnO 
nanorod photoanode decorated with Ag nanoparticles. Nanotechnology, 23(23), 235401/1–
235401/8 (2012)

93
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: 
From Roman Wine Cups to Biomedical 
Devices
Hasitha de Alwis Weerasekera, May Griffith and Emilio I. Alarcon
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
E.I. Alarcon et al. (eds.), Silver Nanoparticle Applications, Engineering Materials, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6_5
Abstract  This chapter reviews the state of the art applications of silver ­nanoparticles 
in the biomedical sciences and health care, and aims to provide the reader with a 
general, but concise picture of the basic concepts that need to be considered when 
using silver nanoparticles (AgNP) in biological systems. We begin with a review of 
basic concepts on nanomaterials for biomedical applications. In the second part, we 
discuss a long-standing controversy regarding the risks versus benefits for the use of 
AgNP in the biomedical sciences. In the last section of this chapter, we present a 
­discussion of future challenges regarding the use of AgNP in medicine.
1  Introduction
Silver has been present in human civilization since ancient times; for example, the 
“Cantharus” was a two-handle elongated Roman wine cup made of pure ­silver 
[1, 2]. Silver-made containers used for water storage were noted to not have any 
H. de Alwis Weerasekera 
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Catalysis Research and Innovation,  
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
M. Griffith (*) 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Integrative Regenerative  
Medicine Centre, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
e-mail: may.griffith@liu.se
E.I. Alarcon (*) 
Bio-nanomaterials Chemistry and Engineering Laboratory,  
Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute,  
40 Ruskin Street Rm H5229, Ottawa K1Y 4W7, Canada
e-mail: ealarcon@ottawaheart.ca
E.I. Alarcon 
Centre for Catalysis Research and Innovation, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada

94
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Available silver concentration calculation
Let us consider an illustrative example for the calculation of the available 
silver concentration for 3.5  nm diameter spherical AgNP prepared using 
0.2 × 10−3 mol/L ionic silver concentration. AgNP concentration and sur-
face density/concentration can be calculated in a fashion similar to that 
described for spherical gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) [12]. In this calculation, 
we have assumed complete Ag+ reduction to form 3.5 nm spherical AgNP. 
Thus, for a large spherical metal cluster, it can be assumed that the volume 
of the cluster (VNP) is equal to N times the volume of each individual atom 
(VAtom) as follows:
(1)
VNP = N × VAtom
growth of microorganisms—possibly the earliest recorded observation of the 
­antimicrobial properties of silver, before nanomaterials revolution in our present 
society [3].
Long before the development of nanomaterials in the 20th century, silver 
played a pivotal role in the medical sciences. Two of the main biomedical uses for 
ionic silver were as prophylactic eye drops for newborns against gonorrhea and 
other bacterial/fungal infections [4], and in the so called ‘silver-baths’, that were 
common practice in burn units to prevent biofilm formation [5]. Colloidal silver 
was hailed as the “magic bullet” when Erlich began treating syphilis with silver-
salvarsan in 1910, and this became the treatment of choice [6].
It should be noted that in some countries silver nitrate eye drops are still used; 
although silver baths are now part of the history of modern medicine due to their 
­elevated toxicity [2, 7, 8]. As a consequence of such elevated toxicity, medical burn 
units replaced the “silver-baths” for the topical application, in the form a 1.0  % 
cream, with another silver “form”; silver sulfadiazine [8]. The use of this “new” form 
of silver had been justified due to its apparent lower toxicity and synergetic antibac-
terial activity between the silver ions and the sulfadiazine moiety. However, studies 
have raised concerns regarding the cell toxicity of silver sulfadiazine in primary skin 
cells [9] and the immune suppressing ability of this compound [10]. Colloidal silver 
is no longer used to treat syphilis, but many individuals consume colloidal as a health 
supplement, despite concerns over adverse effects such as agyria [11].
Although the exact mechanism for the antibacterial activity of silver is not clear 
(see Chap. “Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver”), its use 
in the form of a nano-sized material offers hope in overcoming the silver toxicity, 
since the available ionic silver concentration will be dramatically reduced for a 
fixed total silver concentration; see below.

95
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
Using nanoparticle diameter and volume, the total number of atoms 
­contained in a single nanoparticle can be calculated as follows:
In (2), DNP and dA are the nanoparticle and silver atomic diameters, respec-
tively. We have used in our calculations DNP = 3.5 nm and dA = 0.259 nm. 
This corresponds to an average of 2,468 atoms per nanoparticle (N). From 
this, AgNP concentration can be calculated using Eq. 3:
Here, Ag concentration is in all cases considered equal to 0.2 × 10−3 mol/L. 
This calculation renders a AgNP concentration of ≈80 nM (80 × 10−9 mol/L). 
From this value, and assuming that the available silver concentration will be 
exclusively found on the surface of the nanoparticle—which for practical 
purposes will have a thickness of at least ≈0.26 nm (the diameter of a single  
Ag atom)—the percentage of silver atoms in one AgNP can be approximately 
­calculated, as follows:
In Eq. 4, d corresponds to the nanoparticle diameter (3.5 nm) and l is the 
thickness of the outer layer (0.26 nm). Thus, for 3.5 nm diameter spheri-
cal silver nanoparticles, around 21  % of the atoms are contained on the 
nanoparticle surface, which corresponds to 16.5 nM silver. Table 1 details 
the number of silver atoms per nanoparticle, nanoparticle number per liter, 
nanoparticle concentrations, and available surface silver concentration, for 
spherical silver nanoparticles with different diameters.
(2)
N =
DNP
dA
3
(3)

AgNP

=

Ag

N
(4)
%Ag −surface = d3 −(d −1)3
d3
× 100
Together with the reduced silver concentration in AgNP, the role of the protecting 
agent on the nanoparticle surface also plays a critical role in the nanomaterial bio-
compatibility, since this capping agent controls the interaction of the nanoparticle 
with living organisms; see below. Note that the argument related to the reduced 
silver concentration for nanoparticles is solely and exclusively valid under condi-
tions in which nanoparticle stability and minimal surface oxidation are guaran-
teed. This will be further discussed in the following section.

96
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
2  Revisiting Silver Nanoparticles Toxicity
Ionic silver is well known for its toxic effects on primary cells. However, when 
compared to AgNP at the same total silver concentration, one should suspect to 
see a reduced toxicity since the available silver concentration will be considerably 
lower, as shown in Table 1. Moreover, the greatly increasing number of peer-review 
publications on AgNP, see Chap. “Synthetic Routes for the Preparation of Silver 
Nanoparticles: A Mechanistic Perspective”, present conflicting evidence regarding 
the biocompatibility and toxic impact of AgNP in living organisms. Thus, drawing 
any conclusion regarding the application of nano silver in the biomedical sciences 
is certainly problematic. In the following, we provide the reader with some prac-
tical guidelines to be considered when determining the biocompatibility of AgNP 
that include:
i.	 Nanoparticle size and polydispersity
ii.	 Nature of the capping/protecting agent
iii.	 Nanoparticle stability in the chosen cell culture media or biologically-­relevant 
liquids
iv.	 Experimental differences in the cell viability assays e.g. cell density, cytotoxicity 
assay protocol, and incubation time
In the next paragraphs, we will briefly discuss the importance that points i–iv have 
on the evaluation of the toxicity of AgNP.
Table  1   Number of silver atoms per nanoparticle, nanoparticle density (#/L), nanoparticle 
­concentrations (nM), and available surface silver concentration (nM) for different sizes of spherical 
monodisperse silver nanoparticles
aNumbers in brackets correspond to the percentage of atoms that are on the surface of the nano-
particle. Note that we have limited our consideration of surface atoms to those contained within 
an outer layer of 0.26 nm thickness
Diameter/nm
Ag atoms/ 
nanoparticle  
(×103)
AgNP
concentration 
(nM)
AgNP
density 
(×1010/L)
Available AgNP  
on surface (nM)
2.5
0.9
220
19
62
(28)a
5.0
7.2
28
2.4
4.1
(15)
10
58
3.5
0.30
0.26
(7.5)
25
900
0.22
0.019
0.0068
(3.1)
50
7,195
0.028
0.0024
0.0004
(1.6)
100
57,557
0.0035
0.00030
0.00003
(0.8)

97
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
2.1  Nanoparticle Size and Polydispersity
Numerous reports indicate that nanoparticle size controls the cell uptake mecha-
nism [13, 14]. Those mechanisms can be then divided into two major groups; 
simple and facilitated diffusion. However, under conditions where close contact 
between nanoparticles and cells has been achieved, i.e. longer incubation times,  
a simple calculation using the number of nanoparticles/L listed in Table 1, at a 
fixed cell concentration (5.0 × 104 cells/mL), renders nanoparticle/cell ratios of 
480 and 0.006 for 5 and 100  nm AgNP, respectively. With those numbers and 
assuming that only one nanoparticle is required to induce complete toxicity, irre-
spective of the uptake mechanism, for the 5.0 nm AgNP a 100 % mortality should 
be observed, while for the 100 nm AgNP less than 0.6 % of the population should 
show signs of toxicity. In this scenario for the 100 nm AgNP lack of toxicity would 
be observed only if nanoparticle degradation (i.e. release of ionic Ag) during the 
incubation is minimal and does not contribute to the overall toxicity.
Since reduced polydispersity (i.e. tighter size distribution of nanoparticle size), 
allows for more reliable data interpretation for nanoparticle behavior, particu-
larly when studying nanoparticle-cell interactions, the synthesis of nanoparticles 
with narrower size distributions is required. However, nanoparticle formation and 
growth involves multiple steps (see Chap. “Synthetic Routes for the Preparation 
of Silver Nanoparticles: A Mechanistic Perspective”), resulting in the formation 
of nanoparticles within a range of sizes. Figure 1 left shows a representative plot 
for the size distribution of silver nanoparticles protected with a thiol-modified 
variety of the antimicrobial peptide LL-37 (AgNP@LL37) [9]. This histogram 
was obtained from measuring 400 individual nanoparticles from TEM images. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
6
12
Number of events
d/nm
5.3±1.8nm
0
0.04
0.08
0
50
100
150
200
250
Frequency (f)
Diameter (nm)
5 nm 
10 nm 
35 nm 
50 nm 
Fig.  1   Left Size distribution histogram for AgNP@LL37 nanoparticles obtained from size 
counting of TEM images for 400 individual nanoparticles. The dashed line corresponds to the 
best Gaussian data fit obtained in Kaleida Graph® 4.5.1. Figure adapted from reference [9]. Right 
Effect sample polydispersity on the size distribution of spherical nanoparticles calculated using 
a normal distribution Gaussian equation. The numbers in the plot correspond to the standard 
­deviation (SD) used in the curve simulation. In all cases the area under the curve was normalized 
to the unit

98
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
As mentioned, nanoparticles are formed within a range of sizes; thus, depending 
on the size dispersion, they are grouped in two main categories; monodisperse 
and polydisperse. In this sense, polydispersity index (PDI) accounts for the sam-
ple size of colloidal nanoparticles in a fluid solution and it can be understood as a 
measurement of the size-histogram distribution broadness that can be defined as:
In this equation σ and χ correspond to the standard deviation and mean size diam-
eter, respectively. Let us consider samples A and B, both with mean size distribu-
tions of 100 nm, but with standard deviations 10 and 35 nm. Using those numbers 
in Eq. 5 renders PDI values of 0.01 and 0.123 for A and B, respectively; see Fig. 1 
right. In general terms, colloidal solutions of nanoparticles with PDI < 0.05 are 
considered as monodisperse, while values between 0.05 and 0.10 correspond to 
samples with good monodispersity, and those with PDI > 0.1 are considered poly-
disperse. Samples with PDI  >  0.7 correspond to highly polydisperse samples, 
where multiple populations of nanoparticles co-exist.
The concept of polydispersity also introduces an additional variable in the ­number 
of nanoparticles available at a fixed concentration of starting material, as depicted in 
Fig. 1 right. This figure shows the impact of polydispersity on the relative abundance 
of spherical nanoparticles of different diameters in the solution. In this model, the 
number of available nanoparticles with the same diameter per volume unit will not be 
the same as that expected if a 100 % of the population had the same size distribution. 
Thus, these differences in distributions will markedly impact the interpretation for the 
interaction between nanomaterials and living organisms if samples with wide polydis-
persity are employed. Table 2 shows a summary of selected properties for different 
spherical silver nanoparticles employed in recently published articles. The collection 
of papers shown in this table is relatively small in comparison to what is shown in 
Chap. “Synthetic Routes for the Preparation of Silver Nanoparticles: A Mechanistic 
Perspective” regarding the number of peer-reviewed articles published per year on 
silver nanoparticles. For pedagogical reasons, we have purposely selected papers that 
have been published during the last 4 years and that meet the quality criteria for com-
plete material characterization and biocompatibility testing. Figure 2 shows the size 
distribution histogram for the data collected in Table 2. It can be seen that the nano-
particle sizes ranged from a couple of nanometers to up to 100 nm, with nanoparticles 
smaller than 40 nm being the predominant size found. Statistical analysis of this popu-
lation rendered a mean number of ≈35 nm for nanoparticle diameter with a stand-
ard deviation of 27 nm, which indicates a highly polydisperse population. Note that 
nanoparticle sizes cannot be directly compared when using two different techniques 
to estimate their sizes. Thus, usually electron microscopy techniques render values 
more precise for the metal core of the nanoparticle, while dynamic light scattering 
methodologies, for example, deal with the estimation of the hydrodynamic radii of 
nanoparticles; see Chap. “Synthetic Routes for the Preparation of Silver Nanoparticles:  
A Mechanistic Perspective”. In the latest the role of the protecting agent and medium 
ionic strength will play a critical role in the measured hydrodynamic size.
(5)
PDI =
σ
χ
2

99
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
Table 2   Physical properties and cell toxicity conditions for selected AgNP recently reported in the literature
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Vignoni et al. 
[9]
19.0 ± 1.0
[DLS]
LL37 peptide
0.0002
+37.0  
± 0.8
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
~24 h 
[UV-Vis]
Human dermal 
fibroblast
1. MTS  
colorimetric 
assay3  
2. Live/dead 
staining4
14 (1)
4,808  
(1),  
3,500  
(2)
No significant 
cytotoxicity  
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
Alarcon et al. 
[15]
3.00
[TEM]
HSA
0.0002
+41.0  
± 3.0
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
~18 h 
[UV-Vis]
Human dermal 
fibroblast
MTS colorimet-
ric assay3
6, 24, 48
4,808
No significant 
cytotoxicity 
observed at 
tested concentra-
tions and time 
points
Albers et al. 
[16]
50.01, 2
α- MEM  
[AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
NP
NP
(a) Primary 
osteoblasts 
(b) Primary 
osteoclasts
1. XTT colori-
metric assay3— 
(a, b)  
2. Alkaline 
phosphatase 
assay5 (a) 
3. Tartrate 
resistant acidic 
phosphatase 
assay6 (b)
72
1,923  
(a), 
28,846 
(b)
(a). 194.3 (1), 
146.1 (2)  
(b). 335.0 (1), 
193.5 (3)
Ashraf et al. 
[17]
10.0–15.0  
[TEM]
Casein (milk 
protein)
0.0010
−25.0, 
−25.0
Intracellular 
AgNP 
[Confocal 
laser  
scanning 
microscopy]
Mouse embryonic 
fibroblast—
NIH/3T3
Resazurin based 
fluorescent 
assay7
24
14, 423
0.314 ± 0.075
(continued)

100
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Table 2   (continued)
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Grosse et al. 
[18]
10.01, 2, 50.01, 2, 
100.01, 2
Citrate [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
NP
NP
Rat brain 
endothelial- 
RBE4
1. Neutral red 
assay8, 9
2. LDH assay9
24 (1)
30,000  
(1)
In-situ cytotox-
icity test (1).
 1-10 (10 nm), 
10-25 (50 nm), 
>25 (100 nm)
Kermanizadeh 
et al. [19]
17.51 
[TEM]
Polyoxylaurat 
Tween-20
NP
NP
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[DLS]
Human hepato-
blastoma-C3A
1. WST-1 col-
orimetric assay3 
2. AlamarBlue 
fluorescent 
assay7
24
9,615
3.906–7.810 (1), 
7.810–15.62 (2)
Simpson et al. 
[20]
4.4 ± 1.0 [TEM]
Type-I collagen 
@ rose bengal
0.0002
30.0
NP
Human dermal 
fibroblast
Light micros-
copy imaging
0, 48, 72,  
96
5,000
No significant 
cytotoxicity 
observed at 
tested concentra-
tions and time 
points
Suman et al. 
[21]
30.0–55.0  
[TEM]
Morinda citrifia 
root extract
0.0010
NP
NP
HeLa
MTT colorimet-
ric assay3
24
2,403
~100.0–1000
Alarcon et al. 
[22]
3.50 ± 0.04 
[SEM]
(i) Type-I 
collagen
(ii) α-Poly-L- 
Lysine
0.0002
+30.0 (i),
+70.0 (ii)
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media  
68 (i) and  
39 days  
(ii) [UV-Vis]
(a) Human  
dermal fibroblast 
(b) Human 
epidermal 
keratinocyte
1. MTS col-
orimetric assay3 
2. Live/dead 
staining4
14 (1)
4,808 (1)
In-situ cytotox-
icity test (1). 
(i) 0.0018 (a) 
(ii) 0.0003 (a), 
0.0001(b)
(continued)

101
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
Table 2   (continued)
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Asare et al.  
[23]
20.01 
[DLS~154.6]
BSA [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
NP
AgNP in  
buffers  
[DLS]
(a) Human tes-
ticular embryonic 
carcinoma—NT2 
(b) Primary 
mouse testicular 
(WT and KO)
1. MTT colori-
metric assay3 
2. Propidium 
Iodide/ Hoechst 
staining9
24, 48,  
72 (1)
NR
In-situ cyto-
toxicity test 
(1). (a). ~100.0 
(24h), >100.0 
(48 h); (b-WT). 
10.00–15.00 
(24 h), ~10  
(48 h); (b-KO). 
~10.00 (24 h), 
10.00 (48 h)
Haase et al.  
[24]
20.0 (AgNP20), 
40.0 (AgNP40) 
[TEM]
Peptide (CKK)
0.2000
NP
AgNP sus-
pension in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[DLS,  
SAXS]
Mixed primary 
cells–Wistar 
rat neurons and 
astrocytes (Cells 
were cultured for 
7, 14 & 21 days)
1. WST-1  
colorimetric 
assay3  
2. LDH assay9
24
NR
In-situ cytotox-
icity test (1). 
(AgNP20)— 
~10.00 (7d), 
~30.00 (14d), 
~20.00 (21d). 
(AgNP40)— 
~10.00 (7d), 
5.000–10.00 
(14d), ~10.00 
(21d). In-situ 
cytotoxicity 
test (2) for 
14 d cultures. 
(AgNP20)—
0–5.000, 
(AgNP40)—
30.00–50.00
(continued)

102
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Hayashi et al. 
[25]
83.0 ± 22.01 
[TEM]
BSA [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
−10.0– 
−14.0
Dispersion  
of AgNP in  
cell media 
[DLS,  
TEM], 
Intracellular 
AgNP  
[TEM]
(a) Earthworm 
Coelomocyte
(b) Human acute 
monocytic leuke-
mia (THP-1)
(c) Differentiating 
human acute 
monocytic 
leukemia (diff. 
THP-1)
WST-8 colori-
metric assay3
24
NR
(a) 5.020  
± 1.030
(b) Not tested 
for the concen-
tration range
(c) 7.340  
± 3.800
Justin Packia 
Jacob et al.  
[26]
17.6–41.0  
[SEM]
Piper longum 
leaf extract
0.0010
NP
NP
Human epithelial 
(HEp-2)
MTT colorimet-
ric assay3
24
500,000
31.25
Lu et al. [27]
12.0 [TEM],  
154.2 [DLS]
Egg white  
extract  
(albumen)
0.0100
NP
NP
Mouse fibroblast
WST-8 colori-
metric assay3
24
4,808
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
Mukherjee  
et al. [28]
28.41(dH2O), 
65.41 (HeLa 
med.), 68.61 
(HeCaT med.) 
[DLS]
HeCaT 
media, HeLa 
media [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
−33.33, 
−20.67, 
−15.83
Dispersion  
of AgNP in 
cell media 
[DLS]
(a) Human 
keratinocyte 
(HeCaT) (b) 
Epithelial 
adenocarcinorma 
(HeLa)
1. AlamarBlue 
fluorescent 
assay7 2. Neutral 
red assay8, 9  
3. Coomassie 
blue assay10 
4. MTT col-
orimetric assay3 
5. Apoptosis/
necrosis assay
24 (1–5),  
48 (1–5),  
72 (1–5),  
96 (1–3)
9,615 
(1−4)
Data shown 
are for 24 h 
incubations.
(a). 181.0(1), 
192.5(2), 
80.60(3),  
51.80(4)
(b). 88.60(1), 
180.6(2), 
80.90(3), 
56.40(4)
Table 2   (continued)
(continued)

103
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Suresh et al. 
[29]
4.5 ± 1.5 (i),
4.0 ± 1.5 (ii),
9.0 ± 2.0 (iii),
4.0 ± 1.0 (iv) 
[TEM]
(i) Poly 
(diallyldimethyl- 
ammonium) 
chloride  
(ii) Biogenic  
(iii) Uncoated  
(iv) Oleate
0.0010
+45.0 ± 
3.1 (i), 
−12.0 ± 
2.0 (ii), 
−42.5 ± 
5.2 (iii), 
−45.8 ± 
4.4 (iv)
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[DLS]
(a) Murine perito-
neal macrophage 
(RAW 264.7) 
(b) Murine lung 
epithelial (C-10)
1. MTT col-
orimetric assay3 
2. Confocal 
microscopy 
imaging
4, 12
4,808
In-situ cytotox-
icity test (1) at 
4 h incubation. 
(a). 0.100 (i), 
0.125(ii), 4.900 
(iii), 1.100 (iv) 
(b). 0.450 (i), 
0.700 (ii), 6.300 
(iii), 1.600 (iv)
Bouwmeester 
et al. [30]
20.3 ± 1.91,  
34.4 ± 3.41,  
61.2 ± 5.31 
[TEM]
DMEM [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
NP
Dispersion  
of AgNP in 
cell media 
~0–24 h 
[TEM,  
NTA]
Human colon 
colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(Caco2)
WST-1 colori-
metric assay3
24
3,846
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
Comfort et al. 
[31]
9.15 ± 1.51 
[TEM]
Uncoated
NP
−40.9 ± 
1.9
Dispersion 
of AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[DLS], 
Intracellular 
AgNP  
[TEM]
Human epithelial 
(A-431)
MTS colorimet-
ric assay3
24
7,212
~25.00
Foldbjerg  
et al. [32]
69.0 ± 3.01 
[TEM]
PVP
NP
−21.8 
(stock), 
−11.6 
(media)
Dispersion  
of AgNP in 
cell media 
~24 h  
[DLS]
Human alveolar 
cell line (A549)
1. MTT col-
orimetric assay3 
2. Apoptosis/ 
necrosis assay
24
NR
~ 12.50 (1), ~ 
5.000–10.00 (2)
Table 2   (continued)
(continued)

104
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Haase et al.  
[33]
20.01 (AgNP20), 
40.01 (AgNP40) 
[TEM]
Peptide (CKK)
0.2000
NP
Intracellular 
AgNP  
[TEM,  
confocal 
Raman 
micros- 
copy],   
AgNP in 
aqueous 
suspen- 
sion [DLS, 
SAXS]
THP-1 derived 
human 
macrophage
1. WST-1 colori-
metric assay3  
2. LDH assay9
24 (1),  
48 (1)
9,615  
(1)
In-situ cyto-
toxicity tests 
(1). (AgNP20)–
110.0 (24 h), 
18.00 (48 h) 
(AgNP40)–140.0 
(24 h), 30.00 
(48 h)
Hackenberg 
et al. [34]
46.0 ± 21.01 
[TEM]
BSA [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
−13.6
Intracellular 
AgNP  
[TEM], 
Dispersion  
of AgNP in 
cell media 
[DLS]
Human mesen-
chymal stem
1. Trypan blue 
exclusion assay9 
2. Live/dead 
staining11
1(1), 3(1), 
24(1)
NR
LD50 levels are 
not reported
Park et al.  
[35]
20.3 ± 1.91,  
79.8 ± 5.11, 
[TEM]
Uncoated
NP
−47.1  
± 1.9, 
−49.7  
± 1.8
DLS
(a) Murine perito-
neal macrophage 
(RAW 264.7) (b) 
Mouse fibroblast 
(L929)
1. WST-1 colori-
metric assay3 
2. LDH assay9
24 (1),  
240 (1)
19,230
LD50 levels are 
not reported
Table 2   (continued)
(continued)

105
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Stevanović  
et al. [36]
69.2 ± 6.0 (i), 
47.5 ± 5.0 (ii), 
44.9 ± 5.0 (iii)
(i) Uncoated, 
(ii) Poly-α, γ, 
L-glutamic acid 
(0.05 wt%) 
(iii) Poly-α, γ, 
L-glutamic acid 
(0.1 wt%)
0.0058
−38.5 ± 
11.5 (i),
−49.1 ± 
19.0 (ii),
−43.7 ± 
12.0 (iii)
~3 months 
[UV-Vis]
Human liver car-
cinoma (HepG2)
MTT colorimet-
ric assay3
24
3,846
LD50 levels are 
not reported
Stoehr et al. 
[37]
30.0
[TEM]
PVP
0.1000
NP
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[DLS]
Human 
alveolar epithelial 
carcinoma
1. Resazurin 
based colorimet-
ric assay7
2. LDH assay9
24, 48
1,923
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
Braydich- 
Stolle et al.  
[38]
15.01, 25.01, 
80.01 (i) 
10.01, 25.0-30.01,
80.01 (ii)
[DLS, TEM]
(i) Hydrocarbon, 
(ii) Poly- 
saccharide
NP
NP
~24 h post 
exposure 
intracel- 
lular AgNP  
[SEM,  
TEM, DLS]
Mouse spermato-
gonial stem cells 
(C18-4)
1. MTS col-
orimetric assay3 
2. Apoptosis/ 
Necrosis assay
24 (1),  
48 (2)
4,808 (1), 
4,250 (2)
LD50 levels are 
not reported
Eom and  
Choi [39]
28.0–35.01  
[DLS]
THF [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
30.0
Dispersion 
of AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[TEM,  
DLS]
Human lym-
phoma (Jurkat T)
1. Trypan blue 
exclusion assay9
2. Cell cycle 
analysis12 
3. Live/ dead 
staining13
24 (1)
NR
In-situ cytotox-
icity test (1). 
~0.200–0.500
Martinez-
Gutierrez  
et al. [40]
20.0–25.0  
[TEM]
Gallic acid
0.0010
NR
NP
Human acute 
monocytic leuke-
mia (THP-1)
Trypan blue 
exclusion assay9
24
28,846
10.00 ± 3.40
Table 2   (continued)
(continued)

106
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Moulton et al. 
[41]
11.5–24.2 (i), 
3.8–91.3 (ii)
(i) Epicatechin 
(ii) Tea extract
0.1000
NP
Intracellular 
AgNP ~24  
h [ultra- 
resolution 
imaging], 
AgNP in 
buffer and  
cell media 
[DLS]
Keratinocyte 
(HeCaT)
1. MTS colori-
metric assay3  
2. LDH assay9
24 (1)
NR
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
Powers et al. 
[42]
6 (i), 21  
(ii), 75  
(iii) [TEM]
(i) Citrate (ii) 
PVP
0.0010
NP
DLS,  
Plasma-
optical 
emission 
spectroscopy
PC12
Trypan blue 
exclusion assay9
24
NR
LD50 levels are 
not reported
Trickler et al. 
[43]
28.3 ± 9.6,  
47.5 ± 5.6,  
102 ± 32.8  
[TEM]
PVP
NP
−44.2, 
−46.0, 
−29.5
AgNP in 
suspen- 
sion in  
cell media 
[DLS,  
LDV—laser 
Doppler 
velocimetry]
Primary rat 
brain microves-
sel endothelial 
(rBMEC)
XTT colorimet-
ric assay3
24
4,808
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
Arora et al.  
[44]
7.0–20.01 
[HR-TEM]
DMEM [AgNP 
resuspension]
NP
NP
Intracellular 
AgNP  
[TEM], 
Dispersion  
of AgNP in 
cell media 
[DLS]
(a) Primary fibro-
blast from Swiss 
albino mice (b) 
Primary liver 
cells from Swiss 
albino mice
1. XTT assay3 
2. Apoptotic/
necrosis assay
24
9,615  
(1),  
6,172  
(2)
In-situ cytotox-
icity test (1).  
(a) 61.00  
(b) 449.0
Table 2   (continued)
(continued)

107
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
Table 2   (continued)
Author
Size (nm) 
[Measurements]
Capping  
agent
Initial  
[Ag]/(M)
Zeta  
potential 
(mV)
Particle  
stability  
test
Cell  
line(s)
In situ  
cytotoxic  
assay
Incubation 
time (h)
Cell  
density 
(cells/
cm2)15
LD50 (μg/mL)
Travan et al. 
[45]
33.0 ± 7.6  
[TEM]
Chitlac
0.0005–
0.0010
NP
~90 days 
[UV-Vis]
(a) Mouse 
fibroblast-like 
(NIH-3T3) 
(b) Human 
Hepatocarcinoma 
(HepG2) 
(c) Human 
Osteosarcoma 
(MG63)
1. MTT colori-
metric assay3  
2. LDH assay9
24, 72 (1)
4,808  
(1), 
350,000 
(2)
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
AshaRani  
et al. [46]
6.0–20.0 [TEM]
Starch
0.0010
NP
AgNP in  
cell media  
~48 h  
[TEM]
(a) Normal 
human lung 
fibroblast  
(IMR-90)  
(b) Human  
glioblastoma 
(U251)
1. Cell-titer glow 
luminescent
assay14 
2. Mitochon- 
drial—Cell titer 
blue assay7 
3. Cell cycle 
analysis12 
4. Apoptosis/
necrosis assay
24, 48, 72
9,615 
(1–2)
No signifi-
cant toxicity 
observed 
at tested 
concentrations
In some cases LD50 values were estimated from the experimental data presented in the articles, see footnote
Cell viability assays are explained in 2.4
NR Not reported; NP not provided; 1AgNPs supplied by a manufacturer; 2AgNPs were not characterized further; 3tetrazolium derivatives that uses the reduction 
properties to measure redox activity (see 2.4.1); 4stained with calcein-AM and ethidium homodimer-1 to indicate intracellular esterase activity and membrane 
integrity; 5primary osteoblast growth and differentiation measured using enzymatic alkaline phosphatase; 6primary osteoclast growth and differentiation meas-
ured using enzymatic acid phosphatase; 7resazurin salt that uses the reduction properties to measure metabolic mitochondrial redox properties (see 2.4.1); 8cell 
lysosome marker; 9measures membrane permeability/integrity (see 2.4.1); 10commassie blue staining was employed to measured total protein content; 11cell 
viability marker that fluoresces upon esterase activity; 12via propidium iodide staining; 13via Annexin V (early apoptosis)/Propidium Iodide, Hoechst, TMRE 
staining; 14measure metabolic activity based on ATP concentrations; 15Cell densities were calculated using the reported information concerning the number of 
cells and the plates used in each case. In some cases either cell density or plates used was not included, thus we could not calculate cell density values

108
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Note that in the calculations above we have not considered differences in 
nanoparticle uptake derived from differences in cell metabolism that have been 
reported to influence nanoparticle uptake [47]. Thus, for example, the cell uptake 
for fluorescently labeled carboxylated polystyrene nanoparticles can be ranked as 
G2/M > S > G0/G1, with internalized particles being split with daughter cells after 
cell division.
2.2  Nature of the Capping/Protecting Agent
The idea of using unprotected, a.k.a. “naked” nanoparticles in any form of solu-
tion, for silver nanoparticles is an unrealistic goal. Silver in metallic state is readily 
oxidized by dissolved oxygen traces in the solution. Thus, the use of protecting 
or capping agents in the preparation of AgNP is critical. The role of such protect-
ing agents, however, goes beyond merely preventing surface oxidation. In fact, the 
capping agent dictates the surface charge for the nanoparticle. This charge controls 
for the formation of complexes with biomolecules and eventually cell-nanoparticle 
interaction [48, 49], as a solution of nanoparticles is considered as a colloidal solu-
tion whose stability depends on the formal charge of the second hydration sphere 
of the nanoparticle surface [50]. The formal charge on a single nanoparticle will 
dictate the tendency of two particles to come in close contact to form aggregates. 
Thus, for example, the probability of two particles with the same charge coming 
close decreases at larger surface charges (i.e. zeta potential). Nanoparticle solu-
tions with formal charges of zero are classified under the category of colloidal sus-
pensions, while nanoparticle solutions with formal charges larger than ±20 mV 
are considered stable and meet the criteria for colloidal solutions.
Although the interaction between the capping agent and silver nanoparti-
cles will vary from case to case, some lessons can be learned by examining the 
interaction(s) between ionic silver and biological macromolecules. The use of 
Fig. 2   Size distribution 
histogram for AgNP obtained 
from TEM images. The 
bin size was fixed to 20 
and the numbers in the plot 
correspond to the mean size 
and standard deviation. Total 
number of points was 55
0
10
20
0
60
120
Number of events
d/nm
35±27 nm

109
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
silver staining in gel electrophoresis, for example, is one of the best examples 
for the interaction between silver and biomolecules. This is an efficient staining 
­protocol that allows biomolecule detection at the nanogram scale and is fully com-
patible with mass spectroscopy experiments [51, 52]. Although a complete review 
of the interactions between proteins and ionic silver goes beyond the scope of this 
chapter, in the following we will briefly review those interactions and discuss how 
they can relate to the interaction of silver nanoparticles and proteins.
Silver (I), Ag+, is considered a soft cation, and has an electronic structure simi-
lar to that of copper (I), with an outer d10 (3d) orbital shell structure. This elec-
tronic configuration is responsible for the lack of color of Ag+ in solution and 
also controls the affinity of this cation to bind biologically relevant molecules as 
the endogenously Cu+ does. The prevalence of ionic silver in solution will be pri-
marily determined by the pH and presence of polarizable atoms with which the 
cation forms strong complexes. Figure 3 shows the solubility diagram versus pH 
for different Ag species, including Ag+. From this diagram it can be clearly seen 
that ionic silver is stable within pH 0 and 8. Further increment in pH produces 
a decrease in the solubility of the cation, probably due the formation of silver 
hydroxide, see Eq. 6.
Ionic silver readily forms complexes with cyanide (CN−) and chloride (Cl−) ions. 
Those complexes although different in colors, produce a considerable reduction in 
the oxidation potential of the silver cation. Further addition of CN−, for example, 
leads the formation of Ag(CN)2−, see Eqs. 7 and 8, which can be oxidized by dis-
solved oxygen in the solution.
(6)
2Ag+ + 2OH−→Ag2O (s) + H2O
(7)
Ag+ + CN−→AgCN (s)
(8)
AgCN (s) + CN−→Ag(CN)−
2
Fig. 3   Log C versus pH 
diagram for different species 
of silver in aqueous solutions. 
The arrow shown for 
Ag2O indicates compound 
precipitation. Diagram was 
obtained at 10 mM silver 
concentration. Adapted from 
Burriel et al. [85]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Log C
pH
Ag
+
Ag
AgO
-
Ag

110
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
Other examples for complex formation of Ag+ include sodium carbonate, phos-
phate, and ammonium as shown in Eqs.  9–11. Although a detailed discussion 
about the ability of ionic silver goes beyond the scope of this chapter, Table  3 
includes a collection of relevant association constants for complex formation of 
Ag+ and ions naturally present in biological fluids.
The intrinsic ability of ionic silver to form a complex with thiols has been used, 
for example, in colorimetric detection using the archetypical p-dimethylamin-
obenzylidene rhodanine (pRho) dye. Figure 4 shows the proposed structure for the 
ionic silver-pRho complex, which has a characteristic violet color.
In particular, the interactions of ionic silver and the atoms depicted in Fig. 5 
plus the ability of this ion to form back-donating complexes with soft atoms  
(9)
2Ag+ + CO−2
3
→Ag2CO3 (s)
(10)
3Ag+ + PO−2
3
→Ag3PO4 (s)
(11)
Ag+ + NH3 →Ag(NH3)+
2
Table  3   Complex formation constants for ionic silver and different anions and/or molecules 
measured at 25 °C and at the limit of ideal solutions, see footnote
Values listed in the table corresponds to the ionic pair equilibrium constant formation or * to the 
complex formation association constant defined as βn =
[MLn]
[M][L]n where n represents the stoichi-
ometry for the complex formation
Log b1
Log b2
Log b3
Log b4
Ag+/Br−
4.7
7.7
8.7
9.0
Ag+/CN−
20.5
21.4
21.8
Ag+/Cl−
3.3
5.3
6.0
6.0
Ag+/I−
6.6
11.7
13.1
14.2
Ag+/IO3−
0.6
1.9
Ag+/NO2−
2.3
2.5
Ag+/NH3
3.3
7.2
Ag+/HS*
13.6
Ag+/2HS*
17.7
Fig. 4   Proposed 
chemical structure for 
p-dimethylaminobenzylidene 
rhodanine-silver complex 
formed in acidic solutions
N(CH3)2
CH
S
C
HN
C
S
O
+
Ag
N(CH3)2
CH
S
C
N
C
S
O
Ag

111
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
like oxygen play a pyramidal role in their interaction with amino acids, and by 
extension proteins [53]. Figure 5 contains some of the potential structures for the 
complexes formed between Ag+ and amino acids/proteins.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations and experimental measurements 
for the affinity of amino acids to ionic silver agree in the relevance of side chains 
amine groups in the complex formation [54, 55]. However, despite the natural 
interaction between ionic silver and thiols, studies on the thermodynamic data 
for the complex formation between Ag+ and cysteine are not currently available. 
Regardless, AgNP had been used for the detection of cysteine in biological fluids 
due the high affinity that silver has for the –SH group in cysteine [56].
2.3  Nanoparticle Stability in the Chosen Cell Culture  
Media or Biological Fluids
All the above mentioned concerning the role of the capping agent, and the 
­importance of having stable colloidal solutions of nanoparticles for a reliable data 
interpretation, becomes more crucial in complex solutions, like cell culture media or 
biological fluids. Table 4 contains a list of the inorganic salt composition for some 
of the most commonly used media in cell culture. As discussed in the previous par-
agraphs, since the surface composition of the nanoparticle is the immediate factor 
that dictates the behavior of the nanoparticle with its surrounding, changes in ionic 
strength, for example, will produce significant modifications in the hydrodynamic 
diameter of the nanoparticle. Those changes will change the nanoparticle affinity for 
NH2
C
C
HO
O
H
R
Ag
NH2
C
C O
O
H
R
Ag
H
NH2
C
C
O
O
H
R
Ag
Group A
NH2
C
C OH
O
H
R
Ag
NH2
C
C OH
O
H
R
Ag
Group B
Fig.  5   Proposed chemical structures for complexes formed between amino acid residues and  
silver. Group A corresponds to bidentate complexes that do not involve participation of the side 
chain (R), although the participation of oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the complex formation is 
crucial. Group B shows the formation of bidentate complexes for silver with the participation of 
side chain residue. The possibility of forming a tridentate complex for Group A with the involve-
ment of the side chain is also possible. Figure adapted from reference [53]

112
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
the cell membrane, formation of protein corona, to nanoparticle aggregation [48]. 
Thus, modifications on the nanoparticle stability in a given cell culture media should 
be assessed before cell experiments are carried out to guarantee the preservation of 
the material as a stable colloidal solution during the duration of the experiment.
A representative example of the importance of evaluating the stability of AgNP 
in high ionic strength medium is shown in Fig.  6, where it can be seen that the 
nature of the capping agent plays a determining role in the stability of the nanopar-
ticle. Thus, for example in the case of citrate protected AgNP (citrate@AgNP), they 
were not stable in any of the tested media as revealed in the decrease of the surface 
plasmon band of the AgNP. However, pre-incubation with human serum albumin 
(HSA) of citrate@AgNP increased the stability of the nanomaterial due to a capping 
agent exchange. In Table 2, we have also included a column regarding the evalua-
tion of the nanomaterial stability, where it can be seen that only a few articles had 
effectively carried out such experiments, despite the fact they are extremely impor-
tant for the interpretation of the results concerning the toxicity of AgNP in cells.
2.4  Experimental Differences in the Cell Viability Assays
As diverse as the nature of the capping agents employed for the synthesis of AgNP 
are, the methodologies used for evaluating cell toxicity of AgNP also are as seen 
in Table 1. Although the specific list for those methodologies is quite long, they 
can be grouped in the following main categories:
i.	
Cell membrane markers/dyes
ii.	 Redox activity sensors
iii.	 Cell proliferation assays
Table 4   Inorganic salt composition for selected cell culture media expressed in mM concentrations
aIn brackets are reported the hydration water molecules for the inorganic salts reported by the 
authors in their original papers
Component
MEMa [57]
DMEM [58]
F12 [58, 59]
HBBS [60]
CaCl2
1.8
1.8
0.3 (2H2O)
1.3
KCl
5.4
5.4
3.0
5.4
MgSO4
–
0.8
–
0.8 (7H2O)
NaCl
116
109.4
130
137
NaHCO3
23.8
44
14
–
NaH2PO4
1.1 (2H2O)
0.9
–
–
ZnSO4
–
–
0.003 (7H2O)
–
Na2HPO4
–
–
1.0 (7H2O)
0.33 (2H2O)
MgCl2
1.0 (6H20)
–
0.6 (6H20)
Fe(NO3)3
0.00025 (9H2O)
–
–
CuSO4
–
–
0.0025 (7H2O)
–
FeSO4
–
–
0.003 (7H2O)
–
KH2PO4
–
–
–
0.44

113
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
2.4.1  Cell Membrane Markers
Integrity of the cell membrane has been used as an archetypical marker for cell 
toxicity in cell biology. The membranes of healthy cells are impermeable to a 
range of dyes, i.e. these dyes are excluded from live cells. Dying or dead cells 
no longer have intact membrane, allowing these dyes to enter. The most common 
and widely used dye is trypan blue [61], which stains dead cells with an intense 
blue color. Propidium iodide is a fluorescent molecule that is also membrane 
impermeant to healthy cells, entering dead cells to bind nucleic acids and thereby 
enhance its fluorescence, which can be visualized. Similarly, ethidium bromide, 
a component of “live/dead” kits, is intercalated by DNA in dead cells leading to 
fluorescence.
Similarly, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leaking upon loss of the membrane integ-
rity from the cytosol had been also widely employed as a toxicity marker [62, 63]. 
Note that the LDH content can also be employed as a cell viability marker in tis-
sues since this is stable up to 48 h after cell death [64, 65]. Live/dead® fluorescent 
assay, on the other hand, uses the increment in red fluorescence of cell nucleus due 
to the DNA intercalation of ethidium bromide homodimer. Thus, the presence of 
cells with a red fluorescent nucleus is considered as a marker for cell toxicity, while 
non-stained cells are considered as viable or healthy ones, since Live/Dead® contains 
Calcein-AM which is hydrolyzed by intracellular esterases leading the formation of 
the green fluorescent dye.
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
3
6
18
DMEM
PBS
HBBS
MES
Tris
Time/h
OD/OD0
Fig.  6   Effect of 5.0  µM HSA on AgNP plasmonic absorption evaluated in different media; 
DMEM, PBS, HBBS, MES, and Tris-HCl buffer at different time points of incubation. OD0 cor-
responds to the optical density at the SPB maximum at time zero. The dashed line indicates the 
mean OD/OD0 value obtained for citrate@AgNP without the addition of HSA in the different 
media. All measurements were carried out at room temperature in quadruplicate, figure adapted 
from reference [15]

114
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
2.4.2  Redox Activity Sensors
Among the list of molecules currently employed in cell viability experiments, 
tetrazolium salts occupy a special place. Those methods are based on the color 
change of the tetrazolium salts as they undergo reduction in metabolic active 
cells. Although at first it was believed that the reduction of those compounds 
occurred exclusively in the mitochondria, such reduction can also occur as a 
product of enzyme action [66]. The first and most widely employed tetrazolium 
salt is 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazo l-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), 
that was first used by Mosman to develop a cell counting system in which cell 
viability was directly assayed in the cell culture medium [67], with remark-
able correlation with radioactive cell counting assays [68]. However, due to the 
reduced water solubility of the formazan compound formed upon reduction, the 
use of organic solvents and/or surfactants is required prior absorbance measure-
ments are carried out. This ultimately led to the development of new tetrazolium 
derivatives with improved water solubility in their reduced form. MTS, XTT, 
WST-1 [69] and WST-8 [70]. Despite the improved sensitivity and cell compati-
bility displayed by those reagents, they are affected by the presence of chemicals 
like ascorbic acid or mercaptoethanol, something not observed for MTT [69]. 
Note that changes in cell metabolism and/or chemical agents, like AgNP protect-
ing agents, present in the complex mixture can compromise the reliability of the 
experimental data.
The resazurin is a weakly fluorescent dye that upon reduction forms resorufin; 
a highly fluorescent compound. This reduction occurs inside the cell and several 
enzymes are believed to be involved, including cytochromes, flavin mono and 
­di-nucleotide, flavin adenine dinucleotide, and nicotinamide adenine dehydroge-
nases [71]. Further, both cytosolic and microsomal enzymes have proven to be 
able to reduce resazurin [72]. After reduction, resorufin is excreted to the medium 
resulting in the pink color of the supernatant. Although changes in absorbance can 
be also employed for the resazurin assay, the use of the changes in fluorescence 
emission provides more reliable and sensitive measurements that can obtain meas-
urements from as few as 50 cells in a 96 well plate [73].
In vitro studies using the neutral red dye (NR) were initially developed for 
assessment of viral cytopathogenicity and for the detection of toxic compounds 
at the Rockefeller University [74]. This assay is based on the ability of viable 
cells to incorporate and bind NR, which is mainly located in the lysosomes. 
Thus, the cells are lysed and the incorporated NR dye is released to the solution, 
giving its characteristic red color [75]. Since the dye incorporation and reten-
tion are markedly affected by the integrity of the cell membrane and pH of the 
lysosomes, NR assay can be used to discern between dead and damaged cells 
[74]. As part of the end-point assays, NR is not compatible with other toxicity 
assays, since the sample will be sacrificed for releasing the NR which is con-
tained inside the cells.

115
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
2.4.3  Cell Proliferation Assays
In vitro cell proliferation is one of the most accurate tools for determining long-
term effects of AgNP, like cell cycle arresting and modifications in cell prolifera-
tion. Numerous methodologies can be used to this end, including redox activity 
sensors, DNA quantification, protein excretion, incorporation of BrdU; a thymi-
dine analog during DNA synthesis, and finally manual counting of cells at dif-
ferent time intervals. From that list, the first two assays do not allow the use of 
the same sample for the whole duration of the experiment. Of relatively low cost 
and ease of implementation is cell counting at different time points after addi-
tion of AgNP, which has proven to render relevant information regarding long-
term effects of AgNP in primary cell cultures of human skin fibroblasts [9, 20]. 
However, this assay is not recommended for cells that either grow in suspension 
(HL60) or that proliferate following an island-growth pattern (HeLa). Other varie-
ties of cell proliferation assays include, for example, the measurement of enzy-
matic activity like alkaline phosphatase assays [76], metabolic reporter assays like 
those based on ATP production like CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability 
Assay, and flow cytometry-based cell cycle analysis [77].
The above-mentioned remarks highlight the importance of consciously choosing 
the toxicity assay where the final intended application for AgNP must be carefully 
considered in the decision. The large data dispersion shown in Fig. 7 shows for the 
LD50 (µg/L) values for different sizes of spherical AgNP, despite the intrinsic dif-
ferences between cell lines, a representative example of the inconsistences regarding 
AgNP toxicity found in the literature. This figure, for example, shows that for a given 
nanoparticle diameter i.e. 50 nm LD50 values range from 10 to 350 µg/mL, while for 
4 nm AgNP their LD50 values vary from 0.11 to 1.5 µg/mL. As we have discussed in 
this chapter, the reasons for those differences are numerous, but certainly the lack of 
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
20
40
60
80
100
LD
 (µg/mL)
AgNPs diameter (nm)
Fig.  7   In-vitro toxicity of AgNP expressed as LD50 values in µg/mL measured for spherical 
nanoparticles with different average diameters. Original data is presented in Table 2. Note that in 
many cases LD50 values were not directly presented, so we had to manually estimate them from 
the available experimental data shown in the publications

116
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
standard protocols suitable to guarantee a more direct comparison for the in vitro tox-
icity experiments does not make the labor any easier for scientists. In general terms, 
one can argue that in vitro toxicity experiments for AgNP intended for translational 
applications should be limited to use of primary human cultures, leaving aside cancer 
and animal cells, which have been widely employed due to their relative easy/low 
cost culture. However, extrapolation from that data, particularly for cancer cells, in 
terms of AgNP toxicity is not accurate and certainly had played a critical role in the 
existing discrepancy on AgNP toxicity.
3  Biomedical Devices and Silver Nanoparticles
A medical device is a term that defines a variety of products (excluding drugs) 
that can be used to aid the treatment, mitigation, diagnosis, and prevention of a 
disease or medical condition [78]. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
has developed a method of classifying over thousands of medical devices used in 
the industry, sorting various devices under sixteen groups of various medical spe-
cialties ranging from anesthesiology to toxicology [79]. Those devices are grouped 
into different classes I, II, or III (Fig. 8), scored from the lowest to the highest risk 
to the patient. As the risk increases so does the list of criteria that a device must 
meet to qualify in that category [79]. Thus, for example, a class I medical device 
needs the lowest regulatory normative and this is intended for low to moderate risk 
medical procedures [79]. A class II device is subject to much higher regulatory 
Fig.  8   Medical device classification system according to the Food and Drugs Administration 
(FDA)

117
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
controls and it is used for moderate to high-risk medical applications. Finally, a 
class III device is intended for high-risk medical applications and it has to first 
obtain premarket regulatory approval [79]. Devices under this classification are 
designed and/or intended to sustain life and/or prevent fatal injuries [79]. Although 
the health and sanitary regulations vary from country to country, in general they 
follow well-established international norms. Thus, for example Canada classifies 
medical devices according to the European Council Directive for devices. This 
system is similar to the FDA’s classification used in the United States; however in 
Canada we have implemented a fourth class for the highest risk medical devices 
[80]. The therapeutic products directorate (TPD) is the governing body in Canada 
in charge of monitoring and evaluating the safety and effectiveness of medical 
devices through assurance of pre-market review, post-approval surveillance, and 
quality systems [78].
3.1  Silver Nanoparticles in Biomedical Devices
In the following we will briefly describe some examples of medical devices from 
the different classes that contain AgNP.
(i)	
Dental Material (Class I) Studies have shown that AgNP infused dental 
filling cements have remarkable bactericidal effects [81]. Adding AgNP to 
orthodontic adhesives has also demonstrated notable antimicrobial proper-
ties, which in turn prevents enamel demineralization without jeopardizing 
the physical attributes of the adhesive in the process [82].
(ii)	
Wound Dressings (Class I–Class II) Recent studies have shown that wound 
dressings containing AgNP can be used to inhibit infection and accelerate 
the healing process as a result of the reduced bacteria colonization [83, 84]. 
ActicoatTM was the first commercially available product utilized for wound 
dressing containing AgNP [85]. This product was clinically tested for skin 
wounds including burns, Steven-Johnson syndrome, chronic ulcers, and 
pemphigus [84, 86, 87].
(iii)	
Contact Lens (Class II) With the increasing demand for contact lenses, 
the antibacterial effects of silver for the development of long-term-use 
­contact lenses have experienced a revived interest. Studies have shown that 
the incorporation of ionic silver in contact lens casings confers antibacte-
rial properties to the device [88]. In fact, contact lens cases containing 
ionic silver have been approved by the FDA and are currently commer-
cially available (CIBA Vision Corp., GA, USA; Sauflon Pharmaceuticals, 
Twickenham, UK). In vitro studies have also shown that AgNP incorporated 
within contact lenses have reduced the bacterial colonization of the implant 
[89]. However, in the case of AgNP, further clinical testing is required prior 
­commercially viable product hits the market.

118
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
(iv)	 Medical Catheters (Class II) The antibacterial effect of AgNP on polyu-
rethane, one of the most common polymers used in manufacturing medi-
cal catheters, has been widely studied in the past decade as an application 
that inhibits biofilm formation and prevents catheter indwelling on cen-
tral venous and neurosurgical catheters [90]. In vitro, in vivo and clinical 
studies have shown the effective inhibition of biofilm development along 
with excellent biocompatibility [91–93]. Silverline® [94] and ON-Q Silver 
SoakerTM are some of these commercially available AgNP containing cathe-
ters in the market that currently exemplify a practical use of the innate anti-
bacterial properties AgNP.
(v)	 Bone Cement (Class II) AgNP integrated poly (methyl methacrylate) 
(PMMA) based bone cement used for the secure attachment of artificial 
joint replacements have demonstrated notable prophylactic effects along 
with exceptional biocompatibility [95]. AgNP contained within an ultra-
high-molecular-weight-polyethylene, a product used as inserts for joint 
replacement, have been shown to drastically overcome the wear and tear 
effect of this polymer [96].
(vi)	 Surgical Meshes (Class II–Class III) The rationale behind using surgical 
meshes is to create a connecting conduit for substantial open wounds during 
surgical procedures, which assists in decreasing the amount of postoperative 
nosocomial infections [97]. One study demonstrated that AgNP integrated 
polypropylene surgical meshes have a sustained bactericidal effect [98].
(vii)	 Cardiovascular Implants (Class III) A silicone prosthetic heart valve con-
taining elemental Ag was designed to both prevent bacterial infections and 
reduce the effects to the inflammatory process [99]. Silzone® was the first 
commercial Ag coated heart valve available which exhibited promising bio-
compatibility [100]. Unfortunately, after several years on the market the 
product was recalled because it had caused paravalvular leakage in clients 
through the inhibition of normal fibroblast functioning, triggering hypersen-
sitivity. Recent studies have looked at using AgNP and carbon coated thin 
films as a potential alternative in heart valves as they have demonstrated 
anti-thrombogenic properties [101].
4  Silver Nanoparticles in Advanced Therapy  
Medicinal Products
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMP) are therapies that are generally 
destined for regenerative medicine. There are several therapies that fit under the 
ATMP definition. These include gene therapy products, somatic cell therapy prod-
ucts, and tissue engineered products. AgNP have been used as part of complexes 
for gene delivery, for example, photoactivated microRNA delivery to adipose-
derived mesenchymal stem cells, to promote their differentiation into osteogenic 
or bone lineages [102].

119
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
In tissue-engineered products, silver has generally been used as an anti-bacterial 
additive. However, there are a few reports where AgNP served as active compo-
nents that modulated cell behavior and differentiation. For example, AgNP were 
used to stimulate the differentiation of urine-derived stem cells into osteogenic 
cells, by up-regulating the expression of osteogenesis-related genes [103]. Similar 
effects were reported for mesenchymal stem cells that were included to differenti-
ate into bone cells by AgNP [104]. In other studies, AgNP were found to modulate 
Fig. 9   Various examples  
of AgNP based medical 
devices and their designated 
class type

120
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
the intracellular signaling pathways to enable the neuronal differentiation. 
Although this early work was performed on neuroblastoma cells, further research 
could lead to utility with neuronal stem cells [105]. However, caution is needed as 
AgNP cytotoxicity has been reported for neuronal stem cells [106] as well as other 
progenitors [107].
5  Future Perspectives
With substantial technological advancements being made for various medical 
devices, the use of nanomaterials including AgNP has gained a renewed vital-
ity. However, prior to any realistic use of AgNP in ATMP or implantable medical 
devices, issues concerning their long-term safety and biocompatibility must be 
addressed in a timely and proper manner. In this regard, advancements in nanotech-
nology, particularly surface modification for AgNP achieved in the past 5 years, 
aim to overcome toxic side effects derived from AgNP oxidation, aggregation or 
ionic silver release, and aim to further reduce immune response and implant rejec-
tions. Thus, a whole new horizon of possibilities remains to be explored in uses 
and applications, possibilities that will hopefully lead to the development and 
implementation of safer and better biomedical devices containing AgNP.
Acknowledgments  We would like to express our deeply gratitude to all the researches 
who have been cited in this chapter. EIA thanks the University of Ottawa Heart Institute for 
the financial and scientific support (UOHI grant #1255). The authors would like to thank 
Professor Juan C. Scaiano at University of Ottawa for his permanent and generous Scientific 
and Professional guidance he had provided them for many years in the field of nanomaterials. 
We would like to thank Dr. George Wehbi, Elgin Dental Care and Mr. Bastian Leon for kindly 
supplying images for Fig. 9.
References
	 1.	Hill, W.R., Pillsbury, D.M.: Argyria-the pharmacology of silver. J. Am. Pharm. Assoc. 29(5), 
239–240 (1940)
	 2.	Alexander, J.W.: History of the medical use of silver. Surg. Infect. 10(3), 289–292 (2009)
	 3.	Varner, K.E., et  al.: State-of-the-science review: everything nanosilver and more. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC (2010)
	 4.	Credé, C.S.F.: Die Verhutung der Augenentzundung der Neugeborenen (ophthalmoblennor-
rhoea neonatorum), der haufigsten und wichtigsten Ursache de Blindheit. Verlag von August 
Hirschwald, Berlin (1884)
	 5.	Klasen, H.J.: A historical review of the use of silver in the treatment of burns. II. Renewed 
interest for silver. Burns 26(2), 131–138 (2000)
	 6.	Vecki, V.G., Ottinger, M.R.: Treatment of syphilis with silver-salvarsan. Calif. State J. Med. 
19(11), 438 (1921)
	 7.	Lansdown, A.B.G.: Chapter 1 silver in health and disease. In: Lansdown, A.B.G. (ed.) 
Silver in Healthcare: Its Antimicrobial Efficacy and Safety in Use. The Royal Society of 
Chemistry, Cambridge, pp. 1–8 (2010)

121
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
	 8.	Aziz, Z., Abu, S.F., Chong, N.J.: A systematic review of silver-containing dressings and 
­topical silver agents (used with dressings) for burn wounds. Burns 38(3), 307–318 (2012)
	 9.	Vignoni, M., et  al.: LL37 peptide@silver nanoparticles: combining the best of the two 
worlds for skin infection control. Nanoscale 6(11), 5725–5728 (2014)
	 10.	Gamelli, R.L., Paxton, T.P., O’Reilly, M.: Bone marrow toxicity by silver sulfadiazine. Surg. 
Gynecol. Obstet. 177(2), 115–120 (1993)
	 11.	Agency, U.S.E.P. Silver (CASRN 7440-22-4). http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0099.htm 
(1987). Accessed 10 Oct 2014
	 12.	Pacioni, N.L., et al.: Surface plasmons control the dynamics of excited triplet states in the 
presence of gold nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132(18), 6298–6299 (2010)
	 13.	Chithrani, B.D., Ghazani, A.A., Chan, W.C.W.: Determining the size and shape dependence 
of gold nanoparticle uptake into mammalian cells. Nano Lett. 6(4), 662–668 (2006)
	 14.	He, C., et al.: Effects of particle size and surface charge on cellular uptake and biodistribu-
tion of polymeric nanoparticles. Biomaterials 31(13), 3657–3666 (2010)
	 15.	Alarcon, E.I., et al.: Human serum albumin as protecting agent of silver nanoparticles: role 
of the protein conformation and amine groups in the nanoparticle stabilization. J. Nanopart. 
Res. 15(1), 1374–1377 (2013)
	 16.	Albers, C.E., et al.: In vitro cytotoxicity of silver nanoparticles on osteoblasts and osteo-
clasts at antibacterial concentrations. Nanotoxicology 7(1), 30–36 (2013)
	 17.	Ashraf, S., et al.: Protein-mediated synthesis, pH-induced reversible agglomeration, toxicity 
and cellular interaction of silver nanoparticles. Colloids Surf. B 102, 511–518 (2013)
	 18.	Grosse, S., Evje, L., Syversen, T.: Silver nanoparticle-induced cytotoxicity in rat brain 
endothelial cell culture. Toxicol. In Vitro 27(1), 305–313 (2013)
	 19.	Kermanizadeh, A., et  al.: In vitro assessment of engineered nanomaterials using a 
hepatocyte cell line: cytotoxicity, pro-inflammatory cytokines and functional markers. 
Nanotoxicology 7(3), 301–313 (2013)
	 20.	Simpson, M.J., et  al.: Impact of dye-protein interaction and silver nanoparticles on rose 
Bengal photophysical behavior and protein photocrosslinking. Photochem. Photobiol. 89(6), 
1433–1441 (2013)
	 21.	Suman, T.Y., et al.: Biosynthesis, characterization and cytotoxic effect of plant mediated sil-
ver nanoparticles using Morinda citrifolia root extract. Colloids Surf. B 106, 74–78 (2013)
	 22.	Alarcon, E.I., et al.: The biocompatibility and antibacterial properties of collagen-stabilized, 
photochemically prepared silver nanoparticles. Biomaterials 33(19), 4947–4956 (2012)
	 23.	Asare, N., et al.: Cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of silver nanoparticles in testicular cells. 
Toxicology 291(1–3), 65–72 (2012)
	 24.	Haase, A., et  al.: Effects of silver nanoparticles on primary mixed neural cell cultures: 
uptake, oxidative stress and acute calcium responses. Toxicol. Sci. 126(2), 457–468 (2012)
	 25.	Hayashi, Y., et al.: Earthworms and humans in vitro: characterizing evolutionarily conserved 
stress and immune responses to silver nanoparticles. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46(7), 4166–
4173 (2012)
	 26.	Justin Packia Jacob, S., Finub, J.S., Narayanan, A.: Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using 
Piper longum leaf extracts and its cytotoxic activity against Hep-2 cell line. Colloids Surf. 
B 91(0), 212–214 (2012)
	 27.	Lu, R., et  al.: Egg white-mediated green synthesis of silver nanoparticles with excellent 
biocompatibility and enhanced radiation effects on cancer cells. Int. J. Nanomed. 7, 2101 
(2012)
	 28.	Mukherjee, S.G., et al.: Comparative in vitro cytotoxicity study of silver nanoparticle on 
two mammalian cell lines. Toxicol. In Vitro 26(2), 238–251 (2012)
	 29.	Suresh, A.K., et al.: Cytotoxicity induced by engineered silver nanocrystallites is dependent 
on surface coatings and cell types. Langmuir 28(5), 2727–2735 (2012)
	 30.	Bouwmeester, H., et al.: Characterization of translocation of silver nanoparticles and effects 
on whole-genome gene expression using an in vitro intestinal epithelium coculture model. 
ACS Nano 5(5), 4091–4103 (2011)

122
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
	 31.	Comfort, K.K., et al.: Interference of silver, gold, and iron oxide nanoparticles on epidermal 
growth factor signal transduction in epithelial cells. ACS Nano 5(12), 10000–10008 (2011)
	 32.	Foldbjerg, R., Dang, D.A., Autrup, H.: Cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of silver nanoparticles 
in the human lung cancer cell line, A549. Arch. Toxicol. 85(7), 743–750 (2011)
	 33.	Haase, A., et al.: Toxicity of silver nanoparticles in human macrophages: uptake, intracel-
lular distribution and cellular responses. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 304(1), 012030 (2011)
	 34.	Hackenberg, S., et al.: Silver nanoparticles: evaluation of DNA damage, toxicity and func-
tional impairment in human mesenchymal stem cells. Toxicol. Lett. 201(1), 27–33 (2011)
	 35.	Park, M.V.D.Z., et al.: The effect of particle size on the cytotoxicity, inflammation, devel-
opmental toxicity and genotoxicity of silver nanoparticles. Biomaterials 32(36), 9810–9817 
(2011)
	 36.	Stevanovic´, M., et al.: Effect of poly-α, γ, L-glutamic acid as a capping agent on morphol-
ogy and oxidative stress-dependent toxicity of silver nanoparticles. Int. J. Nanomed. 6, 2837 
(2011)
	 37.	Stoehr, L.C., et al.: Shape matters: effects of silver nanospheres and wires on human alveo-
lar epithelial cells. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 8(36), 3–15 (2011)
	 38.	Braydich-Stolle, L.K., et  al.: Silver nanoparticles disrupt GDNF/Fyn kinase signaling in 
spermatogonial stem cells. Toxicol. Sci. 116(2), 577–589 (2010)
	 39.	Eom, H.-J., Choi, J.: p38 MAPK activation, DNA damage, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis 
as mechanisms of toxicity of silver nanoparticles in Jurkat T cells. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
44(21), 8337–8342 (2010)
	 40.	Martinez-Gutierrez, F., et  al.: Synthesis, characterization, and evaluation of antimicrobial 
and cytotoxic effect of silver and titanium nanoparticles. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. 
Med. 6(5), 681–688 (2010)
	 41.	Moulton, M.C., et al.: Synthesis, characterization and biocompatibility of green synthesized 
silver nanoparticles using tea polyphenols. Nanoscale 2(5), 763–770 (2010)
	 42.	Powers, C.M., et  al.: Silver nanoparticles compromise neurodevelopment in PC 12 cells: 
critical contributions of silver ion, particle size, coating, and composition. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 119(1), 37–44 (2010)
	 43.	Trickler, W.J., et  al.: Silver nanoparticle induced blood-brain barrier inflammation and 
increased permeability in primary rat brain microvessel endothelial cells. Toxicol. Sci. 118, 
160–170 (2010)
	 44.	Arora, S., et al.: Interactions of silver nanoparticles with primary mouse fibroblasts and liver 
cells. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 236(3), 310–318 (2009)
	 45.	Travan, A., et  al.: Non-cytotoxic silver nanoparticle-polysaccharide nanocomposites with 
antimicrobial activity. Biomacromolecules 10(6), 1429–1435 (2009)
	 46.	AshaRani, P., et al.: Cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of silver nanoparticles in human cells. 
ACS Nano 3(2), 279–290 (2008)
	 47.	Kim, J.A., et al.: Role of cell cycle on the cellular uptake and dilution of nanoparticles in a 
cell population. Nat. Nano 7(1), 62–68 (2012)
	 48.	Gebauer, J.S., et al.: Impact of the nanoparticle-protein corona on colloidal stability and pro-
tein structure. Langmuir 28(25), 9673–9679 (2012)
	 49.	Lynch, I., Dawson, K.A.: Protein-nanoparticle interactions. Nano Today 3(1), 40–47 (2008)
	 50.	Delgado, A.V., et al.: Measurement and interpretation of electrokinetic phenomena (IUPAC 
technical report). Pure Appl. Chem. 77(10), 1753–1805 (2005)
	 51.	Eschenbruch, M., Burk, R.R.: Experimentally improved reliability of ultrasensitive silver 
staining of protein in polyacrylamide gels. Anal. Biochem. 125(1), 96–99 (1982)
	 52.	Gharahdaghi, F., et  al.: Mass spectrometric identification of proteins from silver-stained 
polyacrylamide gel: a method for the removal of silver ions to enhance sensitivity. 
Electrophoresis 20(3), 601–605 (1999)
	 53.	Eckhardt, S., et al.: Nanobio silver: its interactions with peptides and bacteria, and its uses 
in medicine. Chem. Rev. (Washington, DC, U.S.) 113(7), 4708–4754 (2013)

123
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
	 54.	Shoeib, T., Siu, K.W.M., Hopkinson, A.C.: Silver ion binding energies of amino acids: use 
of theory to assess the validity of experimental silver ion basicities obtained from the kinetic 
method. J. Phys. Chem. A 106(25), 6121–6128 (2002)
	 55.	Jover, J., Bosque, R., Sales, J.: A comparison of the binding affinity of the common amino 
acids with different metal cations. Dalton Trans. 45, 6441–6453 (2008)
	 56.	Leesutthiphonchai, W., et  al.: Selective determination of homocysteine levels in human 
plasma using a silver nanoparticle-based colorimetric assay. Talanta 85(2), 870–876 (2011)
	 57.	Hay, R.: Preservation of cell-culture stocks in liquid nitrogen. TCA Man./Tissue Cult. 
Assoc. 4(2), 787–790 (1978)
	 58.	Morton, H.: A survey of commercially available tissue culture media. In Vitro 6(2), 89–108 
(1970)
	 59.	Ham, R.G.: Clonal growth of mammalian cells in a chemically defined, synthetic medium. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 53(2), 288–293 (1965)
	 60.	Hanks, J.H., Wallace, R.E.: Relation of oxygen and temperature in the preservation of tis-
sues by refrigeration. Exper. Biol. Med. 71(2), 196–200 (1949)
	 61.	Doyle, A., Griffiths, J.B., Newell, D.G.: Cell and tissue culture: laboratory procedures. In: 
Doyle, A., Griffiths, J.B., Newell, D.G. (ed.) John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Chichester (1995)
	 62.	Decker, T., Lohmann-Matthes, M.L.: A quick and simple method for the quantitation of lac-
tate dehydrogenase release in measurements of cellular cytotoxicity and tumor necrosis fac-
tor (TNF) activity. J. Immunol. Methods 115(1), 61–69 (1988)
	 63.	Korzeniewski, C., Callewaert, D.M.: An enzyme-release assay for natural cytotoxicity. J. 
Immunol. Methods 64(3), 313–320 (1983)
	 64.	Wong, S.Y., et al.: The determination of bone viability: a histochemical method for identifi-
cation of lactate dehydrogenase activity in osteocytes in fresh calcified and decalcified sec-
tions of human bone. Pathology 14(4), 439–442 (1982)
	 65.	Wong, S.Y., et al.: The effect of age on bone composition and viability in the femoral head. 
J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 67(2), 274–283 (1985)
	 66.	Bernas, T., Dobrucki, J.: Mitochondrial and nonmitochondrial reduction of MTT: interaction 
of MTT with TMRE, JC-1, and NAO mitochondrial fluorescent probes. Cytometry 47(4), 
236–242 (2002)
	 67.	Mosmann, T.: Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: application to pro-
liferation and cytotoxicity assays. J. Immunol. Methods 65(1–2), 55–63 (1983)
	 68.	Tada, H., et  al.: An improved colorimetric assay for interleukin 2. J. Immunol. Methods 
93(2), 157–165 (1986)
	 69.	Berridge, M., et al.: The biochemical and cellular basis of cell proliferation assays that use 
tetrazolium salts. Biochemica 4(1), 14–19 (1996)
	 70.	Tominaga, H., et al.: A water-soluble tetrazolium salt useful for colorimetric cell viability 
assay. Anal. Commun. 36(2), 47–50 (1999)
	 71.	O’Brien, J., et  al.: Investigation of the Alamar Blue (resazurin) fluorescent dye for the 
assessment of mammalian cell cytotoxicity. Eur. J. Biochem. 267(17), 5421–5426 (2000)
	 72.	Gonzalez, R.J., Tarloff, J.B.: Evaluation of hepatic subcellular fractions for Alamar blue and 
MTT reductase activity. Toxicol. In Vitro 15(3), 257–259 (2001)
	 73.	Czekanska, E.M.: Assessment of cell proliferation with resazurin-based fluorescent dye. In: 
Stoddart, M.J. (ed.) Mammalian Cell Viability. Academic Press, New York (2011)
	 74.	Borenfreund, E., Puerner, J.: A simple quantitative procedure using monolayer cultures for 
cytotoxicity assays (HTD/NR-90). J. Tissue Cult. Methods 9(1), 7–9 (1985)
	 75.	Repetto, G., del Peso, A., Zurita, J.L.: Neutral red uptake assay for the estimation of cell 
viability/cytotoxicity. Nat. Protoc. 3(7), 1125–1131 (2008)
	 76.	Bessey, O.A., Lowry, O.H., Brock, M.J.: A method for the rapid determination of alkaline 
phosphates with five cubic millimeters of serum. J. Biol. Chem. 164, 321–329 (1946)
	 77.	Pozarowski, P., Darzynkiewicz, Z.: Analysis of cell cycle by flow cytometry. In: Schönthal, 
A. (ed.) Checkpoint Controls and Cancer, pp. 301–311. Humana Press, Totowa (2004)

124
H. de Alwis Weerasekera et al.
	 78.	Canada, H. Safe Medical Devices in Canada [Health Canada Fact Sheet]. http://www.hc-
sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/md-im/activit/fs-fi/meddevfs_matmedfd-eng.php (2014). Accessed 13 Oct 
2014
	 79.	FDA. Classify your medical device. http://www.fda.gov/%20MedicalDevices/DeviceRegula
tionandGuidance/Overview/ClassifyYourDevice/default.htm (2014). Accessed 13 Oct 2014
	 80.	Justice-Canada. 
M.o. 
medical 
devices 
regulations.http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/
regulations/sor-98-282/page-2.html (2014). Accessed 13 Oct 2014
	 81.	Magalhães, A.P.R., et al.: Nanosilver application in dental cements. ISRN Nanotech. 2012, 
365438 (2012)
	 82.	Ahn, S.-J., et al.: Experimental antimicrobial orthodontic adhesives using nanofillers and sil-
ver nanoparticles. Dent. Mater. 25(2), 206–213 (2009)
	 83.	Chen, J., et  al.: Effect of silver nanoparticle dressing on second degree burn wound. 
Zhonghua wai ke za zhi [Chin. J. Surg.] 44(1), 50–52 (2006)
	 84.	Huang, Y., et al.: A randomized comparative trial between Acticoat and SD-Ag in the treat-
ment of residual burn wounds, including safety analysis. Burns 33(2), 161–166 (2007)
	 85.	Burriel, R.E., McIntosh, C.L., Morris, L.R.: Process of activating anti-microbial materials. 
Google Patents (1995)
	 86.	Yang, J.-Y., et al.: A clinical experience of treating exfoliative wounds using nanocrystalline 
silver-containing dressings (Acticoat®). Burns 33(6), 793–797 (2007)
	 87.	Sibbald, R.G., et al.: Bacteriology, inflammation, and healing: a study of nanocrystalline sil-
ver dressings in chronic venous leg ulcers. Adv. Skin Wound Care 20(10), 549–558 (2007)
	 88.	Amos, C.F., George, M.D.: Clinical and laboratory testing of a silver-impregnated lens case. 
Contact Lens Anterior Eye 29(5), 247–255 (2006)
	 89.	Willcox, M.D., et  al.: Ability of silver-impregnated contact lenses to control microbial 
growth and colonisation. J. Optom. 3(3), 143–148 (2010)
	 90.	Samuel, U., Guggenbichler, J.: Prevention of catheter-related infections: the potential of a 
new nano-silver impregnated catheter. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 23, 75–78 (2004)
	 91.	Galiano, K., et  al.: Silver segregation and bacterial growth of intraventricular catheters 
impregnated with silver nanoparticles in cerebrospinal fluid drainages. Neurol. Res. 30(3), 
285–287 (2008)
	 92.	Khare, M.D., et al.: Reduction of catheter-related colonisation by the use of a silver zeolite-
impregnated central vascular catheter in adult critical care. J. Infect. 54(2), 146–150 (2007)
	 93.	Lackner, P., et  al.: Efficacy of silver nanoparticles-impregnated external ventricular drain 
catheters in patients with acute occlusive hydrocephalus. Neurocrit. Care 8(3), 360–365 
(2008)
	 94.	Spiegelberg, R.N.: Technology for brains|EVD-catheters. http://www.spiegelberg.de/prod-
ucts/drainage/evd_catheters.html (2014). Accessed 13 Oct 2014
	 95.	Alt, V., et al.: An in vitro assessment of the antibacterial properties and cytotoxicity of nano-
particulate silver bone cement. Biomaterials 25(18), 4383–4391 (2004)
	 96.	Morley, K., et al.: Synthesis and characterisation of advanced UHMWPE/silver nanocom-
posites for biomedical applications. Eur. Polymer J. 43(2), 307–314 (2007)
	 97.	Darouiche, R.O.: Treatment of infections associated with surgical implants. New Engl. J. 
Med. 350(14), 1422–1429 (2004)
	 98.	Cohen, M.S., et al.: In vitro analysis of a nanocrystalline silver-coated surgical mesh. Surg. 
Infect. 8(3), 397–404 (2007)
	 99.	Grunkemeier, G.L., Jin, R., Starr, A.: Prosthetic heart valves: objective performance criteria 
versus randomized clinical trial. Ann. Thor. Surg. 82(3), 776–780 (2006)
	100.	Jamieson, W., et al.: Seven-year results with the St Jude Medical Silzone mechanical pros-
thesis. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 137(5), 1109–1115. e2 (2009)
	101.	Andara, M., et al.: Hemocompatibility of diamondlike carbon–metal composite thin films. 
Diam. Relat. Mater. 15(11), 1941–1948 (2006)
	102.	Qureshi, A.T., et al.: miR-148b-nanoparticle conjugates for light mediated osteogenesis of 
human adipose stromal/stem cells. Biomaterials 34(31), 7799–7810 (2013)

125
Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles …
	103.	Qin, H., et  al.: Silver nanoparticles promote osteogenic differentiation of human urine-
derived stem cells at noncytotoxic concentrations. Int. J. Nanomed. 9, 2469–2478 (2014)
	104.	Liu, X., et al.: Influence of silver nanoparticles on osteogenic differentiation of human mes-
enchymal stem cells. J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 10(7), 1277–1285 (2014)
	105.	Dayem, A.A., et al.: Biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles induce neuronal differ-
entiation of SH-SY5Y cells via modulation of reactive oxygen species, phosphatases, and 
kinase signaling pathwayss. Biotechnol. J. 9(7):934–943 (2014)
	106.	Soderstjerna, E., et al.: Gold- and silver nanoparticles affect the growth characteristics of 
human embryonic neural precursor cells. PLoS ONE 8(3), e58211 (2013)
	107.	Wang, Z., et  al.: Silver nanoparticles induced RNA polymerase-silver binding and RNA 
transcription inhibition in erythroid progenitor cells. ACS Nano 7(5), 4171–4186 (2013)

127
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective 
Activities of Silver
May Griffith, Klas I. Udekwu, Spyridon Gkotzis,  
Thien-Fah Mah and Emilio I. Alarcon
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
E.I. Alarcon et al. (eds.), Silver Nanoparticle Applications, Engineering Materials, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-11262-6_6
Abstract  Silver nanoparticles are the latest version of silver preparations that 
have been revived and tested as anti-microbials, particularly as an alternative to 
antibiotics since the emergence of drug resistant bacteria. Silver nanoparticles 
share commonalities with other silver preparations and other metallic nanopar-
ticles, but also several significant differences in their interactions with microbes. 
Their mechanism of action is not completely understood but their potential utility 
has led to the high level of research activity to determine the safety and efficacy of 
these nanoparticles for clinical applications.
Keywords  Silver nanoparticles  ·  Anti-infective properties
M. Griffith 
Integrative Regenerative Medicine Centre,  
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,  
Linköping University, 58185 Linköping, Sweden
M. Griffith · K.I. Udekwu · S. Gkotzis 
Swedish Medical Nanoscience Centre, Department of Neuroscience,  
Karolinksa Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
T.-F. Mah 
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology,  
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
E.I. Alarcon (*) 
Bio-Nanomaterials Chemistry and Engineering Laboratory,  
Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute,  
40 Ruskin Street Rm H5229, Ottawa K1Y 4W7, Canada
e-mail: ealarcon@ottawaheart.ca
E.I. Alarcon 
Centre for Catalysis Research and Innovation,  
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada

128
M. Griffith et al.
1  Introduction and the Silver Bullet
The earliest uses of silver as an anti-microbial appears to have been from the time 
of the ancient Greeks and Romans. In a very comprehensive, historical review of 
the uses of silver by Alexander [1].
Hippocrates was credited for using silver preparations for the treatment of 
ulcers and to promote wound healing. Other early accounts for the uses of silver 
include its use internally as well as for treatment of wounds by Paracelsus in 1520, 
and as a treatment for brain infection in 1614 by Angelo Sala. In the 1800s, silver 
sutures were used in surgery were documented to allow wound healing
According to Alexander, the use of silver in medicine began to flourish, in the 
late 1880s, silver nitrate eye drops were applied to newborn babies to prevent gon-
orrheal ophthalmia, a practice that has continued well into the mid- to late 1900s. 
Credewas credited with being the first physician to use colloidal silver for wound 
antisepsis in 1890s, while Crusius used silver nitrate for the treatment of burn inju-
ries. In the eye, Roe was documented to have used colloidal silver to successfully 
treat infected corneal ulcers, keratitis, blepharitis, and dacrocystitis [2].
The first person to actually connect the use of silver to its action as an anti-
microbial agent is believed to be Vonnaegele [1]. He attributed the effectiveness of 
silver as an anti-bacterial agent to the silver ion, opening up the use of silver as an 
effective antimicrobial agent until the discovery of antibiotics.
While the golden era of antibiotics flourished, the use of silver as anti-micro-
bial or anti-infective agents diminished. In the past decade, however, almost every 
known antibiotic has given rise to resistant strains of bacteria, and multi-drug 
resistant (MDR) bacteria [3]. In the quest for alternative to antibiotics, the use of 
the silver has been rediscovered and is coming back into mainstream medicine as 
an anti-microbial and anti-infective agent [4].
This chapter aims to discuss the role of silver nanoparticles as anti-infectives, 
focusing mainly on the interaction of silver nanoparticles with bacteria and 
viruses.
2  Silver and its Derivatives as Anti-microbials
2.1  Metallic Silver
Silver is a noble metal, i.e. chemically, it is inert. However, its interaction with 
moisture on the skin surface and with wound fluids leads to the release of silver 
ions, which have anti-microbial effects [5]. In biomedical applications, metallic 
silver has been used or tested in dental alloys (also as silver amalgam) and pros-
thetic implants such as “mega-endoprostheses” that are grafted after the removal 
of bone tumors [6], as well as silver–treated fabric for heart valves [7] and ­silver 
sutures. In bone prosthesis, incorporation of silver appears to have resulted in a 

129
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
reduction of the infection rate with no adverse side effects. However, the heart 
valves failed, and the silver sutures, which were used for artificial heart valve 
retention resulted in local inflammation that was attributed to released silver [8].
2.2  Silver Nitrate and Ions
Silver salts such as silver nitrate (AgNO3) are one of the best known source of 
ionic silver. In the 18th century, ionic silver was used to treat ulcers, and in the 
1960s, AgNO3 was used as a topical solution (0.5 % AgNO3) for management of 
wounds from burns (reviewed by Chopra, [9]). Silver in form of AgNO3 has also 
been combined with antibiotics, such as sulfonamide in 1968, to produce silver 
sulfadiazine (SSD) cream that resulted in a broad spectrum silver-based antibacte-
rial that continued to be prescribed mostly for the management of burns [10, 11]. 
The synergistic effects of AgNPs and antibiotics will be further discussed below.
The best known targets of silver ions are the thiol moieties present in the respir-
atory enzymes of bacterial cells [11]. Silver readily binds to the bacterial cell wall 
and cell membrane and evidently inhibits the respiration chain [12]. Moreover, it has 
been shown that in E. coli silver inhibits the uptake of inorganic phosphate and causes 
efflux of phosphate, proline, glutamine, succinate and mannitol from cells [12, 13].
2.3  Silver Nanoparticles
In general, nanoparticles can bind not only membrane bound targets but also pen-
etrate the bacterial cell. In particular, AgNP complex strongly to electron donor 
groups containing N, O, S and exhibit an elevated binding constant for thiol con-
taining proteins. AgNP preferentially attack the respiratory chain, hinder cell divi-
sion and ultimately lead to cell death. Sondi and Salopek-Sondi have suggested the 
degradation of the membrane structure of E. coli during treatment with spherical 
12 nm AgNP [14].
It has been shown that in order to function effectively as bactericidal agents, 
AgNP have to fall with a narrow size range. Silver particles made from silver atoms 
are exceedingly small and within the ideal range. However, these naked particles 
are generally unstable and are easily oxidized, see Chap. “Biomedical Uses of 
Silver Nanoparticles: From Roman Wine Cups to Biomedical Devices”. Thus, the 
nature of the capping agent plays a pivotal role in the antimicrobial performance 
of AgNP. In Alarcon et al. [15] for example, AgNP were stabilized by coating with 
type I collagen or α-poly-L-lysine coated AgNP were tested against Gram positive 
bacteria such as Bacillus megaterium (Strain Bm11), a non-sporulating bacterium, 
and Staphylococcus epidermis (Strain Se4), a sporulating bacterium, as well as a 
Gram-negative, uropathogenic strain of Escherichia coli (CFT073). Both coated 
AgNP were found to be as effective as control Ag nitrate (AgNO3) in inhibiting all 

130
M. Griffith et al.
three bacteria. However, it was reported that the poly-L-Lysine coated nanoparti-
cles suffer from spontaneous aggregation at higher ionic strength or lower temper-
ature, while the collagen-coated AgNP were very stable and also cell compatible 
Fig. 1   Top Bacteria growth inhibition profile for B. megaterium left column, E. coli (middle col-
umn), and S. epidermidis (right column) up to 18 h in the presence of AgNP@collagen 1.0 µM and 
AgNO3. Dashed colored lines indicate the time where a 50 % of the maximal OD at the plateau 
level. Additional black dashed horizontal arrows indicate longer lag times for all the other concen-
trations at >18 h. Bottom Bacteria time kill profiles for B. megaterium (left column), E. coli (mid-
dle column), and S. epidermidis (right column) up to 180 min in the presence of AgNP@collagen 
1.0 µM and AgNO3 at 1xMIC and 2xMIC. Figure adapted from Alarcon et al. [15]

131
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
(non-toxic effects) even at dilutions 2X minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) 
when tested with cultures of human skin fibroblasts and epidermal keratinocytes. 
The collagen-stabilized AgNP were bactericidal against B. megaterium and E. coli 
but only bacteriostatic against S. epidermidis, see Fig. 1.
In conclusion, although the action mechanism is not completely clear, silver 
can cause toxicity in multiple sites that is accompanied with leakage of cellular 
metabolites. It binds on the bacterial cell wall weakens it and eventually leads to 
its rupture. It promotes cell disruption via hydroxyl radicals and other reactive 
oxygen species by poisoning respiratory enzymes and components of the micro-
bial electron transport system. Since in the form of AgNP silver is able to diffuse 
inside the cell, it reacts with thiol containing proteins inactivating them and prefer-
entially binds to DNA to inhibit replication with the concomitant bacteria toxicity.
3  Silver Nanoparticles in Microbiology
As mentioned in Chap. “Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: From Roman Wine 
Cups to Biomedical Devices”, the interaction between AgNP and living organisms 
critically depends on the surface composition of the nanoparticle and the nature of the 
organism. Thus, the interactions observed for Gram (+) bacteria cannot be directly 
extrapolated to the observed for Gram (−) due to intrinsic differences in the bacteria 
outer membrane, see Fig. 2. However, in the following we will revise the main mecha-
nisms for the action of AgNP in bacteria.
Though seemingly trivial, it is worth noting that the exact mode of killing by 
most antibiotics is as yet unclear despite the long-existent knowledge of their pri-
mary targets. It was only recently that the mode of action of the oldest known anti-
biotic classes, beta lactams, was clearly elucidated [17]. Thus, it is not surprising 
that the antimicrobial mechanism for AgNP remains not fully understood. However, 
some lessons can be learned from examining the antimicrobial activity of ionic sil-
ver. There are three suggested main mechanisms for the biocidal activities of ionic 
silver: (i) catalytic oxidation with nascent oxygen to form reactive oxygen species; 
(ii) complex formation with thiol containing proteins critical in the chain respiratory 
system [11, 18]; and (iii) binding of silver ions to DNA preventing DNA replication 
leading to cell cycle arresting and/or death [18–20]. Note that ionic silver is also 
able to bind RNA of small nuclear antigens [21]. However, it is possible that mecha-
nisms i and ii are interconnected and together assist to iii as revealed in a toxicity 
study with silver sulfadiazine on Gram negative P. aeruginosa that revealed that the 
silver is distributed within DNA (≈12 %), RNA (≈3 %), lipidic fraction (<0.5 %), 
and the rest within the proteins-polysaccharides fraction [22]. Later studies have 
however questioned the DNA binding, as the expected silver bound to phosphate 
groups were not observed in spectroscopic analysis [23]. It may however be the case 
that the attached bases and not the phosphate backbone provide a site of binding 
for Ag(I). Interaction of ionic silver with metallothioneins, which are believed to be 
responsible for silver detoxification in liver, has been studied quite extensively [24].

132
M. Griffith et al.
Additional damage induced by ionic silver was reported in Vibrio cholera, 
another Gram-negative bacterium. The damage caused is massive proton leakage 
that results in eventual disruption of membrane potential at sub-micromolar con-
centrations of ionic silver, resulting ultimately in the death of the microbe [25]. 
Notably, the study was based on an earlier observation of effects of Ag(I) on ATP 
production in the (bacterial-derived) mitochondria [26].
Fig.  2   Schematic representation for bacterial cell structure of: a Gram-positive bacterial cell 
wall that is composed of a thick and multilayered peptidoglycan case. Teichoic acids are con-
nected to and embedded within glycan membrane; b Structure for a Gram-negative bacterial cell 
wall where the outer membrane is linked through lipoproteins to a thin peptidoglycan layer. For 
these bacteria peptidoglycan layer is placed within the periplasmic space and the outer mem-
brane. Note that the outer membrane contains porins and lipopolysaccharide molecules. Repro-
duced with permission from Hajipour et al. [16]

133
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
The properties of metallic nanoparticles are believed to either differ markedly 
from the derived metal’s ionic state, or on the other extreme, to be exceedingly 
similar. This dichotomous oversimplification could not be further from the truth, 
which lies somewhere in between. What has been unclear is whether or not the 
noted antimicrobial properties are due to the monoionic silver (Ag(I)) or atomic 
silver Ag(0) leaching out of the nanoparticles. Additionally, were there a distinct 
mode of action by the AgNP, as compared to AgNO3, the mechanism would need 
to be elucidated. Some elements of their antimicrobial activity are reminiscent of 
Ag(I) but these are far from clear. Although some studies have employed transmis-
sion electron microscopy (TEM) as a tool to discern AgNP accumulation within 
the cell, it must be noted that in-situ reduction of Ag(I) to Ag(0) can also occur, 
see Ref. [18]. Sondi and Salopek-Sondi described a study where using TEM, they 
determined the nature of the interaction between E. coli and AgNP of average 
diameter 12 nm [14]. Their study provided high-resolution images of accumula-
tion of NPs in the cell membranes and identified the formation of what they term 
‘pits’ in the membrane. Going one step further in 2010, Li et al. evaluated the anti-
microbial mechanism and activity of silver nanoparticles in E. coli, analyzing the 
growth, permeability and ultrastructure of bacterial cells after treatment with 5 nm 
AgNP [27]. Their study provided evidence of membrane-disruption and changed 
permeability as cause of inhibition and/or death in E. coli. The extension of these 
studies could serve to further refine our understanding of the effects specific to 
AgNP accumulation on specific targets in bacterial cells.
Following the initial TEM studies [14], and confirming a role for membrane 
disruption, Lok et al., carried out a comprehensive study exploring the antimicro-
bial action of silver nanoparticles on E. coli [28]. Comparing the protein profile 
obtained from exposure to AgNP with that obtained from exposure ionic silver 
(AgNO3), they found that E. coli cells treated with AgNP present an accumula-
tion of envelope protein precursors that leads to a dissipation of the proton motive 
force. Note that the synthesized spherical AgNP significantly more effective than 
Ag(I), being active at nanomolar versus micromolar concentrations (0.4 nM for 
silver nanoparticles and 6 μM for AgNO3). This was followed soon by another 
study from the same group that showed the requirement for partially oxidized 
AgNP with a chemiadsorbed layer of ionic silver adsorbed onto the surface is 
required for observing antimicrobial activity in E. coli [29, 30]. Kim et al., pro-
duced spherical silver nanoparticles by borohydride reduction and investigated 
their antimicrobial properties on yeast, E. coli and S. aureus. Low concentration of 
the nanoparticles were effective against E. coli and yeast (3.3 and 6.6 nM respec-
tively), on the contrary the growth inhibitory effect on S. aureus was only mild 
[31]. The authors claimed the pivotal role of ROS in the antimicrobial mechanism 
for AgNP.
Other noteworthy antimicrobial studies carried out with AgNP are those rel-
evant to microbial communities of economic and environmental concern; Choi 
et al. for instance, evaluated the inhibitory effects of silver nanoparticles, silver 
ions and silver chloride colloids on mixed nitrifying bacterial communities. Their 
results showed that AgNP (with average diameters of 14 nm at 1 mg/L) inhibit 

134
M. Griffith et al.
nitrifying bacteria bacterial growth of E. Coli up to 86 %. Silver colloids and silver 
ions at the same silver content inhibited respiration by 46 and 42 % respectively 
[32]. The implication of this is that at lower concentrations, AgNP can inhibit 
collective respiration of the microbes within these communities with almost the 
double of efficiency. However, no signs of membrane damage in the bacterial wall 
were observed for any of the silver species in this study.
Ruparelia et al. investigated the antimicrobial properties of silver and copper nan-
oparticles on four strains of E. coli, three strains of S. aureus and B. subtilis [33]. 
They performed both solid and liquid phase trials with silver and copper nanopar-
ticles of sizes 3 and 9 nm respectively. The susceptibility in solution varied among 
the tested microorganisms with E. coli and S. aureus being more affected by silver 
nanoparticles in contrast with B. subtilis that showed highest sensitivity to copper 
nanoparticles. Similar results were observed for solid-state diffusion assays. Navarro 
et al. assessed the short-term toxicity of silver nanoparticles and Ag(I) to photosyn-
thesis of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [34]. They used a polydisperse suspension of 
AgNP most (centered ≈ 25 nm) and to assess the effect on photosynthesis. The tox-
icity of silver nanoparticles was significantly higher than that of AgNO3 and/or the 
available Ag(I) present in the solution. The authors concluded that processes involv-
ing the post-decomposition of AgNP into Ag(I) mediated by H2O2 produced by the 
algae play a critical role in the elevated toxicity displayed by AgNP.
3.1  Relevance of Size and Shape of Silver Nanoparticles
As discussed in Chap. “Synthetic Routes for the Preparation of Silver Nanoparticles: 
A Mechanistic Perspective” the wide range of methods that have been used for the 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles, have given rise to variable particle morphologies 
including spheres, cubes, rods, wires and multifacets. By definition nanoparticles are 
smaller than 100 nm and in the case of spherical silver they can contain from 1,000 
up to 58,000 atoms, see Table 1 in Chap. “Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: 
From Roman Wine Cups to Biomedical Devices”. Silver nanoparticles of differ-
ent shapes and sizes show unique interactions with bacteria and viruses [30, 35]. As 
AgNP of smaller size have higher surface area to volume ratios, the relative rates 
of silver release may be higher for the smaller sized particles, in line with earlier 
observations. The initial experimental observations were of a diverse range of sizes 
of AgNP and an early report concluded that only particles of 1–10 nm in diameter 
exhibited significant antibacterial properties [35]. However to this we should add the 
possibility that AgNP with sizes can freely permeate inside the cell membrane. Baker 
and colleagues also showed that AgNP antimicrobial properties were directly related 
to the total surface area of the nanoparticles [36]. However, the main limitations of 
those works to clearly discern between pure Ag(I) release and actual role of the mate-
rial size lie in the difficulty of matching the same number of AgNP per tested volume 
of cell suspension. Something we call the ‘magic’ number, which corresponds to the 
exact number of AgNP per bacteria required to induce cell death.

135
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
The antimicrobial efficacy of silver nanoparticles has been confirmed to be 
shape dependent in studies that utilized differentially shaped nanoparticles and 
measured the inhibition of bacterial growth suggested that the most effective 
geometry is truncated triangular silver nanoparticles [35, 37]. In this study it was 
shown that the triangular geometry needed silver content >1 μg to exert bacteri-
cidal properties, while spherical and rod shaped nanopartciles, needed 12.5 and 
50–100 μg respectively. These findings were explained in terms of the high-atom-
density facets ({111}) that are found in triangular plates when compared to 
spheres and rods ({100}). Similar conclusions were exposed by Morones and col-
laborators [35].
In addition, AgNP manufactured using different synthetic techniques and for 
different purposes may vary in their physicochemical properties, which can lead 
to significant differences in their biological activity (see Chap. “Biomedical Uses 
of Silver Nanoparticles: From Roman Wine Cups to Biomedical Devices”). If we 
also take into consideration possible coatings, stabilizers and/or other hybridized 
materials it is clear that these additions may lead to modified cellular uptake and 
altered interactions with biological macromolecules. Consequently, not all AgNP 
should be considered the same and it is important to understand that adverse reac-
tions that would not be seen in other silver species can arise. Taken together, it 
appears that the killing efficacy is directly dependent on the rate and loca-
tion where Ag(I) is being released from the nanoparticles. This release is in turn 
dependent on the shape and size of the nanoparticle as well as the physicochemi-
cal nature of the surroundings.
3.2  Synergistic Activity with Antibiotics
Although there are limited number of studies exploring combinations of silver and 
antimicrobials, the topic has recently come into more focus. This upsurge in explor-
ing alternative approaches to infection treatment has also raised the possibility of 
using AgNP with improved pharmacokinetics and even pharmacodynamics. Li 
et al., synthesized silver nanoparticles by reducing AgNO3 aqueous solution with 
ascorbic acid aqueous solution with an average size of 20 nm [38]. Exposing E. coli 
to these nanoparticles to a combination with the beta lactam antibiotic amoxicil-
lin, increased the bactericidal efficiency when compared to AgNP or amoxicillin 
alone. In another study by Shahverdi et al., the combinations of AgNP with five 
antibiotics (penicillin G, amoxicillin, erythromycin, clindamycin and vancomycin) 
were tested against both model microbes E. coli and S. aureus [39]. AgNP were 
produced by aqueous Ag(I) reduction from the supernatant of a Klebsiella pneumo-
niae culture and their sizes spanned between 5–30 nm. In general, enhanced kill-
ing of the bacteria was recorded, when a combinational treatment was employed 
(AgNP + Antibiotic). Notably, the most prominent effects were observed for van-
comycin, amoxicillin and penicillin G against S. aureus.

136
M. Griffith et al.
4  Resistance to Silver Compounds
Antibiotic resistance is a major concern worldwide. Bacteria have developed 
resistance to antibiotics by having evolved various mechanisms including physical 
removing the antibiotics from cell through efflux pumps, modification of the target 
site of the antibiotics (e.g. bacterial ribosomal rRNA and proteins [40]) and inacti-
vation of antibiotic through enzymes, alteration to metabolic pathway [41].
Since the emergence of resistant bacteria, the anti-microbial activities of sil-
ver have been re-investigated. This time however, AgNPs have been the centre 
of the renewed interest. The enthusiasm over silver as an alternative to conven-
tional antibiotics comes from early tests showing that AgNPs within the size range 
of 10–100 nm have strong bactericidal potential against both Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative bacteria that have reported MDR (Morones et  al. [35]). These 
include strains of MDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa, ampicillin-resistant E. coli, 
erythromycin-resistant Streptococcus pyogenes, methicillin-resistant S. aureus 
(MRSA) and vanco-mycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA).
4.1  Silver Ion Resistant Bacteria
In 1975, a strain of Salmonella typhimurium was isolated from three burn patients 
who had been receiving topical treatment with 0.5 % AgNO3 solution [42]. This 
strain of S. typhimurium was found to be resistant to silver nitrate, mercuric chlo-
ride, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, streptomycin, and sulphonamides. 
In this case, other strains isolated showed that they were resistant to the antibiot-
ics but not silver nitrate, suggesting that the resistant S. typhimurium could have 
originated as a a strain that was resistant to the antibiotics, ampicillin and chloram-
phenicol, but further selected by topical use of AgNO3 solutions on the burned sur-
faces. The resistance in this case was later attributed to a set of gene Ag(I) resistant 
genes, sil, from a 180 kb plasmid, pMG101, that belongs to the IncH incompatibil-
ity class [43]. The region of pMG101 that codes for the inducible silver resistance 
has now been sequenced and shown to contain seven genes and two open read-
ing frames of unknown function [44]. As described by Simon Silver [44], silver 
resistance machinery is sort of unique in his class as this is formed by three differ-
ent resistance mechanisms; a periplasmic multi-metal-binding protein, a chemios-
motic efflux pump and an ATPase efflux pump, all those encoded in a single toxic 
metal cation resistance gene cluster.
Silver resistant P. aeruginosa, has also been isolated in burn patients and the 
resistance has also been tracked by to a plasmid source [45]. Note that the strains 
that were also resistant to gentamicin also showed transient resistance to silver, 
which was lost upon repeated subculture,—while they retained their gentamicin 
resistance. In addition, it would appear that transfer of plasmids conferring resist-
ance can occur between different bacterial strains by conjugation, e.g. from 

137
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
Acinetobacter baumannii to E. coli [46]. While these cases of bacterial resistance 
to silver ions and others continue to emerge, they all point to a plasmid-mediated 
mechanism and from 1975 to 2007, there have been fewer than 20 cases reported 
[47]. It would appear that products such as dressing that release sub-lethal levels 
of silver ions, however, may lead to resistance in the bacteria they are intended to 
block. Overall, however, the incidence of silver resistance remains low compared 
to that of antibiotic resistance.
4.2  Silver Nanoparticles and Bacterial Resistance
Reports on the bactericidal effects of AgNP on MDR continue to grow in num-
ber. AgNP are also currently indiscriminately used in consumer products ranging 
from odour-resistant socks to dishwashers washing machines, to medical applica-
tions as anti-microbials. Despite this, there is paucity in the resistance literature 
on AgNPs. There is a belief that resistance against AgNP will not evolve as their 
mechanism of attack against bacteria is through destruction of the cells, circum-
venting their ability to mutate. Zhang et al. studied the effect of long-term expo-
sure of bacteria to AgNP in a membrane bioreactor [48]. They found that in the 
bacterial stains studies, there was an overall increase in expression of the silver 
resistance gene, silE, within the population by up to 50-fold at 41 days after expo-
sure to AgNP. However, continued, long-term exposure resulted in a decreased 
in silE expression. However, the lack of reports of resistance to AgNPs may only 
reflect the enthusiasm for AgNP and not the fact that they do not engender resist-
ance as shown by Zhang et al. even though in this case silE expression appeared to 
have a biphasic response [48].
5  Silver Nanoparticles and Biofilms
Traditionally, microbial research has focused on the study of planktonic cultures, 
where cells grow often as individuals suspended in a liquid phase. Bacteria can 
however, also exist in mono-, or multispecies communities of cells often on the 
interfaces between one phase and another; liquid:solid, liquid:air and solid:air. 
Several types of these are exceedingly important in clinical settings, particularly 
venous and urinary catheters. Additionally, they are found to compound the free 
passage and integrity of waterways, storage reservoirs and play an economically 
significant role in biofouling of these.
Bacteria can form biofilms on both abiotic and biotic surfaces [49, 50], see 
Fig. 3 top for a schematic representation. Abiotic surfaces include anything that 
can be implanted in the body such as urinary or venous catheters, artificial hearts 
and pacemakers. Biotic surfaces are also susceptible to bacterial colonization 
and growth. Many interphases exist between liquid, solid and air in the different 

138
M. Griffith et al.
compartments of the mammalian body. Some of the best-studied examples of 
infections where biofilms are highly relevant are that of the cystic fibrosis (CF) 
lung, in recurrent urinary tract infections and chronic diabetic ulcers. Cystic fibro-
sis afflicted lungs are characterized by the retarded movement of mucus in the 
lungs. This leads to an increased residence time for inhaled, and otherwise trans-
located bacteria in the organ and this in its own turn increases the probability of 
bacterial retention and infection. Biofilms have been shown to play a significant 
role in the CF-related infections of the airways [51].
It has been estimated that up to 70 % of human bacterial infections are bio-
film-related. Once established, biofilms are difficult to eradicate due not only to 
an increased density of cells and quorum sensing (concerted gene regulation in 
response to threshold density sensing) related effects inherent in the biofilm, but 
also reduced permeability of certain antibiotics developing resistance to antibiot-
ics [52, 53]. Due to this much research has focused on trying to identify ways to 
prevent biofilm formation. There are several promising approaches but one that we 
will highlight is the use of AgNP.
Based on the results from several studies, it has been demonstrated that AgNP 
can impact biofilm formation in three ways. In assays where biofilms are formed 
first and then exposed to AgNP, the AgNP can reduce the numbers of viable cells 
in the biofilms [54, 55]. Other studies have assessed the ability of AgNP to pre-
vent biofilm formation. When AgNP are added to a bacterial culture at the time 
of inoculation for a biofilm assay, biofilm formation is inhibited [51, 54, 56–58]. 
Finally, when AgNP are impregnated into different materials and the amount of 
biofilm formation by various medically-relevant bacteria is measured, biofilm 
Fig. 3   Top Schematic representation for biofilm formation from bacteria culture adapted from 
Römling and Balsabore [62]. Bottom Bright field images showing (A) P. aeruginosa biofilm that 
had formed on the surface of 6 well plates after 16 h incubation at 37 °C without any antimi-
crobials (control); and (B) Biofilm formed in the presence of 0.156 µM LL37 peptide and in the 
presence of LL37 coated AgNP (LL37@AgNP) at either 2X and 4X MIC adapted from Vigoni 
et al. [61]

139
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
formation is prevented [59, 60]. In Vigoni et al., AgNP were coated with an anti-
microbial, a cathelicidin known as LL-37 [61]. LL-37 has pleiotropic effects, and 
in this study acted to counteract the cell inhibitory effects of AgNP at higher con-
centrations. These LL-37 coated AgNP were able to prevent biofilm formation by 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) (Fig.  3). While these studies reported 
anti-biofilm activities of AgNPs, other studies have reported that silver has no 
effect, suggesting that the context is important. Furthermore, while the research 
suggests that the use of AgNP as an anti-biofilm compound is promising, the stud-
ies tend to be in vitro. Experimentation must advance into in vivo models to prop-
erly assess the therapeutic potential of these molecules.
6  Silver Versus Other Metallic Nanoparticles
As shown above, AgNPs are both bactericidal and bacteriostatic against several 
bacteria. Other metallic NPs have also been reported to have anti-microbial activ-
ity. For example, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have documented to be effective 
anti-microbial agents against E. coli and Salmonella typhi (S. typhi), two bacteria 
that are common water pollutants that are also health hazards [63]. In this study, 
5 nm AuNPs were dispersed onto zeolites of clinoptilolite, mordenite and fauja-
site. Au-faujasite comprising 5 nm Au on the surfaces were reported to eliminate 
90–95 % of E. coli and S. typhi colonies.
A number of studies of AuNPs synthesized using plant products and extracts as 
reducing agents report anti-microbial activity. The plant products include corian-
der, Bischofia javanica, Daucus carota, Solanum lycopersicums, Hibiscus canna-
binus leaf, Moringa oliefera flower, lemongrass, Bacopa monnieri, Citrus unshiu 
peel and Ananas comosus [64].
Of special note is that unless the particles are stabilized, they will oxidise. The 
oxidized AgO, however, is cytotoxic and no longer effective as an anti-microbial 
agent [61]. While AgNPs lose their anti-microbial activity when oxidized, metallic 
oxide nanoparticles (NPs) from zinc (ZnO), copper (CuO) and iron (Fe2O3) on the 
other hand have been shown to possess anti-bacterial activity against both Gram pos-
itive and Gram negative bacterial strains [65]. Azam and colleagues showed that the 
metallic oxide NPs had anti-bacterial activity against Gram-negative bacteria such 
as Escherichia coli (E. coli) and P. aeruginosa, and Gram-positive Staphylococcus 
aureus (S. aureus) and Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis). Patterns of inhibition obtained 
showed that the anti-bacterial activity observed was positively correlated to an 
increase in the surface to volume ratio of the NPs, which in this case, was increased 
as the size of the NPs decreased. Hence efficacy of ZnO > CuO > Fe2O3 as dem-
onstrated by the relative zones of inhibition obtained when the different bacterial 
strains were incubated with the metallic oxide NPs (Fig. 4). In general, the NPs were 
more effective against Gram-positive strains of bacteria. However, these metallic 
oxide NPs have also been reported to be cytotoxic, as cautioned by these authors, as 
reported for silver oxide when AgNPs became oxidized [15].

140
M. Griffith et al.
7  Pros and Cons of Using Silver Nanoparticles
Not all forms of silver possess antimicrobial properties. Efficacy greatly depends 
upon the silver species in question, its delivery system, duration of release, and 
summary bioavailability. Clinically derived pharmacokinetic studies have shown 
a slower bactericidal activity than common disinfectants such as sodium chlorate 
and phenol. Also noteworthy from the same study was an observed reduced activ-
ity on Gram-positive bacteria [31].
7.1  Side Effects
7.1.1  Ionic Silver
As with any drug, silver ingestion, particularly of mega doses of AgNPs in form 
of colloidal silver has a number of side effects. Most often, ingestion of the high 
Fig. 4   Zone of inhibition produced by different metal oxide nanoparticles against both Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains. Antibacterial activity of a ZnO; b CuO; and c Fe2O3 
of bacterial strains (a) Escherichia coli, (b) Staphylococcus aureus, (c) Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa, and (d) Bacillus subtilis. Modified from Azam et al. [65]

141
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
doses of silver has been found to cause cosmetic abnormalities upon prolonged use. 
Argyria is an irreversible condition caused by the deposition of silver on skin, a con-
dition that was known since the 1700s. Beyond this discoloration however, no patho-
logic and other physiological conditions have been correlated with argyria [66–68].
Other clinical indications that have been associated with silver are transient skin 
discoloration, allergic responses, leucopenia, bone marrow toxicity and renal or 
hepatic damage due to silver deposition. Silver ions are highly reactive species and 
readily bind negatively charged proteins, DNA, RNA and other anions, see above. 
This reactivity complicates the delivery due to the formation of complexes with 
inflammatory related molecules in the infected site. In topical applications there is 
evidence that silver ions may form complexes by anions in body fluids (e.g. chloride 
anions), see Chap. “Biomedical Uses of Silver Nanoparticles: From Roman Wine 
Cups to Biomedical Devices”. The problems with most topical silver antimicrobi-
als lie in the lack of deep tissue penetration, lack of control over release, the limited 
number of reactive species being released and the slowed down wound healing.
7.1.2  Silver Nanoparticles
Studies suggest that silver is highly toxic to keratinocytes and fibroblasts, with the 
latter being more sensitive. It is capable of altering gene expression [69]. Moreover, 
arrested healing in patients treated with silver compounds, due to fibroblast and 
epithelial cell toxicity, has been reported [70]. Evidence also exists of cytotoxic-
ity of silver nanoparticles towards mammalian germline stem cells [71]. The silver 
nanoparticles employed in that study drastically reduced mitochondrial function, 
increased membrane leakage, necrosis and induction of apoptosis. Exposure to silver 
nanoparticles seems to exert toxicity by decreasing the function of mitochondria.
Silver nanoparticles show very promising results in agar-based screenings but it 
in liquid medium, even at high concentrations, can only cause a growth delay in E. 
coli [37]. This phenomenon was explained by the coagulation of silver nanoparti-
cles with intracellular substances from the lysed cells, which led to a rapid reduc-
tion in available silver in active form [14].
7.2  Advantages
As mentioned previously, the advent of antibiotics was quickly followed by the 
emergence of antibiotic resistant and later of multi-antibiotic resistant strains that 
consequently led to a comeback of silver as potential antimicrobial agent. Due to 
recent technological advances nanosilver production has become increasingly acces-
sible. Nanosilver particles exhibit novel biological, physical and chemical properties 
that help overcome some of the problems that are associated with earlier metallic sil-
ver based treatments. Advances in manufacturing and quality control methods have 
facilitated the production of AgNP displaying significantly less systemic toxicity.

142
M. Griffith et al.
To add to this, AgNP exhibit a multilevel antibacterial effect on cells and this 
taken together with the low rates of acquired resistance emergence in many bac-
terial species, AgNP are particularly promising as antimicrobials. Several studies 
have highlighted the successful treatment of multidrug resistant species, where last 
resort antibiotics have failed to contain the infection. The ability to tune the release 
of the silver reactive species is also being explored in promising studies of long-
term bactericidal effects. Further, pioneering work by Wong et al., has shown that 
materials containing AgNP are able to considerably reduce the inflammation in 
wounds, allowing for wound healing with minimal tissue scarring [72–74].
8  Anti-Infective Activity on Viruses
AgNP have also been reported to have anti-viral activities against a range of 
­different viral families. The most significant viruses that are tragetted by AgNP 
include the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), and 
the hepatitis B virus. In many cases, the AgNP were capped or coated with other 
biomaterials and the effects appear to be synergistic. Table 1 gives a list of viruses 
inhibited by AgNP together with potential mechanism of action in each case.
Table 1   Anti-viral properties of silver nanoparticles and possible mechanism(s) adapted from 
Ref. [75]
Virus
Family
Coating
Size (nm)
Mechanism of 
action
Human immunode-
ficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1)
Retroviridae
PVP coating
1–10
Interaction with 
gp 120
Bind with 
viral envelope 
glycoprotein
Herpes simplex 
virus type 1 
(HSV-1)
Herpesviridae
MES coating
4
Competition for the 
binding of the virus 
to the cell
Hepatitis B virus 
(HBV)
Hepadnaviridae
_
10, 50
Interaction with 
double stranded 
DNA/binding with 
viral particles
Monkey pox virus
Poxviridae
Simple and 
polysaccharide 
coating
10–80
Block of virus- 
host cell binding 
and penetration
Tacaribe virus 
(TCRV)
Arenaviridae
Simple and 
polysaccharide 
coating
5–10
Inactivation of 
virus particles 
before entry
Respiratory 
syncytial virus
Paramyxoviridae
PVP coating
69 ± 3
Interference with 
viral attachment

143
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
9  Concluding Remarks
It is generally accepted that the bactericidal effects of silver nanoparticles are due 
to ion release. Silver nanoparticles need to address two main functions: to gener-
ate a sustained flux of silver ions from a supply of nanoparticles and to be able 
to actively transport the silver ions to their biological targets on the surface or 
inside the target cells. An efficient control release mechanism for silver nanopar-
ticles would provide multiple advantages and would become a strong tool to help 
broaden nanoparticle applications in medicine. Some of the benefits include dose 
control and limitation in a fashion that the desired bactericidal effects are optimal 
without enhanced toxicity on host cells, optimization of release kinetics and tar-
geted delivery, control over the nanoparticle lifetime and effectiveness and lastly 
minimize the additional release of silver ions beyond the therapeutic dose.
Acknowledgments  Research in TF Mah’s laboratory has been supported by grants from 
Cystic Fibrosis Canada and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 
(NSERC). EIA thanks the University of Ottawa Heart Institute for the financial and scientific 
support (UOHI grant#1255). MG acknowledges funding from the Swedish Research Council and 
AFA Försäkring for research conducted within her laboratory.
References
	 1.	Alexander, J.W.: History of the medical use of silver. Surg. Infect. 10(3), 289–292 (2009)
	 2.	Roe, A.L., Collosol argentum and its ophthalmic uses. British Med. J. 1(2820), 104 (1915)
	 3.	Tenover, F.C., Mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. Am. J. Med. 119(6 Suppl 
1), S3–S10; discussion S62–S70 (2006)
	 4.	Rai, M.K., et al.: Silver nanoparticles: the powerful nanoweapon against multidrug-resistant 
bacteria. J. Appl. Microbiol. 112(5), 841–852 (2012)
	 5.	Chernousova, S., Epple, M.: Silver as antibacterial agent: ion, nanoparticle, and metal. 
Angew. Chem. 52(6), 1636–1653 (2012)
	 6.	Hardes, J., et  al.: Lack of toxicological side-effects in silver-coated megaprostheses in 
humans. Biomaterials 28(18), 2869–2875 (2007)
	 7.	Butany, J., et al.: Prosthetic heart valves with silver-coated sewing cuff fabric: early morpho-
logical features in two patients. Can. J. Cardiol. 18(7), 733–738 (2002)
	 8.	Butany, J., et al.: Pathologic analysis of 19 heart valves with silver-coated sewing rings. J. 
Card. Surg. 21(6), 530–538 (2006)
	 9.	Chopra, I.: The increasing use of silver-based products as antimicrobial agents: a useful 
development or a cause for concern? J. Antimicrob. Chem. 59(4), 587–590 (2007)
	10.	Fox Jr, C.L.: Silver sulfadiazine–a new topical therapy for pseudomonas in burns. Therapy of 
pseudomonas infection in burns. Arch. Surg. 96(2), 184–188 (1968)
	11.	Liau, S.Y., et al.: Interaction of silver nitrate with readily identifiable groups: relationship to 
the antibacterial action of silver ions. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 25(4), 279–283 (1997)
	12.	Bragg, P.D., Rainnie, D.J.: The effect of silver ions on the respiratory chain of Escherichia 
coli. Can. J. Microbiol. 20(6), 883–889 (1974)
	13.	Schreurs, W.J., Rosenberg, H.: Effect of silver ions on transport and retention of phosphate 
by Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 152(1), 7–13 (1982)
	14.	Sondi, I., Salopek-Sondi, B: Silver nanoparticles as antimicrobial agent: a case study on E. 
coli as a model for Gram-negative bacteria. J. Coll. Interface. Sci 275(1), 177–182 (2004)

144
M. Griffith et al.
	15.	Alarcon, E.I., et al.: The biocompatibility and antibacterial properties of collagen-stabilized, 
photochemically prepared silver nanoparticles. Biomaterials 33(19), 4947–4956 (2012)
	16.	Hajipour, M.J., et al.: Antibacterial properties of nanoparticles. Trends Biotech. 30(10), 499–
511 (2012)
	17.	Cho, H., Uehara, T., Bernhardt, T.G.: Beta-lactam antibiotics induce a lethal malfunctioning 
of the bacterial cell wall synthesis machinery. Cell 159(6), 1300–1311 (2014)
	18.	Feng, Q.L., et al.: A mechanistic study of the antibacterial effect of silver ions on Escherichia 
coli and Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 52(4), 662–668 (2000)
	19.	Batarseh, K.I.: Anomaly and correlation of killing in the therapeutic properties of silver (I) 
chelation with glutamic and tartaric acids. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 54(2), 546–548 (2004)
	20.	Feng, Q.L., et al.: A mechanistic study of the antibacterial effect of silver ions on Escherichia 
coli and Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 52(4), 662–668 (2000)
	21.	McNeilage, L.J., Whittingham, S.: Use of the bio-rad silver stain to identify gel purified RNA 
components of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein antigens. J. Immunol. Met. 66(2), 253–260 
(1984)
	22.	Modak, S.M., Fox Jr, C.L.: Binding of silver sulfadiazine to the cellular components of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Biochem. Pharmacol. 22(19), 2391–2404 (1973)
	23.	Bovenkamp, G.L., et al.: X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy study 
of the interaction of silver ions with Staphylococcus aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, and 
Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79(20), 6385–6390 (2013)
	24.	Stillman, M.J., et al.: Spectroscopic studies of copper, silver and gold-metallothioneins. Met.-
Based Drugs 1(5–6), 375–394 (1994)
	25.	Dibrov, P., et  al.: Chemiosmotic mechanism of antimicrobial activity of Ag(+) in Vibrio 
cholerae. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46(8), 2668–2670 (2002)
	26.	Chappell, J.B., Greville, G.D.: Effect of silver ions on mitochondrial adenosine triphos-
phatase. Nature 174(4437), 930–931 (1954)
	27.	Li, W.-R., et al.: Antibacterial activity and mechanism of silver nanoparticles on Escherichia 
coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotech. 85(4), 1115–1122 (2010)
	28.	Lok, C.N., et al.: Proteomic analysis of the mode of antibacterial action of silver nanoparti-
cles. J. Proteome Res. 5(4), 916–924 (2006)
	29.	Lok, C.N., et al.: Silver nanoparticles: partial oxidation and antibacterial activities. J. Biol. 
Inorg. Chem. 12(4), 527–534 (2007)
	30.	Lok, C.N., et al.: Silver nanoparticles: partial oxidation and antibacterial activities. J. Biol. 
Inorg. Chem. 12(4), 527–534 (2007)
	31.	Kim, J.S., et al.: Antimicrobial effects of silver nanoparticles. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. 
Med. 3(1), 95–101 (2007)
	32.	Choi, O., et al.: The inhibitory effects of silver nanoparticles, silver ions, and silver chloride 
colloids on microbial growth. Water Res. 42(12), 3066–3074 (2008)
	33.	Ruparelia, J.P., et al.: Strain specificity in antimicrobial activity of silver and copper nanopar-
ticles. Acta Biomater. 4(3), 707–716 (2008)
	34.	Navarro, E., et al.: Toxicity of silver nanoparticles to Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 42(23), 8959–8964 (2008)
	35.	Morones, J.R., et al.: The bactericidal effect of silver nanoparticles. Nanotechnology 16(10), 
2346–2353 (2005)
	36.	Baker, C., et al.: Synthesis and antibacterial properties of silver nanoparticles. J. Nanosci. 
Nanotechnol. 5(2), 244–249 (2005)
	37.	Pal, S., Tak, Y.K., Song, J.M.: Does the antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles depend 
on the shape of the nanoparticle? a study of the Gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73(6), 1712–1720 (2007)
	38.	Li, P., et al.: Synergistic antibacterial effects of β-lactam antibiotic combined with silver nan-
oparticles. Nanotechnology 16(9), 1912 (2005)
	39.	Shahverdi, A.R., et al.: Synthesis and effect of silver nanoparticles on the antibacterial activ-
ity of different antibiotics against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. Nanomed. 
Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 3(2), 168–171 (2007)

145
Anti-microbiological and Anti-infective Activities of Silver
	40.	Musser, J.M.: Antimicrobial agent resistance in mycobacteria: molecular genetic insights. 
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 8(4), 496–514 (1995)
	41.	Chopra, I., Roberts, M.: Tetracycline antibiotics: mode of action, applications, molecular 
biology, and epidemiology of bacterial resistance. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 65(2), 232–260 
(2001)
	42.	McHugh, G.L., et al.: Salmonella typhimurium resistant to silver nitrate, chloramphenicol, 
and ampicillin. Lancet 1(7901), 235–240 (1975)
	43.	Gupta, A., et al.: Diversity of silver resistance genes in IncH incompatibility group plasmids. 
Microbiology 147(Pt 12), 3393–3402 (2001)
	44.	Silver, S.: Bacterial silver resistance: molecular biology and uses and misuses of silver com-
pounds. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 27(2–3), 341–353 (2003)
	45.	Bridges, K., et al.: Gentamicin- and silver-resistant pseudomonas in a burns unit. Br. Med. J. 
1(6161), 446–449 (1979)
	46.	Deshpande, L., Chopade, B.: Plasmid mediated silver resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii. 
Biometals 7(1), 49–56 (1994)
	47.	Chopra, I.: The increasing use of silver-based products as antimicrobial agents: a useful 
development or a cause for concern? J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 59(4), 587–590 (2007)
	48.	Zhang, C., Liang, Z., Hu, Z.: Bacterial response to a continuous long-term exposure of sil-
ver nanoparticles at sub-ppm silver concentrations in a membrane bioreactor activated sludge 
system. Water Res. 50, 350–358 (2014)
	49.	Hall-Stoodley, L., Costerton, J.W., Stoodley, P.: Bacterial biofilms: from the natural environ-
ment to infectious diseases. Nat. Rev. Micro. 2(2), 95–108 (2004)
	50.	Romling, U., et  al.: Microbial biofilm formation: a need to act. J. Intern. Med. 276(2), 
98–110 (2014)
	51.	Palanisamy, N.K., et al.: Antibiofilm properties of chemically synthesized silver nanoparti-
cles found against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Nanobiotech. 12, 2 (2014)
	52.	Mah, T.F.: Biofilm-specific antibiotic resistance. Future Microbiol. 7(9), 1061–1072 (2012)
	53.	Hoiby, N., et al.: Antibiotic resistance of bacterial biofilms. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 35(4), 
322–332 (2010)
	54.	Martinez-Gutierrez, F., et al.: Anti-biofilm activity of silver nanoparticles against different 
microorganisms. Biofouling 29(6), 651–660 (2013)
	55.	Park, H.-J., et al.: Biofilm-inactivating activity of silver nanoparticles: a comparison with sil-
ver ions. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 19(2), 614–619 (2013)
	56.	Kalishwaralal, K., et al.: Silver nanoparticles impede the biofilm formation by Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa and Staphylococcus epidermidis. Colloids Surf. B 79(2), 340–344 (2010)
	57.	Mohanty, S., et al.: An investigation on the antibacterial, cytotoxic, and antibiofilm efficacy 
of starch-stabilized silver nanoparticles. Nanomedicine 8(6), 916–924 (2012)
	58.	Radzig, M.A., et al.: Antibacterial effects of silver nanoparticles on gram-negative bacteria: 
influence on the growth and biofilms formation, mechanisms of action. Colloids Surf. B 102, 
300–306 (2013)
	59.	Babapour, A., et al.: Low-temperature sol-gel-derived nanosilver-embedded silane coating as 
biofilm inhibitor. Nanotechnology 22(15), 155602 (2011)
	60.	Paladini, F., et al.: Efficacy of silver treated catheters for haemodialysis in preventing bacte-
rial adhesion. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 23(8), 1983–1990 (2012)
	61.	Vignoni, M., et al.: LL37 peptide@silver nanoparticles: combining the best of the two worlds 
for skin infection control. Nanoscale 6(11), 5718–5725 (2014)
	62.	Romling, U., Balsalobre, C.: Biofilm infections, their resilience to therapy and innovative 
treatment strategies. J. Intern. Med. 272(6), 541–561 (2012)
	63.	Lima, E., et al.: Gold nanoparticles as efficient antimicrobial agents for Escherichia coli and 
Salmonella typhi. Chem. Cent. J. 7(1), 11 (2013)
	64.	Bindhu, M.R., Umadevi, M.: Antibacterial activities of green synthesized gold nanoparticles. 
Mat. Lett. 120, 122–125 (2014)
	65.	Azam, A., et al.: Antimicrobial activity of metal oxide nanoparticles against Gram-positive 
and Gram-negative bacteria: a comparative study. Int. J. Nanomed. 7, 6003–6009 (2012)

146
M. Griffith et al.
	66.	Bouts, B.A.: Images in clinical medicine. Argyria. N. Engl. J. Med. 340(20), 1554 (1999)
	67.	Hanada, K., et  al.: Silver in sugar particles and systemic argyria. Lancet 351(9107), 960 
(1998)
	68.	Legat, F.J., et al.: Argyria after short-contact acupuncture. Lancet 352(9123), 241 (1998)
	69.	Poon, V.K., Burd, A.: In vitro cytotoxity of silver: implication for clinical wound care. Burns 
30(2), 140–147 (2004)
	70.	Burd, A., et al.: A comparative study of the cytotoxicity of silver-based dressings in mon-
olayer cell, tissue explant, and animal models. Wound Rep. Reg. 15(1), 94–104 (2007)
	71.	Braydich-Stolle, L., et al.: In vitro cytotoxicity of nanoparticles in mammalian germline stem 
cells. Toxicol. Sci. 88(2), 412–419 (2005)
	72.	Liu, X., et al.: Silver nanoparticles mediate differential responses in keratinocytes and fibro-
blasts during skin wound healing. Chem. Med. Chem. 5(3), 468–475 (2010)
	73.	Zhang, S., et  al.: Silver nanoparticle-coated suture effectively reduces inflammation and 
improves mechanical strength at intestinal anastomosis in mice. J. Pedia. Surg. 49(4), 606–
613 (2014)
	74.	Wong, K.K.Y., et al.: Further evidence of the anti-inflammatory effects of silver nanoparti-
cles. Chem. Med. Chem. 4(7), 1129–1135 (2009)
	75.	Khandelwal, N., et al.: Application of silver nanoparticles in viral inhibition: a new hope for 
antivirals. Digest J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 9(1), 175–186 (2014)

