Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simply Social Media
The Exhaustive Course
 
Ava Catherine Marcella Fails

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Introduction to Social Media Marketing (SMM)
Creating Your Service
What Any SMM Service Needs to Accomplish for Its Clients
How To Get Clients
Getting Ready to Accept Clients
Posting Software
Sprout Social
Sendible
Buffer
Analytics Software
Image Editing Software
Client Relations Management (CRM) Software
Researching and Posting Content for Your Clients
Research
How Long Should My Blurb Be?
Things to Consider
The Hardest Part of Your Job
Tips for Finding Content for Your Clients
Google Alerts
Setting Up Google Alerts
Using RSS Feeds to Find Content
Brainstorming
Alternative Search Engines
Check the Competition
AllTop.com
Searching for Similar Sites
Client’s Website or Blog
Cross-linking
Search
Make It Quote Day
Post Something Different
Social Media and Images
Overview
Finding Images
Finding Images with Google
Finding Images with Yahoo!
Finding Images with Bing
Finding Images with Creative Commons
Branding Images using Pixlr.com
Other Image Resources
Animated GIF’s
Free Stock Photo Sites
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
More Tricks of the Trade
Using Hashtags
What is a Hashtag?
What is the Point?
Guidelines for Hashtags
Hashtags for Business and Marketing
Building Your Audience on the 4 Main Social Media Networks
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Conclusion

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Introduction to the Course
Thanks for purchasing Simply Social Media. You’ve purchased this course for one of the
following reasons:
You want to learn yourself
You want to start a SMM company
You want to train your staff
All of the above
This course is designed to help you do just that. We’ve done the research for you, and you
won’t find this info doing a Google search all in one place. So, grab a snack, your favorite
beverage, a notebook (or your chosen note-taking medium), and prepare to get
knowledge!
Who Are You
  
Hi, my name is Ava. I’m just a Southern woman pushing 40. I am a writer, a dabbling
artist, and Internet junkie. I’m a published author of both fiction and non-fiction works.
My most recent job was building and training a Social Media Marketing team for an
established SEO company based in the US. In 9 months, I put together a team of 6, created
more than 50 pieces of training material, and established a new department which is still
going strong.
Since then, I have been working on this course and freelancing full-time. You can find me
around the web at the following places:
https://facebook.com/prowebwriter
https://twitter.com/pr0webwriter
http://prowebwriter.com
http://facelessmarketing.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
http://stackingbenjis.com
Kik: prowebwriter
Skype: waxingpoetic75
Email: ava@prowebwriter.com
Disclaimer
© 2014 Ava Catherine Marcella Fails All rights reserved. No part of this book
may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without written permission from the author, except for brief
quotations in a review.
NOTE: This is the main document to a full course on Social Media Marketing that I’ve released through JVZoo
and WarriorPlus. Shoot me an email at the address above, and I will send you the rest at no extra charge!

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Introduction to Social Media Marketing (SMM)
If you are considering offering Social Media Marketing as a service, you will need to find
out what you want that service to include. SMM is so
much more than just creating a post to the various social networks.
Knowing how to craft an engaging Facebook status, or how to compose a Tweet is a large
part of SMM, but you also need to know the following skills:
How each network works
What the strengths and weaknesses of each network are
Which networks are suited for promoting different industries
How to promote your clients on each network
Creating Your Service
Most SMM agencies create packages to outline what features they are offering in their
service.
SMM includes a monster list of billable services including, but not limited to, the
following list:
Business analysis - analyzing your client to find out which social networks would
best serve their business
Social Profile creation - creating a Page or account and optimizing it with
information
Branding - Creating profile images such as Facebook covers, profile pictures,
Twitter covers, Google+ covers, etc.
Videos - If you have a knack for video creation, this is a very lucrative branch of
SMM
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Engagement - engaging the clients followers on social media by commenting,
following back, and acknowledging follows and mentions
Networking - actively seeking out new people to follow and engage with
Consulting - advising clients on how to improve their Social Media following
Posting - creating a set number of posts per network per day or week
Analytics - Detailed monthly reports showing stats for your client’s campaigns
Dedicated account manager - being accessible to your clients
Hosting giveaways or specials
Advertising - running network-specific ad campaigns
Squeeze and Landing page promotion - using Social Media to funnel traffic to
specific pages
You’ll want to create your packages so that they include combinations of these services
that make sense for your customers. We suggest that you do search Google for other
companies in your target area and find out what they offer. Offer more value and put what
you learn here into practice and you will blow them out of the water! Don’t be afraid to
get creative and add in your own services. The more you are a part of this industry, the
more likely you will be to find areas where you can offer extra value and additional
services making you stand out from the crowd.
What Any SMM Service Needs to Accomplish for Its Clients
Anyone who hires you or your company to manage their Social Media accounts will have
a lot of expectations. They want to see numbers. They want “likes”, “shares”, “retweets”,
“mentions”, etc. We do not suggest that you engage in buying any of the above as this is
just a bad business practice. There’s no way to specify if the traffic you buy will be
targeted, and you’ll like end up with followers from countries other than your client’s. If
they are global, this isn’t necessarily a bad thing. However, if your client is a local, small
business, they will not likely be pleased with new followers from Bulgaria unless they are
in Bulgaria. Capeche?
The businesses you target will determine how much they are willing to spend on their
SMM campaigns. Obviously, if you have clients who are doctors, lawyers, and dentists,
they are more apt to try your bigger, more expensive packages. If you are working mainly
with small, local businesses, they may balk at your pricing.
Pricing will be one of the tougher areas you deal with because the value in SMM isn’t
really widely known among small businesses. Sure, they might be aware that they can
leverage Social Media to get more customers, but they will not understand how much
work goes into managing their accounts. Price your packages so that they are affordable to
the smaller businesses, but also offer a couple options to the ones who want to go all in
with their campaigns.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
How To Get Clients
If you already have a successful business offering services to clients, then you probably
have one or all the following:
A list of email subscribers to promote your new service to
A sales department
A marketing department
Staff
This gives you a jumpstart. If you’re seeking to offer SMM as a service on your own, then
one of your biggest questions is probably, “Where can I get clients?”
This subject could probably fill another course/ebook entirely, but we will cover it briefly
to give you a few ideas and get you started. First, you need to decide if you are looking to
target online, offline, or both.
If you are looking mainly online for new clients, here are some ideas:
Webmaster forums like WarriorForum.com
A dedicated website promoting your service - this is a must
oDesk - oDesk is an online platform that connects service providers with people
seeking workers for a number of things - SMM being one of them
Elance - Just like oDesk
Promote yourself on Social Media - nothing says you know what you’re doing like
showing them that you do
If you’re looking to target potential customers offline, one of the most basic things you
can do is get some business cards and spread them around. The best way to target offline
is send direct mail to businesses you would like to pitch your services to. Obviously, this
will cost you an initial investment, but there are a ton of cheap printing services online that
will allow you to get started on a low budget.
Here are a few more ideas:
Fliers on cars in parking lots in targeted areas
Word of mouth - tell everyone who you are and what you do
Consider running an ad in the newspaper and other local classifieds
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Think outside the box a little. One of the most creative free marketing ideas we ever heard
was a fellow who had collected a number of magazines from friends and family who had
subscriptions. He then printed up some stickers the same size as the address stickers you’d
normally see on magazines you subscribe to. These stickers had his contact info and some
brief information about his business. He then delivered these magazines to various
doctors’ and dentists’ offices around his town. This became one of his main marketing
methods for his business.
A combination of both on and offline marketing is probably your best bet. It allows you to
expand your horizons a little and maximize your marketing efforts. If you are going to be
a Social Media Marketer, then you must be able to market yourself.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Getting Ready to Accept Clients
Being able to handle multiple Social Media clients can get expensive really quickly
because it requires that you have a platform to work from. You could log into all of those
accounts and post manually, but we don’t recommend it for obvious reasons. The potential
that you might make a mistake and post about flooring on your dentist’s page and vice
versa is greatly increased.
Let’s consider the investments you may have to make in your platform:
Posting software
Analytics software
Image editing software
Client Relations Management (CRM) software
These would be the bare minimum. We are going to go in-depth with each one and present
to you what we’ve found to be the most cost-effective solutions.
Posting Software
There are a lot of options out there. Seriously, a lot. Your selection should be based on the
following parameters:
Pricing
Supported networks
Features
In that order.
Our experience lies with 5 of the top competitors: HootSuite, Sprout Social, Sendible, and
Buffer.
We will not be covering HootSuite because the pricing is simply ridiculous in our humble
opinion. For each of the other platforms, we will provide an overview followed by a
comparison table for your convenience.
Sprout Social
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Sprout Social offers some basic features and is great for managing clients who have
Facebook and Twitter profiles. While they claim to support Google+ and LinkedIn as well,
at the time of this writing, they do not offer full support of these two networks and they
are not included in Sprout Social generated reports.
While you can post to Google+ profiles, you can only post to LinkedIn accounts from the
Admin account. This makes Sprout Social a bad choice for an agency who assigns out
posting to team/staff members.
The other bad thing about Sprout Social is its price point. A certain number of team
members are included with each level of account, but when it comes down to needing to
add additional staff, you can expect to pay $99 per month per team member. This escalates
quickly. If your company is at an enterprise level it will certainly be worth your while to
go for the Unlimited account, but you will still pay per team member.
Sprout Social is second to none in analytics and generates some fantastic-looking reports
for your clients.
Sendible
Sendible is a fantastic platform and a solid choice for individual marketers or agencies.
Sendible covers a ton of networks including WordPress blogs, LinkedIn Status updates
and Groups, Pinterest, etc. If you are looking for the platform that covers the most
networks, Sendible is the one. There is a bit of learning curve with Sendible, but they have
provided a few videos to get you started and it will take you well under an hour to figure it
out if you are savvy at all. You can also run full-scale email marketing campaigns with
Sendible as well.
The price point on Sendible is a lot better than Sprout Social, but you will sacrifice a
couple key features:
Monitoring - You can still monitor clients’ streams in Sendible, but each one must be
added manually as a service. This is one of the limits on each account level, so you
may want to restrict what you add as a service.
Reports - Sendible’s reporting system requires that you set up each client as a user in
Sendible in order to be able to generate reports on their account. Again, users are one
of the limits that will require you to pay extra to acquire more. We found a
workaround for this which we will cover in the next section on Analytics software.
Buffer

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Buffer is one of the few platforms that offers a free plan. Buffer works with the following
networks:
Facebook Pages
Facebook Profiles
Facebook Groups
Twitter
LinkedIn Profiles
LinkedIn Company Pages
App.net Profiles
Google+ Pages
On their free plan you can have one each of: Facebook, Google+, App.net, Twitter, and
LinkedIn. This is currently the only feasible way to be able to schedule posts to Google+
for free. There’s a Google Chrome Extension called Do Share that will let you, but it is
horrible in that it requires that you leave your computer on and browser open to post your
scheduled updates.
Really, the only way we would suggest that you use Buffer is if you only plan on having a
small number of clients or if you plan to set up a Buffer account for each of your clients as
a part of your service. Again, this would really only be feasible if you only plan to have a
few clients.
 
 Features
 
 Sprout Social
 
 Sendible
 
 BufferApp
 
 Pricing
 
 $$$
 
 $$
 
 $
 
 Supported Networks
 
 4
 
 Most
 
 8
 
 Analytics
 
 YES
 
 $$$
 
 YES
 
 Scheduling
 
 YES
 
 YES
 
 YES
 
 Users
 
 Limited
 
 Limited
 
 Limited
 
 Clients
 
 Unlimited $$$
 
 Unlimited $$$
 
 Limited $$$
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Analytics Software
We only recommend analytics software if you are tracking analytics outside of your
platform software which may be more cost-effective for you by far. This software is a
great workaround for the likes of HootSuite or Sendible who want to charge you up to $50
for a report on your client. The company is Cyfe.com, and it’s really simple to add in your
clients’ accounts, create a custom dashboard for them that you can share, and download
detailed reports of their account activity. If you want to brand your reports for your client,
simply add their logo using the image widget to their dashboard. It really is the best
service we’ve seen.
Image Editing Software
Photoshop is the industry-standard for image editing for a reason. However, it may not be
within your budget to shell out $20-$50 a month just to have access to it. Pixlr.com/editor
is a very viable (and FREE) solution to branding your images. What do we mean by
branding images? One of the best small things we do for clients to add value that they
absolutely LOVE is branding the royalty-free images we use in their campaigns with the
URL of their website. It acts as a sort of watermark for the images and spreads their brand
through images that get indexed in the search engines. It also tells people who they are,
say if their post gets shared with someone who doesn’t follow them. It gives potential
followers and customers a way to find them online. We will cover how to edit images with
Pixlr further on into the course.
Client Relations Management (CRM) Software
Once you have all of the tools you need to offer your new service to clients, you will
definitely need a place and way to keep it all organized. There are a number of ways you
can do this, but we’ve found the easiest way is via a CRM. Sendible and Sprout Social
have CRM functionality built in to an extent, but you will probably still find it necessary
to keep a small database online or on your computer for certain things.
We recommend Basecamp because you can get a 60-day free trial, and there is very little
learning curve on figuring out how it all works. It’s super simple to use. Plus it will
provide you a virtual back office that you can share with your client. You can upload their
reports, intake information, etc. to Basecamp and easily keep everything in one convenient
place.
NOTE: You can get a free trial with most of these platforms and software so you can
try it out and find out what works for you. Most trials are a minimum of 1 month.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Researching and Posting Content for Your Clients 
Your number one goal for each client is to post up-to-date industry news and
updates. Besides this, the most important thing we are trying to accomplish is to engage
the client’s audience. We want more “Likes”, more followers, etc.
Research
You should spend a minimum of 2 hours researching your client’s business and industry.
Keep in mind their goals for their Social Media campaigns. Size up the competition, and
make sure you do it better than they do. Find at least 3-5 industry-related sites that you can
visit on a daily basis to look for fresh content.
If you have trouble finding that many, find one good one, and put it into
http://similarsitesearch.com. This will give you 50 sites similar to your query. You will
still have to weed through them a bit because some of them will be competitor sites, or
just low quality content.
When you put your post together, it should contain these elements in this order:
1. A short blurb crafted by you. This blurb can ask a question, present an article,
introduce a quiz, video, slideshow or other content              
2. A link to relevant, up-to-date content
3. A large related image
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
How Long Should My Blurb Be?
On Facebook, the ideal length is 40 characters. ← That sentence is 40 characters
without spaces; 47 with. Perfect. Don’t be afraid to write a longer blurb, but make it count.
Pay attention to the Pages that you like personally on Facebook. When a post catches your
eye, note the length. What about it attracted you? 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The ideal length of a Tweet is 100 characters. 120 to 125 should be the max, but if you
can keep your Tweets around 100, you’ve hit the sweet spot.
A good length for Google+ is less than 60 characters. This keeps the headline of the
post contained to one line. If you can’t contain it within 60 characters, write a killer lead-
in to the content you are sharing.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Here’s an example using blog posts. Since the content we share is usually represented by
an image, our posts are a little different. However, we can still take this information to
heart.
This post had a headline exceeding 60 characters and was bumped from feeds.
This post kept the title within 60 characters and was contained on one line.
If your post can’t be contained in one line, write a killer first sentence.
Things to Consider
Remember: People aren’t on Social Media to think about going to the dentist, or putting a
new roof on their home, or to buy things. They are on Social Media to keep up with
friends, news, and see content that helps them solve a problem or answer a question.
Whenever possible, make it fun!
You are competing with other business’ pages, friends, relatives, etc. for the attention of
your client’s audience. That’s a lot of competition. Create posts that grab people. What

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
kind of posts grab your attention? Think like a member of the client’s audience because
you are a part of someone’s audience.
The Hardest Part of Your Job
The absolute hardest part of SMM is finding good, industry-relevant content to share for
your clients. Some days, it seems there’s just nothing out there. With more than 51 million
websites going up every year, there IS something out there. You just have to be clever to
find it. Unless your client creates their own content on a regular basis, you are going to
have to go outside of their online properties to find interesting things to share with their
audience. This is a good rule of thumb anyway even if your client updates their content
regularly.
You should post at a ratio or about 1 post linking to your client’s online properties
for every 5 other links to relevant content you share unless your client asks you
specifically not to. SMM is quite a bit more effective if you’re not talking about yourself
or promoting your own products constantly. The idea is to offer content that solves a
problem or answers a question for your audience first, and then promote your client’s
products.
That being said, you will be challenged from time to time to find really good content to
share, whether it’s an article link, image, or both. We’ll go over some creative tips to help
you out with this.
Tips for Finding Content for Your Clients
Google Alerts
Google Alerts are one of our secret weapons in finding relevant content for our clients.
Google Alerts brings good content to your Gmail inbox. If you have a personal Gmail account that you use often,
you may want to set up a new one for this.
Setting Up Google Alerts
            
Log into your Google account where you want to receive your Alerts.
Type alerts.google.com in the address bar of your browser.
Google Alerts will open.              
You can either type your keyword or query directly in the box to create an Alert, or you
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
can fill out the Options.
Fill in the form as follows:
How often: Leave defaulted to At most once per day
Sources: Leave defaulted to Automatic
Language: Leave defaulted to English unless you and your client are multi-lingual
Region: You can update this to your client’s location if they are regional. If you do
this, you may want to set up 2 Alerts for the same keyword or phrase so you get
national news as well
How many: Leave defaulted to Only the best results. This way you won’t have to
filter out a bunch of garbage
Deliver to: Make sure this is defaulted to the appropriate Gmail account
Click Create Alert. You will receive daily emails of new content indexed by Google for
any of the keywords in the future. You will be able to use this resource to find relevant,
up-to-date articles and news to post for your clients.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Once you have created some Alerts, they will appear under the Search box. If you need to
edit or delete your Alerts, you can do so by clicking the Pencil icon to edit or the Trashcan
icon to delete them.
.
Using RSS Feeds to Find Content
RSS feeds can be used in a number of ways for Social Media. The most important would
be for finding content for your clients.
First you want to use an RSS feed search engine like RSSMicro.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Select the Feeds tab and then type in your keyword. This can be one of your client’s
keywords or simply a search phrase pertaining to their industry like you used for your
Google Alerts.
RSSMicro will return feeds relevant to your search phrase.
You are then able to view the content and add the feed to your favorite reader if it’s a site
you feel you’ll be able to check often for fresh articles. Since Google did away with their
reader, if you are looking for a new one, we recommend Digg.com’s free RSS reader. You
can find it here: http://digg.com/reader
You can also add the RSS feeds for your clients Social Media accounts or add in

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
competitors to constantly monitor what they are posting.
Brainstorming
Imagine yourself as your client’s customer. What would you want to know about their
business? Write it down and search Google. Type whole questions right into Google
Search and see what comes up. If there is a lot of content, add the query to your Google
Alerts.
Alternative Search Engines
Try your search in a different search engine. Here’s a list of search engines. Different
engines produce different results.
Check the Competition
Search Google for the competition and get their Social Media links from their website
when available. Yes! You can post the same content from time to time. We do NOT
suggest posting from the competition daily or even weekly. We suggest checking the
industry sites they post from and use them if they contain good content and are not
competition to your client.
You need to be monitoring your client’s competitors as a general rule anyway. This way,
you can compare your efforts to what they are doing and ensure you are doing it better!
AllTop.com
AllTop is an aggregator. You will notice in the top right of the website, there is an A to Z
list. Click the letter for your client’s industry. If your client is a dentist, click D. AllTop
will populate a list of websites with the most recent content listed from those sites. Hover
your cursor over the title to see more. If there isn’t a category on AllTop for the industry
you are looking for, AllTop will make suggestions. Sometimes you just won’t find
anything there. AllTop has a lot, but it doesn’t have everything.
Searching for Similar Sites
So you found a couple of killer industry sites when you did your initial research for your
client, but you need more. Try typing the URL to sites in at http://similarsitesearch.com or
http://siteslike.com. You’ll get a list of 50 sites like that good one you found in the
beginning. You will still need to do a little weeding out here, but you’ll find something
you can use. It’s definitely worth a couple minutes of your time.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Client’s Website or Blog
Check your client’s website daily for new content. Especially if they have a blog. You can
never go wrong linking back to the client’s website. In fact you should be linking to the
client’s website twice per week on ALL networks. Remember, a good rule of thumb is to
link back to the client website once for every 5 posts.
Also, check the client’s website and/or social profiles for reviews. Do a Customer
Highlight post thanking that customer for their review.
Cross-linking
Cross link between the client’s social networks. For example, post a link to their Google+
page on Facebook and vice versa. Don’t do this more than once every 2-3 weeks.
Search
You found a great article, but it was on a competitor’s site or is written in broken English?
Try searching the Internet for the title. Yes, just copy and paste it right in the search box. A
lot of times, second-rate sites will get content from larger and more well-maintained

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
websites. This is called scraping. You may just find a better version of that same great
article.
Make It Quote Day
Do an image search for quotes related to your client’s industry. Sometimes, this will be
difficult, and sometimes, it may just not work for the industry you need. However, you can
find quotes for most industries out there. There you have your post and image in one
search. Write a little blurb, throw up a hashtag, upload image… Done.
Post Something Different
Post a video, quiz, poll, slideshow, or a meme. Just search it. “[your industry] videos”,
“[your industry] slideshows” etc.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Social Media and Images
Overview
Photos get 53% more likes, 104% more comments and 84% more click-throughs on links
than text-based posts. For this reason, you should include a large image with every post
with the exception of LinkedIn. LinkedIn images appear the same size no matter how you
post them.
Finding Images 
It’s true that images are important; however, it is equally important that the images you
use be legal. A large percentage of the images available on the Internet are copyrighted
and the property of their respective owners. Many image searches will pull content from
stock image sites that are for sale. The use of these types of images is illegal and can
create a lot of trouble, for the client, and you. Do NOT use them.
Using one or more of the 3 major search engines is the best way to find a large amount of
images you can use. We will outline how to use all 3 below. We will also show you how to
use Creative Commons and list some more resources below.
Finding Images with Google
Step 1. Open Google and type in your keyword in the search box.
Step 2. Click the Images tab at the top.
Step 3. Click the Search Tools button.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 4. Select Medium or Large under Size. Select Labeled for reuse under Usage
Rights. If you start with Large under Size and can’t find any images to use, try Medium.
Google will then return results for images that you can freely use in your Social Media
posts.
If you get really desperate, try Yahoo! or Bing. Sometimes they will return different
results and you will find something to use.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Finding Images with Yahoo!
Step 1. Type your keyword into Yahoo! Search.
Step 2. Select Images in the left sidebar.
Step 3. Scroll down the left sidebar to select image size and license. Yahoo! will return
results that you can freely use.
Finding Images with Bing
Step 1. Type your keyword in the search box at Bing.
Step 2. Select your size and then select Free to use and share commercially under

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
License. Bing will return results that you may freely use in your Social Media posts.
Finding Images with Creative Commons
Step 1. Got to http://flickr.com
Flickr offers Creative Commons licensure to users in lieu of a copyright. Users who have
marked their images for sharing are easily searchable, and there are A LOT of them.
This is an overview of the what the Creative Commons licenses mean in brief:
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Don’t worry, you don’t have to memorize this. It’s just for reference. Searching the
Commons for images is really quite simple.
Step 2. Type your keyword in the search box in the top right of the screen.
Step 3. Select Commercial use allowed under License.
Flickr will return results you are free to use in your Social Media Posts.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Branding Images using Pixlr.com
Pixlr.com is simple and free online image editor. As I mentioned before, clients love to see
their URL on the images being posted to their social media. You can quickly and easily
brand images using Pixlr.
Step 1. Open Pixlr in your browser by typing pixlr.com in the Address bar. Click PIXLR
EDITOR.
Step 2. Pixlr Editor opens in the same tab or window. Search for an image using Google
as outlined in the previous section.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 3. Click the image you want to use from Google Images. Google Images will give a
preview of the image. Click View Image.
Step 4. The image opens in a tab/window by itself. Copy the image URL from the
Address bar of your browser or simply press Ctrl C.
Step 5. Go back to the pixlr editor tab/window. Click Open Image from URL.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 6. The Open image URL dialog box opens. Paste in the URL of your image or press
Ctrl V. Click OK.
Step 7. Your image is now loaded in Pixlr. In the Tools menu to the left of your image,
click the Type Tool.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 8. The Type Tool is selected. Click your image near the top center.
TIP: If you click at the bottom, the Text Options box will pop up partially off the bottom of your screen. Type and
format your text, then we’ll move it to the proper location.
Step 9. The Text Options box will open. Type the URL of your client in the box provided.
Step 10. Format the text. These are the Options that have been selected for this example,

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
but you can use whatever works best for you.
Font: Verdana – This is the default for Pixlr, and it’s fine. It’s an easily readable text.
Size: Click the arrow next to the number indicating size. Click and drag the slider until the
text is an appropriate size. Don’t make it too small so that it’s difficult to read. Sometimes
it is better to lean more toward big, than too small.
Style: Click the arrow next to Regular if you prefer a different Style. Select the Style you want from the drop-
down menu.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Color: Click the color block to select a font color. The Color selector will open. The
default font color is black. If you are posting to a darker image, you’ll want to change to a
lighter color. You can also choose a color from within the image itself by moving your
cursor over the image. Your cursor will turn into an eyedropper. Select a color by clicking
the desired area on your image. Click OK when you’re done.
Don’t worry about the Alignment of the text unless you are adding multiple lines as we’ll
move the text exactly where we want it in the next couple steps.
Step 11. Click OK on the Text box when you are finished formatting your text.
Step 12. Click the Move Tool in the Tools menu.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 13. Click and drag the text to an appropriate location. This will normally be in the
bottom right, bottom center, or bottom left of the image.
Step 14. It’s time to save your image. Click File and select Save from the drop-down
menu or press Ctrl S.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Step 15. The Save image dialog box opens. Click OK.
Step 16. Select the location you would like to save your image to on your computer. Click
Save.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The file will save to the location you specified on your computer. It can then be uploaded
in your clients’ Social Media post. When you attempt to close the image in Pixlr, it will
ask you if you want to save it. It’s already saved to your computer, so click No.
Other Image Resources
Animated GIF’s
How to Find Them
Animated GIF Search Engine
Reddit
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GIF Hub of the Universe — These last 2 are Tumblr.com blogs. If you are familiar with
Tumblr, then you know it’s pretty much GIF central online. So if you search around, you
can probably find a lot more inside Tumblr itself.
GIF’s From Last Night
Free Stock Photo Sites
http://www.stockphotosforfree.com/
Stock Photo Search Engine
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Public_domain_image_resources
250+ Free Image Sites
53+ Image Sources
Free High Quality Images

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
More Tricks of the Trade
The longer you are in Social Media Marketing, the more tricks of the trade you will learn.
Here are a few to get you started.
Using Hashtags
What is a Hashtag?
A hashtag creates a shortlink based on a certain keyword or phrase. For example,
#FollowFriday is a hashtag that has been used on Twitter for years to suggest to your
followers, who from your list they should follow. So, if you have a Twitter user that you
feel Tweets useful or fun information, you might suggest that person in a #FollowFriday
Tweet.
The hashtag started on Twitter, but other social networks have picked up support of this
useful feature.
The following social networks support hashtags:
            
Twitter
Facebook
Instagram
Google+
Tumblr             
Pinterest
What is the Point?
The hashtag might seem like a confusing extra detail to Social Media that you would
rather forget. Hashtags actually serve an important purpose. Everything behind the hash
(or pound sign #) becomes a shortlink that allows you to track all the discussions of that
keyword or phrase.
So, if you’re into #TheWalkingDead or #SonsofAnarchy, you can track discussions on
social networks about these two topics. The other important function that hashtags serve is
connecting people who do not follow each other, but are talking about the same topic. This
is powerful for our clients. That is a huge part of what we are trying to accomplish as
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Social Media Marketers. This is why hashtags cannot be ignored.
Guidelines for Hashtags
No spaces - If you attempt to insert a space in a hashtag like so: #Social Media, the
hashtag will only create a link of the word, “social”. When using multiple words in
your hashtag, use capital letters: #SocialMedia #BrushYourTeeth #UsingHashtags
Yes, you can use numbers - However, punctuation won’t work. So, you can post
about #7MistakesOfSocialMediaMarketers, but leave your commas for your blurb!
The @ symbol is NOT interchangeable with the hashtag. The @ symbol does
something completely different. If you’re tweeting to a specific person, then the @
symbol is what you need. If you are tweeting about a person, place, or thing, then
hashtag it!
Yes, you can create your own hashtag! You can hashtag commonly used industry
words for your clients. For example, if you have a dentist, hashtagging words like
teeth, dentist, dental, etc. is acceptable. If you have a roofer, you might use roof,
roofer, MetalRoof, etc.
Multiple hashtags are okay, but no more than 3 per update.
Here are some examples of posts that use hashtags to add context, humor, and voice:
Let the weekend begin! #TGIF
Wearing socks with Crocs is so stylish #kidding
Just dropped my second ice cream cone #fail
I hate when people smoke e-cigs indoors. #annoying #rude #whygodwhy
The movie #Gravity is beautiful, but so terrifying! #nevergoingtospace
Hashtags for Business and Marketing
Using hashtags for your clients is one way to target the audience locally. As most of our
clients are small local businesses, this is essential. Here are some tips when using hashtags
for business:
Use the client’s keywords as hashtags
Use the client’s city as a hashtag
See what hashtags other businesses in the client’s industry are using. Check the
competition as well
See what’s trending. You can see trending hashtags at Twitter.com. You can also
check http://whatthetrend.com or http://trendsmap.com for trending hashtags to use in
your posts
See which hashtags are commonly used with other at http://hashtagify.me

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Building Your Audience on the 4 Main Social Media Networks
The four main networks are as follows:
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
In this chapter, we will cover how to network for your clients on each.
Facebook
With Facebook, you must be Adminstrator or Editor of the Page you want to manage. This
is accomplished by having your client add you as one of these in the Settings of their
Page. 
 
Have your client log in to Facebook and manage their Page. If they don’t have a Page and
you are creating one, you will need to do it from your own Facebook Profile or from a
Profile you’ve created for your business. A Facebook Page cannot stand on its own. It
must have an owner with a personal Profile. To create a Page simply click Create Page in
the left sidebar of your Facebook Home/News Feed.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Follow these steps to walk your client through adding you as an Administrator or
Editor of their Page:
Step 1: Click Settings.
Step 2: Click Page Roles.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Step 3: Add the email address of the Facebook Profile you want to use to manage their
Page.
 
Step 4: Click the Admin drop-down and select either Admin or Editor. Either one will
suffice.
Step 5: Click Save. They will be required to enter their password.
That’s it. You will receive a notification on Facebook when the Page has been added to
your account. This usually just take a few seconds.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Now you’re ready to go! We already talked about posting engaging content to Facebook.
The posting can be done either manually through Facebook itself or using one of the
platform softwares we talked about previously. However, networking for you clients must
be done manually as well.
Networking involves reaching out to Facebook users and engaging them.
First, make sure you are acting as your client’s Page. Click the name of your client’s Page
in the left sidebar of your Facebook Home/News Feed.
Click the arrow next to the other icons in the top bar of Facebook and select the Page you
want to manage from the list.
You will know that you are acting as your client’s Page because Facebook will indicate at
the top like so:
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Now you are ready to network for your client. Use Facebook Search to find other Pages in
the industry. Keep in mind these Pages should not be competitors of your client. In this
example, we have a client who does commercial and residential moves.
Some good Pages to “Like” on behalf of this client are: 
Uhaul - This one is borderline, but they do sell moving supplies
PODS
Storage Facilities
Truck companies - Like International and other manufacturers
UPS Store
Once you have liked a few Pages, click Home. As with your own Facebook Profile, when
you click Home, Facebook generates a News Feed of the Pages you have liked. Now that
you have this in one spot, you can go through and find a useful post to share on behalf of
your client. You can also like and comment as your client on others’ posts which leaves a
link back to your client’s Page.
If you are managing a client in your local area, you can Invite your friends to Like the
Page. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Do this when viewing the Page. You will notice a list of your Friends in the left sidebar
with an Invite button. This button will reappear with a new friend as many times as you
click it until your run out of friends. You WILL get new Fans this way.
If you don’t want to subject your friends list to your client’s Page, or if you are not in the
same local area as your client, you can advise your client to this. It will always bring up a
list of your friends. If your client is on the other side of the country or world, it won’t be
appropriate unless your client’s company is global or national. Make sense?
The other way to increase Fans for your client organically is by Sharing the posts from the
Page. Again, if it is not appropriate for you to do so, or you simply don’t want to, your
client needs to do this. They should also encourage their staff to do the same. These few
things are the ONLY ways to build an audience organically.
The third thing you can do to pull in some extra traffic on Facebook is to use hashtags.
This is very important, and it does work! A post with a relevant hashtag can get more than
15 times the traffic as one without.
CAUTION: Do NOT buy Fans, Likes or Shares. Sure, you will get some nice-looking
stats, but it won’t last, and when your client sees all of those great numbers coming from
China, Pakistan, and India, they will NOT be happy. Like SEO, Social Media will
eventually penalize for “Black Hat” practices like this. I can almost promise you that. 
In January of 2015, Facebook will be updating their News Feed to prohibit marketing
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
posts; specifically those which attempt to sell products. Keep this mind as you post for
your clients. Always share useful information that solves a problem or answers a question,
and just throw in a few promotional things here and there.
Facebook is moving toward a pay-only model for companies it seems, so keep that in
mind as well. It’s not a bad practice to include Facebook advertising allowances in your
SMM packages. There aren’t many companies who do this, and you can get by with 20
bucks of advertising and still see results.
Keep your blurbs short, your photos nice and big, and you will rock Facebook.
Twitter
Twitter is a lot less complicated than Facebook. A lot of people don’t understand Twitter
or really what it is good for. Think of it like this: Twitter is a micro-blogging platform. It’s
like blogging in 140 characters or less.
Contrary to some methods I’ve run into online, Twitter is NOT good for selling. Just
because it’s quick and easy to share a link, doesn’t mean people will click it. People
perusing Twitter are usually nowhere near their wallet. They are scrolling because they are
bored. They want to catch up with friends and the latest gossip in little digestible bites.
The majority of them are also on mobile devices. Links get complicated on Mobile, and
links to buy something, even more so.
Keep this mind as you create content for Twitter. Have that “shot-in-the-dark” attitude.
The best way you can use Twitter is for sharing content and building relationships. If you
engage people, they will look for you. Then you can market to them. Twitter is also decent
for helping build your email list.
In 2014, Twitter implemented native media sharing. Before that, pictures and videos were
shared via a link usually using a third party host of some sort. Now media shows right in
your Twitter Stream.
So, just like with Facebook, when you post to Twitter, include a big image to accompany

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
your post whenever relevant. Keep your Tweet between 70 and 100 characters when
possible to allow retweeting. Use relevant hashtags.
When networking on Twitter for a client, do the following:
Follow back recent followers
Thank new followers with a Mention using the hashtag #WelcomeTweet
Thank anyone who retweets with a Mention
Answer questions from other users
Respond to other users promptly
See much more in the Twitter Drill-Down included with this course.
Google+
As with other Social Networks, you can’t just assume that people will follow you simply
because you are awesome. Google+ uses the term Circles to refer to your friends list.
Google+ gives you 4 default Circles to work with:
Friends
Family
Acquaintances
Following
We will work primarily with Friends. Posting to Google+ is basically the same as
Facebook. You must also have a Google+ Profile personally to manage the Pages of
others. However, unlike Facebook, Google+ business Pages can stand alone.
Your client will need to add you as a Manager by doing the following:
 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Hover their cursor over the Home button and select Pages from the drop-down menu.
Have them click Manage this page on the Page they want to add you to.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Next, they need to over their cursor over the My Business button and select Settings from
the drop-down menu.
Click the Managers tab at the top.
Click Add managers in the top right of the screen.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Whew! Almost there.
A pop-up window appears. Have your client type the gmail address to the Google+
account you will be using to manage the Page. Click Invite.
That’s it. You will receive an email at that gmail account inviting your to become manager
of your client’s Page. Open it and click Accept.
NOTE: A Google+ Page has a limit of 3 Managers at a time, so if you client has 3,
they will need to remove one before adding you.
To network for your client on Google+, follow these steps:
Step 1. Search for people who are talking about the niche of your client. i.e. dentistry,
roofing, sports, etc. Your client’s keywords will also come into play here. Just plug them
directly in the search box in Google+. Add relevant accounts to the Friends circle. Don’t
forget to check competitor pages. Comment on the posts of some of the accounts you add

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to your client’s Circles. If you wait for them to interact with you, it won’t happen.
Step 2. Mine Google Search for more. Perform a typical search query for your client’s
niche. Thanks to Google Authorship, people who are writing and sharing content on the
subject matter will appear with their Google+ link next to their byline. You want to choose
those who have large numbers of people in their Circles.
Step 3. Engage the people in the Friends Circle with +1’s and comments. Usually, when
you engage with someone else’s content, they will begin to engage and share yours.
LinkedIn
LinkedIn is a bit of an enigma. It doesn’t support hashtags, it doesn’t support large image
uploads, and unless your client is trying to get a job, it’s really more of a platform for
individuals. There are many who would beg to differ, I’m sure, since LinkedIn has
expanded their network to include things like a publishing platform and Company Pages.
The best thing you can do for clients is to post consistently to LinkedIn for them. More in-
depth marketing for LinkedIn will be presented in the LinkedIn Drill-Down included with
this course.
Conclusion
You’ve completed the main body of this course. If you put everything you’ve learned here
into practice, and you took good notes, you can make A LOT of money doing Social
Media Management for others. Make sure you check out the other parts of this course for
even more information! We have tried in EVERY way to pack this with value for you. The
other documents and files in this course are more brief in their content, but supplement
what you’ve learned perfectly. Some of them offer extra items to help you with your
business, while others provide even more information to help you stand out in the Social
Media Marketing world. We sincerely wish you every success.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com

