HOW THE BEST
BUSINESSES IN THE
WORLD SUCCEED
FOREWORD BY PERRY MARSHALL
RICHARD KOCH AND
GREG LOCKWOOD
simplify

SIMPLIFY
RICHARD KOCH  
and  
GREG LOCKWOOD
Foreword by Perry Marshall, Author of  
80/20 Sales and Marketing

Entrepreneur Press, Publisher
Cover Design: Andrew Welyczko
© 2016 by Entrepreneur Media, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Reproduction or translation of any part of this work beyond that permitted 
by Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act without 
permission of the copyright owner is unlawful. Requests for permission or 
further information should be addressed to the Business Products Division, 
Entrepreneur Media Inc.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information 
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that 
the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting or other professional 
services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent professional person should be sought.
	
ebook ISBN: 978-1-61308-354-3
Production and Composition: Ponderosa Pine Design
First published in Great Britain in 2016 by Piatkus, an imprint of the  
Little, Brown Book Group. 
Original content © Richard Koch and Gregory Lockwood. 
Richard Koch and Gregory Lockwood have asserted their right to be  
identified as authors of this Work.

For Christina and Zoe
– Greg
For Matthew, Jamie, Justin, and Peter
– Richard


Contents
Foreword by Perry Marshall  
x
Preface by Richard Koch
xiii
 
 Preface by Greg Lockwood 
xvii
 
 The Secret Red Thread 
ixx
 
 How to Simplify 
xxv
PART ONE: GREAT SIMPLIFIERS
1 The Man Who Democratized Travel
3
Results 
10
Key Points 
11
 2 The Billionaire Who Travels by Bus 
12
How Can IKEA Be So Much Cheaper? 
13
How IKEA Seduces Its Customers 
17
Results 
20
Key Points 
21

3 The Assembly Line of Food 
22
Results 
30
Key Points 
31
 4 Victory Over Big Brother: The Real Story of 1984 
33
Which Type of Simplifying is Better? 
41
Results 
43
Key Points 
44
 5 The Strategy Simpliﬁers 
45
Results 
56
Key Points 
57
 6 Taxi! The Brave New World of Apps 
59
Travis Kalanick and Garrett Camp: Uber 
60
The Samwer Brothers: Easy Taxi 
60
Daniel Ek: Spotify 
69
Joe Gebbia: Airbnb 
71
Back to Uber: Results 
73
Key Points 
74
 7 The Two Strategies and Their Trade-offs 
76
Three Precepts for the Price-Simpliﬁer 
79
Two Precepts for the Proposition-Simpliﬁer 
80
Making Clever Trade-Offs 
81
Virtuous Trade-Offs 
83
A Visit to London Zoo 
85
Key Points from Part One 
90
Conclusion 
91

PART TWO: HOW TO SIMPLIFY
8 Which Type of Simpliﬁer Will You Be? 
95
The Attitude Test 
96
Scoring 
104
The Gap Test 
105
The Key Tests 
112
Keys in Price-Simplifying 
113
Keys in Proposition-Simplifying 
114
The Better Skills Test 
115
Key Points 
120
 9 How to Proposition-Simplify 
122
Step One: Easier to Use 
124
Step Two: More Useful 
129
Step Three: More Aesthetically Appealing 
132
Are Free Services Price- or Proposition-Simplifying? 134
Conclusion 
136
Key Points 
137
 10 How to Price-Simplify Part I: Product Redesign 
139
How to Spark a Price Revolution 
143
Redesign the Product 
144
 11 How to Price-Simplify Part II: Business System  
Redesign and Scale Up 
153
Redesign the Business System to Transform  
Your Industry 
154
Scale Up 
171
Conclusion 
172
Key Points for Chapters 10 and 11 
172

PART THREE: SAVE THE DINOSAURS?
12 Do They Need Saving? 
177
Warning Signals Test 
180
Key Points 
183
 13 The Weakness of Strong Firms: Five Bad Reasons  
Why Managers Don’t Simplify 
184
The Overhead Trap 
185
The Cannibalization Trap 
187
The Customer Trap 
191
The Complexity Trap 
194
The Skills Trap 
196
Key Points 
199
14 How Market Leaders Can Simplify Without Tears 201
Countering Price-Simplifying 
203
Countering Proposition-Simplifying 
208
Counter Price- and Proposition-Simplifying 
210
Is the Penny Dropping About Acquiring  
Proposition-Simpliﬁers? 
211
Key Points 
212
PART FOUR: THE REWARDS OF SIMPLIFYING
15 Does Price-Simplifying Pay? 
215
Ford 
216
McDonald’s 
219
Southwest Airlines 
221
IKEA 
223
Charles Schwab 
225
Honda 
227

16 Does Proposition-Simplifying Pay? 
231
Amazon 
232
Google 
238
Apple (the iPod Years) 
239
ARM 
242
Tetra Pak 
243
The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) 
245
 17 The Success of Simplifying:  
An Archaeological Dig 
248
How Do the Companies Fare in Terms of Increasing  
Their Market Value? 
276
How Do the Companies Fare in Terms of Annual  
Increase in Value? 
256
How Do the Companies Fare in Terms of  
Outperformance of Their Rivals? 
258
Industry-Wide Simplifying 
260
Conclusions 
263
 18 The Limitations, Power, and Glory of Simplifying 
267
Are There Any Viable Non-Simplifying Strategies? 
268
Simplifying in the Big Picture 
275
The Next Steps for Entrepreneurs 
280
Next Steps for Corporate CEOs 
281
Endnotes 
283
Acknowledgments 
293
About the Authors 
297
Index 
299

Foreword
PERRY MARSHALL
T
his is not just a “great” book. Nor is it merely an import-
ant book, or a “good read.” SIMPLIFY is one of the ten 
most valuable business books you will read in your lifetime. 
I charged $7000 a head for a three day seminar with Richard 
in Chicago. The event culminated in ﬁve hours of Richard 
delivering his SIMPLIFY material. This audience included 
entrepreneurs with $10 million+ businesses, with potential 
to reach into the billions. They were ecstatic. 
SIMPLIFY is a shortcut to the exact business that will 
game-change any industry. Business people and investors 
talk about “unicorns,” “disruptive business models,” and all 
the rest. Those superstars are hard to predict, but we know 
them when we see them — usually after the big money 
has already been made. This book leaps you past years of 
meandering to the exact product or service that will tip the 
playing ﬁeld solidly in your favor. If you pull this off, your 
competitors will ﬁnd it impossible to follow you. And you 
will make life-changing money.

SIMPLIFY
FOREWORD 
xi
The real title of this book could very well be, SIMPLIFY: 
If you don’t, they will. That’s because it is inevitable that 
sooner or later, someone will come along and revolutionize 
your industry. It will typically be an outsider — like Larry 
Page and Sergey Brin upsetting the search engine industry 
with Google. The good ol’ boys club rarely sees the outsiders 
coming until it’s too late.
It will happen. The question is, who is going to do it? It 
can be you. Even if you’re insider. If you know the formula. 
This is not just a book to read and enjoy. (Though it is a 
very enjoyable read.) This is a book to memorize, to inter-
nalize, whose ideas should permeate your thinking, your 
planning, and the language you share with your investors 
and key team members.
Richard worked harder on this book than any other. It was 
a massive undertaking. Simpliﬁcation always is. 
Oliver Wendell Holmes famously said “For the simplic-
ity that lies this side of complexity, I would not give a ﬁg, 
but for the simplicity that lies on the other side of com-
plexity, I would give my life.” What he means by this is, 
our initial conceptions of a product or a project are often 
clear and simple ... then in the middle of the project things 
get almost hopelessly complex. Most people never get out 
of the woods.
But on rare occasions, a visionary like Steve Jobs has a 
clear vision for achieving simplicity and elegance and dog-
gedly pursues this to the end. That vision is what Richard 
deﬁnes in this book. We’ve heard all the stories about Jobs’ 
obsession with simplicity, but here Richard lays it all out in 
a succinct formula that mere mortals can achieve. He has 
embodied simplicity even in his teaching of it.

SIMPLIFY
xii 
FOREWORD
Richard sent me several drafts and we spent months dis-
cussing it. His ﬁnal product is genius. I don’t know if it will 
outsell his famous book The 80/20 Principle; it may not, as 
this material is highly advanced. 
But it doesn’t matter. Because this is Richard Koch’s 
Magnum Opus. 

Preface
RICHARD KOCH
F
or the past forty years I have searched for simple, elemen-
tal, elegant, and parsimonious principles that will help 
individuals create great new businesses, and thus enrich the 
world and the people involved.
Principles are wonderful things, because if they are really 
powerful they can save us enormous effort and stop us going 
down dead ends. In science and business there are just a few 
such principles; but whereas most scientists are aware of the 
beautiful principles in their ﬁeld, few business people are 
guided by principles in their daily work, preferring to rely 
on methods — the next level down. Yet, as the nineteenth-
century philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson said, “As to 
methods there may be a million and then some, but princi-
ples are few. The man who grasps principles can successfully 
select his own methods. The man who tries methods, ignor-
ing principles, is sure to have trouble.”
To qualify, a principle must be so overwhelmingly pow-
erful that ordinary mortals — such as you or me — can 

SIMPLIFY
xiv 
PREFACE  •  RICHARD KOCH
reliably create extraordinary results, not through personal 
brilliance, but just by following the principle carefully and 
with a modicum of common sense.
The principles can tell you which businesses you can 
create or work within, with a reasonable expectation that 
if you follow the principles, the business will stand a great 
chance of success.
Through trial and error, I have had some success in iden-
tifying some really stunning principles. If you had asked me 
four years ago which single principle works best in business, 
I would have said the Star Principle. As you may know, this is 
my interpretation of the famous “Boston Box,” invented by 
the Boston Consulting Group. Also known as the Growth–
Share Matrix, the Boston Box says that every business falls 
into one of four categories:
• Star — the largest business in a high-growth market.
• Question mark — a business in a high-growth market 
but not the largest in it.
• Cash cow — the largest business in a low-growth 
market.
• Dog — a business in a low-growth market that is not 
the largest in it.
The Star Principle says:
• The best businesses are “stars”: that is, they hold 
the number-one position in a market or niche that is 
growing fast (by at least 10 percent a year over several 
years).
• Stars are incredibly valuable because they can grow 

SIMPLIFY
PREFACE  •  RICHARD KOCH 
xv
exponentially, while also being very proﬁtable and cash 
positive.
• Stars comprise only about one or two out of every 
hundred businesses, yet they account for more than 
100 percent of cash generated over the lifetime of the 
product (because some non-star businesses absorb 
more cash than they generate). Hence stars are the 
businesses where entrepreneurs, venture capitalists, 
and other investors make all their money.
• It is possible to create a new star business by overtaking 
the early leader in your market, by inventing a whole 
new business category from scratch, or by re-segment-
ing into a new business category that is a subset of the 
original market.1
By applying the Star Principle to my investments I have built 
up my personal wealth.2 Over the past twenty-three years I 
have invested in 16 startups or young companies, of which 
eight have returned at least ﬁve times my original capital. 
This has created returns of about 20 percent a year com-
pounded — far above the average attained by professional 
venture capitalists.
How have I managed to do this? By following the Star 
Principle. I now invest only in businesses that are stars 
or have the potential to become stars in their particular 
markets.
There is, however, a problem. The Star Principle tells 
you whether an existing business is already a star. But it 
does not tell you how to create a star business, nor how to 
overtake the market leader in a high-growth market and thus 
become a star.

SIMPLIFY
xvi 
PREFACE  •  RICHARD KOCH
So is there another principle that can tell you how to do 
that, reliably and with a high chance of success?
I have spent the last four years trying to ﬁnd out.
Working with the venture capitalist Greg Lockwood — 
my co-author on Superconnect — and supported by 
top-quality research from OC&C Strategy Consultants, I 
believe we have an answer. Dare I say, the answer?
And that answer is to simplify a business and a market.
If you wish to learn why that’s so important, and how to 
do it, read on.

Preface
GREG LOCKWOOD
M
y job is to invest in businesses, so I am a professional 
sceptic. Instinctively, I dislike simplistic mantras and 
the latest management fad. I am predisposed to think that 
there is a lot of detail and nuance required to make businesses 
successful, and that the personalities who run a new company 
are all important. So, in many ways, I’m an odd co-conspirator 
with Richard, whose world-view is much more reductionist 
than my own — or that of just about anybody else I know!
Yet, during the fourteen years I’ve known Richard, he 
has helped me to understand that certain crude rules of 
thumb — while not invariably true — often contain con-
centrated insights and predictive power. The Star Principle 
and the 80/20 Principle are two well-validated examples. 
Richard’s rules are always easy to grasp, easy to communi-
cate and, perhaps most importantly, create the philosophical 
resolve that leads to action. In business, being mostly correct 
and decisive typically yields better results than taking the 
time to ﬁgure out what is perfectly correct.

SIMPLIFY
xviii 
PREFACE  •  GREG LOCKWOOD
The simpliﬁcation of business, by reducing innovation 
to two alternative strategies — proven in practice — is a 
natural extension of Richard’s 80/20 and Star principles. He 
simpliﬁes the practice of strategy as well as the art of making 
businesses simple and highly effective.
A ﬁnal attraction of the subject is that it deals with 
innovation in its most impactful sense. We often think 
of innovation as invention. There is rightly a cult of the 
inventor: after all, it takes a very special person to extend 
the bounds of knowledge, to create something fresh, or to 
conquer an unsolved problem. However, the ﬁrst creation 
of knowledge touches few people. Those who deliver the 
most economic beneﬁt to humanity are the simpliﬁers, the 
people who bring the fruits of invention and discovery to 
mass markets.
Beneﬁt × People affected is when the world really changes, 
and where the highest economic rewards reside. The inven-
tors deserve their pedestals. Equally, though, we should 
celebrate those who bring extraordinary value-for-money 
to millions. This is the cult of the simpliﬁer.

The Secret Is Out!
I
n my Preface, I (Richard) talked about the importance of 
simplifying your business and your market. Why is this so 
desirable? Well, it turns out that it is the secret of creating a 
very large market, and of generating a very proﬁtable business.
I ﬁrst realized this when I was twenty-ﬁve and came across 
the Boston Consulting Group (BCG). I’d been to Wharton 
Business School, where I pursued an “individualized major,” 
which was a fancy name for studying everything that inter-
ested me, including cooperatives, which were in vogue at the 
time but taught me nothing about creating a super-proﬁtable 
business. In truth, I was in a bit of a panic as to who would 
employ me when I graduated, because I had not specialized 
in a narrow skill, such as corporate ﬁnance or marketing. 
Moreover, although I knew a lot of arcane things about busi-
ness, I knew nothing that was particularly useful. So imagine 
my relief when I met the recruiters at BCG, who said that 
they were looking for young and frankly wet-behind-the-
ears people like me, because they could train us using their 
model of business success, which involved categorizing a 
client’s business as a star, a cash cow, a question mark or a 

SIMPLIFY
xx 
THE SECRET IS OUT!
dog, and then telling them what to do with it. I didn’t need 
to know anything myself; I just had to learn how to do that 
kind of analysis.
Apart from relief, though, what struck me was what a really 
peculiar business BCG itself was. Here it was, charging some 
of the top companies in America and around the world a 
fortune for advice that could be mass produced by a handful 
of smart but totally inexperienced, newly minted MBAs. I 
came to discover that the work was very valuable to com-
panies as they could sell or close ﬁrms with little potential, 
while concentrating on the few really good businesses that 
they had — the star businesses. Yet, what impressed me the 
most was how BCG could grow like billy-o and also generate 
extremely high margins because its own “costs of produc-
tion” were so low. The simple principles behind the Boston 
Box made it possible for BCG to train almost unemployable 
people like me and then trust us to turn out original and 
useful analysis in a very short period of time.
How could BCG do this? Because it simpliﬁed. It boiled 
down the libraries of worthy work on business strategy into 
one dinky little model that could be replicated for any busi-
ness at relatively low cost, but which could be sold at a very 
high price, because it had great beneﬁts for the customers — 
the large industrial corporations that were BCG’s market.
What were the beneﬁts from the customer’s viewpoint? 
The Boston Box was something that was so simple that it 
could be grasped by everyone throughout an organization, 
and so useful that it told all the ﬁrm’s managers exactly 
what to do. It was easy to use, highly practical, elegant, and 
memorable. It could be used as a simplifying and unifying 
communication device throughout the client organization.

SIMPLIFY
THE SECRET IS OUT!
xxi
Is your business a star? Get your Star Principle  
score in sixty seconds at www.simplify.fm.
That set me thinking that perhaps the most successful com-
panies were ones that were not only the market leaders in a 
high-growth market (the Star Principle), but also the most 
simple. In hard economic terms, simplifying has two great 
beneﬁts:
• it can lead to high growth in a business and market; and
• it can do so at high margins, because simplifying can 
lead to low costs of production and high prices at the 
same time.
What a neat trick to pull!
Throughout my career, I had always been on the lookout 
for simple answers, but I had never applied the principle 
template to simplifying in the same systematic way as I had 
with the 80/20 and Star principles. Then, about ﬁve years 
ago, Greg pointed out this gap in my thinking. That was 
how we started the journey that culminated in the book you 
are holding in your hands.
The Secret Red Thread
Greg and I came to the conclusion that simplifying should 
lead to extraordinary success. But there was a big surprise 
in store for us. We decided that the best way to illustrate 
simplifying — and to identify how to simplify — would be to 

SIMPLIFY
xxii 
THE SECRET IS OUT!
explore case studies of the most successful simpliﬁers of the 
past hundred years or so. This was easier than we expected. 
There were plenty of great case studies available to us, from 
both the distant and the very recent past.
Then the truth dawned on us — the real secret of simplifying: 
Nearly all of the great success stories of the twentieth century — 
right up to the present day — are stories of simplifying.
We discovered that simplifying not only should lead to 
great economic success — as the theories of strategy and 
economics suggest. By observing men and women who have 
changed not only the face of business but how we work and 
live, we also learned that clever and creative simplifying has 
and continues to do just that. It really does lead to extraor-
dinary success, and it has a huge impact on society to boot.
If you make a list of the people who have been most suc-
cessful in the last hundred years — or, if you prefer, the last 
ﬁfty, twenty, ten or even ﬁve years — a large majority of 
them have been great simpliﬁers:
• Henry Ford;
• Allen Lane;
• the McDonald Brothers and Ray Kroc;
• Walt Disney;
• Ingvar Kamprad;
• Kihachiro Kawashima;
• Bruce Henderson;
• F. Kenneth Iverson;
• Herb Kelleher;
• Steve Jobs and Jony Ive;
• Akio Morita;
• Bill Bain;

SIMPLIFY
THE SECRET IS OUT!
xxiii
• James Dyson;
• Mitt Romney;
• Jeff Bezos;
• Pierre Omidyar;
• Larry Page and Sergey Brin;
• Daniel Ek;
• Joe Gebbia; and
• Travis Kalanick and Garrett Camp.
The list goes on and on, and it continues to grow as new 
“unicorns” (private companies valued at more than a billion 
dollars) emerge every month.
All of these entrepreneurs simpliﬁed. Some of them were 
quite upfront about it. For instance, Henry Ford said of his 
revolutionary new car, the Model T, that
“… its most important feature was its simplicity . . . I thought 
it was up to me as the designer to make the car so completely 
simple that no one could fail to understand it. That works 
both ways and applies to everything. The less complex an 
article, the easier it is to make, the cheaper it may be sold, 
and therefore the greater number may be sold.”1
Ray Kroc wrote that the McDonald brothers had created
“… a radically different kind of operation, a restaurant 
stripped down to the minimum in service and menu, the 
prototype for legions of fast-food units that would later 
spread across the land . . . Of course, the simplicity of 
the procedure allowed the McDonalds to concentrate on 
quality in every step, and that was the trick. When I saw it 

SIMPLIFY
xxiv 
THE SECRET IS OUT!
working that day in 1954, I felt like some latter-day Newton 
who’d just had an Idaho potato caromed off his skull.”2
His ﬁrst motto for McDonald’s, he said, “was KISS, which 
meant, Keep it simple, stupid.”
Steve Jobs described his whole approach as “very 
simple . . . the way we’re running the company, the product 
design, the advertising, it all comes down to this: Let’s make 
it simple. Really simple.”3 His biographer, Walter Isaacson, 
wrote that Jobs “made devices simpler by eliminating but-
tons, software simpler by eliminating features, and interfaces 
simpler by eliminating options. He attributed his love of 
simplicity to his Zen training.”4 Jony Ive, the creator of 
every Apple device from the iPod onwards, constantly harps 
on to anyone who will listen that his approach is to make 
products that are incredibly simple to use, even though the 
design process itself is extremely difﬁcult. He stresses that it 
is hard to make something so simple. His task, he says, is “to 
solve incredibly complex problems and make their resolution 
appear inevitable and incredibly simple, so that you have no 
sense of how difﬁcult this thing was.”5
Given these clues, Greg and I ﬁnd it extraordinary that, 
so far as we can tell, nobody has previously realized that 
simplifying is the key to the kind of product and business 
innovation that creates incredibly high value for customers, 
society and shareholders alike. Simplifying has been an 
invisible red thread running through business history in our 
lifetime, and that of our parents and grandparents.
But now the secret is out! And this should enable tens of 
thousands of new innovators— perhaps you are one of them— 
to create extraordinary value for themselves and others.  

SIMPLIFY
THE SECRET IS OUT!
xxv
The process of intelligent innovation can be speeded up!
Not only that, Greg and I have made another discovery. 
All of these simpliﬁers — every single one — followed one 
of just two simplifying approaches. So if you want to know 
how to simplify, our answer is that you have a choice of two 
equally reliable and well-validated models.
How to Simplify
The two simplifying strategies are quite different and nearly 
always incompatible. So, as we’ll show through multiple 
examples, if you want to simplify, you must choose just one 
of them. After some reﬂection and a few tests, which we will 
explain in detail later, it will become clear which of the two 
strategies is better suited to your venture, aspirations and 
market opportunity. You must then be uncompromising in 
executing the chosen strategy.
The strategies themselves are simple.
The ﬁrst we call price-simplifying. This requires cutting 
the price of a product or service in half, or more. Sometimes, 
within a few years, prices may be cut by 90 percent. On the 
face of it, this might sound unrealistic. Yet we will show you 
numerous examples of when it has happened. The new — 
hugely cheaper — product or service is not identical to the 
old, expensive product, but it fulﬁlls the same basic func-
tion. For example, no one would argue that traveling on a 
budget airline is as pleasant an experience as traveling on a 
full-service rival, but they still get you from A to B quickly 
and safely. And yet, as we will explain, the way to cut prices 
by 50–90 percent is usually not to provide an inferior prod-
uct, but rather to organize the delivery of the product in a 

SIMPLIFY
xxvi 
THE SECRET IS OUT!
different way that allows much higher volume and greater 
efﬁciency . . . and often to co-opt the customers into doing 
some of the work!
In a nutshell, price-simplifying works because markets 
usually respond to dramatic price cuts by multiplying their 
size exponentially. If the price is halved, demand does not 
double. It increases ﬁvefold, tenfold, a hundredfold, a thou-
sandfold or more. If prices are reduced to a ﬁfth or a tenth 
of what they were originally, demand may multiply by ten 
thousand or a hundred thousand times. Occasionally, the 
multiples may be measured in the millions — look at what 
McDonald’s did to the hamburger market.
Yet price-simplifying makes ﬁnancial sense only if you are 
able to make the product simpler to make and thereby cut 
costs by at least half.
Of course, it is not easy to halve costs and prices, let alone 
drive them down to a tenth of what they were. But there 
is a reliable template for doing this. Even better, it works 
equally well in every industry and region of the world. 
Price-simplifying can involve radical redesign not only of a 
product but also of the way that the industry is organized — 
what is called in the jargon business system redesign. To stand 
a whole industry on its head is hard. Still, there is a reliable 
way to transform the industry, common to nearly all the 
examples in our research.
Video by Richard Koch: How price simpliﬁers 
exponentially spike demand, creating markets that did 
not exist before: www.simplify.fm.

SIMPLIFY
THE SECRET IS OUT!
xxvii
Our term for the second strategy, which is very different 
but equally effective, is proposition-simplifying. This involves 
creating a product that is useful, appealing, and very easy 
to use, such as the iPad (or any other Apple device of the 
last decade), the Vespa scooter, the Google search engine or 
the Uber taxi app. Proposition-simpliﬁed products are also 
usually aesthetically pleasing.
Proposition-simplifying creates a large market that did 
not previously exist in the same form, or at all. For instance, 
there was no market for tablet computers before the iPad. 
Unlike price-simplifying, products that proposition-simplify 
do not involve a radical reduction in price; they may even 
command a price premium. Yet proposition-simplifying 
also multiplies value for money and therefore market size by 
making the product or service so much easier to use as well 
as more practical and/or beautiful. Proposition-simplifying 
works when the product becomes a joy to use.
As with price-simplifying, there is a common formula for 
how to proposition-simplify, and we will explain it to you.
If you are the impatient type — and impatience is a virtue 
in business — and want to jump straight to our conclu-
sions, feel free to go directly to Part Four: The Rewards of 
Simplifying, which lays out the research and summarizes 
our most important ﬁndings. Then read the whole book 
later.
For the more patient, linear reader — and patience is also 
a virtue — we suggest starting at the beginning, with Part 
One: Great Simpliﬁers, which describes a dozen standout 
cases of successful simplifying.
Part Two: How to Simplify will help you decide which 
of the two simplifying strategies is better for you and your 

SIMPLIFY
xxviii THE SECRET IS OUT!
ﬁrm, and then provides a template for each.
Part Three — provocatively titled Save the Dinosaurs? — 
examines the threat to established market leaders from 
simpliﬁers and how leading ﬁrms can stay on top. For an 
interactive guide to simplifying and how it can help estab-
lished businesses, visit www.SIMPLIFYforCEOs.com.
Part Four: The Rewards of Simplifying looks at the 
ﬁnancial rewards that have been gained by simpliﬁers in 
their respective ﬁelds, as examined independently of the 
two authors by an elite ﬁrm of strategy consultants. OC&C 
selected and analyzed twelve cases, six of each type of sim-
plifying. Greg and I then explain why these companies have 
been so successful and how the case studies resemble — or 
contrast with — each other.
Visit www.simplify.fm and www.SIMPLIFYforCEOs.
com for more online tools.

PART ONE
Great Simplifiers
We start by looking at some of the best examples of sim-
plifying that our research uncovered. There are plenty of 
recent examples of great simplifying, but we also present 
quite a few cases that date back many decades. Some of 
you may question the value of “ancient” business history. But 
we would turn the question around and ask, “Where are we 
likely to ﬁnd the simpliﬁers who have had the most impact 
on the world?” Admittedly, some of these are relatively 
modern — Apple, Google, eBay, Amazon.com, and we 
believe that Uber will make it into that pantheon before long. 
But other examples, such as Ford and McDonald’s, started a 
long time ago. As we will see, the most valuable simpliﬁers 
are often those that have proven track records of growth and 
staying power over many decades. Their successful methods 
have been followed by more recent simpliﬁers . . . and you 
can follow, too.


1
The Man Who  
Democratized Travel
The ordinary way of doing business is not 
the best way.
Henry Ford
A
ncient history? No one in business today can remem-
ber the earthquake caused by Henry Ford, and even in 
business schools his case is rarely taught. Yet we will see that 
Ford’s story has priceless lessons for any ambitious entrepre-
neur or executive today.
When he was 45, and a moderately successful industrialist, 
Henry Ford took a brave stand that shook the world. The 
decision not only created his fortune but made him a lead-
ing architect of the twentieth century and one of the most 
celebrated and inﬂuential people on the planet.

SIMPLIFY
4 
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL
He decided to simplify and democratize the automobile.
Video by Richard Koch: How Henry Ford’s Simplifying 
vision eclipsed all others in the car industry:  
www.simplify.fm.
Ford recalled the turning-point in his autobiography:
“What I am trying to emphasize is that the ordinary way of 
doing business is not the best way. I am coming to the point 
of my entire departure from the ordinary methods. From 
this point dates the extraordinary success of the company.
We had been fairly following the custom of the trade. 
Our automobile was less complex than any other. We had 
no outside money in the concern. But aside from these 
two points we did not differ materially from the other 
automobile companies.”1
When Ford had his light-bulb moment, several hundred 
rival entrepreneurs were making cars. They were much 
the same in background and activity: all engineers; nearly 
all product designers; all auto enthusiasts, entering cars in 
motor races and taking a keen interest in who won; and all 
making no more than a few cars a day. They sold them to 
the same type of customer, too — the only market at that 
time for cars — rich and leisured gentlemen, usually motor 
“nuts,” skilled in driving and maintaining their beautiful 
beasts. Ford, though not the market leader, was one of the 
biggest manufacturers, making around ﬁve vehicles a day.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL 
5
But however conventional he appeared in 1908, there was 
always something odd about Henry Ford and his opinions. 
“From the day the ﬁrst motor car appeared on the streets,” 
he wrote, “it had to me appeared to be a necessity.”2 This 
was considered an eccentric view at a time when the cost of 
a car was far more than the annual wages of a skilled worker. 
Yet Ford was a stubborn man. Though his whole industry 
was in the business of providing “pleasure cars” for the rich, 
Ford conceived a vision of something completely different. 
To their horror, he told his salespeople:
“I will build a motor car for the great multitude. It will be 
large enough for the family but small enough for the indi-
vidual to run and care for. It will be constructed of the best 
materials, by the best men to be hired, after the simplest 
designs that modern engineering can devise. But it will be 
so low in price that no man making a good salary would 
be unable to own one — and enjoy with his family the 
blessing of hours of pleasure in God’s great open spaces.”3
This vision, he said, “led me to build to one end — a car that 
would meet the wants of the multitude . . . year following 
year, the pressure was, and still is, to improve and reﬁne, and 
make better, with an increasing reduction in price.”4
The idea of democratizing the automobile inspired Ford. 
His great insight was that the key was price. If he could make 
a car cheap enough, it would, he believed, sell in vast quanti-
ties. He had some supporting evidence: in 1905–6, Ford made 
two models, one priced at $1,000 and the other at $2,000. 
The company sold 1599 cars that year. The following year 
he simpliﬁed both models and slashed the prices: “The big 

SIMPLIFY
6 
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL
thing was that [my] cheapest car sold for $600 and the most 
expensive for only $750, and right there came the complete 
demonstration of what price meant. We sold 8,423 cars, 
nearly ﬁve times as many as in our previous biggest year.”5
It’s all very well to realize that price might be the key to 
expanding sales, but how did Ford manage to keep his prices 
sufﬁciently low to create a new mass market? His ﬁrst idea 
was to redesign the product and make just one standardized, 
simple model:
“Therefore in 1909 I announced one morning, without 
any previous warning, that in future we were going to 
build only one model, that the model was going to be the 
‘Model T,’ and that the chassis would be exactly the same 
for all cars . . .6
The most important feature of the new model . . . was 
its simplicity. There were but four constructional units in 
the car — the power plant, the frame, the front axle, and 
the rear axle . . . I thought it was up to me as the designer 
to make the car so completely simple that no one could 
fail to understand it.
That works both ways and applies to everything. The 
less complex an article, the easier it is to make, the cheaper 
it may be sold, and therefore the greater number may be 
sold.”7
So, by making a single product — for more than a decade, 
with few variations and options permitted — Ford could 
reduce his costs considerably.
He also paid great attention to the materials that went into 
his cars. For example, he pioneered the use of vanadium steel, 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL 
7
a French invention that was both very light and very strong — 
ideal to create usefulness for the customer. There were initial 
difﬁculties to overcome: no steel maker in America could 
manufacture it. So Ford found a small company in Canton, 
Ohio, and covered the cost of the early trials himself. As he 
recounted, “the ﬁrst heat was a failure. Very little vanadium 
remained in the steel. I had them try again, and the second 
time the steel came through.”8 The new product had a ten-
sile strength of 170,000, about 260 percent that of normal 
American steel. The vanadium steel disposed of most of the 
weight in Ford’s car — decreasing fuel consumption — yet 
actually cost less than the traditional alternative.
The other plank of Ford’s low-price car was a new pro-
duction system, geared to make vehicles at high scale and 
low cost. He built the world’s biggest factory — not just the 
biggest car factory — on a massive sixty-acre site at Highland 
Park, near Detroit. It opened on New Year’s Day, 1910, and 
the gain in productivity was marked: “Contrast the year 1908 
with the year 1911 . . . The average number of employees 
[rose] from 1,908 to 4,110, and the cars built from a little over 
six thousand to nearly thirty-ﬁve thousand. You will note that 
men were not employed in proportion to the output.”9
However, although Ford managed to increase the number 
of cars produced per employee by nearly three times in just 
three years, and his cars became much cheaper to make 
than those of any of his rivals, the absolute level of efﬁciency 
remained low. The real breakthrough came with a propri-
etary innovation, designed by his production managers: 
the move from batch production to a continuously moving 
assembly line. This didn’t happen until 1913, and it was 
then that Ford famously insisted that all of his cars would 

SIMPLIFY
8 
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL
be painted black, because only Japan black paint could dry 
quickly enough to keep up with the speed of the line.
The effect of simpliﬁcation and scale was to move the 
price of a Model T down to $550 by 1914, when 248,307 of 
them were sold. By 1917, the price had fallen even further, 
to $360, with the result that sales soared to 785,432. In 1920, 
1.25 million Model T’s were bought. Compared to 1909, 
a price reduction of 63 percent — to almost a third of the 
original price of the Model T, which was itself a good ﬁfth 
cheaper than comparable cars — had resulted in a sixty-sev-
enfold increase in the number of cars Ford sold.
Compared to Ford’s sales in 1905–6 (the year before the 
simplifying strategy began), the sales in 1920 marked a 781-
times increase. Simplifying made the company’s cars both 
easier and cheaper to make. And the price reduction was 
enormously effective in boosting the whole market as well as 
Ford’s share of it. By 1920, his share had soared to 56 percent, 
three times larger than that of his nearest rival, General 
Motors, which was an agglomeration of ﬁve different car 
brands. Ford was by far the most proﬁtable car company in 
the world, both absolutely — relative to sales — and relative 
to capital employed.
Even Henry Ford himself was surprised by how much 
demand responded to the lower price. A price reduction 
to 35–40 percent of the original price boosted sales by 
more than 700 times. We shall see this pattern repeated 
throughout this book — the impact of a really chunky price 
reduction on sales is always grossly underestimated. The 
relationship between price reduction and demand expansion 
is asymmetrical. If you cut price by half or more, demand 
rises exponentially — by tens or hundreds or thousands of 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL 
9
times. This is one of our most important ﬁndings. Radical 
cost reduction is one of the most powerful economic forces 
in the universe.
Henry Ford is our ﬁrst price-simpliﬁer. His overriding 
objective was to cut the price of his cars dramatically — to 
well below a half of the previous level. His case perfectly 
illustrates how cost and price reduction is not a one-off 
affair, but a gradual, continual process, fuelled by a few 
big innovations — in Ford’s case a simpliﬁed car model, 
standardizing on one model, and the moving assembly 
line — and a mass of smaller ones. Prices don’t have to be 
slashed in half immediately. Instead, a virtuous circle can be 
created, where the ﬁrst cost reductions create a larger market 
and greater market share, with the beneﬁts of greater scale 
subsequently lowering costs and prices, and raising demand 
further. What is essential, however, is a dogged commitment 
to achieve the lowest possible cost and price.
Though Ford’s main objective in simplifying was always 
to cut costs, he also simpliﬁed to achieve two other objec-
tives — a more useful car (higher utility) and one that was 
easier to drive and maintain (greater ease of use). One reason 
why the Model T was more useful was that it used a new 
grade of steel that was both stronger and lighter than earlier 
versions. As a result, Ford’s car was both more rugged and 
more economical to run than its rivals — fuel consumption 
rises with weight. He designed the car for “simplicity in 
operation — because the masses are not mechanics,”10 intro-
ducing a “planetary transmission” that made the gears easy 
to change and the car easy to maneuver. Hence the slogan 
“Anybody can drive a Ford.” Because the car was simpliﬁed 
into four structural units (the power plant, the frame, and 

SIMPLIFY
10 
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL
the front and rear axles), and these were easily accessible, no 
special skill was required to repair or replace broken parts.
All of these design changes combined lower cost with 
greater utility and ease of use. Speciﬁcally, Ford’s cars were 
lighter, cheaper to run and maintain, more rugged and reli-
able, and easier to drive, maintain, and repair.
Results
• For Henry Ford, a personal fortune estimated by Forbes 
in 2008 at $188 billion (in 2008 dollars), most of which he 
bequeathed to the Ford Foundation. Ford also invented 
the American answer to Marxism — “Fordism:” the 
mass production of simple, well-designed, cheap prod-
ucts, combined with high wages for workers. After 
the success of the Model T, Ford was courted by U.S. 
presidents and he even inﬂuenced, for good and ill, the 
industrial policies of Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler.
• For the Ford Motor Company, the creation of a power-
ful brand that has survived egregious mismanagement 
(including under Henry Ford himself and his son Edsel). 
The company has lasted over 110 years and currently is 
valued at $59 billion, having grown in value each year 
since 1906 by nearly 10 percent compounded.11
• The creation of a huge global mass market for cars.
• Greater freedom for the mass of people resulting from 
personal mobility, previously enjoyed only by the priv-
ileged few.
• Ford foreshadowed some of the other great simpliﬁers 
who are discussed in this book, because they built on 
his methods.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE MAN WHO DEMOCRATIZED TRAVEL 
11
Key Points
1. One way to create a huge new market — with a dif-
ferent type of customer, only able or willing to pay a 
much lower price — is to simplify your product so that 
it is much easier and cheaper to make, and hence sell.
2. In order to price-simplify, you need to reduce the price 
by at least 50 percent. This does not need to happen 
all at once, but you need to continue cutting costs and 
prices each year — by about 10 percent a year.
3. Take a lesson from Ford:
• Redesign your product from ﬁrst principles, cutting out 
unnecessary or costly parts.
• Reduce product-line variety and if possible 
standardize on a single “universal product.”
• Reduce the number of components.
• Eliminate frills and unnecessary options.
• Use different, new, lighter, and cheaper materials.
• Go for volume and production facilities that are far 
larger than those of your rivals.
• Organize tasks to maximize the specialization of 
your workforce.
• Automate tasks.
4. If you are a price-simpliﬁer, cutting your prices is the 
primary objective. But, like Ford, also increase your 
product’s quality, utility, and ease of use if this can be 
done without incurring extra costs.

2
The Billionaire Who  
Travels by Bus
Reach good results with small means.
Ingvar Kamprad
I
ngvar Kamprad has furnished more rooms than anyone 
else, living or dead. He built up a company from nothing 
to being worth more than $40 billion. And he has done it 
all by simplifying.
Ingvar Kamprad was only seventeen when he founded IKEA 
as a mail-order company. Five years later he started selling 
furniture. The story goes that one day he couldn’t ﬁt a 
table into his car, and a friend suggested removing the legs. 
Kamprad immediately had the idea of ﬂat-packed furniture.1
He realized that half the sale price of a table was in the cost 
of transporting it. So if he could persuade the customer to 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS 
13
do the ﬁnal assembly — by engineering parts that ﬁtted 
together easily and providing unambiguous instructions — 
he could cut his costs in half. It was a true epiphany.
The ﬁrm’s purpose is to sell stylish furniture at low prices. 
In 1976 Kamprad wrote The Testament of a Furniture Dealer, 
his ﬁrm’s Bible.2 The book stresses simplicity as the means 
to provide furniture at prices that are not just unbeatable 
but astounding. Yes, IKEA products should look good; yes, 
they should be as stylish as possible; yes, the ﬁrm builds 
extensively on the Swedish heritage of informal quality. But 
make no mistake, IKEA is founded on the idea that its goods 
should cost no more than half — and preferably a third — the 
price of equivalent furniture and furnishings. For example, 
in 1996, the company wanted to sell a mug for ﬁve kronor 
(about 40 pence or 55 U.S. cents). A large part of the cost 
was transportation, so IKEA found a way to ﬁt 864 mugs on 
a single pallet. Even then, the cost was deemed too high, so 
the mug was redesigned in order to ﬁt 1280 on each pallet. 
Eventually, through further redesigns, 2024 mugs could be 
loaded on to a pallet, reducing shipping costs by 60 percent.3
The obsession with target prices and economy comes 
directly from IKEA’s founder. Employees still talk about 
the time Kamprad attended a glittering event to collect a 
Businessman of the Year award. The security guards saw 
him arrive by bus and refused to let him in.4
How Can IKEA Be So Much Cheaper?
Much of the answer lies in those transportation costs. 
Consider that a table or a bookcase sold through a shop has 
to be transported at least twice and often three times — from 

SIMPLIFY
14 
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS
the factory to a warehouse; from there to the store; then 
from the store to the customer’s home. IKEA eliminates 
most of this cost. Typically, its goods travel only once at 
IKEA’s expense — from the manufacturer to the store. And 
because the goods are in ﬂat packs, they are much easier and 
cheaper to transport and to store than pre-assembled fur-
niture. Of course, somebody then has to take the product to 
the customer’s home and assemble it there. But that person 
is the customer! We’ll come shortly to why customers are 
happy to do this.
First, though, we need to look at what else IKEA does to 
make its prices so attractive? If all there was to IKEA was 
ﬂat-pack furniture, it would be easy to imitate. Indeed, many 
other stores now sell ﬂat-pack furniture. But none has come 
close to emulating IKEA’s scale, success or rock-bottom 
prices. Why is that?
Part of the answer lies in the giant stores that IKEA has 
built on the edges of cities. These are far larger than its rivals’ 
equivalents in all of the countries where it operates. Another 
part of the answer is the way it organizes its stores. Right 
from the beginning, the stores were massive and featured 
a novel way of enticing customers past their wares — what 
IKEA cheekily calls “the long natural way.” This involves a 
steady progression, as though in a theme park, anticlockwise 
through the store. There are a lot of product categories, 
but relatively few products within each category. Instead of 
asking a salesperson for advice, customers must choose for 
themselves, helped by clear instructions, placards and a very 
well-designed, mass-produced catalog. They then take their 
purchases on a cart or in a bag to the checkout, and from 
there they take them home.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS 
15
IKEA therefore obtains for itself and its customers ﬁve 
further cost beneﬁts, over and above the transport cost 
savings:
• One-stop shopping. IKEA covers just about every 
category of goods you need to furnish a home, from 
bedding and cushions to artworks. This is convenient 
for customers and also increases sales.
• High sales per store, even relative to space, combined 
with lower premises costs as a result of being located 
outside the city center.
• Low cost of sales staff as there are very few of them.
• High sales per product stocked, by stocking a relatively 
limited range within each product category. The mugs 
may be cheap and cheerful, but don’t expect a huge 
choice of them.
• By testing new designs in a few stores ﬁrst, IKEA 
works out which lines will work and which will not, so 
it doesn’t order large quantities of goods that won’t sell 
and will have to be discounted (a common bugbear in 
the furniture trade).
Yet that is not all. At the heart of IKEA’s simple system is a 
different way of organizing its industry. IKEA is a retailer, 
but it also designs most of its furniture and selects its man-
ufacturing partners carefully, giving them very large orders 
for only a few products. This lowers the furniture-makers’ 
costs dramatically; it also raises IKEA’s bargaining power. 
The manufacturers become part of the IKEA system.
The all-encompassing IKEA system is a lot simpler and 
more efﬁcient than the traditional way of producing and 

SIMPLIFY
16 
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS
selling furniture, which comprises a patchwork of mainly small 
furniture-makers, selling to small chains of retailers, with the 
difﬁcult job of moving products to retail outlets sometimes 
handled by the manufacturers’ own small transport systems, 
but mainly contracted out to third-party logistics ﬁrms that 
are not specialists in furniture. Before IKEA came along, the 
furniture industry was a mess — highly complex and sub-scale 
in all three stages (production, retail, and distribution), with 
poor coordination across these stages.
Ingvar Kamprad gradually reconstructed the whole 
industry, just as Henry Ford did with the car industry. Both 
men developed new business systems that offered customers a 
much better deal — much lower prices and better value for 
money — by making their industries hugely more efﬁcient. 
Cars and furniture are obviously very different products, 
yet there are common elements in what Ford and Kamprad 
did, elements that you can emulate if there is a chance to 
reconstruct your own industry:
• Simple product design to eliminate unnecessary costs.
• Limited product variety within each category, so more 
of each product line can be made and sold; as a result, 
stock-keeping costs are decimated.
• Much greater scale.
• Great reduction in cost at every stage of production and 
distribution. In Ford’s case, this was achieved through 
the assembly line, whereas Kamprad organized the 
functional equivalent of an assembly line within his 
stores, with the customer doing most of the “assembly,” 
both in the store and at home.
• The beauty of Ford and Kamprad’s systems was that 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS 
17
they became proprietary — peculiar to their own orga-
nization, excluding rivals. Once Ford had built the 
biggest factory in the world, there wasn’t space in the 
market for anyone else to follow suit. Once Kamprad 
had built his stores, nobody else could copy his 
system — the market in each location and overall was 
just not big enough. If he had moved too slowly, and an 
imitator had managed to out-IKEA IKEA by building 
a similar but larger system, Kamprad’s company would 
have foundered. But nobody did. The charm of his new 
business system was the way it all ﬁtted together. Once 
rivals really understood how it worked, it was too late 
for them to imitate it.
How IKEA Seduces Its Customers
IKEA would not make so much money without getting its 
customers to lend a hand. So how does it manage to convince 
those customers to do so much hard work? And why do they 
put up with it?
A very low price — less than half the price under the 
traditional system — is the obvious answer. This is also the 
correct answer. But it is not the whole answer.
If price were IKEA’s only appeal, it would have far fewer 
customers. If you walk through an IKEA store, you will 
see not only hard-up students and young married couples, 
but also plenty of well-heeled people. You don’t even need 
to go into the store — just wander around the parking lot 
and you’ll see plenty of Volvos and 4×4s and BMWs, not to 
mention a small number of Bentleys and Jags. But you may 
need to go into the store to understand why. If you look at 

SIMPLIFY
18 
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS
the shoppers’ experience, you’ll soon realize that, although 
IKEA asks a lot of its customers, it gives back a lot too — 
advantages you won’t ﬁnd in a typical furniture store.
IKEA increases the usefulness of its products and its shop-
ping experience by offering a one-stop solution. A visit to 
the store can be a day out for the whole family — there are 
play areas for children, and inexpensive restaurants. 
Then there is the art embodied in the products. We deﬁne 
art as anything that is emotionally appealing or attractive 
that cannot be reduced to hard economic usefulness. IKEA’s 
products meet this deﬁnition by being well designed and 
stylish.
IKEA also increases ease of use for its customers. The 
stores are easy to ﬁnd — with their colossal yellow-and-
blue signs — and have ample, free parking. There is a more 
extensive range of stock sitting within the store than else-
where. And the vast majority of items can be taken away 
immediately — no waiting for delivery.
For many customers, these advantages of shopping at 
IKEA — quite apart from the low prices — balance or even 
outweigh the disadvantages (mainly the time and effort 
that the IKEA system demands). But this is where Ingvar 
Kamprad was particularly cunning. If you scrutinize the 
non-price advantages, you notice one thing in common: 
they are all either relatively cheap to provide or even generate 
extra proﬁts for IKEA. A few jugglers or magicians across a 
large crowd don’t cost very much per head, and if they draw 
in a few more families they more than pay for themselves. 
The restaurants make a proﬁt. If the play area for children 
encourages a young couple to stay longer in the store, they 
will likely end up spending more. Good design costs no 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS 
19
more than bad design. Signage serves as cheap advertising, 
usually seen from a nearby motorway or main road. The land 
on which each store is built is usually cheap, often bought in 
an area where there are no neighboring shops, so the parking 
lots don’t cost much. There’s plenty of stock in the stores, 
yet because they attract a huge ﬂow of customers, inventory 
is actually higher than in traditional stores.
While it offers these low-cost (or proﬁt-making) beneﬁts 
to its customers, IKEA has deliberately chosen not to pro-
vide certain typical — high-cost — industry services. For 
instance, if IKEA had lots of well-paid salespeople swanning 
around its stores, the cost would bite badly into proﬁts. If 
the furniture was not self-assembly, its cost would almost 
double. One of Ingvar Kamprad’s key principles is “Reach 
good results with small means . . . We have no interest in a 
solution until we know what it costs.”5
Like Ford, Kamprad was a price-simpliﬁer. A common 
tactic in price-simplifying is to cut back certain expensive 
services and to compensate for this by lavishly providing 
low-cost (or, ideally, proﬁt-making) services. As we’ve seen, 
that is exactly what IKEA does.
The overriding objective is to cut prices yet offer “cheap” 
or “free” beneﬁts to draw in more customers. These bene-
ﬁts can be categorized as ease of use, greater usefulness, and 
art. These provide a template for any simpliﬁer to dream 
up cheap or free advantages for their customers. The other 
principal weapons in the simpliﬁer’s armory are ingenuity, 
scale, seeing the business from the customers’ perspective 
(IKEA is very good at this), customer segmentation (select-
ing the target market carefully and knowing who is within 
it and who is outside it), and being extremely hard-nosed 

SIMPLIFY
20 
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS
about cutting any non- essential features that cost extra or 
complicate the business system.
Yet the big test of any new system for a simplifying ﬁrm 
over the long term is whether it can be imitated or improved 
by a rival. If the new business system is bold enough, if it 
eliminates traditional beneﬁts that the customer is willing 
to forgo in exchange for large price cuts, and if it provides 
other beneﬁts that are both cheap and unique, then the risk 
of imitation or supersession falls dramatically. Market share 
provides the ﬁnal bulwark against this risk. If, like IKEA, 
you can win more than half of the relevant market (self- 
assembly furniture, in IKEA’s case), and be ten times larger 
than any rival, you are likely to be secure unless a rival spots 
a different way to discount prices again. In IKEA’s case, this 
seems highly unlikely.
Results
• IKEA invented the ﬂat-pack furniture market and has 
provided elegant, inexpensive furniture to tens of mil-
lions of customers.
• IKEA is the world’s largest furniture retailer, with 
annual sales in the region of 29 billion euros. In its core 
European markets, IKEA is nearly ten times larger 
than its nearest rival.
• While the industry has grown by 2 percent per year, 
IKEA’s growth has been 14 percent.
• IKEA is highly proﬁtable, with operating margins over 
15 percent — more than double the rest of the industry. 
We estimate that the company is worth $47 billion.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE BILLIONAIRE WHO TRAVELS BY BUS 
21
Key Points
1. IKEA proves that, with imagination and the right tem-
plate, prices can be more than halved — in its case by 
between 50 and 80 percent.
2. Ingvar Kamprad constructed a new business system 
based on self-assembly of furniture, stylish product 
design, giant stores, massive volume of sales per prod-
uct line, and control of third-party manufacturers, who 
were integrated into the IKEA system. Can you think 
of a new business system for your industry that could 
enable you to cut prices by more than 50 percent?
3. IKEA integrated its customers into the production and 
retailing system, persuading them to do much of the 
work. Again, is there a parallel with your own industry, 
or could there be?
4. Customers play ball not just because of extremely low 
prices but also because IKEA offers them advantages 
and an experience that other retailers do not. Are there 
ways in which your ﬁrm — or a new venture — could 
offer customers advantages that would not cost you 
very much, or would even increase proﬁts?
5. IKEA’s system now appears to be impregnable because 
the ﬁrm’s market share and very high sales levels pro-
tect it from imitators. This was not inevitable, however: 
if a quick-thinking rival had been fast enough to imitate 
IKEA’s system and implemented it outside Sweden. So, 
if you invent a way of price-simplifying that works, be 
sure to roll it out internationally before local rivals have 
a chance to copy it.

3
The Assembly Line of Food
A designer knows he has achieved 
perfection not when there is nothing left  
to add, but when there is nothing  
left to take away.
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry1
T
hree men created this golden icon, which is recognized 
and loved (and hated) around the globe. Simplifying can 
work just as well in service industries as for products, and 
for precisely the same reasons.
One day in 1954, a ﬁfty-two-year-old man, not in the best 
of health, ﬂew from Chicago to Los Angeles. The following 
day, bright and early, he drove sixty miles towards the Mojave 
Desert. His destination was a small, octagonal building, 
located on a corner in a small town. The stranger was not 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD 
23
impressed by the humble structure. It did not seem to ﬁt with 
what he had heard.
Shortly before eleven o’clock, employees began to ﬁle 
in — men dressed in spiffy white shirts, smart trousers, 
and paper hats. The stranger liked that. The men began to 
trundle trolleys laden with food and drinks into the build-
ing, their tempo picking up so much that they reminded 
the stranger of ants bustling around a picnic. Cars began 
to arrive, the parking lot soon ﬁlled up, and lines began to 
form as customers stepped up to the windows.
The investigator was impressed by the activity, but still 
dubious. He joined the line and said to the man in front of 
him — swarthy but well dressed, in a seersucker suit — “Say, 
what’s the attraction here?”
“Never eaten here before?”
“Nope.”
“Well, you’ll see. You’ll get the best hamburger you ever 
ate for just ﬁfteen cents. And you don’t have to mess around 
with tipping waitresses.”
The stranger left the line to walk around the corner, 
where he found several workers sitting in the shade, gnawing 
on hamburgers. He approached a man in a carpenter’s apron 
and asked him how often he came there for lunch.
“Every damn day,” he said without a pause in his munch-
ing. “Sure beats the old lady’s cold meatloaf sandwiches.”2
The stranger was Ray Kroc, a dogged drink-machine 
salesman. After the lunchtime rush, he introduced himself 
to the drive-in restaurant’s bosses, Mac and Dick McDonald, 
and arranged to take them out to dinner.
As the brothers outlined their system that evening, Kroc 
became hooked by its simplicity and efﬁciency. The menu 

SIMPLIFY
24 
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD
was strictly limited to just nine items, including drinks. The 
food comprised of either hamburgers or cheeseburgers and 
fries. The burgers were all identical — a tenth of a pound of 
beef, all cooked the same way. Whereas a coffee shop sold a 
hamburger for thirty cents, it was only ﬁfteen at McDonald’s, 
or four cents more for a cheeseburger. The star attraction was 
the French fries, though — another bargain at ten cents for 
a three-ounce bag. The menu was completed by coffee at a 
nickel a cup, soft drinks at a dime, or a large milkshake for 
twenty cents. That was it.
Kroc had tracked down a remarkable unsung success story 
in San Bernardino. The brothers had started their business 
back in 1948, when they turned the barbecue restaurant 
they’d been running into a slick assembly-line operation 
they called a “speedee service line.” At the time the typical 
mass-market restaurant was a mom-and-pop coffee shop 
offering hundreds of items. The brothers’ nine-item menu 
never changed. Food was always cooked and served in the 
same automated way, so customers always got their meals 
immediately, when they were hot. They paid when they 
ordered, and cleared away their own debris after eating.
All of the food was good, especially the fries, yet Kroc 
stressed that the main attraction was the price. A meal at 
McDonald’s cost about half the equivalent at a coffee shop. 
How had Dick and Mac McDonald managed to do this?
Like Henry Ford and Ingvar Kamprad, they added 
value by subtraction. By removing menu variety, they 
made it much simpler to procure ingredients, operate the 
restaurant, and cook and serve the food. They subtracted 
waitresses. By simplifying and automating the whole pro-
cess, persuading customers to do some of the work, and 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD 
25
producing assembly-line food, their labor costs per serving 
were reduced to a fraction of those of a typical coffee shop. 
The levels of throughput were astounding, too. The little 
shop that Ray Kroc visited had sales exceeding $400,000 a 
year (around $4 million in today’s money) — more than that 
of an average (much bigger) McDonald’s today.3
By sourcing beef and other ingredients in large quantities, 
a virtuous circle was created — lower prices for hamburgers, 
leading to higher demand, further increasing purchasing 
muscle and overhead cost coverage, resulting in yet-lower 
prices but also higher margins. Even when it was a tiny 
operation with just a handful of restaurants, McDonald’s had 
great purchasing power, which allowed it to cut costs. The 
restaurants needed to buy fewer than forty items in total to 
make their nine products, unlike a coffee shop which needed 
to purchase hundreds of items for its far more extensive 
menu. Even with sales no greater than those of the local 
coffee shop, therefore, each McDonald’s outlet had much 
more concentrated buying power for its buns, ketchup, mus-
tard, and other ingredients.4
Kroc recognized a money-making machine when he saw 
it. He also realized that the way to achieve even lower costs, 
and therefore prices, was to scale up the operation, while 
maintaining its pristine simplicity. At dinner that ﬁrst day 
with the brothers, he told them that he’d never seen any-
thing to rival their system in all the time he’d been selling 
milkshake machines to restaurants and drive-ins throughout 
America. He asked the McDonalds why they hadn’t already 
opened dozens of outlets and was met by silence. “I felt like 
I’d dragged my tie in my soup or something. The two broth-
ers just sat there looking at me.”5

SIMPLIFY
26 
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD
Finally, Mac turned round to point up a hill that rose 
behind the restaurant. There was a big white house with a 
large and pretty porch, from where the McDonalds could 
watch the sunset. They loved the peace and quiet and didn’t 
want the hassle of expansion. They were happy with their lot.
Kroc didn’t understand. He felt they were sitting on a gold 
mine, and if he were in their position . . .
What had the McDonalds achieved before they met Kroc? 
They had invented a product and proved its potential. They 
had reinvented the restaurant and proved the economics of 
fast-food simplicity. The good deal for the customer and 
its attraction were also basically in place. As with Ford and 
IKEA, the overwhelming attraction was dramatically lower 
prices. The original huge sign hanging over the ﬁrst restau-
rant proclaimed “McDonald’s famous Hamburgers — Buy 
by the Bag,” but this was framed on both left and right by a 
simple “15c” in far bigger point size. Fifteen cents.6
In addition, there were subsidiary beneﬁts (again, as with 
both Ford and IKEA):
1. Usefulness:
• High-quality food. As Ray Kroc said, “the simplicity 
of the procedure allowed the McDonald’s to 
concentrate on quality in every step, and that was 
the trick.”7
• Consistency and reliability — an identical product 
time after time.
2. Art:
• Spiffy uniforms for sharp employees.
• The Golden Arches.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD 
27
• Cleanliness and visible hygiene in the store.
• The McDonald’s name and “M” branding.
3. Ease of use:
• Fast service.
• No tipping.
The brothers licensed eight other outlets in California and 
two in Arizona, but these restaurants failed to adopt the sim-
pliﬁed approach of the San Bernardino operation. According 
to Ray Kroc, “The brothers” own store in San Bernardino 
was virtually the only “pure” McDonald’s operation. Others 
had adulterated the menu with things like pizza, burritos, 
and enchiladas. In many of them the quality of the hamburg-
ers was inferior, because they were grinding hearts into the 
meat and the high fat content made it greasy.”8
Kroc had the vision of a host of “pure” McDonald’s fran-
chisees. He negotiated a deal with the brothers whereby he 
would franchise the new outlets, and in 1961 he bought the 
whole company for $2.7 million (about $21 million in today’s 
money).
Then he set about turning McDonald’s into a big chain. 
He created a universal product of high quality, and produced 
a uniform system that allowed no variation, making it sufﬁ-
ciently simple to be franchised to thousands of entrepreneurs 
while still retaining absolute control and consistency. In his 
short memoir, he devotes a full twelve pages to the beauty of 
McDonald’s fries, which he claims are in a different league 
to those of their rivals and prepared with religious devotion, 
both under the brothers and on a far bigger scale under his 
stewardship.

SIMPLIFY
28 
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD
Initially, getting the French fries right on an industrial 
scale was one of Kroc’s biggest challenges. He describes the 
dismay he felt in 1955 when he opened his ﬁrst franchise 
restaurant in Des Plaines, Illinois, and failed to replicate 
the taste of the McDonald brothers’ fries. His fries, he said, 
were as good as elsewhere, but they were not a patch on the 
McDonalds’ fries in California. Hugely frustrated, he called 
the brothers, but they couldn’t work out what he was doing 
wrong. The breakthrough came when a researcher at the 
Potato and Onion Association asked Kroc to describe in 
detail the procedure for making fries in San Bernardino. The 
secret turned out to be that the potatoes were stored in open 
chicken-wire shaded bins, which allowed plenty of time for 
the wind to dry out the potatoes and change the sugars to 
starch. With advice from the potato experts, Kroc created his 
own natural curing process with a big electric fan. And bingo! 
The fries now tasted just like those in the original restaurant, 
and the same process could be replicated in all new stores.9
Kroc also describes how he developed a proprietary system 
that would deliver consistency for both customers and 
franchisees:
• Consistent menu — no variants allowed — and the 
same methods to attain the same food quality.10
• Sparkling clean toilets, restaurants, and parking lots. 
Cleanliness was one of the four principles that Kroc 
stressed, along with quality, service, and value.11
• No pay telephones, jukeboxes, or vending machines of 
any kind.
• Founding the “Hamburger University” for franchisee 
and staff training.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD 
29
• Offering franchisees a simple product by providing 
them with a suitable ready site and ﬁnancing.
• Keeping the economics favorable, with a narrow prod-
uct line, and helping the best suppliers to serve a large 
number of McDonald’s outlets and lower their costs, 
for example through bulk packaging and allowing them 
to deliver more items per stop.12
Any business person writing their memoirs will — like Ford 
and Kroc — make the most of the opportunity to advertise 
the quality of their product. Yet it is clear that Kroc, Ford, 
and Kamprad all realized that the main purpose of their 
systems was to deliver a good product at an exceptionally 
low price. The bigger the scale of the operation, while 
allowing no variation in product and procedure, the lower 
the price. And the lower the price, the greater the customer 
satisfaction, sales, proﬁts, and value of the company. Kroc 
kept the price of McDonald’s hamburgers at ﬁfteen cents for 
nineteen years — until 1967, when inﬂation brought about 
by President Johnson’s Great Society and the Vietnam War 
forced an increase. He authorized the increase to eighteen 
cents reluctantly: “If you look at it from the customer’s point 
of view — which is how I do it, because this guy is our real 
boss — you see the importance of every penny.”13 This is the 
credo of every price-simpliﬁer.
Who created the greater value — the McDonald brothers 
or Ray Kroc? It depends on your perspective. Financially, 
Kroc added far more. Yet, we could argue that the brothers 
created the product, the proposition, the brand, the pric-
ing, and indeed the system. The changes to their template 
since 1961 have been relatively minor. However, imitation 

SIMPLIFY
30 
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD
is usually more vital than creation. Certainly, in this case, 
imitation created an extraordinarily valuable business with 
a global footprint. Ray Kroc added a simple, uniform, 
high-quality franchise system that cloned the McDonald’s 
formula to a degree that was truly mind-boggling.
Results
• McDonald’s was the ﬁrst restaurant to create an assem-
bly-line operation that recreated the coffee shop with a 
limited but complete meal solution. The ﬁrm also ﬁrst 
made the fast-food restaurant a universal phenomenon. 
It created a new branch of the restaurant business, a 
template for fast-food specialists in chicken, pizzas, 
and innumerable other food genres, which in aggregate 
have dwarfed even McDonald’s.
• By the end of 1976, McDonald’s had 4,177 restaurants. 
Seven years later, this had nearly doubled to just short 
of 8,000. Ray Kroc died in 1984, still in harness. Today, 
the ﬁrm serves 68 million customers every day in 
35,000 restaurants and 119 countries, from Panama to 
Russia to New Zealand.
• In 1976 the revenues of the McDonald’s Corporation 
(excluding the sales of franchisees and afﬁliates, includ-
ing only their payments to McDonald’s) exceeded $1 
billion and net earnings after taxes were over $100 
million. In 2014 revenues were $28.1 billion, and net 
income was $8.8 billion. The ﬁrm is worth $93.5 billion 
today — 39,000 times what the McDonald brothers 
received when they sold out to Ray Kroc in 1961. This 
compares with a meager twenty-ﬁvefold increase in the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD 
31
Standard & Poor’s index over the same time period. 
Kroc (and his successors) therefore added some $90 bil-
lion of value to McDonald’s by spreading the formula 
that Dick and Mac McDonald had invented but could 
not — or would not — propagate.
Key Points
1. McDonald’s is another example of price-simplifying — 
where subtraction and an assembly-line operation have 
slashed complexity and enabled costs to be halved. 
Could you automate an industry or service that has not 
yet experienced anything comparable?
2. If you work in a service business, take heart that 
price-simplifying works as well in a service or retail 
setting as it does in manufacturing.
3. With prices cut in half and the appropriate economic 
exploitation, world demand for fast-food hamburger 
meals has expanded to a degree that was unimaginable 
in 1948. Can you think of a pedestrian market today 
that could conceivably explode in a similar fashion if 
prices were at least halved through automation and 
co-opting customers and/or franchisees?
4. Once again, the simplifying ﬁrm created a new, propri-
etary business system, with economics quite different 
from those of more complex restaurants. If you are 
considering price-simplifying, how might you create 
a dramatically better economic system than whatever 
exists today in your market?
5. The ﬁrm combined an exceptionally low price with 
greater usefulness (consistently high-quality food; play 

SIMPLIFY
32 
PART 1  •  THE ASSEMBLY LINE OF FOOD
areas for children), art (especially the Golden Arches 
and instantly recognizable branding) and ease of use 
(speed). What might be the equivalent extra beneﬁts 
in your industry?
6. The McDonald’s formula was invented in miniature by 
its two founders. It was made into an economic power-
house by one person who took the system, standardized 
it, and cloned it on a scale that its creators could never 
imagine. So look for a simplifying system that already 
exists on a tiny scale but could be made into a universal 
product and rolled out around the globe.

4
Victory Over Big Brother
The Real Story of 1984
He made devices simpler by eliminating 
buttons, software simpler by eliminating 
features, and interfaces simpler by 
eliminating options. He attributed his love 
of simplicity to his Zen training.
Walter Isaacson
T
his is the story of a man and a machine that transformed 
the way we work and play. He distorted and compressed 
reality, and achieved the impossible by insisting on simplic-
ity and its beneﬁts for customers.
There had been nothing like it before. In the middle of 
Super Bowl XVIII, immediately after a touchdown, came 
images conjured up by Ridley Scott, the director of Blade 

SIMPLIFY
34 
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER
Runner. Masses of skinheads in an urban wasteland are 
paying full attention to Big Brother on a huge screen. 
But then a female athlete wearing a white top labelled 
“Macintosh” leaps clear of pursuing police to hurl a sledge-
hammer that smashes the screen and destroys Big Brother. 
“On January 24th,” announces the voice-over, “Apple 
Computer will introduce the Macintosh. And you’ll see 
why 1984 won’t be like 1984.”
The sixty-second commercial cost $750,000 to make and 
$800,000 to air. But it was well worth it. All three of the 
main U.S. networks featured stories about the advertise-
ment that night, and the publicity it generated was huge. 
Advertising Age and TV Guide both later voted it the greatest 
commercial of all time.
“Big Brother” was a thinly veiled reference to IBM, com-
monly called “Big Blue.” In October 1983, Business Week 
had opined that the battle for market supremacy in personal 
computers “is already over. In a stunning blitz, IBM has 
taken more than 26 percent of the market in two years, and 
is expected to account for half the world market in 1985. 
An additional 25 percent of the market will be . . . IBM-
compatible machines.”1
At the public launch of the Macintosh on January 24, 
1984, Steve Jobs, chairman of Apple, attacked IBM directly. 
After detailing the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of the 
much larger company, he built towards his climax: “It is 
now 1984. It appears that IBM wants it all . . . and is aiming 
its guns at its last obstacle to industry control, Apple. Will 
Big Blue dominate the entire computer industry? The 
entire information age? Was George Orwell right?”2 Jobs 
had the crowd of journalists and commentators hollering 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER 
35
and cheering. Then came a rescreening of the commercial, 
which generated a standing ovation. It was a dramatic launch 
for what turned out to be a rather special machine.
The build-up to 1984 had started in the early 1970s, when 
computer technology began to change and a wave of sim-
pliﬁcation began, as the microprocessor made computing 
faster, cheaper, and easier to operate. In 1975, the MITS 
Altair became the ﬁrst mass-produced personal computer 
kit, but it was much less sophisticated — as well as much 
cheaper — than the many microcomputers that were emerg-
ing at the time. For $495, the hobbyist got a pile of parts to 
solder to a board; even assembled, it was pretty primitive.3
One of those hobbyists was Steve Wozniak; another was 
his friend, Steve Jobs. In 1975 they began working on the 
Apple I, a step up from the Altair, but still an unprepossessing 
machine. The Apple II, a much neater product, quickly fol-
lowed. The ﬁrst real packaged computer, it came in a sleek and 
friendly plastic case modelled on the Cuisinart food processor; 
and it could be plugged in and used straight out of the box. Its 
simplicity made the computer a general consumer product for 
the ﬁrst time: you didn’t need to be a geek to use it.4
Jobs’ biographer, Walter Isaacson, says Jobs “liked the 
notion of simple and clean modernism produced for the 
masses . . . he repeatedly emphasized that Apple’s products 
would be clean and simple.” In Jobs’ own words, “We will 
make them bright and pure and honest about being high-
tech . . . that’s our approach. Very simple . . . the way we’re 
running the company, the product design, the advertising, it 
all comes down to this: Let’s make it simple. Really simple.”5
Yet the real breakthrough came not with the Apple II 
but with the work being done at the Xerox PARC research 

SIMPLIFY
36 
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER
labs at Palo Alto. Jobs secured an invite for himself and his 
team at the end of 1979 and he was amazed by what he saw. 
Up to that time, all computers had used command lines 
that required some operator skill, and there were no user-
friendly graphics. But the Xerox engineers had invented the 
“desktop” — a screen that could have several documents and 
folders on it at the same time, represented by icons. A device 
they called a mouse was used to access the one you wanted 
with a simple click. When he saw this demonstrated, Jobs 
was captivated. “THIS . . . IS . . . IT!” he exclaimed. “It was 
like a veil being lifted from my eyes. I could see what the 
future of computing was destined to be.”6
All of these features were included in the Xerox Star. 
Launched in 1981, it was the ﬁrst recognizably modern PC. 
But the Xerox Star retailed at $16,595, and only 30,000 of 
them were ever sold. If it was to trigger a revolution, the 
Xerox Star needed to be simpliﬁed.7
The Apple Lisa, introduced in January 1983, was the ﬁrst 
computer on which users could drag a ﬁle across the desktop, 
drop it into a folder, scroll smoothly through a document, 
and overlap a series of windows. Through Jobs’ famous 
WYSIWYG — What You See Is What You Get — the Lisa 
also enabled users to print off exactly what they saw on the 
screen. The Lisa 2, introduced a year later, cost $3,495 — 
about a ﬁfth of the price of a Xerox Star for a greatly superior 
machine.8 The Macintosh was a further advance — it cost 
$2,495 and had many charming features that made it both 
easy and fun to use, including a superb graphics package and 
a great variety of different fonts, documents, spreadsheets, 
and other templates.
In truth, the ﬁrst Mac was far from perfect. Its gorgeous 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER 
37
user interface required far more memory than it possessed. 
Over time, however, the necessary improvements were made, 
and, as we’ll see later, the appeal of the Mac to a certain type 
of user — broadly creative types and those who revel in good 
design — made it a huge long-term commercial success.
But Jobs was not a price-simpliﬁer. One of his early 
co-conspirators on the Mac project — and the man who 
named the machine — was Jef Raskin, a young, brilliant, 
and highly opinionated computer scientist. Raskin wanted to 
build a computer for the masses, to go into every home — a 
utopian and preposterous idea, it seemed, at a time when 
fewer than one in a hundred homes owned computers. His 
ideal was a machine with a keyboard, a screen, and the 
computer itself in one unit, priced at $1,000. If Jobs had 
supported this notion, Apple might have become the Ford 
Motor Corporation of computers. He could have done so, 
which would have made him a price-simpliﬁer. But he had a 
different idea, as Walter Isaacson explains:
“Jobs was enthralled by Raskin’s vision, but not by his 
willingness to make compromises to keep down the cost. 
At one point in the fall of 1979 Jobs told him to focus 
on building what he repeatedly called an ‘insanely great’ 
product. ‘Don’t worry about price, just specify the com-
puter’s abilities,’ Jobs told him. Raskin responded with a 
sarcastic memo.”9
A power struggle ensued. Jobs prevailed; Raskin left the 
company. In 1984, the Mac was priced at a 25 percent 
premium to the rival IBM PC, an inferior machine in every-
one’s eyes, except for the majority of buyers.

SIMPLIFY
38 
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER
Jobs was not obsessed with price or with the creation of 
a mass market for his machine. He simpliﬁed principally to 
make his PC better for the user. He made a device that he 
himself wanted to use. He was not wholly uncommercial: 
he simpliﬁed so that his machines were easier to produce 
and therefore cheaper; and he introduced some stunning 
cost savings relative to the Xerox Star. But he reduced cost 
and price only when doing so did not compromise his main 
objective, which was to make a fabulous computer. Ease of 
use, art, and usefulness made his machine a joy to use. Price 
was important too, but markedly less so. Ever since, no Apple 
device has been sold primarily on price.
Therefore, Jobs is the ﬁrst of our second breed of sim-
pliﬁer — those we call proposition-simpliﬁers — because the 
overwhelming innovation and advantage lie in the proposi-
tion of the product or service, not in its price. In Jobs’ own 
phrase, the product has to be “insanely great.” In our phrase, 
the product must be a joy to use; it must have a palpable “wow 
factor.” Jobs spoke for all the proposition-simpliﬁers we will 
meet in this book when he said, “products are everything.”10
By relating the stories of Ford, IKEA, and McDonald’s, 
we showed that the overwhelming beneﬁt brought to cus-
tomers by price-simpliﬁers is a massive price reduction of 
anything between 50 and 90 percent. This reduction is 
absolutely essential for price-simpliﬁers. We then showed 
that Ford, Kamprad, and the McDonald brothers attempted, 
where possible, to improve the ease of use, usefulness, and 
aesthetic appeal (art) of their products, provided this did not 
conﬂict at all with the overwhelming aim of a low — and 
continually lower — price.
With proposition-simpliﬁers, the position is exactly 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER 
39
reversed. Their absolute priority is to make the product or 
service not just a little better, but a whole order of magnitude 
better, so that it is recognizably different from anything else 
on the market. The Macintosh, the iPod, the iPad, and the 
Apple watch all met this criterion: the proposition was either 
a great improvement on an existing product or else a totally 
new, unique creation. It had to be insanely great, a joy to 
use. At least one of the dimensions we speciﬁed as optional 
extras for price-simpliﬁers — ease of use, usefulness or art — 
must be present in a proposition-simpliﬁer’s new product or 
service. In fact, usually two or three of these beneﬁts must 
be present; but whether it is one, two or all three of these 
advantages, they must transform the proposition.
In the case of the Macintosh, all three beneﬁts were evi-
dent, with ease of use the most important:
1. Ease of use:
• Simple to set up and plug in.
• Escape from the DOS command mentality that was 
still used in all other machines at the time. Even the 
path-breaking IBM PC, launched in 1981, used 
old-fashioned command-line prompts to drive the 
operating system.
• The Macintosh operating system, with its desktop 
and bitmapped graphical displays, was far more 
intuitive and required less training and expertise than 
the DOS systems.
2. Usefulness:
• The ability to store and access documents on the 
desktop.

SIMPLIFY
40 
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER
• Overlapping windows that scrolled perfectly.
• The ability to compose a document and print it 
exactly as it appeared on the screen.
3. Art:
• Playful and intuitive icons.
• Wide range of beautiful fonts.
• The hardware design was clean and light — an 
attractive consumer product in comparison with IBM’s 
gun-metal grey.
These features were the raison d’être of the Macintosh. Price 
reduction was a subsidiary, much less important objective. 
In fact, as we shall see later in the book, most proposition-
simpliﬁed products and services — such as the Mac — sell 
at a premium to their rivals.
In designing the Lisa and the Mac, Jobs’ reference point 
was the Xerox Star. He was interested in dramatic cost reduc-
tion, but only if it coincided with product improvement. For 
example, the mouse. The Xerox mouse had three buttons and 
didn’t roll smoothly. Also, because of its many features, it cost 
$300. So Jobs commissioned a design house to come up with 
a $15 mouse with one button and smooth rolling even on a 
rough surface. Before long, they had developed one.
Jobs’ main purpose was not to re-engineer the Xerox 
technology to make it commercially viable. He wanted to 
surpass it — to enable users to move a window around the 
desktop, drop it into a folder, increase or reduce its size, all 
simply by manipulating the icon, with no need to select a 
command before doing so. The Xerox Star couldn’t do any 
of this. The Mac could do all of it, and more.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER 
41
Which Type of Simplifying is Better?
It depends:
• on what the entrepreneur or executive wants to do,
• on what his or her ﬁrm is able to do,
• on the opposition,
• on the market,
• on the technology, and
• on the time and place.
Neither approach is inherently superior to the other.
The big advantage with price-simplifying is that it is often 
possible to build a huge mass market and a business system 
that cannot be imitated and out-scaled easily — at least not 
after the early days — which effectively shuts out all rivals. 
The price-simpliﬁer is likely to end up with much higher 
volume than the proposition-simpliﬁer, for the latter relies 
on the customer’s willingness to pay a premium for a demon-
strably superior product. The rub for proposition-simpliﬁers 
is that they need to keep ahead of their rivals through con-
stant innovation and new product development — otherwise, 
they will lose market share and suffer falling margins. Yet 
they may be able to build an extremely valuable, loyal fol-
lowing, and brand among the middle to top of any given 
market. The price-simpliﬁer must price down the experience 
curve, passing on cost savings and keeping margins tightly 
constrained. In contrast, the proposition-simpliﬁer can — 
sometimes — hang on to fat net margins: up to 40 percent in 
the case of Apple, which at the time of writing was the most 
valuable company in the world.

SIMPLIFY
42 
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER
The history of computing shows that there can be room 
for both a price-simpliﬁer and one or more proposition-
simpliﬁers to weave their magic within the same broad 
market. But any company that tries to pursue an approach 
that is halfway between the two is destined to fail. The Mac 
never reached double ﬁgures in terms of overall market 
share, so it never slayed the mighty IBM. What helped IBM 
and IBM-compatible machines was that Microsoft eventu-
ally duplicated most of the features of the Mac’s operating 
system. Windows 1.0 was not launched until the autumn of 
1985, and it was initially a poor imitation of the Mac’s (and 
even the Xerox’s) operating system. But gradually the gap 
was closed, especially between 1985 and 1996, when Jobs 
was exiled from Apple and there was little reinvestment in 
Macintosh software.
Even so, the laws of simplicity saw to it that IBM was not 
the main beneﬁciary of its Faustian pact with Microsoft. 
IBM continued to be outﬂanked in terms of product qual-
ity by the Mac, and then lost most of its remaining market 
share to price-simpliﬁers — initially Compaq and Hewlett-
Packard, and later Dell. As a company, IBM was always a 
reluctant simpliﬁer, pursuing neither proposition-simplify-
ing nor price-simplifying with any great vigour. Over the 
life of its involvement with PCs, it never made any money 
from them, bleeding cash to such an extent that the whole 
ﬁrm nearly collapsed. In 2005 Big Blue made its last com-
puter and sold the husk of the business to a Chinese rival, 
Lenovo.
And what of plucky little Apple? Its share of the computer 
market fell to just 3 percent during the barren Jobs-less 
years, but it did just ﬁne after the Second Coming of Steve 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER 
43
in 1997. Jobs rationalized the product line, developed new 
software with impressive wow appeal and, together with the 
ﬁrm’s new design supremo Jony Ive, triumphed with the 
iMac, launched in 1998 as a desktop computer for the home 
market. Priced at $1,299, the iMac sold 800,000 units in its 
ﬁrst ﬁve months, the highest run rate that Apple had ever 
had.11 During the 2000s, the Mac reached new heights when 
it became the hub for other Apple devices. It took more than 
two decades, but proposition-simplifying ﬁnally paid off in 
spades. As with Henry Ford’s price-simplifying, Steve Jobs 
didn’t reach the summit in a single bound. Self-belief and 
doggedness eventually proved just as essential as the right 
strategy.
Results
• On the stock market in May 2000, Microsoft was worth 
twenty times more than Apple. Ten years later, Apple 
overtook Microsoft, and a year later it was worth 70 
percent more than its chief rival.12 As we write, Apple 
is worth $742 billion.
• In 2010, Macintosh’s global market share in comput-
ers was just 7 percent, yet it accounted for 35 percent 
of the industry’s operating proﬁts,13 higher than any 
other company. Apple created and dominated the top 
segment of the PC market and was rewarded with very 
attractive returns.
• Without Apple, it is unlikely that computers today 
would be so elegant and easy to use. Without Apple, the 
desktop we all take for granted today might not have 
become the common currency of computers.

SIMPLIFY
44 
PART 1  •  VICTORY OVER BIG BROTHER
Key Points
1. Steve Jobs was a different kind of simpliﬁer from our 
previous examples. He was a proposition-simpliﬁer who 
aimed to make an “insanely great” product. Do you 
ﬁnd it easier to imagine yourself as a price- or a proposi-
tion-simpliﬁer? What about your company?
2. Price-simpliﬁers create or enlarge a mass market. With 
the Mac, Apple served the middle and upper echelons 
of users, who were willing to pay a signiﬁcant premium 
for a more intuitive, useful, and beautiful product. Do 
you think this might work in your industry?
3. In the same broad market, price- and proposition- 
simpliﬁers can happily coexist, each with their 
distinctive customer appeal, and each with their dis-
tinctive commercial advantage. For price-simpliﬁers, it 
is a mass market. For most proposition-simpliﬁers, it is 
higher net margins. Which of these advantages do you 
think your organization would value more?
4. The worst fate, as with IBM, is to fall between the two 
simplifying stools — to be out-proposition-simpliﬁed 
and out-price-simpliﬁed. No matter how iconic the 
brand, how lofty the reputation, how high the installed 
base of users, how clever the executives, or even how 
rich the company, for those stuck in the middle, the 
knacker’s yard beckons. Is this a danger for your ﬁrm?

5
The Strategy Simplifiers
Strategy should be a punch between the eyes.
Bruce D. Henderson
T
he strategy simpliﬁers transformed the business world. 
Not only did they spawn a huge and highly proﬁtable 
consulting industry, they also allowed young people to 
learn about business more quickly than ever before, and 
thus lowered the average age of chief executives. They also 
reinvented business theory and grounded it securely in 
economics, and in ﬁnancial and marketing theory. Business 
became less intuitive and more analytical, a process that has 
now been overdone, but at the time made it possible to use 
resources much more effectively.
When I (Richard) was ﬁnishing my MBA at the Wharton 
Business School in 1975, I attended an interview with the 

SIMPLIFY
46 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
Boston Consulting Group, then a small management con-
sultancy ﬁrm, and asked what was different about their 
practice. “Basically, we have a model which guides our con-
sulting,” my interviewer, Philip Hulme, said. He went on to 
explain the Boston Box, with its cash cows, dogs, question 
marks, and stars. I was instantly gripped by both the clarity 
of his answer and the prospect that huge businesses could be 
guided by something so simple, and helped by someone like 
me, a green twenty-ﬁve-year-old. So when BCG offered me 
the job, I immediately accepted.
I soon came to understand the scale of the transformation 
implied not just by the model but by the whole premise of 
BCG’s existence. Before Bruce Henderson set up the ﬁrm 
in 1963, top-level boardroom consulting was dominated by 
the venerable ﬁrm of McKinsey, and the archetypal consul-
tant was a grizzled veteran who had seen and done it all and 
was now offering advice to the industry in which he — it 
was always a he — was an acknowledged expert. In effect, 
McKinsey sold experience.
BCG, by contrast, sold distilled intellect. Its typical 
consultant was an MBA whose youth and brains either fright-
ened or bemused clients. But whereas McKinsey tended to 
use individual consultants or small teams, BCG supplied a 
simple, universal model that was applicable to any business 
or industry. There had never been such a model before; nor 
has there been a simpler one since, and certainly not one that 
contains so much truth. BCG said it was better to be a market 
leader than a follower, and that ﬁrms should “price down 
the experience curve” — that is, gain market share in order 
to reduce costs and prices and therefore attain a lower cost 
position than any competitor. The best position was a “star 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS 
47
business”: that is, a market leader in a high-growth market. 
Such positions were inordinately valuable. BCG claimed that 
over the lifetime of a product, nearly all the cash made by 
any company would be derived from businesses that were or 
had been stars.
This advice, incidentally, largely coincides with the 
price-simpliﬁer strategy, minus this book’s emphasis on 
simplifying as the means to become a star and create a huge 
market.
BCG’s model greatly simpliﬁed the advice for any large 
ﬁrm. It told the corporate center and operating managers 
what to do — focus on their stars, increase market share 
everywhere, cut costs, and pass the beneﬁts on to customers 
through ever-lower prices.
I saw ﬁrst-hand how useful this advice could be. There 
were some dangers and errors in the theory, but overall it 
worked, saving companies from making expensive mistakes 
and pushing them in the right direction. The belief in a 
simple model and the intellectual force behind it also had 
a galvanizing and uniting effect on ﬁrms that bought into 
the BCG model. It supplied a common language and logic, 
shared from the boardroom down through divisions and 
operating units. The belief that radical improvements were 
possible in market share, proﬁt and the value of the ﬁrm was 
energizing, reinforcing the economic logic at the core of the 
advice. Belief in ideas — broadly the right ideas — created 
huge wealth.
BCG simpliﬁed and both the company itself and its clients 
prospered.
This was pure proposition-simplifying. BCG made no 
attempt to cut prices: generally, it followed the rather high 

SIMPLIFY
48 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
hourly rates of the market leader, McKinsey. This was a sen-
sible strategy, because the market for high-quality consulting 
is not price sensitive. Chief executives and boards want the 
best advice, and they are willing to pay for it. A cut-price offer 
would merely have called the ﬁrm’s credibility into question.
So what was BCG’s appeal?
1. Ease of use:
• Previously, business strategy was either not considered 
at all, or was considered too complex to reduce to a 
simple model. But now it was possible to determine 
the position of any business and what to do with it by 
knowing two simple pieces of information: its market 
share relative to its largest rival; and the future market 
growth rate. The position within the Boston Box could 
be estimated in real time, and checked later. The chart 
could be used by the boardroom or by managers 
in a small business unit. It told everyone what to do. 
Business strategy suddenly became demystiﬁed — it 
was now accessible and even fun; and it could be 
communicated hundreds of times more concisely, 
effectively and memorably than before.
• The simplicity of the ideas made them easy to grasp 
and turn into action.
2. Usefulness:
• The advice was useful because it was based on 
simple and powerful micro-economic concepts. Market 
share was useful because it lowered costs. Having 
higher market share than competitors, and therefore 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS 
49
lower costs, enabled prices to be reduced and market 
share to be increased yet further. Competitors would 
make lower returns and become less interested in the 
market. If prices were kept sufﬁciently low, rivals might 
even be forced to exit the market altogether, increasing 
the leader’s market share.
• BCG’s system required client executives to think for 
themselves, based on BCG’s ideas, rather than 
merely follow expert advice. Internalization of 
the ideas created the ability and commitment to 
implement them, and to adapt the strategy when 
circumstances changed.
3. Art:
• The Boston Box lent itself to colorful, attractive, and 
simple visual presentations that made the concepts 
come alive and applicable to client circumstances.
• The elegance and simplicity of BCG’s concepts were 
explained in “Perspectives” — short, well-written 
tracts — and at CEO conferences held in luxury hotels.
BCG simpliﬁed not only the consulting “product” but the 
process. Because they were simple, the consultancy’s ideas 
were easily taught to new consultants. And because the con-
sulting was based on ideas, those consultants did not need 
to have decades of experience. The new consultants were 
relatively cheap, so simplicity also lowered the cost of pro-
duction, as it usually does. As a result BCG grew faster than 
McKinsey and became more proﬁtable because it charged 
similar fees but incurred lower costs.
There is a certain irony here, because BCG’s business 

SIMPLIFY
50 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
model — the one it used for its own commercial and strate-
gic decisions — was different from the one it preached. In 
our terms, BCG assumed that every business should be a 
price-simpliﬁer. That is broadly correct. Most markets are 
like that. But BCG — and many other ﬁrms — can operate 
successfully within the proposition-simplifying model.1
Another terriﬁc proposition-simpliﬁer — in the same ﬁeld 
but with a different proposition — was Bain & Company, a 
ﬁrm that split off from BCG in 1973 amid some acrimony. I 
left BCG to join Bain in 1980 and was amazed how different 
the two ﬁrms were, despite adhering to the same concepts. 
In those days, Bain’s proposition was extremely innovative, 
daring, and simple. It simpliﬁed its client base. It simpliﬁed 
its objective. And consequently it simpliﬁed the process of 
consulting.
Bain was different from all other consulting ﬁrms in the 
world because it only ever worked for the group CEO of a 
company. Right from the start, even when it was a tiny ﬁrm, 
this gave Bain elite status. Its sole objective was to increase 
the market value of its client companies, and thus grow itself. 
Results would follow from the right strategy — which Bain 
promised to work out — but only if that strategy were imple-
mented wholeheartedly. Only the top dog had the power to 
make that happen, so Bain refused to talk to anyone else.
The proposition to the chief was invariably simple and 
audacious. We (Bain) will put the technology we possess — 
the vast power of strategy (remember, this was the 1970s and 
1980s) — exclusively at your disposal. We will never work for 
any of your competitors. We will advance your interests — 
both yours personally and those of your ﬁrm — since, with 
our advice, you will be following the right strategy and you 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS 
51
will be the right pilot. So you can trust us with all your 
secrets.
But (Bain would continue) we require something from 
you in return. You must agree never to work with any of 
our competitors (BCG, McKinsey, and so on). You must 
also take our recommendations seriously. Of course, since 
our proposals will be based on data and logic, you can chal-
lenge the data and the logic. But unless you can prove us to 
be wrong, you must follow our suggestions. Moreover, no 
arbitrary limit may be set on the Bain budget. If we deliver 
continued increases in proﬁt and market value — and you get 
a good return on the money you spend with us — you should 
follow our recommendations for the next steps, including 
our budget.
Bain assumed all responsibility for explaining the strat-
egy down the line. Indeed, before any new strategy and 
recommendations reached the CEO and the board, Bain 
outlined everything to everyone — from the lowest to the 
highest managers — correcting any mistakes and securing 
consensus along the way. This process of securing consensus 
for its recommendations ﬂushed out any disagreement from 
powerful “barons’ within the management structure — for 
example, the head of a division or a region. Since the rules 
of the Bain process dictated that data and analysis were par-
amount, it was hard for any baron to disagree, even though 
his or her intuition or personal interests might dictate oth-
erwise. Meanwhile, the CEO’s power vis-à-vis the next level 
down was greatly increased, which made his or her life much 
simpler and easier.
The path envisaged was one of ever-closer symbiosis 
between Bain & Company and the client . . . and ever-higher 

SIMPLIFY
52 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
consulting revenues. Participating in this virtuous cycle — 
and perhaps getting very rich by doing so — was heaven.
I should add, however, that Bain & Company’s proposition 
has since changed, to my nostalgic regret. Its product line 
and practice have become much more extensive and var-
iegated as the boardroom consulting market has exploded 
into a huge number of micro-segments. Both Bain and BCG 
have become more like McKinsey — less providers of “pure” 
strategy and more hypermarkets of specialized experts, 
returning the compliment McKinsey paid to BCG in the 
1970s when it entered the strategy market in a big way.
The original Bain & Company strategy was simple 
because it cut through and across all the corporate politics 
within a ﬁrm. The interests of the ﬁrm’s CEO and Bain were 
totally aligned, elevating the power of both. For the CEO, 
it was a joy to employ Bain for several reasons:
1. Ease of use:
• Life for the CEO became hugely simpler. He now 
had ﬁrst-class strategic insight with which to dazzle 
the board, he knew what to do, he had a trusted 
conﬁdant and sounding board completely outside 
the organization’s tentacles, and he had all the data 
and analysis he could possibly need to persuade 
everyone of what he wanted to do. He could also 
be conﬁdent that, barring unforeseen disasters, his 
tenure was going to be very successful and his 
options worth a fortune.
• The power of the CEO and his or her ability to force 
through radical change were greatly enhanced.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS 
53
2. Usefulness:
• Bain was enormously effective in raising the market 
value of its clients.
• Its process generated huge energy among managers 
and channeled  it in a single direction. One senior 
manager described the Bain consultants working 
in the bowels of his organization as “like nuclear 
reactors generating wave upon wave of commitment 
and excitement.”
3. Art:
• The spiel from Bain’s partners to the CEOs was 
original, slick, and effective — basically because it 
was true. The art lay especially in the originality — 
the CEOs had never heard anything like it before.
During the 1970s and 1980s, Bain grew much faster than 
BCG, overtook its alma mater, and became very proﬁtable. 
Today, it has over 6000 employees, compared with BCG’s 
9700. They are now two of the three most prestigious con-
sulting ﬁrms in the world (with the third being McKinsey).
The difference between BCG and Bain may seem esoteric 
to anyone who has not dealt with a “strategy consultant.” 
Yet I was staggered by the differences in the way the two 
ﬁrms behaved, despite using the same intellectual material 
for their work. These were two very different business sys-
tems, sold differently, which selected and wooed their clients 
differently, with a different modus operandi both within the 
consulting ﬁrms themselves and in their interactions with 
clients. Since then, whenever I have been able to observe 
two competitors in the same ﬁeld, I have been sensitive to 

SIMPLIFY
54 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
the subtle differences that can lead them to play the game 
in disparate ways. This is to the advantage of both ﬁrms, 
because it blunts the edge of competition between them. If 
the differences are very large, as they are between BCG and 
Bain, they do not compete head-to-head, and each ﬁrm can 
have a dominant share of “its” market segment.
This is how it is with proposition-simplifying — it is pos-
sible for two ﬁrms, such as BCG and Bain, each to develop 
a unique proposition. Moreover, the success of a previous 
proposition-simpliﬁer does not stop a new ﬁrm from develop-
ing a new proposition, which may — indeed should — appeal 
to a different set of customers, newly deﬁned by the prop-
osition-simpliﬁer with their fresh formula. The possibility 
of multiple proposition-simpliﬁers in what is apparently a 
single market is in marked contrast to what happens with 
price-simplifying, where, as the biggest part of the market 
must be served, there are typically fewer degrees of freedom 
in conﬁguring the business. For example, if you want to make 
cars cheaply to compete with Ford, you need a huge factory 
and a moving assembly line, just like Ford’s. If you want to 
sell furniture cheaply, you need to commission relatively few 
suppliers to make it, transport it in ﬂat packs and stock it 
in huge, out-of-town stores. In other words, your business 
system must be identical to IKEA’s. The quest for the low-
est-cost universal product and business system tends to result 
in a similar answer every time. Since the target is most of the 
market, there is less basis for segmentation or differentiation. 
Any ﬁrm trying to ﬁnd the lowest-price solution will proba-
bly have to create a similar product and system.
So when a price-simpliﬁer creates a mass market, it tends 
to collapse segmentation within the existing market, or 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS 
55
at least decimate the sales of other players in that market. 
There is just one new mass market, offering the lowest price 
and the greatest value. Other segments may decay or die. 
McDonald’s invents the hamburger restaurant, that market 
grows exponentially, and mom-and-pop coffee shops and 
greasy spoon cafés hit hard times. Budget airlines create a 
mass market, and full-service airlines lose market share. It 
is the same with IKEA or any other price-simpliﬁer. They 
suck out at least some of the oxygen previously enjoyed by 
traditional competitors because price is a singularly potent 
weapon that becomes even more powerful over time. Scale 
advantages compound as the business system of the leader 
expands internationally, the cost advantage gap between 
the leader and other competitors widens, as does the price 
gap, making it virtually impossible for the followers to catch 
up. The leader, if the business is run well, should become 
ever more dominant over time. This is why so many of 
our price-simplifying case studies have been successful for 
decades.
But the pattern is different with proposition-simpliﬁers. 
Instead of reducing or collapsing the degree of difference 
between competitors, the difference and distance between 
them may increase. New market segments may be layered 
on to an existing market, sometimes with minimal damage 
caused to established ﬁrms. BCG did not really damage 
McKinsey; in fact, it created a new market for the old dom-
inant ﬁrm (the strategy consulting market). Similarly, Bain’s 
success did not spell the downfall of BCG. Where price is 
not a key purchase criterion, where value for money is hard 
to compare between rivals, and where new ventures may 
ﬁnd ways to delight new, specialized groups of customers (as 

SIMPLIFY
56 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
with Bain, which exclusively served the chief executives of 
large companies), the arrival of new proposition-simpliﬁers 
may enlarge the market and its proﬁtability, meaning that 
there is plenty of room for several successful players, rather 
than just one.
But not always. When a proposition-simpliﬁer comes up 
with a clearly superior formula — one that appeals to a large 
part of the previous mainstream market — the effect may be 
to crush most of the traditional competitors. Uber is a case 
in point, as are smartphones. Although the new generation 
of mobile phones is much more expensive than their prede-
cessors, they are so much more appealing, convenient, and 
useful — with enticing new apps added all the time — that 
they have already transformed the market. As a consequence, 
Nokia — which was slow to develop a smartphone — has 
suffered greatly at the hands of Apple and Samsung.
Insofar as we can generalize, the two forces that do 
most damage to previous segmentation — those that tend 
to collapse segmentation in a market, rather than create 
independent new segments and leave old ones largely 
intact — appear to be price and technology. And when these 
converge in a free service that utilizes a novel technology — 
such as Google — the effect on the traditional market (in 
this case, print media) can be utterly devastating.
Results
• In 1963, McKinsey enjoyed a virtual monopoly in 
boardroom consulting for top companies. In the early 
1970s BCG became a credible competitor in this 
lucrative market, and Bain & Company joined that 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS 
57
gravy train in the late 1970s. Since then, despite the 
emergence of high-quality “boutique” rivals, these 
three ﬁrms have remained the most prestigious consul-
tancies, with each establishing itself as a global brand.
• The market for boardroom and strategy consulting — 
with the latter being a large subset of the former — has 
grown enormously since 1963. The best estimate is 
that the worldwide market has grown by around 16 
percent each year since then, which means it is now 
more than 2000 times bigger. McKinsey had revenues 
of $7.8 billion in 2013 and employed 17,000 people. The 
following year, BCG reported revenues of $4.6 billion 
and had a total staff of 9700. Bain & Company does 
not publish its revenues, but it employs 5400 people. 
(Pro-rating its revenues by staff, compared to BCG, 
gives an estimated revenue of $2.6 billion.) These are 
stunning numbers for three ﬁrms that were members 
of little more than a cottage industry back in the 1970s. 
All three are also astonishingly proﬁtable, with returns 
on sales varying between about 15 and 40 percent. 
Moreover, all of the expansion has happened organi-
cally, without any need for external capital.
Key Points
1. Proposition-simplifying is often a great opportunity 
for service businesses. If simplifying can increase use-
fulness, ease of use and art, revenues can be multiplied 
at the same time as margins expand.
2. The proposition’s value can usually be greatly increased 
by simplifying. All it requires is sufﬁcient imagination 

SIMPLIFY
58 
PART 1  •  THE STRATEGY SIMPLIFIERS
and empathy — an ability to put yourself in the shoes of 
the least price-sensitive and most proﬁtable customers.
3. Whereas there can be only one successful price-simpli-
ﬁer in any given market, there can be more than one 
proposition-simpliﬁer, each with a differentiated prop-
osition. Can you think of a proposition that will allow 
you to carve out a new market and provide your new 
target customers with a service that greatly increases 
ease of use, usefulness, and aesthetic appeal to them?
4. Now it’s time to become up to date with three very 
recent examples of simplifying that have used the inter-
net and the smartphone as the platform to provide new 
or sensationally improved services.

6
Taxi! The Brave New  
World of Apps
If it ain’t broke, break it.
Richard Pascale
Something interesting is happening. Uber, 
the world’s largest taxi company, owns 
no vehicles. Facebook, the world’s most 
popular media owner, creates no content. 
Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no 
inventory. And Airbnb, the world’s largest 
accommodation provider, owns no real estate.
Tom Godwin
I
n this chapter, we look at three further instances of 
proposition-simplifying, all of which now seem so obvi-
ous that we wonder why they didn’t happen years earlier. 

SIMPLIFY
60 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
Proposition-simplifying can make life easier and more 
pleasant, and can make a fortune for the simpliﬁer. Perhaps 
the value of simplifying and how to do it are only just start-
ing to be fully understood. Perhaps, also, the internet and 
associated technologies are making it easier to simplify and 
transform a market almost overnight.
Uber and Easy Taxi
If you live in Paris, or one of many other big cities, getting a 
cab can be a nightmare. The strict regulation system in the 
French capital means that drivers have to pay hundreds of 
thousands of euros for their “medallion,” which means that 
the rides are expensive, especially as the number of cabs is 
kept deliberately below the level of demand. Consequently, 
it is often impossible to hail a cab in the late evening or at 
weekends, or when it’s raining hard. Moreover, drivers often 
have to stop to ask directions, and you never know how much 
the fare will be or whether you will be taken to your desti-
nation via the scenic route.
However, since 2009, this age-old system, and similar vari-
ants throughout the world, has started to crumble and die. In 
you live in a big American city, or increasingly elsewhere — 
from London to Singapore to Bangalore — you will already 
probably be well aware of the brave new world of Uber. You 
install a smartphone app, enter your credit card details, and 
the next time you need a cab, you open the app and enter your 
pick-up location and destination. You will be told how long 
the cab will take to arrive, and two minutes before the driver 
reaches your location you will receive a text message. The 
cab is usually cleaner and smarter than a traditional taxi. The 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
61
driver always knows where he or she is going because the car 
has built-in GPS. When you arrive at your destination, your 
card is charged automatically and you are emailed a receipt, 
so there’s no need to carry cash. You can share the fare with 
friends if you like, in which case the bill is divided between 
the members of the group. No tip is necessary. After the trip, 
you can rate the driver; and you may well have checked out 
previous ratings before your ride. If you give a driver only 
three stars you may receive a follow-up call from someone 
in customer services wanting to know what went wrong. 
You have security and peace of mind, because every driver 
is known and every car is tracked. Uber encourages civility, 
so you are told the driver’s name and he or she knows yours.
Uber works well for the drivers, too. They rate the ser-
vice’s clients. The time and energy they would otherwise 
spend cruising the streets for fares is eliminated and their 
uptime is increased. Several drivers have credited Uber with 
improving their potential earnings substantially.
Fares may be cheaper than in a normal taxi, depending on 
location, but the big advantage of Uber is the proposition, 
not the price. It provides all three of our three customer 
beneﬁts from simplicity:
1. Ease of use:
• Simpliﬁes the ordering process — no hailing, no 
phoning, no searching.
• Reduces uncertainty of when the car will arrive and 
the type of vehicle.
• Simpliﬁes the payment process — the system is 
entirely cashless.

SIMPLIFY
62 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
• No need to tip — indeed, it is not even possible 
(except with cash payments).
• Makes it easy to split the fare.
• Makes the price transparent with an accurate fare 
estimate for your trip.
2. Usefulness:
• Security and peace of mind through tracking.
• Better quality through rating driver and passenger on 
every trip.
• Universality — a single app works in most major 
cities around the world.
• Saves time through seamless on-demand 
dependability.
• Automatic electronic receipts.
• Choice of services, from everyday to luxury cars.
3. Art:
• The experience is a revelation when compared with 
traditional taxis.
In sum, it is a joy to ride in an Uber cab.
The system itself is extremely simple, not least for the 
company itself. It owns no cars. It is just an intermediary that 
uses technology to connect riders with drivers, then takes a 
slice of each transaction.
Uber was founded in San Francisco in 2009 by CEO 
Travis Kalanick and Garrett Camp. They devised the 
software app that enables the system to work, recruited 
drivers in San Francisco, and launched the site in 2010. 
Since then, Uber has spread to 250 cities throughout the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
63
world, constrained only by legal and regulatory challenges 
as traditional taxi drivers ﬁght a rear-guard action, and a 
handful of imitators who got in ﬁrst in a few cities, notably 
London. Although the regulatory issues are serious, the 
new way of catching a cab seems set to kill traditional taxi 
ﬁrms stone dead.
Uber has been incredibly successful already. Although 
it was started with very little money, on 15 May 2014 the 
Financial Times reported that Uber had raised $1 billion of 
funding at a $10 billion valuation.1 Seven months later, the 
ﬁrm raised a further $1.2 billion, but now the reported valu-
ation was more than four times higher — $41 billion.2 And in 
May 2015 the company was reported to be raising a further 
$1.5–2 billion. By then, the valuation had increased to $50 
billion3, and in November 2015 is said to be up to $70 billion4.
As impressive as these valuations are, Uber’s operational 
growth is even more staggering, and the main reason why 
it has been able to raise such colossal funding. At the time 
of writing it was estimated that Uber would be operating 
at an annualized rate of $10 billion of ride value by the end 
of 2015,5 from which it will earn approximately $2 billion 
in commission. Two billion dollars of net revenue for a six-
year-old company is simply extraordinary.
Uber is the most outstanding recent example of proposi-
tion-simplifying, so it warrants close inspection. Of course, 
the company echoes several of the characteristics of other 
proposition-simpliﬁers, but it also reveals much about how 
proposition-simplifying can work today.
One of the more remarkable aspects of Uber has been how 
the company was able to grow in its early days. In September 
2011 one of its blog posts reported:

SIMPLIFY
64 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
“Uber spends virtually zero dollars on marketing, spread-
ing almost exclusively via word of mouth. I’m talking old 
school word of mouth, you know at the water cooler in the 
ofﬁce, at a restaurant when you’re paying the bill, at a party 
with friends — ‘Who’s Ubering home?’ 95 percent of all 
our riders have heard about Uber from other Uber riders. 
Our virality is almost unprecedented. For every seven 
rides we do, our users’ big mouths generate a new rider. 
Imagine if twitter got a new user every seven tweets?”6
The speed at which a truly compelling proposition can dif-
fuse through word of mouth in a superconnected world can 
be surprising, and another reason why analysts and onlook-
ers habitually underestimate the growth and potential size 
of simpliﬁers.
But word of mouth is only one aspect of Uber’s growth 
potential. Other ﬁgures imply that the company is not 
only capturing market share but increasing the size of that 
market. Travis Kalanick stated in early 2015 that the tra-
ditional taxi market in San Francisco is about $140 million 
per year, while Uber’s gross revenues in that city are now 
approximately $500 million per year — a good three times 
larger than the traditional market. Moreover, Uber’s rev-
enues in San Francisco are tripling each year and should 
continue to grow for several years yet, which will easily make 
it ten times larger than the whole of the old market.
Even this understates Uber’s growth potential, though. 
The company is already going beyond merely being a taxi 
service. It is experimenting vigorously, and may become 
a much broader logistics service, spanning personal on-
demand transport, ride pooling, personal logistics, such as 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
65
deliveries and transporting kids to school, car replacement, 
and even business logistics. It certainly has the potential 
to steal market share and increase market size in many of 
these areas.
At this point, after so many accolades, one might conclude 
that Uber was always going to be unbeatable once it per-
fected its service. After all, it created a disruptive experience 
that radically simpliﬁed the taxi proposition; it had a very 
direct revenue model that earned a handsome cut of every 
transaction; customers seemed happy to do the heavy lifting 
of attracting other customers, so there was no need to spend 
fortunes on marketing and advertising; and, as we have seen in 
San Francisco, it could build a multi-million-dollar business in 
just one city, even before it expanded into hundreds of others.
So, we might ask, why did Uber need to raise all those 
billions of dollars? Why couldn’t it fund its growth through 
its own surging cash ﬂow? Wasn’t the original proposition- 
simplifying idea good enough to ensure success?
The answer is that success was certainly not assured, 
and it was probably a near-existential decision to raise the 
amount of funding that the company did in 2014–15. There 
were fundamental characteristics of Uber’s service, and how 
it had to operate within its markets, with which the compa-
ny’s leaders had to grapple. In particular, they faced three 
dramatic threats.
First, Uber’s basic service is easily and cheaply replicable. 
By way of comparison, imagine what you would have to do to 
build and supply a viable rival to a single IKEA store. That 
would be far more difﬁcult and expensive than gathering 
together a few good software developers to build an app 
and a support system, organizing a few hundred drivers, 

SIMPLIFY
66 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
and marketing your new taxi service. Unsurprisingly, then, 
very few companies have attempted to copy IKEA, whereas 
Uber has been copied hundreds of times in various countries 
around the world, in many cases with less than a million 
dollars of investment capital. The importance of this cannot 
be overstated. For Uber to succeed over the long term, it 
has had to grow at a phenomenal rate in order to shut out its 
rivals. And that exponential growth rate is becoming even 
more crucial, since some of those rivals are now receiving 
heavy backing and have global ambitions.
A case in point is Easy Taxi, the Samwer brothers’ clone 
of Uber, which operates in thirty countries, mostly in Latin 
America, the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. With $77 
million raised at the time of writing, it is not even the best 
funded of Uber’s competitors, but it is notable because of 
who is behind it.
Oliver, Alexander and Marc Samwer — founders of 
Rocket Internet in Germany — have practically turned 
cloning good ideas into an art form, scouring the United 
States for proof of concept, then rolling the idea out in 
dozens of countries simultaneously. Few startups are able 
to transition to a multi-country rollout, create the required 
management infrastructure, or attract the investor base to 
fund such ambitious expansion plans in the tight timeframes 
within which Rocket Internet operates. The Samwers leave 
product and proposition formulation, as well as prooﬁng the 
concept in the market place, to other entrepreneurs, then 
muscle in to appropriate and spread the idea. They special-
ize in just one skill — building and rolling out the business 
system as rapidly and efﬁciently as possible in any attractive 
open market they identify.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
67
While this strategy might offend our creative sensibili-
ties, it is brutally effective. Rocket Internet when public in 
October 2014 with a valuation of 6.7 billion. The brochure 
listed sixty-one companies in which it has invested, eleven of 
which have been “proven winners.” To those who criticize 
his lack of innovation, Oliver Samwer says: “In the internet 
business there are Einsteins, and Bob the Builders. I’m a 
Bob the Builder.”7
The second threat faced by Uber is that its rivals not only 
poach valuable customers but also degrade Uber’s service 
characteristics while improving their own. Imagine pick-up 
times in a city with ﬁve rival taxi ﬁrms, each of which oper-
ates two hundred cars. Now imagine the same city has one 
operator with six hundred cars, while the other four ﬁrms 
have only one hundred each. In the latter case, the large 
operator will consistently deliver far shorter waiting times 
than any of the smaller operators. Its ability to optimize 
the efﬁciency of its pick-up and delivery network creates 
a much better service. This is a very powerful network 
effect — being largest matters, and it is very dangerous to be 
substantially smaller than the market leader. Such markets 
invariably consolidate down to one or two main competitors 
over time, as the leading ﬁrm’s product or service becomes 
far better than the rest simply because it is bigger.
Finally, Uber had to address the fact that its business 
is initially local, city-by-city. To realize the advantages of 
a better-optimized pick-up and delivery network and not 
suffer the disadvantages of being a follower, the company 
had to launch in hundreds of cities around the world at the 
same time in order to pre-empt competition. This rapid 
rollout gave the ﬁrm another advantage, too: because Uber 

SIMPLIFY
68 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
established a presence in so many cities, its business custom-
ers soon began to realize the beneﬁts of using a single app 
wherever they were in the world. Hence, the competitive 
footprint and success conditions for competitors started 
to become harder than merely achieving dominance in a 
particular city.
So, far from assuming success is guaranteed, Uber has had 
to behave like a fearsome and paranoid competitor. In August 
2014 the Wall Street Journal focused on Lyft, a smaller San 
Francisco-based competitor of Uber, and declared: “Forget 
Apple versus Google. The ﬁercest battle in the tech capital 
may well be between two heavily ﬁnanced upstarts plotting 
the demise of the taxi industry — and each other.”8 Uber has 
rapidly adjusted its service offering to check Lyft’s advance. 
The former was initially a white-glove town car service, but 
it moved rapidly to offer a more mass-market service based 
on mid-range cars in response to Lyft’s launch positioning. 
Tales of sharp competitive practice have been rife. Lyft has 
accused Uber of poaching its drivers in order to disrupt its 
network growth; and both companies have accused the other 
of ordering and cancelling cars to interfere with service 
levels. Uber’s stance against regulators and unclear legislation 
has been equally aggressive: get in ﬁrst; conciliate the regu-
lators later. And, after relying on word-of-mouth marketing 
in its early days, Uber is now pouring money into recruiting 
drivers and advertising its services everywhere.
And as we have seen, Uber has been a prodigious 
fundraiser and a ﬁerce competitor. The management and 
execution challenges multiply when you decide to build in 
250 cities across ﬁve continents and ﬁght a dozen well-backed 
regional competitors all at once. In these circumstances the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
69
ability to raise plenty of cash becomes a critical competitive 
weapon. This will probably continue for quite some time. 
Since Uber has proven the previously unimagined scale of 
the revenue opportunity in proposition-simplifying sectors 
of transportation and logistics it has started to see a very 
different kind of animal enter the arena. In February 2015, 
for instance, Bloomberg reported: “Google is developing its 
own Uber competitor — the two competitors are going to 
war over self-driving taxis.”9 Google is reported to be testing 
its ride-sharing app with its own employees, attracted by the 
relevance to its long-running  initiative on self-driving cars, 
and no doubt intrigued by the “ﬁre hose of data about trans-
portation patterns within cities.” Life in this space seems set 
to remain fascinating for the foreseeable future.
As with the wheel, the steam engine or the semiconductor, 
some technological advances are widely applicable to many 
problems and markets, and they trigger an explosion of fur-
ther simplifying across a range of activities. The internet 
and its mobile extension through the smartphone are surely 
two of the most powerful simplifying platform technologies 
today as they can create global access to billions of custom-
ers. We now look at two more powerful simpliﬁers that have 
been facilitated by these recent developments.
Spotify
A few years ago, you were probably still fumbling around 
with CDs (and their cracked cases), feeling very modern 
by paying iTunes 99p for every song you wanted to hear 
on your ﬁrst-generation iPod, or being very naughty and 
downloading tracks for free from a shadowy peer-to-peer 

SIMPLIFY
70 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
ﬁle-sharing service that never paid the artists a penny. 
It would have been an outrageous idea to think that you 
might have access to most of the music in the world. Now, 
though, sixty million people can make that claim, courtesy 
of Spotify: three-quarters of them use the service for free 
and put up with annoying adverts between the music, while 
the other quarter pay £9.99 per month for an unfettered, 
all-you-can-hear experience. The latter group are also able 
to save playlists to listen to ofﬂine.
Spotify is another profound consumer proposition-
simpliﬁer, and it displays some of the familiar characteristics. 
Judging from our own experiences with the service, it almost 
certainly increases our consumption of music, and perhaps 
how much we are prepared to pay for music over a lifetime, 
even though it is completely free for most of its users. It has 
also grown in a highly viral way, just like the early Uber, 
because the proposition is so strong and even more social — 
users share their playlists with friends and can follow other 
users’ playlists and favorite artists.
In two respects, however, Spotify is radically different 
from Uber. First, it was extremely hard to develop the ser-
vice and then launch it. But second, having cleared those 
initial hurdles, Spotify became global almost effortlessly.
The value chain that Uber attacked was weak, frag-
mented, poorly organized, and largely indefensible. Spotify, 
by contrast, had to co-opt the concentrated, legally forti-
ﬁed, and calciﬁed grip that four major record labels had 
on the entire music industry. Because this was so difﬁcult 
to execute, requiring enormous upfront investment, and 
because it was not something that could be imitated with a 
million dollars and a few talented developers, the Spotify 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
71
story developed in a very different way from Uber’s. When 
you look at Spotify’s competitive environment, there are 
many competitors, but very few of them are serious (Apple 
Music being a notable exception) or able to attract major 
funding.
The difﬁculty of imitation seems to have given Spotify, 
which now boasts over twenty million licensed tracks, a wide 
lead over any rival. It is not just about discovery, as in the 
case of competitors such as Pandora. On Spotify, users can 
listen to any artist or any song they want. Its largest rival is 
the French company Deezer, which operates in 180 countries 
(Spotify is in only 58), but Deezer has only sixteen million 
users, with only six million of them paying customers.
Airbnb
Like the taxi industry, in the 2000s the hotel sector was ripe 
for disruption. In many cities, hotels in central locations 
were (and still are) overpriced and lacked the “atmospheric” 
character of the place itself. Airbnb enables homeowners to 
offer their couches, spare rooms or entire homes for rent 
for short stays, and the company has become a network of 
over 25,000 active hosts in 190 countries. More than twenty 
million guests have booked thirty million nights on the 
platform since it was founded in 2008.
The beauty of the proposition lies in the experience. For 
the host, it is now easy to operate a “hotel,” however modest, 
with global reach of potential guests. Meanwhile, the guests 
can request anything from a room in a shared apartment 
with a local host to a country estate or a villa by the sea. 
This is obviously a more local experience than staying in a 

SIMPLIFY
72 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
characterless hotel, advertised with the slogan “belong any-
where.” The experience is also easy. You search for a city, 
list the number of guests and number of nights, and ask for 
a room in a shared home (with the host) or an entire home 
(without the host). Then you are able to specify a particular 
neighborhood, host language or amenities. Finally you scroll 
through the matched listings and reviews.
Many guests make their bookings entirely on the basis 
of the reviews. When you arrive, you meet the host, receive 
the keys and get advice about the property itself as well as 
what to do in the neighborhood. After your stay, you are 
encouraged to review the host and the property, and your 
payment is transferred.
Airbnb enables hosts to supplement their income from an 
asset they already own. The company has done a tremendous 
job of ensuring quality proﬁles of properties and giving 
the owners an efﬁcient system to manage all aspects of the 
transaction — from booking, property proﬁles, and guest 
veriﬁcation to payment and insurance.
Like Uber, Airbnb has come under pressure from the 
industry it is disrupting. The legality of generating revenue 
from renting out private property has raised alarm bells 
from regulators, particularly in cities such as New York, 
where vested interests have formed anti-Airbnb groups and 
launched hostile ad campaigns. In response, the company 
has now started to work with city authorities in order to 
ensure its operations are fully legal. Some rival companies 
have also appeared, although all of them are far less success-
ful, with far lower proﬁles, than Airbnb.
Airbnb has already raised $800 million and the company 
is valued at $20 billion. It now offers more lodging options 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
73
than any hotel chain in the world. And, like Uber, its advan-
tages over its traditional rivals are obvious:
• For both guests and hosts, it’s easy to ﬁnd and list 
properties.
• It’s easy to ﬁlter properties based on availability.
• The payment process is simple.
• It’s universal — you can book in 190 countries.
• By clicking one button, a host can schedule a photog-
rapher to present their property in the best light.
• The guest’s ID can be easily veriﬁed.
• Both guests and hosts have access to — and can 
write — detailed reviews.
• Hosts can get insurance easily.
Back to Uber: Results
• Uber has the highest valuation of any private company 
currently backed by venture capital, and this has been 
achieved in just six years. The company raised more 
than $3 billion from a wide range of blue-chip venture 
capitalists in twelve months.
• In January 2015 Uber had approximately 160,000 active 
drivers operating in the United States alone. Figures 
suggest that unless their after-tax costs average more 
than six dollars per hour (petrol, depreciation and insur-
ance), the net hourly earnings of these drivers exceed the 
hourly wages of employed taxi drivers and chauffeurs.10
• The early evidence suggests that Uber can multiply the 
size of the taxi market, perhaps by ten times or more, 
in many of the 250 cities where it operates.

SIMPLIFY
74 
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS
Key Points
1. As with price-simplifying, proposition-simplifying can 
dramatically enlarge a market. While price can make 
a product affordable for more people, a better proposi-
tion can result in much more frequent use of a product.
2. If you are a strong proposition-simpliﬁer, you can 
create word-of-mouth referral, resulting in explosive 
growth with little investment in customer acquisition. 
If you move ﬁrst and/or fastest, you can gain an enor-
mous advantage in building the best service — because 
of the iron laws of networks — as well as really strong 
barriers against your rivals. One further important 
advantage of moving fast is that it enables you to raise 
substantial funding on the most attractive terms: that 
is, at the highest valuations. Speed therefore reinforces 
a virtuous circle.
3. Where it is relatively easy to imitate a product or ser-
vice, constructing a business system around it which 
builds barriers against your opponents becomes vital 
for your long-term success. In Uber’s case the ability 
to use the service in every U.S. city, and in most of the 
world’s other major cities, confers a huge edge.
4. Network effects, economies of scale and other vol-
ume-based economic “goods” necessitate an intensiﬁed 
competitive stance. If you are playing in one of these 
markets you have to become the leading ﬁrm, and you 
have to do it really fast. So, if you can, destroy or mar-
ginalize your rivals in the early days.
5. The “economic goods” do not change over time, and 
the same is generally true of the elements of business 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  TAXI! THE BRAVE NEW WORLD OF APPS 
75
systems. But platform technologies change constantly. 
New enabling technologies are often leading indica-
tors of where the next great wave of innovation can be 
created.
We’ll shortly invite you to consider whether you and your 
ﬁrm should become a price-simpliﬁer or a proposition- 
simpliﬁer. But ﬁrst we need to consider the nature of these 
two strategies a little more, as well as the trade-offs that each 
must make to generate an earthquake in the market.

7
The Two Strategies and  
Their Trade-offs
I wouldn’t give a ﬁg for the simplicity this side 
of complexity; I would give my right arm for 
the simplicity on the far side of complexity.
Oliver Wendell Holmes
T
he two simplifying strategies are very different — in 
what you have to do to make them happen, in what your 
objectives are, and in the way you are rewarded for success. 
By comparing and contrasting them, we can begin to think 
about which you and your ﬁrm might be able to execute before 
anyone else has the same idea. But the two strategies also have 
something in common. At their heart is the imaginative use 
of trade-offs, baked into a unique business system, to outfox 
competitors and deliver a product that the target market will 
buy in droves.

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
77
We’ve seen that there are two “natural positions” to trans-
form a market:
• Price-simplifying: Create a mass market — simplify 
to make a product or service dramatically cheaper. 
Simplicity results in the product being easier to make, 
so simplicity for the producer matters most. The pro-
ducer operates on low margins but enjoys massive 
growth in revenues.
• Proposition-simplifying: Create a premium market — 
simplify to make the product or service dramatically 
better and a joy to use. Simplicity results in the product 
or service being easier to use and usually more useful 
and/or aesthetically appealing, so simplicity for the user 
matters most. The producer enjoys high margins and 
growth in both revenues and proﬁts. The premium 
part of the market will normally be a smaller part of 
the total market than with price-simplifying, although 
in some cases proposition-simplifying can create a new 
mass market, as with smartphones.
We can illustrate the two strategies as shown in Figure 1.
In either case, the market is greatly enlarged, but the 
mass market will normally end up being several times 
larger than the premium market. On the other hand, the 
margins from the premium market may be several times 
greater, so the absolute proﬁt opportunity and the return 
on cash invested may be high and broadly similar which-
ever strategy is adopted. The only exception is the bonanza 
that may accrue if proposition-simplifying also generates 

SIMPLIFY
78 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
a mass market, as with some of Apple’s devices, but this 
phenomenon is rare.
At this stage, all we are seeking is a rough, visceral sense of 
whether you and your ﬁrm may adopt either strategy; and if 
so, which one. The market size and returns are necessary but 
insufﬁcient bases for you to decide to pursue either strategy. 
(As we will see in the next chapter, other very important 
factors must be considered, too.) Yet, somewhere along the 
line, one of the two simplifying strategies will need to spark 
your excitement. Picture what major success might look like, 
then decide between them.
Mass
market
Potential
future market
size
SIMPLICITY
Low
WILLINGNESS TO PAY
High
Low
High
Premium
market
Potential
future market
size
Current
market
size
Figure 1: The simplifying opportunity chart
Proposition-simplifying
Price-simplifying

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
79
Three Precepts for the Price-Simpliﬁer
1. Use simplicity to make something much cheaper both to 
make and to supply. This must always be the primary 
objective.
2. In making the product cheaper, simplify to eliminate what 
we call “expensive utility” — anything the customer 
can do without. Henry Ford eliminated variety of car 
models, features and, eventually, colors. The McDonald 
brothers dispensed with waitresses and broad menu 
options. Ingvar Kamprad provided one style of furni-
ture, reduced variety within each product category, and 
eliminated certain transport costs through self-assembly.
3. Increase utility where it can be provided at little or no 
extra cost. Substitute cheap utility for expensive utility. 
Henry Ford provided a lighter, more robust car that 
was easier to drive and maintain, but did so at no 
extra cost through simple design, lighter materials, 
and an automated production system. Dick and Mac 
McDonald provided better hamburgers and fries than 
were available at the local coffee shop, but because they 
sold so many of them — and automated production — 
they were able to charge only half the price. IKEA 
sells furniture that is not only inexpensive but well 
designed, while also providing play areas and crèches, 
inexpensive restaurants and sometimes entertainment 
for the kids — real beneﬁts that pay for themselves by 
attracting a larger ﬂow of customers.
Deciding which elements of utility to remove and which to 
substitute requires imagination, and putting yourself in the 

SIMPLIFY
80 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
shoes of the mass-market customer. Think about each of our 
three categories separately:
• Greater ease of use. What could this mean in your 
market?
• Greater practical usefulness of the product or service. 
How could you provide this?
• Greater art — everything that makes a product or 
service attractive, yet cannot be reduced to hard useful-
ness or ease of use. Is this a dimension that is missing 
in existing products or services?
Two Precepts for the Proposition-Simpliﬁer
1. The primary objective is to use simplicity to make some-
thing a joy to use — to add utility through greater ease of 
use in the ﬁrst place; then greater usefulness and/or art. 
In the epigraph at the start of this chapter, we quoted 
U.S. Supreme Court judge Oliver Wendell Holmes: 
“I wouldn’t give a ﬁg for the simplicity this side of 
complexity; I would give my right arm for the sim-
plicity on the far side of complexity.” In other words, 
you may have to work through greater complexity in 
order to provide greater simplicity to your customers.
 The Macintosh illustrates this perfectly. The great 
thing about the Mac when it emerged in 1984 was that 
it provided an accessible, modern PC — the desktop 
made life so much easier for the user, when compared 
with the old type of personal computer where you had 
to write code to get it to do anything. The ability to 
access ﬁles in a ﬂash by clicking on an icon, to print 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
81
a page exactly as it appeared on the screen, and to 
scroll smoothly through a document were huge break-
throughs in terms of ease of use, utility, and art. But 
what was easy for the user was not easy for Apple to 
provide. In fact, writing the Mac’s software was horren-
dously complex. Apple’s engineers went through hell 
to reach the simplicity on the far side of complexity. 
And it took chief rival Microsoft another two or three 
years to develop a barely acceptable Windows version. 
More than half of the battle is knowing what the end 
result should be. To get there, you either have to make 
a huge leap in imagining what would make life simpler 
for the customer — in effect, what the experts at Xerox 
PARC had achieved as early as 1979 — or, like Steve 
Jobs, see an early prototype and realize where it is head-
ing and how it might be improved. The end result for the 
proposition-simpliﬁer is always a giant vault forwards in 
terms of simplicity and utility for the customer.
2. A secondary objective is to use simplicity to make the 
product cheaper to make; or at least to ensure that the 
extra utility far outweighs the extra cost.
Making Clever Trade-Offs
When developing new products and business systems, 
designers always have to make trade-offs — that is, they 
have to decide between two positive attributes, since they 
can’t have both together to a great degree. For example, 
car designers have to trade off power for fuel efﬁciency, or 
vice versa — you can’t have fast acceleration and power and
high mileage per gallon. Another common trade-off is that 

SIMPLIFY
82 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
of high service against low price — as, for example, with a 
taxi versus a bus. The art is to make trade-offs that appeal 
to a particular customer segment and give them what they 
really want to a higher degree than any other product. Make 
trade-offs that beneﬁt both your ﬁrm and your customers.
For the price-simpliﬁer, this is straightforward. The cen-
tral objective is always to reach a very low price — which the 
customer will value enormously — by trading off attributes 
that your customers think are less important. Imagine a hag-
gling conversation with a typical customer. For instance, the 
person who invented the supermarket might have said to his 
target customer, “If you are willing to push a trolley around 
my big shop, pick the products you want yourself, and take 
them to the till, I will charge you much lower prices than 
your local grocery store.” Similarly, imagine the McDonald 
brothers saying, “If you will line up for your meal and accept 
a limited menu, we will cut the price of your burgers in half.” 
Or Ingvar Kamprad: “If you will drive some distance to my 
giant warehouse of a store, follow the signs, and go the long 
way round so you have to walk past dozens of products you 
weren’t intending to buy, pick your furniture, push it to the 
checkout, drive it home, and assemble it yourself, I will give 
you stylish goods at prices you won’t believe.”
Yet it’s usually not enough to slash prices without providing 
some other beneﬁts, too. Even Aldi offers the convenience 
of a large parking lot and enticing “job lot” merchandise in 
addition to rock-bottom prices. Cunning price-simpliﬁers 
always substitute cheap beneﬁts for the expensive ones they 
eliminate. The latter may include staff. There is an implicit 
deal with the customer: “Put your back into some of the 
heavy lifting that is done by our rivals’ employees, and you 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
83
will get a fantastic price and plenty of other beneﬁts, too.”
At IKEA, you get good design, entertainment to keep 
your children amused, and a wide range of products to take 
home immediately. At McDonald’s, you get great prices, 
high-quality burgers and fries, fast and efﬁcient service, 
cheerful surroundings, kids’ play areas, and spotlessly 
clean toilets. Amazon offers unbeatable prices — which is 
hardly surprising when you consider its scale and wafer-thin 
margins — but also a one-click service, extensive product 
reviews, and super-fast delivery.
The principle is slightly less obvious, but equally true, for 
proposition-simpliﬁers. They make deals with their more 
afﬂuent customers, with the latter persuaded to pay a little 
more for something that they believe is much better. The way 
to square this circle is to go through the complex process of 
simplifying what is bought. Think of the examples already 
mentioned: the speed and intuitive nature of a Macintosh; 
the ease of use and peace of mind in taking an Uber cab; 
the insight and rapid results for a chief executive who seeks 
advice from BCG or Bain & Company.
But the highest form of making a trade-off comes when 
the trade-off is not really a trade-off at all — what we call a 
“virtuous trade-off.”
Virtuous Trade-Offs
Instead of choosing between two good things, if you are 
very lucky or very creative, you may be able to trade off 
something bad against something that is good.
At the start of the Second World War, it was evident that 
there was going to be a shortage of steel and other metals 

SIMPLIFY
84 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
among all the combatants. But Britain had a plentiful supply 
of wood . . . and furniture-makers. So Geoffrey de Havilland 
designed a very simple but fast bomber that could be made 
almost entirely out of wood, and ﬂown by just two men. The 
raw material made the plane lighter than its rivals, enabling 
it to be ﬁtted with smaller and simpler engines. It was also 
easier and cheaper to build. By using wood and eliminating 
protective armor and defensive gun turrets, de Havilland 
enabled his “Mosquito” to ﬂy at well over four hundred 
miles an hour, making it faster than any German ﬁghter and 
therefore impervious to air attack. Manpower and operat-
ing costs were halved, and fatalities almost eliminated. De 
Havilland pushed through his simple design in the teeth of 
Air Ministry opposition: the establishment could not believe 
that a bomber without protective guns and armor plating 
was a viable proposition.
The genius of the Mosquito was that it transcended the 
traditional trade-off between weight and speed. The more 
protection a plane possessed (a good thing), the less speed 
it could achieve (a bad thing). Protection versus speed had 
always seemed an inescapable dilemma, but the Mosquito 
changed all that. Since no enemy plane could catch it, it 
needed no armor plating. So it could be even lighter. Suddenly 
there was no trade-off — the speed provided the protection. 
With the Mosquito, pilots had both unbeatable speed and 
unparalleled protection — the two went together, creating 
a virtuous circle. It was as if de Havilland had suddenly dis-
covered how to give a Ferrari the fuel economy of a Mini.
The plane proved to be an immense success. In 1943 the 
Commander in Chief of the Luftwaffe, Hermann Göring, 
admitted, “It makes me furious when I see the Mosquito. I 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
85
turn yellow and green with envy.”1
Virtuous trade-offs are different from normal hard-choice 
trade-offs. If you can make a virtuous trade-off, you end up 
with two good attributes, instead of one good and one bad. 
This is really creative simplifying — ingenuity that trumps 
iron laws. Many “giving back” attributes of price-simpliﬁed 
products are really virtuous trade-offs in disguise. For 
instance, if a private art gallery offers visitors a nice big glass 
of champagne when they walk through the door, knowing 
that its sales and proﬁts will increase as a result, it is deploy-
ing a virtuous trade-off — between giving away glasses of 
champagne and proﬁts. Similarly, IKEA’s free entertainment 
and play areas boost revenues and proﬁts. The trade-off is 
virtuous. The stuff for kids is a genuine beneﬁt, but its cost 
is illusory. Both customers and the company win.
A Visit to London Zoo
In 1935 the publisher Allen Lane, who was waiting for a 
train at Exeter station, was unable to ﬁnd a good, inexpen-
sive book at the bookstall to read on his long journey back 
to London. This started him thinking, leading him to the 
conclusion that he should price-simplify.
Lane wanted the quality of a hardback combined with the 
low price of a paperback. At the time, paperbacks were gen-
erally reprints of old titles, usually by dead authors, and they 
were shoddily produced to cut costs. Hardbacks, by contrast, 
were so expensive that they were beyond the pockets of most 
working people. Lane thought that if he could push the price 
down to sixpence (around £1.50 or $2.25 in today’s money — 
a ﬁgure that even Kindle books rarely match today), he could 

SIMPLIFY
86 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
create a new mass market by tempting ordinary people to 
buy books rather than borrow them from public libraries. 
The main problem was that it was expensive to buy the 
rights to high-quality, contemporary ﬁction. Substituting 
a paper cover for a hard one would save some money, but 
nowhere enough to reduce the price by the necessary 90 
percent. Lane’s next step was to persuade everyone — 
authors, publishers assigning rights, bookstores, and his own 
company (Penguin) itself — to accept lower margins. The 
authors’ initial recalcitrance was voiced by George Orwell: 
“In my capacity as reader I applaud the Penguin Books; in 
my capacity as writer I pronounce them anathema.”2 Lane 
then cut his costs further by moving the company out of its 
expensive central London premises and onto a large site in 
Harmondsworth in what was then rural Middlesex (it now 
overlooks Heathrow Airport). He was charged £2000 for the 
land and £200 for the cabbages growing on it. But still the 
sums didn’t add up.
Lane needed a new approach and ﬁnally he spotted one 
that had eluded both himself and everyone else. His great 
idea was to sell Penguin books from non-traditional out-
lets — in particular kiosks, such as the one in Exeter station 
that couldn’t offer him a decent cheap read, and general 
stores. The ﬁrst breakthrough came when Woolworth’s, 
the top mass-market general store, agreed to take 100,000 
Penguins on consignment. Almost immediately, Lane’s titles 
were available in far more outlets than other publishers’ 
books, so he was able to order much larger print runs and 
thereby reduce unit cost. Initial runs for popular hardbacks 
were around ﬁve thousand at the time, while for Penguins 
they could be twenty thousand. That meant the goal of 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
87
sixpence per book was achievable, since production costs 
were now so much lower. Lane narrowed his list down to 
just ten titles, then sold the entire list to his outlets, rather 
than the individual titles.
Allen Lane invented a whole new publishing business 
system — a mass market based on distribution that was 
much wider than anything that had been attempted before. 
The principal advantage for customers was that prices were 
roughly a tenth of those for comparable hardbacks, yet the 
quality was still high. The roster of authors was ﬁrst rate, 
too. Lane’s ﬁrst ten titles were all written by bestselling 
novelists at the top of their game, including Agatha Christie, 
Ernest Hemingway, André Maurois, Compton Mackenzie, 
Beverley Nichols, and Mary Webb. The uniform design 
was arresting: the book title, in a white band, was framed 
by two borders of color — orange for novels and green 
for crime — with the famous Penguin logo — drawn by 
a nineteen-year-old ofﬁce junior during a visit to London 
Zoo — centered below. The design became a classic, and an 
updated version of the logo is still used today. In contrast 
to the prevailing cheap paperbacks, Lane used decent paper 
and bindings that were made to last for years. Penguin’s 
wide distribution network also made the books easier to buy 
at times when they were most desired by potential readers.
At the heart of the Penguin revolution, though, was a 
virtuous trade-off. Lane avoided the traditional trade-off 
between price and quality by redeﬁning quality in terms of 
the contents of the book, not the cover’s material. He recog-
nized that, as we would say today, books are software, not 
hardware. His simple system — based on a limited list, a new 
distribution channel and high print runs — made it possible 

SIMPLIFY
88 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
to produce high-quality books at extremely low prices.
Note, though, that at the root of the virtuous trade-off 
lay an enormous expansion of demand. The depth of Lane’s 
insight — or gamble — can be gauged by contrasting the 
contemporary and well-argued view of George Orwell that 
Penguin Books would lead to a decline in the amount of 
money spent on books:
“The Penguin books are splendid value for sixpence, so 
splendid that if the other publishers had any sense they 
would combine against them and suppress them. It is a 
great mistake, of course, to imagine that cheap books are 
good for the book trade. If you have, for instance, ﬁve 
shillings to spend [about £15 or £22.50 in today’s money], 
and the normal price of a book is half-a-crown [£7.50 or 
£11.25 today] you are quite likely to spend your whole ﬁve 
shillings on two books. But if the books are sixpence each, 
you are not going to buy ten of them, because you don’t 
want as many as ten; your saturation-point will have been 
reached long before that. Probably you will buy three 
sixpenny books and spend the rest of your ﬁve shillings 
on seats at the ‘movies.’ Hence the cheaper the books 
become, the less money is spent on books.”3
The great ﬂaw in Orwell’s argument was that he considered 
only prosperous book-buyers, those who had ﬁve shillings — 
the weekly wage of a laborer — to spend on books or some 
other pastime. Laborers could afford no more than sixpence 
for a book, but they wanted to own books just as much as 
their rich neighbors did. So once Lane was able to cut his 
cover price to that extraordinarily low level a huge number 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
89
of working- and lower-middle-class people suddenly became 
book-buyers for the ﬁrst time in their lives.
So it goes. A price that is a fraction of the previous price 
for a desirable item will always create a vast new market. 
Moreover, the size of that market is always greatly under-
estimated, even by sage observers such as George Orwell. 
Therein lies the marvelous opportunity for price-simpliﬁers.
Conventional thinking will never lead you to a virtuous 
trade-off. You have to be willing to construct a new route to 
virtue via lateral thinking or a novel argument. For instance, 
“If we do X, then we should arrive at a virtuous trade-off. 
We can avoid a trade-off that everyone else thinks is inev-
itable, such as one between a well-produced popular book 
and a high cover price.”
In your market, can you ﬁnd a way to increase an import-
ant consumer beneﬁt while also increasing your own supplier 
beneﬁt? Can you see a connection between any one of the 
beneﬁts in the left-hand column and any one on the right? 
(Look beyond the beneﬁts that lie next to each other.)
Consumer Beneﬁt
Supplier Beneﬁt
Power or performance up
Market share and volumes up
Easier to buy
Costs down
Easier to use
Proﬁts up
Speed of consumption
Speed of delivery
Advantage of being in a larger 
network
Advantage of being in a larger 
network
Lower prices
Lower costs
Higher standards
Greater customer loyalty and 
retention
Greater consistency
Lower cost of recruiting customers

SIMPLIFY
90 
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS
Self-service beneﬁts customer
Self-service beneﬁts supplier
Lighter
More portable
New segment of consumers
Key Points from Part One
1. There are two reliable strategies for successful simpli-
fying to create a very attractive star business that can 
stand the test of time. However, the two strategies you 
may use are very different. Price-simplifying focuses on 
“simple to make,” relying on a spectacularly low price 
to generate a mass market. Proposition-simplifying 
makes the product a joy to use — easier, more useful 
and more aesthetically pleasing. It is time for you to 
consider whether either strategy could be successful 
in your market, and whether it could be devised and 
executed by you and/or your ﬁrm.
2. Price-simpliﬁers substitute cheap customer utility for 
expensive customer utility.
3. Proposition-simpliﬁers work through the complexity 
of a sophisticated product or service until it becomes 
really easy to use.
4. Both types of simpliﬁer must be adept at making trade-
offs — delivering superb value for money yet also high 
proﬁts. This is achieved through shrewd and original 
redesign of the product and how it is delivered. How 
might you do this in your market?
5. The ideal is to transcend normal trade-offs by discov-
ering “virtuous trade-offs” — where you have two good 
attributes rather than one good and one bad attribute. 

SIMPLIFY
PART 1  •  THE TWO STRATEGIES AND THEIR TRADE-OFFS 
91
New virtuous trade-offs are always out there, waiting 
to be unearthed. The best of them are great for the 
customer, great for the ﬁrm and lethal to competitors. 
What might be your virtuous trade-off?
Conclusion
We hope we have given enough examples to convince you 
that there are two attractive and viable ways to create a 
valuable new star business through simplifying. If you are 
convinced and enthusiastic, you need to decide which of the 
two strategies will ﬁt your market opportunity, your skills 
and those of your ﬁrm, and be the most difﬁcult for your 
competitors to adopt or replicate. Once you have chosen 
your strategy, ﬂesh it out in detail and work out how to 
execute it brilliantly. You need to think profoundly about 
the economics of your market and of your existing and pro-
spective competitors. You must also consider what will be 
required to sustain simplifying success.
In brief, you will need to learn how to simplify for your 
own market.
No plan, it has been said, survives contact with the enemy. 
That’s true enough. But the more deeply you think before 
you act — and the more you know about what has caused 
other simpliﬁers to win or lose — the better your project 
launch will be, the more prepared for what lies ahead you 
will be, the more adroit your improvisation will be, and the 
greater your chance of magniﬁcent success will be.
Part Two is our best attempt to gird your loins for the 
ﬁght.


PART TWO
How to Simplify
In Part Two, we map out in detail how to simplify by describ-
ing what you will need to do for each of the two strategies. 
As in Part One, we proceed by mixing examples of what 
successful (and sometimes unsuccessful) simpliﬁers have 
done in the past with lessons and rules of thumb that we 
have distilled from our case studies and from the most useful 
principles of strategy.
There is more texture in this part, and our ﬁrst case, 
Honda, is an instructive vignette of how a wholly inap-
propriate strategy can be corrected by “contact with the 
enemy” — that is, by encountering inconvenient market 
reality and rival ﬁrms. With the beneﬁt of historical hindsight, 
we hope you may gain a degree of prefabricated foresight, 
or at least be alert to the pitfalls and how to surmount the 
roadblocks you will inevitably meet along the way.
For reasons that will become apparent, in this part we 
reverse the order of Part One, dealing with how to proposi-
tion-simplify before tackling how to price-simplify.
But before we get to the “how,” we must ﬁrst address the 

SIMPLIFY
94 
PART 
issue of “which.” Price- and proposition-simplifying are both 
game-changing strategies, but they are mutually exclusive. 
Which is the right one for you? The next chapter will help 
you decide.

8
Which Type of Simplifier  
Will You Be?
Modern industry never looks upon the 
existing form of process as ﬁnal. The 
technical basis of that industry is therefore 
revolutionary.1
Karl Marx
T
o be a price-simpliﬁer or a proposition-simpliﬁer — that 
is the issue.
Here are four questions that will help you decide which one 
you should be:
1. Do your ﬁrm’s attitudes — its policies and culture — 
make it more disposed to pursue price-simplifying or 
proposition-simplifying?

SIMPLIFY
96 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
2. Has a competitor already occupied one or both of the 
target positions?
3. Can you see the key to unlocking either position?
4. Does your ﬁrm have people with the necessary skills to 
execute the target strategy? If not, do you know how 
you might recruit them and from where?
For an interactive version of this test, visit www.
SIMPLIFYforCEOs.com, which will help you select 
which of the two simplifying strategies better ﬁts your 
organization.
The Attitude Test
Try taking the test that is presented over the next few pages. 
Give your ﬁrst response without thinking about it for too 
long. Your answer should be placed on the scale from 0 to 10 
that appears below each question. Place a tick on the scale 
to indicate where your ﬁrm currently resides. In most cases, 
the answer to the question will be either a straight “Yes” or 
“No”; so, wherever possible, choose either 0 or 10. Move 
towards the middle of the scale only when there is no clear 
answer. Note that “Yes” is sometimes positioned on the left 
of the scale, and sometimes on the right (and the same is 
true for “No,” of course). You may add your ticks to the book 
itself so you have a permanent record of your answers, or — 
if you want to keep the book pristine — you could always 
photocopy the pages of the test.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
97
1. Do you believe that your ﬁrm or a competitor could cut 
costs and prices by more than 50 percent?
a. No
b. Yes
NO (a) 
YES (b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
2. If you started again from scratch, would you see more 
potential in:
a. Making the product or service a joy to use
b. Making it simpler so that you could cut prices by a 
large amount
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
3. What are the operating margins in your business? 
(Operating margin is EBIT — earnings before interest 
and tax — divided by revenue.)
a. Over 25%
b. 11–25%
c. 10% or less (including losses)
(a)
(b)
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

SIMPLIFY
98 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
4. Are you currently the lowest-cost and price competitor 
in your market?
a. No
b. Yes
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
5. Has your ﬁrm invested in state-of-the-art systems to 
speed product or service ﬂows and drive out cost?
a. No
b. Yes
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
6. Which do you think is more important — your ﬁrm’s 
operating margin or the return on cash invested?
a. Operating margin
b. Return on cash invested
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
7. How long is your time horizon when you make a 
serious capital investment?
a. 1–5 years
b. 6–10 years
c. More than 10 years
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
99
8. How important is revenue growth to your ﬁrm?
a. Important
b. Vital
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
9. Is — or was — the founder of your ﬁrm:
a. A visionary obsessed with “insanely great” products 
or services, making them a joy to use and solving 
customer problems
b. Frugal and penny-pinching
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
10. Is your ﬁrm’s culture:
a. Meritocratic/elitist — the top 5 percent of the ﬁrm 
make or break it
b. Egalitarian — for example, similar ofﬁce space and 
facilities for everyone, emphasis on teamwork, no 
reserved parking spot
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
11. Does your ﬁrm believe in using simplicity mainly:
a. To make products/services better
b. To make products/services cheaper
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10

SIMPLIFY
100 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
12. Is it important for your ﬁrm to hide complexity from 
customers so that the product/service is easy for them 
to use?
a. Yes
b. No
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
13. Is the product/service’s usefulness, ease of use, and 
appearance or emotional appeal to customers very 
important to the ﬁrm?
a. Yes
b. No
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
14. Is the price of the product or service the most important 
thing?
a. No
b. Yes
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
101
15. Does the ﬁrm believe that being the leader in the market 
overall or being the leader in a premium segment that 
will pay more for the product is more important?
a. Being the leader in the premium segment
b. Being the leader in the market overall
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
16. Which do you think is more important — investment in 
people or investment in production and delivery systems for 
customers?
a. Investment in people
b. Investment in systems to deliver consistency for 
customers and to keep costs low
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
17. How important is constant and relentless innovation in 
your ﬁrm?
a. Vital
b. It’s more important to get the business system right 
to start with, and then make gradual improvements 
afterwards
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10

SIMPLIFY
102 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
18. Which is more important in your ﬁrm?
a. Developing new projects
b. Making the existing business system run smoothly
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
19. Is there a continual buzz about change in your ﬁrm, or 
is it more valuable to do the basics right every time?
a. Buzz about change
b. Basics right every time
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
20. Which is the better description of your ﬁrm?
a. Dynamic and free-wheeling
b. Disciplined and predictable
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
21. How much does your ﬁrm encourage risk-taking?
a. It is ﬁne to take big risks, even if they don’t pay off
b. Only moderate risk-taking is acceptable
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
103
22. Does your ﬁrm aim to:
a. Captivate the customer with something new
b. Impress the customer with great value every day
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
23. Which is more important?
a. Designing the product or service itself
b. Designing the business system underpinning the 
production and delivery of the product or service
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
24. Does your business aim to provide a universal product 
or service that is the same always and everywhere?
a. No
b. Yes
(a)
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
25. What is the level of your organization’s overheads (general 
administrative and sales expenses, marketing, product 
development, research and development, and so forth)?
a. High
b. Low
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10

SIMPLIFY
104 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
Scoring
Add up the scores for all twenty-ﬁve questions. The mini-
mum score is zero and the maximum score is 250.
As you may have realized, the scales below each question 
are designed so that the left-hand side represents the typical 
answer of a proposition-simpliﬁer, and the right-hand side 
that of a price-simpliﬁer. So, if you have added ticks to the 
scales on the preceding pages, you will probably see at a 
glance the better strategy for your organization.
For a more precise appraisal, though, this is how to inter-
pret your total score:
0–30 Your organization is highly suited to 
proposition-simplifying, and not at all to 
price-simplifying.
 
31–50 Your organization is quite well suited 
to proposition-simplifying, but not to 
price-simplifying.
51–99 There is a slight leaning towards 
proposition-simplifying. If your 
organization wants to proposition-simplify, 
it will have to change some of its policies. 
Price-simplifying is probably not feasible.
 100–150 There is no substantial leaning towards 
either form of simplifying. This is a red 
light — your organization is probably 
unsuitable for either strategy.
 151–199 There is a slight leaning towards price-
simplifying. If your organization wants 
to pursue this strategy, it will have to 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
105
change some of its policies. Proposition-
simplifying is probably not feasible.
 200–219 Your organization is quite well suited 
to price-simplifying, but not to 
proposition-simplifying.
220–250 Your organization is highly well suited 
to price-simplifying, and not at all to 
proposition-simplifying.
The Gap Test
Business strategy — especially when it involves case studies 
from business schools — is always written with the beneﬁt 
of hindsight and often with a very broad brush. It’s like the 
plot of an old-fashioned thriller in which the good guys and 
the bad guys are sharply deﬁned: the good guys always get 
stuck in terrible ﬁxes, but they know what they are doing and 
somehow emerge victorious as the story races to its climax.
But business does not work like this. The good guys often 
don’t have a clue what they are doing. They try one approach, 
ﬁnd it doesn’t work, then pivot to a different strategy, and 
another, and another, until they ﬁnally ﬁnd one that works.
A superb illustration of this phenomenon is the struggle 
in the 1960s and 1970s between the iconic motorcycle man-
ufacturer Harley-Davidson and the Japanese upstart Honda. 
We know that Honda eventually won the war because they 
price-simpliﬁed. They were able to introduce to the market 
bikes that were “inferior” to those of Harley-Davidson — 
lower in power and much smaller — but priced much more 
competitively. According to a careful reconstruction of history 
by the Boston Consulting Group — conducted for Tony Benn, 

SIMPLIFY
106 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
the UK’s socialist Trade and Industry Minister in 1975, who 
wanted to explore strategy options for Britain’s ailing motor-
cycle industry — Honda won because they adopted a different 
business system with much lower costs than Harley. Japanese 
labor productivity was far higher than that in the UK, and 
Honda also had much greater scale in the production of small 
engines. This, in turn, rested on a large domestic motorcy-
cle market and the fact that the same engines were used in 
lawnmowers and other applications as well as in motorcycles. 
Honda started with a 50cc bike and then gradually worked 
its way up, eventually challenging Harley in all but the most 
powerful and expensive bikes. It could do this because it had 
much lower costs and charged much lower prices.2
As an interpretation of what happened, the BCG report 
is brilliant — superbly written, incisive economic analy-
sis based on accurate data. As history, though, it is bunk. 
Because Honda actually started with the wrong strategy and 
found the right one only by accident.
Honda “knew” that its little 50cc delivery bike had 
no market in America, so it did not try to sell it there. 
Unsurprisingly, the company’s market research showed that 
Americans liked heavy, fast, powerful bikes . . . and that price 
was relatively unimportant to them. So Honda decided to 
design and make a big, relatively expensive bike. Then they 
sent three employees to Los Angeles to start selling it.
The whole project was a total ﬁasco. Most dealers refused 
even to stock the Honda bikes. But even worse was to come 
when the Honda men managed to sell a few hundred of 
them. Honda had no experience of making bikes that were 
driven over long distances on freeways, and it soon turned 
out that its new product was no good for this — the clutches 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
107
wore out in no time and oil leaks splattered American roads. 
Honda conscientiously air-freighted replacement parts from 
Japan to the United States, but the expense of doing so 
nearly bankrupted the ﬁrm.
Kihachiro Kawashima had the unenviable task of leading 
Honda’s three-man American sales and marketing team. One 
Saturday he sought relief from his work troubles by going 
dirt-biking in the hills around LA on the little “Supercub” 
50cc bike he’d shipped over from Japan. The next week, he 
invited his colleagues to share this biking therapy. (They had 
had also brought over Supercubs to get around LA.) To cut a 
long story short, these three Dinky Toy bikes were noticed 
and admired by the other dirt-bikers, with many of them 
asking where they could buy one. The three Honda executives 
became convinced that they could sell the Supercub for recre-
ational purposes, mainly for the type of off-road biking they 
themselves enjoyed each weekend. Head ofﬁce in Japan hated 
the idea, because they still believed the market research which 
stated that chunky Americans would never buy tiny Japanese 
bikes. But out of sheer desperation — after the evident fail-
ure of the big-bike strategy — they eventually agreed to let 
Kawashima give it a go. The rest you know. The small-bike 
market took off, initially among off-road enthusiasts, but then 
with commuters and other road users, too. The U.S. motor-
cycle market grew from 550,000 units in 1959 to around ﬁve 
million a year by 1975, almost all driven by Honda’s small-bike 
policy.3 As the company sold more bikes, it was able to cut 
costs and retail price even further, and the market exploded.
The moral of this story is that Honda initially chose the 
wrong strategy — it targeted ground that was already well 
occupied by a competitor with better products. Instead, it 

SIMPLIFY
108 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
should have aimed for a gap through price-simplifying, for 
which it already had the ideal product. Honda could have 
saved itself a great deal of money and frustration if it had 
asked a simple question from the outset: “Does a competent 
competitor already occupy the ground we plan to target?” 
If the answer to that question is “Yes” — as it would have 
been in this instance — that is always a red ﬂag. A necessary 
follow-up question is: “Can we simplify to provide a product 
that is better in terms of usefulness, ease of use and/or art?” 
Unless the answer to that question is a clear “Yes,” too, it is 
better to scrap the whole project.
Every ﬁrm should abide by two decision rules:
• If the market leader is competing on features and per-
formance, do not try to muscle your way into its market 
unless and until you have simpliﬁed to provide a much 
superior product that is a joy to use.
• If there is a gap and no ﬁrm is occupying the price-
simplifying ground, and you can think of a way to cut 
prices in half, go for it.
In 1931, Charles Guth bought the Pepsi-Cola Company. He 
was already a successful entrepreneur, but Pepsi was just a 
shell company, with a trademark and a formula, but no sales. 
Guth tried to breathe life into the brand by selling it through 
Loft, Inc., his chain of confectionery shops. It didn’t work. 
Meanwhile, Coca-Cola remained totally dominant in the 
cola market, increasing its sales and proﬁts even during the 
Great Depression.
Guth realized he had to try a new tack, so he price-
simpliﬁed. He effectively halved the price of cola by selling 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
109
a twelve-ounce bottle of Pepsi for a nickel, the same price as 
a six-ounce bottle of Coke. A radio jingle — to the tune of 
“Do Ye Ken John Peel” — promoted the offer throughout 
the country:
Pepsi-Cola hits the spot
Twelve full ounces, that’s a lot
Twice as much for a nickel too
Pepsi-Cola is the drink for you
The new strategy was clever because the vast majority of 
the cost of a bottle of cola lies in the bottling and distribu-
tion, not in the ingredients, so the cost difference between 
a twelve-ounce bottle and a six-ounce bottle was relatively 
small. Of course, it cost a bit more to make and transport 
the larger bottles, but nowhere near twice as much. Hence 
the extra value for customers far exceeded the additional cost 
for Pepsi-Cola.
Guth’s business system was pretty rudimentary, but it 
worked. In less than four years he built ﬁve bottling plants 
and a network of 313 franchised bottlers, all churning out 
the new bigger bottles. No other soft-drink producer moved 
quickly enough to copy Pepsi’s strategy. Coca-Cola refused 
to contemplate competing on price and did not retaliate, even 
though, with its much larger economies of scale and far lower 
costs, it could easily have bankrupted Pepsi if it had chosen to 
create a new “ﬁghting brand” (not Coke) to imitate its rival’s 
strategy and undercut the price. That was a fateful decision. 
By 1940, Pepsi had a 10.8 percent share of the total U.S. soft-
drinks market, and it was more than a ﬁfth of the size of Coke, 
from a standing start less than a decade earlier. The following 

SIMPLIFY
110 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
year, Pepsi declared a pre-tax proﬁt of $14.9 million, which 
compared very respectably with the market leader’s $55.2 mil-
lion.4 A one-horse race had become the two-horse race that 
we have witnessed ever since — and it started when Pepsi took 
the price-simplifying ground that Coca-Cola had ignored.
But what if there is already a mass market, yet no sub-
stantial premium market? If you can think of a new strategy 
and build a unique a new business system, occupy the vacant 
ground:
• If no ﬁrm is the clear leader in proposition-simplifying, 
and you can simplify to deliver a much better product 
or experience, go for it!
In 1921, Pierre du Pont, the boss of General Motors (GM), 
asked his vice-president of operations, Alfred Sloan, to look 
at product policy and work out a new strategy to compete 
with Ford. The prospects seemed bleak: Ford was dominant, 
with 62 percent of the market; GM was only a quarter the 
size. Indeed, its disadvantages in terms of costs and proﬁts 
were even greater than this would suggest, as its volume was 
split between ﬁve separate companies, all of which competed 
with the others as well as with Ford.
Presented with this uninviting task, Sloan did not attempt to 
compete with Ford in what we would call the price-simplifying 
space. Instead, he pitched GM into the proposition-simplifying 
space. He deﬁned new segments of the market, and tailored 
products for them that would excite target customers. He 
started by giving each of the ﬁve GM car marques a distinctive 
position and price range, eliminating duplication and compe-
tition for the same customers between them. This not only 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
111
improved margins for GM but simpliﬁed the product image 
and role for the buyer. Each marque was appropriate for a 
different kind of buyer, based on how much he (it was nearly 
always a he) could afford to pay. The entry-level marque was 
the Chevrolet, positioned as a better — if slightly more expen-
sive — alternative to Ford’s Model T. Next came Oakland (soon 
to be renamed Pontiac), then Buick, then Oldsmobile, and 
ﬁnally, at the apex of customer aspiration, Cadillac. Customers 
were encouraged to trade up to whichever GM marque was 
positioned immediately above the one they already owned.
Sloan also introduced annual model changes. “The changes 
in the new model,” he wrote, “should be so novel and attrac-
tive as to create demand for the new value.” This he identiﬁed 
as a matter of style — “art,” as we have deﬁned it. “Each line of 
General Motors cars should preserve a distinction of appear-
ance, so that one knows on sight a Chevrolet, a Pontiac, an 
Oldsmobile, a Buick, or a Cadillac.” He set up a new “Art and 
Color Section” in Detroit and installed Harley Earl — who 
had previously worked in Hollywood, making custom car 
bodies for movie stars — as its chief. In a more modest way, 
Sloan wanted his cars to be a joy to own and somehow to 
reﬂect his customers’ personalities. By contrast, Henry Ford, 
says the historian Richard Tedlow, “made no concession to 
consumer self-expression ... he felt so strongly that people 
should not want anything other than basic transportation.”5
Sloan also improved ease of use for drivers and product 
utility, adding new features such as gear shifters and shock 
absorbers as standard, features that Ford’s Model T did not 
boast.6 Finally, he facilitated purchase by extending credit 
to both customers and dealers — making GM the ﬁrst car-
maker to offer this. Local dealers immediately lined up to 

SIMPLIFY
112 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
defect from the frugal Ford system to the more open-handed 
GM one, which resulted in a massive increase in the quality 
and quantity of the company’s dealer network. This was espe-
cially important for GM’s trade-in/trade-up policy, which 
Ford, still with just one basic model, could not emulate. Sloan 
courted the dealers assiduously, asking for feedback on GM’s 
products and plans, and on customer attitudes. He even had 
a special railroad car ﬁtted out as an ofﬁce, so that he and his 
team could visit every dealer in a city in turn.7
By doing the opposite of Ford, GM not only occupied 
the product proposition space but gained overall market 
leadership in 1931, a position it then kept for the next seven-
ty-seven years. It ﬁnally lost the top spot in 2007 to another 
proposition-simpliﬁer, Toyota, which, just as GM had done 
decades earlier, offered a simpler range and a much high-
er-quality product. In 2008, GM sold nine different vehicles 
that were all priced at $25,500. Toyota offered just two.8
So, we can restate the lesson in one rule:
• Go for the gap — and do the opposite from the market 
leader before anyone else does.
This bring us on to our next test.
The Keys Test
Successful simpliﬁers always come up with a new key, or keys, 
to unlock and transform a market. These keys are almost 
never based on market research. Instead, they come from 
insight — often a sudden epiphany or a bolt from the blue 
that nearly always arrives away from the ofﬁce. But one of our 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
113
aims in this book is to simplify and systematize insight. We 
believe that by studying previous conceptual breakthroughs, it 
is possible to emulate them and adapt them for a new context.
A striking ﬁnding of our research is that certain patterns 
keep recurring in the most successful simpliﬁcation stories. 
Though there might be one initial key that unlocks the imag-
ination — Ingvar Kamprad chopping off the legs of a table to 
stuff it into his car boot; the McDonald brothers applying the 
industrial assembly-line process to their restaurant — usually 
that key leads to another, then a third, and a fourth. So there 
is usually a cluster of keys.
Another ﬁnding is that the keys for the two main types 
of simplifying are different, yet similar within each type. 
When you think about it, this is not surprising. Just as there 
are said to be only seven basic plots for a successful novel, 
there are only a handful of ways to achieve the objective of 
price-simplifying, and a different handful of ways to meet 
the contrasting aims of proposition-simpliﬁers.
Keys in Price-Simplifying
The sole objective of price-simpliﬁers is to cut costs by at 
least half. In our case studies we have already come across 
the main keys they use to achieve this:
• Ford: Reduce variety, redesign product, introduce new 
production system (massive investment and invention 
of the assembly line), use better-quality materials.
• IKEA: Redesign products, control furniture-makers, 
reduce variety, build giant stores, co-opt customers 
(self-service, self-delivery, self-assembly).

SIMPLIFY
114 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
• McDonald’s: Reduce variety, automate, speed up service, 
co-opt customers and franchisees, use better-quality 
ingredients.
• Penguin: Reduce variety, create new distribution chan-
nels, raise quality of content, lower overheads, co-opt 
authors and other publishers.
• Honda: Reduce variety, scale down product, lower costs 
of labor and of the main component (the engine).
• Pepsi-Cola: Offer twice as much product for the same 
price, use effective advertising, introduce new distri-
bution system, exploit market leader’s price umbrella. 
These themes consistently recur in the case studies we 
will discuss later in this book.
Keys in Proposition-Simplifying
The aim of the proposition-simpliﬁer is to make the product 
or service a joy to use by increasing ease of use, usefulness 
and art. We have seen examples of the following keys so far:
• Apple Macintosh: Create high-end customer segment, 
make product more intuitive for the user, design a user-
friendly and beautiful item that is also more useful than 
existing machines.
• Uber: Make experience of using a taxi quicker, more 
friendly and more reliable, and also often cheaper, 
through new software.
• BCG: Create new high-end “strategy” product (the 
ﬁrst new consulting product since the introduction of 
“time and motion”), condense ideas, so that devising 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
115
strategy becomes memorable and fun, select a few 
principles so that any properly trained person can use 
them, communicate shared framework throughout the 
ﬁrm, prioritize actions and standardize projects.
• Bain & Company: Create new high-end “CEO” service, 
co-opt the CEO, increase ease of proﬁt improvement 
throughout the client ﬁrm, increase usefulness of con-
sulting process.
• General Motors: Create new segments in middle and 
top of the market, each targeted at different customers 
and with different styles and appearance, raise cus-
tomer utility through brand differentiation and new 
annual models, introduce new features to make cars a 
joy to drive, and raise ease of purchase for customers 
and dealers by extending credit.
If you can see a key, does it belong to price- or proposi-
tion-simplifying? That will give you at least a clue as to the 
better strategy for you.
Now for our ﬁnal test.
The Better Skills Test
In order to succeed as a simpliﬁer, your ﬁrm needs to have 
the right skill set for your market, but it must also be better 
at simplifying in that way than any current or potential 
competitor. This is a hard test for companies and it is easy 
for them to delude themselves, or to miss one vital skill that 
they don’t possess while some other ﬁrm does.
Think back to the personal computer war of the 1980s and 
1990s — a war whose effects we are still feeling today, not 

SIMPLIFY
116 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
least because it crippled not one but two giant corporations 
(IBM and Xerox) and was crucial in the rise of another ﬁrm 
(Apple), which may prove to be the biggest and longest- 
running success story of our era.
First, let’s think about what happened to Xerox. That 
corporation — or rather a spin-off from it — could have 
become the most valuable in the world from the 1980s 
onwards. The computer scientists at Xerox PARC invented 
the modern PC and much else besides. They can lay claim 
to developing the desktop and the mouse, and they could — 
perhaps should — have been able to claim the power and the 
glory, too. Imagine for a moment what would have happened 
if Steve Jobs — who was hugely impressed by what he saw 
at Xerox PARC in 1979 — had decided to throw in his lot 
with the company. Imagine what would have happened if 
the leaders of the copier-company back at HQ in New York 
State had enjoyed a collective ﬁt of intelligence and decided 
to buy Apple. They could have funded such an acquisition 
out of their petty cash. Imagine what would have happened 
if the Xerox bosses had been properly advised, if they had 
merged Xerox PARC and Apple — they were close both 
geographically and spiritually — if they had put Jobs in 
charge of “Xerox Apple,” if they had then spun it off to Xerox 
shareholders as a separately quoted company, with Jobs and 
his pals as substantial shareholders in the new entity. And 
imagine if Jobs — while clearly the numero uno — had agreed 
to hire a world-class CEO or COO to handle the hard job 
of managing the technological prima donnas — and that the 
two bosses had then got along famously.
It’s a lot to imagine. Yet, what ﬁreworks the world would 
have seen. Xerox’s cash coupled with Apple and Xerox 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
117
PARC’s expertise would surely have delivered a terriﬁc 
second-generation PC — complete with desktop, mouse, 
smooth scrolling, and plenty of power — not in the late 
1980s (when the Mac ﬁnally achieved the feat), but in 1981 
or 1982 at the latest. If that had happened, Jobs never would 
have been thrown out of Apple, and “Xerox Apple” would 
not have messed around with the Newton, but instead would 
have moved on to the brave new world of the iPod, the 
iPhone and the iPad in the 1990s, rather than the 2000s. 
Much of the top talent in Silicon Valley would surely have 
gravitated towards “Xerox Apple.” And Steve Jobs, not Bill 
Gates, would have become the richest person in the world.
History tells a different story, though. On its own, Xerox 
PARC utterly failed to capitalize on its discoveries. There 
were two reasons for this. First, the research unit had weak 
or non-existent commercial skills, and no other department 
within Xerox had them, either. True, excellent product 
management skills could have been employed, but a head 
ofﬁce that did not understand the need for them was never 
likely to do that — and it didn’t! The Xerox HQ probably 
subtracted more shareholder value than any other head ofﬁce 
in the last century by not understanding the potential gold 
mine it possessed out in California.
Second, and more fundamentally, the folks at Xerox 
PARC did not have the simplifying mentality of Steve Jobs. 
They did not understand the importance of ease of use. If 
they had, they would have made their mouse far easier to use, 
would have cracked the issue of smooth scrolling, and would 
have commercialized their version of WYSIWYG much 
more quickly. Nor did they think to make their machine as 
useful as it could be, or understand the importance of a slick 

SIMPLIFY
118 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
appearance and a stylish design. This was because they never 
viewed the computer as a consumer product.
In short, the Xerox PARC engineers — brilliant and 
trail-blazing innovators though they were — did not share 
Steve Jobs’ vision of a simple product. They easily com-
prehended, and rather relished, the complexity with which 
they wrestled every day. By contrast, they had no interest in 
simplifying. They snatched defeat from the jaws of victory 
because they liked complexity more than they liked sim-
plicity. Anyone who has compared the Xerox Star with the 
Macintosh knows this to be true. The former was clunky, 
over-engineered and hard to use; the latter was intuitive, 
elegant and, once it had sufﬁcient power, a joy to use.
And what about IBM? It was not a natural price-simpliﬁer. 
It never aimed to provide the cheapest PC on the market, 
nor even the cheapest “quality” PC. And it was hobbled 
by being a high-overhead company. But was it a proposi-
tion-simpliﬁer, or could it have become one?
If we propel ourselves back to the early 1980s again, we might 
argue that IBM set the standard in PCs, and did so by simplify-
ing. As we saw earlier, it introduced its PC in 1981, and within 
two years it commanded a full quarter of the market, easily 
outselling the Apple II. Yet, from the moment the Macintosh 
arrived in 1984, it was clear that IBM had lost the proposition 
high ground because the Apple’s operating system was so much 
easier to use. IBM scrambled around in alliance with Microsoft 
to produce its Windows equivalent, but it never caught up. 
True, IBM continued to outsell Apple by a wide margin for 
many years, but Apple kept the premium market in its pocket, 
as a higher-value and more proﬁtable business as IBM contin-
ued to lose money on each and every PC it sold.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
119
IBM should have gone one of two ways: either produce 
a machine that was clearly superior to the Mac (i.e. more 
useful, easier to use, and more aesthetically appealing) or 
sell the lowest-price machine by some distance. It did nei-
ther. Instead, it remained stuck in the middle, outﬂanked by 
Apple at the top and by Hewlett-Packard, Compaq, and Dell 
in the mass market.
But were the better options ever really options at all? In the 
premium market, IBM would have succeeded only by buying 
Apple and then allowing a “reverse takeover,” whereby the 
leaders of the puny Apple would have been handed the reins 
of the mighty IBM. Such a scenario was always extremely 
improbable. So what about the mass market? For sure, IBM 
could have insisted that Microsoft — then a small com-
pany that relied on its association with IBM — not license 
its Windows software to other computer manufacturers. 
But IBM would still have been constrained by its high-cost 
structure — its successful sales force and matchless technical 
support — and its customer base, which was conﬁned mainly 
to large and some medium-sized companies. It is hard to 
believe that HP, Compaq, Dell, or another company would 
not have found a way around the software problem — pos-
sibly by sponsoring one of Microsoft’s rivals — and then 
leapfrogged IBM by selling direct to customers, rendering 
IBM’s highly paid sales force a liability rather than an asset.
One possible salvation for IBM might have been to scour 
the world for the lowest-cost PC manufacturer and outsource 
all its manufacturing, closing its U.S. factories, dismantling 
its sales team and adopting the Dell model of direct selling. 
But then, of course, IBM would not have been IBM.
The simplicity tests outlined above would have indicated 

SIMPLIFY
120 
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE?
in no uncertain terms that IBM’s position was hopeless right 
from the start (without desperate measures and complete 
transformation), because it faced one rival that was more 
skilled at proposition-simplifying and several others that 
were more skilled at price-simplifying.
So the Skills Test is vital, although it can be extremely 
tough for management to accept. In some circumstances, 
deliverance can come only from a dissident management 
faction, or from investors insisting on radical action. Yet it 
must be understood and widely employed. Nobody in the 
late 1970s or early 1980s realized that IBM was set to fail. 
Yet if the company’s bosses had explored whether they were 
able to pursue either form of simplifying better than their 
rivals they would have seen the writing on the wall. Similar 
analysis could be employed in some of the world’s most valu-
able companies today, and it would undoubtedly show that 
several of them are set to fail, too.
Key Points
1. Take the Attitude Test. See whether your ﬁrm is a 
“natural” price- or proposition-simpliﬁer.
2. The Gap Test asks you if there is already a price-sim-
pliﬁer or proposition-simpliﬁer in your market. If your 
ﬁrm’s natural direction is vacant in the market, seize 
the ground. If it is occupied, beware.
3. The Keys Test invites you to ﬁnd a cluster of keys that 
might unlock a simplifying opportunity. The best clues 
may be what previous very successful simpliﬁers of 
your type did in other markets.
4. The Better Skills Test explains that, to succeed in the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  WHICH TYPE OF SIMPLIFIER WILL YOU BE? 
121
long run, your company must have the skills to execute 
one of the two simplifying strategies but must also pos-
sess those skills to a higher degree than any competitor. 
Do you think that it meets these criteria?
5. If these tests all point in the same direction, your strat-
egy is internally consistent and makes sense. Taken 
together, these are hard tests to pass. If your ﬁrm fails 
them, you should assess how it might be protected 
against a radical price- or proposition-simpliﬁer. And if 
the odds of that do not look good, perhaps you should 
consider moving to another ﬁrm — one that has a great 
simplifying opportunity. If you are an investor, you 
may wish to do the same.
You should now have decided whether your ﬁrm should — 
and has the ability to — become a price-simpliﬁer or a 
proposition- simpliﬁer. But how exactly do you become one 
of these two types of simpliﬁer? The next three chapters will 
provide the answer.

9
How to Proposition-Simplify
You need a very product-oriented culture.1
Steve Jobs
A good taxi driver may be 2 or 3 times 
better than a bad one. But a good designer 
is 100 or 200 times better.2
Steve Jobs
Good design is as little design as possible.
Dieter Rams
P
roduct design is nearly everything in proposition-simpli-
fying. The objective is to make the product a joy to use: 
ﬁrst and foremost, easier to use; then, if possible, more useful 
and more aesthetically appealing.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
123
If a new product or service is more useful and artistic than 
rival products but does not make life easier for the user, then 
there has been no proposition-simplifying. The product may 
be wonderful, but the ideas in this book probably will not 
apply to it. For example, the Porsche 911, introduced in 1963, 
gave a different driving experience from that of any com-
parable sports car. It was also a work of art. But the 911 did 
not make driving easier; probably the reverse, because, with 
its rear-mounted engine and unusual weight distribution, 
it required considerable skill to drive. Aﬁcionados may see 
that as part of its appeal, but it disqualiﬁes it from being a 
form of proposition-simplifying. Nor was the 911 any easier 
or cheaper to make than comparable cars, so it was not an 
example of price-simplifying, either. In general, simplifying 
is neither necessary nor natural for luxury products, such 
1
Ease
of use
Simplifying Product Redesign
2
More 
useful
3
More 
artistic
Figure 2: Three steps to start a proposition revolution

SIMPLIFY
124 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
as Porsche cars and Rolex watches. Luxury markets are not 
price sensitive, and complexity is often part of the appeal of 
the product.
By our deﬁnition, all examples of successful proposition-
simplifying involve increasing ease of use. This attribute is 
the most important in leading to greater customer adop-
tion — if a product or service is easier to use, more people 
will use it. This is invariably the case, whereas proposi-
tion-simplifying does not always involve making a product 
more useful and/or more aesthetically appealing (although 
this often happens too).
Step One: Easier to Use
The essential ﬁrst step — make the user experience easy 
and simple — is more than the sum of its parts. It requires 
empathy with the user and a genuine simplifying mission.
Who do you think would make the better designer of 
electronic devices? Someone with a natural afﬁnity for com-
puters, even back in the day when operating them required 
real skill? Or someone who found that experience extremely 
tough? Listen to one of the latter:
“I went right through college having a real problem with 
computers. I was convinced I was technically inept . . . 
Right at the end of my time as a student I discovered the 
Mac. I remember being astounded at how much better it 
was . . . I was struck by the care taken with the whole user 
experience. I had a sense of connection via the object with 
the designers.”3

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
125
The speaker was Jony Ive, the son of a London silversmith. 
He went on to become a product designer and was the man 
behind the iMac, MacBook Air, iPod, iPhone, iPad and 
Apple Watch. If we look at how these devices (and those in 
our other simplifying case studies) were made easier to use, 
we see ﬁve major themes:
• eliminate;
• make intuitive and easier;
• make faster;
• make smaller/lighter/more portable;
• make easier to obtain.
Eliminate
Remember that Steve Jobs “made devices simpler by elim-
inating buttons, software simpler by eliminating features, 
and interfaces simpler by eliminating options.” In designing 
the Mac, he eliminated all the function keys and cursor 
arrows, features that all other computer manufacturers 
thought were essential. Users were forced to use the mouse 
instead, which they soon learned was a much more elegant 
way to move the cursor around the screen, once they got 
used to it. Ive, whom Jobs called his “spiritual partner,” also 
started his career at Apple by eliminating. “We wanted to 
get rid of anything other than what was absolutely essen-
tial,” he said. “We kept going back to the beginning again 
and again, “Do we need that part? Can we get it to perform 
the function of the other four parts?” It became an exercise 
to reduce and reduce, but it makes it easier to build and 
easier for people to work.”4

SIMPLIFY
126 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
Intuitive and Easier
Simplicity for the user is complexity concealed. Ive says 
he aims “to solve incredibly complex problems and make 
their resolution appear inevitable and incredibly simple [to 
the user], so that you have no sense how difﬁcult this thing 
was.”5 The iPad is a superb illustration. Have you sat in a 
doctor’s waiting room or on a plane and seen a toddler play-
ing games or watching cartoons on an iPad? It is literally 
child’s play. No stumbling blocks — no causes of possible 
frustration — are allowed on the device, which is the reason 
why you can’t print from it.
Faster
Almost every device is getting ever faster to use, but some 
are faster than others — faster to boot up, faster to operate, 
faster to service. Products and services can create a new 
market or niche they then dominate for decades merely 
by performing an operation much faster than their rivals. 
The Polaroid instant camera was introduced in 1948, and 
the Polaroid Corporation then dominated the market for 
four decades, selling 14.3 million cameras in 1978 alone. 
Eventually, of course, it was superseded by the digital 
camera.
Today, AUTO1.com lets Europeans sell their cars quickly 
and easily by making a cash-up-front offer to buy them, 
and at the same time gives car dealers access to inventory 
delivered within hours. Bringing rapid network efﬁciency to 
the used-car trade has helped create one of Europe’s fastest 
growing businesses, backed by the authors.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
127
Nespresso is another prime example. Its machines make 
high-quality coffee far faster than any rival system of com-
parable quality. They are also simple to use, stylish, and 
cleaning them is a doddle.
Smaller/Lighter/More Portable
The Walkman, introduced by Akio Morita’s Sony 
Corporation in 1979, was easier to use than other cassette 
players, but the big advance was its portability. Previously, 
people would walk down the street with huge boom-boxes 
perched on their shoulders. The Walkman subtracted the 
integral loudspeakers, replacing them with small head-
phones, as well as the ability to record. As a result, and by 
using its in-house technicians’ genius for miniaturization, 
it was possible to make a thin and light machine that could 
be carried anywhere. The Walkman also played magnetic 
tapes, meaning it had superior sound quality than rival for-
mats, even though the machine was much lighter and more 
compact. In the face of stiff competition from Toshiba, 
Aiwa, and Panasonic, the Sony device remained dominant 
in its segment and highly proﬁtable until the late 1990s. It 
declined only when the iPod and iTunes took over by rein-
venting and transcending all the advantages of ease of use, 
miniaturization, and portability.
Easier to Obtain
iTunes also made music much easier to buy. It was no longer 
necessary to make a trip to the record store, album tracks 
could be purchased individually for the ﬁrst time, and users 

SIMPLIFY
128 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
could choose from a much wider selection than any record 
store could possibly stock. Spotify has since taken this 
process a step further by giving its users instant access to 
millions of songs through streaming.
Of course, making products easier to obtain is not a new 
idea: as we saw earlier, in the 1920s General Motors intro-
duced credit for customers who wished to trade up to more 
expensive cars. But there are always new means to make a 
product more accessible. Unlike traditional car rental ﬁrms, 
Zipcar — founded in 2000 — allows its customers to rent 
vehicles by the hour, and it prides itself on making the whole 
hiring process quick and hassle-free. It operates on a mem-
bership model: once you become a member you can unlock 
the car using your membership card or a mobile phone 
and drive away within seconds. The cars are also parked in 
street-side bays, closer to most customers than the majority 
of car rental ofﬁces. Avis Budget Group acquired Zipcar in 
2014 for around half a billion dollars.
The dramatic and controversial success of Wonga, pro-
vider of “pay day” loans in the UK, Europe, Canada, and 
South Africa, is based on the company making cash advances 
much easier for qualiﬁed applicants to obtain. Wonga greatly 
simpliﬁed the whole process of securing a short-term loan 
and then paying the principal and (very high) interest back 
to the company over the next few weeks. Indeed, regulators 
have argued that Wonga not only charges excessive interest 
rates but has made loans too easy to obtain. Recently, the UK 
and other countries have introduced caps on the interest 
such ﬁrms may charge.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
129
Step Two: More Useful
There are also ﬁve ways to make a product or service more 
useful:
• vary performance — make more (or less) powerful;
• improve quality;
• add new capabilities without adversely affecting ease 
of use;
• provide a wider range of products;6 and
• personalize.
Some propositions are more useful across all ﬁve of these 
dimensions. For example:
• Facebook offers a “social operating system” for the 
internet, aiming to sit at the center of users’ online 
social lives.7 You could argue that it ticks all the boxes 
above when compared with how people traditionally 
kept in touch and interacted, and that it offers a wide 
range of activities on the site while ensuring that it 
remains easy to use.
• TripAdvisor, Google Search, and Uber also tick all ﬁve 
boxes, as did General Motors in the 1920s.
Other propositions tick most of the boxes:
• BCG provided an original decision-making frame-
work — the famous Boston Box with its cows, dogs, 
stars, and question-marks — that was much simpler 
than anything that had been devised before. It was also 
more powerful, higher quality, enabled a company to 
monitor a new capability (relative market share), and 

SIMPLIFY
130 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
allowed the matrix to be personalized to the company’s 
exact position.
In some cases, however, one or two of the ways to increase 
usefulness stand out:
• Starbucks’ usefulness hinges on the fact that it is a 
convenient place to meet friends, with pleasant sur-
roundings. You won’t be moved on as soon as you’ve 
ﬁnished your drink and the wiﬁ is free. Oh yes, and 
they sell a wide range of coffee (although the quality is 
hotly debated).
• The Sony Walkman was more useful mainly because 
of its superior sound quality. Apart from this, the 
enhancement in usefulness was limited; the big attrac-
tion, as we noted earlier, was in ease of use through 
portability.
Although greater usefulness is present in the large majority 
of proposition-simplifying examples, in some cases it is not 
important at all. With Wonga and Zipcar, for instance, ease 
of use (speciﬁcally the ease with which the product may be 
obtained) is paramount; the basic usefulness of the product 
(short-term loans and car hire, respectively) has hardly 
changed at all.
Figure 3 illustrates the ways in which certain companies 
and products have increased usefulness. Does it prompt any 
ideas with respect to your own product or service?
The signature characteristic of proposition-simpliﬁers is 
that, in all cases, hard usefulness is added without making 
the user experience more complicated. Moreover, boosts to 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
131
General
Motors
Improve
Performance
Improve
Quality
Improve
Capabilities
Wider
Range
Personalize
Transistor
Radio
Sony Digital 
Camera
Dyson
Bagless VC
Nespresso
Nintendo
Wii
Macintosh
PC
iPod
iPhone
iPad
Google
Search
Google
Maps
TripAdvisor
Facebook
Wonga
Sony
Walkman
Starbucks
eBay
Twitter
BCG
Bain & Co
Uber
Zipcar
Figure 3: Innovations employed by some proposition-simpliﬁers  
to make their products more useful

SIMPLIFY
132 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
the product’s usefulness are always combined with increases 
in its ease of use.
Step Three: More Aesthetically Appealing
As you will recall, we deﬁne “art” as anything that enhances 
the appeal of a product that cannot be reduced to hard use-
fulness or ease of use. Art is to do with the appearance and 
texture of a product or service, how it makes the customer 
feel, and how it turns consumption into a great experience.
Steve Jobs understood this better than anyone. When 
making the Apple II, he took inspiration from Cuisinart’s 
revolutionary food processor, introduced ﬁve years earlier. 
With its rounded, transparent shapes, the Cuisinart is very 
useful but also a beautiful artefact in itself. Jobs repeatedly 
told his people to make Apple computers “look friendly.” 
Hardly anyone understood what he meant, but that was part 
of the advantage he had over his rivals. It is hard to imagine 
IBM’s designers — competent as they were — understand-
ing the concept of a “warm and friendly” machine. Jobs 
explained: “We’re really shooting for Museum of Modern 
Art quality.”8 He urged this principle to be applied even to 
invisible components, such as the motherboard: “I want it 
to be as beautiful as possible, even if it’s inside the box. A 
great carpenter isn’t going to use lousy wood for the back 
of the cabinet, even though nobody’s going to see it.”9 First 
impressions were crucial: “When you open the box of an 
iPhone or iPad, we want that tactile experience to set the 
tone for how you perceive the product.”10
More than nine out of every ten proposition-simplifying 
cases we have identiﬁed have involved a substantial addition 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
133
of art to the product mix. One of the earliest examples 
was Alfred Sloan’s decision to change General Motors’ car 
models every year — the ﬁrst time anyone in the industry 
had displayed such a commitment to style and fashion. “The 
appearance of a motorcar,” he said, “is a most important 
factor . . . perhaps the most important single factor.”11
Today, web-based companies such as Google, Twitter, 
and Spotify lavish a great deal of attention on how they 
present themselves. In a prophetic article in the New York 
Times in 2007 — when Myspace was three times larger 
than Facebook — the latter’s “clean, uniform appearance” 
was contrasted with the former’s cluttered layout. A user 
of both said that he checked Facebook several times every 
day but hardly look at his Myspace account any more. 
“Myspace is so messy and there’s so much spam. It’s not 
worth it,” he said.12
Art can simplify or it can make a product more com-
plicated. You should aim for the kind that simpliﬁes, that 
communicates so directly and intuitively that words and 
other explanations become redundant. With the desktop 
icons on the ﬁrst Macintosh, and the touch-screen capabil-
ity of the iPod, iPhone, and iPad, we see a marriage of art 
and technology that not only beguiles users but makes their 
lives easier and richer. The best simplifying art is important 
not only in its own right but because of the hard beneﬁts it 
generates in terms of convenience and utility.
The Vespa scooter shows how art can combine seamlessly 
with ease of use. Introduced in 1946, conceived to be both 
a work of art and an intensely practical machine, it was 
designed to be extremely easy to use for its well-dressed 
riders. Men in suits and women in ankle-length skirts were 

SIMPLIFY
134 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
able to ride the scooters without any risk to their expensive 
clothes. The patent documentation said the motorcycle had 
a frame “with mudguards and engine cowling covering all 
working parts” so that it would offer “protection from mud 
and dust without jeopardizing requirements of appearance 
and elegance.” In the 1953 movie Roman Holiday, Audrey 
Hepburn rides side-saddle on Gregory Peck’s Vespa. In the 
sixties it was still a style icon, publicized by the Beatles and 
featuring in Fellini’s La Dolce Vita.
Another product that uses art to reinforce ease of use and 
practical value is the Dyson bagless cleaner. It is easier to 
use than a conventional vacuum cleaner because there is no 
bag to replace. It advanced performance through its patented 
cyclonic separation technology. And it embodies simplifying 
art by letting you see what it is picking up, so you realize 
what a good job it is doing.
So, art is usually a very important element in any propo-
sition, but it can vary enormously from product to product. 
Whichever form it takes, though, the “artists” and designers 
who are given the task of creating a new product should 
understand clearly that their mission is both to simplify and 
to make that product a joy to use. Therefore, hire the best 
creative talent you can afford, and ensure that they really 
love the product before you commission them.
Are Free Services Price- or 
Proposition-Simplifying?
Cutting the price of a service to zero might seem like an 
extreme form of price-simplifying. But, of course, the zero 
price is always an illusion. Free isn’t really free; free is a trade.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
135
There are two common models of this. One is when the 
consumer is offered a service at zero price but the supplier’s 
business model relies upon selling advertising. Here, the 
supplier is buying the attention of the consumer and selling 
this attention to third parties. Social media companies such 
as Facebook and Twitter use this model, as does Google 
Search, albeit in a slightly different way. It’s a very old model, 
stretching back to the ﬁrst days of newspapers, commercial 
radio, and television.
The other option is the “freemium” model, where a basic 
service is provided free to all subscribers, but premium ser-
vices incur a fee. This model can be seen in a wide variety of 
consumer and business software-as-a-service models, from 
dating sites such as Tinder, to Dropbox and Spotify, to news-
paper and magazine websites. Most users prefer to pay nothing 
and put up with the basic service, but successful companies 
attract enough premium subscribers to make their businesses 
proﬁtable. Of course, the “free” price is illusory for those who 
try for free and then decide to pay for the premium service.
The basis of competition is not price, but proposition. The 
winning dating site is the one that offers the most attractive 
service to its target market. The winning search engine is the 
one that most users choose to use because they like the way it 
works. And this is facilitated by our three (not free) friends — 
making the service easier to use, making it more useful, and 
making it more aesthetically appealing. The rules for free 
services are precisely the same as those for any other form 
of proposition-simplifying. The fact that the service can be 
free — for a certain group of participants — facilitates entry to 
the market and allows a large and potentially valuable network 
to be built, packaged and sold to a different set of customers.

SIMPLIFY
136 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
Conclusion
To proposition-simplify, you need to provide a product that 
is a cut above others on the basis of three criteria — make it 
easier to use, more useful and more emotionally appealing. 
If you can do that, you will enjoy both high growth and high 
margins, which in turn will lead to signiﬁcant increases in 
cash ﬂow and company valuation. The jackpot comes when 
proposition-simplifying spawns a new mass market. When 
Steve Jobs returned to Apple in 1997 and resumed the 
process of proposition-simplifying, the ﬁrm was valued at 
$2.25 billion. At the time of writing, Apple was worth $742 
billion — 330 times more.
The Achilles heel of proposition-simplifying is that it can 
be hard to fend off imitators, or new proposition-simpliﬁers 
who come up with unique and even more compelling prod-
ucts. Proposition-simplifying is an innovation treadmill, 
and very few ﬁrms stay on it for more than a decade or two. 
These days, breakthrough products may enjoy only ﬁve years 
in the sun before they are reverse engineered, imitated, and 
forfeit both market share and margin. Hence, even successful 
proposition-simpliﬁers often achieve a stratospheric market 
value only eventually to plunge back to earth. The problem is 
defensibility, or rather the lack of it. On the other hand, as we 
saw with McKinsey, BCG, and Bain, proposition- simplifying 
can lead to subtly differentiated competition, with several 
ﬁrms able to lead within their own segments and all gener-
ating huge proﬁts in what outsiders perceive to be a single 
market (whereas in fact it is nothing of the sort).
Price-simplifying works differently. It generates much 
lower margins, but greater defensibility. That is why many of 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY 
137
the most successful price-simplifying ﬁrms have been at the 
top for many years. It is not unusual to see price-simpliﬁers 
such as McDonald’s, IKEA, and the budget airlines increas-
ing their market share steadily over time, and they tend to 
be far more competitively secure than many proposition- 
simpliﬁers. The reason for this is that, in addition to 
undertaking radical product redesign, price-simpliﬁers rede-
sign the whole business system to attain a low-cost position 
that simply cannot be challenged by competitors and to erect 
extra defenses that protect the business over the long term. 
In the next chapter we explain how they do this.
Key Points
1. The heart of proposition-simplifying is total product or 
service redesign — your simplifying should be radical, 
so that the product is easier to use, more useful, and 
more beautiful.
2. The trick is to increase ease of use, making the product 
a joy to use. The ﬁve best ways to achieve this are to: 
eliminate superﬂuous features and components; make 
it intuitive to use; make it faster; make it smaller, lighter 
and/or more portable; and make it easier to access.
3. Make the product more useful without making it harder 
to use; greater utility without greater ease of use is 
pointless.
4. Art — the emotional connection to the user — is the 
third weapon in your armory. The best art not only 
impresses but makes the product more intuitive.
5. Proposition-simplifying can lead to huge increases 
in sales and proﬁts, perhaps sustained over a decade 

SIMPLIFY
138 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFY
or more. But the greatest challenge is to stay ahead 
of imitators. The timescale for enjoying a secure lead 
with new products appears to be decreasing, so con-
stant innovation is necessary for sustained success. 
The greatest danger is that the innovator’s creative 
wellsprings become exhausted.

10
How to Price-Simplify
Part I: Product Redesign
I can teach you the secret to running this 
airline in thirty seconds. This is it: We are 
THE low-fare airline.
Herb Kelleher
C
an you remember when full-service airlines, with two or 
three classes of passengers, were the only choice — for 
both intercontinental and domestic travel? It was not a bad 
system, but it was complex, expensive, and exclusive. Only 
the rich traveled by air. Then one man changed the system 
forever. In this chapter, we explain how he did it, and start 
to explore how to create a mass market for any product that 
excludes most people because it is too expensive. Part of that 
process involves product redesign.

SIMPLIFY
140 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
There is a recurring pattern with markets and ﬁrms. 
Companies provide better products and more of them. 
Striving to increase product performance multiplies both 
product and organizational complexity, making it harder 
for many customers to afford or use the product or service 
easily. When ﬁrms become more complex, they distance 
themselves from their customers, executives lose sight of 
what they should be doing, and products become even more 
elaborate and expensive. Then the music stops. One or two 
new entrants decide to simplify and slash prices. The new 
product or service they offer is often technically inferior 
but simpler and much cheaper (between 50 and 90 percent 
cheaper than its rivals). Demand explodes and the industry 
changes forever.
Airlines are a perfect example of this phenomenon. 
Commercial airlines emerged after the First World War, 
with ﬁrms such as Imperial Airways, BOAC, and BEA — 
which later merged to become British Airways — providing 
an elaborate “hub and spoke” route network that traversed 
the globe. Passengers could ﬂy anywhere on a single ticket, 
with bags checked through to their ﬁnal destination. They 
boarded a host of different aircraft depending on demand 
and location. There were several different classes of travel, 
all the way up to luxurious lounges that served copious 
meals on bone china and champagne in crystal glasses. The 
number of routes and standards of service rose continually, 
but the business system became ever more complicated and 
expensive to operate. This greater complexity necessitated 
higher fares, which were introduced, yet no airline was par-
ticularly proﬁtable, and many suffered heavy losses for years. 
A mass market for air travel remained elusive.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
141
This pattern was rudely interrupted in 1971, when Herb 
Kelleher started the ﬁrst budget airline — Southwest — 
which ﬂew a short triangular route between the Texan cities 
of Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio.1 Southwest Airlines 
now ﬂies more passengers within the United States than any 
other airline.2
So what was Kelleher’s ticket to success?
He price-simpliﬁed by totally redesigning the product.
After declaring, “I can teach you the secret to running 
this airline in thirty seconds. This is it: We are THE low-
fare airline,” he added, “Once you understand that fact, you 
can make any decision about this company’s future as well 
as I can.”3
Kelleher was being modest. He simpliﬁed Southwest’s 
product in several crucial ways, including:
• only point-to-point routes;
• one class of travel;
• no free refreshments or lounges;
• a ﬂeet consisting solely of Boeing 737s, simplifying 
maintenance, scheduling, and training;
• ten-minute turnaround at the gate;
• utilize smaller, secondary airports, which are cheaper 
and faster than the main hub airports; and
• sell direct to customers.
The system worked because low prices meant the planes 
were usually full and costs were pared to the bone.
But behind Kelleher’s product redesign lay something 
even more fundamental. He automated ﬂying, just as Henry 
Ford automated car-making, Ingvar Kamprad automated 

SIMPLIFY
142 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
the furniture industry, and the McDonald brothers auto-
mated hamburgers. We will discuss this in detail in the next 
chapter.
European budget airlines have further simpliﬁed 
Kelleher’s template by co-opting customers to do some of 
the work, such as checking in online, carrying their own 
bags to the plane, and ensuring they are ready to board 
promptly. This creates an efﬁciency saving that is shared 
between the customers themselves and the airline.
But how do customers beneﬁt from this efﬁciency saving? 
The obvious answer is in the price they pay: on a per mile 
basis, a budget airline ﬂight is typically less than half the 
price of a full-service economy (coach) equivalent, and 
sometimes as little as a tenth. Moreover, because of fast 
turnaround times and the use of smaller airports, customers 
may also beneﬁt from substantial time savings.
What works for the customers also works for the budget 
carriers. For decades the airline industry was notorious 
for losses and bankruptcies, and poor returns even for the 
survivors. Yet the largest budget airlines — Southwest, 
EasyJet, and Ryanair — have all demonstrated dramatic 
growth in revenues, earnings per share and stock market 
value.
Much more important, however, is that airline simplifying 
has made it easier for a wide range of people to visit their 
friends and family. It has shrunk the globe, enhancing the 
experiences and increasing the sophistication of hundreds 
of million travelers. Finally, because ﬂying is so much safer 
than driving, it may even be said that the budget airlines 
have saved thousands of lives.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
143
How to Spark a Price Revolution
As we know, with price-simplifying, price is everything. 
Price is the strategy. Everything else is tactics — the means 
to arrive at the target price. Price-simplifying rests on the 
observation that if you can halve the price, the market will 
more than double (and may well increase by ten times or 
more). And if you can somehow engineer a 75 percent reduc-
tion, the market will explode. So everything you do from 
now on — in thinking, in planning, and in execution — 
must be done with price in mind. It must become a burning 
obsession . . . but for a purpose.
Even with a clear price target, it is an abstraction until 
you relate it to your future customers — those who are 
currently denied the product because it is too expensive. 
With price-simplifying, you are on the side of these target 
customers who want to buy the product or service but simply 
cannot afford it. Put yourself in their shoes and provide your 
product for a fraction of the current price.
The most effective and successful price-simpliﬁers think 
of what they do as a mission, a crusade to bring at least some 
of the good life to people who have not been able to afford 
it before. Henry Ford aimed to democratize the automobile 
and then did just that. Michael Marks, a Jewish refugee who 
ﬂed the pogroms in tsarist Russia, and Tom Spencer, his 
English partner, set out to provide middle-class clothing at 
a price working-class people could afford. As a result of their 
efforts, Marks & Spencer became one of the world’s most 
successful retailers. Herb Kelleher aimed to make ﬂying 
cheaper than driving in order to create a new mass market, 
and he managed to do both.

SIMPLIFY
144 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
If you are contemplating cutting prices in half — and 
perhaps in half again — you probably know that this is not 
“business as usual.” It cannot be achieved through the usual 
methods. Three fundamental changes must take place:
• The product must be redesigned to make it simpler 
and cheaper. Visualize your target customers — those 
whom you wish to create and reward.
• The business system must be redesigned to make the 
product simpler and cheaper to produce and deliver, and 
to provide protection for your ﬁrm against imitators.
• The business must be scaled — that is, its sales must 
multiply, and continue to multiply — as quickly and 
extensively as possible.
We will now explain how you can accomplish all of this.
We have examined the most successful price-simpliﬁers’ 
strategies and have summarized them in nine steps (see 
Figure 4). Steps One to Three relate to product redesign, Steps 
Four to Eight relate to business system redesign, and Step Nine 
relates to scaling up your business.
We will describe the ﬁrst three steps in this chapter, and the 
remaining six steps in Chapter 11.
Redesign the Product
Almost anyone can think up an idea. The 
thing that counts is developing it into a 
practical product.4
Henry Ford

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
145
1
Subtract features
2
Reduce variety
Simplifying
Product Redesign
Business System
Redesign
Scale Up
3
Add cheap benefits
4
Automate
5
Orchestrate
6
Co-opt customers
7
Sell direct
8
Use simpler 
technology
9
International
scale up
Figure 4: Nine steps to spark a price revolution

SIMPLIFY
146 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
Step One: Subtract Features/Performance and Return 
to the Product’s Core Function
To launch a price revolution you need to work out the core, 
primary function that the product serves. Most likely the 
products that are currently available, before your price rev-
olution, have strayed beyond the original purpose and now 
serve more than one function. For example, air travel orig-
inally aimed to cover distances faster than was possible by 
road, rail, or sea. But airlines quickly overlaid this utilitarian 
function with many other features. Even early posters adver-
tising air travel emphasized the pleasure, romance, service, 
food and drink, and sophistication of ﬂying, rather than the 
speed. Pleasure was added to utility, but soon threatened to 
eclipse it.
Sparking a price revolution in air travel therefore required 
going back to basics, returning to the core function — 
getting passengers from A to B quickly and safely. That 
required reliable planes and experienced crews. Nothing 
else: no complimentary food and drink, no lounges, no 
checked-through baggage, no airport check-ins, no travel 
agents, no allocated seats, no expensive airports.
Herb Kelleher offered a seat, not a pleasurable experience. 
It was air travel stripped down to the bare essentials. As he 
said, Southwest “is THE low-cost airline.” So, he contin-
ued, if Tracy from marketing were to suggest serving a nice 
Caesar salad on every ﬂight, you had to ask, “Will that help 
us to be THE low-cost airline?” The answer was obvious.
It was the same with Henry Ford’s price revolution. All 
previous non-commercial vehicles had been sold as “pleasure 
cars” for rich enthusiasts. Ford went back to the primary 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
147
function of the motor car — fast mobility. He quipped that 
market research was bunk because if he’d asked the public 
what they wanted, they’d have said “a faster horse.” But that 
was precisely what the Model T provided. It was not a car 
to show off in, not a car to test your skill, not a car with a 
throaty roar and rapid acceleration — but it did enable mil-
lions of people to travel distances they had never dreamed 
possible.
With IKEA, buying a sofa or a table is not a rite of passage, 
not a signal that you have arrived or established indepen-
dence from your parents. It is a monetary transaction, pure 
and simple. You don’t want advice from a salesperson, don’t 
want to bounce up and down on the sofa, don’t need to know 
if you can get it in yellow polka-dots or brown leather. You 
buy it because you need it. With eBay, auctions are not some 
kind of upper-class ritual marked by discreet hand signals 
and the thrill of the chase. They are a way to buy or sell 
goods cheaply and quickly. With McDonald’s, you do not 
demand a wide assortment of food, candlelight, a man in a 
tuxedo, a friendly waitress, or even somewhere to sit down. 
You want a quick, tasty, ﬁlling meal. Romance is thrown out 
of the window; hard utility is everything.
Every price revolution goes back to basics, back to eco-
nomics, back to utility. If you are clear about a product’s 
core function — and about everything that is not its core 
function — you are well primed for product redesign. Many 
of the features and services that everyone once viewed as 
essential fall by the wayside, and as a result some customers 
will be lost. Trade-offs usually involve dropping features 
and/or customers to get the price as low as possible.
Subtract everything that is not absolutely essential for a 

SIMPLIFY
148 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
product’s usefulness. Doing so will leave you with nothing 
but the core function.
For a physical product, subtraction should also be pursued 
in two other dimensions — weight and size.
Subtract weight
Expense always rises with weight. It is largely through the 
reduction of weight that living standards rose so markedly 
during the last century. Economic historians tell us that in 
the U.S. and UK the weight of all the goods that generated 
GNP in 2000 was roughly the same as it had been in 1900. 
Yet that same output was twenty times more valuable in 
real terms. In other words, products went on a huge diet 
during the last century — the same value was generated for 
one-twentieth the weight.5 A typical timepiece bought in 
1900 would have been a heavy fob watch. Contrast that with 
a Swatch. The latter is far more accurate yet weighs much 
less, and costs a fraction of its predecessor. Even money itself 
is lighter. Contrast a 1900 gold sovereign with today’s paper 
money, a credit card, or especially an electronic bank transfer.
Products also lost weight when manufacturers started 
using lighter versions of existing materials (such as Ford’s 
vanadium steel), when they developed entirely new materials 
(such as plastics), when they eliminated heavy components, 
and when they replaced hardware with software.
Follow Henry Ford’s advice:
“Start with an article that suits and then . . . ﬁnd some way 
of eliminating the entirely useless parts. This applies to 
everything — a shoe, a dress, a house, a piece of machin-
ery, a railroad, a steamship, an airplane. As we cut out the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
149
useless parts and simplify necessary ones we also cut down 
the cost of making. This is simple logic, but oddly enough 
the ordinary process starts with a cheapening of the man-
ufacturing instead of with a simplifying of the article. The 
start ought to be with the article. First we ought to ﬁnd 
whether it is as well made as it should be — does it give the 
best possible service? Then — are the materials the best 
or merely the most expensive? Then — can its complexity 
and weight be cut down . . . A great deal of poverty grows 
out of the carriage of excess weight.”6
Ford aimed to make his cars as light as possible, which would 
lower the cost of making them, lower the cost of running 
them and increase their reliability:
“With the Ford, there are only 7.95 pounds to be carried 
by each cubic inch of piston displacement. This is . . . why 
Ford cars are “always going” wherever you see them — 
through sand and mud, through slush, snow, and water, 
up hills, across ﬁelds and roadless plains . . . The more a 
motor car weighs, the more fuel and lubricants are used.7
Someday, we shall discover how further to eliminate 
weight. Take wood, for example. For certain purposes wood 
is now the best substance we know, but wood is extremely 
wasteful. The wood in a Ford car contains thirty pounds 
of water. There must be a way of doing better than that.”8
Subtract size
Expense also increases with size. A bigger product uses more 
materials, and it occupies more space throughout its journey 

SIMPLIFY
150 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
from assembly to the consumer’s hands — more space in the 
factory, the warehouse, the shop, and during transportation 
between these stages and ﬁnally to the consumer. It is no 
accident that those products that have slimmed down most 
over the past decades have also been those that have seen 
the greatest price reductions and consequent explosions in 
demand: computers, mobile phones, music players, and other 
electronic devices, and, of course, the biggest space-saver of 
all — the Cloud. Investigate every possible means of minia-
turizing the product, and of saving space, especially in transit. 
(Recall Ingvar Kamprad’s table legs and those IKEA mugs.)
Step Two: Reduce Variety — Invent a Universal Product
Successful simpliﬁers slash the variety of what is offered to 
customers in order to cut costs and prices. Ideally, a single 
“universal product” emerges, one that is both cheaper to 
produce and achieves high fame and scale: the Model T 
Ford; the Big Mac; IKEA’s light-colored pine furniture; 
Penguin books; the Honda Supercub; single-class travel on 
Southwest Airlines.
Consolidating many different products into a few — or 
just one — has really strong economic advantages: large 
reduction in stock-keeping units; higher stock turns; lower 
purchasing costs with greater volume per product; lower 
marketing and selling costs; and lower production costs. 
Moreover, a universal product stands out from the crowd as 
an anomaly, so it attracts attention and commands respect, 
reducing the need for advertising and the cost of interna-
tional growth, and multiplying visibility and sales.
In redesigning your product, ask yourself, “Can I invent a 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
151
universal product, or something close to it, that incurs much 
lower costs and has the potential to appeal throughout the 
world?” Price-simpliﬁers invariably think like this. Recall 
Ray Kroc, who wanted to make McDonald’s burgers and 
fries identical in appearance and taste everywhere. Simplicity 
breeds universality; and universality demands simplicity.
Many “information” products — such as Dropbox, 
Google, and Spotify — have used the internet to become 
universal products with remarkable speed by focusing on 
a single element of utility: I want to broadcast or narrow-
cast a headline (Twitter); I want to text messages privately 
(Snapchat); I want to know who is attractive, nearby, and 
interested in me (Tinder). Speed and ease of communication 
are complemented by the weightlessness of software from a 
production point of view, and the ability to give the product 
away for free (mass distribution) in order to lure in premium 
(paying) customers or to create a large and valuable audience. 
Also, and increasingly, when people choose a communica-
tion standard the network effects create a scalable business 
model that can generate a global brand seemingly overnight.
Step Three: Add Cheap Benefits
The third step is to provide beneﬁts that cost the price- 
simpliﬁer little but have substantial value for target customers. 
Often these beneﬁts can cost the simplifying ﬁrm nothing 
whatsoever — or even less than nothing when the additional 
volume of customers and their spending are taken in account.
Earlier, we saw several cases of price-simpliﬁers offer-
ing customers inexpensive extra features — for instance, 
IKEA’s free parking lots, childcare, and restaurants — in 

SIMPLIFY
152 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
compensation for eliminating expensive features, such as 
pre-assembled furniture and home delivery. This might 
seem like a simple case of boosting the balance sheet by 
withdrawing expensive features and replacing them with 
cheap ones, but in fact it is far better than that for IKEA. 
All of the ﬁrm’s apparent “gifts” increase proﬁts in themselves, 
usually by attracting more trade. Anything that generates 
more volume has high marginal value, and this usually more 
than offsets the extra cost of providing the service. But 
beware of complicating the product or business system, and 
avoid anything that might raise the price.
If you can, conduct a controlled experiment — at different 
times and/or in different places — to see whether your basic 
offering, or something additional, generates more net proﬁts.
Once your product has been redesigned, it’s time to con-
sider how to redesign the business system around it, how to 
deliver your simpliﬁed product to customers in a way that 
makes the whole industry vastly more efﬁcient, and shuts out 
rival ﬁrms. This is an even more ambitious and critical task 
because you are aiming to do nothing less than transform 
your industry. We explain how you might go about that in 
the next chapter.

11
How to Price-Simplify
Part II: Business System Redesign  
and Scale Up
True prosperity is marked by a reduction of prices.1
Henry Ford
A
s we saw in Chapter 9, proposition-simplifying begins 
and ends with redesigning the product. We have also 
seen that product redesign is crucial when price-simplifying. 
But the price-simpliﬁer has an even more fascinating and 
far-reaching mission than that. Once the product has been 
simpliﬁed, they must set about rejigging their entire business 
system and creating a new mass market.
In Chapter 10 we described the ﬁrst three steps to becom-
ing a price-simpliﬁer, all of which related to product 

SIMPLIFY
154 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
redesign. But price-simpliﬁers need to go further than this 
by transforming their total business system and ensuring 
that it is scaled up to become dominant and irreplaceable. 
Let us remind ourselves of the nine steps in the overall 
process.
We have already described Steps One to Three in Chapter 
10. Now let’s look at the rest.
Redesign the Business System to  
Transform Your Industry
There are ﬁve steps you can take to redesign your business 
system:
• Step Four — Automate;
• Step Five — Orchestrate;
• Step Six — Co-opt customers;
• Step Seven — Sell direct; and
• Step Eight — Use simpler technology.
It is unusual for any business system redesign to take all 
ﬁve of these steps. Typically, one step is pre-eminently 
important while a couple of others are signiﬁcant as well. 
You may skip a step entirely if it isn’t relevant to your busi-
ness, provided that you settle on one or two that have the 
potential to turn your industry upside down. Having said 
that, in most of our case studies, the next two steps (Four 
and Five) have proved vital.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
155
1
Subtract features
2
Reduce variety
Simplifying
Product Redesign
Business System
Redesign
Scale Up
3
Add cheap benefits
4
Automate
5
Orchestrate
6
Co-opt customers
7
Sell direct
8
Use simpler 
technology
9
International
scale up
Figure 5: Nine steps to becoming a price-simpliﬁer

SIMPLIFY
156 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
Step Four: Automate
By “automate,” we mean that you should standardize a 
product or service so that it can be repeated more automat-
ically, with the result that it demands fewer resources and/
or less managerial intervention, and enables you to operate 
at much greater scale while maintaining consistent quality. 
The common theme is a dramatic reduction in cost. But 
automation can take many different forms, and the payoff is 
greatest when an entrepreneur automates something that has 
previously been regarded as “impossible” to automate. For 
example, the moving assembly line made it possible to auto-
mate the production of cars; the Betfair betting exchange 
automated placing a bet; Tinder automated ﬁnding a sexual 
partner; and the Uber app automated ordering a taxi. 
Paradoxically, automating a market and a business system 
can be an highly creative process, and entrepreneurs who 
have succeeded in doing it say that it is extremely gratifying 
intellectually (as well as ﬁnancially).
To see how it can be done, let’s think about how Henry 
Ford automated car production, because this is still one 
of the best examples for any price-simpliﬁer to follow. 
“His hallmark was eclecticism,” says the historian Richard 
Tedlow.2 Ford had to experiment, because nobody had built 
cars in such volumes before — there was no model of mass 
production to follow in automobiles or indeed in any com-
parable industry.3
Ford started with product redesign — the Model T was 
the ninth car model he produced, and it took him ﬁve years 
to get it right. We’ve already described how he designed 
the Model T to make it robust yet cheap, but we haven’t 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
157
mentioned that he designed it in such a way that its pro-
duction could be automated. In 1903, ﬁve years before the 
Model T, Ford told one of his partners, “The way to make 
automobiles is to make one automobile like another auto-
mobile, to make them all alike, to make them come from 
the factory just alike — just like one pin is like another pin 
when it comes from a pin factory.”4
He started with a price target of $600, found initially (in 
1909) that the lowest he could price his car was $950, but then 
experimented to reach his goal. There were four milestones in 
Ford’s quest for automation. First, he built the biggest factory 
in the world at Highland Park, which opened on New Year’s 
Day, 1910. Second, he organized production so that employ-
ees moved from one work station to another in a prescribed 
order. This, and the advantages of scale, decreased the cost 
of the Model T to the $600 price target by 1912. But Ford 
was still not satisﬁed. His third milestone was, as he put it, to 
“take the work to the man rather than the man to the work’5. 
By concocting a series of conveyor belts, rollways and gravity 
slides, the manufacture of everything except the chassis (the 
ﬁnal stage) was put on to a moving line in 1913. The produc-
tion line had arrived, replacing batch production. As a result, 
the price of the car was cut again, to $550. The fourth and 
ﬁnal step was when Ford put the assembly of the chassis on 
to a moving line as well. Prior to this, it took 12 hours and 28 
minutes to assemble each chassis; by the spring of 1914, the 
assembly line had cut this to just 1 hour and 33 minutes. The 
price of the Model T fell to $490 in 1914, and $360 in 1916.
Three and a half decades later, the McDonald brothers 
had the brilliant idea to adapt Ford’s moving assembly line to 
the production of hamburgers and fries. Previously, nobody 

SIMPLIFY
158 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
had thought of using a production-line system in a service 
industry. Once again, standardization and process design 
were spectacularly successful. Once again, automation was 
only possible because product variety was severely curtailed 
and the product was totally standardized — one hamburger 
was exactly the same as another. By 1993, McDonald’s had 
sold one hundred billion of those identical hamburgers.
Budget airlines, while not automating in the traditional 
sense, simpliﬁed the product and redesigned the process to 
produce a more standardized product with fewer moving 
parts, fewer choices and decisions, and therefore much 
lower costs than their full-service rivals. The process ﬂows 
of budget airlines are machine-like — higher repetition, less 
variation, fewer exceptions. By contrast, traditional airlines 
used an ever-expanding, ever more complex, hub-and-
spoke system that made cost control impossible. It is much 
harder to automate a service with several travel classes, 
high variation in operating policies, and a huge number of 
destinations.
You can simplify almost anything if you view it as a prod-
uct to be standardized and automated as far as is humanly 
possible. If air travel and restaurants can be automated, and 
a mass market created by offering very low prices, the same 
must be true for any other sector.
Opportunity lies wherever an industry has not yet been 
automated.
Step Five: Orchestrate
IKEA is a prime example of how to orchestrate. Orchestration 
means pulling the strings in an industry by seizing the high 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
159
ground — the customers — and then co-opting independent 
players into your new system. They beneﬁt, but you beneﬁt 
even more.
Before IKEA, you had furniture-makers, most of whom 
were small scale. You also had retailers, again mostly small 
scale. You had customers, most of whom were confused as 
to where to go to buy what they wanted, and often daunted 
by the high prices of decent furniture. And you had logistics 
providers — transport companies that were mainly ﬁrms 
outside the industry, for whom furniture was a minor prod-
uct. No strong brands. No integration. No economic logic. 
High prices, but generally low proﬁts.
IKEA provided a unifying plan — to the great beneﬁt of 
customers. And IKEA itself.
The business system is close to perfect, because:
• It achieves stunning economic beneﬁts for customers, 
who are happy to play their part in the orchestra.
• The combination of retail scale and design/brand 
power renders manufacturers subservient.
• Once the system was fully in place, there was no room 
for a larger imitator. The IKEA system could have been 
imitated in a particular national market, but without 
IKEA’s overall scale any imitator would have been 
hamstrung by much higher costs and prices. As with 
any successful business system, scale feeds its power, 
providing protection against all comers.
Dell Computer was another successful orchestrator when 
it became the most successful supplier of PCs in the 1990s, 
taking market leadership from Compaq in 1999 and holding 

SIMPLIFY
160 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
that lead through to 2004. Michael Dell’s business model 
combined orchestration with direct selling. It involved:
• Scouring Asia for the lowest-cost computer manu-
facturers, then controlling and orchestrating those 
companies, without making any ﬁnancial investment 
in them.
• Selling direct to ﬁrms and individuals, initially by 
phone and from 1996 through Dell’s dedicated website. 
This shredded costs and gave Dell a large competitive 
advantage. In 1999, Compaq, having lost market share 
to its lower-priced rival, started to sell direct over the 
internet too, but its retailers forced the ﬁrm to abandon 
this strategy.
• Offering customers the ability to personalize their 
computers by allowing an almost inﬁnite number of 
permutations: customers could telephone the factory 
direct to instruct Dell of their preferences. This may 
appear to contradict our advice to standardize and 
eliminate variety as much as possible, but every rule has 
an exception. Dell found a low-cost way to personalize 
machines by working to order and thus avoiding the 
most dangerous cost of variety — that of unsold stock.
• Operating on short cycle times, with reduced inventory. 
Holding inventory is a large cost penalty in the PC 
industry, where new machines cost less than old ones.
• Having the lowest operating costs in the industry. 
Dell’s operating costs in 2002 were 10 percent of its rev-
enues. Those of its main rivals, Compaq and Gateway, 
were more than double that. In addition, Dell was 
able to expand without the need to source extra funds 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
161
because it operated on negative working capital, receiv-
ing money from customers before it paid its suppliers.
Dell’s prices were much lower and its net margins signiﬁ-
cantly higher than those of its competitors. The formula 
worked until around 2005, when Dell attempted to move 
upmarket and started to manufacture several products that 
did not ﬁt within its price-simplifying formula.
The same dynamic is evident in two of the most successful 
industry orchestrators today — Walmart and Amazon — 
both of which ruthlessly exploit the beneﬁts of scale, brand 
and, most importantly, a strong customer relationship with a 
signiﬁcant proportion of the U.S. population. Because these 
two orchestrators enjoy such enormous customer volumes, 
they are able to force their suppliers to cut their prices to 
the bone; and because their prices are so low, they are able 
to maintain enormous customer volumes.
Step Six: Co-opt Customers
IKEA’s business system has three strings to its bow: the main 
string, which is orchestration; and two secondary strings — 
automation and co-opting customers. IKEA’s method of 
co-option is similar to that employed by McDonald’s and 
the budget airlines. There is an implicit deal with the cus-
tomers — they take on some of the functions that used to be 
performed by the ﬁrm, and in exchange the ﬁrm cuts prices 
down to levels that the customers can afford.
As we’ve said before, with IKEA, the customer assumes 
the job of ﬁnal assembly — a huge part of the total old 
system cost. The customer also effectively takes on the 

SIMPLIFY
162 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
traditional role of the salesperson by using a catalog and fol-
lowing signs to ﬁnd the product they want. They then carry 
their goods to the checkout and take them home — jobs that 
in the old system required expensive warehouses and a ﬂeet 
of delivery trucks.
In McDonald’s, the customer takes on the job of the 
waiting staff, some of the kitchen staff and even some of 
the cleaners. By participating in this system, the customers 
enjoy lower prices and faster service than they would in a 
traditional restaurant; and McDonald’s beneﬁts because it 
greatly reduces its labor costs. Moreover, because customers 
are prepared to accept a short menu, McDonald’s can buy its 
ingredients in bulk, lowering its costs and prices still further.
When traveling on a budget airline, the customers facili-
tate greater speed of boarding and punctuality by accepting 
that they will have to queue and ﬁt into a tight schedule. 
They buy their tickets and check in online, doing the job 
that travel agents used to do. They sometimes carry their 
own bags — which are strictly limited in size and weight — 
on and off the plane, making baggage handlers unnecessary. 
They also pay for their food and drink, and accept that they 
will probably have less space and legroom than on a sched-
uled ﬂight.
When added together, these compromises make a large 
economic difference. The customer cheerfully accepts them 
because the end result is an unbeatably low price for the air-
line’s principal function — getting passengers from A to B. 
Sometimes it seems that the passengers are serving the air-
line rather than the other way round, but this is the modern 
way of doing business, and it makes perfect economic sense 
for both parties. Again, it explains why low prices can coexist 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
163
with unprecedented rates of growth and proﬁt for the budget 
airlines.
Firms that co-opt customers are really orchestrating 
them. Like all forms of orchestration, the beneﬁts of vertical 
integration are enjoyed without the cost of ownership. For 
example, IKEA’s customers are the equivalent of an in-house 
delivery service. The orchestrator is like a benign spider, 
welcoming suppliers and customers into its web, with the 
main technique being seduction. Suppliers are seduced by 
high volumes. Customers are seduced by rock-bottom prices. 
The market is redeﬁned because the suppliers and customers 
complement each other, and both gravitate to the common 
space demarcated by the orchestrator.
Such transactions can be found in exchanges or electronic 
marketplaces, such as eBay, the New York Stock Exchange 
and Uber, as well as on hundreds of other sites that are 
proliferating by the day. Buyers and sellers are autonomous 
individuals, not owned in any way by the marketplace. 
But each is greatly attracted by the other’s presence in the 
orchestrator’s system.
Step Seven: Sell Direct
Direct selling is not new. It grows in ﬁts and starts, respond-
ing to changes in technology.
In the early nineteenth century there were no chain stores 
selling general merchandise. But with the advent of the 
railways it became possible to ship goods across countries, 
even one as vast as the United States. First to take advantage 
of this new transport system to sell goods by mail-or-
der catalog was Aaron Montgomery Ward in 1874. The 

SIMPLIFY
164 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
following decade, the great publicist and salesman Richard 
W. Sears — who could, according to Henry Goldman (of 
Goldman Sachs), “sell a breath of fresh air”6 — entered the 
industry. But he went further, because his ﬁrm — Sears, 
Roebuck — was willing to accept cash on delivery and offer 
a money-back guarantee. By providing a better deal than 
Montgomery Ward, and undercutting retail stores by about 
a quarter, Sears had become the market leader by 1900.
Sears’ new business system was based on offering the 
widest range of goods, making the largest purchases of items 
from producers large and small, and the company’s extraor-
dinary catalog, with lyrical copy originally written by Sears 
himself. When asked which American book he would give 
to every Russian if he had the chance, Franklin D. Roosevelt 
allegedly replied, “The Sears catalog.”
As Richard Tedlow says:
“Sears was about ‘the humbling of the products.’ Some 
products may have been available only in certain areas, 
but Sears brought them everywhere. Other products may 
have been technically complex or expensive machines, 
previously sold only to the elite. Sears pushed the price 
down and sold them to the average citizen.”7
Just as every new generation believes it has invented sex, so, 
with a little more justiﬁcation, every generation believes it 
has invented direct selling. With new technologies come new 
kinds of direct selling — from the postal service to the phone, 
the fax (remember the fax?), email (still one of the best media 
if used selectively with Sears-like attention to copy quality) 
and the ultimate (to date), in terms of simplicity, convenience 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
165
and low cost, the internet, including the new ways of selling 
through Facebook, Google, eBay, and other social media.
But a word of caution: each new generation of direct sell-
ing does not necessarily — or even usually — result in a price 
revolution. For that to happen, two conditions must be met: 
any price reduction must be real and signiﬁcant; and the 
business system must be original and sufﬁciently defensible 
to repel effective competition. This is rare.
Price-simplifying through direct selling kicks in when at 
least two of the following three conditions apply:
• An expensive middleman is eliminated.
• New technology is used in some shape or form.
• There is a clever simplifying idea at the root of the new 
business.
Let’s work through this idea with the help of three case 
studies.
Direct Line
Started by three British entrepreneurs in 1985, Direct Line 
transformed the motor insurance business. First, it cut out 
the insurance brokers who stood between the underwrit-
ers — the syndicates who actually insure the risk — and the 
motorists. That saved about 20 percent. This was a good 
start, but not enough.
The founders realized that the motor insurance market 
“average-priced” the cost of insurance. Because it was widely 
believed that it was impossible to predict the likelihood of an 
individual car owner having a crash, everyone was charged 
pretty much the same. But what if you knew that Mrs. Jones 

SIMPLIFY
166 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
was far less likely than Mr. Black to be involved in a crash? 
If you could target the 20 percent of drivers who were least 
likely to have an accident, you could afford to cut their pre-
miums in half and still make a tidy proﬁt.
So was it possible to discriminate in this way? Yes, it was, 
as long as you used the telephone (and later the internet) to 
offer direct quotes to individuals. This was the “direct” part 
of Direct Line, and it had the added beneﬁt of costing the 
ﬁrm less than the traditional system.
But how was Direct Line able to predict who would 
probably be a safe driver in the future? This was where 
technological advances were crucial. In the 1960s and 1970s, 
only a powerful mainframe computer, costing around £2 
million, would have been able to do the necessary analysis. 
But with the advent of personal computers in the early 1980s 
it was suddenly possible to buy a second-hand mainframe 
for around £20,000. Direct Line invested in several of 
them and set about creating a database that estimated the 
probability of any speciﬁc individual — deﬁned by several 
demographic indicators — claiming on their car insurance. 
Once the system was up and running a caller would receive 
their quote in seconds, and if the database declared that they 
were a good risk the premium would be much lower than 
any they had received elsewhere. So, for the right customers, 
the new system was dramatically cheaper, as well as faster 
and more convenient.
Despite competitors imitating Direct Line, the strength 
of its brand and its matchless reputation for offering the 
lowest prices has enabled it to remain the UK’s market leader 
for more than a quarter of a century. It also now operates in 
Spain, Germany, Italy, and Japan.

Charles Schwab & Co
In 1975 Charles Schwab & Co became the world’s ﬁrst dis-
count broker, cutting commission rates by 80 percent. In 
1982 it became the ﬁrst broker to offer a 24/7 order entry 
and quote service. By 2011, the company had 8.2 million 
brokerage customers, with $1.65 trillion in assets.8 At the 
time of writing, the ﬁrm is valued at $39.3 billion.
Schwab automated the brokering process, eliminating 
the client’s individual stockbroker–adviser, subtracting the 
“advice” part of the service, and using new technology to 
enable clients to enter the stock market directly. Eventually, 
through product redesign, automation, intelligent use of the 
internet and huge scale, Schwab managed to cut costs and 
prices to less than a tenth of their original level.
The Vanguard Group
Financier John Bogle started the ﬁrst index tracker fund 
on 31 December 1975. His Vanguard Group cut out the 
role of the active fund manager, instead investing simply 
in a “basket” of shares from the stock market index. The 
index fund idea rested on three decades’ worth of academic 
work which indicated that fund managers, in aggregate, 
under performed stock market indices. This explosive ﬁnd-
ing — that an enormously well-paid industry was both 
parasitic and unnecessary — was fascinating, but nobody 
had done anything about it before Bogle.
His index fund cut annual fees by up to 90 percent — 
a great example of price-simplifying. It was ridiculed at 
the time as “Bogle’s folly,” with the chairman of Fidelity 
Investments declaring that he couldn’t “believe that the great 
mass of investors are going to be satisﬁed with receiving just 

SIMPLIFY
168 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
average returns.” Vanguard is now the largest mutual fund 
in the United States, with $3.0 trillion under management.9
It has since been emulated by numerous imitators, yet it still 
claims to have 10 percent of all available global investment 
funds.10
Can you think of a new way to sell direct, using new tech-
nology that nobody has yet applied to your industry?
Step Eight: Use Simpler Technology
One of the best business books of the last twenty years 
is The Innovator’s Dilemma by Harvard professor Clayton 
Christensen. He documents how new, technically inferior, 
yet much cheaper technology — what he calls disruptive 
technology — changes markets and usually results in a 
new market leader.11 “Products based on disruptive tech-
nologies,” Christensen says, “are typically cheaper, simpler, 
smaller, and, frequently, more convenient to use.”12 His 
examples include transistors’ disruption of vacuum tubes 
(and semiconductors’ subsequent disruption of transistors), 
steel mini-mills’ disruption of integrated steel-makers, 
cable-actuated excavators losing out to hydraulic excavators, 
and small disk drives replacing larger ones. More recent 
examples (which do not feature in Christensen’s 1997 book) 
include computer tablets and smartphones disrupting the 
laptop market, and apps such as Uber and Airbnb challeng-
ing the traditional taxi and cheaper hotels markets. (Indeed, 
all apps have the potential to disrupt their respective indus-
tries, though the great majority fail to do so.)
The story typically plays out in the following way. First, 
the new technology satisﬁes only the bottom end of the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
169
market. For example, steel mini-mills, which are less than a 
tenth the size of a traditional integrated mill, began oper-
ating in the late 1960s, but initially the steel they produced, 
though much cheaper, was good enough for only the lowest-
grade application — steel reinforcing bars.
Second, big companies, although they have the option to 
use the new technology, shun it. They tend to do this for 
several apparently very good reasons. One is that big compa-
nies’ customers usually say that they are not interested in the 
new technology and its cheaper products because their per-
formance is inadequate for their needs. Another is that “it is 
very difﬁcult for a company whose cost structure is tailored 
to compete in high-end markets to be proﬁtable in low-
end markets as well” — established companies are used to 
operating with high overheads. Finally, “small markets don’t 
solve the growth needs of large companies’13 and “markets 
that don’t exist can’t be analyzed.”14 These are all powerful 
arguments against the adoption of many new technologies. 
In the case of mini-mills, no major integrated steel-maker 
anywhere in the world chose to make the transition.
Third, since the established market leaders fail to embrace 
the new technology, it falls to generally small-scale recent 
entrants to the industry to champion the new products and 
try to ﬁnd a market for them through trial and error; typi-
cally, at ﬁrst, in new applications. For instance, Nucor and 
Chaparral began at the bottom of the steel market — bars 
and rods — before gradually moving up to more demanding 
applications, such as structural steel, and ﬁnally to high-level 
sheet steel. This is the typical pattern: the new technology 
improves its performance until it ultimately satisﬁes most 
or all of the main market. Moreover, the old technology 

SIMPLIFY
170 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
usually improves at the same time, but to such an extent 
that it eventually outstrips the requirements of almost every 
customer. It becomes unnecessary to use the old technology 
because the new, simpler products are more than adequate. 
As Christensen says, “when the performance of two or more 
competing products has improved beyond what the market 
demands . . . the basis of product choice evolves from func-
tionality to reliability, then to convenience, and, ultimately, 
to price.”15
Enter the price-simpliﬁer. One of the newcomers to the 
industry tends to win by being in the right place at the 
right time, adopting the new technology, providing the 
lowest-cost and price product, and scaling up to take the 
leading market position.
When Christensen’s book was published, the leading 
mini-mill company, F. Kenneth Iverson’s Nucor, accounted 
for just 7 percent of the North American sheet-steel market, 
which, as he says, was “hardly enough to concern the inte-
grated mills, because Nucor’s success has been limited to the 
commoditized, least-proﬁtable end of their product line’. But 
Christensen boldly forecast that Nucor would soon chal-
lenge and ultimately overtake the integrated steel-makers, 
such as Bethlehem and U.S.X, which were then riding high 
on the stock market:
“[T]he integrated steel companies’ march to the prof-
itable northeast [high-speciﬁcation] corner of the steel 
industry is a story of aggressive investment, rational deci-
sion making, close attention to the needs of mainstream 
customers, and record proﬁts. It is the same innovator’s 
dilemma that confounded the leading providers of disk 

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
171
drives and mechanical excavators: Sound managerial 
decisions are at the very root of their impending fall from 
industry leadership.”16
Christensen was proved right. Nucor, a small and marginally 
proﬁtable company in 1996, is now the market leader in the 
U.S. steel market and a Fortune 300 company.
So, if there is a new, inferior but much cheaper technology 
that has not yet been seriously adopted in your industry, and 
if it has the potential to cut costs in half, you would be wise 
to jump in before anyone else does. Construct a business 
system around it so that you can become — and remain — 
the low-price player.
Scale Up
Step Nine: Scale Up and Roll Out Internationally
Your ﬁrm will be most vulnerable when you have redesigned 
the product and the business system and have just started 
to put them in place. If the price cut is signiﬁcant, if the 
design is good and you have developed a universal product, 
and if the business system is unique, simple, and elegant, you 
will win . . . unless another ﬁrm copies your approach and builds 
volume faster than you do. If that happens, you will almost 
certainly lose.
Scaling up quickly is therefore vital. Maximize sales and 
take an early lead, even if that means operating at zero or 
negative margins for a few years. If cash is a constraint, seek 
venture capital. As volumes build, your costs will decline and 
you will be able to take a small margin on high revenues.

SIMPLIFY
172 
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY
Once the concept is proven in one place, take it nation-
wide, then international and global as quickly as possible. 
History shows that when a ﬁrm with a genuinely universal 
and attractive product — such as Coca-Cola or eBay — 
leaves a gap in a market, allowing a local imitator to 
grab ﬁrst-mover advantage, they may never recover. For 
instance, Coke was slow to enter the Middle East and, as 
a result, Pepsi took the lead there, a lead it has never sur-
rendered. eBay was similarly sluggish in Eastern Europe. 
When it ﬁnally arrived, a dominant business — Allegro — 
was already in its way, and it is now one of the largest 
e-commerce players in the region.
Conclusion
Price-simplifying offers the prospect of building huge vol-
umes — admittedly, at low margins, but with huge growth 
in revenues and proﬁts for decades to come. The ultimate 
prize — if you do everything right and build a unique 
business system that is too large to be replicated, and if you 
continue to cut costs and prices and increase international 
volume — is long-term market leadership.
But what about current market leaders? Should they sim-
plify? If so, when. And how? And what are the dangers if 
they don’t?
Key Points for Chapters 10 and 11
1. To cut prices in half, you need to redesign and simplify 
your product from ﬁrst principles. Subtract features. 
Reduce variety. Create a universal product.

SIMPLIFY
PART 2  •  HOW TO PRICE-SIMPLIFY 
173
2. You must also redesign your business system to build 
a simple, proprietary system that lets you deliver stun-
ningly low prices that your rivals cannot match.
3. Your best defense against imitation is to scale up so 
quickly and extensively that no nooks or crannies 
are left in which a rival can take root. Nowadays this 
requires early, preferably immediate, international 
rollout — whatever it costs and however hard it might 
seem to achieve.


PART THREE
Save the Dinosaurs?
In Part Three we switch the perspective from that of the 
poacher to that of the gamekeeper. How can market lead-
ers who are not simpliﬁers protect themselves from actual 
or potential insurgents? How serious are the threats to non-
simplifying leading companies? Why do they often shun the 
opportunity to simplify when it is perfectly feasible — and 
usually not too expensive — for them to take the plunge? 
Finally, if they do decide to protect themselves, which of 
the several approaches available to them is most likely to 
succeed?


12
Do They Need Saving?
Long runs on Broadway are rare.
Tom Peters
A
re market leaders naturally vulnerable to simpliﬁers? 
What are the warning signs?
Can we conclude from our research that market leaders 
are typically vulnerable when faced with ﬁrms that start to 
simplify their markets?
The honest answer is: we don’t know.
On the one hand, a long and impressive roll-call of blue-
chip ﬁrms have seen their market value and proﬁts collapse 
almost overnight when challenged by simplifying insur-
gents. For instance:
• In the 1960s, IBM lost a large portion of its market when 

SIMPLIFY
178 
PART 3  •  DO THEY NEED SAVING?
DEC introduced “minicomputers,” which, as the name 
suggests, were much smaller and simpler than main-
frames. (Although minicomputers themselves were huge 
and complex by today’s standards.)
• Two decades later, despite being the PC market leader 
from 1981 to 1985, IBM again suffered at the hands 
of simpliﬁers, outﬂanked by the price-simpliﬁers 
Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, and Dell, and unable to 
stop proposition-simpliﬁer Apple securing the lucrative 
upper tier of the market. IBM ﬁnally stopped making 
computers in 2005.
• DEC and Wang also lost their businesses to the 
PC price-simpliﬁers in the 1980s, having been the 
dominant forces in their respective segments — mini-
computers and word processors.
• Xerox succumbed to Canon and Ricoh after the insur-
gents introduced smaller, simpler copiers that could sit 
on a manager’s desk.
• Integrated steel mills, such as Bethlehem and U.S.X, 
lost market leadership to price simpliﬁer Nucor with 
its lower-cost mini-mills.
• Pan-Am, TWA, and American Airlines all ﬁled for 
bankruptcy after losing U.S. market leadership to 
Southwest Airlines.
• Kodak lost out to Sony when the latter introduced 
digital cameras.
• Lotus, once the world’s leading software ﬁrm, fell to 
price-simpliﬁer Microsoft.
• Encyclopaedia Britannica, which had been the market 
leader for 222 years, was wiped out by price-simpliﬁers 
Encarta and Wikipedia.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  DO THEY NEED SAVING? 
179
• Nokia, once the dominant mobile phone manufacturer, 
was devastated by Apple’s and Samsung’s introduction 
of smartphones.
• The video-rental market leader, Blockbuster, was out-
gunned by Netﬂix.
• AltaVista lost its lead in online searching to Google.
• Barnes & Noble was humbled by Amazon.
• Then came dozens of other examples of digital compa-
nies ousting their real-world counterparts. In all these 
cases market leadership was forfeited to a simpler and 
cheaper provider, or to a proposition-simpliﬁer whose 
product was a joy to use.
In light of this list, it would be easy to argue that simplify-
ing ﬁrms with clearly superior propositions and/or simpler 
business models typically win . . . as long as the change they 
initiate is sufﬁciently radical.
The problem with this argument, however, is that it is 
statistically weak. There are just not enough examples to 
generalize. There is also the issue of survivor bias: we don’t 
celebrate — and rarely even recall — when a leading ﬁrm 
sees off the challenge of a simplifying rival.
For sure, there is a general tendency for simpliﬁers to 
emerge victorious, but it is not inevitable. There are plenty 
of counter-examples, such as the hotel industry, which has 
quite complex international systems, yet nobody has come 
close to challenging Hilton or Marriott. Airbnb — valued 
at $10 billion in a private equity transaction in April 2014 — 
may triple the size of the bed-and-breakfast industry, eat 
into the lower and middle reaches of the hotel sector, and, 
as it owns no hotels itself, become extremely proﬁtable, but 

SIMPLIFY
180 
PART 3  •  DO THEY NEED SAVING?
it is no threat to the luxury hotels. They will only succumb 
to a “joy to stay” innovator, and it is hard to see that hap-
pening . . . yet. At present, the big boys’ rivals are mainly 
local boutique hotels that are able to trade on their unique 
locations and the individual skills of their owner–managers, 
so they cannot be replicated on a large scale.
There is also the food industry, where giants such as 
General Mills and Kellogg’s do not appear to be vulnerable 
to simplifying rivals. Similarly, the hugely complex ﬁrms 
of Unilever and Procter & Gamble have faced no serious 
challengers. Their brands — many of which are several 
decades old — seem to insulate them from competition. 
How long this situation will last is a matter of conjecture, 
not statistics.
Furthermore, simpliﬁers do not always face a single dom-
inant player. Sometimes the dinosaurs form a large pack of 
similar-sized animals. McDonald’s, Direct Line, Starbucks, 
Twitter, IKEA, and many other simpliﬁers transformed 
their industries without replacing a dominant leader, because 
there wasn’t one when they began. These simpliﬁers did not 
kill Goliath; they drove dozens of smaller operators out of 
business.
Warning Signals Tests
Certainly, dominant ﬁrms cannot afford to be complacent. 
The sensible approach is to watch out for the wrecking ball, 
and take steps to avoid it before it is too late. The attacks 
can come from price-simpliﬁers and/or from proposition- 
simpliﬁers. Their respective warning signals are somewhat 
different from each other.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  DO THEY NEED SAVING? 
181
Warning Signals from Price-Simplifiers
1. A much cheaper product emerges. It does not matter 
if the new product’s performance is inferior. If it is 
good enough for the market, it is a serious threat. The 
mere existence of a product that is 25–50 percent 
cheaper should set off alarm bells for the leader. The 
only safe assumption to make is that the new product 
will gain in performance and become even cheaper 
as volume increases and its business system develops. 
It also does not matter if the new product is rejected 
by your customers and attracts only a new type of 
customer. Your customers may change their minds 
later, once the product improves and becomes even 
less expensive.
2. The ﬁrms making the new product are recently 
established. This means that their impact cannot be 
determined as yet and that they may not be constrained 
by traditional ways of operating.
3. The new entrants are playing the game differently. 
Their product may be smaller, lighter, faster, or all 
three. It may be based on new technology. It may be 
based on customers accepting some of the work that 
is performed for them in the established system. The 
business system itself may be different. The challengers 
may be more specialized, making only one product or 
a few, so their product range is far narrower than those 
of established ﬁrms.
4. At least one simplifying ﬁrm is growing fast. Even if 
it has a tiny market share at present, it may soon start 
to grow exponentially. This is easy to overlook or 

SIMPLIFY
182 
PART 3  •  DO THEY NEED SAVING?
underestimate. Do not rely on market statistics; inves-
tigate the ﬁrm’s potential growth directly.
5. The new ﬁrm has lower margins than yours. Its busi-
ness may seem to be unproﬁtable, or only marginally 
proﬁtable. This is a warning because it may discourage 
you from making the new product yourself.
6. The new product has the potential to cost much less 
to make than your rival product. If the new ﬁrm were 
to achieve your volumes, would it be able to undercut 
you by 50 percent or more?
7. Your ﬁrm could make the new product but chooses 
not to. If you want to make a new product, you will 
ﬁnd a way to do it. If you decide not to make it, your 
decision will be hard to rescind, even when the product 
becomes viable.
Warning Signals from Proposition-Simplifiers
You will notice that the ﬁrst three warnings here are differ-
ent from those in the previous list:
1. The product or service is designed differently. It is 
radically simpler, using a new method or technology, 
or it is based on different assumptions about what is 
important to the customer.
2. The new product is a joy to use.
3. The product is priced at a premium to yours, yet it is 
eating into your market share.
4. The challenger is playing the game differently.
5. The ﬁrm or ﬁrms are recent entrants to the market.
6. At least one of the new entrants is growing fast.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  DO THEY NEED SAVING? 
183
7. Your ﬁrm either can’t make the new product or chooses 
not to.
For more insights into how you can spot price- or prop-
osition-simplifying in your market, and for support in 
formulating your response, visit www.SIMPLIFYforCEOs.
com.
Key Points
1. There is no inevitability about the decline of market 
leaders. Simplifying ﬁrms’ threat to them may never 
materialize.
2. But it may do. There are numerous examples of hugely 
successful and dominant ﬁrms losing out to challeng-
ers that originally seemed puny. The Warning Signal 
Tests should be taken now and at frequent intervals.
3. It is prudent to make contingency plans for what to do 
if you face a simpliﬁer.
It is hard for established ﬁrms to deal with a new type of 
competition, because managers in successful ﬁrms are gen-
erally loathe to simplify. In the next chapter, we outline the 
threats to market leaders that may emerge from inside, rather 
than outside, the ﬁrm.

13
The Weakness of Strong Firms
Five Bad Reasons Why Managers  
Don’t Simplify
To survive for the long haul, you must 
passionately pursue the destruction of 
what you have created. The question: Can 
you passionately pursue perfection and 
destruction simultaneously?1
Tom Peters
T
here is plenty of anecdotal evidence that managers in 
large, successful ﬁrms consistently tend to use to make 
their businesses more complex rather than simpler. But why 
do they do that?
It turns out that there are ﬁve reasons why managers in 
market leaders don’t simplify, and they are all traps. We call 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
185
them: the Overhead Trap; the Cannibalization Trap; the 
Customer Trap; the Complexity Trap; and the Skills Trap.
Nearly always, market leaders could simplify; it’s just that 
they choose not to. Those whom the gods wish to destroy 
they ﬁrst make complex.
The Overhead Trap
When I (Richard) co-founded the strategy consulting ﬁrm 
LEK in 1983, we entered a joint venture with a much larger 
and more established ﬁrm, PA Consulting. PA had practices 
devoted to management consulting, human resources, tele-
coms and technology. On several occasions it had also tried 
to break into LEK’s ﬁeld, the strategy market (a market we 
shared with BCG, Bain and McKinsey), but it had always 
failed to make much headway. This wasn’t because PA’s cli-
ents wouldn’t buy strategy from them. Rather, PA had never 
been willing to pay enough money to attract ﬁrst-rate strat-
egists. The idea of paying any individual several hundred 
thousand pounds a year was taboo; nobody at PA received a 
six-ﬁgure salary in those days.
Then Peter Lawson at PA had the bright idea of instigating 
the joint venture between his ﬁrm and LEK. It operated as 
PA Strategy Partners: PA provided us with leads and we sold 
a lot of strategy. There was no organizational problem for 
PA as they didn’t have to pay any of LEK’s overheads yet still 
took a share of the proﬁts. Making a million pounds proﬁt 
per partner in a separate venture was just ﬁne for them.
It is sometimes observed, correctly, that organizations like 
to go upmarket, towards higher gross-margin products and 
customers. Yet making overhead commitments well beyond 

SIMPLIFY
186 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
the norm in an organization can be just as problematic as 
accepting margins that are much lower. PA was unwilling to 
add higher-cost expert consultants ahead of demand, even 
though margins in the strategy business were much higher 
than those in its core sectors. This lack of comfort with high 
overheads explains why PA had not previously made any 
progress in the classic strategy arena.
The other side of the coin — companies’ reluctance to 
accept lower-margin business — has been well documented 
by earlier studies, so it need not detain us long. Clayton 
Christensen tells the story of the Micropolis Corporation, 
founded by Stuart Mabon to make 8-inch disk drives for the 
computer industry. His ﬁrm soon became the leader in that 
market. Then, when 5.25-inch drives came out, Mabon real-
ized that the new, cheaper disks were a serious threat to his 
business, so he put his best engineers to work on a project to 
make them. However, because the 5.25-inch disks were lower 
margin, his managers kept trying to move the talent back to 
work on the old 8-inch disks, where Micropolis made most 
of its money. Although he was the boss, Mabon had to ﬁght a 
constant rear-guard action to keep his top people working on 
the new disks. It was, he said, the most exhausting experience 
of his life, demanding “100 percent of my time and energy for 
18 months’.2 Even so, Micropolis never became the market 
leader in 5.25-inch disks, and before long the market was 
moving on to even smaller disk drives anyway.
A ﬁnal example of the Overhead Trap is DEC’s failure 
to make its mark in personal computers. From 1965, when 
the company introduced the ﬁrst “minicomputer,” until the 
1980s, DEC was one of Wall Street’s biggest success stories. 
It was the dominant force in minicomputers, leaving IBM 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
187
trailing in its wake. But when the PC market began to sprout 
in the 1970s, DEC looked into entering the new sector eleven 
times and held back every time. It ﬁnally started to make PCs 
only in 1983, two years after IBM and seven years after Apple. 
None of its PC products was ever successful.
Why was that? DEC certainly had the design and 
technical skills. But the ﬁrm was used to a market with dif-
ferent economics. Minicomputers required a huge, ongoing 
research effort . . . and rewarded it with gross margins north 
of 50 percent. By contrast, PC gross margins were under 30 
percent. Also, the new breed of computers did not require 
the massive, continuous research investment that minicom-
puters did, and customers were not willing to pay the sorts 
of prices that would support expensive research anyway. 
DEC’s belated move into PCs was at the top of that market, 
where gross margins were highest but volumes were lowest 
and customer requirements greatest.
It seems that ﬁrms develop their own rules of thumb about 
acceptable margins and then become addicted to them. So, 
if simpler, lower-margin products come along, it is hard for 
any successful company to embrace them and realize that, 
although the margins are lower, the overheads are too. New 
entrants with simpler products do not have the handicap 
of success in more complex, more proﬁtable products, and 
the overhead and margin assumptions that such success 
generates.
The Cannibalization Trap
In 2000, Betfair, a new betting company, started in London. 
Other online bookmakers already existed, but Betfair’s 

SIMPLIFY
188 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
business model was different from those of all its rivals, 
online or ofﬂine. Instead of setting the odds itself, Betfair 
created an electronic market — a betting exchange — where 
gamblers could offer odds to other gamblers or take the odds 
posted by other individuals.
I (Richard) invested in Betfair early in 2001, acquiring 
10 percent of the ﬁrm for £1.5 million, meaning the whole 
company was valued at just £15 million. However, although 
the ﬁrm was minuscule at the time (at least in comparison 
with the market leaders), it was growing at a rate of around 
50 percent a month. Within a couple of years, though still 
relatively small, it was already beginning to make signiﬁcant 
inroads into the main betting market. This was not surpris-
ing, given that Betfair charged an average commission of 3 
percent, compared with the mainstream bookmakers’ “over-
round” — or gross proﬁt margin — of about 12 percent. 
Moreover, Betfair charged commission only on winning 
bets. So it was charging just 1.5 percent on total bets — a 
price reduction of 87.5 percent!
You can understand the traditional bookies’ fear of “can-
nibalization”. They saw no sense in adopting the new system 
themselves and encouraging their customers to move from 
the current high-margin way of betting towards a much 
lower-margin method. This is a common concern of any 
business faced with a disruptive, lower-cost new entrant 
to their market. But the bookmakers did not realize that, 
whatever they did, any price-sensitive gambler who was not 
a total technophobe would soon be beating a path to Betfair’s 
door. The sensible thing, therefore, would have been for one 
of the “big three” bookmakers in the UK — Ladbrokes, 
Corals, or William Hill — either to start their own online 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
189
betting exchange or, better still, buy Betfair for petty cash 
(in their terms) and thus eliminate a potentially very serious 
rival. Yet none of them chose either of these options. For 
them, Betfair was the enemy — a company to be crushed 
underfoot — preferably by persuading the government to 
declare betting exchanges illegal.
When the government refused to play ball, Betfair went 
on to become, at one stage, the number-one online betting 
company in the UK, with a market value of £1.3 billion. At 
the time of writing, this had increased to around £3 billion. 
Meanwhile, the erstwhile leading bookmakers in the tra-
ditional market were all overtaken by a new leader, Paddy 
Power, which provided a wider range of “fun” bets and cut 
its margins. If one of the big three had acquired Betfair, and 
kept it as a separate business, they would likely be the market 
leader now, instead of an also-ran.
The same pattern — fear of cannibalization preventing 
leading companies from doing anything positive to halt that 
cannibalization — has occurred across almost the entire 
ﬁeld of internet retailing. The leaders in nearly all of the 
internet retail categories — such as books (Amazon) and 
auctions (eBay) — are very different from the “real world” 
leaders. Despite potential advantages from combining 
bricks-and-mortar retailing with online retailing in the same 
category — ranging from bargaining leverage with suppliers 
to using the customer base, to fulﬁlment and many other 
synergies — the real world leaders were initially reluctant to 
go online for fear of cannibalization. And when they realized 
their mistake, they did too little, too late. Barnes & Noble, 
for example, was the world’s largest bookseller, but it was May 
1997 before it ﬁnally launched its website, almost two years 

SIMPLIFY
190 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
after Amazon. Once again, fear of cannibalization had led to 
greater cannibalization than would otherwise have occurred. 
Amazon now sells far more books than Barnes & Noble.
However, perhaps the greatest victim of fear of cannibaliza-
tion — and one of the biggest corporate declines ever — was 
Xerox. The company’s patents for plain paper copying gave 
it a virtual monopoly in the 1950s and 1960s, which Xerox 
exploited to the fullest. The typical machine cost about $700 
to make and was sold for $3000 or more. But nothing lasts 
forever. In the late 1960s, Canon began to circumvent Xerox’s 
patents and price-simpliﬁed, introducing a small desktop 
copier for less than a third of the price of Xerox’s monster 
machines.3 Helped by the Federal Trade Commission, which 
forced Xerox to license its patents to other ﬁrms, Canon soon 
seized market leadership. By 1979, Xerox’s U.S. copier market 
share had plummeted from 99 percent to just 14 percent.
Consider what we call the cannibalization paradox:
• The decision to provide a stripped-down, simpler, and 
much cheaper product is valid if your customers will 
use that product. If you think they will, you might as 
well cannibalize yourself before some other ﬁrm does 
it for you. If you think they will never use the cheaper 
product, it might seem to make no sense to introduce it.
And yet:
• If you truly believe that your customers will never 
switch, there is no danger of cannibalization, so you 
might as well make the cheaper product anyway and use 
the proﬁts to top up those from your existing business.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
191
So, with the important exceptions of luxury and niche mar-
kets — where customers are not price-sensitive — it logically 
follows that:
• There is no circumstance in which it makes sense not 
to introduce a simpler and cheaper product!
But logic and psychology are two very different things. 
It might have been sensible for Xerox to continue to milk 
its customers and delay the introduction of a simpler and 
cheaper copier until Canon launched its product, or was 
getting close to doing so. But then Xerox would have needed 
to act extremely quickly and decisively to cannibalize itself, 
which would have required having a small machine already 
in development. Yet the company did nothing. For sure, a 
determined CEO acting in the shareholders’ interests could
have pushed through development of a small Xerox machine 
to fend off Canon, regardless of the inevitable opposition 
from his powerful sales force. But the real world does not 
work like that. The fear of cannibalization paralyzes success-
ful management, delaying action until it is too late.
The Customer Trap
Why did it take so long for full-service airlines to imitate 
their budget rivals, despite the latter’s obvious success? The 
ﬁrst full-service foray into enemy space was United’s Shuttle 
service, launched in 1994, twenty-three years after Southwest 
Airlines started operating. Perhaps it was fear of cannibal-
izing the ﬁrm’s established customers, but we think it was 
more likely the opposite. The Customer Trap is when you 

SIMPLIFY
192 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
assume that your customers aren’t interested in the new 
business model.
This is usually true . . . at ﬁrst. Southwest appealed to 
people who wanted to travel point-to-point — those who 
had previously driven or had not traveled long distances at 
all. It did not appeal to the sophisticated frequent ﬂiers who 
traveled to major cities, often abroad, and comprised most 
of the scheduled airlines’ market. But when a mass market 
is created, the new product gradually becomes increasingly 
visible. The number of budget airlines grew, and their reach 
gradually extended, so that everyone traveling on a full fare 
became aware of the much cheaper alternatives. And, ulti-
mately, money always talks. Business people started to use 
budget airlines when traveling at their own expense, and 
learned that they were not so bad: they still had a seat (albeit 
with less legroom) and they arrived safely and usually on 
time, just as on a scheduled ﬂight. Then, when the economy 
suffered a downturn, ever more small- and medium-sized 
ﬁrms made their staff use the cheaper carriers for business 
ﬂights, too; and these habits persisted even when the econ-
omy improved.
What happened in the airline market reﬂects a general 
pattern. In The Innovator’s Dilemma, Clayton Christensen 
documents how, time and again — in the mechanical exca-
vator industry, in motorcycles, in the steel-making and in 
dozens of other examples — the leading ﬁrms’ customers ini-
tially do not want the new product. When Honda accidentally 
stumbled across a new market — off-road dirt-biking — for 
its Supercub in California around 1960, nobody viewed the 
Japanese ﬁrm as much of a threat to the motorbike market 
leader, Harley-Davidson. Honda’s customers were different, 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
193
and the company sold its bikes through sporting goods shops, 
not through motorcycle dealerships. Harley’s customers 
wanted serious bikes, not puny Japanese toys, no matter how 
cute they looked. But then, once Honda had secured a toe-
hold in the market, it began to develop more powerful bikes 
that were intended for use on the road. Bit by bit, model by 
model, the ﬁrm moved upmarket, and Harley-Davidson was 
gradually forced to retreat. After failing to compete effec-
tively with Honda in the 100–300cc range, and later in the 
500–750cc range, Harley repositioned itself solely at the high 
end of the market. Although high margin, this sector was 
much smaller than the others, and Harley fell on hard times. 
It has managed to rationalize itself as a successful premium 
brand today, boosted by a successful clothing side-business, 
but Honda sells three times as many motorcycles worldwide.
The trap here is that the market leader believes its cus-
tomers, and so ignores the threat from the new product. The 
typical pattern can be summarized as follows:
• The performance of the new product gradually 
improves, and after a while it meets the requirements 
of all but the most demanding customers.
• With increased learning and volume, the simpler 
product becomes ever cheaper, which makes the 
price difference between it and the premium product 
increasingly hard to ignore.
As this happens, the typical response of the market leader — 
such as Harley — is “segment retreat” — a move to even 
more complex and expensive products. This is usually 
explained as a natural response to short-term earnings 

SIMPLIFY
194 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
pressure from the simpler product. Such an explanation is 
often valid, but something else may also be involved . . .
The Complexity Trap
In the early stages of industry innovation, companies 
typically build new and better products through heavy 
investment in both product and process complexity. The 
product is hard to make, hard to use and expensive to pro-
duce. In the search for expansion, product variety, product 
proliferation, and customization are all vigorously pursued, 
greatly adding to the complexity of the ﬁrm’s offering and 
operations. This is a natural path.
How do many ventures start? An entrepreneur innovates, 
turning an idea into a product that may be sold to other 
businesses. A viable solution is found and an initial customer 
is signed up. Whatever the customer wants — whatever 
adaptations and customization they demand — the new 
ﬁrm eagerly supplies. Keeping this precious customer happy 
therefore leads to increasing complexity. Soon, a second cus-
tomer comes along, but they want different adaptations from 
the ﬁrst one. More complexity. Then, in the quest to ﬁll all 
possible niches — in the rational wish to exclude rivals and 
increase revenue — new products are created. New features 
and new technology are added in a hurry in order to provide 
a product for each segment. For instance, there may be a 
luxury version, an eco version, a sports version, a baby version, 
and so on. Adding features and technology seems entirely 
logical, and it helps to identify the venture with every aspect 
of the new market.
The complexity increasing is apparent in design, in 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
195
manufacturing, in selling, and in delivering an ever- 
widening range of products and services. When the ﬁrm has 
the ambition to expand, or when sales slow, the default mode 
is to increase complexity — more solutions, more varied 
products and customers, more customization, more markets 
and more diverse activity. There is constant pressure to 
come up with new ideas and managers are always excited by 
the “new new thing.”
People who design complex products don’t do it just for 
the hell of it. They are driven by a vision of how the prod-
ucts could be much more useful and attractive. The danger 
is that they get locked into the assumption that it is okay 
for the product or business system to become increasingly 
complex — heavier, more expensive, more convoluted, and 
harder for the uninitiated to use — as long as performance 
continues to improve.
At the start of its life cycle, the only way to improve a 
product is to add more resources and energy. After a while, 
though, this ceases to be true. It becomes possible to sim-
plify — to make lighter, smaller products that have fewer 
features, are easier to use, cheaper to buy and operate, and 
less costly to produce and deliver. Yet managers who are used 
to progressing only by adding complexity often see simpler 
products not as a step forwards but as a step backwards.
There’s another twist, too. Intelligent managers often 
instinctively prefer complexity to simplicity. For instance, 
engineers frequently relish the challenge of making a 
product that is more intricate than its predecessor. Moving 
upmarket appeals not only because margins are higher but 
because there is more opportunity to deploy expertise. So 
it takes a very resolute leader to convince managers that 

SIMPLIFY
196 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
products should be simpler, not more elaborate. Simpliﬁers 
generally emerge from outside the mainstream — new 
entrepreneurs rather than corporate bigwigs. Short of cash, 
and often naturally inclined to parsimony, innovators such as 
Henry Ford, Sam Walton (the founder of Walmart), Ingvar 
Kamprad, Herb Kelleher, and Stelios Haji-Ioannou (the 
founder of EasyJet) are the natural exponents of simplicity, 
economy and the lowest-cost solution. Even when he was a 
billionaire, Walton drove himself everywhere in a car with 
over 100,000 miles on the odometer. The multi-billionaire 
Kamprad travels by bus or budget airline. Not many senior 
corporate leaders do likewise.
The Skills Trap
Theodore Levitt wrote one of the Harvard Business Review’s 
most famous articles — “Marketing Myopia” — back in 
1960.4 In this piece he argued that ﬁrms should meet cus-
tomer needs rather than sell particular products. Thus, 
instead of thinking of itself speciﬁcally as a railroad, Penn 
Central should have acknowledged that it was in the trans-
portation business. So, when air travel started to grow, it 
should have entered that market.
Business strategists have generally ridiculed this view. 
What did Penn Central know about running an airline? 
Products are where companies possess distinctive expertise 
and a reason to exist. So the ﬁnal reason why managers are 
reluctant to simplify may appear to be a very good one — 
they don’t have the skills or the culture required to enter a 
new market. Would it have made sense for America’s lead-
ing chain of full-service restaurants to start McDonald’s 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
197
in 1948? Probably not. The skills that make a ﬁrm good at 
supplying a complex product or service often disqualify them
for entering a far simpler market.
But consider three vignettes that point the other way.
In the 1980s, Hewlett-Packard quickly became the leading 
PC printer-maker, based on its expertise in sophisticated laser-
jet printers. But when the simpler, slower, lower- resolution but 
much cheaper ink-jet printers started to dominate the market, 
HP set up an autonomous unit in Vancouver, Washington, 
which was allowed to compete with its own laser-jet business, 
based in Boise, Idaho. Thereafter, the classic pattern played 
out. The Boise operation went upmarket, producing ever 
more complex printers — larger, faster, and higher resolution. 
Of course, these were expensive, but they enjoyed fat margins. 
HP’s Vancouver operation, meanwhile, steadily increased the 
speed of its ink-jet printers while keeping prices and costs 
low, which enabled it to compete with Canon and other new 
entrants. As ink-jet printers started to satisfy the demands of 
the mainstream, and laser-jet printers became a small segment 
at the very top of the market, HP was able to maintain its 
market leadership.5
The disk-drive industry boasts a rare example of a leader 
in an old product succeeding with a new, simpler one in 
the form of the Quantum Corporation and its spin-off, the 
Plus Development Corporation (PDC). Quantum was the 
leading manufacturer of 8-inch disk drives, but was stranded 
by the emergence of the simpler, cheaper 5.25-inch drive. 
The corporation introduced its own 5.25-inch product four 
years too late. However, in 1984, some Quantum employees 
decided to leave the ﬁrm, found PDC, and start making 
a 3.5-inch disk drive. Quantum offered to fund the new 

SIMPLIFY
198 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
venture, securing 80 percent ownership. PDC designed 
the new drives but outsourced production to a division of 
Matsushita in Japan. Three years later, Quantum’s sales of 
8- and 5.25-inch drives had all but vanished, but it wisely 
bought the remaining ﬁfth of PDC that it didn’t already 
own, put the PDC executives in charge of the whole busi-
ness, effectively shut down the old operation, but kept the 
Quantum brand.6 The new Quantum went on to become 
the world’s largest disk-drive supplier before selling out in 
2001 and entering a third incarnation, this time as a leader 
in tape-storage products.
A ﬁnal example. For decades, the Allen Bradley 
Company (AB) of Milwaukee was the leader in its ﬁeld — it 
made rugged, heavy-duty, sophisticated, electromechan-
ical switches to control large electric motors.7 But these 
traditional controls were eventually threatened by smaller, 
simpler, cheaper, more ﬂexible electronic motor controls. 
The ﬁrst company to make these was Modicon, which 
started production in 1968. But the new technology was not 
seen as sufﬁciently robust or high performance for the users 
of electromechanical controls: machine-tool and crane man-
ufacturers, and heating, ventilation and air-conditioning 
contractors. So Modicon sold its products to new customers, 
such as car-makers, who were starting to use motor controls 
in the process of factory automation.
If it had followed the well-worn script, AB would have 
continued to scorn the new technology until it was too late. 
Instead, though, it bought a quarter of Modicon’s shares 
when the latter ﬁrm was just one year old. AB then bought 
the whole of another young electronic controls company and 
merged the two ventures. The new ﬁrm was kept separate 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS 
199
from AB’s traditional business and, indeed, competed with it. 
As electronic controls increasingly usurped electromechanical 
switches in U.S. factories, AB’s four main rivals — including 
General Electric and Westinghouse — started to make their 
own electronic devices, but within their existing electrome-
chanical operations. None of these four competitors proved 
successful in electronics, so AB maintained its dominance 
through its acquisition of the two startups.
The moral of these three stories is that the requirement 
for different skills is not necessarily a barrier to effective 
simplifying, provided the new skills are developed and 
kept outside the original operation, even after acquisition. 
As we saw earlier, one of the leading UK betting compa-
nies would have been well advised to buy Betfair and its 
new electronic exchange technology at the start of this 
century, when it was a ﬂedgling but fast-expanding com-
pany. Perhaps companies such as Google — which rarely 
hesitates to buy businesses that are adjacent to its own — 
are right to do so, both to facilitate growth and to protect 
themselves from potential rivals.
Key Points
It is not that leading ﬁrms cannot simplify. Rather, there are 
deep managerial tendencies that make ﬁrms both reluctant 
and slow to do so:
1. The Overhead Trap — Companies have expectations 
about gross margins and are unwilling to develop prod-
ucts that deviate either up or down from their existing 
overhead and margin levels.

SIMPLIFY
200 
PART 3  •  THE WEAKNESS OF STRONG FIRMS
2. The Cannibalization Trap — The leading ﬁrm does not 
want to eat its own lunch, which allows challengers to 
do it for them.
3. The Customer Trap — The ﬁrm rejects the new product 
because its best customers do.
4. The Complexity Trap — Managers naturally love com-
plexity, or become accustomed to it, believing it is the 
only route to progress.
5. The Skills Trap — The ﬁrm may not have the right 
skills for simpler products, but it also fails to appreciate 
that these can be acquired, often quite cheaply.
There are, then, deep-rooted reasons why number-one ﬁrms 
usually do not simplify. But is managerial failure inevitable? 
Deﬁnitely not. There are many exceptions to the typical 
pattern. If the leaders of number-one ﬁrms understand 
what might happen, they can correct for the managerial 
bias towards complexity. In the next chapter, we look at what 
incumbents can do to simplify and stay ahead.

14
How Market Leaders Can 
Simplify Without Tears
The opportunity to secure ourselves against 
defeat lies in our own hands.
Sun Tzu
A  
simplifying ﬁrm emerges. Can the market leader stay 
on top? Of course it can, provided it has the right atti-
tude and structure.
This is how a market leader can stay on top:
1. Determine whether your new rival is price- or 
proposition-simplifying.
2. Decide whether to respond by price- or proposition-
simplifying yourself.
3. Commit to neutralizing the threat by simplifying more 
radically than they are.

SIMPLIFY
202 
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS
4. Adopt the structure that will maximize your chances 
of success. This means choosing one of the following 
ﬁve options:
• Develop and manufacture the new, simple product 
alongside and within your existing organization. This 
nearly always fails! For example, DEC made its ill-
fated PCs within the same organization as its core 
product — minicomputers.
• Abandon your existing, more complex product and 
switch entirely to developing the new simple product. 
This can work. For example, as we will see below, 
Kmart ditched its supermarket operation in the 1960s 
to focus exclusively on discount stores. Another 
example is McDonald’s, which gave up its successful 
barbecue restaurant business and bet the farm on 
hamburgers.
• Set up a parallel, completely autonomous unit to 
supply the new, simple product. This can work, too, 
provided the new unit is allowed to be genuinely 
autonomous. Examples include HP’s new ink-jet 
printer operation.
• Sponsor a spin-off to make the new, simple 
product. For example, Quantum’s funding of the Plus 
Development Corporation.
• Acquire one or more of the new, simplifying ﬁrms. 
This is usually the strategy with the best chance of 
success. An example is the Allen Bradley Company, 
which acquired two startups in the electronic motor 
controls sector.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS 
203
Countering Price-Simplifying
Intel
Intel Corporation invented the Dynamic Random Access 
Memory (DRAM) chip in 1969 and did very well with it for 
several years. By 1978, however, Japanese semiconductor 
makers were able to undercut the U.S. ﬁrm. A few years 
later, these low-cost rivals had put Intel in a very precarious 
position.
Intel saved itself by commissioning the development of 
the microprocessor, with the research, rather ironically, per-
formed by a Japanese calculator-maker. Professor Clayton 
Christensen describes the microprocessor as follows:
“Mainstream as they seem today, microprocessors were 
disruptive technology when they ﬁrst emerged. They 
were capable only of limited functionality . . . But they 
were small and simple, and they enabled affordable logic 
and computation in applications where this had not been 
feasible.”1
In the 1960s, computers were powered by several integrated 
circuits, which used more electrical power, and generated 
more heat, than microprocessors. The latter were also 
smaller, higher performance, easier to incorporate into 
devices, and therefore easier for the machines’ users. The 
Intel 4004, introduced in 1971, was the ﬁrst commercial 
microprocessor, but it was some time before the corpora-
tion was able to make a viable product that could be used in 
numerous devices. (It eventually beneﬁted from “Moore’s 

SIMPLIFY
204 
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS
Law,” which states that the number of components on a 
chip doubles every two years.) The big breakthrough came 
in 1981 when IBM decided to use the Intel 8088 micropro-
cessor in its personal computer.2 Shortly thereafter, Intel 
also supplied the “clones” — lower-cost PC-makers, such 
as Compaq — which soon overtook IBM. This strategy was 
spectacularly successful: Intel’s market capitalization leapt 
from $4 billion to $197 billion between 1979 and 1987.
But the opportunities for breakthrough products are 
rare. If proposition-simplifying is impossible, the best 
response to a price-simpliﬁer is to out-simplify that sim-
pliﬁer. I (Richard) had personal experience of this in the 
early 1990s.
Filofax
Filofax — the maker of iconic personal organizers before the 
days of digital organizers — had a great run from the 1960s 
to 1987, but then its sales and proﬁts started to falter. The 
success of the company — and its high prices and proﬁts — 
had invited lower-cost competition. In the UK, the main 
rival was Microﬁle, a price-simpliﬁer offering an almost 
identical product for less than half the price.
As Filofax started to run out of cash, I organized a rescue 
bid and gained control of the company. The hypothesis was 
simple — since Microﬁle had price-simpliﬁed, Filofax should 
too. Microﬁle still had lower worldwide sales than Filofax, 
so we followed its cost-cutting measures: we replaced the 
leather folders with plastic and sourced cheaper paper from 
Scandinavia, while contracting out manufacturing and 
logistics. Filofax, we reckoned, should be able to get its costs 

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS 
205
below those of Microﬁle. We rationalized the product range 
down from several hundred to just four, and put most of 
our efforts into our new lead product — a “standard ﬁll” of 
diary/calendar, Tube/subway maps, address book and notes. 
We also improved the design so the product was not only 
inexpensive but a joy to use.
Within three years, Filofax had quadrupled its volume 
and regained its market dominance. We sold the company 
for seven times what we had paid.
There was no signiﬁcant change in either the product or 
the technology; and, as a single-product company, Filofax 
was relatively easy to turn around. But where the business 
model shifts fundamentally, it’s a different story.
Woolco Versus Kmart
In the 1950s, F. W. Woolworth was the worldwide leader 
in general stores. It faced only one serious rival — S. S. 
Kresge — but the latter was stuck ﬁrmly in second place. 
Towards the end of the decade, however, a new retail 
format — discount stores — started to appear. These stores 
were the precursors, in concept if not in technology, of online 
retailers. They were price-simpliﬁers — with much lower 
prices and margins — but compensated by having far higher 
stock turns because the lower prices attracted customers.
F. W. Woolworth and S. S. Kresge opened their ﬁrst 
discount stores in 1962, calling them Woolco and Kmart, 
respectively.3 Kresge put all its money on the Kmart horse, 
closing its general stores. Woolworth decided to ride the 
two horses simultaneously within the organization. Initially, 
Woolco had its own discount store headquarters, but to 

SIMPLIFY
206 
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS
save money it was later folded into the Woolworth general 
store regional structure. Under pressure from Woolworth’s 
management, Woolco gradually raised its margins from 20 
percent (similar to Kmart’s) to 33 percent, much closer to 
the rest of Woolworth’s.
Kmart’s full commitment to the new business, and 
Woolworth’s equivocal commitment, had a predictable 
result. By 1971, the former had revenues of $3.5 billion and 
a highly proﬁtable business. By contrast, Woolco had sales 
below a billion and it was making no money. In 1982, it quit 
discount retailing altogether.
Sponsored Spin-Offs
So does setting up a separate division or operating site work? 
It certainly didn’t for IBM or Woolworth, partly because, in 
both cases, when the going got tough, the parent company 
curbed the new division’s autonomy. Yet, as we saw earlier, 
it did work for Hewlett-Packard, which did not restrict the 
new ink-jet division’s autonomy. We also saw that the Plus 
Development Corporation was almost alone in making 
the transition to the simpler generation of disk drives. 
And, because its parent company Quantum sponsored the 
spin-off, retaining 80 percent of the equity, it was able to 
survive when its competitors in the 8-inch disk-drive market 
perished.
Sponsored spin-offs — where a ﬁrm retains a large stake 
in a new business — are rare, however. This is surprising, 
given that spin-offs have all the advantages of setting up an 
autonomous division, and several more besides:

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS 
207
• The individuals who propose and lead a spin-off are 
likely to be more entrepreneurial than the leaders of 
an autonomous unit, and they have greater motivation 
to make the new business valuable.
• After the initial set-up, the spin-off can raise money 
independently of the sponsoring corporation. This 
is perhaps the most important advantage. Though 
“autonomy” sounds great, the truth is that whoever 
controls the purse strings controls the operation. 
Financial independence is necessary for managerial 
independence.
• The sense of being masters of their own destiny is typi-
cally stronger for workers in a spin-off than for those in 
an autonomous unit within a big company. The absence 
of a corporate safety net tends to make spin-off execu-
tives more commercially focused and cash-conscious.
• A separate legal and ownership structure makes it all 
but impossible for the sponsoring corporation to lose 
its nerve and reincorporate the new unit.
• If the spin-off is kept totally separate, it can develop its 
own culture and rules of thumb that are better suited 
to simpler products and new customers. The spin-off 
is also more likely to develop an obsession with cost 
reduction as it will be unconstrained by any fear of 
cannibalization.
• Finally, the spin-off can offer a good home to an 
extremely talented but disruptive employee. For exam-
ple, what if Steve Jobs and the Apple employees who 
founded NeXT had been “spun off” from Apple in 
1985, with Apple retaining a signiﬁcant stake in the 
new venture? (This is not a preposterous idea. Initially, 

SIMPLIFY
208 
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS
the Apple board proposed taking a 10 percent stake in 
Jobs’ new business. He was in favor, but his fellow exec-
utives vetoed the idea.4) This would have made Jobs’ 
exit from Apple a great deal smoother, and would have 
facilitated a much easier return to Apple when that was 
desperately needed a decade later.
Acquisition
A market leader facing a new simplifying ﬁrm may choose to 
buy the ﬂedgling company rather than compete with it. This 
is particularly attractive when the technology or business 
model in the simplifying company is radically new, as it was 
with Betfair and the Allen Bradley Company. Buying the 
simpliﬁer eliminates competition, gives the buyer a head start 
in the new business model, and serves as cheap insurance.
But a word of caution: acquisition may not work if the leader 
emasculates the acquired ﬁrm by interference. Keeping the 
latter separate and fully autonomous is essential for success. 
For example, Flickr was the undisputed leader in online pho-
to-sharing when it was bought by Yahoo! in 2005, but then 
Yahoo! imposed a new set of objectives and tried to integrate 
Flickr into its corporate development processes. As a result, 
innovation was neglected, Facebook and Instagram ﬁlled the 
breach, and Flickr is now a shadow of its former self.5
Countering Proposition-Simplifying
As we have seen above, a market leader has several options 
when it comes to countering a price-simpliﬁer. It is much 
harder to counter a proposition-simpliﬁer.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS 209
With price-simplifying, the new approach should be evi-
dent almost as soon as it hits the market. If the leader chooses 
to play the new game, or at least hedge its bets, it will have 
the money and market presence to do so. Hence, in theory at 
least, it should be able to move faster than the start up, which 
will usually be short of both cash and experienced managers.
By contrast, you cannot counter a proposition-simplifying 
product if you are unaware of it. The new product may be 
in development and lurking in the shadows for several years 
before it is revealed in all its glory. Once that happens, it may 
take the leader several years to replicate the product, and 
by then the newcomer may have seized ﬁrst-mover advan-
tage, locked in customers, established distribution and scale 
advantages, and cemented its brand identity within the new 
market category.
Consequently, leading ﬁrms have rarely managed to fend 
off innovators with a simpler product that is truly a joy to use.
In 1995, AltaVista proposition-simpliﬁed, introducing a 
search engine that was faster and more comprehensive than 
any other. As a result, it quickly became number one in 
online search engines, and one of the early internet’s most 
visited sites. But when Google came along with an engine 
that was even quicker, simpler, more accurate and easier to 
use, AltaVista fell away very quickly. Neither Compaq nor 
Yahoo! — each of which acquired the ﬁrm — could save it.
Similarly, as soon as the Sony Walkman appeared, it 
seized market leadership in the stereo player market, seeing 
off ﬁrst Stereobelt — an invention of the German–Brazilian 
entrepreneur Andreas Pavel — and then Toshiba, Aiwa, and 
Panasonic. The Walkman was the simplest product on the 
market and a joy to use.

SIMPLIFY
210 
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS
The Austrian entrepreneur Dietrich Mateschitz created 
Red Bull in 1987. His product was a simpliﬁed version of an 
existing Thai drink which he marketed as an “energy drink” 
(this was Mateschitz’s truly innovative idea). Then he put it 
in a beautiful, tall, thin, silver–blue can and rolled the drink 
out rapidly throughout the Western world. Since then, many 
lower-price versions have achieved some success, but none 
has toppled Red Bull. This has parallels with the Coke versus 
Pepsi battle, in which the latter price-simpliﬁed and seized 
part of the market, but never became top dog.
A similar pattern occurred with smartphones. Nokia, 
the dominant maker of mobile phones for over a decade, 
was swept aside by Apple. Then, with its cheaper products, 
Samsung challenged Apple, especially in Europe. Yet, from 
its launch in 2007 to at least 2012, the iPhone was both the 
U.S. and the global market leader, despite its phones costing 
far more than any of their rivals.
Counter Price- and Proposition-Simplifying
A market leader is rarely assailed simultaneously by both 
price- and proposition- simpliﬁers. But, as we have seen, 
IBM was in the mid-1980s. When the Apple Macintosh 
appeared, IBM did not even try to make a machine that was 
more intuitive and easy to use. Around the same time, it 
also lost out to price-simpliﬁers — HP, Compaq, and Dell.
IBM could have done something to counter these 
threats: it could have bought Apple in 1982 and put all of 
its energy into proposition-simplifying. Instead, it tried 
to straddle two utterly incompatible strategies and failed 
miserably at both.

SIMPLIFY
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS 
211
Is the Penny Dropping About Acquiring 
Proposition-Simpliﬁers?
Right now, several ﬁrms in Silicon Valley seem particularly 
keen to buy up smaller competitors who might become 
threats as proposition-simpliﬁers.
Waze was founded in 2008 with the aim of pioneering a 
new generation of GPS software that would collect infor-
mation about trafﬁc jams from users and provide real-time 
updates. Once developed, this free, proposition-simpliﬁed 
service was a true joy to use — far simpler and more practi-
cal than traditional GPS. Google bought Waze in 2013 for 
$996 million.
The video-sharing website YouTube launched in 2005 
and Google bought it the very next year. Network effects 
have since given YouTube a huge lead in its market, and 
it will probably never be replicated because it hosts the 
content. When Google acquired the service, YouTube’s 
growth was exponential because its videos were instantly 
approved, whereas Google’s sat in limbo for three days, 
awaiting approval. This delay killed vitality and spontaneity. 
YouTube, by contrast, was a joy-to-use proposition-simpli-
ﬁer. It is also now the world’s second-biggest search engine 
(after Google itself).
By buying these and other businesses that were adjacent 
to its core search engine operation, Google has increased 
its dominance in searching and has built a buffer against 
competition in that market.
Finally, launched in 2009, WhatsApp is a cross-platform 
texting subscription service. By April 2014, it had 500 million 
active users and handled more than 10 billion text messages 

SIMPLIFY
212 
PART 3  •  HOW MARKET LEADERS CAN SIMPLIFY WITHOUT TEARS
every day, with 700 million photos and 100 million videos 
shared daily. Six months later, Facebook bought its rival for 
a stunning $19 billion — another example of acquiring a 
dominant proposition-simpliﬁer.
Key Points
1. To repulse a simpliﬁer, the leading ﬁrm should commit 
to providing the purest possible form of either price- or 
proposition-simplifying. Then it must adopt the struc-
ture that maximizes its chances of doing that.
2. Acquisition is often the best and simplest way to do 
this, provided you can resist the temptation to interfere 
afterwards.
3. It is easier to counter price-simplifying than  proposition- 
simplifying. In the latter case, early acquisition of the 
simpliﬁer is sometimes the only option if the market 
leader is to avoid catastrophe.
To identify the best option for your company if you are 
facing a simplifying rival, visit www.SIMPLIFYforCEOs.
com.
We now turn to the ﬁnal part of the book, in which we 
ask if simplifying really makes a big difference to ﬁnancial 
returns.

PART FOUR
The Rewards of 
Simplifying
In this ﬁnal part, we look at the returns from both price- and 
proposition-simplifying. Then we conduct a little “archaeolog-
ical dig” to probe why returns may be high or low, before 
exploring the limitations, power and glory of simplifying.


15
Does Price-Simplifying Pay?
We will make electricity so cheap that only 
the rich will burn candles.
Thomas Edison
H
ow good are the returns from price-simplifying? What 
do our case studies indicate about the conditions for 
success and how far it can go?
To shed some light on the ﬁnancial rewards of simplify-
ing, we asked OC&C Strategy Consultants to examine 
the twelve case studies — six price-simpliﬁers and six 
proposition-simpliﬁers — that they consider the most sig-
niﬁcant simpliﬁers since 1900. In this chapter we look at the 
results for the price-simpliﬁers; in the next we look at those 
for the proposition-simpliﬁers. OC&C’s ﬁndings are not 
guarantees that similar patterns will occur in the future, but 
the twelve case studies are at least highly suggestive.

SIMPLIFY
216 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
The six price-simpliﬁers have all appeared in earlier chap-
ters, but here we focus on the impact of price-simplifying 
on their respective fortunes and the size of their markets.
Ford
You may recall from Chapter 1 that Henry Ford started 
simplifying in 1906. A period of huge expansion followed, as 
Ford’s focus on a single car led to the Model T and to invest-
ment in the world’s largest factory to produce it on a massive 
scale. But the big breakthrough came in 1913, when the 
moving assembly line replaced batch production. Through 
basic but excellent design, and by reducing his prices every 
year, Ford had no problem selling all his output, even though 
the latter increased by between 47 and 117 percent every year 
until 1917, when some of the company’s manufacturing was 
diverted into war work.
This phase of rapid market expansion through rolling out 
ever-cheaper Model Ts began to lose momentum in 1920. 
Although Ford set a new record that year by selling 1.25 
million cars, the rate of growth began to decline thereafter 
as the newly merged General Motors shifted the basis of 
competition from price to model innovation by offering 
greater style, variety, and improved features to more afﬂuent 
customers. OC&C therefore decided to study only the years 
1906–20 in order to measure the initial, profound effect of 
Ford’s price-simplifying. Ford’s prices fell by 76 percent 
between 1906 and 1920, which was all the more impressive 
considering that consumer prices more than doubled in 
the same period (the Consumer Price Index increased by 
130 percent). Yet the company’s revenue rose from under 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
217
$2.4 million in 1906 to $359 million in 1920 — a 150-
fold increase. The number of cars the ﬁrm sold each year 
increased even more impressively — by 782 times — and its 
market share (by units) rocketed from 8 percent in 1906 to 
between 75 and 80 percent in 1920 (dollar market share was 
slightly lower at between 65 and 70 percent).
Ford’s unit market volume increased by over 500 times, 
and its market value rose by 150 times, compared with just 
a ninefold increase for the companies that later merged into 
General Motors, Ford’s most serious competitor(s) both from 
1906 to 1920 and for most of the rest of the twentieth cen-
tury. The ﬁgure for “value outperformance” — the number 
of times Ford’s value increased relative to the number of 
times its closet rival’s value increased — is therefore 17 (150 
÷ 9). In absolute terms, the company’s surge in value com-
pounded at 43 percent annually between 1906 and 1920.
All of these astonishing achievements are summarized in 
Figure 6.
As is well known, the Ford Motor Company was very badly 
managed from the 1920s and for most of the rest of the 
1906
+37% CAGR
Impact on US
automobile market size
000 units
1,573
Impact on
Ford market value
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
1920 multiple of 1906 value
9x
20
2.4
+43% CAGR
358.8
150x
1920
1906
1920
Ford
GM
Figure 6: Ford’s early growth

SIMPLIFY
218 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
century. It lost market leadership to GM in 1935, failed to 
continue price-simplifying, failed to make the adjustment to 
proposition-simplifying, failed to reinvent the low-cost car 
in the way that both the Volkswagen Beetle and the BMC 
Mini did, and — for more than a decade — failed to match 
the quality standards of Toyota and other Asian car-makers.
Therefore, it is intriguing that, taking the whole period 
from 1906 to the present day, Ford’s market value increased 
by more than 24,451 times, at a compound annual growth 
rate of 10 percent. GM’s value increased “only” 500 times, 
so Ford’s value outperformance ﬁgure over the long term 
(albeit against a rival that eventually turned out to have feet 
of clay) is 49. This suggests that the brand equity created 
by Henry Ford by being the ﬁrst price-simpliﬁer — by 
“democratizing the automobile,” as he put it — was so mas-
sive that it endured for more than a century and continued 
to generate above-average ﬁnancial returns over that whole 
period (see Figure 7). As we will see later, this pattern — a 
ﬁrm gaining an extremely long-lasting advantage from early 
innovation — is evident in other industries, too.
+6.1% CAGR
Impact on US
automobile market size
000 units
Impact on
Ford market value
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Current multiple of 1906 value
+9.9% CAGR
11,661
58,645
24,451x
20
1906
2014
2
500x
1906
2015
Ford
GM
Figure 7: Ford’s growth over a century

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
219
McDonald’s
In 1948 the McDonald brothers converted their conven-
tional barbecue restaurant into a production line not unlike 
Henry Ford’s. They used their “speedee service” to provide 
high-quality hamburgers at half their competitors’ price — 
ﬁfteen cents instead of thirty. As we saw in Chapter 3, the 
McDonalds price-simpliﬁed by narrowing their menu to just 
nine items, by buying the ingredients for those few items in 
bulk, by persuading the customers to serve themselves, and 
by collapsing the time taken to cook and deliver the food so 
that they could serve far more customers without the need 
to move to larger premises or take on extra staff. It was a 
beautifully simple economic revolution.
The ﬁnancial rewards soon followed. The proﬁt in 1948, 
the ﬁrst year of the “new” McDonald’s, was approximately 
$50,000, and the value of the San Bernardino business at 
the end of that year was $237,000.1 Thirteen years later, 
Ray Kroc’s consortium bought the whole business — which 
now comprised thirteen restaurants — for $2.7 million, so 
McDonald’s value grew 11.4 times between 1948 and 1961 — 
a compound annual growth rate of 20.6 percent (see Figure 
8). Of course, this calculation does not include the increase 
in value between 1947 and 1948 due to the conversion to the 
new hamburger restaurant model. Since we know that this 
more than doubled the company’s revenues, it seems reason-
able to assume that the real uplift from the new system was 
at least double the 1948–61 calculation.
OC&C next analyzed McDonald’s increase in market 
value between 1961 and 2014, due to Ray Kroc and his suc-
cessors rolling out the simple McDonald’s formula across 

SIMPLIFY
220 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
the United States and then the world. The company’s value 
in 2015 was $93 billion, a 34,627-fold increase since 1961, or 
a compound annual increase of 21 percent. There was no 
comparable restaurant chain during this period, so OC&C 
compared the McDonald’s increase to the Standard & Poor’s 
(S&P) 500 index over the same period, which increased by 28 
times (Figure 9). Therefore, McDonald’s registered a 1249-
times value outperformance over the S&P index.
+4.3% CAGR
Impact on US
restaurant market size
$m
+20.6% CAGR
6,338
10,907
0.2
2.7
1948
1961
1948
1961
McDonald‘s value
growth
$m
Figure 8: McDonald’s early growth
+8% CAGR
Impact on US
restaurant market size
$m
+21% CAGR
McDonald‘s value
growth
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Current multiple of 1961 value
528,176
93,493.4
34,827x
10,907
2.7
28x
1961
2013
1961
2015
McDonald’s
S&P 500
Figure 9: McDonald’s growth to the present day

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
221
This impressive performance was based on McDonald’s 
amazing revenue growth (which increased by 10,554 times 
between 1961 and 2015), on an expansion of margins, and 
on the multiple of market value to proﬁts growing. Roughly 
speaking, the revenue increase was multiplied by three to 
arrive at the market value increase.
But McDonald’s would not be worth anything like its cur-
rent value without that exponential increase in revenue over 
the last ﬁfty-four years. What does this imply about market 
growth? OC&C found that the U.S. restaurant market 
increased in value from $10.9 billion in 1961 to $526.2 billion 
in 2013, an increase of more than 42 times, and an annual 
compound increase of 8 percent. But, of course, this mas-
sively understates the real growth in the McDonald’s, Burger 
King and Wendy’s type of operation — “fast-hamburger” 
restaurants — in the United States and around the world. If 
we assume that McDonald’s had roughly 95 percent of this 
fast-hamburger market in 1961, and that today it has roughly 
50 percent of it globally, then the increase in market size 
becomes more than 20,000 times — a compound annual 
increase of 20 percent sustained over more than half a cen-
tury.2 That is quite an increase to result from a simpliﬁed 
retail format and a 50 percent price cut!
Southwest Airlines
In Chapter 10 we traced the story of Herb Kelleher’s creation, 
Southwest Airlines. In 1971 the new airline charged only 
twenty dollars for a trip between Dallas and San Antonio 
or Houston, a cut of 65 percent compared with previous 
average fares. Southwest’s IPO in 1971 valued the company 

SIMPLIFY
222 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
at just $6.5 million. Eight years later, Southwest was making 
a healthy operating proﬁt of $29 million on a turnover of 
$136 million, and the company was valued at $61.9 million. 
This 9.5-fold increase in Southwest’s value compared to a 
40 percent decline in value for American Airlines and a near 
standstill in the S&P 500, which increased by a mere 10 
percent over the same period. Total industry revenues nearly 
tripled in these eight years, nearly all the full-service airlines 
were unable to increase their proﬁts (see Figure 10).
In 1979, the U.S. airline market was deregulated and 
Southwest expanded hugely as it was “THE low-cost air-
line.” By 2011, it had become the number-one U.S. airline 
by passengers carried, and three years later its revenues 
were 137 times higher than they had been in 1979 (at $18.6 
billion). Its market value increased even more over the same 
period — by 468 times — to $29 billion. This compares with 
increases in American Airlines’ value (from a very low base 
in 1979) of 74 times and in the benchmark S&P 500 index of 
+13% CAGR
Impact on
US airline market
$m
+33% CAGR
Impact on Southwest
Airlines market value
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
1979 multiple of 1971 value
10,046
27,227
61.9
9.5x
1971
1979
1971
1979
0.6x
1.1x
6.5
Southwest
Airlines
American
Airlines
S&P 500
Figure 10: Southwest Airlines’ growth in the 1970s

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
223
only 19 times (see Figure 11). Once again, a price-simpliﬁer 
demonstrated huge value growth and signiﬁcant outperfor-
mance over the long term by rolling out a formula it had 
established in its ﬁrst few years.
IKEA
As we saw in Chapter 2, Ingvar Kamprad simpliﬁed the 
furniture industry through a proprietary system which 
lowered cost at every point, not least through IKEA’s 
innovation of ﬂat-pack furniture assembled at home by 
the customer, leading to huge savings in transport costs 
(which can comprise up to half of total product costs in the 
traditional furniture industry). Kamprad insisted on engi-
neering products down to prices that were 50–80 percent 
lower than before.
Between its founding in 1958 and 1974, IKEA’s expansion 
in Scandinavia led to a 56-times increase in both revenue 
and market value, an increase of 29 percent each year — 
although calculating the true value of IKEA, a private 
+6% CAGR
Impact on
US airline market
$m
+19% CAGR
Impact on Southwest
Airlines market value
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Current multiple of 1979 value
Southwest
Airlines
American
Airlines
S&P 500
200,245
27,227
28,975.6
468x
74x
19x
61.9
1979
2013
1979
2015
Figure 11: Southwest Airlines’ growth, 1979 to the present day

SIMPLIFY
224 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
company which is as parsimonious with its ﬁnancial data 
as it is with its product costings, is notoriously difﬁcult. 
We know, however, that IKEA’s revenue in 2014 was €29.3 
billion, a mammoth 173 times higher than in 1974, when 
the company ﬁrst started to conquer the world’s furniture 
markets. The group’s declared operating income in 2014 
was €3.793 billion, though this excludes the “franchise fee” 
of 3 percent of revenue levied by Inter IKEA Systems. If 
this amount — €879 million — is added to the operating 
proﬁt, and a conservative multiple of ten is then applied, we 
arrive at a total “economic value” of IKEA of some €46.7 
billion.3 This would imply a value that is also 173 times 
higher than in 1974, a compound annual increase of 14.1 
percent (Figure 12).
Yet again, price-simplifying seems to have produced excel-
lent growth in market value over several decades. Intuitively, 
we may understand this as being due to the interaction of 
two price-simplifying characteristics. The ﬁrst of these is 
competitive security and therefore solid margins, because no 
+12% CAGR
Impact on Swedish
household goods market
SEKm
+2% CAGR
IKEA market value
m
+29% CAGR
+14% CAGR
4,284
25,414
57,563
46,718
1958
1974
2014
1958
1974
2014
5
270
Figure 12: IKEA’s growth to the present day

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
225
rival can attain the same scale and hence the same low-cost 
position. Despite its very low prices, IKEA still has operat-
ing margins above 15 percent — more than twice as high as 
those of its main rivals.
The second big advantage of price-simplifying is that it 
lends itself to growth through internationalization, which 
dramatically increases revenues while also enhancing scale 
and margin beneﬁts. Even though its growth is now slowing, 
over the last quarter-century or so IKEA’s annual revenue 
growth has been 14 percent, whereas the rest of the industry 
has grown by a mere 2 percent.
Charles Schwab
In 1975 the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
removed limits on brokerage commissions, and Charles 
Schwab slashed its brokerage rates by 80 percent. Later, the 
ﬁrm reduced them to less than a tenth of what they had been 
originally. As we saw in Chapter 11, the ﬁrm automated its 
system, and in 1982 it became the ﬁrst to offer 24/7 direct 
access to the stock market.
Ever since, Schwab has remained the market leader 
in discount brokerage and the ﬁrm has beneﬁted hugely 
from the market explosion that it catalyzed. The market 
grew from $7.4 billion in 1975 to $272 billion in 2014, an 
increase of 37 times, equating to 10 percent a year com-
pounded. Meanwhile, the value of Charles Schwab grew 
even more impressively — from just $100,000 to $43.5 
billion by 2015 — a 435,471-fold increase, equating to an 
average compound annual increase of 38 percent. The ﬁrm’s 
closest competitor, though neither a discount broker nor a 

SIMPLIFY
226 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
price-simpliﬁer, is Merrill Lynch, which increased by just 
48 times over the whole period. Charles Schwab therefore 
wins the “outperformance in value creation” competition 
between our six price-simpliﬁers, as it performed 9165 
times better than its nearest rival. In the outperformance 
stakes, it truly is in a class of its own. (Remember that Ford 
outperformed its nearest rival — GM — by “only” 49 times 
over the last century.)
The Charles Schwab story reinforces the theme that 
price-simpliﬁer success can last for a very long time. It is 
telling that the ﬁrm’s proﬁts declined only once, in 2004, 
after the eponymous founder of the ﬁrm — “Chuck” 
Schwab — stepped down as CEO and his long-time deputy 
David Pottruck took over for a year. Pottruck went against 
the ﬁrm’s heritage by increasing prices, and he was punished 
by a 26 percent fall in trading revenue. The founder took 
up the reins again, cancelled the commission increases, and 
took the ﬁrm to greater heights by driving fees even lower.
+10% CAGR
Impact on US
broker-dealer market
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Present day multiple
of 1975 value
+38% CAGR
Impact on
Charles Schwab market
$m
7,373
272,000
43,547.1
435,471x
0.1
48x
1975
2014
1975
2015
Charles
Schwab
Merrill
Lynch
Figure 13: Charles Schwab’s growth

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
227
Honda
As we saw in Chapter 8, Honda’s initial mistake was to 
disregard its marvelous little bike — the 50cc Supercub — 
when it ﬁrst attempted to break into the U.S. motorcycle 
market. The ﬁrm soon corrected this error on the advice of 
Kihachiro Kawashima,4 but it could have avoided months of 
turmoil (and almost zero sales) if it had followed one basic 
price- simplifying rule from the outset:
• If you have a well-designed, low-cost product that 
can be sold for half the price of a comparable prod-
uct, go for it, even if that rival product is technically 
superior.
The comparable products in this case were U.S. (and 
later UK) low-power motorcycles. Honda’s bikes were 
approximately 70–80 percent lower in price than these 
rival products. Clearly not all buyers of the more expensive 
domestic products considered a Japanese 50cc bike accept-
able, but enough of them did for Honda to establish a viable 
foothold in the U.S. market.
The Supercub had lower performance than its rivals, but 
it also offered great value for money. BCG’s 1975 report into 
the British motorcycle industry showed that Honda’s labor 
costs per bike were approximately one-tenth of those in the 
UK for bikes of similar performance, even though Honda 
paid its workers 45 percent more! The Japanese company 
was able to do this partly through higher scale but mainly 
through superior design and lower production costs. As the 
report said,

SIMPLIFY
228 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
“It is often said that Honda created the market in the 
United State and elsewhere — for what we have called 
secondary uses of motorcycles — through their extensive 
advertising and promotion activities; and it is true that 
Honda presented the attractions of motorcycling as a 
‘fun’ activity in a new way . . . However, the success of 
this campaign depended in the last resort on the fact that 
the lightweight machines that were then the company’s 
primary product were fun and easy to use, did not give the 
mechanical problems that had traditionally been associ-
ated with motorcycles, and were cheap to purchase.”5
We saw in Chapter 8 that Honda’s entry into the U.S. 
market was the catalyst for a tenfold increase in market size 
between 1959 and 1975. In that period the company also 
started to make more powerful bikes, helped by its modular 
bike-component design. This forced established British 
bike-makers — such as Norton Villiers Triumph — into 
bankruptcy. The Japanese then forced Harley-Davidson, the 
U.S. market leader, into progressive “segment retreat,” with 
the U.S. ﬁrm obliged to focus on ever-larger bikes, the only 
ones where Honda did not have the edge.
OC&C’s analysis shows that Honda’s market value 
increased by 377 times between 1959 and 2015, compared with 
a “mere” 33-fold increase for its main competitor, Harley-
Davidson — an outperformance of 11 times (see Figure 14).
Honda took a similar price-simplifying approach in cars 
and other areas, exploiting its simple engine technology to 
the maximum extent.

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
229
Just six case studies cannot be statistically signiﬁcant, but the 
parallels between them are certainly interesting.
• In every case, halving prices multiplied the market size; 
and if deﬁned narrowly (as with fast hamburgers), this 
could more than double every two years for more than 
half a century, rising tens of thousands of times.
• In every case, the revenues of the price-simpliﬁer rose 
by several thousand times (and in one case by 280,000 
times).
• In every case, the value of the company rose sharply, 
with increases measured in the tens, hundreds, 
thousands, tens of thousands, or (again in one case) 
hundreds of thousands.
• In every case, the compound annual growth rate of 
value increased impressively, ranging from 10 percent 
a year over more than a century to 40 percent a year 
over four decades.
+15% CAGR
Impact on US
motorcycle market
Units
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Present day multiple
of 1959 value
+11% CAGR
Impact on
Honda market value
$m
550,000
5,000,000
53,600
377x
142
33x
1959
1975
1959
2015
Honda
Harley-
Davidson
Figure 14: Honda’s growth

SIMPLIFY
230 
PART 4  •  DOES PRICE-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
• In every case, outperformance relative to a comparable 
non-simplifying company or the stock market was also 
striking, varying from 11 times to over 9000 times.
• In every case, the value increase continued over several 
decades, even when the company stopped innovating 
or cutting prices.
Let us now see whether the story is any different for the six 
proposition-simplifying companies which OC&C selected 
for analysis.

16
Does Proposition- 
Simplifying Pay?
Once the [iPod] project was launched, Jobs 
immersed himself in it daily. His main 
demand was “Simplify!” He would go 
over each screen of the user interface and 
apply a rigid test: he should be able to get 
there in three clicks. And the click should 
be intuitive. If he couldn’t ﬁgure out how 
to navigate to something, or if it took more 
than three clicks, he would be brutal.1
Walter Isaacson
W
hat do the six proposition-simplifying case studies 
tell us? Does proposition-simplifying pay as impres-
sively as price-simplifying?

SIMPLIFY
232 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
Amazon
We start with a small dilemma. Is Amazon an example of 
price-simplifying, proposition-simplifying, or both?
We have decided to classify the company as a proposition- 
simpliﬁer because it made book shopping (and then shopping 
in general) so much easier. There are four elements to this:
• First, Amazon pioneered online book sales (and later 
sales in other categories), offering extraordinary range 
and the convenience of buying almost anything imme-
diately, without the need to visit a store.
• Second, Amazon’s patented “1-click” system made it 
even easier to buy.
• Third, Amazon’s reviews and suggestions provide a 
wealth of information to inform the purchase decision 
(and to stimulate users to buy more). Once again, the 
company was the principal pioneer of this system and its 
process has been greatly imitated but rarely improved.
• Finally, the creation of the Amazon marketplace has 
allowed other sellers to play along, which has enhanced 
convenience and increased product range for the 
consumer.
So Amazon makes it a joy to shop, principally through greater 
ease of use, so it is clearly a proposition-simpliﬁer.
But it also offers unbeatable prices. So is it also a 
price-simpliﬁer?
OC&C calculated that Amazon offers an average 32.7 per-
cent discount on list price of popular (physical) books, and 
an average 53 percent discount for Kindle books compared 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
233
with list price of the cheapest physical book equivalent. 
This clearly does not meet our basic requirement that 
price- simpliﬁers must cut prices in half, although it is not a 
million miles away. But perhaps retailers should be viewed 
as a special case, because their cost of goods — what they 
must buy before they sell — is so much higher as a propor-
tion of ﬁnal sales price than that of most businesses. The 
true measure (for all businesses) should be the proportion 
of “value-added” that price-simpliﬁers remove in a price cut. 
The value-added for Amazon on books is not much more 
than what they pass on to the customer in price reduction. 
The proof is that Amazon.com currently operates on a net 
operating proﬁt margin of just 1 percent of sales, whereas 
most retailers (including other online retailers) operate on 
margins of between 3 and 15 percent.
As we saw earlier, the bane of the proposition-simpliﬁer’s 
existence is that its rivals may imitate its joy-to-use innova-
tions ... and Amazon is no exception. Everyone can now sell 
with one click, post online reviews and offer recommenda-
tions. Many sites can now boast an enormously wide variety 
of certain goods. Rivals have copied Amazon’s Kindle — 
both the hardware and the software — numerous times. 
Unsurprisingly, then, although Amazon’s massive customer 
base, enviable service levels, wide range within and between 
product categories and broad marketplace for third-party sell-
ers still give it an edge, its proposition advantage is eroding. 
So it might eventually be viewed as more of a price- than a 
proposition-simpliﬁer, or even as that rarest of beasts — both
a price-simpliﬁer and a proposition-simpliﬁer. Nevertheless, 
since it started as a proposition-simpliﬁer, we have included 
it in this chapter.

SIMPLIFY
234 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
So, what effect has Amazon had on its market over the 
past two decades?
By value, the online book market has grown by an average 
of 21 percent each year since the launch of Amazon in 1995. 
Amazon still enjoys the dominant share of that market (with 
63 percent of all online book sales and 40 percent of total book 
sales),2 but its growth in other sectors has been even more 
impressive. Since the company’s expansion into consumer 
electronics and other products — and into offering its prop-
osition-simplifying online expertise to other merchants, 
including Marks & Spencer and Lacoste — its revenues have 
soared, multiplying 176,000 times between 1997 and 2014, 
meaning they have more than doubled each year (a compound 
annual growth rate of 104 percent). Moreover, Amazon’s 
market value multiplied over 55,000 times between 1995 and 
2015 — a stunning annual growth rate of 73 percent. This 
compares with a 1.1-times growth for Barnes & Noble, the 
previous market leader in bookselling, and 3.4 times for the 
S&P 500 index over the same period (see Figure 15). Amazon’s 
outperformance value (against the index) is therefore 16,448 
(and, of course, it is even higher against its chief rival).
+21% CAGR
US online book market
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Present day multiple
of 1995 value
+73% CAGR
Amazon value growth
$m
7,540
248,597.3
55,536x
1.1x
3.4x
228
4.5
1995
2013
1995
2015
Amazon
Barnes
& Noble
S&P 500
Figure 15: Amazon’s growth

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
235
Can You Be Both a Price- and a 
Proposition-Simpliﬁer?
In normal market conditions, where there is a level playing 
ﬁeld for all competitors, the answer is a resounding “No!” For 
our purposes, we somewhat arbitrarily deﬁne “normal market 
conditions” as a time when there is a low rate of technological 
change, so all competitors have relatively equal access to 
the principal technologies of production and marketing, and 
newer technologies are well diffused. In addition, under normal 
market conditions, there are no strong non-market phenomena 
at work, such as stringent government regulation and the like.
We’ll explain why this matters shortly, but ﬁrst it is evident 
that there are some fundamental differences between price- 
and proposition-simplifying business models under normal 
market conditions. Let’s examine price-simplifying ﬁrst.
As we know, price-simplifying is deﬁned by a single over-
riding objective — clear cost and price leadership. A unitary 
and relatively rigid business form then ﬂows organically from 
this single purpose. There is no segmentation — the market 
is the largest-possible mass market. There are no material 
product attribute trade-offs against lowest price. There are 
no radically different ways of achieving the scale economics 
needed to deliver lowest price. For instance, UK/Irish budget 
airlines use exactly  the same technologies as and bear an 
uncanny resemblance to U.S. budget airlines. Achieving 
the price imperative requires highest scale, and this informs 
every choice in the design of the business and production 
system. This quest for scale leads to integrated and inﬂexible 
linkages in the production system and supply chain in order 

SIMPLIFY
236 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
to coordinate higher throughput. Capital equipment is intro-
duced to automate production and eliminate labor, but this 
requires heavy investment. These assets have long productive 
lives and long payback periods, meaning the enterprise is 
even more tied to a rigid modus operandi over an extended 
period of time, again limiting ﬂexibility.
Proposition-simplifying is very different because the com-
pany has to respond to several variables, not just price. Here 
the simpliﬁer targets one of several possible large segments, 
or clusters of segments, and positions the product or service 
depending on the appropriate permutation of utility, ease of 
use, and aesthetic appeal for that target market. A different 
combination of attributes might be chosen by competitors 
attempting to encroach, outﬂank, or re-segment the position 
that the product simpliﬁer has chosen. This leads to product 
contention and product evolution driven by competition. For 
example, the iPhone established the benchmark in smart-
phones; then Samsung emulated the basic concept but with a 
larger screen; then Apple responded with its own larger-screen 
version. So the iPhone ended up as a family of products in 
order to defend its territory from competitive differentiation.
This need to respond to competitive differentiation means 
that the simpliﬁer has to maintain production ﬂexibility and 
not optimize for price. Fortunately, it can afford to do so 
because a leading simpliﬁed proposition can sustain a 
premium price and high proﬁt margins, which in turn allow 
for ﬂexibility and responsiveness in the production system. In 
many cases production is outsourced to maintain maximum 
ﬂexibility. There is not the same degree of business system 
simpliﬁcation, rigidity, integration, design for scale capacity 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
237
and cost optimization as with a price-simpliﬁer. This would 
be inappropriate, too dangerous, too limiting on the product 
side; it would leave the proposition-simpliﬁer too exposed to 
competition. Hence, the proposition-simpliﬁer needs to focus 
its main effort on producing by far the simplest and most 
appealing offering in an evolving ﬁeld, not on developing a 
business system with a sharp focus on reducing cost.
In a normal market the two strategies therefore lead to two 
very different, incompatible business conditions and require-
ments. But what if we were to abandon the assumption that 
technology is stable, with equal access for all?
Imagine you are the inventor of the wheel. You go down 
to the local patent ofﬁce and secure the exclusive legal right 
to use and apply your invention for a long time. That puts 
you in a rather interesting position. Having unequal access 
to this extraordinary new technology allows you to produce 
all manner of products that are fundamentally better propo-
sitions than their predecessors — donkeys and horses, canal 
boats, litters, Sherpas and so on — but also much cheaper. 
Your groundbreaking invention has enabled you to be both 
a price- and a proposition-simpliﬁer! Exclusive access to a 
dramatically better idea or technology is the condition that 
allows a ﬁrm to follow both strategies successfully.
But a word of warning for our wheel entrepreneur and his 
successors: all technologies diffuse over time. So, at some 
point in the future, you will need to choose just one strategy 
and abandon the other. If you do not, your competitors will 
eventually out-price- and out-proposition-simplify you, and 
you will be stuck between two incompatible paths.

SIMPLIFY
238 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
Google
As mentioned earlier, Google’s story is remarkable. The 
search engine the company launched in 1998 was so much 
easier and quicker to use than any of its rivals that it rapidly 
wiped the market leader, AltaVista, off the map. In an echo 
of other successful proposition-simpliﬁers, the art lay in con-
cealing the complexity of the internal process (in this case, 
Google’s algorithm) from users, and making the product 
seem incredibly simple.
Since then, Google has changed the world of advertising, 
and with it the whole media world. Between 1997 — the last 
year BG (Before Google) — and 2015, the global internet 
advertising market soared from $907 million to $171 billion — 
an astounding annual growth rate of 34 percent. But Google’s 
value soared even faster — compounded annually at 135 per-
cent — to reach nearly $200 billion by 2015 (see Figure 16).
Google’s value grew by almost two million times between 
1998 and 2015 — by far the highest rate of any of our case 
+34% CAGR
Impact on global internet
advertising market
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Present day multiple
of 1998 value
+135% CAGR
Impact on Google
market value
$m
3.5x
0
907
0.1
170,500
199,838.9
1,998,389.0x
1997
2015
1998
2015
Google
Yahoo!
AltaVista
Figure 16: Google’s growth

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
239
studies. Over the same period, early rival AltaVista became 
defunct, the S&P 500 index grew by 1.7 times, and Yahoo! 
displayed a 3.5-fold increase. Google’s value outperformance 
ﬁgure when measured against its closest rival (Yahoo!) was 
nearly 600,000. This reﬂects the fact that online network 
markets are very much winner-takes-all environments — 
the most popular site gains a dominant market share, 
whether for reasons of liquidity, because everyone wants to 
use the site everyone else is using, or because the site obvi-
ously offers the best proposition. Google’s outperformance 
of its rivals also reﬂects the incredibly short time period — 
just sixteen years — during which it became so valuable. No 
other company in history (even adjusting for inﬂation) has 
become worth so much so quickly.
Apple (the iPod Years)
Apple was founded on 1 April 1976. As we saw earlier, it 
made its fortune with the ﬁrst popular “modern” computer, 
the Macintosh, in 1984. Then the company lost its way after 
Steve Jobs was forced out the following year, and by 1997 
it was almost bankrupt. However, Jobs’ “Second Coming” 
towards the end of that year began a remarkable period of 
pruning and kick-started the ﬁrm’s renaissance. Jobs focused 
on just two models of the Mac and returned Apple to proﬁt 
by producing the easiest-to-use, most fun personal computer 
on the market. But the growth in that niche was limited, and 
breaking into the mass computer market was not an option 
(at the time the company had only a 4 percent unit market 
share in computers). Apple was a proposition-simpliﬁer, not a 
price-simpliﬁer.

SIMPLIFY
240 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
So what could Jobs do? The strategy professor Richard 
Rumelt recounts meeting Apple’s CEO in 1998 and telling 
him, in effect, that he was boxed into a corner. “He did not 
attack my argument,” Rumelt remembers. “He didn’t agree 
with it, either. He just smiled and said, ‘I am going to wait 
for the next big thing.’”3
That next big thing, as we now know, was the iPod — 
another extraordinary example of proposition-simplifying. It 
began with iTunes, launched in January 2001. As the Apple 
team played around with hooking up existing MP3 players 
to their new platform, they found the machines — in the 
words of Jon Rubenstein — “horrible, absolutely horrible.” 
Another iTunes team member, Phil Schiller, said, “These 
things really stink. They hold about sixteen songs, and you 
can’t ﬁgure out how to use them.”4 So began the intensive 
process whereby, in less than a year, Jobs and the team 
devised a far simpler player. As his biographer recounts,
“The most Zen of all simplicities was Jobs’ decree, which 
astonished his colleagues, that the iPod would not have 
an on–off switch . . . Suddenly everything had fallen 
into place: a drive that would hold a thousand songs; an 
interface and scroll wheel that would let you navigate a 
thousand songs; a FireWire connection that could sync a 
thousand songs in under ten minutes; and a battery that 
would last through a thousand songs. ‘We suddenly were 
looking at one another and saying, this is going to be so 
cool,’ Jobs recalled. ‘We knew how cool it was, because we 
knew how badly we each wanted one personally. And the 
concept became so beautifully simple: a thousand songs 
in your pocket.’”5

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
241
Lighter, more stylish and elegant, and much easier to use 
than any other music player, the iPod was an overnight 
sensation. The enthusiasm of Jobs and his team resulted in 
a product as great as it was simple. But did it make the ﬁrm 
any money?
Between 2001 and the next great Apple innovation in 
2007 — the iPhone — the worldwide market for portable 
media players grew by 160 percent, an annual increase of 17.6 
percent. Apple’s product astonished the nerds with its price 
as much as its technical excellence — at $399 it was by far 
the most expensive portable music player on the market. The 
joke on the internet was that iPod meant “Idiots Price Our 
Devices.”6 As we have seen throughout this book, however, 
proposition-simpliﬁers who have a genuine breakthrough 
product can extract their pound of ﬂesh: unlike price- 
simpliﬁers, they do not have to accept a trade-off between 
growth and margins.
In just six years, Apple’s total revenues increased by 4.5 
times, and the ﬁrm’s market value exploded from $7.6 billion 
to $167 billion — a 22-fold increase, equal to a compound 
+17.6% CAGR
Impact on global portable
media player market
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
2007 multiple
of 2001 value
+67.5% CAGR
Impact on Apple
market value
$m
0.9x
1.3x
10,137
7,558.5
26,782
167,105.5
22.1x
2001
2007
2001
2007
Apple
Microsoft
S&P 500
Figure 17: Apple’s growth after the launch of the iPod

SIMPLIFY
242 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
annual growth rate of 68 percent. By contrast, Microsoft’s 
value declined slightly, and the S&P 500 index rose only mar-
ginally, by 1.3 times (see Figure 17).
ARM
Advanced RISC Machines, a joint venture between Acorn 
Computers, Apple, and VLSI Technology, was founded in 
1990. Eight years later, it changed its name to ARM Holdings 
and was ﬂoated on both the London and NASDAQ stock 
exchanges. Based in “Silicon Fen” (Cambridge, England), 
ARM is a proposition-simpliﬁer that designs products — 
speciﬁcally lighter, less power- intensive semiconductor 
chips — and then licenses them to manufacturers of mobile 
phones and tablets. It therefore has a symbiotic relationship 
with the markets for these products — especially the smart-
phone market — both accelerating their growth through its 
innovative designs and beneﬁting from that growth itself. 
In 1997 sales of chips containing ARM cores stood at nine 
million. By 2013, that ﬁgure had rocketed to ten billion — 
an annual increase of 55 percent. In 2010, chips designed by 
ARM accounted for 95 percent of all chips in smartphones.7
ARM’s market value in 1998 was a shade over $1 billion. 
By 2015, it had increased 19 times — to $19.773 billion — 
an annual growth rate of 20 percent. This compares with 
increases of 1.1 times for Intel (which both designs and 
makes chips) and 1.7 times for the S&P 500 index over the 
same period (see Figure 18).

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
243
Tetra Pak
Ruben Rausing founded the Swedish company Tetra Pak in 
1951. His mantra was that “a package must save more than it 
costs” — the saving for dairies and other liquid-food manu-
facturers must be greater than the price Tetra Pak charged 
for the packaging. This was made possible by the invention 
of a new tetrahedron-shaped pack, initially for storing cream 
and milk, and also by the introduction of new machines that 
could use Tetra Pak’s unique laminated material and do the 
packing on site at dairies and juice-makers. It took Rausing 
more than a decade to perfect these innovations, but then 
his business took off.
Tetra Pak’s technological innovations make the fac-
tory ﬁlling and packing, transportation, and stacking on 
supermarket shelves so much easier for the company’s cus-
tomers — the dairies and juice producers. The packs costs 
more than conventional containers, yet customers save more 
money than they pay Tetra Pak. This is achieved because 
there is less need for refrigeration, spoilage is reduced, and 
+6% CAGR
Impact on global
semiconductor market
$m
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Present day multiple
of 1998 value
+19% CAGR
Impact on ARM
market value
$m
1.1x
1.7x
134,800
1,019
339,811
19,773
19.4x
1998
2014
1998
2015
ARM
Intel
S&P 500
Figure 18: ARM’s growth

SIMPLIFY
244 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
transportation, storage and disposal costs are all cut. Tetra 
Pak says that the typical cost reduction for a dairy or juicer 
is around 12 percent of operating costs — a large sum, but 
not nearly enough to make the company a price-simpliﬁer. 
Yet the advantages that accrue to the company’s customers 
in terms of ease of use, greater speed in production, and 
logistics — as well as further advantages for its customers’ 
customers (supermarkets) — fully justify calling Tetra Pak 
a proposition-simpliﬁer.
The Institute of Food Technologists called the asep-
tic “Tetra Brik”, introduced in 1963, the most important 
food-packaging innovation of the twentieth century.8 And 
when Niels Bohr, one of the greatest physicists of all time, 
visited the company’s factory and research-and-development 
facilities in Lund, he said that he had never seen “such an 
adequate practical application of a mathematical problem.”9
By sticking to its packaging mission and continually 
improving the products it offers to its customers, Tetra Pak 
has become the largest and most proﬁtable food-packaging 
Impact on aseptic
packaging market
bn units
+13.4% CAGR
Impact on Tetra Pak
market value
m
300
180
0
4,470
2
1950
1951
2014
Tetra Pak
packaging
2013
Aseptic
packaging
2012
Figure 19: Tetra Pak’s growth

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
245
company in the world. In 2013, it made 180 billion of its 
Briks. Between 1951 and 2014, Tetra Pak increased its 
market value more than 2800 times, a compound annual 
growth rate of over 13 percent (see Figure 19).
The Boston Consulting Group (BCG)
In Chapter 5, we told the story of BCG and how it radi-
cally simpliﬁed top-level consulting. The company and its 
founder Bruce Henderson have probably been the most 
important inﬂuences on business thinking and practice 
across the globe since BCG’s launch in 1963.
The invention of “strategy consulting” — which 
combined two previously separate domains of thought 
(marketing and ﬁnance) — has generated remarkable com-
mercial success for the ﬁrm itself. Furthermore, BCG has 
probably had an even greater impact through its alumni, 
who have become entrepreneurs and venture capitalists, 
making large personal fortunes for themselves and enrich-
ing the world in general. Yet a more narrow, traditional 
assessment of BCG’s success is equally impressive. OC&C 
(itself a ﬁrm of strategy consultants) estimates that the 
market for top-level strategy consulting grew by 16 per-
cent annually between 1963 and 2014,10 by which time it 
stood at more than $21 billion, from a base of only $11 
million in 1963 — a 2008-fold increase. Moreover, all of 
this was achieved with minimal capital. If a similar growth 
rate were to be maintained for another ﬁfty years, strategy 
consultants would rule the world. But let’s not contemplate 
such an appalling prospect!
Instead, we should note OC&C’s current (theoretical) 

SIMPLIFY
246 
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY?
valuation of BCG — $15.8 billion. Using the same meth-
odology, the previous market leader — McKinsey — would 
now be worth $32.1 billion. However, because it was a much 
larger company in 1963, McKinsey has grown by “only” 761 
times (ultimately based on its revenues), whereas BCG has 
grown by more than 28,500 times! BCG’s value outperfor-
mance ﬁgure against its chief rival is therefore approximately 
37 — a reasonable dividend for being the biggest simpliﬁer 
in the industry it founded.
Note the word “theoretical” in the above calculations. 
Monetizing the theoretical value of professional services 
ﬁrms such as McKinsey and BCG is notoriously difﬁcult. 
The successful IPO of Goldman Sachs, however, has shown 
that it can be done. Admittedly, Goldman Sachs is an invest-
ment bank, not a strategy house, and it has the advantage 
of deploying huge amounts of capital and technology. Yet it 
ultimately depends on its human capital, just as the strategy 
consultants do. The most signiﬁcant difference between the 
two sectors lies in investment bank employees’ desire and 
determination to get rich quick, compared to a more relaxed 
attitude on that score among consultants.
The truth is that strategy consultants, in general, have 
little desire to monetize themselves. It is not in their cul-
ture. Marvin Bower strove throughout his long career as 
the leader and then the godfather of McKinsey to make 
“the Firm” — always with a capital “F” — a professional ﬁrm, 
which for him really did mean putting the clients’ interests 
ahead of those of the Firm. That ethos is almost as strong 
in BCG, because Bruce Henderson was also more interested 
in inﬂuence and ideas than money. As a result, McKinsey 
and BCG, and most other strategy houses, are effectively 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  DOES PROPOSITION-SIMPLIFYING PAY? 
247
cooperatives that are owned and controlled by their staff. 
Neither cooperatives nor their leaders become billionaires.
So BCG is probably not “worth” $15.8 billion, because it 
will never go public. That is a self-imposed limitation (and, 
incidentally, one that I have never understood), yet it does 
nothing to detract from the ﬁrm’s achievements; and the 
comparison with McKinsey is entirely fair. So the value 
estimate may be unrealistic, but the relative performance is 
unarguable, and it is all based on brilliant simplifying.
In the next chapter we summarize company performance 
in all twelve simplifying case studies and look at other 
aspects of the comparative performance of simpliﬁers and 
non-simpliﬁers.
Impact on global strategy
consulting market
$m
+16% CAGR
Impact on notional
BCG market value
$m
+22% CAGR
Growth over period
vs benchmarks
Present day multiple
of 1963 value
21,101
11
15,837
22,527.8x
761.4x
1963
2014
1963
2014
BCG
McKinsey
1
16% CAGR
+22% CAGR
Figure 20: BCG’s growth

17
The Success of Simplifying
An Archaeological Dig
Most of us spend too much time on the last twenty-
four hours and too little on the last six thousand years.
Will Durant
I
n this penultimate chapter, we dig deep to uncover the 
economic forces that cut across the two simplifying alter-
natives. We also summarize the results of the twelve case 
studies, and look at OC&C’s further research, which com-
pares industries that innovate through simplicity with those 
that innovate by other means.
How Do the Companies Fare in Terms of 
Increasing Their Market Value?
Figure 21 shows each of our twelve companies’ growth in 
market value from the start to the end of their respective 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING 
249
19x
22x
173x
377x
468x
2,818x
24,451x
28,528x
34,627x
55,536x
435,471x
1,998,389x
Price simplifiers
Proposition simplifiers
ARM
1998–2015
Apple
2001–2007
IKEA
1974–2014
Honda
1959–2015
Southwest
Airlines
1979–2015
Tetra Pak
1951–2014
Ford
1906–2015
BCG
1963–2014
McDonald’s
1961–2015
Amazon
1995–2015
Charles
Schwab
1975–2015
Google
1998–2015
Figure 21: Market value growth

SIMPLIFY
250 
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING
study periods. First, though, a caveat is necessary. These 
time periods vary enormously, ranging from just six years 
for Apple’s iPod era — when the company’s growth was 
almost dependent on the success of that device — to 109 
years for Ford. So, as you look at the ﬁgure, take the time 
periods into account — they are given at the bottom — and 
apply a mental corrective. (We will eliminate the effect of 
the differences in time periods in Figures 22 and 23.)
But why should we look at how much each company’s 
value multiplied at all? The answer is that, as you will see, 
there is very high variation among the cases. All of the 
growth levels are high when compared with more conserva-
tive ﬁrms, but they range from a “mere” 19-times increase 
for ARM to an almost 2,000,000-times increase for Google. 
Given this degree of variation, the number of years in the 
different cases is of secondary importance.
Three points stand out from Figure 21:
• The increases are astonishingly high in six cases — 
ranging from more than 20,000 times to almost 
2,000,000 times.
• All twelve simpliﬁers have enjoyed high growth, and 
there is no evidence that price-simplifying is better 
than proposition-simplifying, or vice versa. While 
twelve cases is a very small sample, we may surmise 
that, for the highest returns, it does not matter which 
type of simplifying is employed. Certainly, either 
approach can lead to stunning increases.
• If we ask why Ford, BCG, McDonald’s, Amazon, 
Charles Schwab, and Google have been so outstanding 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING 
251
at multiplying their values, it helps to look at their 
individual stories and then see whether there are any 
common patterns — in addition, of course, to their 
enthusiasm for simplifying.
Ford, Value Multiplied by 24,451 Times
Henry Ford’s price-simplifying sparked massive market 
growth, sustained over more than a century. The company 
beneﬁted from redeﬁning its industry, designing a new prod-
uct that established the brand in the critical early years, and 
from internationalization, especially in Europe.
BCG, Value Multiplied by 28,528 Times
BCG could scarcely be more different from Ford: it is in a 
service rather than a manufacturing industry; it is a propo-
sition- not a price-simpliﬁer; it is positioned at the top and 
not in the low-to-middle end of its market; it is driven by 
intellectual capital rather than investment in factories and 
inventory. And yet, BCG’s and Ford’s respective successes 
can be explained in remarkably similar ways.
BCG redeﬁned the industry of boardroom consulting by 
inventing a new dominant product which founder Bruce 
Henderson labelled “strategy consulting.” For half a century 
the strategy consulting market grew at 16 percent each year; 
and BCG’s revenue growth was even higher at 22 percent 
per annum.1 Both the market and BCG’s own growth were 
sustained through international expansion. As we have seen, 
Ford also reinvented an industry that then grew rapidly 
around the world for more than ﬁfty years.

SIMPLIFY
252 
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING
In addition, BCG beneﬁted from two factors that are 
typical of proposition-simpliﬁers:
• First, its margins, which were already high, increased 
slightly over time. This enabled the ﬁrm to recruit the 
very best raw intellectual ﬁrepower . . . and in turn that 
ﬁrepower justiﬁed and sustained the high margins.
• Second, unlike Ford, BCG could expand rapidly 
without the need to raise much capital. What work-
ing capital it had came from deferred payments to 
staff, which enabled BCG to avoid dependence on 
external capital.
McDonald’s, Value Multiplied by 34,627 Times
Once again, the explanation here broadly follows the Ford/
BCG pattern: McDonald’s created its own market — the 
“fast-hamburger meal” market — which expanded exponen-
tially over the next sixty years.
The company enjoyed it highest rate of growth — 
increasing by over 30,000 times at a rate of over 20 percent 
a year — between 1961 and 2015, the era of Ray Kroc and 
the system he created. As we have seen, Kroc took the 
McDonald brothers’ brilliantly simple, pared-down and 
parsimonious system and mass produced it through an enor-
mous, unprecedented expansion of outlets. He was able to 
scale up McDonald’s so effectively and quickly because the 
heart of the system was so simple. It could be multiplied 
proﬁtably because its economics were so good. The company 
had substantial capital requirements, but most of them were 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING 
253
outsourced initially to insurance companies and then to 
other capital providers and franchisees.
No doubt the brand and its visual incarnations — the 
Golden Arches and the Big Mac — were also vital, but the 
parallels with Ford and BCG are inescapable. Again, inter-
national expansion perpetuated a ﬁrm’s growth over several 
decades.
Amazon, Value Multiplied by 55,536 Times
Amazon’s increased value cannot be explained simply by the 
parallel growth in a single focused market. The company’s 
growth has been quite sharp and sudden, whereas the online 
book market has grown by “only” 21 percent each year since 
the late 1990s. Furthermore, Amazon’s share of that market 
has fallen from 100 percent to between 60 and 65 percent in 
the same period.
So we have to ﬁnd another explanation for Amazon’s 
phenomenal success. The answer lies in the company’s efﬁ-
cient use of its customer base to expand into other products, 
deploying its rock-bottom prices and legendary service to 
make life easier for its customers. Amazon has bulldozed its 
way into almost every retail category . . . and international 
expansion has done the rest. But the latter appears to have 
much further to go.
Charles Schwab, Value Multiplied by 435,471 Times
Charles Schwab follows the Ford/BCG/McDonald’s pattern: 
the ﬁrm created huge market growth through its product’s 
simplicity and extreme scalability. Schwab’s prices and costs 

SIMPLIFY
254 
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING
were far lower than those of its competitors, and the com-
pany already had all the ﬁrst-mover advantages when those 
rivals began to imitate its system — a brand that was syn-
onymous with the product coupled with greater experience 
and scale which made it impossible for any rival to offer the 
same deal and still make money. Schwab also beneﬁted from 
international expansion, although not to the same degree as 
the other companies at the top of our increased-value list.
Google, Value Multiplied by 1,998,389 Times
Google has diversiﬁed prodigiously, but its fortune is still 
based on the world’s simplest and best search engine. Again, 
it has followed (and extended) the pattern followed by Ford, 
BCG, McDonald’s, and Charles Schwab: Google vastly 
expanded its market by creating and perfecting the simplest, 
fastest and most useful search engine; it beneﬁted from the 
network effects that drew users and advertisers to its site; 
and it eventually ruled the world.
Of course, there are profound differences, which we have 
stressed throughout this book, between price-simplifying 
and proposition-simplifying. What you do and how you 
do it, and whether you move upmarket or downmarket, 
largely depend on the type of simplifying you adopt. But it 
is something of a revelation to learn that the very successful 
simpliﬁers’ value-multiplication formulas cut across both 
types of simplifying.
Looking at the “archaeological structure of economic 
success” within our twelve case studies, we can discern two 
main patterns:

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING 
255
• The route followed by Ford, BCG, McDonald’s, 
Charles Schwab, and Google, as well as by ARM, 
Southwest Airlines, IKEA, and Tetra Pak. This is 
based on developing a new, simpler product that is 
so much cheaper — or so much better to use — than 
its predecessors that it inﬂates the market to such an 
extent that this becomes the platform for an expo-
nential increase in company value. Essential to this 
mind-blowing growth is a process of internationaliza-
tion, based on a universal (or nearly universal) product 
with huge scale and/or network advantages.
• Then there is the route followed by Amazon, Apple, 
and Honda. Here, the company designs something — 
an engine, an electronic device, a new way of doing 
business based on simplifying the customer’s expe-
rience — that can be replicated in several different 
markets, one after the other. Each new market or 
product builds on and reinforces the simplicity and 
competitive advantage that has already been secured 
with other products and/or in other markets in a 
number of ways: For example, by increasing the cus-
tomer base and selling more items to each customer, 
which lowers the cost of acquiring more sales; by using 
the company’s skills in a different context, which again 
lowers costs and reinforces the skill base; by increas-
ing the company’s leverage with suppliers and other 
market participants; and, perhaps most importantly, by 
growing fast in a new market without the investment 
and launch costs that a new entrant which lacked skills 
honed in other markets would face.

SIMPLIFY
256 
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING
How Do the Companies Fare in Terms of 
Annual Increase in Value?
Although the above exploration of absolute increase in 
market value is interesting, we can make fairer inter- company 
comparisons by investigating the twelve case studies’ 
compound annual growth rates. Bear in mind, however, that 
the effect of inﬂation has not been removed from the ﬁgures. 
Between 1900 and 1950, annual inﬂation in the United States 
averaged 2.2 percent; over the next ﬁfty years it was 4 percent; 
and from 2000 to 2013 it dropped again — to 2.3 percent.2
So, broadly, it could be argued that we should subtract 2–4 
percent from the ﬁgures. On the other hand, the OC&C 
ﬁgures do not include dividends — typically 2–4 percent of 
market value — paid out by each of these companies each 
year. Consequently, the inﬂation and dividend effects roughly 
cancel each other out. Hence, the ﬁgures we present here are 
pretty close to the “real” rates of return.
Any company that makes a real return of 10 percent every 
year is putting in a very strong performance if it manages to 
sustain it over a long period of time. A return of 15 percent 
compounded each year is outstanding. Anything over 20 
percent is exceptional; and if this is sustained for a couple of 
decades, it is the stuff of dreams.
All of the results are impressive. Even so, there is a massive 
difference between the top performers and the bottom ones. 
The ﬁgures for Google, Amazon, and Apple are obviously 
astounding. But Tetra Pak, McDonald’s, BCG, and Charles 
Schwab (in ascending order) are particularly noteworthy for 
maintaining consistently high levels of growth over long 
periods of time.

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING 
257
10%
11%
13%
19%
21%
22%
29%
38%
68%
73%
135%
Price simplifiers
Proposition simplifiers
ARM
1998–2015
Apple
2001–2007
IKEA
1958–1974
Honda
1959–2015
Southwest
Airlines
1979–2015
Tetra Pak
1951–2014
Ford
1906–2015
BCG
1963–2014
McDonald’s
1961–2015
Amazon
1995–2015
Charles
Schwab
1975–2015
Google
1998–2015
19%
Figure 22: Compound annual increases in market value

SIMPLIFY
258 
PART 4  •  THE SUCCESS OF SIMPLIFYING
How Do the Companies Fare in Terms of 
Outperformance of Their Rivals?
Our ﬁnal — and perhaps the best — way to rank our twelve 
companies is to look at their outperformance of their nearest 
market rival (or, if there is no comparable rival company, the 
most relevant stock market index). We decided to exclude 
Tetra Pak and IKEA from these comparisons because they 
have no direct competitors for which data are available, and 
index comparisons would be similarly tricky. (They both 
originated in Sweden but then became international, and 
they are both private companies.) So we have compared ten 
of our companies with their best-performing rivals (or the 
stock market), and have measured their outperformance of 
those rivals — deﬁned as a company’s increase in market 
value divided by its main rival’s (or the stock market’s) 
increase in value over a certain period of time. This inher-
ently removes the effect of inﬂation (since it will affect each 
party equally), and, although it is still imperfect, it is the 
purest possible measure of comparable performance.
Again, each of the ten companies scores very well — 
performing at least eleven times better than its nearest rival or 
index. BCG’s and Ford’s performances (37 times better and 49 
times better than their principal rivals, respectively) are both 
striking. McDonald’s, Charles Schwab’s, and Amazon’s are 
out of this world. And a suitable adjective for Google’s perfor-
mance eludes us! Half a million times more growth than its 
nearest rival is as close to an inﬁnite difference as you will ever 
see in business. Only a (highly unlikely) repetition of Google’s 
combination of pure simplicity and global network effects will 
ever deliver anything remotely similar in the future.

Price simplifiers
Proposition simplifiers
ARM
1998–2015
Apple
2001–2007
Honda
1959–2015
Southwest
Airlines
1979–2015
Ford
1906–2015
BCG
1963–2014
McDonald’s
1961–2015
Amazon
1995–2015
Charles
Schwab
1975–2015
Google
1998–2015
11x
1,249x
11x
17x
24x
37x
49x
9,165x
16,448x
577,036x
Figure 23: Outperformance (increase in company’s market value divided by  
increase in value of best rival or index over the same period)

SIMPLIFY
260 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
Industry-Wide Simplifying
OC&C conducted one ﬁnal piece of analysis to measure the 
superiority — or otherwise — of simplifying as a strategy, 
this time by assessing whole industries rather than individual 
companies. Speciﬁcally, they looked into the biotechnology, 
defense, oil and gas, pharmaceuticals, and soft-drinks indus-
tries — all of which have displayed signiﬁcant innovation 
over recent years, but not simplifying innovation:
• Biotechnology has displayed some tremendous exper-
imentation, but by its nature this is invariably very 
complex. It does not seem to be a ﬁeld that lends itself 
to simplifying.
• The oil and gas industry has grown, but through increas-
ingly complex extraction methods, such as deep-sea 
exploration and tar sands. Again, there is little evidence 
of simplifying.
• The pharmaceuticals industry has opted for ever more 
complex chemical analysis, leading to more complex 
and increasingly specialized drugs. Research-and-
development costs have risen inexorably, and mergers 
have seemed to discourage or preclude simple innova-
tion by new ventures, as have ever-higher regulatory 
barriers and costs.
• The defense industry, led by a number of U.S. con-
tractors, has created ever more intricate and powerful 
weapons while continuing to argue that high capital 
outlay is necessary to save the lives of service personnel.
• John Stith Pemberton, a tinkering pharmacist, con-
cocted the recipe for Coca-Cola over the course of a 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
261
few months in 1886. The company has been unusual 
ever since as it still derives a large majority of its proﬁts 
from just three very simple products — Coke itself, 
Diet Coke and Fanta — although it has tried and failed 
to diversify into many other drinks over the years. It 
has been left to smaller companies to bring innovative 
products to the market, which some of them have 
done very successfully. However, these new products 
are increasingly elaborate and segmented, such as 
diet, vitamin, sports, and many other types of drinks. 
Hence, the industry and its competitive structure are 
far more complex than they used to be.
OC&C looked at U.S. stock market growth for these ﬁve 
industries (excluding dividends) from 1994 to 2014, and com-
pared these increases with the growth in ﬁve “simplifying” 
industries: consumer electronics, media, internet, retail, and 
software. OC&C’s analysts chose the latter ﬁve industries 
because of their shared trend towards greater product and 
service simplicity — lower prices (in some cases dramatically 
so), greater convenience and ease of use, and smaller yet 
more powerful devices. Remember, OC&C made no judge-
ment about the simplicity levels of these industries relative 
to the others; rather, they merely identiﬁed ﬁve industries 
that have become more complex and ﬁve others that have 
become simpler over time.
As can be seen from Figure 24, the non-simplifying 
industries increased in value by between 4 and 15 times, 
whereas the simplifying industries increased in value by 
between 5 and 152 times. The mean increases were 6.8 times 
for the non-simplifying industries and 38.6 times for the 

SIMPLIFY
262 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
Non-simplifying
Simplifying
15x
6x
5x
4x
4x
152x
18x
11x
7x
5x
Biotechnology
Oil & gas
Pharmaceuticals
Defense
Soft drinks
Internet
Consumer
electronics
Software
Retail
Media
Figure 24: Stock price growth of simplifying and non-simplifying industries, 1994–2014

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
263
simplifying industries (although the latter ﬁgure was heavily 
inﬂuenced by the huge increase in the internet). The median 
increases were 5 times for the non-simplifying industries 
and 11 times for the simplifying industries.
Conclusions
• The twelve case studies of simplifying companies all 
display very high increases in market value, high annual 
rates of increase and signiﬁcant outperformance when 
compared with rival companies or stock market indices.
• The returns from both price-simplifying and proposition- 
simplifying are very high, with no indication that one 
type ultimately results in higher ﬁnancial returns than 
the other. (The sample sizes are very small, however, so 
more extensive research might reveal some differences 
that we have not detected.)
• The increases in value for all twelve of these simpliﬁers 
have persisted for decades, even once the major period of 
simplifying innovation has ended. Eventually, of course, 
the rewards start to revert to the mean, but they do 
continue at a high level for a surprising length of time.
• We have emphasized several of the underlying economic 
reasons for these long-term high returns throughout 
this book: the increase in market size that results from 
either a 50 percent-plus price cut or making a product or 
service that is a joy to use; the brand and reputational 
advantages that accrue to a company that succeeds with 
a radical simplifying innovation; and the lower costs 
that come from high scale, experience, and/or network 

SIMPLIFY
264 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
effects. All of these factors combine to make the simpli-
fying company’s economics far superior to those of rival 
ﬁrms that fail to simplify to the same extent or even at 
all. Then all that remains is for the simplifying ﬁrm to 
decide whether to claim its superior returns in further 
expansion of market share or higher margins. In either 
case, a virtuous circle is established which continually 
improves the ﬁrm’s competitive position and security. It 
seems that this virtuous circle can persist for a very long 
time, even without further innovation. These are, how-
ever, intuitive and somewhat theoretical explanations. 
They suggest that price-simpliﬁers’ advantages are some-
what different from those of proposition- simpliﬁers. The 
beneﬁt of in-depth case studies that look at returns over 
long periods, however, is that we can arrive at a deeper 
and more empirical “archaeological” explanation of how 
each simplifying company reaps such high and lasting 
returns. Here we put aside our preconceptions and simply 
observe how these returns have been generated. We ﬁnd 
two distinct patterns: the market explosion pattern and 
the transformation of customer experience pattern.
The Market Explosion Pattern
In this pattern, the simplifying company creates such a 
superior new product or service — superior in either its 
remarkably low price or in the fact that it is a joy to use — 
that the product itself multiplies exponentially. The simple 
new product or service expands the market hundreds or 
even thousands of times, ﬁrst through expansion in the 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
265
domestic market (e.g., North America, Japan, or Europe), 
then through a relentless process of internationalization. It 
seems that only simple “universal” products are able to do 
this. Scale, experience and/or network advantages multiply 
enormously and tilt the playing ﬁeld even more towards the 
simplifying innovator. Both price- and proposition-simpliﬁers 
have reaped rich rewards from this process. They include 
price- simpliﬁers such as Ford, McDonald’s, IKEA, Charles 
Schwab, and Southwest Airlines, and proposition-simpliﬁers 
such as BCG, Tetra Pak, ARM, and Google. (The only par-
tial exception or qualiﬁcation to the “archaeology” of success 
outlined in this paragraph is Southwest Airlines, which failed 
to replicate its formula outside of the United States, leaving 
it to European budget airlines, notably Ryanair and EasyJet, 
to internationalize Southwest’s innovation.)
The Transformation of  
Customer Experience Pattern
This transformation works so well in one product or service 
area that it is then rolled out into other products or services, 
generating extraordinary growth by invading new compet-
itive territory in a fashion that Genghis Khan, Julius Caesar, 
or Napoleon would have loved. Honda, Amazon, and 
Apple have all adopted this approach. This list includes 
one clear price-simpliﬁer (Honda), one clear proposi-
tion-simpliﬁer (Apple) and one company that is certainly 
a proposition-simpliﬁer but probably also a price-simpliﬁer 
(Amazon). So we are left in little doubt that the transforma-
tion–invasion pattern can work for both types of simpliﬁer.3

SIMPLIFY
266 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
• In order to maximize the ﬁnancial returns from their 
simplifying, it would therefore seem to be advisable for 
companies to pursue either the market explosion pat-
tern or the transformation–invasion pattern. However, 
it might be possible to pursue both simultaneously. 
Perhaps McDonald’s should have ridden not only the 
“fast-hamburger” market but also the “fast-chicken” 
and other fast-food markets based on the skills that Ray 
Kroc perfected: a single-minded focus on very few menu 
items; very low prices for them; an emphasis on product 
quality and speedy service; spotless premises and rest 
rooms; attractions for kids; rigid control of franchisees to 
ensure consistent quality and economy; site development 
and ﬁnancing packages; domination of the U.S. market 
and then pre-emptive internationalization; and relentless 
brand-building and promotion over half a century. Kroc 
rode the market explosion formula almost ﬂawlessly, but 
he totally missed — or ignored — the opportunity to use 
his ﬁnely honed skills and resources to transform–invade 
other fast-food markets (with different brands, of course, 
and probably via different corporations). Perhaps it would 
have been managerially impossible to do both simulta-
neously, but Kroc certainly had the template to create 
fast-food markets in a huge range of product categories.
• Finally, whichever type of simplifying your company 
pursues, and whichever value maximization pattern 
you follow, rapid expansion in the domestic market 
and then around the world is vital. Filling the global 
market with your simple product or service before your 
rivals do means the high returns of simplifying have 
the potential to become astronomical.

18
The Limitations, Power, and 
Glory of Simplifying
The essence of strategy is that you must set 
limits on what you’re trying to accomplish.1
Michael Porter
The difference between stupidity and genius 
is that genius has its limits.
Albert Einstein
R
ecall Jan Vermeer’s masterpiece, The Girl with the Pearl 
Earring — the torso and head of a young girl against 
a dark background, turned as if the viewer has suddenly 
caught her attention, gazing with wide eyes and parted red 
lips. Her luminous face ﬂoats almost three-dimensionally 
against strong unitary negative spaces. Vermeer knew how 

SIMPLIFY
268 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
to paint not only the girl herself but the background in order 
to accentuate her beguiling presence.
Everything is like this — deﬁned by the boundary between 
what a thing is and what it is not — irrespective of whether 
the thing in question is a tangible object or an ethereal idea. 
But while you can perceive the limits of an object with your 
senses, you cannot do the same with the abstract notion that 
the two types of simplifying represent the predominant strat-
egies in business. So it demands signiﬁcantly more effort to 
ﬁgure out what simplifying is and what it is not.
Are There Any Viable  
Non-Simplifying Strategies?
Of course there are. Consider the furniture industry, which 
boasts tens of thousands of ﬁrms but only one IKEA. The 
latter’s competitors are not — and cannot all be — success-
ful price- or proposition- simpliﬁers. Yet there are hordes 
of them, including a smattering that are rather successful, 
striving away in the face of IKEA’s price-simplifying jug-
gernaut. In one way, the furniture industry is like a natural 
ecosystem — perhaps a jungle. There are only a few crea-
tures at the top of the food chain, but there are thousands 
of lesser species with almost inﬁnite variation in physical 
and reproductive characteristics, defense mechanisms and 
habitats, as well as myriad passive, predatory, symbiotic and 
parasitic behaviors, which are in essence naturally selected 
strategies. These may not be the most powerful strategies, 
but they have been viable, because the ﬁrms are still going. 
Many other species are now extinct, because their strategies 
have been eclipsed by more successful ones in this evolving 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
269
marketplace. If we focus solely on the simplifying ﬁrms, we 
are allowing no space on the canvas for the strong, unitary, 
empty spaces that provide such a contrast to the beautiful 
creature we are describing. We will be unable to see clearly 
what is, because we will be unable to see clearly what is not.
Back in the forest of industrial production and commerce, 
what does that competitive variation look like? What are 
some of the alternative — and at least temporarily sustain-
able — competitive strategies? There are three principal 
ones: elaborating, invention and discovery strategies.
Elaborating Strategies
Elaborating is the opposite of simplifying: it involves making a 
product or service more complex. This can be a very success-
ful strategy. Take, for example, luxury goods and services. The 
Patek Philippe Grand Complications wristwatch (in its various 
forms) retails for tens of thousands of pounds; it is made by 
hand in very small quantities; and it is terriﬁcally complex 
mechanically. These are rare and beautiful timepieces, and 
they function in a world that is antithetical to the “demo-
cratic” strategies of price- or proposition-simplifying. With 
simpliﬁed products, even those targeted at customers who are 
willing to pay a price premium (proposition-simplifying), a 
larger market is always desirable, and the dream is to develop 
a universal product that can be mass manufactured. True 
luxury markets, by contrast, are always niche and deliberately 
exclusive; the product’s complexity and rarity are desirable 
attributes. The intent is to anoint the privileged few with 
exclusive opulence and status through fantastic product elab-
oration — simple functionality and affordability be damned.

SIMPLIFY
270 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
Of a similar ilk are bespoke products and services: for 
example, enterprise software — large systems that are 
tailored to and integrated with a ﬁrm’s existing systems 
and practices. Enterprise software is typically replete with 
important-sounding acronyms: ERP (enterprise resource 
planning), MIS (management information systems), MRP 
(materials resource planning), and many others. The 
requirement to tie together a diverse set of information 
from numerous sources, with each of those sources either 
subtly or markedly different with each new deployment, 
results in incredibly complex products that have to be 
intimately tailored for each installation. This makes the 
cost eye- wateringly high, yet the customer often becomes 
locked in to the system because they feel it is integral to 
their organization, and switching will cost even more. It’s 
like an addict’s relationship with a powerful drug, and the 
company that supplies the enterprise software reaps rewards 
of a magnitude that would make a pusher jealous.
The ﬁnal type of elaborating strategy involves the devel-
opment of bigger-is-better products. These are generally not 
as commercially successful as luxury or bespoke products 
over the long term, but they can enjoy quite high growth for 
a short period. Products might be made bigger — or stron-
ger or faster — in search of scale economy or some speciﬁc 
utility, but in doing so they may become extremely complex, 
harder to make, and often harder to use. They do, however, 
represent a meaningful segment of the product universe, 
where greater complexity is accepted as long as a product 
performs better than its predecessors — or achieves some-
thing that was previously impossible or unavailable. Even 
though their complexity has high costs — both economic 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
271
and otherwise — such products still have important roles 
to play. Consider the behemoth Airbus A380 — a technical 
marvel that has stretched the physical size of a plane and its 
engines to the limit of what is feasible, for which its designers 
deserve great credit. Yet the A380 has also taken Airbus and 
its customers to the very edge of commercial and opera-
tional viability. Among other things, the plane’s complexity 
may prevent it from ever ﬁnding a large enough market or 
commanding a premium margin. Therefore, it may be the 
latest in a long list of bigger-is-better products — including 
the Apollo program, the Hummer and Concorde — that 
eventually disappear.
Invention Strategies
Some inventions simplify; others complicate; and yet others 
do both. The wheel simpliﬁes. The Airbus A380 complicates. 
But a coach-and-horses, compared with the horse-and-trap, 
has both simplifying and complicating aspects. Similarly, the 
car — while demonstrably faster and more comfortable than 
a horse-drawn coach (proposition-simplifying by being a joy 
to use) — is obviously a much more complex piece of kit that 
requires expensive manufacture, skill in both driving and 
maintenance, and a new, complex infrastructure of roads and 
trafﬁc controls, in stark contrast to the beautiful simplicity 
of the equine world.
Is an online meeting or relationship generally superior to 
a good old-fashioned person-to-person date?
Some inventions are both seductive and commercially 
successful, up to a point, yet eventually complicate or even 
compromise our lives and their value. We would be hard 

SIMPLIFY
272 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
pressed to argue, however, that simplifying is a one-way 
street and always the road more traveled.
Discovery Strategies
Discovering — ﬁnding something, as opposed to inventing 
it — can be a very lucrative strategy, even when it does not 
simplify. The beauty of Seville’s gold-encrusted churches 
and houses rests upon the discovery of America, and the port 
city’s subsequent monopoly on voyages to and from the con-
tinent. Again, however, although the discovery of America 
was hugely lucrative — and in our opinion (not everyone 
would agree) beneﬁcial — it did not simplify the world.
Similarly, think of John D. Rockefeller’s mega-successful 
strategy: “Get up early, strike oil.” You can characterize most 
of the world’s mineral-extraction industries in this way — it 
is a speciﬁc strategy that is a far cry from simplifying. Bio-
technology is another case in point.
Ways to Escape Market Forces
The three ﬂourishing yet non-simplifying strategies men-
tioned above do not exhaust the list. There is another set of 
dimensions, which we may broadly categorize as successful 
strategies to escape the market forces of perfect competition. 
These strategies can simplify, but they are much more likely 
to add complexity.
Market forces are a great leveler — they push you towards 
becoming a commodity producer and they destroy your 
proﬁts. So good strategy suspends market forces. It creates 
breathing space and competitive advantage, and it preserves 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
273
market share and proﬁts. There are myriad tactics and 
non-market phenomena which, if combined with the stra-
tegic pathways we’ve discussed, can create the enormous 
competitive variation that makes markets resemble natural 
ecosystems. Several of them are listed below.
• Network effects: This is when product or service 
characteristics improve as the number of customers or 
participants rises. Imagine a closed (non-interoperable) 
instant-messaging network. It would be next to useless 
if only a few people were connected, but tremendously 
useful if everyone were to connect. The service 
improves as the number of users increases, and it 
becomes increasingly difﬁcult for a smaller competitor 
to offer a viable alternative. Network effects can be 
so strong that even a substantially better-designed 
product will fail to make headway against a powerful 
market leader, because the number of users is so crucial. 
Businesses like this tend to destroy their competitors; 
market structure tends towards monopoly or oligopoly. 
This is suspension of market forces writ large. 
Sometimes — think Google, Amazon, or Facebook — 
networks are based on simplifying. But at other 
times — think telecom networks, banking networks, 
hub-and-spoke networks (such as airline destinations), 
or multinational institutions (such as the European 
Union) — the network combines a little simplifying 
with a great deal of added complexity.
• Regulation: There is nothing like having a government 
or other authority tell your would-be competitors 
that they must cease operation, or force them to jump 

SIMPLIFY
274 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
through so many hoops that market entry becomes a 
daunting, risky and/or prohibitively expensive enter-
prise. This is another way in which market forces are 
suspended, and many ﬁrms specialize in operating 
within highly regulated markets, reaping rich rewards 
as a result.
• Intellectual property: This is another form of regu-
lation, although a somewhat more meritocratic one. 
In the best instances, protecting intellectual property 
provides an incentive to embark on the lonely and 
uncertain path to invention. In the worst, though, it 
allows unscrupulous patent trolls to extort money by 
exploiting a ﬂawed legal system.
• Lock-in and switching costs: It is not unusual for com-
panies with an inferior product but a large installed 
base of users to make strong proﬁts year after year. 
Possessing the best product can seem almost irrelevant 
in these circumstances, at least for a period of time.
• Personal relationships: We are social creatures who 
crave the comfort of relationships with other human 
beings. That is admirable, but it leaves some of us 
vulnerable to the blandishments of the honey-tongued 
fraudster. There is nothing like a strong personal 
relationship to cloud judgement and suspend a market 
force.
• Scarcity: Some things are naturally scarce. By deﬁ-
nition, they cannot be replicated, so they cannot be 
directly attacked. Just ask the owner of Villa D’Este on 
Lake Como whether he would be happy to swap it for 
another hotel. Similarly, the owner of cats.com would 
be unlikely to let that particular URL go for a song.

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
275
• Niche effects: Sometimes a market is so small and 
specialized that, once occupied, no competitor will be 
interested in launching an attack. At a certain point 
market efﬁciency just doesn’t seem to work — the 
costs of entry can be too high if the market is unable 
to support two players, which allows the incumbent to 
enjoy proﬁtable solitude.
• Government: Organizations both great and small are 
protected from market forces by government interven-
tion. Sometimes half of a nation’s total economy might 
be insulated from competition in this way. Governments 
rarely simplify; indeed, they nearly always complicate.
• Not-for-proﬁt organizations: The junior cousin of 
government, often sponsored, appropriately enough, by 
moguls (both living and dead) who made their fortunes 
by evading market forces.
Given the extent of this list, it is amazing that the economy 
works at all to increase the wealth of nations and individ-
uals over time. As we can see, a substantial majority of all 
economic activity either largely or totally escapes market 
forces. This is the greatest manifestation and vindication of 
the 80/20 principle.
Simplifying in the Big Picture
Simplifying, then, is not the only viable strategy; nor is 
it the only way to make a fortune. There are numerous 
non- simplifying strategies that work perfectly for their 
practitioners. Nevertheless, two cardinal points should be 
remembered.

SIMPLIFY
276 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
The ﬁrst is that the large majority of business returns 
accrue to simpliﬁers. Admittedly, we have not proved this 
rigorously; indeed, researching it further would make a very 
good doctoral study. But given the returns enjoyed by the 
simpliﬁers discussed in this book — returns that far exceed 
the average, sometimes over many decades — we are con-
ﬁdent that simplifying sits at the apex of the business food 
chain. Simplifying companies are almost certainly a small 
minority of the total universe of ﬁrms, yet they generate the 
majority of total economic value. For anyone interested in 
high returns, simplifying is a dominant strategy — probably 
the dominant strategy. If you are a business person, you must 
investigate whether your ﬁrm can ﬁnd a path to simplify and 
so vastly increase its value. If you conclude that it cannot, 
you might consider starting a new business to simplify with 
a blank slate. As a business person, you also need to know 
whether your company is currently — or may become — 
dangerously exposed to a price- or proposition-simplifying 
competitor. If it is, you had better ﬁgure out how to evade or 
defeat your prospective rival . . . or sell the business before 
the threat materializes.
If the ﬁrst cardinal point is economic and ﬁnancial, the 
second is broader. From a consumer and human perspective, 
the signiﬁcance of simplifying strategies is intriguing. One 
of the most fundamental, deﬁning aspects of humanity, 
even since we began to fashion tools from ﬂint, is the way 
we have continued to be bound up with technology in the 
broadest sense of the term. We have created our own envi-
ronment through technology, one that is nestled within yet 
transcends nature.
This techno-human environment, although highly 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 277
enriching in many ways, immensely stimulating and able to 
relieve suffering, is also inescapable and unrelenting in its 
evolutionary pace. It is the simplifying strategies that are 
able to deliver the beneﬁts of technology — via highly useful 
and/or affordable products and services — in ways that are 
relatively human-friendly. Without them, and the relief they 
bring, we would be in danger of drowning in the torrential 
waves of technological progress, and might forget that the 
main justiﬁcation for business is not the money it makes for 
some but the good it does for many.
Almost all of the non-simplifying ways of evading market 
forces mentioned earlier in this chapter are good for the 
businesses that pursue them and therefore for their employ-
ees and owners. But they are not so good for the rest of us; 
indeed, sometimes they actively work against our interests.
The joy and justiﬁcation of simplifying is that entrepre-
neurs and their teams can evade market forces and make 
fortunes, but also know that what they are doing is good for 
the rest of society too.
How will the ﬁfty-dollar smartphone change the lives of 
African villagers? How will artiﬁcial intelligence change 
all of our lives and especially those of our children? How 
will quantum computing or the next big leap forward in the 
internet deliver advances that we never thought possible?
No matter how the future plays out, you can bet that it 
will be simpliﬁers who deliver benevolent change in accept-
able, affordable, and exciting ways.
So where does this leave you at the end of our excursion?
We hope you cannot wait to simplify. But don’t expect 
your new path to be easy:

SIMPLIFY
278 
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING
• Simplifying is not a magic bullet, nor an infallible for-
mula for success.
• You must come up with a radical simplifying idea.
• Then you must develop a product or service that is 
dramatically simpler than any existing product or ser-
vice — something that is much simpler to make (and 
therefore at least 50 percent cheaper) or so much simpler 
to use that your customers will pay a premium to do so.
• Moreover, the product or service must be so simple that 
it has the potential to become universal. Geography, 
culture and other barriers to universal use must be 
conquered or transcended, not necessarily imme-
diately, but certainly at some point in the not too 
distant future. Ray Kroc, for example, probably did 
not have Azerbaijan in his sights when he took control 
of McDonald’s. But nowadays any delay in making 
a simple product or service universal is becoming 
increasingly hazardous.
• The business system must be redesigned too, so that 
the new product and the company both sit at the center 
of a new web. Customers, suppliers, and other import-
ant players, such as franchisees, must all be part of that 
system, sitting in concentric circles around the product 
and the company, like planets around the sun.
• Equally, rivals must be banished to the periphery of the 
system, or excluded altogether. They may be allowed 
to retreat to areas where the company and product do 
not wish to compete, but they must not be allowed 
to challenge the dominance of the new product in its 
heartland market.
• The product or service must be internationalized 

SIMPLIFY
PART 4  •  THE LIMITATIONS, POWER AND GLORY OF SIMPLIFYING 
279
before imitators can launch their versions.
• Simplifying is a creative affair, but it is also intensely 
practical. Combining the two is hard.
Yet the gods of economics and customer psychology favor 
the simpliﬁer. A small and relatively new ﬁrm — one that 
commits to following one of the two simplifying strategies 
and adapts it to suit its own industry — can hit the jackpot.
Furthermore, simpliﬁers, in addition to beneﬁting them-
selves, will surely help society and everyone in it to a much 
greater degree than non-simpliﬁers.
Finally, although there are limits to the genius of simpli-
fying, there is no limit to the number of simple universal 
products than can be imagined and created.
Go forth and simplify!

SIMPLIFY
280 
The Next Steps for 
Entrepreneurs
Visit www.simplify.fm for:
• Exclusive video clips of Richard Koch explaining how 
to simplify.
• The Star Principle Quiz and scorecard.
• Further support and materials for entrepreneurs who 
wish to simplify.
• A community forum for simplifying entrepreneurs.

SIMPLIFY
281
The Next Steps for  
Corporate CEOs
Visit www.SIMPLIFYforCEOs.com for:
• An interactive guide to simplifying for established 
companies.
• An interactive quiz to help you decide between price- 
and proposition-simplifying.
• How to spot incipient simplifying among new ventures.
• How to counter simplifying among new ventures.
• A community forum for leading companies wishing to 
simplify or facing threats from simplifying rivals.
Why Two Websites?
• Simplifying is a two-sided battle between established 
leading ﬁrms and new simplifying ventures.
• Go to where you will ﬁnd like-minded people who can 
offer the tips and support you need.


Endnotes
Preface by Richard Koch
1 Richard Koch (2008) The Star Principle: How It Can Make You Rich, 
London: Piatkus.
 2 “Sunday Times Rich List 2015’, Sunday Times Magazine, 26 April 
2015, page 72: “Richard Koch £180m’.
The Secret Is Out!
1 Henry Ford (1922) My Life and Work, London: William Heinemann, 
pages 68–9.
2 Ray Kroc (1977) Grinding It Out: The Making of McDonald’s, Chicago: 
Contemporary Books, pages 70–1.
 3 Walter Isaacson (2011) Steve Jobs, New York: Simon & Schuster, page 
126.
 4 Ibid., page 564.
 5 Leander Kahney (2008/2009) Inside Steve’s Brain, London: Atlantic 
Books, page 96.
Chapter 1: The Man Who Democratized Travel
1 Ford, op. cit., page 64.
 2 Ibid., page 67.
 3 Ibid., page 73.
 4 Ibid., pages 67–8.
 5 Ibid., page 58.

SIMPLIFY
284 
ENDNOTES
6 Ibid., page 72.
 7 Ibid., page 69.
 8 Ibid., page 66.
 9 Ibid., page 74.
 10 Ibid., page 68.
 11 See Chapter 15.
Chapter 2: The Billionaire Who Travels by Bus
1 “He Lives in a Bungalow, Flies EasyJet and “Dries Out” Three 
Times a Year . . . The Man who Founded Ikea and is Worth £15bn’, 
Daily Mail, 14 April 2008, www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-559487/
He-lives-bungalow-ﬂies-easyJet-dries-times-year-man-founded-
Ikea-worth-pound-15bn.html, retrieved 3 November 2009.
 2 Ingvar Kamprad (1976) The Testament of a Furniture Dealer, Delft, 
The Netherlands: Inter IKEA Systems BV.
 3 Quoted in Chris Zook and James Allen (2012) Repeatability: 
Building Enduring Businesses for a World of Constant Change, Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, pages 99–100.
 4 “He Lives in a Bungalow,” op. cit.
 5 Kamprad, op. cit.
Chapter 3: The Assembly Line of Food
1 Quoted in Chip Heath and Dan Heath (2008) Made to Stick: Why 
Some Ideas Take Hold and Others Come Unstuck, London: Arrow, page 
28.
 2 Kroc, op. cit., pages 6–8 (adapted; the quotes are verbatim).
 3 “The “Average” McDonald’s by the Numbers’, Burger Business, 
8 February 2012, www.burgerbusiness.com/?p=9385, retrieved 3 
November 2012.
 4 Kroc, op. cit., page 100.
 5 Ibid., pages 11–12.
 6 Ibid., see photographs on pages 106–7.
 7 Ibid., page 71.
 8 Ibid., page 113.
 9 Ibid., pages 77–8.
 10 Ibid., page 113.
 11 Ibid., page 115.
 12 Ibid., page 100.
 13 Ibid., page 159.

SIMPLIFY
ENDNOTES
285
Chapter 4: Victory over Big Brother
1 Business Week, 3 October 1983.
 2 Quoted in Isaacson, op. cit., page 169.
 3 Ibid., page 59.
 4 Kahney, op. cit., pages 72–6; Isaacson, op. cit., page 73.
 5 Isaacson, op. cit., pages 125–6.
 6 Ibid., page 97.
 7 Ibid., page 99.
 8 Ibid., pages 95–100, 491.
 9 Ibid., page 110.
 10 Ibid., page 195.
 11 Ibid., page 356.
 12 Ibid., page 562.
 13 Ibid.
Chapter 5: The Strategy Simplifiers
1 We do not mean to imply that the leaders of BCG were being 
hypocritical. I don’t think that the discrepancy occurred to them, or 
that they really thought about their ﬁrm as a “business” in the same 
sense as their clients had businesses. If they had, they might have come 
to the realization (rather earlier than they did) that there are two kinds 
of customers and markets, each of which requires a different strategy: 
one based on price and volume; the other on proposition and margin.
Chapter 6: Taxi! The Brave New World of Apps
1 “Uber looks to ﬂag down a $10 bn valuation.” The Financial Times. http://
www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c4a403a6-dc71-11e3-9016-00144feabdc0.html.
 2 “Uber Conﬁrms New $1.25B Funding Round At $40B Valuation.” 
TechCrunch. http://techcrunch.com/2014/12/04/uber-conﬁrms-
new-1-2b-funding-round-looks-to-asia-for-expansion/.
 3 “Uber eyes $50 Billion Valuation in New Funding.” WSJ.com. www.
wsj.com/articles/uber-plans-large-new-funding-round-1431137142.
 4 “Uber Refueling Its Warchest Yet Again, At A Valuation Of Up To 
$70BN.” Techcrunch. techcrunch.com/2015/10/24/one-more-billion/. 
Retrieved 24 October 2015.
 5 “Uber is Generating A Staggering Amount Of Revenue.” Business Insider. 
http://uk.businessinsider.com/uber-revenue-projection-in-2015-2014-11.

SIMPLIFY
286 
ENDNOTES
6 “Chicago — Uber’s biggest launch to date?” Newsroom.
uber.com. http://blog.uber.com/2011/09/22/
chicago-ubers-biggest-launch-to-date/.
 7 “I’m a Bob the Builder” — Oliver Samwer at CEO Berlin’. 
venturevillage.eu/ceo-berlin-im-a-bob-the-builder-oliver-samwer.
 8 “Tech’s Fiercest Rivalry: Uber vs. Lyft.” WSJ.com. www.wsj.com/
articles/two-tech-upstarts-plot-each-others-demise-1407800744.
 9 “Exclusive: Google is developing its own Uber competitor.” 
Bloomberg Business. www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-02/
exclusive-google-and-uber-are-going-to-war-over-taxis.
 10 “An analysis of the labor market for Uber drivers.” Scribd.com. www.scribd.
com/doc/253410228/An-Analysis-of-the-Labor-Market-for-Uber-Drivers.
Chapter 7: The Two Strategies and Their Trade-offs
1 Horst Boog, Gerhard Krebs and Detlef Vogel (2006) Germany and the 
Second World War, Volume VII: The Strategic Air War in Europe and 
the War in the West and East Asia, 1943–1944/5, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, page 407.
 2 http://vintagepenguins.blogspot.co.uk/p/review-of-penguin-books.
html, retrieved 15 August 2014.
 3 George Orwell, “Review of Penguin Books,” New English Weekly, 
5 March 1936, http://vintagepenguins.blogspot.co.uk/p/review-of-
penguin-books.html, retrieved 15 August 2014.
Chapter 8: Which Type of Simplifier Will You Be?
1 Karl Marx (1863/1995) Capital, edited by David McLellan, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, pages 291–2.
2 See both the report and appendices in Boston Consulting Group 
(1975) Strategy Alternatives for the British Motorcycle Industry, London: 
Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce.
 3 United States Bureau of the Census (1980) Statistical Abstract of the 
United States, Washington, DC: United States Bureau of the Census, 
page 648, quoted in Clayton Christensen (1997) The Innovator’s 
Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail, Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press, pages 152, 158.
 4 Richard S. Tedlow (1990) New and Improved: The Story of Mass 
Marketing in America, New York: Basic Books, pages 22–111. The 
market share data are on page 88, and the ﬁnancial data on pages 
92–3.

SIMPLIFY
ENDNOTES
287
5 Ibid., pages 168–9.
 6 Ibid., page 171.
 7 Ibid., pages 169–75.
 8 See Richard Rumelt (2011) Good Strategy, Bad Strategy: The Difference 
and Why It Matters, New York: Crown Business, page 221.
Chapter 9: How to Proposition-Simplify
1 Quoted in Peter Burrows, “The Seed of Apple’s Innovation,” Business 
Week, 12 October 2004, page 188.
 2 Kahney, op. cit., page 109.
 3 http://designmuseum.org/design/jonathan-ive, retrieved 14 June 
2014.
 4 Kahney, op. cit., page 91.
 5 Ibid., page 96.
 6 As mentioned above, price-simpliﬁers normally reduce variety to cut costs. 
But proposition-simpliﬁers have a different agenda: to make their product 
or products better. This sometimes entails increasing product range.
 7 Brad Stone (2007) “Facebook Expands into MySpace’s Territory,” 
New York Times, 25 May, www.nytimes.com/2007/05/25/
technology/25social.html?_r=0, retrieved 16 June 2014.
 8 Isaacson, op. cit., page 126.
 9 Ibid., page 133.
 10 Ibid., page 78.
 11 Tedlow, op. cit., page 168.
 12 Stone, op. cit.
Chapter 10: How to Price-Simplify Part I
1 “Southwest Airlines: A Brief History,” www.southwest.com, quoted 
in Southwest’s Wikipedia entry, retrieved 2 November 2012.
 2 Based on 2011 data, “Scheduled Passengers Carried, International 
Air Transport Association,” quoted in Southwest’s Wikipedia entry, 
retrieved 2 November 2012.
 3 James Carville and Paul Begala (2002) Buck up, Suck up, and Come 
Back when You Foul up, New York: Simon & Schuster, page 88.
 4 Ibid., page 3.
 5 Diane Coyle (1997) The Weightless World: Strategies for Managing the 
Digital Economy, Oxford: Capstone, page vii.
 6 Henry Ford (1926) Today and Tomorrow, London: William 
Heinemann, page 14.

SIMPLIFY
288 
ENDNOTES
7 Ibid., page 68.
 8 Ibid., page 15.
Chapter 11: How to Price-Simplify Part II
1 Henry Ford, Today and Tomorrow, op. cit., page 15.
 2 Tedlow, op. cit., page 128.
3 The “Merry Oldsmobile” — really a motorized buggy and not 
strictly comparable with Ford’s family car — was by far the largest-
selling car model before the Model T. In 1904 it sold 5000 units, 
making it the market leader, before disappearing after Ransom E. 
Olds fell out with his ﬁnanciers. The Model T sold 5986 in 1908, 
12,292 the following year and 577,036 in 1916. Ibid., pages 119–25.
 4 Ibid., page 123.
 5 Ford, op. cit., page 80.
 6 Tedlow, op. cit., page 274.
 7 Ibid., page 261.
 8 www.aboutschwab.com/about, retrieved 18 January 2015.
 9 about.vanguard.com/who-we-are/fast-facts/.
 10 http://www.statista.com/statistics/235553/
assets-managed-in-mutual-funds-worldwide/.
 11 Christensen, op. cit.
 12 Ibid., page xv.
 13 Ibid., page xx.
 14 Ibid., page xxi.
 15 Ibid., page xxiii.
 16 Ibid., page 93.
Chapter 13: The Weakness of Strong Firms
1 Tom Peters (1992) Liberation Management: Necessary 
Disorganization for the Nanosecond Nineties, New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, page 489.
 2 Christensen, op. cit., page 106.
 3 Rumelt, op. cit., pages 135–7.
 4 Theodore Levitt (1960) “Marketing Myopia,” Harvard Business 
Review, July–August, pages 45–56.
 5 Christensen, op. cit., pages 115–17.
 6 Ibid., pages 104–5.
 7 Ibid., pages 135–7.

SIMPLIFY
ENDNOTES
289
Chapter 14: How Market Leaders Can Simplify Without Tears
1 Christensen, op. cit., page 153.
 2 Gordon Moore, Intel’s co-founder and chairman, initially described 
IBM’s use of the 8088 microprocessor in its PC as just a “small 
design win” for his company. See George W. Cogan and Robert A. 
Burgelman (1994) “Fading Memories: A Process Theory of Strategic 
Business Exit in Dynamic Environments,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 39 (1), pages 24–56; quoted in Christensen, op. cit., page 
154 and 158.
 3 Christensen, op. cit., pages 111–15.
 4 Isaacson, op. cit., page 213.
 5 http://gizmodo.com/5910223/how-yahoo-killed-ﬂickr-and-lost-the-
internet, retrieved 27 April 2015.
Chapter 15: Does Price-Simplifying Pay?
1 OC&C estimates based on data in John F. Love (1995) McDonald’s: 
Behind the Arches, New York: Bantam, pages 12 and 152.
 2 Authors’ calculation based on McDonald’s revenues of $2.6 million 
in 1961 (ibid., page 152) and $27,441 million in 2014 (McDonald’s 
annual report).
 3 This compares with a 2012 Bloomberg Billionaires Index estimate 
of €52.4 billion for Ingvar Kamprad’s total wealth. The latter 
was technically incorrect, as Kamprad does not own the empire 
personally, but it can be taken as a reasonable estimate of the total 
value of all IKEA entities.
 4 See an intriguing summary of the strategy debate in Richard P. 
Rumelt (1995) “The Many Faces of Honda,” www.anderson.ucla.edu/
faculty/dick.rumelt/Docs/Papers/HONDA, retrieved 16 September 
2015.
 5 Boston Consulting Group, op. cit.
Chapter 16: Does Proposition-Simplifying Pay?
1 Isaacson, op. cit., pages 388–9.
 2 “The Fall of Facebook,” The Atlantic, December 2014, page 35.
 3 Rumelt, Good Strategy, Bad Strategy, op. cit., page 14.
 4 Isaacson, op. cit., pages 386 (Rubenstein) and 384 (Schiller).

SIMPLIFY
290 
ENDNOTES
5 Ibid., pages 389–90.
 6 Ibid., page 393.
 7 Timothy Prickett Morgan (2011) “ARM Holdings Eager for PC 
and Server Expansion,” The Register, 1 February, www.theregister.
co.uk/2011/02/01/arm_holdings_q4_2010_numbers/, retrieved 15 
September 2015.
 8 Frederick C. Ingram’s chapter on Tetra Pak, The Gale Directory of 
Company Histories, www.answers.com/topic/tetra-pak-international-
s-a, retrieved 8 December 2014.
 9 Peter Andersson and Tommy Larsson (1988) Historien om dynastin 
Rausing, Stockholm: Norstedts, page 23.
 10 This may be an understatement, because OC&C has conservatively 
included McKinsey’s 1963 revenues in the market size. A different 
deﬁnition would include only the BCG revenues, since in 1963 it 
was the only ﬁrm in the world to be practicing the new approach 
on the basis of the emergent methodology. Only in the late 1960s 
did McKinsey begin to offer anything approaching a similar 
service. If we were to say that the strategy consulting market 
in 1963 comprised only BCG’s revenues, then the market has 
increased by 149,000 times since that year — a compound annual 
growth rate of 26.9 percent.
Chapter 17: The Success of Simplifying
1 Readers may wonder how this can be possible, given that BCG 
invented the market and went from 100 percent market share to 
something signiﬁcantly lower. The answer is that McKinsey’s 
boardroom consulting revenues for 1963 are included in OC&C’s 
deﬁnition of the strategy consulting market.
 2 The corresponding UK ﬁgures were a little higher: 2.3, 6.2 and 3 
percent, respectively (www.measuringworth.com for increases in the 
Consumer Price Index; authors’ calculations for compound annual 
growth rates).
 3 Strategists may note that the distinction between these two 
patterns is somewhat similar to the difference between the 
BCG/Michael Porter theory of competitive advantage (based 
on individual market segment advantage) and the Pralahad/
Hamel theory of “core competences’ (as well as resource theory 

SIMPLIFY
ENDNOTES
291
generally). However, our conclusion arose from empirical 
examination of how the extraordinary returns of our twelve 
simpliﬁers accrued in practice. We therefore hope that a more 
“universal,” consensus theory of competitive advantage may 
emerge in due course.
Chapter 18: The Limitations, Power, and Glory of Simplifying
1 http://www.fastcompany.com/42485/michael-porters-big-ideas


Acknowledgments
I (Richard) can’t remember exactly who suggested I should 
write this book, but I think it was some combination of Chris 
Outram, Greg Lockwood, my publisher Tim Whiting, and 
my agent Sally Holloway, after I had mentioned the possibil-
ity. And if it wasn’t them, but something autonomous in my 
brain, all four of them certainly encouraged me, so they are at 
least partly to blame. If the book strikes a chord, then I shall 
thank them profusely. If it doesn’t, I shall hold them entirely 
responsible for wasting my time over the past four years.
In all seriousness, Greg and I owe a big debt of gratitude 
to Chris, Tim, and Sally. Let me deal with Chris and his 
organization ﬁrst.
Chris Outram is the founder and chairman emeritus of 
OC&C Strategy Consultants, and I remember discussing 
the idea for the book with him over lunch in a strangely 
“English” pub somewhere in the Algarve, after ﬁnding all 
the Portuguese restaurants we wanted to visit were closed. 
Chris instantly liked the idea, and roped in one of his part-
ners, Nic Farhi, who was also keen to get involved. He might 
not have been so keen if he had known how long the journey 
would be and how much time and work would be involved! 
Although Chris and Nic were often quite blunt about the 
inadequacies of early drafts, they were also unfailingly 
engaged and never complained. They and many of their 
OC&C colleagues made a terriﬁc contribution to the ideas 
contained in these pages and the way they were eventually 
structured.

SIMPLIFY
294 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
OC&C undertook an extensive research program for 
the book, uncovering and estimating data on some obscure 
markets with great diligence and ingenuity. This project was 
ably led by Aveek Bhattacharya, with ﬁrst-class support from 
Richard Brooks, Greg Coates, Matt Cummins, Meilene 
Lam, and Chris Smith.
Tim Whiting, Publisher at Piatkus, has been whole-
heartedly behind the book from start to ﬁnish, and his team 
has been consistently professional. It has been a joy to work 
with them all.
Nobody could wish for a better agent than Sally 
Holloway — she has been most patient and supportive yet 
also perceptive and direct when necessary.
Great thanks also to two academic experts in business strat-
egy — Professors Andrew Campbell and David J. Collis — and 
to the well-known American marketing guru Perry Marshall. 
Andrew, a founder and director of the Ashridge Strategic 
Management Center in London, kindly read several drafts 
of the book and made appropriately penetrating and incisive 
comments — not least regarding the need to make the text 
as simple as possible. It was hard not to be discouraged by his 
comments at times, but — as usual — he was totally right. 
The book has beneﬁted immeasurably from his input.
A million years ago, David was one of my colleagues 
at BCG. He is now the Thomas Henry Carroll Ford 
Foundation Adjunct Professor at Harvard Business School. 
Like Andrew, David also generously slogged through several 
drafts of Simplify and urged us to address half a dozen critical 
points, which we did. He was also responsible for highlight-
ing that customers’ willingness or unwillingness to pay a 
premium for a product is an important factor to consider 

SIMPLIFY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
295
when choosing between proposition- and price-simplifying. 
His thinking strongly inﬂuenced Figure 1: The simplifying 
opportunity chart in Chapter 7.
Perry is the author of the world’s most popular book on 
internet advertising — Ultimate Guide to Google Adwords — as 
well as 80/20 Sales and Marketing. In addition to commenting 
helpfully on many drafts of Simplify, his pivotal intervention 
was to invite me to be the main speaker at a three-day event 
in Chicago attended by a large number of entrepreneurs 
and CEOs from around the world. One day of the seminar 
was devoted to a trot through the Simplify theory, and the 
experience convinced me that we were on to something big. 
Perry has contributed signiﬁcantly to the ideas in the book 
and he has been a constant source of intellectual stimulation 
and inspiration.
We are also grateful to the many other people who read 
drafts of the book and suggested improvements. I would par-
ticularly like to mention Andrin Bachmann, Natasha Ratanshi, 
and Aidan Montague, who all went out their way to help.
Josh Douglas, my business manager, made innumerable 
useful comments on the text and contributed plenty of prac-
tical advice. He also drew the ﬁgures.
My partner, the songwriter and surprise new pop star 
Matthew Grimsdale, has been a tower of strength through-
out the project, and made me keep at it when I would 
otherwise have thrown in the towel.
Finally, many thanks to the 150 people who attended the 
Simplify seminar in Chicago. You were great participants 
and the material was hugely validated and enhanced by 
your comments and enthusiasm. Any reader wishing to see 
highlights of the event can ﬁnd them on www.simplify.fm.


SIMPLIFY
297
About the Authors
Richard Koch is the bestselling author of The 80/20 Principle, which 
has sold over a million copies and been published in thirty-three 
languages. He is also a highly successful entrepreneur and inves-
tor whose ventures have included Filofax, Plymouth Gin, Belgo 
and Betfair. He was formerly a partner of Bain & Company and 
co-founder of LEK Consulting. He is also the author of more than 
20 highly acclaimed non-ﬁction books. He lives in Gibraltar.
Greg Lockwood is a founder of Piton Capital, a London-based 
venture capital ﬁrm that invests in businesses with network effects. 
He has a Masters of Management degree from the Kellogg Graduate 
School of Management, and is the co-author of Superconnect with 
Richard Koch.


Index
Diagrams are indicated in bold and tables in italics.
acquisitions  198–199, 202, 208, 
211–212
advertising
internet  238
store signs  19, 26
TV commercials  33–34
viral  64, 70, 74
zero price offerings  135
airplanes  84–86, 271
air travel
automation  158
customer participation  162–163
customer trap  191–192
price-simpliﬁcation  xxiii, 55, 
146, 221–223
product redesign  139, 140–143
see also Southwest Airlines
Airbnb  59, 71–73, 179–180
Airbus  271
Aldi  82
Alibaba  59
Allegro  172
Allen Bradley Company (AB)  198–
199, 202
AltaVista  179, 209, 238, 239
Amazon
growth  233–234, 249, 253, 257, 
258, 259
market lead  179, 189–190
orchestration  161
price-simpliﬁcation  232–233
proposition-simpliﬁcation  83, 
232
American Airlines  178, 222
Apple
growth  241–242, 249, 250, 257, 
259
iPad  xxv, 39, 126, 131
iPod  xxii, 69–70, 127, 131, 240–
241, 250
NeXT  207
premium market  178
product design  xxii, 33–40, 
80–81, 114, 117, 132
smartphones  56, 179, 210, 236
Steve Job returns  42–43, 136, 
208, 239–240
Xerox  115–116
see also Macintosh computer
apps  56, 65–66, 69, 151, 156, 168
ARM Holdings  242–243, 249, 250, 
257, 259
art
Apple  40, 117
Bain & Company  53
Boston Consulting Group (BCG)  
49
General Motors (GM)  110–111
IKEA  18
McDonald’s  26–27, 31
price-simpliﬁcation  80
proposition-simpliﬁcation  132–
134, 137
Uber  62

SIMPLIFY
300 
INDEX
artiﬁcial intelligence  277
assembly line production
Ford  7–8, 16–17, 156–157, 216
IKEA  16
McDonald’s  24–25, 27, 30, 157–
158, 252
attitude test  95, 96–104, 120
AUTO1.com  126
automation  11, 24, 31, 141–142, 
156–158
see also mass production
Avis Budget Group  128
Bain & Company  50–54, 55–56, 57, 
83, 114, 131
Barnes & Noble  179, 189–190,  
234
bespoke products  269–270
Betfair  156, 187–189, 199
Bethlehem Steel  170, 178
biotechnology industry  260, 262, 
272
Blockbuster  179
Bogle, John  167–168
Bohr, Neils  244
“Boston Box”  xii, xviii, 46, 48, 129
Boston Consulting Group (BCG)
complexity  52
growth  56–57, 245–247, 249, 
251–252, 256, 257, 258, 259
market segmentation  53–54, 55
proposition-simpliﬁcation  xvii–
xviii, 46–50, 83, 114, 252
usefulness  48–49, 129–130, 131
Bower, Marvin  246
British Airways  140
brokerage services  167, 225–226
bulk buying  25, 162, 163, 219
business structure redesign  202, 
206–208
business system redesign
automation  156–158
customer participation  161–163
orchestration  158–161
overview  153–154, 155, 173, 
278
price-simpliﬁcation  xxiv, 16, 20, 
144
scalability  171–172
cameras  126, 131, 178
Camp, Garrett  62
cannibalization trap  187–191, 200
Canon  178, 190–191
car industry  xxi, 3–10, 54, 81–82, 
110–112, 126, 133, 216–218, 
251
car rental  128
Cash Cow (“Boston Box”)  xii
Chaparral  169
Charles Schwab & Co  167, 225–
226, 249, 253–254, 256, 257, 
258, 259
Christensen, Clayton  168, 170–171, 
186, 192, 203
cleanliness  28
Cloud storage  150
Coca-Cola  108, 172, 260–261
commodity markets  272
communications  151
 see also social media
Compaq  42, 160, 178, 204
competitive advantage  135, 255, 
263–264, 272
competitive variation  268–275
competitor position  96, 107–108
complexity  80, 123–124, 126, 140, 
152, 269–272, 273
complexity trap  194–196, 200
computer industry
DEC  178, 186–187, 202
Dell  159–161
ease of use  124–125
historical development  34–38, 
80–81
Xerox  115–117
 see also Apple; disk-drives; IBM; 
microprocessors; printers
consensus  51
consistency  27–28
consulting industry  45–57, 245
 see also Boston Consulting Group 
(BCG)
consumer beneﬁts  89–90
consumer electronics  261, 262
consumer goods  180
consumers as product  135
costs
bulk buying  25, 162, 163, 219
inventory  16, 160
labor  24–25
packaging  108–109

SIMPLIFY
INDEX 
301
simpliﬁcation beneﬁt  xix
simpliﬁcation principles  11
transport  12–14, 108–109, 150, 
223
Cuisinart  132
customer experience  18, 21, 151–
152, 265
customer loyalty  41, 274
customer participation  xxiv, 12–13, 
14, 21, 142, 152, 161–163
customer segmentation see market 
segmentation
customer service  61
customer trap  191–194, 200
de Havilland  84–85
DEC  178, 186–187, 202
Deezer  71
defense industry  260, 262
defensibility  136–137, 138
Dell  42, 118–119, 159–161, 178
demand see market size
design process see product design
design simpliﬁcation see 
proposition-simpliﬁcation
dinosaurs  175, 177–183, 184–200
Direct Line  165–166
direct sales  160, 163–168
discovery strategies  272
disk-drives  186, 197–198, 206
disruptive technology  56, 168–169, 
203, 277
Dog (“Boston Box”)  xii
Dropbox  135, 151
Dyson  131, 134
Earl, Harley  111
ease of use
Apple  31–32, 38, 39, 117
Bain & Company  52
Boston Consulting Group (BCG)  
48
IKEA 18
McDonald’s  27
price-simpliﬁcation  80
proposition-simpliﬁcation  124–
128, 137
Uber  61–62
EasyJet  142
Easy Taxi  66
eBay  131, 147, 163, 172
Edison, Thomas  215
elaboration  269–271
Emerson, Ralph Waldo  xi
Encarta  178
Encyclopaedia Britannica  178
energy drinks  210
enterprise software  270
exchange markets  163, 188–189
exclusivity  268–269
Facebook
acquisitions  212
art  133
consumer as product  135
usefulness  129, 131
fast-food restaurants  22–32, 55, 
219–221, 252–253, 266
 see also McDonald’s
Filofax  204–205
ﬂat-pack furniture  12–14, 19, 20
Flickr  208
food industry  180
Ford
growth  8–9, 216–218, 249, 250, 
251, 257, 258, 259
market lead  110
Ford, Henry
assembly line production  7–8, 
16–17, 156–157, 216
brand equity  10, 218
price-simpliﬁcation  5–6, 8–9, 
113, 157, 218
product design  xxi, 3–7, 9–10, 79, 
111, 144, 146–147, 148–149
Ford Foundation  10
France  60
franchises  27–28
free services  134–135
“freemium” model  135
furniture trade  12–21, 54, 158–159, 
268–269
 see also IKEA
gap test  105, 107–108, 109, 111–112, 
120
Gateway  160
General Electric  198–199
General Mills  180
General Motors  8
General Motors (GM)  110–112, 
115, 128, 131, 133, 216, 218

SIMPLIFY
302 
INDEX
globalization
IKEA  225
McDonald’s  30, 32
simpliﬁcation beneﬁt  255
speed  171, 266, 278
Uber  67–69, 70
see also scalability; universality
Goldman, Henry  164
Goldman Sachs  246
Google
acquisitions  211
art  133
consumer as product  135
disruptive technology  56
growth  238–239, 249, 250, 254, 
257, 258, 259
market expansion  69
market lead  179
usefulness  129, 131, 151
government intervention  275
 see also legislation; regulations
GPS software  211
growth, simpliﬁcation beneﬁt  xix, 
276
 see also market growth rate
Growth–Share Matrix see “Boston 
Box”
Guth, Charles  108–109
Harley-Davidson  105–106, 192–
193, 229
Henderson, Bruce D.  45, 46, 245, 
246
Hewlett-Packard  42, 178, 197, 202, 
206
Hilton  179
Holmes, Oliver Wendell  76, 80
Honda
growth  192–193, 227–229, 249, 
257, 259
price-simpliﬁcation  93, 105–107, 
113
hotel industry  179–180, 274
IBM
failure to counter simpliﬁers  44, 
118–120, 177–178, 210
growth  34
Intel  204
Microsoft  42
price  37
IKEA
bulk buying  163
business system redesign  15–17, 
54
customer experience  17–19, 79, 
83
customer participation  12–13, 14, 
151–152, 161–162
growth  223–225, 249, 257
orchestration  158–159
price-simpliﬁcation  13–15, 
18–20, 113, 147, 223–225
scalability  159, 225
store design  14–15
utility  79
 see also Kamprad, Ingvar
iMac  43
industry simpliﬁcation  260–261, 
262
inﬂation  256
innovation  xvi, 131, 136, 138
insight  112–113
Instagram  208
insurance industry  165–166
Intel  203–204, 242
intellectual property  274
internationalization see 
globalization
internet advertising  238
internet growth  261, 262, 277
internet retail  189, 234
 see also Amazon; apps; eBay
invention strategies  270–271
inventory costs  16, 160
investment industry  167–168
iPad  xxv, 39, 126, 131
iPhone  131, 210, 236
iPod  xxii, 69–70, 127, 131, 240–241, 
250
Isaacson, Walter  xxii, 33, 35, 37
iTunes  127–128, 240
Ive, Jony  xxii, 43, 124–125
Iverson, F. Kenneth  170
Jobs, Steve
NeXT  207
product design  xxii, 34–40, 44, 
81, 117, 122, 125, 132
return to Apple  42–43, 136, 208, 
239–240
Xerox  115–117

SIMPLIFY
INDEX 
303
joint ventures  185
joy  38, 39, 62, 77, 80, 111, 122, 211, 
232
Kalanick, Travis  62, 64
Kamprad, Ingvar  12–21, 79, 82, 
112, 196, 223
Kawashima, Kihachiro  107, 
227–229
Kelleher, Herb  139, 141–143, 146, 
221
Kellog’s  180
keys test  112–115, 120
KISS motto  xxii
Kmart  202, 205–206
Kodak  178
Kresge  205–206
Kroc, Ray  xxi–xxii, 22–32, 151, 
219–220, 252, 266
labor costs  24–25
Lane, Allen  85–89
Lawson, Peter  185
legislation  63, 68, 72
LEK  185–186
Lenovo  42
Levitt, Theodore  196
location costs  86
see also store locations
lock-in beneﬁts  274
Lotus  178
luxury products  123–124, 269
Lyft  68
Mabon, Stuart  186
Macintosh computer
innovation  131
market share  42, 43
product design  34–35, 36–37, 
39–40, 80–81, 83, 118
proposition-simpliﬁcation  114, 
239
manufacturing partners  15
margins
price-simpliﬁcation  77
proposition-simpliﬁcation  44, 
252
simpliﬁcation beneﬁt  xix, 41
traps  186, 187
market explosion pattern  264–265, 
266
market forces escape strategies  
272–275
market growth rate  63, 64–65, 66, 
73, 74, 255, 266
market leaders
as dinosaurs  175, 177–183
internal traps  184–200
survival strategies  201–212
market segmentation  19–20, 54–55, 
136, 193, 194, 236
market share  46, 48–49
market size
price-simpliﬁcation  xxiv, 8–9, 
44, 78, 88–89, 143, 217–226, 
228–230, 263
proposition-simpliﬁcation  78, 
234, 238, 241–242, 244–245, 
263
Marks, Michael  143
Marks and Spencer  143
Marriott  179
mass production
Ford  7–8, 16–17, 156–157, 216
IKEA  16
McDonald’s  24–25, 27, 30, 157–
158, 252
Mateschitz, Dietrich  210
McDonald’s
assembly line production  24–25, 
27, 30, 112, 157–158, 219, 252
bulk buying  25, 162, 219
customer experience  83
customer participation  82, 162
early development  xxi–xxii, 
22–24, 25–27
franchises  28–29
growth  xxiv, 30–31, 219–221, 
249, 252–253, 256, 257, 258, 
259, 266
product range limitation  24, 25, 
29, 162, 219
simplicity  24–25, 113, 147, 202
uniformity  27–28, 151
utility  26–27, 79
 see also Kroc, Ray
McKinsey  46, 52, 55, 56–57, 
246–247
media industry growth  261, 262
Merrill Lynch  225–226
methods  xi
Microﬁle  204–205

SIMPLIFY
304 
INDEX
Micropolis Corporation  186
microprocessors  203–204
Microsoft  42, 43, 81, 118–119, 178, 
242
mineral-extraction  272
MITS Altair  35
mobile phones see smartphones
Model T Ford  xxi, 6–10, 147, 
156–157, 216
Modicon  198–199
Montgomery Ward  163
Moore’s Law  203–204
Morita, Akio  127
motorcycle industry  105–107, 133–
134, 192–193, 225–229
music downloads  69–71, 127–128
Myspace  133
Nespresso  127, 131
Netﬂix  179
network effects  67, 151, 254, 273
niche markets  269, 275
Nintendo Wii  131
Nokia  56, 179, 210
non-simpliﬁcation  268–275, 277
Norton Villiers Triumph  229
not-for-proﬁt organizations  275
novel plots  113
Nucor  169, 170, 178
oil & gas industry  260, 262
online retail see internet retail
orchestration  158–161
Orwell, George  86, 88
outsourcing  119, 198, 236
overhead trap  185–187, 199
PA Consulting  185–186
packaging costs  108–109
packaging industry  243–245
Paddy Power  189
Pan-Am  178
Pandora  71
Paris  60
Patek Philippe  269
patents  190, 232, 237, 274
Pavel, Andreas  209
“pay day” loans  128
Penguin Books  86–89, 113
Penn Central  196
Pepsi-Cola  108–109, 114, 172
personal relationships  274
Peters, Tom  177, 184
pharmaceuticals  260, 262
Plus Development Corporation 
(PDC)  197–198, 202, 206
Polaroid  126
Porsche  123
potatoes  27–28
Pottruck, David  226
premium services  135
price premiums  41, 44, 48, 51, 77, 
269
price-simpliﬁcation
advantages  xix, 41, 136–137, 
263–264, 277, 279
business system redesign  153–
154, 155, 156–171
Charles Schwab & Co  167, 
225–226
compared to proposition-sim-
pliﬁcation  76–78, 90–91, 
235–237
computer industry  42
counter-action  204–208, 210
Ford  5–6, 8–9, 113, 146–147, 157, 
216–218
Honda  105, 113, 225–229
IKEA  13–15, 18–20, 113, 147, 
223–225
keys  113
market segmentation  54–55, 58
market size  xxiv, 8–9, 44, 78, 
88–89, 143, 217–226, 228–
230, 263
McDonald’s  24–25, 26, 29, 113, 
147, 151, 219–221
overview  xxiii–xxiv
Penguin Books  85–89, 113
Pepsi-Cola  108–109, 113
precepts  79–80
principles  11, 19–20, 41, 77, 
82–83, 143–144, 278–279
product redesign  144, 145, 
146–152
Southwest Airlines  141–143, 146, 
221–223
warning signals tests  181–182
principles  xi–xii
printers  197, 202, 206
Proctor & Gamble  180
producer, price-simpliﬁcation  77

SIMPLIFY
INDEX 305
product delivery  xxiii–xxiv
product design
complexity  194–195
joy  38, 39, 62, 77, 122, 134, 232
price-simpliﬁcation  144
primary function  146–148
redesign process overview  123, 
144, 145, 146–152, 172
replicability  66, 74
simplicity  xxii, 6, 80–81, 90, 117, 
125–126, 195–196, 255, 278
size  149–150
transport costs  13
universality  87, 150–151, 255
weight  148–149
 see also art; ease of use; 
proposition-simpliﬁcation; 
usefulness
product range
limited  15, 24, 25, 29, 219
reduction  11, 150–151, 172, 205
product size  127, 270–271
production costs  86–87
 see also price-simpliﬁcation
proof of concept  66, 67
proposition-simpliﬁcation
advantages  41, 263–264, 277, 279
Airbnb  71–73
Apple  37–40, 43–44, 114
art  132–134, 137
Bain & Company  50–53, 114
Boston Consulting Group (BCG)  
47–48, 114, 252
compared to price-simpliﬁcation  
76–78, 90–91, 235–237
counter-action  208–210
ease of use  124–128, 137
General Motors (GM)  110–111, 
114
keys  114
limitations  136, 138
market growth  74, 234, 238, 
241–242, 244–245, 263
market segmentation  54, 55–56, 
58
precepts  80–81
principles  xxv, 77, 83, 137–138, 
278–279
product redesign  123, 136
Spotify  70
Uber  60–66, 114
uniqueness  54
usefulness  129–132, 137
warning signals tests  182–183
proprietary systems  17, 28, 31
publishing industry  85–89
Quantum Corporation  197–198, 
202, 206
Question Mark (“Boston Box”)  xii
Rams, Dieter  122
Raskin, Jef  37
Rausin, Ruben  243–244
Red Bull  210
regulations  63, 68, 273–274
replicability  65–66, 74
retail industry growth  261, 262
Ricoh  178
Rockefeller, John D.  272
Rocket Internet  66–67
Rubenstein, Jon  240
Rumelt, Richard  240
Ryanair  142
Samsung  56, 179, 210, 236
Samwer brothers  66–67
scalability
advantages  55
business system redesign  16
globalization  171–172, 173
IKEA  159, 225
price-simpliﬁcation  29, 41, 144, 
235–236
Uber  67, 74
scarcity  274
Schiller, Phil  240
Schwab, Chuck  226
 see also Charles Schwab & Co
Sear, Roebuck  164
search engines  179, 211, 238
 see also Google
segment retreat  193, 229
self-assembly furniture  12–14, 19, 
20
service industries  31, 57, 126
 see also McDonald’s
Silicon Valley  211
skills specialization  11
skills test  96, 115–120
skills trap  196–199, 200
Sloan, Alfred  110–111, 133

SIMPLIFY
306 
INDEX
smartphones  56, 179, 210, 236, 242, 
277
see also apps
Snapchat  151
social media  129, 131, 133, 135, 151, 
165
soft drinks  260–261, 262
see also Coca-Cola; Pepsi-Cola; 
Red Bull
software industry  261, 262, 270
Sony
digital cameras  178
Walkman  127, 130, 131, 209
Southwest Airlines
growth  249, 257, 259
market explosion  265
market leadership  178
price-simpliﬁcation  141–143, 
146, 191–192, 221–223
speed of growth  63, 64, 66, 73, 74, 
255, 266
speed simpliﬁcation  126–127
Spencer, Tom  143
spin-off companies  206–208
Spotify  69–71, 128, 133, 135, 151
Star (Star Principle)  xii–xiii, 47
Star Principle  xii–xiii, xix
Starbucks  130, 131
steel
mini-mills  168, 169–171, 178
vanadium  6–7, 9, 148
Stereobelt  209
stock markets  163, 167–168, 225
store design  14–15
store locations  14, 18
strategy selection  90–91, 95–96, 
120–121
strategy simpliﬁcation  45–58
style icons  134
supermarkets  82, 202
supplier beneﬁts  89–90
survivor bias  179
Swatch  148
switching costs  274
taxis  60–69
technology
diffusion  237
disruptive  56, 168–169, 203, 277
enabling  75
evolution  276–277
Tedlow, Richard  111, 156, 164
Tetra Pak  243–245, 249, 256, 257
The Innovator’s Dilemma  168, 
170–171, 192
The Testament of a Furniture 
Dealer  13
Tinder  135, 151, 156
Toyota  112
trade-offs  76, 81–85, 87–88, 
90–91
transport costs  12–14, 108–109, 
150, 223
travel bookings  71–73, 179–180
TripAdvisor  129, 131
TWA  178
Twitter  131, 133, 135, 151
Uber
automation  156
globalization  67–69, 70
growth  73
market transformation  56
proposition-simpliﬁcation  
60–66, 114
usefulness  62, 74, 83, 129, 131
“unicorns,” deﬁnition  xxi
Unilever  180
United Airlines  191
universality  150–151, 172, 255, 264, 
278
URLs  274
usefulness
Apple  31, 39–40, 117
Bain & Company  53
Boston Consulting Group (BCG)  
48–49
IKEA  18
McDonald’s  26
price-simpliﬁcation  80
product comparisons  131
proposition-simpliﬁcation  129–
132, 137
Uber  62, 74, 83, 129, 131
user, proposition-simplification  
77
U.S.X  170, 178
utility  79–80, 90
see also art; ease of use; usefulness

SIMPLIFY
INDEX 
307
vanadium steel  6–7, 9, 148
Vanguard Group  167–168
venture capital  171
Vermeer, Jan  267–268
Vespa scooter  133–134
viral advertising  64, 70, 74
Walkman  127, 130, 131, 209
Walmart  161
Walton, Sam  196
Wang  178
warning signals tests  180–183
watches  148, 269
Waze  211
website  96, 183, 212, 280, 281
Westinghouse  198–199
WhatsApp  211–212
Wikipedia  178
Wonga  128, 130, 131
Woolco  205–206
Woolworth’s  86, 205–206
word-of-mouth advertising  64, 70, 
74
workforce specialization  11
Wozniak, Steve  35
WYSIWYG  36, 117
Xerox  35–36, 40, 81, 115–117, 178, 
190–191
Yahoo!  208, 239
YouTube  211
Zen  xxii, 240
zero price offerings  134–135
Zipcar  128, 130, 131

