www.ebook3000.com

P R A I S E  F O R  S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
“Ten years in the making, Simply Electrifying is an inspiring book about the 
pioneers and visionaries who brought the transformative technology of elec-
tricity to all of society. Thoroughly researched, with insightful commentary, 
the book provides a thought-provoking and comprehensive examination of 
the challenges and evolving opportunities surrounding the electrification of 
our economy. The book also underscores the critically important role that 
electricity plays in powering our lives and our future.”
—Tom Kuhn, president, Edison Electric Institute 
“Simply Electrifying is as impressive as it is engaging and informative. 
Documenting the comprehensive history of one of humanity’s greatest 
achievements is no small feat, but Craig R. Roach has given us an elegant 
book that provides an excellent review of electricity and the utility industry 
in this country.”
—Joshua W. Martin III, director, Southwest Power Pool
“Craig Roach is a very accomplished economist, so as I sat down to read his 
Simply Electrifying, I expected another economic treatise replete with graphs 
and equations geared more toward the academic community than the gen-
eral public. Just the opposite: As an economist myself, I was captivated as 
he filled in the blanks of history on a subject that has governed most of my 
career. The perseverance of entrepreneurs, the politics, the government, and 
the competitions—all of which gave us the miracle of electricity—is written 
beautifully in the genre of historical fiction. But this is not fiction, and Craig 
does not stop in the present nor with power alone, but rather with sensitivity 
to man’s responsibility in future pursuits of scientific achievements. This book 
should fill a prominent place on anyone’s bookshelf as a reference to one of 
man’s greatest achievements.”
—Alan R. Schriber, PhD, former chair, 
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio
“Dozens of times a day we flip a switch and lights, TVs, computers, washing 
machines, and all the other devices we rely upon in our modern lives come 
on. We simply take for granted that this magical thing we call electricity will 
be available on-demand, 24/7, 365 days a year. Rarely do we even wonder 
about how that happens, where electricity comes from, and how it gets to 

us, instantly ready when we need it. In this well-researched, well-written, 
and engaging book, Dr. Roach presents an accessible history of this simply 
electrifying topic: electricity itself.   Starting with Benjamin Franklin and 
continuing through to Elon Musk and Bill Gates, Dr. Roach gives us the 
inside story, unpacking scientific breakthroughs and connecting physics and 
engineering to the economic, regulatory, legal, business, and environmental 
policies that shape this crucial industry. Both newbies to the field and experi-
enced policy wonks will learn much from this important book.” 
—Julie Simon, energy industry expert, Washington, DC
“A history buff’s delight! Step into the incredible story of the origins of elec-
tricity like never before. It’s fascinating to see how far we’ve come and con-
sider what the future may hold. Simply Electrifying is a gem and a must-read for 
anybody that has ever reached for a light switch.”
—Kent Parsons, energy and electricity lawyer, Baton Rouge, LA
“If you have any interest in learning about the roles that science, govern-
ments, and private enterprise can play in determining the economics and 
choice of new technologies for social benefit or harm, read Craig’s book on 
the US electricity market. It is a comprehensive, balanced, and very informa-
tive analysis of the history of this essential product. I am already recommend-
ing Simply Electrifying to my students.”
—Ken Hendricks, Laurits R. Christensen Distinguished Chair, 
Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin–Madison
“Dr. Roach’s talent for identifying key issues and explaining complex ideas 
in straightforward terms enriches his ‘wide-angle’ review of the origin and 
development of the electricity industry and the business of supplying power. 
Simply Electrifying brings into vivid focus both the inventors responsible for 
the turning points in the discovery, production, and commercialization of 
electricity, and the executives and investors who shaped the electricity busi-
ness. This incisive work connects advances in electricity technology and uses 
to the broader  sweep of scientific progress, while also framing the  trans-
formative  consequences of the democratization  of electricity in economic, 
regulatory, and environmental terms.  Dr. Roach’s outstanding book, by 
explaining how electricity became fundamental to modern life, allows us to 
better understand where the industry will go next.” 
—Kenneth M. Simon, partner (ret.), Latham & Watkins LLP
www.ebook3000.com

Simply 
Electrifying

www.ebook3000.com

Simply 
Electrifying
T H E  T E C H N O L O G Y  T H A T 
T R A N S F O R M E D  T H E  W O R L D , 
f ro m  B E N J A M I N  F R A N K L I N 
t o E L O N  M U S K
Craig R. Roach
 
BenBella Books, Inc. 
Dallas, TX

Copyright © 2017 by Craig R. Roach
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatso-
ever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical 
articles or reviews.
BenBella Books, Inc.
10440 N. Central Expressway, Suite 800
Dallas, TX 75231
www.benbellabooks.com
Send feedback to feedback@benbellabooks.com
Printed in the United States of America
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Roach, Craig.
Title: Simply electrifying : the technology that transformed the world, from 
   Benjamin Franklin to Elon Musk / Craig R. Roach.
Description: Dallas, TX : BenBella Books, Inc., [2017] | Includes 
   bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017004508 (print) | LCCN 2017006347 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9781944648268 (trade cloth : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781944648275 (electronic)
Subjects: LCSH: Electricity—History. | Electrical engineering—History. | 
   Inventors—Biography.
Classification: LCC QC527 .R63 2017 (print) | LCC QC527 (ebook) | DDC 
   621.309—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017004508
Editing by Stephanie Gorton Murphy	
Text design by Aaron Edmiston
Copyediting by Miki Alexandra Caputo	
Text composition by PerfecType, Nashville, TN
Proofreading by James Fraleigh	
Cover design by Pete Garceau
  and Laura Cherkas	
Author photo by Dupont Photographers
Indexing by Debra Bowman	
Jacket design by Sarah Avinger
  Indexing Services	
Printed by Lake Book Manufacturing
Distributed by Perseus Distribution
www.perseusdistribution.com
To place orders through Perseus Distribution:
Tel: (800) 343-4499
Fax: (800) 351-5073
Email: orderentry@perseusbooks.com
Special discounts for bulk sales (minimum of 25 copies) are available. 
Please contact Aida Herrera at aida@benbellabooks.com.
www.ebook3000.com

To all those who agree with Benjamin Franklin that “when Men differ in 
Opinion, both Sides ought equally to have the Advantage of  being heard by 
the Publick; and that when Truth and Error have fair Play, the former is 
always an overmatch for the latter.”

www.ebook3000.com

C O N T E N T S
 
Acknowledgments 
xi
 
P R O L O G U E  Just Imagine 
xiii
P A R T  O N E :  T H E  A G E  O F  F R A N K L I N :
A  T I M E  O F  A W E  A N D  D I S C O V E R Y
 
C H A P T E R  1  Benjamin Franklin’s Kite 
3
 
C H A P T E R  2  James Watt’s Steam Engine 
21
 
C H A P T E R  3  Faraday’s Faith (and Maxwell’s Equations) 
32
P A R T  T W O :  T H E  A G E  O F  E D I S O N :
L E T  T H E R E  B E  L I G H T  ( A N D  P O W E R )
 
C H A P T E R  4  Samuel Morse’s Telegraph 
55
 
C H A P T E R  5  Thomas Edison’s Light 
71
 
C H A P T E R  6  George Westinghouse’s and 
Nikola Tesla’s Alternative 
87
 
C H A P T E R  7  Samuel Insull’s Electric City, Chicago 
105

P A R T  T H R E E :  T H E  A G E  O F  B I G : 
B I G  G O V E R N M E N T,  B I G  P O W E R  P L A N T S
	
C H A P T E R  8 	 FDR’s New Deal (for Electricity)	
127
	
C H A P T E R  9 	 Herbert Hoover’s Dam	
150
	
C H A P T E R  1 0 	 David Lilienthal’s Tennessee Valley Authority	
168
	
C H A P T E R  1 1 	 King Coal’s Reign	
186
	
C H A P T E R  1 2 	 Albert Einstein’s Equation (E = mc2)	
203
P A R T  F O U R :  T H E  A G E  O F  H A R M : 
C R I S I S ,  C H A N G E ,  A N D  S C A N D A L
	
C H A P T E R  1 3 	 Eisenhower’s Atoms for Peace (and War)	
225
	
C H A P T E R  1 4 	 Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring	
247
	
C H A P T E R  1 5 	 California’s Electricity Crisis (and Enron’s Greed)	
265
	
C H A P T E R  1 6 	 Competition’s Steady Rise	
288
P A R T  F I V E :  T H E  A G E  O F  U N C O M P R O M I S I N G  B E L I E F
	
C H A P T E R  1 7 	 President Obama’s Clean Power Plan	
309
	
C H A P T E R  1 8 	 George Mitchell’s Shale Gas Revolution	
328
	
C H A P T E R  1 9 	 Elon Musk’s Vision (and History’s Lessons)	
344
	
E P I L O G U E 	 Just Imagine	
369
	
List of  Acronyms	
376
	
Bibliography	
378
	
Endnotes	
395
	
Index	
443
	
About the Author	
462
www.ebook3000.com

xi
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
I could not have written simply Electrifying without the tenacious and insightful 
research of John Garnett; look for great things from this top-shelf histo-
rian out of George Mason University.
I also owe a great debt to all the biographers, historians, scientists, 
journalists, corporate executives, and public servants who have written 
about electricity over these many decades. As evidenced by the hundreds 
of endnotes, I have built upon the great work of others, and I hope I have 
given credit where credit is due; any errors, of course, are my own.
Many thanks to my agent, Jeff  Ourvan, of the Jennifer Lyons Literary 
Agency in New York. Jeff  saw the compelling narrative in Simply Electrifying 
early on and has worked tirelessly since then to make sure that readers had 
a chance to see it, too. 
I am grateful to Glenn Yeff eth, publisher of BenBella Books, for 
putting together a great team ready to pursue success in this new era of 
book publishing. I could not have had a more engaged and skillful editor 
than Stephanie Gorton Murphy. Thanks also to Leah Wilson, BenBella’s 
editor-in-chief, for her care and insight in the editing process. 
A decade is a very long time to take to write a book. My good friend 
Julie Simon off ered encouragement and advice over that entire time. She 
was the one who told me to put the wow in every chapter—I hope I have 
met her standard. Another friend, Mark Pacelli, is one of the best-read 
people I know. His advice on what to read and how to make the story work 
was a great help to me.

xii	
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
Thanks to my wife, Joanne Lepanto, for her encouragement and 
patience over the past decade of writing—and, of course, for all the other 
things that really matter. 
www.ebook3000.com

xiii
P R O L O G U E 
Just Imagine
[Franklin] found electricity a curiosity and left it a science.
—Carl Van Doren (1938)1
Imagine your world without electricity: no morning alarm clock or coffee maker. 
No electric lights, heat, or air conditioning. No whirling electric motors. 
And no computers or cell phones. 
This was the world 265 years ago in Philadelphia, the birthplace of 
the modern science of electricity. The morning alarm was the sun ris-
ing or the cock crowing. Coff ee and heat required a simple woodstove. 
Muscle power and perhaps literal horse power drove businesses. And any 
computing going on was surely done with pencil and paper. No one could 
imagine a world with electricity because at that time the notion of such 
a force was fantastical; man had not yet captured and harnessed such 
power.
Without electricity the urban night was dimly lit at best and often dan-
gerous. Imagine sitting around a candle trying to read or sew or do close 
work of any kind; it would have taken over a hundred candles to give the 
same amount of light produced by a single 100-watt incandescent electric 

xiv	
P r o l o g u e
lightbulb. Getting close to the open flame could mean a shirtsleeve, lock 
of hair, or curtain could be set on fire. The dangers continued outside and 
ranged from tripping along a dark street to being mugged or worse. The 
one partial consolation might have been that, without electric lights, there 
was nothing to obstruct the beauty of a star-filled night sky.2 
Amazingly, a few bold minds were eager and able to imagine 
electricity—to see the unseen. None was more important than Philadelphia’s 
Benjamin Franklin, who allowed the world to “see” electricity one day in 
June 1752 by flying his kite in the midst of a storm. Because of the obvious 
danger, doubts persist to this day whether Franklin actually flew his kite in 
a storm, but there is no reason to doubt that he conducted his kite experi-
ment, perhaps in less dramatic weather.3
While Franklin’s unique intellect was surely central to his success, so 
too was the fact that he lived at a watershed moment for science and tech-
nology. The Scientific Revolution had already transformed man’s under-
standing of the universe, and the Industrial Revolution would soon begin 
to transform the world’s economy. Newton and others had already begun 
to explain in precise mathematics the mechanics of the universe in terms 
of the force of gravity. Eventually, Franklin and others would do the same 
for electricity, as well as for magnetism and light.
At the same time, there were several common scientific and medical 
beliefs that seem primitive or even cruel today. One example is the prac-
tice of bloodletting as a remedy for fever and infection. It is more likely 
that George Washington, among many others, died from such “remedies” 
than from the ailment he contracted toward the end of his life. Great shifts 
in science and technology sometimes spread progress unevenly across the 
many facets of life.4
Benjamin Franklin and his kite represent only the first step in a fasci-
nating journey from an era when life with electricity was barely imagined 
by a few to a time in which life without electricity was unimaginable for 
most. That journey was powered by the bold actions of many famous (and 
some infamous) figures who were sometimes propelled forward, and as 
often pushed back, by the demands and mores of their times. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J u s t  I m a g i n e 	
xv
These innovators built the powerful, pervasive electric infrastructure 
on which everyone in the developed world now depends. The first cor-
nerstone of that infrastructure was remarkable scientific advances made 
by Benjamin Franklin, Michael Faraday, James Clerk Maxwell, Nikola 
Tesla, and Albert Einstein. Indeed, Einstein believed that the discovery 
of electricity was not just a stop along the path to modern physics, it was 
the path itself. Man’s understanding of electricity led to many of the major 
breakthroughs in all of physics.
The second cornerstone was the technology based on this great sci-
ence. Samuel Morse’s telegraph was the first fruit of the hard-won scientific 
knowledge linking electricity and magnetism. The fact that the purpose of 
the telegraph was for communication is significant. The electricity busi-
ness and the telecommunications business were born of the same science, 
and yet the latter has far outpaced the former in technological advances 
in modern times.
The first war between technology titans in electricity featured 
Thomas Edison against George Westinghouse, with Nikola Tesla by 
Westinghouse’s side. Their clash was the original Battle of the Currents. 
In the end, Westinghouse’s alternating-current system bested Edison’s 
direct-current system. Alternating current allowed for economies of scale 
because electric power plants could be linked to customers across a vast 
distance. Interestingly, few people today are fully aware of the key roles 
played by Westinghouse and Tesla.
The third cornerstone was the business practices that governed the 
nationwide spread of electric service. Innovative business magnate Samuel 
Insull set the standard here with a full understanding of and belief in econ-
omies of scale. His aim was to spread the fixed cost of power plants and 
transmission lines over an increasing number of customers, thus causing 
the per-unit price of electricity to fall. Eventually, electricity became avail-
able and affordable to all, and, in this way, Insull implemented the first 
democratization of electricity. 
The pursuit of the big, however, is also what got Insull into trouble 
and why his reputation is still infamous to some today. In 1932 Insull 

xvi	
P r o l o g u e
owned one of just three holding companies that together controlled almost 
half of all power generation in America. When his holding company failed 
in the Great Depression, none other than President Franklin D. Roosevelt 
blamed Insull for the severity of the ensuing economic collapse.5
The fourth cornerstone, closely linked to the third, was government 
regulation. In the early 1900s, Insull had actually invited state regulation 
of utilities; with such regulation, he won the exclusive areas of service (util-
ity monopolies that would allow economies of scale) in exchange for giving 
the states the right to enforce cost-based rates for electric service. Federal 
regulation, however, came about during the Great Depression. During his 
presidency, Franklin D. Roosevelt aggressively broke up the large holding 
companies—one of the largest government interventions ever outside of 
wartime. That set up a jurisdictional tension between states and the fed-
eral government that remains in full force today. 
Environmental regulation also is part of the regulatory cornerstone— 
an increasingly important part. The deadly air pollution episodes in 
Donora, Pennsylvania, and New York City were an important impetus. 
The landmark book Silent Spring (1962) by Rachel Carson is often cred-
ited with creating the modern environmental movement, with its combi-
nation of Carson’s compelling documentation of the detrimental effects 
of pesticides and her personal courage. She continues to have a major 
impact on the electricity business despite the fact that she never directly 
wrote or spoke about that industry. Carson’s template for environmental 
action can be seen today in efforts ranging from former vice president Al 
Gore’s An Inconvenient Truth in 2006 to former president Barack Obama’s 
Clean Power Plan in 2015, initiatives meant to address widespread con-
cern about global climate change. 
Today, fundamental changes in both scientific knowledge and cultural 
values have led to the question of whether an entirely new electric infra-
structure must be built. The fact that environmental concerns—especially 
global climate change—drive and dominate the electricity business is one 
of those changes. Add to that the growing concern about electric-service 
reliability at the customer’s doorstep, rather than at the grid, due to more 
frequent storms and cyber warfare. And, further, add a demand for choice 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J u s t  I m a g i n e 	
xvii
in electricity supply no different than the demand for choice in transport 
reflected in the rise of Uber. With such fundamental changes there is the 
possibility of a second Battle of the Currents. This time, the opposition 
would pit the well-established electrical grid against “personal power” 
from new industry leaders like Elon Musk, who often deploy smaller-scale, 
renewable technologies. A second democratization may also lie on the hori-
zon, in which individual consumers can “vote” with their wallets for more 
environmental protection, more doorstep reliability, and more choice.
The ambitious narrative summarized here reflects the view that 
the only way to truly understand the past and anticipate the future is 
to use a wide-angle lens. All 265 years of the history of electricity must 
be taken into consideration. If the story starts with Edison, for example, 
it will have missed much of the first cornerstone—the great science of 
Franklin, Faraday, and Maxwell. Likewise, it is important to capture 
the full range of factors driving the evolution of the electricity industry. 
Only with assessments of the wider fields of science, military strategy, 
and geopolitics—particularly, the geopolitics of the Cold War—can one 
explain the rise of nuclear power. Only with assessment of the strategic 
opportunities in the auto business plus a deep dive into the culture of 
cars can one anticipate the future of electric vehicles. And only with the 
wide view can we judge whether the seemingly confrontational cabinet 
appointments of President Donald Trump might actually set the stage for 
constructive compromise on climate. 
Electricity is at the core of all modern life, yet the full story of this 
revolutionary force has remained untold—until now. 

www.ebook3000.com

P A R T  O N E 
The Age of 
Franklin
A Time of Awe and Discovery

www.ebook3000.com

3
C H A P T E R  1
Benjamin Franklin’s Kite
He snatched the lightning from the sky 
and the scepter from the tyrants. 
—Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot (1779)1
“death and slaughter of a man and his son at Plough together with Four Horses” 
read the headline of a news bulletin in 1680. The culprit? Lightning. The 
bulletin went on to explain in graphic detail that the boy’s clothes were 
“rent from his body, and his Hat torn in two or three Pieces,” and that his 
body was burned from his neck down his back. So fearsome was lightning 
at the time that a 1766 sermon predicted that on Judgment Day God’s 
wrath would be carried out with thunder and lightning so powerful that 
“with one clap the earth will split to the very center, and the whole globe 
crumble.” In an earlier sermon of 1746 a diff erent preacher expressed little 
hope that man could understand this great mystery of lightning, conclud-
ing that “humane Capacities cannot fully comprehend it.”2
Benjamin Franklin refused to concede that lightning was incom-
prehensible. Indeed, by fl ying his kite in the midst of a storm one day, 
Franklin revealed that lightning could be understood by man as an 

4	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
electrical phenomenon and not just as God’s wrath. Imagine Franklin’s 
courage when he flew his kite; this was not just intellectual courage with 
the gravest consequence being public embarrassment for a failed experi-
ment. What he proposed was no safe lab trial. Franklin took on lightning, 
one of the most mysterious and dangerous forces then known.
With his kite experiment, Franklin enabled man to see the unseen. 
Franklin inspired an era of science in which electricity was the essence 
of scientific inquiry—the Age of Franklin. Through all this, Franklin 
showed the world the physical and intellectual courage that would con-
tinue to propel him throughout his remarkable life.
In his day, Franklin was recognized as one of the world’s foremost sci-
entists, with some of his contemporaries referring to him as the “Newton 
of electricity.” Yet today there is a tendency to downplay his scientific con-
tribution. Take a look at America’s hundred-dollar bill: Franklin’s face is 
on one side and Independence Hall on the other. Fair enough, but why are 
there no images related to his experiments, his kite, or his lightning rod? 
Some have argued that without his diplomatic success few would have paid 
attention to his science. Increasingly, however, modern historians are begin-
ning to believe the reverse is more accurate. Scholars have recently argued 
that his reputation as a scientist created the opportunity for his success as 
America’s original diplomat. His electrical experiment and theories made 
him a celebrity around the world, and that celebrity gained him access to 
the dinner tables of the well-to-do and influential in France. From that 
perch, he negotiated the alliance with France that gave the American colo-
nies the troops, ships, and supplies needed to beat the English at Yorktown 
and win the Revolutionary War. Electricity’s greatest contribution to the 
world is generally thought to be light, but, to America, it may quite well 
have been freedom.3 
The lasting meaning of Franklin’s story is that science and scientists 
matter greatly to the history of electricity. This makes electricity funda-
mentally different from the other widespread forms of energy, like coal 
and oil. In Franklin’s day, scientists were thought to bring wisdom to 
any issue of the day, whether that be technology, politics, law, or culture. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
5
Just think of the progress that could be made in now-deadlocked debates 
on global climate change and other challenging issues if that were still 
true today. 
T H E  O R I G I N S  O F  H I S  S U C C E S S
It is said that success happens when opportunity and talent collide. For 
Franklin, it is arguably more accurate to say his scientific success came 
when context and personal ambition collided. Born in Boston in 1706, 
Franklin was a product of his time; he lived in the wake of the Scientific 
Revolution. His was an era when, for those with the money and time, 
science was central to both entertainment and social conversation. It also 
was a time of economic progress for the American colonies, and Franklin 
would rapidly become a wealthy man.4 
His early years molded his character in ways that contributed to his 
great success. At the age of twelve, Franklin was apprenticed to his brother 
James as a printer for a term that was expected to be nine years. Let’s 
pause a minute to think of the importance of printing at the time: a printer 
was a skilled worker and a print shop might be thought of as the Google of 
the day, a place where information was routinely collected, updated, and 
disseminated to those with access. So powerful was this dissemination of 
information that historians identify printing as an essential tool for huge 
cultural shifts ranging from the Protestant Reformation to the Scientific 
Revolution. As an apprentice, Franklin spent hours reading and learn-
ing from what he printed. Printers were exposed to a unique education; 
another great scientist, Michael Faraday, would later enjoy the same edu-
cation in the print shop of his mentor. Franklin came to see the printed 
word as something of an arbiter of the truth, writing that “printers are 
educated in the Belief that when Men differ in Opinion, both Sides ought 
equally to have the Advantage of being heard by the Publick; and that 
when Truth and Error have fair Play, the former is always an overmatch 
for the latter.”5 

6	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
At seventeen Franklin breached his apprenticeship and ran away 
from Boston. He eventually settled in Philadelphia, where he started his 
own printing business with another former apprentice, Hugh Meredith. 
During his time as a printer, Franklin enjoyed a series of successes that 
revealed his broad talents, depth of intellect, and abundance of energy. 
One such success was a new fireplace (the Franklin stove), which con-
served wood. He called his invention “another sun” because of the light 
and warmth it provided. Reflecting an innate altruism, Franklin refused 
to patent his inventions; this to-patent-or-not-to-patent question became a 
recurring theme in the history of electricity.6 
Franklin stepped away from his printing business in 1748, at age 
forty-two. The printing trade had given Franklin the wealth that allowed 
him to retire in order to serve the world with his scientific genius and to 
serve America with his talent for diplomacy. Franklin had a confidence 
born of hard-won successes, and he believed he could achieve anything he 
put his mind to. He had a breadth of curiosity made manifest by a long list 
of achievements that would be hard to match in any age, and he was savvy 
enough to let practical and political reality guide him to what worked. 
Finally, Franklin had a depth of commitment to serve mankind in general 
and America in particular. 
It would be wrong, however, to see Franklin as a perfect man. Franklin 
was inclined to pranks and hoaxes. One example involved his brother 
James, who published a newspaper called the New England Courant. James 
was intrigued one day to find an article under his door signed “Silence 
Dogood,” which he liked enough to print in his newspaper on April 2, 
1722. Over the next six months he would find fifteen of these articles. 
James did not know that Mrs. Dogood was actually the nom de plume 
of his sixteen-year-old brother, Benjamin. In addition to playing tricks, 
Franklin became a scofflaw when he breached his apprenticeship. He also 
sired a son out of wedlock, perhaps with a prostitute.
Failure is sometimes a necessary step on the road to success, and 
this was the case with Franklin’s first trip to London. The governor of 
Pennsylvania, William Keith, falsely promised to provide letters of 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
7
introduction and credit for Franklin. At age eighteen, Franklin found 
himself abandoned and far from home with little money. He got a job as 
a printer and spent eighteen months learning about printing and about 
London. While cited far less than his later visits to London, the first jour-
ney helped forge a character of confident self-reliance.7
T H E  S C I E N T I S T
The Right Time and a Plan
The historian I. Bernard Cohen, a professor emeritus of the history of 
science at Harvard, declared that Franklin became “one of the best 
known living scientists” of his time by providing the “first satisfactory 
theory” of electricity and was “the primary creator of this new science.” 
Astonishingly, in an era when simple communication meant sending a let-
ter that could take days or weeks to arrive, Franklin won much of his fame 
in a short five-year span, from about 1747 to 1752, primarily by sending a 
series of letters to Peter Collinson in London concerning Franklin’s own 
experiments with electricity.8
What did it take to transform Franklin from successful printer to inter-
nationally famous scientist? Clearly it took intellectual genius, but, more 
than that, Franklin had an intuition for the needs and preoccupations of 
his time. In Franklin’s day, the term science meant “wisdom,” while natural 
philosophy coincided with what is called physics today. In the eighteenth 
century, reports on the latest experiments were commonly published even 
in provincial newspapers. As an apprentice printer, Franklin had taught 
himself to write by studying journals like the popular Spectator, in which 
Joseph Addison boasted that he had “brought Philosophy out of Closets 
and Libraries, Schools and Colleges, to dwell in Clubs and Assemblies, at 
Tea-Tables and in Coffee Houses.”9 
It was the right time, and Franklin had a solid plan to get noticed. He 
would become what today would be called a public intellectual, and he 

8	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
understood that distant and lowly colonists needed the support of London 
in order to be recognized as high-profile scientists. To this end, Franklin 
built on his relationships with botanist and Royal Society fellow Peter 
Collinson in London, particularly when Franklin learned that Collinson 
was searching for a “colonial protégé.” It is Collinson who would take 
Franklin’s letters, which reported on his experiments with electricity, and 
have them read to the Royal Society in London.10 
Science in Newton’s Shadow
Isaac Newton’s famous Principia was published in 1687, just nineteen years 
before Franklin’s birth. Newton’s other classic, Opticks, was published in 
1704. These two works were fundamentally different, and it was Opticks 
that had a greater influence on Franklin. Opticks was accessible to him 
because it was written in English rather than Latin and, more important 
according to Cohen, was “devoted to the description of beautiful, sim-
ply performed experiments.” Franklin’s work was consistent not only with 
Opticks’ focus on experimentation but also with the fundamental nature 
of the effort. In Principia, Newton theorized that gravity was a function 
of mass and that the type of material did not matter. Opticks contrasted 
sharply with this view because it focused deeply on types of material, 
including specific materials that would conduct electricity or were mag-
netic. Franklin’s work is in the same vein as Opticks since Franklin was, as 
Cohen notes, “an experimental Newtonian scientist.”11 
Franklin’s scientific work lived up to the motto of the Royal Society: 
“On the Word of No One.” That is, the laws of nature should be discov-
ered through experimentation, not taken for granted. This commitment 
to experimental proof was the foundation of the Scientific Revolution 
launched by Newton and others. The study of electricity was a great 
test of that commitment, since there was likely a temptation to stick with 
the celebrated findings of Newton, rather than develop a different view. 
But the boldest “electricians” did not succumb to that temptation; they 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
9
let themselves be confronted and confounded by the differences between 
gravity and electricity. Newton’s gravity was all about attraction of celes-
tial bodies, but electricity was different: it concerned both attraction and 
repulsion. The goal was to explain the coexistence of attraction and repul-
sion, something that had never been attempted before. Franklin would do 
just that in his letters to Collinson.12
Franklin’s Letters to London: An Exquisite Experiment
In two letters to Collinson dated May 25 and July 28, 1747, Franklin 
explained his basic theory of electricity. It depended on the concept of 
balance, or equilibrium. When an object—such as a piece of amber or 
a glass tube—had its normal amount of “electrical matter” or “electrical 
fluid,” that object was in a normal state and did not attract or repel other 
objects. However, if the object lost or gained electrical fluid and became 
unbalanced, the object became “charged.” Franklin established defini-
tions for these imbalances: when an object gained electrical fluid, it was 
positively charged; when the object lost electrical fluid, it became nega-
tively charged. Franklin’s theory focused on the redistribution of a single 
type of electrical matter or electrical fluid.13
Most important, Franklin’s theory explained attraction and repulsion. 
Attraction occurs when two objects or materials are brought together and 
one is positively charged and the other negatively charged; so, with elec-
trical fluid, as in romance, you could say that opposites attract. In con-
trast, if two objects are brought together and both are either positively 
charged or negatively charged, the objects will repel one another—like 
repels like. Franklin’s theory was sometimes called the single-fluid theory. 
The experiments in which he proved his theory were elegantly simple, and 
they sometimes had the feel of a parlor game because real people were the 
ones positively or negatively charged. In one experiment Person A rubs a 
piece of glass with silk to create static electricity. When A passes the glass 
to B, sparks fly.14 

10	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Franklin’s Letter on the Leyden Jar
In 1746 a university researcher in Holland conducted what he described 
as “a new but terrible experiment.” The researcher’s name was Pieter 
van Musschenbroek, and the device he developed through the exper-
iment became known as a Leyden jar, after Leiden University where 
Musschenbroek worked. The device is best envisioned as an ordinary, 
partially filled glass jar of water with a brass wire dipped into it. Noted 
Berkeley historian J. L. Heilbron says the “standard form” also has 
“metal foil inside and out.” The foil on the inside of the Leyden jar is 
given an electrical charge by touching the brass wire with a metal rod; 
the rod got its charge from a glass tube rubbed with silk, which created 
static electricity. A charge of opposite sign and equal magnitude would 
then form on the outer metal foil. Because glass is a good insulator, the 
two charges hold each other in a standoff until a path is created to let the 
charges come together.15 
Why was the Leyden jar a “terrible experiment”? When Musschenbroek 
put his right hand on the outside of the Leyden jar and his left hand on 
the iron bar that conveyed static electricity to the inside of the jar, his 
body linked two oppositely charged objects. That opposite charge was the 
source of the jolt with which his “whole body quivered just like someone 
hit by lightning.”16
The world took sides on explaining the Leyden jar, with Franklin in 
one corner and the Frenchman Jean-Antoine Nollet in the other. Though 
Nollet’s name is nowhere near as recognizable as Franklin’s today, 
Heilbron concluded that from 1745 to 1752 Nollet’s theory “enjoyed the 
widest consensus any electrical theory had yet received.”17 
Franklin’s concept of positive and negative charges allowed him to 
explain the properties of the Leyden jar, and thus his theory won the day. 
Heilbron wrote that the electrical fire inside the Leyden jar accumulated 
“on the inner surface of the jar because it is unable to pass” through the 
glass; in other words, Franklin got the role of the glass right—it is a great 
insulator. This excess of electrical charge on the inside meant that an 
equal amount of electrical fire must be repelled, and that force can be 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
11
neutralized only by an equal but opposite charge on the outside of the 
glass. Nollet conducted the terrible experiment himself, and it “bent him 
double and knocked out his wind.” Ultimately, he was unable to explain 
precisely why the Leyden jar did what it did; he concluded that it was an 
“exception.” In a letter to London in July 1747, Franklin explained the 
science behind the Leyden jar, and, with that feat, increased his interna-
tional fame as a scientist.18 
Franklin’s Kite: Lightning Is Electricity
Franklin’s victory in the battle of the theories was impressive. A lowly 
American went head-to-head with the best-educated and best-funded 
scientists Europe had to offer, and he bested them all. Not only did he 
win personal fame but he helped the striving American colonies gain 
recognition in the international scientific community. Franklin’s suc-
cess showed that Americans had the mettle to equal if not surpass their 
European counterparts. 
The impact of this scientific victory on his international reputation, 
however, pales in comparison to the impact of the experiment he suggested 
that showed that lightning is best explained as the equivalent of electrical 
force. Franklin was not the first to suggest the equivalence, but he was the 
first to successfully propose and inspire an experimental test to illustrate 
it. In July 1750 Franklin proposed what became known as the sentry-box 
experiment in a letter to Collinson. His proposal started with the idea of 
an enclosed sentry box that would be big enough for a man standing on 
insulation. The sentry box would have an iron rod that extended twenty 
or thirty feet into the sky. Franklin’s proposed experiment was an attempt 
to understand the nature of lightning by drawing it down from the sky to 
an iron rod.19
What Franklin wanted to test was the theory that lightning began 
with an electrical charge in the storm clouds, and that lightning dis-
charges would descend to the highest object around, whether that was a 
church steeple or a mighty oak. The inspiration to others began with the 

12	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
publication of Franklin’s letters in April 1751 in a book titled Experiments 
and Observations on Electricity, Made at Philadelphia in America by Mr. Benjamin 
Franklin. A Frenchman, the Comte de Buffon, read and admired Franklin’s 
work, and he asked that Jean-François Dalibard translate the work into 
French, with the help of an electrical experimenter named Delor. Buffon’s 
interest also reflected his intense dislike for Nollet and his colleagues, for a 
variety of reasons, including a personal feud with René-Antoine Ferchault 
de Réaumur, Nollet’s patron. Buffon and Réaumur had traded insults 
directly and through others. Since Franklin’s work opposed Nollet, and by 
association Réaumur, Buffon wanted to promote Franklin’s views.20 
Buffon, Dalibard, and Delor gained their first opportunity to publi-
cize Franklin by re-creating some of his experiments for none other than 
the king of France, Louis XV. The three Frenchmen then sought to con-
duct Franklin’s sentry-box experiment. In May 1752 Dalibard set up the 
needed apparatus at Marly-la-Ville, a village about twenty miles outside 
Paris. On May 10 two other men were instructed to conduct the dan-
gerous experiment by touching a pole to a brass wire and “saw the first 
spark man ever intentionally drew from the sky.” Dalibard reported the 
Marly experiment to the Academy of Sciences in Paris. The experiment 
confirmed “the kinship of lightning and electricity” and that Franklin was 
right about the lightning rod: “an elevated, grounded, pointed rod” offered 
protection from storms. The success at Marly proved that the study of 
electricity was not “toy physics” but rather a significant path of inquiry 
that could explain a major physical phenomenon.21 
Franklin’s experiment to prove that lightning was electricity—flying 
a kite during a storm—was a variant of the sentry-box experiment. 
Franklin conducted the kite experiment in June 1752—which was before 
he heard of the successful sentry-box experiment at Marly, but not before 
the French experiment had actually been conducted. It was the kite exper-
iment, rather than the sentry box, that caught the public imagination and 
led the philosopher Immanuel Kant to refer to Franklin as a “modern 
Prometheus.”22 
Franklin described his apparatus in his letter to Collinson in October 
1752. The body of the kite was a silk handkerchief stretched over a cross 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
13
made of two pieces of cedar wood. Extending from the top of the kite was 
a thin metal wire. A long string ran from the bottom of the body of the 
kite. At a point close to Franklin’s hand a metal key was tied to the string, 
and below that key was another piece of silk that Franklin held in his 
hand. This simple apparatus would tame the power of nature.23 
With the kite flying high, he invited lightning to strike the tip of the 
metal wire extending above his silk kite and then send the captured elec-
tric current down the string to the waiting key. That key would then allow 
Franklin to transfer and store the electrical charge in a Leyden jar. Once 
in the Leyden jar, the electrical charge from the lightning was shown to 
be the same as the static electricity that scientists used at that time to 
experiment with electricity—a much less fearsome proposition. Since the 
extra piece of silk Franklin used as a handle was crucial to his safety—this 
is why the charge supposedly stopped at the key—he suggested that it 
was best for future experimenters to stand inside a small building to keep 
themselves and the silk handle dry.24
The danger is clear: Franklin’s experiment put him in the perfect 
position to be struck by lightning and killed. This dire consequence was 
brought home by the death of George Richman, a scientist attempting 
Franklin’s experiment in July 1753 from his apartment in St. Petersburg. 
An obituary for Richman tells of both his notable scientific stature and 
the danger of experiments with electricity. Richman’s death was a loss 
to science: he was well educated, a member of the Imperial Academy of 
Sciences and Arts at St. Petersburg, and a professor of experimental phi-
losophy. While well aware of the “dangerous consequences,” as the obit-
uary notes, he “neglected no opportunity” to measure the strength of the 
charge in a “thunder-cloud.” Richman’s death and the obvious danger of 
the experiment provoke doubts to this day that Franklin actually flew his 
kite in a storm.25 
The Harvard historian I. Bernard Cohen makes clear his view that 
Franklin did indeed conduct the kite experiment, while acknowledging 
the debate around it. In an article from 1952, Cohen starts by pointing 
to a famous depiction of the kite experiment by Currier and Ives and 
then points out all that is wrong with the depiction. In the end, Cohen 

14	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
concludes that there is no “legitimate doubt” that Franklin conducted his 
kite experiment. Cohen also says there is good evidence that others repli-
cated the experiment, so there is no reason to doubt Franklin’s claim. Still, 
doubts persist. Author Tom Tucker makes his conclusion quite obvious 
in his 2003 book, Bolt of Fate: Benjamin Franklin and His Electric Kite Hoax. 
Tucker frames the kite experiment by concentrating on Franklin’s propen-
sity for trickery, and he sees it as just another classic Franklin prank. Yet if 
Franklin did not conduct his kite experiment as he said he did, this would 
have gone well beyond a good-natured hoax in the name of fun. It would 
have been a deception on a grand scale. There was no reason for Franklin 
to lie; he would have won international fame by simply suggesting the 
sentry-box experiment and having Dalibard conduct it. As Cohen sug-
gests, Franklin probably did not conduct the experiment with the drama 
emphasized by the Currier and Ives depiction, but there is no reason to 
conclude he did not do it at all.26
Franklin’s Invention: The Lightning Rod
Not only was Franklin an innovative experimental scientist, he was also 
a master at the practical application of his science. Franklin described 
his most important invention, the lightning rod, in his Poor Richard’s 
Almanac of 1753 under the heading “How To Secure Houses, & C. From 
LIGHTNING.” He first said, “It has pleased God in his goodness” to pro-
vide some level of protection from “mischief by thunder and lightning.” 
The protection comes in the form of a “small iron rod” with “one end 
being three or four feet in the moist ground.”27 The other end should be 
“six or eight feet above the highest part of the building.” He adds that a 
foot-long brass wire should be attached to the upper end. And he prom-
ised that with such a device the house “will not be damaged by lightning” 
because the lightning would be attracted “by the points, and passing thro 
the metal into the ground without hurting any thing.”28 
Although the lightning rod seems intuitive and even quaint today, 
it represents a hard-won achievement in both science (discovery that 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
15
lightning is an electrical phenomenon) and technology (the consequent 
invention of a lifesaving tool available to all). Similarly, it is important not 
to underestimate the possible philosophical advance it represented in the 
battle of man versus nature—with the balance tipping toward man. 
The lightning rod also demonstrated how politics can enter the debate 
surrounding any technology. In England a controversy arose over the 
shape of the lightning rod: should it be “pointed” as Franklin proposed or 
should it be a blunt knob as suggested by the English scientist Benjamin 
Wilson and others? Heilbron calls it a “comical battle” that started in 
1772 when the Royal Society was asked how to protect an arsenal stocked 
with gunpowder from lightning. The Royal Society’s committee, despite 
Wilson’s dissent, concluded that pointed lightning rods were the best 
protection. In 1777 the town of Purfleet suffered damage from lightning 
despite the pointed lightning rods near its arsenal and other buildings. 
By then, of course, Franklin’s America had begun its revolution. King 
George III himself entered the fray, with a request to the Royal Society 
to reverse its decision. Cohen paraphrased the president of the Royal 
Society Sir John Pringle’s reply thus: “His Majesty might change the laws 
of the land but could not reverse or alter the laws of nature.” Suffice it to 
say that Pringle lost his job at the Royal Society. It was a “comical” and 
unnecessary public debate since, as Heilbron puts it, when viewed from 
the same height “on nature’s scale both [a knob and a point] appear to 
be points.” This, of course, was not the last time politics would interfere 
with scientific inquiry.29 
T H E  C O N S E Q U E N C E S  O F  H I S  S U C C E S S
His Fame in Science
Franklin earned renown as America’s diplomat in France, but, as men-
tioned earlier, modern historians increasingly find that Franklin’s inter-
national fame as a scientist gave him advantages as a diplomat. Harvard 
American history professor Joyce Chaplin more boldly states, “Franklin 

16	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
was not a statesman who did science. He became a statesman because 
he had done science. And he was able to do so because, in the eighteenth 
century, science became part of public culture.”30 
Franklin’s international scientific fame is well-documented. His book 
Experiments and Observations on Electricity (1751) was printed in five English 
editions and was translated into three languages, all before the American 
Revolution and Franklin’s assignment to France. Franklin also received 
many awards and honorary degrees for his scientific contributions. In 
1753 he was awarded the Sir Godfrey Copley Gold Medal, the high-
est award for scientific research from the British Royal Society. Before 
Franklin’s award, the medal had been given only to British Fellows of 
the Royal Society. His other honors during his lifetime included hon-
orary degrees from Harvard, Yale, the College of William and Mary, 
Scotland’s University of St. Andrews, and England’s Oxford University. 
Franklin was elected as a Fellow of the British Royal Society, a member 
of the Royal Society of Göttingen in Germany, and a member of the 
Royal Academy of Sciences in Paris—only one of eight foreigners to be 
so honored at the time.31 
Two Missions in London
Scientific fame, however, does not guarantee diplomatic success, as evi-
denced by Franklin’s two diplomatic missions to England. He went one for 
two, with his loss being far more consequential than his win. On his first 
mission to England, from 1757 to 1762, Franklin was sent to London as the 
representative of the Pennsylvania Assembly to negotiate with William 
Penn’s heirs. Franklin’s awkward goal was to ask the Penn family as pro-
prietors to allow themselves to be taxed to generate revenue for the colony. 
Chaplin reports that the Pennsylvania Assembly correctly guessed that 
Franklin was “famous enough to shine” in London, and Franklin did take 
“his place in London as a somebody—as the electrical genius, the winner 
of the Copley Medal, and the famous American philosopher.” Still, despite 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
17
Franklin’s glowing reputation, by the end of his first mission in 1762 one 
of the Penn family called him a “malicious villain.” In August 1760, how-
ever, “Franklin won the day” as the “Privy Council ruled mostly in favor 
of the Pennsylvania Assembly and against the Penns.”32
Franklin’s second mission to England covered an even longer period, 
the eleven years between 1764 and 1775. This time, the issues at hand 
were more delicate and dangerous; they would lead to the Revolutionary 
War. Franklin’s second mission ended, as did the first, with a session of 
the privy council. Unlike the first, however, Franklin won nothing—in 
fact, he lost a great deal. The unstated agenda of this session of the privy 
council was to rebuke Franklin for releasing private letters written by the 
appointed governor of Massachusetts. Meetings of the privy council were 
not often well attended, but most of the political elite were present for this 
session. The prime minister, Lord Frederick North, was there, as were 
Lord Dartmouth, the secretary of state for the colonies; the archbishop of 
Canterbury; the bishop of London; and other leading figures. The solic-
itor general himself, Alexander Wedderburn, was asked to conduct the 
examination of Franklin. H. W. Brands, a noted Franklin biographer, 
writes that through it all, the packed audience in the gallery “laughed and 
cheered at the solicitor’s slashing assault on Franklin’s behavior and char-
acter.” He notes that Wedderburn struck out at the fame Franklin had 
earned for his work on electricity when he said Franklin was “the prime 
conductor” of the affair. He ridiculed Franklin’s position as postmaster, 
stating that, going forward, he would “esteem it a libel to be called a man 
of letters.”33 
The ridicule was meant to put Franklin and the colonies in their place. 
In England’s view, America was not its equal on any grounds. Franklin, 
however, was clearly the equal of any of their great minds; indeed, his 
scientific achievements were judged to be as exciting and innovative in 
England as elsewhere. Moreover, Franklin had made his own success; 
nothing had been given to him by title or birthright. Perhaps on that day, 
the ideal that all men are created equal began to form in his head. Surely 
it was on that day that Franklin turned firmly toward revolution.

18	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The Alliance with France
Soon after the scathing session in front of the privy council, Franklin 
returned to America and was asked to take on another great challenge for 
his country. It was one that would be both physically and professionally 
demanding: at age seventy, Franklin was asked to make an arduous jour-
ney to France. He would travel across hostile waters, in difficult weather, 
with only his two young grandsons to accompany him. The professional 
challenge lay in the task he was given: to convince King Louis XVI of 
France to give monetary and military support to America so that it could 
assert its independence from King George III of England. Franklin, of 
course, accepted the challenge and achieved his goal. Thus, the scientist 
behind the discovery of electricity became the metaphorical “lightning 
rod” to the independence of the United States—the nation in which the 
development and application of electricity would be nurtured for centuries 
to come.
How did he do it? To start, the French knew him. Not only had Franklin 
bested the French scientist Nollet’s theories on electricity but the first suc-
cessful test of Franklin’s conjecture that lightning was electricity—the 
sentry-box experiment—was done in France by the French. 
However, while fame or reputation got Franklin in the door, it by no 
means guaranteed success. Franklin’s persuasiveness as a diplomat must 
be due in equal part to the fact that he was savvy enough to understand 
what France wanted from an alliance with America. Franklin also under-
stood what the influential figures in France wanted from him personally. 
He knew that the small group of powerful French were open to being 
convinced “at the dinner table,” where he was “different enough to be 
interesting but familiar enough not to be frightening.” Franklin’s identity 
as a diplomat was not restricted to certain hours or meetings: it governed 
his approach to life.34
Unusually for an American, Franklin learned to fit perfectly into 
the European culture of his day. He spent much of the twenty-eight-year 
period from 1757 to 1785 in Europe. Historian Morris Bishop finds that 
Franklin’s scientific fame gave him “access to the scientific and cultural 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B e n j a m i n  F r a n k l i n ’ s  K i t e 	
19
world of Europe” in which he finally found “stimulating intellectual com-
panionship.” The science of electricity was not relegated to the labora-
tory; rather, it often was trotted out at dinner parties, as a topic of interest 
for the elites. Moreover, though Franklin had few intellectual equals in 
America, Bishop concludes that “Franklin’s experience in France was the 
homecoming of his mind.” The scientist and diplomat was stimulated by 
the other curious minds around him, regardless of nationality.35 
A triumphant career did not come without personal pain. Franklin 
lost his son, William, when William chose to support England. Franklin 
said, “Nothing has hurt me so much and affected me with such keen sen-
sations as to find myself deserted in my old Age by my only Son.” William 
would be imprisoned throughout the war and lived out his days in London, 
exiled from both father and country.36
F R A N K L I N ’ S  L E G A C Y
Franklin’s place in history is best captured by the caption of a famous 1779 
engraving: “He snatched the lightning from the sky and the scepter from 
the tyrants.” Snatching the lightning made him an important scientist; 
snatching the scepter made him an astonishing statesman. His dual fame 
makes him unique and somewhat difficult to place in a single category in 
the narrative of history. Was he a man of his time, or a man who created 
his time?37 
He was a man of his time in that he lived in a country where free-
dom was blossoming and the social ladder was lowered for him to climb. 
He was a man of his time because the Scientific Revolution had begun, 
and so an interest in science was pervasive. His writings put him center 
stage as a scientist, while the American Revolution put him center stage 
as a diplomat. Still, more than most, he created his time when he left 
the middle-class comfort of his printing business to pursue his curiosity 
around science and politics. 
Franklin’s core theory of electricity from 265 years ago is consistent 
with modern theory. Today, scientists believe all matter is made up of 

20	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
atoms. In the basic (but incomplete) picture of an atom, there are elec-
trons orbiting around a nucleus that contains other particles including, but 
not limited to, protons. Both the electrons and the protons carry an elec-
trical charge, with electrons arbitrarily assigned a negative charge and 
protons said to carry a positive charge. Inside that atom, Franklin’s old 
rules apply: opposites attract. Therefore, orbiting electrons are attracted 
to protons, and that attraction serves as the force holding the different par-
ticles in an atom together. In most materials, atoms have exactly offsetting 
positive and negative charges, so they are electrically neutral. However, 
electrons in the atoms of some materials can be “taken” by other atoms. 
When that happens, the atoms that have done the taking have an excess 
of electrons, so the balance or equilibrium among the atoms is disturbed. 
Electricity itself is a feature of the “movement” of these electrons in the 
face of disequilibrium. 
Franklin’s stature was unmatched in colonial America. His contempo-
raries, whether they knew him or had only heard about him, recognized 
his genius. In a letter to Franklin in his later years, George Washington 
wrote, “If to be venerated for benevolence, if to be admired for talents. If 
to be esteemed for patriotism, if to be beloved for philanthropy, can gratify 
the human mind, you must have the pleasing consolation to know, that 
you have not lived in vain.”38 
When Franklin died in April 1790, more than twenty thousand peo-
ple, the equivalent of half Philadelphia’s population, attended his funeral. 
In France, where the National Assembly decreed an unprecedented three 
days of mourning, a secretary of the French Royal Society summarized the 
feelings of the nation: “A man is dead, and two worlds are in mourning.”39 
The two worlds that suffered the loss might be seen not only as the Old 
World and the New but also as the worlds of science and statesmanship.
www.ebook3000.com

21
C H A P T E R  2
James Watt’s 
Steam Engine
Tamer of lightning and tamer of steam, Franklin and 
Watt . . . how much further the steam engine is to 
be the handma id of electricity cannot be told.
—Andrew Carnegie (1913)1
If Franklin placed the first cornerstone for a world to be built on the pervasive 
production and use of electricity, James Watt placed the second corner-
stone by perfecting the technology for the steam engine in the midst of the 
Industrial Revolution. 
At fi rst glance, electricity and steam seem unrelated. This refl ects the 
uncertain dance of science and technology. Only the long view of history 
reveals the perfect fi t between them. This is evident in two ways. First, for 
much of the electric power generated in the world, even today, the gen-
eration of steam is the fi rst step. Steam is produced by burning fuels that 
range from coal to natural gas, or even by producing heat from a nuclear 
reaction. This steam is then used to drive a turbine that spins a magnet 

22	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
inside a coil of wire, which, in turn, generates electricity—the “flow” of 
electrons that Franklin “saw” and Michael Faraday would later prove. 
Second, the ubiquity of steam engines in factories set the stage for 
the equally widespread use of electric motors because the steam engine 
inexorably linked factories to the use of mechanical power. This shift 
signaled the birth of the Industrial Revolution. Had manufacturers not 
become addicted to mechanical power with the steam engine, there may 
not have been the same opportunity to replace older systems with the 
electric motor—and to reap the enormous economic benefits of doing so.
More broadly, steam generation is a technology that provides us with 
an early template for technological change. Since technological change is 
offered as a solution to almost every problem in modern times, it is worth 
examining that template. Its evolution is a tale of perseverance, partner-
ship, patents, and productivity. 
P E R S E V E R A N C E
In a letter to James Watt’s son, well after his father’s death, Dr. James 
Gibson, who was married to Watt’s granddaughter, wrote up a family leg-
end describing Watt’s early fascination with steam. Watt was frequently ill 
as a child and had been sent to the countryside to recover. Gibson wrote, 
“While the elders were at table the subject of this éloge [Watt] was found 
sitting by the parlour fire holding a plate . . . to the spout of the boiling 
tea kettle noticing carefully the distances at which the steam condensed 
when it came in contact with the cold plate.” Gibson wondered if this 
could have given Watt “the first idea of the power and elasticity of steam.” 
Watt’s own experimental notes discuss his use of a teakettle to understand 
the science underlying his first major breakthrough—that is, the science 
behind the theory of latent heat. It would be difficult to conclude that his 
encounter with the teakettle as a child set him off on an inevitable path to 
invention, but the recollection indicates an innate curiosity, the patience 
for observation, and an interest in precise measurement that served him 
well as a scientist.2 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J a m e s  W a t t ’ s  S t e a m   E n g i n e 	
23
Born in 1736 in Greenock, Scotland, James Watt enjoyed a comfort-
able childhood. His father was an established merchant, shipwright, and 
carpenter, and became renowned for his ability to make delicate mechan-
ical instruments used for precise measurement. Watt first revealed his pre-
cocity through an aptitude for math, reading widely, and at his workbench 
where he made models of mechanical devices such as pumps and pulleys. 
In 1753 Watt suffered two serious hardships when his mother died and 
his father lost his wealth. In the face of his father’s financial loss, Watt 
needed a trade and set his sights on becoming a mathematical instrument 
maker. In the next year, Watt moved to Glasgow, where he was mentored 
by John Anderson and Robert Dick, both professors of natural philosophy 
at the University of Glasgow. Watt then went to London in 1755 to look 
for a shortened apprenticeship. John Morgan, a mathematical instrument 
maker, agreed to grant him a one-year instruction. In 1756, at age twenty, 
Watt returned to Glasgow. The protective guilds there would not let him 
work as an instrument maker because he had not completed a seven-year 
apprenticeship, but the University of Glasgow did. At that moment, the 
university was filled with great men, including Adam Smith, the famous 
economist, and Joseph Black, a noted professor of medicine and chemis-
try. Watt became the instrument maker for the university and was given 
his own shop. The door to a life of invention was opened.3
How does an instrument maker become a world-class inventor and 
scientist? The answer starts with the link between science and instru-
ment makers during Watt’s lifetime. Instrument makers were the “unsung 
heroes” of the Scientific Revolution. Scientists of all fields depended on 
the instruments that these craftsmen provided. Meteorologists needed 
barometers, chemists needed tools for laboratory analysis, and surgeons 
needed forceps and medical devices. Newton had brought on the Scientific 
Revolution by focusing on measuring and quantifying relationships, and 
instrument makers were central to giving precision to those measure-
ments. In essence, the instrument makers provided the cutting-edge tech-
nology that enabled the explosion of scientific advancement.4 
The University of Glasgow had a model of a valuable steam engine, 
designed by early inventor Thomas Newcomen, that needed repair. In 

24	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
1764 professor John Anderson asked Watt to fix it. The engine was very 
simple: Steam was injected into a cylinder, and it pushed a piston upward. 
When the steam cooled, the piston fell. The movement of the piston low-
ered and raised a beam that performed work. In normal use, the engine 
pumped water out of mines; the need to pump water out of coal and other 
mines drove a great demand for improved steam technology. These efforts 
to improve and fully exploit mines helped ignite the Industrial Revolution 
in England before it began anywhere else. 
Watt found the Newcomen engine to be terribly inefficient. He had 
to burn substantial quantities of coal to boil water in order to produce 
enough steam to get the piston to move even a few strokes. Through his 
own experiments, however, Watt discovered Joseph Black’s theory of 
latent heat. Independently, Black and Watt found that when heat was ini-
tially applied to water, it increased the water’s temperature; we all observe 
this every time we heat water for a cup of tea. However, the tempera-
ture of water doesn’t increase as one might predict. Once the temperature 
reaches 212 degrees Fahrenheit, the boiling point of water, it stubbornly 
remains the same as the water turns to steam. The heat applied to increase 
the temperature of the water is called sensible heat, and the heat used to 
transform a liquid like water to a vapor like steam is called latent heat. Black 
termed it “latent” or “hidden” because it could not be detected by measur-
ing temperature. Watt concluded that by condensing or cooling the steam 
in the cylinder of the Newcomen engine with each stroke latent heat was 
lost and this undermined the engine’s efficiency.5
Watt’s great breakthrough was the separate condenser. To keep the 
engine’s cylinder hot, he would draw the steam over to a separate ves-
sel where it could condense back into water. Watt did this by creating a 
vacuum in the separate condenser so steam rushed into it from the cyl-
inder and was cooled there without cooling the cylinder. Professor John 
Robison, speaking in 1796, captured the productive mix of talents that 
enabled Watt to achieve this great breakthrough. When visiting Watt’s 
instrument shop, Robison said, “After first feasting my Eyes with view of 
fine instruments . . . I saw a Workman and expected no more—but was 
surprized to find a philosopher.” Further, Robison wrote that “every thing 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J a m e s  W a t t ’ s  S t e a m   E n g i n e 	
25
became Science in his hands.” Science came naturally to Watt; fortune, 
meanwhile, was more elusive.6
P A R T N E R S  A N D  P A T E N T S
Watt was neither the first nor the last inventor to need an outside investor 
to transform his invention into a commercial success. It was a long road 
from a model steam engine to a full-scale engine that could pump water 
from a real mine. Once again, Joseph Black, his friend and mentor, helped 
Watt get to the next stage, first with his own money, and then by intro-
ducing him to John Roebuck, a prospective investor. Flooding was a big 
problem at Roebuck’s coal mines, and the Newcomen engine he used to 
pump water out did not solve his problem efficiently enough.7
Roebuck gave Watt a place at his Kinneil estate near Barrowstoness, 
a coastal area in the Central Lowlands of Scotland, to build a full-scale 
steam engine. But ultimately, Roebuck was not ready to support Watt 
financially. Watt encountered a series of setbacks as he pushed forward, 
and in 1766 he had to sell his instrument maker’s shop and do surveying 
work in order to support his family. Around this time, Watt met Matthew 
Boulton, a successful businessman who would eventually become central 
to his success. Boulton was already famous for developing the first great 
manufacturing facility at Soho outside Birmingham, England.8 
In 1769 Watt won his first patent for the steam engine. As with any 
law, patents have benefits and shortcomings. In contemporary society, we 
are more likely to think of the good side of patents: they guarantee an 
inventor the rights to his or her invention, and this serves as both protec-
tion and incentive. In Watt’s day, the view of patents tended to be more 
negative: it was thought that a patent could allow a monopoly, and that 
patents should be few and far between. Boulton and others advised Watt 
to seek a broad patent for his invention, to keep others from profiting from 
his idea by developing a slight variation.9 
Watt and Boulton spent thirty years struggling against rivals under 
the patent law of the time. Some say it was because their early patent was 

26	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
too vague; it covered a principle, not the application of that principle. The 
issue is more complicated and, once again, reflects this uncertain dance 
between science and technology. Did the new scientific awareness of latent 
heat or, more broadly, thermodynamics justify this principle-based pat-
ent? Or should Watt and Boulton have filed a patent on the specific tech-
nology of the separate condenser? Must the technology be described in 
enough detail that once the patent expires others can use it to advance 
the technology even more? The debate on whether and how to patent 
hindered Watt, became an affliction for Samuel Morse, and persists even 
today. The Economist observed in 2015, “Today’s patent regime operates in 
the name of progress. Instead, it sets innovation back.”10
A series of setbacks followed the development of and the patent for 
the full-scale engine in 1769. About four years later, history repeated itself 
for Watt when, once again, life dealt him two serious setbacks at a crucial 
moment. He suffered a financial loss when his investor, John Roebuck, 
went bankrupt, and he suffered a personal loss when his wife, Peggy, 
died. Watt had married Peggy in 1764, and she died nine years later 
when Watt was thirty-seven years old. They had six children, though not 
all reached adulthood. 
In 1774, nine years after his breakthrough with the separate con-
denser, Watt moved his steam engine to Boulton’s Soho Manufactory. 
Birmingham was a place where people “came on foot and left in chari-
ots,” a place known for free enterprise, upward mobility, and freedom of 
religion—the same freedoms, at the same time, that inspired Franklin 
and other American colonists. Historian Arnold Toynbee says that when 
“Adam Smith wrote his bitter criticism of the corporations, he was prob-
ably thinking of the particular instance of Glasgow, where Watt was not 
allowed to set up trade.” This move to Birmingham, a “free town,” would 
allow him to flourish from that freedom. In 1775 Watt and Boulton won 
some breathing room when Watt’s patent was extended for twenty-four 
years by the British government.11 
Watt and Boulton then turned to the task of making the steam 
engine work. For this they recruited others, including John “Iron-Mad” 
Wilkinson. Wilkinson was “iron mad” because he thought the iron he 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J a m e s  W a t t ’ s  S t e a m   E n g i n e 	
27
made could and should be used for everything. The tin cylinder Watt had 
been using was problematic. Wilkinson had patented a technique to bore 
out a smooth iron cylinder for use with cannons, and that technology, 
along with switching from tin to iron, helped to fix some of the problems 
in Watt’s steam engine. In addition, Boulton recruited William Murdoch, 
who became Watt’s right-hand man in the mining district of Cornwall, 
the major location where steam engines were built and used at the time. 
It was not long before Watt would proclaim that “the business I am here 
about has turned out rather successful; that is to say, the fire-engine I have 
invented is now going, and answers much better than any other that has 
yet been made.” Cross-pollination of ideas and skills from one industry to 
another was key to technological progress throughout the history of elec-
tricity. It still is today.12
Watt, always the scientist and inventor, continually improved the steam 
engine. Boulton, the businessman, filed more patents. Granting patents 
was a major way for the government to influence technological advances 
at the time. Contrast that with today’s cash and tax subsidies, which give 
money directly to finance inventions. Still, at least one private investor, 
namely Boulton, did step in to finance and direct the development of this 
soon-to-be-pervasive technology. And Boulton brought much more than 
money to Watt’s invention; he had confidence and vision. When he was 
first approached about a joint effort with Roebuck and Watt, Boulton dis-
missed the initial offer to share in sales from just three counties. Instead, 
Boulton boldly proposed, “We would serve all the world with Engines of 
all sizes.”13 
P R O D U C T I V I T Y
The impact of Watt’s steam engine on industry was unprecedented. In 
1913, 144 years after his first patent, Andrew Carnegie, the famed steel 
magnate, published a biography of James Watt. Carnegie initially declined 
the publisher’s request, but later agreed, saying, “Why shouldn’t I write the 
Life of the maker of the steam-engine, out of which I had made fortune?” 

28	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
This statement alone, by one of America’s towering industrialists, indi-
cates the significant and long-lasting impact of Watt’s steam engine on the 
world’s industrial development.14 
Historian Eric Robinson emphasizes that “Watt’s invention, after 
all, has been generally recognized as the key-invention of the Industrial 
Revolution.” Also impressive is the range of industries that were trans-
formed; there were revolutionary changes in copper mining and fun-
damental changes in the cotton industry. The iron industry benefited 
significantly, too. The steam engine revolutionized factories by freeing 
them of locational constraints (e.g., proximity to water) and allowing econ-
omies of scale to be realized. After additional improvements, it also revo-
lutionized transportation with its use in trains and steamboats.15 
In his biography of Watt, Carnegie presented a back-of-the-envelope 
calculation of his subject’s economic impact that illustrated how the steam 
engine increased the world’s industrial productivity. Carnegie reckoned 
that by 1905 the world had about 150 million effective horsepower of 
steam capacity at work; presumably, his estimate included steam power 
both in factories and in transportation. To complete his calculation, 
Carnegie concluded that, since each horsepower was the equivalent of 
twenty-four men’s labor, the world’s steam capacity in 1905 did the work 
of 3.6 billion men. This was ten times his estimate of the number of adult 
men in the world at that time.16 
Carnegie was right to judge the economic impact of invention in 
terms of the effect on productivity; that is, in terms of enabling one man 
or woman to do the work of many. Modern economic historians, while 
more precise in their analyses, have similarly identified and quantified 
the steam engine’s impact on productivity. They also go one step further 
to estimate how that productivity growth increased economic growth. In 
this growth-accounting mentality, increasing the number of people and 
the number of machines can only move economic growth in a linear fash-
ion: a 2 percent increase in the same kind of worker using the same kind of 
tools would result in a 2 percent increase in economic output. It is the pro-
ductivity growth from invention that lets a nation get ahead of the game. 
Only with productivity growth (broadly defined) can economic growth 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J a m e s  W a t t ’ s  S t e a m   E n g i n e 	
29
outpace population growth so that income per person increases and the 
standard of living is improved.
Although more analytically diligent than Carnegie, modern eco-
nomic historians still agree on one point: they credit Watt’s invention 
with having a transformative impact. That impact can be assessed in at 
least two ways. In the first, there is the direct impact: the cost of steam 
power fell dramatically and the amount of steam power used increased 
dramatically. By one account, about a hundred years after Watt’s break-
through, cost had fallen almost 80 percent and steam had beaten its rivals 
to account for 90 percent of total power from steam, water, and wind in 
the United States.17
The second way is to assess indirect impact. This is often termed 
spillover effects, and the impact is much greater and more surprising than 
the direct impact. Spillover effects mean that an invention induces other 
changes beyond the invention itself. For example, the manufacturers who 
used the steam engine could adapt their technologies to each new, more 
efficient version. Nathan Rosenberg, an economic historian from Stanford 
University, and Manuel Trajtenberg from Tel Aviv University point out 
an example in the textile industry. In the mid-1800s George Corliss intro-
duced important advances to the steam engine that allowed precise con-
trol over the amount of power delivered, so that a uniformity of power 
delivery could be ensured. In support of a patent application by Corliss, 
one textile manufacturer from Pittsburgh reported that “the avoidance of 
thread breakage attending the irregular motion of his old engine brought 
a savings probably equal to that from reduced fuel consumption.” The 
steam engine, then, enabled textile manufacturers not only to stop wasting 
coal but also to stop wasting thread. Moreover, the uniformity of power 
delivery enabled some manufacturers, when customer demands war-
ranted, to shift to higher-quality textile products because there was less 
risk that material would be wasted.18 
The most compelling spillover effect of the steam engine, however, 
was that it removed the severe geographic constraint of using water power. 
If an industry used water power, it needed to be located next to a river, 
without any exceptions. With steam power, especially after coal use was 

30	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
cut dramatically thanks to Watt’s innovations, manufacturers could set 
up anywhere. This new freedom led to other benefits. For example, an 
industry could get closer to its customers or to a larger source of skilled 
workers. Today, this liberation from geographical constraints is cited by 
historians as the key link between the invention of the steam engine and 
rising urbanization. More broadly, it shows the connection between a 
general-purpose technology and economic growth.19 
W A T T ’ S  L E G A C Y
There is no better evidence of the importance of Watt to electricity than 
that found by simply looking at monthly electric bills. Those bills show 
the charges in terms of kilowatt-hours, or kWh. That capital W, of course, 
stands for Watt; the watt is the unit of measurement for electric power. 
Watt’s direct legacy for the history of electricity is that even today 
steam is a fundamental ingredient for much of the production of electric-
ity in the world. Watt’s legacy also consists of a template for technological 
change. The template recognizes the perseverance it takes to go from an 
idea, typically a scientific idea, to a successful, scalable technological inno-
vation. Boulton was rich and powerful, and that surely helped, but that is 
not what makes the partnership between him and Watt worthy of atten-
tion. Boulton brought the vision and the confidence of an entrepreneur, 
along with political connections and a steady source of money. 
James Watt died on August 19, 1819, at the age of eighty-three. 
Carnegie writes that, fittingly, Watt was “laid to rest” next to Matthew 
Boulton, his investor, partner, and friend.20 It comes as no surprise, then, 
that in March 2011 the Bank of England issued a new fifty-pound note fea-
turing portraits of Matthew Boulton and James Watt, along with images 
of both the steam engine and Soho Manufactory.21 
As we have seen, patents, lawyers, and courtrooms were of significant 
concern in the early years of science and invention; litigiousness is not 
just a modern ailment. Patent fights were common from the beginning. 
Boulton and Watt reported that they could list thirty-four patents related 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J a m e s  W a t t ’ s  S t e a m   E n g i n e 	
31
to the steam engine between 1698 and 1793 beyond those of Watt him-
self; they later said there were probably a dozen more. Watt himself gave 
a blunt response as to why there were so many patents when he said, “I 
do not think we are safe [from patent challenges] a day to an end in this 
enterprizing age. Ones thoughts seem to be stolen before one speaks them. 
It looks as if Nature had taken up an adversion to Monopolies and put 
the same things in several heads at once to prevent them.” Watt was not 
alone in his obsession with the steam engine at a time when the rise of 
steam-dependent industry was reaching a “fever pitch.”22 
Ultimately, one cannot measure the impact of advances in the science 
and technology of electricity only by the change in the cost of electricity. 
The impact includes truly revolutionary change in broad-scale economic 
ways and means. And it is the impact on industrial productivity that made 
Watt a man of his time as well as a man of the future. Watt was a man of 
his time because his perfected steam engine drove the great manufactur-
ing surge of the Industrial Revolution. He was a man of the future because 
the widespread adoption of his steam engine set the stage for the rapid 
and pervasive adoption, more than one hundred years later, of the electric 
motor. That electric motor was beyond Watt’s horizon, but it would be 
created and perfected by Watt’s inheritors in science, Michael Faraday 
and Nikola Tesla. 

32
C H A P T E R  3
Faraday’s Faith 
(and Maxwell’s Equations)
From this simple laboratory toy was to c ome 
the whole of the electric power industry.
—Pierce L. Williams (1965)1
michael Faraday built ambitiously upon the cornerstones set by Franklin and 
Watt. His scientifi c experimentation was central to the discovery of the link 
between two of nature’s most important forces: magnetism and electricity. 
This link led Faraday to develop the two fundamental technologies for the 
nascent electric power industry. He invented the fi rst electric motor in 1821, 
and ten years later he invented the fi rst “dynamo,” or electric generator.2 
A further triumph came later in his career, when he laid the founda-
tion for modern theories about electromagnetic waves. Wave theory is still 
central to modern science and underlies much of modern telecommunica-
tion. If Franklin had the genius to see the unseen, then Faraday had the 
genius to see that the empty space between us is not empty; it is fi lled with 
electromagnetic waves. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
33
Faraday, however, has not enjoyed the sustained fame of Benjamin 
Franklin. He did not have the immediate technological impact of James 
Watt, either. While his scientific breakthroughs were undeniably trans-
formative, he is a somewhat unrecognized hero in the history of science. 
Two biographers have seen a need to resurrect Faraday’s reputation. 
Writing in 1965, L. Pearce Williams hoped “to reveal the full dimen-
sions of his genius and to place him more accurately in the mainstream of 
the history of science.” James Hamilton, with his more recent biography 
in 2002, said he wanted “to look at Faraday in a way that gives a new 
and I hope urgent priority to his role as a central figure in the history of 
western culture.”3 
With the long-standing debate on the presumed conflict between sci-
ence and religion as a backdrop, Faraday opens yet another important 
dimension to this story: he combined his deep faith in God with his deep 
commitment to science and created a seamless whole. Faraday’s working 
relationship with James Clerk Maxwell opened still another dimension. 
With great respect, Maxwell took Faraday’s thinking about the link between 
electricity and magnetism, brought to it the discipline and imagination 
of a new mathematics, and thereby revolutionized the science of physics. 
Maxwell’s equations embody one of man’s greatest scientific advances. 
T H E  K I N D N E S S  O F  S T R A N G E R S
Like Franklin, Faraday was trained as a printer. In 1804, at the age of thir-
teen, Faraday was apprenticed to a London bookbinder by the name of 
George Riebau. This was formative for Faraday. Riebau gave him access 
to books and, later, introductions to some of the most important scientists 
of the day. As Franklin did before him, Faraday took advantage of his 
job to read many of the books he handled. As he bound the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, Faraday read a 127-page article on electricity by James Tytler. 
Tytler’s article recounted the history of electricity substantially based on 
Joseph Priestley’s then-famous book The History and Present State of Electricity, 

34	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
published in 1767, but Tytler went well beyond what Priestley had to say in 
his own view on the science of electricity.4 
Instead of thinking of electricity as a fluid, as in Franklin’s theory, 
Tytler thought of it as a “vibration,” like the “waves produced by a stone 
being cast into a pool of still water.” In his scientific worldview, Tytler pro-
moted the idea of the unity of major forces; light, heat, and electricity were 
“identical in substance.” Faraday did not buy into the Tytler theory com-
pletely when he first read it, but it is remarkable how many raw elements 
of Tytler’s theory emerge later in Faraday’s work. Tytler’s article inspired 
Faraday to conduct his first experiment, and even though the “lab equip-
ment” was nothing more than two bottles, Faraday had to wait until their 
price dropped before he could afford them.5 
When Faraday’s father died in 1810, Riebau became a father figure to 
him. The printer encouraged Faraday to attend public lectures by scien-
tists of the day. Faraday first went to the lectures of John Tatum, a teacher, 
philosopher, and silversmith. Tatum’s lectures covered a wide range of 
topics, including electricity, optics, geology, experimental mechanics, 
astronomy, and chemistry. 6 
Faraday worked hard to understand what he heard at these lectures 
and to gain a broad knowledge of scientific fields. He took exhaustive 
notes as Tatum spoke, and then, after he returned home, he would rewrite 
the notes to deepen and expand his comprehension. The Tatum lectures 
paid off in terms of giving Faraday a basic scientific education but resulted 
in another spectacular advantage, too. Riebau showed a copy of Faraday’s 
bound notes to an acquaintance, who was impressed enough to get Faraday 
one of the hottest tickets in town: an invitation to the Royal Institution to 
hear the most popular English scientist of the day, Humphry Davy.7 
T H E  U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  E U R O P E 
The impact of Davy’s lectures on Faraday was substantial. Davy, a chem-
ist, was famous for his work with electrolysis, the decomposition of a sub-
stance by running electricity through it; Napoleon had even awarded Davy 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
35
a French science medal for this work. In 1800 chemists and other students 
of electricity employed a powerful new tool that provided a steady source of 
electricity. The tool was called a “voltaic pile,” a rudimentary but, for the 
time, powerful battery. The invention of the voltaic battery began in 1794 
when Luigi Galvani, an Italian biologist, discovered what he believed to be 
a new form of electricity; he called it “animal electricity.” Galvani had been 
conducting a series of experiments on the effects of electricity on animals. 
He noted that when his steel scalpel came into contact with the brass fix-
ture holding a frog’s leg the frog’s leg twitched, and he attributed the twitch 
to electricity inherent in the frog—hence the term “animal electricity.”8 
Galvani’s colleague Alessandro Volta admired Galvani’s experiments, 
but reached entirely different conclusions as to why the frog’s leg twitched. 
In a series of experiments, he showed that the source of the electricity was 
actually the two dissimilar metals coming into contact, and that those 
metals were the active source of electricity. Volta invented the voltaic pile 
by stacking plates made of these dissimilar metals with a wet conductor 
between each layer of metal. This voltaic pile was based on Volta’s “con-
tact theory,” which found that “when dissimilar materials come into con-
tact, one becomes positively and the other negatively charged.” With this, 
Volta gave those who studied electricity a great source of electric current 
flowing between the positive and negative charges—and also gave the 
science of electrochemistry a great boost.9
Faraday took copious notes at Davy’s lectures, and, once again, those 
notes won him recognition. Boldly, Faraday presented Davy with a copy 
of his bound lecture notes, and Davy soon hired Faraday as the lab assis-
tant at the Royal Institution. Being a lab assistant was a lowly post, but 
it gave Faraday a chance to work with Davy on a variety of experiments. 
Davy decided to travel to France to receive the science medal he had won 
and asked Faraday to accompany him. Faraday happily agreed, but it 
became a wearying experience. At the last minute, Davy’s valet backed 
out. Faraday was asked to serve as Davy’s valet as well as his lab assistant. 
He had not expected having to take out Davy’s clothes or deal with hotel 
employees or other such tasks. Moreover, Davy’s wife looked down on 
Faraday because of his humble start, and treated him badly.10 

36	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Still, the journey with Davy was truly an education. It was, as biog-
rapher L. Pearce Williams suggests, a degree earned at the “University 
of Europe.” Faraday got to see places that typically would be seen only 
by the rich. More importantly, he got to meet famous scientists, including 
André-Marie Ampère, one of the early contributors to the understand-
ing of electromagnetism. Faraday even participated in Davy’s lab analysis 
showing that iodine was a new element. After eighteen months of travel, 
Davy and Faraday returned to London. While he still worked with Davy 
and other scientists, Faraday was ready to strike out on his own.11 
F A R A D A Y ’ S  F I R S T  T R I U M P H :  T H E 
E L E C T R I C  M O T O R
In 1820 Davy, Faraday, and the world learned of Hans Christian Ørsted’s 
discovery of the interaction of electricity and magnetism. Ørsted, a Danish 
scientist, took his first step toward this discovery by accident while con-
ducting a lecture and using a battery. When he connected the battery to 
create an electric current in a wire, he saw that the needle of a compass on 
a nearby table moved. In his words, the electricity in the wire “disturbed” 
the compass needle. With this, Ørsted showed that there was attraction 
(or repulsion) between the electricity in the wire and the magnetism in 
the compass needle. Scientists at the Royal Institution replicated Ørsted’s 
discovery and pushed for explanations. William Wollaston, another sci-
entist at the Royal Institution, spoke widely about it. The French scientist 
Ampère also jumped into the fray. But a complete explanation was not 
immediately clear to anyone.12 
In 1821 Richard Philips, editor of the Annals of Philosophy, asked 
Faraday to sum up the state of knowledge on electricity in a series of arti-
cles. The work Faraday did for these articles led him to the discovery of 
“electromagnetic rotation”—or, in technological terms, the invention of 
the electric motor. Ørsted had shown that electricity has an effect on mag-
netism, and Faraday would go further to show that there is a mutual effect. 
When Faraday brought a permanent magnet toward a wire carrying an 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
37
electric current, that wire rotated around the pole of the magnet. This 
meant that electricity, in the presence of a magnet, could be converted into 
mechanical energy (it would make a wire rotate) and thereby do mechan-
ical work. All the electric motors that have been used in factories and 
homes since that day are based on Faraday’s discovery of the basic rela-
tionship between electricity and magnetism.13 
Faraday wrote two papers that were published in 1821. The first 
appeared in the Annals of Philosophy under the title “Historical Sketch 
of Electromagnetism.” There he attempted to explain Ørsted’s and 
Ampère’s theories. It was as he finished the first paper that he conducted 
the experiments that would lead to his first triumph. Faraday then wrote 
a sixteen-page article about his original research titled “On Some New 
Electro-magnetical Motions, and on the Theory of Magnetism.” It was 
published in the Quarterly Journal of Science and he signed it “M. Faraday, 
Chemical Assistant in the Royal Institution.” Almost immediately, as 
biographer James Hamilton writes, Faraday was “crucified by the scien-
tific world” because he had not acknowledged Davy and Wollaston, with 
the implication being that the “servant ran off with the silver.”14 
A sad consequence of this affair was that it led to the open betrayal 
of Faraday by his mentor, Humphry Davy. The Royal Society wanted 
Faraday as a member, but Davy tried to block his membership. Davy 
alleged that Faraday had stolen his ideas, not just on electromagnetism but 
also on the liquefaction of chlorine. But Davy was alone in his attempt to 
keep Faraday out of the Royal Society. In 1824 Faraday was voted in with 
only one no vote. The episode shows that since science is done by human 
beings, it is not always as objective as might be thought or hoped.15 
F A R A D A Y ’ S  S E C O N D  T R I U M P H :  
T H E  E L E C T R I C  G E N E R A T O R 
Ten years after he invented the first electric motor, Faraday invented its 
mirror image—the electric generator. The electric motor uses electricity 
to create mechanical action. The electric generator does the reverse; it uses 

38	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
mechanical action to create electricity. Both technologies have at their 
core the intimate link between magnetism and electricity. In a series of 
papers published from 1831 onward, Faraday described his lab work and 
announced, “These considerations, with their consequence, the hope of 
obtaining electricity from ordinary magnetism, have stimulated me at 
various times to investigate experimentally the inductive effect of electric 
currents. I lately arrived at positive results.”16 
Positive results indeed. Through his simple and systematic experi-
ments, he proved that the movement of his ordinary magnet inside a coil 
of metal wire would generate electricity. That is the principle on which 
almost all electric power plants work today and the principle that links 
Watt to electricity—his steam engine is what moves the magnet back 
and forth.17 
To fully perceive the simple brilliance of Faraday’s insight, it is worth 
delving into a few of his experiments. Faraday first wrapped two sets of 
wires around a cylinder of wood. One of the wires was connected to a 
battery, and when the battery was turned on it would send an electric cur-
rent through that wire; Faraday called that component the inducing wire. 
The other wire was connected to a galvanometer, a device used to detect 
electric current. Faraday called this part the wire under induction. Faraday 
wanted to see the electricity in the inducing wire create electricity in the 
wire under induction. With a small battery (and therefore a small electric 
current), Faraday reported that he found “not the slightest sensible deflec-
tion of the galvanometer needle.” This failure was a necessary part of his 
success because it led him to define two new experiments.18
Faraday then turned to experiments with what might best be pictured 
as an iron doughnut—a welded ring of soft iron. Faraday wound separate 
wires around each half of the doughnut. The wire on the left side was 
connected to a galvanometer and the wire on the right side was connected 
to a battery. The hoped-for effect was that the inducing wire on the right 
(the one with the electric current from the battery) would magnetize the 
iron doughnut and that in turn would create an electric current in the wire 
under induction on the left side. Faraday did indeed find the effect on his 
galvanometer “to a degree far beyond what has been described when with 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
39
a battery of tenfold power helices without iron were used.” Importantly, only 
a temporary effect was detected with the galvanometer; that is, it detected 
electric current in the wire under induction only when the battery was 
started and then again when the battery was stopped.19 
Finally, Faraday turned to an ordinary magnet. He pushed this mag-
net into a hollow coil of wire and his galvanometer detected the creation of 
an electric current. There was no battery involved here, as he was looking 
for the magnet to induce electricity in the coil. As in his other experi-
ments, however, the induced current was temporary; if he had left the 
magnet sitting idle inside the coil of wire, the galvanometer needle would 
have returned to its original position. When he pulled the magnet out 
of the coil of wire, again his galvanometer needle was deflected, in the 
opposite direction.20 Faraday concluded, “The various experiments of this 
section prove, I think, most completely the production of electricity from 
ordinary magnetism.” Indeed, moving a magnet within a coil of wire is 
the essence of generating electricity at power plants to this day.21 
There was little fanfare for this silent revolution created with the inven-
tion of the first electric generator. On one occasion, the prime minister, Sir 
Robert Peel, visited Faraday’s lab. Apparently, Peel asked Faraday what 
the ramifications of his invention might be, to which Faraday replied, “I 
know not, but I wager that one day your government will tax it.” Today 
we know that the experiments in Faraday’s lab have been of enormous 
importance, even beyond being a source of tax revenue. Faraday discov-
ered magneto-electric induction and invented the first electric generator. 
As Williams concludes, “From this simple laboratory toy was to come the 
whole of the electric power industry.”22
F A R A D A Y ’ S  T H I R D  T R I U M P H : 
E L E C T R O M A G N E T I C  W A V E S
Even after two triumphant experiments, Faraday was not finished with 
his contribution to science. Through the experiments described ear-
lier, Faraday showed that magnetism could induce electricity; that is, a 

40	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
magnet moved back and forth inside a coil of wire created a sustained, 
detectable electric current in the wire. Faraday later showed that elec-
tricity itself could induce electricity; an electric current in one wire could 
induce a detectable electric current in a nearby wire. This electric-electric 
induction would lead to the technology of transformers, which are used 
widely today to raise and lower the voltage of electric currents for more 
efficient transmission of electricity and safer use. For his work on induction 
Faraday was awarded the highest prize of the Royal Society, the Copley 
Medal, which Benjamin Franklin had also won.23
To achieve his third triumph, Faraday’s research was aimed at 
another essential question of science: How is force transmitted? Put sim-
ply, how does magnetic force get from the magnet to the wire, and how 
does the electric force in one wire get to the other wire? In Newtonian 
science, the answer can be summarized in the phrase action at a distance. 
Gravitational force was thought to act at a distance. Gravity as a force 
depended only on the mass of the objects affected and on the distance 
between them. For Newtonians, empty space, often referred to as aether 
or ether, filled the distance between these objects. The science of electricity 
reflected this Newtonian view in Coulomb’s Law, which said that electri-
cal force between objects depended on the quantity of the electric charge 
in the object and the distance between the objects. (Charles-Augustin de 
Coulomb was a French physicist born in 1736.)24 
Faraday’s theory broke with the mainstream and revolutionized sci-
ence. He refuted action at a distance, a core of Newtonian science. He 
claimed that force was not transmitted through empty space but rather 
was transmitted particle to particle in that space. His theory eventu-
ally became mainstream through James Clerk Maxwell’s and Albert 
Einstein’s respective works on modern field theory. Through the work of 
these later scientists, Faraday’s theories laid the foundation for the study 
of electromagnetic waves which came to underpin all modern telecom-
munication technology.25 
Faraday’s path to these groundbreaking theories is fascinating for 
anyone interested in scientific discovery and innovation, in any age. For 
example, his path began with chemistry, not physics; cross-pollination 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
41
like this across sciences or businesses continues to be an avenue for 
important progress. 
Faraday’s most “spectacular” experiment concerning action at a dis-
tance happened in January 1836, in the theater at the Royal Institution. 
He built “a great cube with an edge of 12 feet” and a covering made 
up of good “conducting material.” The “cage” was sitting on insulated 
“supports” so that “it could be charged with electricity until sparks flew 
from it.” Inside that cage sat Faraday himself, “in perfect electrical 
peace” with equipment that showed no sign of electricity inside the cage. 
The point of the cage, and many other less dramatic experiments, was 
that the power of attraction or repulsion in “electrified bodies or in the 
electric spark does not lie in those bodies.” Rather, “it is seated in the 
surrounding space,” that is, in the empty space between the electrified 
objects. It took supreme confidence to perform this seemingly dangerous 
experiment, but Faraday was no stranger to belief in the unseen in his 
scientific or personal life.26
A  S E A M L E S S  L I F E
Religion was “one of the first and foremost influences” on Faraday. He 
belonged to a sect founded by Robert Sandeman, a preacher out of 
Scotland. The Sandemanians, as his followers were called, were part of 
a wave of change in a time of splinter groups that ran through England. 
The biographer James Hamilton says, “The teachings of the Bible were 
literally and strictly true in Sandemanian belief,” and believers sought 
balance under one power: God. While Faraday claimed that he kept sci-
ence and religion separate, Williams concludes, “His deepest intuitions 
about the physical world sprang from this religious faith in the Divine 
origin of nature.” Since there was one God, Faraday hoped there was one 
force in nature; that is why finding the link between the forces of nature 
was central to Faraday’s science.27 
Faraday was never hesitant to talk about God and science at the 
same time. He spoke of the forces he discovered as “the second causes,” 

42	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
as compared to the “one Great Cause” who “works his wonders and gov-
erns this earth.” Williams opined that Faraday believed that there was 
no higher calling for a man than to seek “knowledge of God’s creation.” 
In a speech on the importance of education in the sciences, Faraday 
summed up both his scientific and religious beliefs. He said that, yes, 
electricity can be called “wonderful—beautiful,” but “only in common 
with the other forces of nature.” He expressed his view of man’s domin-
ion over nature when he said that while nature’s mystery is compel-
ling, “it is under law” and the “taught intellect can even now govern it 
largely.” Finally, he reflected his faith when he said education in science 
“is rendered supereminent in dignity” because “it conveys the gifts of 
God to man.”28 
Humility was a by-product of Faraday’s faith. Faraday thought him-
self blessed to do the work he did. This attitude is evident throughout his 
correspondence and work. Faraday once said, “In all kinds of knowledge 
I perceive that my views are insufficient, and my judgment imperfect. In 
experiments I come to conclusions which, if partly right, are sure to be in 
part wrong.” His acceptance of human error, including his own, gave him 
persistence as a scientist.29
As Faraday aged, however, he increasingly—and tragically—struggled 
with memory loss. Faraday described how his memory “both loses recent 
things and sometimes suggests old ones as new” and how “the past is 
gone, not to be remembered, the future is coming not to be imagined or 
guessed at, the present only is shaped in my mind.” By 1860, when he 
was near seventy, he wrote, “When I try to write of science, it comes back 
to me in confusion.” A German physicist of that era, G. C. Lichtenberg, 
describes the sad experience of memory loss: “As long as memory lasts . . . 
a crowd of people are working together as a unity: the twenty-year-old, 
the thirty-year-old and so on. As soon as it fails, one begins increasingly 
to be alone and the whole generation of selves stands back and mocks the 
helpless old man.” In 1861 Faraday offered his partial resignation to the 
Royal Institution. In his letter he looked back on his forty-nine years of 
membership and thanked the managers of the Royal Institution, saying 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
43
that he had “been most happy in your kindness.” Faraday concluded that 
he was in a time of “gentle decay,” but still felt that the “evening of life” 
was a “blessing.”30
Faraday had not been made rich by his discoveries, since, unlike Watt, 
he never concerned himself with patents and was not driven by a desire 
for material gain. Fortunately, his contribution to science was recognized 
in a modest way by the British government, and in 1858 Queen Victoria 
rewarded his lifetime of devotion to science by giving Faraday the use of 
a house at Hampton Court Palace. It would become his residence for the 
remainder of his life.31 
Taken on its own, Faraday’s science is both impressive and important, 
but, in truth, his science cannot be fully understood without consideration 
of his spiritual faith. His faith motivated him to look for an invisible force, 
and it simultaneously compelled him to believe in what he could not see. 
It also gave him courage in both his science and his life, especially in his 
final illness. In a letter of 1861 Faraday wrote of death, “Such peace is 
alone in the gift of god, and as it is he who gives it, why shall we be afraid.” 
Faraday died on August 25, 1867.32
M A X W E L L’ S  E Q U A T I O N S
Maxwell’s deepening of Faraday’s understanding of the link between 
electricity and magnetism was enough to earn him lasting fame among 
scientists, but his work went even a step further. He found that light waves 
were also electromagnetic waves, and that all electromagnetic waves 
travel at the speed of light. Thus, Maxwell combined electricity, magne-
tism, and light into a single unified theory. He is among the few scientists 
from the earliest days of science whose star only shines brighter today, 
as scientific advances continue to be based on his theory. Even Albert 
Einstein gave fulsome credit to Maxwell when tracing the source of his 
own great work, saying, “One scientific epoch ended and another began 
with James Clerk Maxwell.”33 

44	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
A Prodigy
Born in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1831, Maxwell entered the world of sci-
ence at the age of fourteen. He started with the simple game of drawing 
circles using a pencil attached by a piece of string to a pin poked into 
a fixed point on a piece of paper. He then added a second pin to draw 
an ellipse and then added more pins to guide his drawing. Then, tak-
ing the game a step further, Maxwell developed a mathematical equation 
to describe the curves he drew. His father showed the work to a friend, 
James Forbes, who was a professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh 
University and would later become Maxwell’s mentor. Forbes and a col-
league in the mathematics department researched whether any such work 
had been done before, and they found that it had been covered by the 
famous French mathematician and philosopher René Descartes. Shortly 
thereafter, Professor Forbes read Maxwell’s paper to the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh, since Maxwell was too young to attend.34 
Maxwell was given ample exposure to the cutting-edge science and 
technology of the mid-nineteenth century. His uncle took him to the work-
place of a noted optician, William Nicol, and Maxwell also visited his 
cousin who was married to Hugh Blackburn, a professor of mathematics 
at Glasgow University. Blackburn was friends with William Thomson, a 
professor of natural philosophy who would become one of the best-known 
scientists in England. Thomson and Faraday would become two of 
Maxwell’s greatest influences.35 
In 1847, at the age of sixteen, Maxwell began taking classes at Edin­
burgh University. There he learned various approaches to the study of 
science and read widely on mathematics. Among the scientific approaches 
was one espoused by David Hume, who believed that mathematics should 
be the foundation of all scientific truths and that any theory that was not 
backed by math was conjecture. Two of Maxwell’s mathematical investi-
gations were produced as papers and, once again, Maxwell was too young 
to read his work to the Society, so it was presented for him. Three years 
later, in 1850, Maxwell left Edinburgh for Cambridge University, where 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
45
he thrived at Trinity College. In his university studies, Maxwell took a 
keen interest in the science of electricity and magnetism.36 
“The Man Who Changed Everything”
Albert Einstein, writing for the centenary of Maxwell’s birth, made it 
clear that Maxwell and Faraday together brought about radical change in 
the science of physics. Einstein said, “The greatest change in the axiom-
atic basis of physics—in other words, of our conception of the structure 
of reality—since Newton laid the foundation of theoretical physics was 
brought about by Faraday’s and Maxwell’s work on electromagnetic phe-
nomena.” Einstein went on to explain that Newton’s system characterized 
reality as the interaction of objects (“material points” and the “forces” 
between those points). Maxwell came along and changed the mainstream 
view of nature, from the interaction of objects to the pervasiveness of elec-
tromagnetic waves; Faraday’s and Maxwell’s ideas thereby revolutionized 
the science of physics.37
Over a ten-year period from 1855 to 1865 Maxwell wrote three papers 
that greatly advanced man’s knowledge of the relationship between elec-
tricity and magnetism, and fundamentally changed the science of phys-
ics. In the words of his biographer Basil Mahon, Maxwell can justifiably 
be looked at as “the man who changed everything.” In 1855 and 1856, 
Maxwell published, in two parts, the first of these great papers on electric-
ity and magnetism, titled On Faraday’s Lines of Force. In 1861 and 1862, he 
published his second paper, On Physical Lines of Force, in parts, and in 1865 
he published A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field. Eight years later, 
in 1873, Maxwell published a book-length masterpiece titled A Treatise on 
Electricity and Magnetism.38 
Maxwell’s first argument was directly allied with Faraday’s, as its 
title suggests. Faraday had said that the space between two objects was 
filled with what he termed “lines of force”; most scientists opposed the 
idea. Maxwell, an avowed follower of the “experimental genius” Faraday, 

46	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
thought that there had to be easy-to-find physical evidence of this phe-
nomenon, and there was. To see these lines of force, one need only sprin-
kle iron filings around a magnet and observe the clear pattern in which 
those iron filings array themselves around the magnet. When Maxwell 
wrote his first paper, On Faraday’s Lines of Force, Faraday wrote to thank 
him and to say he had been impressed that the lines of force theory had 
withstood mathematical scrutiny.39 
A Story Well Told
It is tempting to say that Maxwell simply translated Faraday’s ideas into 
math and that he did so to make Faraday’s ideas acceptable to mathe-
matical scientists of the day. Scholar Thomas K. Simpson, in his unique 
take on the Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Figures of Thought, published 
2006), found that Maxwell’s math was much more than just another inter-
pretation; it was a “new way of looking at physical processes . . . a truly 
poetic conception.” Math drives Maxwell’s story forward, deepens it, and 
in the end disciplines the story and lends it added credibility. Indeed, it 
is math that carries the story to its surprise ending—that light itself is an 
electromagnetic wave.40 
In his treatise Maxwell proved that Faraday was right in believ-
ing that the “empty” space between objects was not actually empty. To 
explain the importance of space not being empty, picture two people on 
opposite ends of a trampoline. The first person flexes her legs, leaps into 
the air, and comes down hard on the trampoline. The person at the other 
end of the trampoline bounces. Why does the second person bounce? Was 
it Newton’s action at a distance—does the weight of the first person and 
distance from the second person somehow explain that bounce? Or was 
it the first person’s effect on the fabric of the trampoline—the “empty 
space” or “ether” in between—that made its way to the second person and 
caused that bounce? Faraday and Maxwell would have concluded that the 
second person bounced because of the first person’s effect on the fabric of 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
47
the trampoline; that is, the action takes place in a seemingly empty space, 
which in fact is not empty. 
To focus this concept on electricity and magnetism, Faraday and 
Maxwell believed that the current in the wire was not the direct cause of 
the movement in the magnetic needle. Rather, it was the current’s impact 
on the space in between that caused the needle to move. So what is in 
that empty space? What is the equivalent of the fabric of the trampoline? 
The empty space is in fact filled with an intricate fabric of interwoven 
electric and magnetic fields. To see that, Maxwell made another funda-
mental change from the Newtonian paradigm: he thought in terms of 
energy. The first person flexing her legs and jumping created the energy 
that affected the fabric of the trampoline, and that effect made the other 
person bounce. It was not force—not the Newtonian notion of attraction 
or repulsion—that caused the other person to bounce.41
One of the unsolved mysteries in Faraday’s work showed how import-
ant it was for Maxwell to focus on energy rather than force. Recall that 
Faraday got the effect he wanted—electricity created by a magnet—only 
with movement of the magnet inside the coil of wire. Maxwell wanted to 
explain this, and he did so by distinguishing between potential energy—the 
stored energy in the person’s legs at the position when she was poised to 
leap—and kinetic energy—energy associated with her motion. It is kinetic 
energy that has the “power” to do work and cause force. That is why 
Faraday could only create electricity while the magnet was in motion. 
Maxwell’s perspective on electromagnetic waves revealed a funda-
mental difference between electricity and other forms of energy. Think of 
electricity in comparison to gasoline for cars. The owner of the car fills up 
the tank and drives that energy away. Visualize gasoline flowing out from 
the nozzle at the gas station into a car’s gas tank. If an electric socket is like 
that nozzle, why doesn’t electricity continually spill out?
It is because electricity is all about the movement of electrons, not 
about the movement of fluid. It is better to think of a long row of the 
electrons lined up in close rank like dominoes. Flick a finger to knock 
down the first and all the others soon follow. The energy is not transferred 

48	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
solely by moving the first domino but rather by jostling all the dominoes 
already standing in a row. Only when a lamp at a home or an electric 
motor at a business is plugged into the wall socket does the “flow”—the 
jostling—of electrons occur. Only when there is a source and a use at the 
same moment is electric power consumed.42 
Lagrange Offers a Perfect Fit
Maxwell did not start from scratch with the math that enabled him to 
“change everything”; he drew on the mathematical work of others. Most 
important, Maxwell was led to Joseph-Louis Lagrange, a mathematician 
in France. Lagrange had developed a complete mathematical depiction 
of a system ideally suited to the theory Maxwell wanted to propose. With 
Lagrangian math, the goal is to measure what happens to total energy 
when a small change is made—for example, a small change in the electric 
current put into a loop of wire. How total energy changes with a small 
change in one quantity is captured in what mathematicians call a partial 
derivative. Maxwell acknowledged that the effect of a single change depends 
on the configuration of the whole system at that moment.43 
Maxwell moved past Newton with Lagrangian math because the mass 
of an object became far less important as a principal way of comprehend-
ing the physical world. Indeed, Simpson concludes that Newton’s depen-
dence on mass—his knowledge of the objects that caused force—was no 
longer necessary for Maxwell. Motion could be explained by the changes 
in objects, but Maxwell didn’t need to know which objects; he could 
abstract from their actual nature.44 
By using math that moved beyond Newton, Maxwell also moved 
past the smart and curious lay reader. To help explain these revolution-
ary views without the math, Maxwell provided a “thought experiment” 
involving bell ringers. Imagine a room filled with bell ringers, each with 
their hands on their own rope that controls a bell above. All the ropes pass 
through a ceiling with holes in it, so the bell ringers cannot see the actual 
bells they are ringing, or whether the bells are linked.45 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
49
How does the bell ringer metaphor help the layperson to understand 
Maxwell’s astonishing science? What do the bells and the bell ringers rep-
resent? First, it tells us that we do not need to know the complete intricate 
mechanics of the interconnected bells to understand the music played. 
Just as we do not need to know the intricate mechanics of nature to under-
stand the total potential and kinetic energy produced in Maxwell’s system. 
Second, through experiments we can know the music played when 
the ropes are at particular positions and pulled with particular velocities. 
The same knowledge can be gained about the changes in total energy, 
when the quantities such as electrical charge have particular positions and 
velocities. Third, however, the effect of one bell ringer pulling on a rope 
depends on the status of all other bells at that moment in turn. That’s true 
for a change in total energy caused by an electrical charge, too.46
Fourth, it is a dynamic system—the bell ringer must pull on the rope 
to have an effect, just as Faraday had to push and pull a magnet inside a 
coil of wire to produce electrical energy. In this way, Faraday was comput-
ing Maxwell’s partial derivations.47 
Maxwell Makes Waves: His Surprise Ending
The revolutionary impact of Maxwell’s work with Lagrangian concepts 
cannot be overstated. For Maxwell, the most relevant implications were 
that his dynamic system view was the only way to understand electromag-
netic waves. To clearly understand Maxwell’s wave theory, one can start by 
recalling the Ørsted and Faraday effects: Ørsted found that electricity had 
an effect on magnetism, and Faraday found that magnetism had an electri-
cal effect. More specifically, Ørsted found that a changing electric charge 
was surrounded by a magnetic field, and Faraday found that a changing 
magnetic field “gives rise to an electric field.” If it is true that an electric 
field gives rise to a magnetic field and a magnetic field gives rise to an elec-
tric field, then electric and magnetic fields must extend out into space in 
an endless game of leapfrog. It is this weaving together of the Ørsted and 
Faraday effects that allows a full conception of electromagnetic waves.48

50	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Maxwell pictured the electromagnetic wave as a smoothly oscillating, 
or sinusoidal, wave of the electric field coupled with the sinusoidal wave of 
the magnetic field. Picture the sinusoidal wave as a person sliding down a 
firehouse pole; instead of coming straight down, the person twirls around 
the pole. This vision of the way an electromagnetic wave propagates into 
space became the inspiration for the surprise ending. Maxwell believed 
that all such electromagnetic waves should propagate at the same speed. 
However, speed is a matter of observation, not theory, so speed had to 
be determined through experimentation. Maxwell determined that the 
speed of propagation of an electromagnetic wave was the speed of light, 
and thus light itself must be an electromagnetic wave. With this great 
insight, in 1861 Maxwell linked three of the most important phenomena 
in the physical world—electricity, magnetism, and light.49 
F A R A D A Y ’ S  A N D  M A X W E L L’ S  L E G A C I E S
Faraday’s and Maxwell’s legacies rest on the importance of science to elec-
tricity, the importance of character to scientists, and the importance of 
the study of electricity to scientific advance. Regarding the importance of 
science to electricity, Faraday’s discoveries of the basic electric motor in 
1821 and the basic electric generator in 1831 added significantly to the sci-
entific and technologic cornerstones for the electricity business originally 
placed by Franklin and Watt. This dependence on science distinguishes 
electricity from most other types of routinely used energy, including the 
petroleum used to make gasoline to run cars, the natural gas used to heat 
homes and as feedstock for chemicals, and the coal used to fuel power 
plants. All are essential sources of energy and all have driven important 
advances in technology. None of these other forms of energy, however, in 
their creation and use, require a scientific understanding so intimately 
connected with the fabric of nature. 
As to the importance of character to scientists, it is interesting that 
Faraday and Maxwell could not have been more different in their respec-
tive paths to scientific achievement. Faraday had little formal education 
www.ebook3000.com

	
Fa r a d a y ’ s  Fa i t h  ( a n d  M a x w e l l’ s  E q u a t i o n s )  	
51
and relied instead on public lectures and humble experimentation. In 
sharp contrast, Maxwell grew up with the great universities and royal 
societies of England and Scotland available to him for knowledge and sup-
port. Still, Maxwell, the young mathematical prodigy, sought out Faraday, 
the workbench experimenter with vision. Indeed, Maxwell seemed to give 
Faraday credit for his surprise ending, the electromagnetic theory of light. 
Maxwell said, “The electromagnetic theory of light, as proposed by him 
[Faraday], is the same in substance as that which I have begun to develope 
[sic] in this paper, except that in 1846 there were no data to calculate the 
velocity of propagation.” So, too, both showed courage in their willing-
ness to go in a direction that was at odds with the accepted theories of 
the day. They proved that empty space is not empty but, rather, is filled 
with electromagnetic waves—this undermined respected Newtonian the-
ory. The scientific process should be celebrated in history only when it is 
squarely focused on finding the truth, unimpeded by other aims. Faraday 
and Maxwell had the character to do it right.50 
At that time, the study of electricity was the core of scientific study. 
It was not driven purely by a narrow interest in understanding electricity 
but by a broad interest in understanding all the forces of nature. To put 
it another way, the study of electricity was not just a stop along the path 
to scientific advance; it was the path itself. It is in this sense that, when it 
came to science, the Age of Franklin was a time of awe and discovery. 
Faraday and Maxwell were inspired, dedicated scientists whose dis-
coveries are very much still with us. The technologies they developed or 
inspired have supported the breadth of the electricity and wireless tele-
communication businesses from their very start through the present day. 
The scientific theories they grappled with revolutionized physics and, 
more broadly, man’s fundamental understanding of nature. All the major 
advances in physics that came after, up to and including those by Albert 
Einstein, can be traced back to Faraday and Maxwell. And the ethical 
and humble manner in which they conducted themselves should inspire 
all scientists and all people to selflessly pursue the truth. 

www.ebook3000.com

P A R T  T W O
The Age of 
Edison
Let There Be Light 
(and Power)

www.ebook3000.com

55
C H A P T E R  4
Samuel Morse’s Telegraph
And Science proclaimed, from shore to shore, 
That Time and Space ruled man no more.
—Rossiter Johnson (1872)1
samuel morse reaped the first fruits of man’s discovery of the science behind 
nature’s electromagnetic wonders. Morse’s telegraph was a simple, ele-
gant application of Faraday’s fi ndings on the link between electricity and 
magnetism. That link is an electric current sent through a coil of wire 
that would magnetize an iron bar placed inside the coil. At the receiv-
ing end of the telegraph, on-and-off  magnetizations drove a lever, and 
a pencil attached to that lever “wrote” the resulting dots and dashes on 
scrolling paper. Morse’s code translated the dots and dashes into letters 
and numbers. With the widespread adoption of the telegraph in the late 
1800s, electricity began to power modern communication and drive us 
toward instantaneous communication, bringing us all the way to today’s 
smartphones.2
As did Watt’s experience with his steam engine, Morse’s invention 
of the telegraph shows the importance of persistence, partners, patents, 

56	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
and productivity. This is true for any new technology, but Morse’s story 
involves a heightened intensity and perversity. Morse was exceptionally 
persistent in bringing together all the elements needed for the first com-
mercial success with the telegraph. And yet he pursued that success despite 
the fact that creating the telegraph was not at all his original ambition. At 
first he wanted to be a famous painter.
Morse’s lifelong defense of his patents is a much bigger part of his story 
than it was for Watt, and it puts the spotlight on the role of the courts. In 
1854 the United States Supreme Court ruled that Morse “was the original 
and first inventor” of the telegraph, regardless of competitors who disputed 
the claim. It was an early instance of the court playing an outsized role in 
determining who received the fame and fortune from a new technology.3 
Economy-wide productivity mattered as much for Morse’s telegraph 
as it did for Watt’s steam engine. The impact of the telegraph went far 
beyond the cleverness of the invention itself. The author Tom Standage 
aptly refers to the telegraph as the “Victorian Internet”; like today’s inter-
net, the telegraph connected the world. So, too, by enabling markets and 
businesses to increase in scope and scale, the telegraph had an economic 
impact well beyond that measured by the money spent to build the system.
Morse was the first to show us that electricity is the invisible force 
driving communication technology. Morse’s innovation shows us, further, 
that modern communication is the foundation on which a global economy 
is built. And his life shows us that great men are not always great, nor 
always right on crucial issues of the day.
R E L I G I O N ,  P A I N T I N G ,  D I S A P P O I N T M E N T
Morse was not a genius—scientific or practical—as were Franklin, 
Faraday, and Maxwell. His life was a hard slog forward as he staked a 
claim on a technology that many others claimed to have invented before 
him. Watt confronted this kind of challenge, too, but he had the good for-
tune of having Boulton as a partner. Still, it is hard to feel sorry for Morse. 
He was born into a well-educated, well-to-do family—unlike Franklin 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
57
and Faraday. He ultimately won the great patent war over the telegraph. 
And it would be hard to muster sympathy in any event for a person choos-
ing to take the positions he took on slavery and religious freedom. 
On April 30, 1789, Morse’s father, Jedidiah Morse, became the pastor 
of the Congregationalist Church in Charlestown, Massachusetts. In due 
course, Jedidiah married, and two years later, on April 27, 1791, Jedidiah 
and his wife, Elizabeth, had their first child, whom they named Samuel 
Finley Breese Morse. Jedidiah had gained an international reputation as 
the author of geography texts such as The American Universal Geography in 
1793, and he had occasionally rubbed elbows with the likes of Benjamin 
Franklin and George Washington. His fervent interest in politics and his 
religious bias against Catholics were passions that he would pass down to 
his son.4
At eight years old Samuel Morse attended Phillips Academy in 
Andover, Massachusetts, and later attended Yale University. At Yale, 
Professor Benjamin Silliman’s lectures introduced Morse to the emerg-
ing science of electricity. While drawn to science, Morse was drawn even 
more strongly to painting. He lived in Europe for three years to study 
under Washington Allston, a widely known American painter in the same 
league with earlier famous American painters including Benjamin West 
and John Singleton Copley. 
Morse returned to the United States to earn money to continue his 
education and career as an artist. While back home, Morse attempted 
to sell ten paintings, including two of his large historical paintings, Dying 
Hercules and Judgment of Jupiter, but after public displays in Philadelphia 
and Boston, neither painting sold. In 1817 Morse had his “first commer-
cial success” as a painter when he went to Charleston, South Carolina, 
and was commissioned by the city to paint President Monroe. In 1821 he 
made a bold attempt at a major painting featuring the interior of the US 
House of Representatives. (Morse’s painting, The House of Representatives, 
was recently moved to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC.) 
Morse then moved to New York and was chosen by the city to paint the 
hugely popular General Lafayette, who was touring America at the time. 
More high-profile portraits followed.5

58	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
And yet sustained commercial success eluded him, and at forty-one 
Morse accepted a post as a professor of painting and sculpture at the 
University of the City of New York (later New York University). Morse 
the painter then turned politician. In 1834 alone he wrote twelve arti-
cles on the “Catholic peril” for the Observer, his brother’s newspaper. In 
1835 he wrote, “This Jesuitical artifice of tyrants . . . if not heeded will surely 
be the ruin of Democracy.” Jesuits were working “upon the passions of the 
American community, managing in various ways to gain control” of the 
country in a “conspiracy” to overthrow the government. The only thing 
worse to Morse than Catholics were immigrants, and he went so far as to 
run for mayor of New York City in 1836 under the banner of the Native 
American Democratic Association. Needless to say, this was not a group 
that supported the rights of actual Native Americans. Morse was not alone 
in his anti-immigrant nativism, especially in cities in the Northeast, but he 
was set apart by his very public aggressive views. Thankfully, he failed at 
politics and turned instead to technology.6 
M O R S E  T U R N S  T O  I N V E N T I O N
In 1837 two Frenchmen came to the United States to demonstrate what 
they called the telegraph. Actually, the Frenchmen demonstrated what is 
best described as an optical or visual telegraph called a semaphore. They 
used a device that looked like a football goal; the arms of the goalpost 
could be tilted and bent, with each position indicating a letter and num-
ber detailed in a codebook. At the time, Morse had a crude but working 
version of his telegraph. The key difference from other attempts was that 
Morse’s telegraph was based on electricity and magnetism, rather than on 
physical symbols, as with the French invention.7 
What drove Morse to technology? Jilted by his first love—painting—
perhaps Morse was turning to his second love at Yale—science, particu-
larly electricity. And then there was his chance encounter in 1832, on his 
return voyage from Europe on the ship Sully. One evening on the Sully the 
conversation turned to Ampère’s work on electromagnets. One gentleman 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
59
asked if the power of an electric current diminished over long distances, 
and Dr. Charles T. Jackson, a physician from Boston, responded that the 
answer was no, because Benjamin Franklin had shown electricity could be 
transmitted for miles. Jackson went on to say that his research in Europe 
had confirmed this. Morse responded that he believed there was “no rea-
son why intelligence might not be instantaneously transmitted by electric-
ity to any distance.” He relished the thought that this idea was original 
to him. However, if he had read more widely on the topic he would have 
realized the concept was already in the public sphere. Morse pursued the 
idea in his notebook as the trip on the Sully continued, writing out his first 
rudimentary code for possible messages.8 
After the voyage, Morse was low on funds and needed financial help 
from his brothers in New York. While teaching there, Morse continued 
his work on the telegraph and in 1837, soon after seeing the Frenchmen 
demonstrate their semaphore, Morse sought notice from the US Patent 
Office for the invention of the “American Electro-Magnetic Telegraph.” 
He submitted his actual patent application in April 1838. In that same 
year, on his way to pursue funds from Congress, Morse demonstrated 
his telegraph at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia. The first scientific 
assessment of his invention garnered positive reactions. Mentioning com-
peting devices in Europe, the Franklin Institute reported Morse’s plan was 
“entirely different from any of those devised by other individuals.”9
T H E  B U S I N E S S  A N D  P O L I T I C S  
O F  T H E  T E L E G R A P H
Morse began to enlist partners for his business venture to commercialize 
his telegraph. He started with colleagues at New York University, includ-
ing Professor Leonard D. Gale. Alfred Vail, a former student of the uni-
versity, also became an active player in the venture. Morse also turned to 
his brothers and to Vail’s family for funding. After a high-profile demon-
stration before Congress, he asked his listeners for $26,000 to conduct a 
fifty-mile test and suggested that the federal government take ownership 

60	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
of the telegraph. He proposed that the government keep the rights to 
the technology but allow private firms to build lines from point to point. 
He saw this arrangement—what today would be called a public-private 
partnership—as the best of both worlds.10 
Congressional committee chair Francis O. J. Smith oversaw Morse’s 
request. Ignoring concern about a conflict of interest, Smith took leave 
from Congress (he did not resign) and became one of Morse’s partners. 
Morse had three partners in his venture, and each gained a share of 
the patent rights for his telegraph. Smith secured four-sixteenths of the 
US patent rights and five-sixteenths of the foreign patent rights; Vail 
secured two-sixteenths of both the US patents and foreign rights; Gale got 
one-sixteenth of both. Morse was left with nine-sixteenths of the rights in 
the United States and eight-sixteenths in Europe.11 
Morse traveled to Europe once again, but this time it was to secure 
patents for his invention rather than to paint. A British judge rejected 
his patent request and told Morse to be satisfied with his US patents. It 
seemed clear that part of the reason for the judge’s denial of a patent for 
Morse was that there were British competitors. While he was rejected by 
the British, the French granted Morse a patent under the condition that he 
sell the telegraph only to the French government.12 
Morse returned home from Europe to be confronted with a host of 
problems. First, he had no money. Second, Jackson, who had been his 
fellow passenger on the Sully, continued his claim that the idea of the tele-
graph was his own. In addition, New York University suffered a declining 
student base, putting Morse’s day job in jeopardy. And Congress still had 
not approved funding for his telegraph. Finally, in 1843, Congress once 
again considered the issue of funds for Morse’s experimental line. By a 
narrow vote—eighty-nine to eighty-three—the House passed the funding 
proposal for $30,000. In the Senate, the funding bill passed unopposed, 
and the bill was signed by President John Tyler.13
On May 24, 1844, Morse completed his forty-mile line from Baltimore 
to Washington. It terminated at the US Supreme Court chamber in 
the Capitol. Morse had asked the US patent commissioner’s daughter 
to come up with an appropriate first message. Annie Ellsworth, at her 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
61
mother’s suggestion, chose from Numbers 23:23. The first message over 
the first commercial telegraph line in the United States was “What hath 
God wrought.”14 
The carefully orchestrated experiment ultimately won Morse’s line 
the publicity it needed. The Democratic Party held its convention in 
Baltimore, and Vail used Morse’s line for a blow-by-blow account of the 
deadlocked voting. At the start, Martin Van Buren was in the lead, but 
on the eighth ballot James K. Polk entered the race. Polk won the nomi-
nation. On the convention floor, a delegate from New York reported that 
the “telegraph has announced the nomination of Mr. Polk to our friends 
in Washington, and I am happy to inform the Convention that his nomi-
nation is well received.” He asked for the convention’s indulgence to read 
the message sent from Washington, which read: “Three cheers for James 
K. Polk, and three cheers for the telegraph.”15
Interestingly, while Morse was very political, he made sure to keep his 
powerful technology neutral. Before the 1844 election Morse wrote in a 
letter to Vail, “As there is great interest by the citizens generally of both 
political parties in the results of the various elections occurring . . . you 
will be especially careful not to give a partisan character to any informa-
tion you may transmit.”16 
T H E  G R E A T  P A T E N T  W A R
The patent war over the telegraph began when Henry O’Reilly, a com-
peting investor, attempted to expand the telegraph system west using 
equipment designed by Royal Earl House, a scientist and inventor from 
Vermont. Morse believed that House’s design infringed on his patent, and, 
in 1848, a judge in Frankfort, Kentucky, ruled in Morse’s favor. O’Reilly 
appealed the Kentucky decision to the US Supreme Court in the case 
O’Reilly v. Morse. Chief Justice Roger B. Taney wrote the opinion for the 
court, in which he asked three questions. First, was Morse the “first and 
original inventor of the Electro-Magnetic Telegraphs described in his 
two reissued patents of 1848?” Second, if he was, were his patents “issued 

62	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
conformably to the acts of Congress?” Third, if Morse’s patent was con-
forming, was the “telegraph of O’Reilly . . . substantially different from 
that of Professor Morse” so that there was no infringement on the Morse 
patent by O’Reilly?17 
Suffice it to say, O’Reilly v. Morse was an important case in confirm-
ing that Morse should be credited with inventing the telegraph, but it 
was only one of many. By one count there were sixty-two opponents of 
Morse in litigation. In one case, the press, only half-joking, warned a com-
peting inventor in Europe not to bring his children to America for fear 
that Morse would claim them as his own inventions. Indeed, the legal 
attacks continued for the remainder of Morse’s life. In 1872, the year he 
died, Morse received a draft chapter on the telegraph from a book titled 
Great Industries of the United States. The author argued that Morse’s claim 
to be the inventor of the telegraph was a “pious fraud.” The book went 
on to say that Morse could not have produced the so-called Morse tele-
graph because “he lacked the requisite scientific knowledge, mechanical 
skill, and entrepreneurial ability.” These traits “had been supplied by its 
actual inventors: by Joseph Henry, ‘the legitimate father of the American 
electro-magnetic telegraph’; by Alfred Vail, ‘the brains of the mechanical 
portion’; and F. O. J. Smith, who ‘made it a commercial success.’”18 
T H E  T R A N S A T L A N T I C  T E L E G R A P H  C A B L E
One remaining challenge for the telegraph was to link North America 
and Europe with a transatlantic cable. Laying a cable under the rough 
waters of the Atlantic and making it work posed special challenges. John 
Brett first set out to link England and France with a cable under the 
Channel, and in 1852 the first message was sent from London to Paris. 
In 1853 England was connected to Ireland and later across the North 
Sea to Germany, Russia, and Holland, but the transatlantic cable was a 
feat waiting to be attempted. In 1854 English inventor Frederick Gisborne 
visited American businessman Cyrus Field, who had made his fortune 
in the paper trade and retired at thirty-three. Gisborne convinced Field 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
63
that he should invest his fortune in the telegraph. Intrigued by Gisborne’s 
proposition, Field learned that the raised seabed between Newfoundland 
and Ireland could potentially serve as a platform for the telegraph cable. 
Field turned to Brett, who had laid the cable under the English Channel, 
and together they formed the Atlantic Telegraph Company and secured 
backing from the US and British governments. Field then hired English 
surgeon and electrician Dr. Edward Orange Wildman Whitehouse as his 
science adviser. It was a decision he would come to regret.19 
In July 1857 Field made his first attempt to lay the transatlantic cable. 
Again pursuing a public-private partnership, Field won the use of two 
ships, America’s USS Niagara and the British HMS Agamemnon. About 350 
miles out from the Irish coast, the cable snapped and Field met his first 
failure. By June of 1858 Field was ready to try again. At last, after suffer-
ing three broken cables, the 2,050 miles of cable were completely laid on 
August 5, 1858. North America and Europe were connected for the very 
first time. The celebrations were triumphant, as was the hyperbole. It was 
said that the “cable had reunited the British and American peoples” and 
had “half undone the Declaration of 1776.” The first message transmitted 
along the cable, which took a week to send successfully, said, “Europe 
and America are united by telegraphic communication. Glory to God in 
the highest, on earth peace, goodwill to men.” The triumph was prema-
ture. It took more than sixteen hours to transmit another message sent 
from Queen Victoria to President Buchanan. Within one month the cable 
stopped working altogether.20 
A committee was formed to determine what went wrong. The star 
member was Professor William Thomson, one of Maxwell’s greatest influ-
ences and a rival of Field’s science adviser, Whitehouse. Thomson con-
cluded that much of what Whitehouse recommended had been wrong. 
Whitehouse had suggested that a small-diameter cable form the core of 
the whole cable, but Thomson found that the core, which contained the 
conducting wires, was too small to function consistently. Whitehouse had 
recommended high voltage, but Thomson found that the high voltage 
destroyed the cable’s protective insulation. Thomson also suggested that 
the cable would benefit from a better receiver, and recommended his own 

64	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
mirror galvanometer. Drawing on Thomson’s diligent science and tech-
nological expertise, Field embarked on his next attempt on June 24, 1865. 
On August 2, two-thirds of the way across the Atlantic Ocean, the cable 
broke and was lost. Field tried again and finally succeeded in July 1866. 
Luckily, the cable lost on the previous attempt was recovered; in the end, 
therefore, two Atlantic cables were ready for service—albeit after nine 
years of trying.21 
Thomson was knighted by the British for his scientific contribution, 
while Field was given a special medal by the US Congress and heralded 
as the “Columbus of our time ” by John Bright, a high-profile English 
politician, orator, and free-trade advocate. On top of the awards and hon-
ors, the transatlantic cable was profitable and Field was able to pay off 
his debt in a single year. Public-private partnerships had a key role in the 
commercialization of electric technology. Notable, too, is the fact that fail-
ure was a defining part of the journey to success with this first-of-a-kind 
technology.22 
T H E  V I C T O R I A N  I N T E R N E T
As Tom Standage puts it in his book The Victorian Internet (1998), “In 
the nineteenth century there were no televisions, airplanes, computers, 
or spacecraft; nor were there antibiotics, credit cards, microwave ovens, 
compact discs, or mobile phones. There was, however, an Internet.” The 
Victorian internet was a “patchwork of telegraph networks, submarine 
cables, pneumatic tube systems, and messengers combined to deliver mes-
sages within hours over a vast area of the globe.” As with today’s new 
communications technologies, the primary advantage of the Victorian 
internet was that it cut the time needed for communication. When Morse 
installed the first link in 1844 with his Baltimore–Washington line, it 
took over two months to send and respond to a message from London to 
Bombay. Thirty years later, it took minutes. Soon, person-to-person com-
munication wasn’t its only use. Some used the telegraph to track the stock 
market and to buy or sell based on the information they received; others 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
65
used it to bet on horse races. The Victorian internet was used for fun and 
romance; telegraph operators even played checkers over the wires. The 
1879 novel Wired Love by Ella Cheever Thayer was based on the notion of 
online flirting and dating, and couples could get married online.23
The telegraph disrupted the old ways of the news business. Before the 
telegraph, readers accepted that anything they read was likely to be days 
or weeks old. With the advent of the telegraph, people experienced news 
in real time. As is true today, there was much debate over whether the 
news business, as it was known, would be enhanced or rendered obsolete 
by this communications revolution. With emerging newswire services, like 
the Associated Press and Reuters, the telegraph quickly became essential for 
the news business.24 
Issues of privacy, policy, and law also arose. Some wanted messages 
to be private, so they encrypted them, and in 1875 regulations were pro-
posed to limit the coded messages. Legal questions arose. For example, if a 
loss was incurred on a stock transaction because a telegraph message was 
in error, who was liable? One person sued Western Union for such a stock 
loss and the case went to the Supreme Court, which ruled that the plaintiff 
was only due a refund of the price he paid to send the original telegram: 
$1.15 versus the $20,000 he allegedly lost.25 
A N  O U T S I Z E D  E C O N O M I C  I M P A C T
The telegraph had an outsized economic impact, as do most innovations 
in the science and technology of electricity. Because it introduced real-time 
communication, it enabled the creation of bigger markets, and thus big-
ger businesses. The telegraph itself became a global business, enveloping 
not only the United States but Europe and Asia as well. In about twenty 
years—from 1846 to 1866—the US telegraph system grew from a few 
hundred miles of lines to more than one hundred thousand miles, and 
from thousands of dollars of investment to $40 million. Its impact was out-
sized in the sense that it could not be measured by the amount of money 
invested on the poles and wires and stations or on the amount of money 

66	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
spent each year on sending messages. Rather, its effects on the economy 
could be measured only by looking at what it enabled other businesses to 
do and how it empowered businesses to grow.26 
Before the telegraph, information traveled no faster than people could 
get from one place to another. Travel time in the United States was short-
est in the Northeast because of the network of rail lines; rail time was about 
a half day from New York to Boston. Outside the Northeast, the time 
needed to deliver a person or a message was much longer, two weeks from 
New York to New Orleans, months to California. Within seven years after 
Morse’s Baltimore–Washington line opened in 1844, however, there was 
real-time communication between the East and stations on the Mississippi 
River. In a head-to-head price comparison between the US Postal Service 
and the telegraph, the Postal Service might have looked like a better deal. 
Before 1845 a one-page letter cost up to twenty-five cents to send; in 1851 
the price fell to just three cents an ounce. For the telegraph, a ten-word 
message cost $2.05 to send; by the 1870s its price dropped to fifty cents, 
but it was still much higher than a one-page letter delivered by mail. In the 
end, because for many businesses time often mattered more than savings, 
the telegraph’s high prices did not diminish its growth.27
The telegraph’s creation of real-time communication enabled the 
growth of businesses and markets that ultimately benefited the nation’s 
economy. A big market was better for buyers since they could shop for 
better prices and better-quality products over a broader geographic range. 
A big market was also good for sellers, since they could increase sales 
and thereby increase the scale of their enterprises, which enabled them 
to use newer, larger-scale, lower-cost technology to produce their prod-
ucts. Just as the marketplace on Amazon.com has transformed the way 
we shop today, the telegraph cut the costs of communication for the buyer 
to find the right supplier and the supplier to find and to serve a larger 
number of customers. This also encouraged the rise of big firms as compa-
nies became more integrated; they took on more of the chain of activities 
needed to produce and deliver a final product.28
The telegraph helped to create bigger markets and bigger firms that 
reached into nearly every aspect of ordinary life. It enabled a much bigger 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
67
and more transparent market for stocks and other financial instruments. 
The meatpacking business in the Midwest was able to serve the East with 
modern centralized slaughterhouses because the telegraph allowed them 
to sell to a bigger market as well as to integrate delivery by refrigerated 
railcars.29
The telegraph and rail businesses developed a symbiotic relationship. 
To ensure access to the best rights-of-way, the telegraph companies often 
ran their lines along the railroad rights-of-way. Businesses, meanwhile, 
used the railroads to deliver products to big geographic markets recently 
created by the telegraph. America’s rise as an economic powerhouse of 
the nineteenth century was fueled by the dual developments of rail and 
telegraph: they enabled the collapse of space and time in a nation that was 
still relatively new.30
A  R O L E  F O R  G O V E R N M E N T ,  I N E V I T A B LY 
From the start, Morse wanted the government to buy and control the 
telegraph. But Congress did not want the government to own the pat-
ents or assume the responsibility of building the lines; instead, private 
ventures built an extended and overlapping network of telegraph lines. 
The telegraph was never subsidized or politicized to the extent the rail-
roads in America were. State governments, however, did get involved, and 
their role changed over time. At first the states promoted and enabled 
private-sector investment in the telegraph. The states primarily helped 
ensure rights-of-way and set penalties for those who damaged telegraph 
lines. Then the states began to protect the public from bad performance 
by the telegraph companies. Protection included a requirement that the 
messages from competing lines had to be accepted, a certain priority of 
messages had to be followed, and the content of messages was automati-
cally considered confidential.31
In an effort to end the chaos of competing telegraph lines in the 
1850s, government also facilitated the consolidation of the private tele-
graph companies. Industry attempts at self-regulation had not worked. In 

68	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
his book Wiring a Continent (1972), Robert Luther Thompson writes of the 
telegraph industry’s “irresistible trend toward monopoly.” Amos Kendall, 
whom Morse hired to run the business side of the telegraph, had hoped 
for better organization of the telegraph industry through individual man-
agement of lines by the Morse patent team; however, quarrels among the 
team undermined such structured management. Competition from other 
technologies contributed to the fragility of the industry, and, as competi-
tion increased, profits vanished. Several other attempts to coordinate the 
telegraph industry through self-governance also failed. O’Reilly tried a 
democratic council, while Kendall’s American Telegraph Confederation 
also failed. In 1857 a last-ditch effort resulted in the Six-Party Contract 
that assigned areas to competitors and set rules for their interaction. 
Out of the Six-Party Contract grew the North American Telegraph 
Association, which, according to Thompson, became a major force in the 
industry. In the end, however, it was consolidation that allowed Western 
Union to transform into the first truly nationwide industrial monopoly 
in 1866 after acquiring the United States and the American Telegraph 
Companies.32 
T H E  T E L E G R A P H ’ S  L E G A C Y,  A N D  M O R S E ’ S
The telegraph was the first commercial application of the new science of 
electricity and electromagnetism. It did no more than send a stuttering 
on-and-off flow of electricity through a wire that, when the electricity was 
on, magnetized a block of iron. This simple device, however, revealed the 
commercial importance of electricity and revolutionized communication. 
Electricity had an essential role in the birth of modern telecommunica-
tions. Eventually, the electricity supply and the telecommunications busi-
nesses would go their separate ways, but they remain twins born of the 
same great science. As the narrative unfolds it is worth asking why one 
twin—the telecommunications business—is today a symbol of technologi-
cal advance while the other—the electricity supply business—is generally 
seen as stodgy, with little technological innovation achieved. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  M o r s e ’ s  T e l e g r a p h 	
69
The outsized economic impact of the telegraph is difficult to overstate; 
it enabled the globalization of business. Communication technology was 
and is an essential parallel development to industrialization. Together they 
allowed the United States to begin to exploit one of its greatest assets—its 
size. This same outsized economic impact, although different in nature, 
would be seen again with new electricity technologies after the telegraph.
The fact that the commercialization of the telegraph was messy, con-
tentious, and litigious is another important part of its legacy. The great 
patent war makes this plain. The judgment of a court—most likely the 
judgment of one judge—was a potent force in deciding, in effect, the 
paternity of this new technology. Patents are a powerful means for gov-
ernment to affect the nature and pace of technological development, and 
the question of whether patents promote or deter innovation is a hot topic 
even today. As we will discover later on, the range of issues decided by the 
courts broadens over time to include all issues of the modern electricity 
business—a development that unsettles many people. 
The telegraph’s evolution also set a model for the relationship between 
government and private corporations. The telegraph got a jump-start from 
the federal government’s funding for Morse’s Baltimore–Washington line. 
The private sector then built the system with unbridled enthusiasm—and 
little interest in coordinating efforts. State governments first enabled the 
private investment, then helped mitigate abuses. Private sector control over 
the telegraph had mixed results, as evidenced by Western Union emerging 
as a monopoly. In the end, it came full circle with a new technology—the 
telephone—protecting the consumer by offering a better, less expensive 
service to replace the telegraph monopoly. The lesson taken from the tele-
phone eclipsing the telegraph is of great importance: the best government 
oversight might be simply keeping the door open to new competitors with 
new technologies. 
Morse’s personal legacy is complicated. He died on April 2, 1872, 
at the age of eighty. Flags across America were flown at half-mast, tele-
graphs were covered in black, and most obituaries said that he was a great 
man, though some countered that view by citing his defense of slavery. 
Among other positions, Morse had actively campaigned with a group of 

70	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
prominent men hoping to revoke the Emancipation Proclamation. Great 
men are not great, or right, all the time, and for some the bad surely grows 
to outweigh the good.33
A poem in tribute to Morse summed up his most lasting achieve-
ment: “And Science proclaimed from shore to shore, / That Time and 
Space ruled man no more.” Ironically, this once-ambitious painter was 
memorialized in grandiose paintings done of him by others. A telling 
example is a fresco painted by Constantino Brumidi in 1865, depicting 
George Washington “rising to the heavens in glory.” Around him are six 
themes: the one for science has the goddess Minerva instructing Benjamin 
Franklin, Robert Fulton, and Samuel F. B. Morse.34 
www.ebook3000.com

71
C H A P T E R  5
Thomas Edison’s Light
It has sometimes been said that we live in an industrial 
age. It might better be said we live in the age of Edison.
— Henry Ford (1931)1
with his 1,093 Us patents, Thomas Alva Edison remains one of the most prolific 
and celebrated inventors in American history. While few of these patents 
single-handedly brought about revolutionary change, many marked sig-
nifi cant advancement for specifi c technologies, and the breadth of the 
technologies to which he contributed is remarkable. Edison began with 
inventions that advanced telegraph technology, and despite Alexander 
Graham Bell beating him to the punch, Edison made important contri-
butions to the telephone. And then Edison went even further: he invented 
the phonograph and motion pictures as well.2 
Not only was Edison a prolifi c inventor, he also redefi ned the process 
of invention. Edison, the symbol of the solitary inventor, was actually the 
fi rst to create a corporate research laboratory in which he and his team 
became adept at drawing out the commercial value of the science of the 
day. As Edison scholars Robert Friedel and Paul Israel note, “In Edison 

72	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
we find the transition from the common, ingenious invention that seemed 
to move much of the world forward in the nineteenth century to the spe-
cialized, scientific technology that was to be a dominating social and eco-
nomic force in the twentieth.”3
Edison actually invented the entire electricity business as it is known 
today, from top to bottom. He started with painstaking research to create 
an electric lightbulb, meant to replace the gas-fired lights of his day; a key 
hurdle was finding a material for a filament that would make electric light-
ing commercially feasible. He also had to invent the technology, or at least 
improve existing technology, for the rest of the business, such as the wall 
switches, power lines that snaked under city streets to deliver electricity to 
the lights, and dynamos that produced the electricity to initially jostle the 
electrons in those lines and illuminate the lightbulbs. 
Edison was no stranger to hard work or to hard times. His work ethic 
is legendary; he often worked well into the night and demanded the same 
from his colleagues. He put his own money on the line, and on occa-
sion he literally bet his home on an invention. But Edison also needed 
and received money to fund his research from some of the most famous 
names on Wall Street: Cornelius Vanderbilt and J. Pierpont Morgan were 
both investors. In the end, however, it was the moneymen who erased the 
Edison name from his own company, Edison General Electric Company, 
and changed it to what is known today as General Electric, or simply GE. 
However, Edison could not be erased from American mythology. It 
is no accident that drawing a lightbulb above a person’s head symbolizes 
a great idea. Not only was the lightbulb one of America’s brightest ideas; 
Edison was one of America’s brightest lights.
I N C U B A T I O N
A large part of Edison’s legend grew from what we know about how hard 
he had to work, how much he had to risk, and how sharp his vision had 
to be to achieve success. Edison was born February 11, 1847, in Milan, 
Ohio. In 1854 his family moved from Milan to Port Huron, Michigan. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
73
The family left Milan when railroads disrupted the success of canals, 
including the canal that connected Milan to Lake Erie and allowed the 
town to prosper. Edison received little formal education in Milan because 
he was often sick and his family didn’t have much money; their finan-
cial problems continued in Port Huron. Edison’s mother became the most 
influential teacher in his life, introducing him to books including Edward 
Gibbon’s History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.4 
By age twelve Edison had his first job, selling snacks and newspa-
pers in the aisles of the Grand Trunk Railway. He was already an avid 
experimenter and built his own mini-telegraph. Later he got interested 
in chemical experiments, and, in one such experiment, he broke a bot-
tle of phosphorus and started a fire on the train. The conductor on the 
train is said to have “boxed Edison’s ears,” and some biographers trace his 
lifelong hearing difficulties to this incident. But good fortune also visited 
Edison while he worked on these trains. One day Edison saved a young 
boy’s life when he pulled him from the path of an oncoming train. The 
boy’s father, James Mackenzie, rewarded Edison by offering to teach him 
how to be a telegraph operator.5 
With this practical education in hand, Edison became a traveling 
telegraph operator for five years, from 1863 to 1868. It was in this role 
that Edison produced what some call his first invention. As a telegraph 
operator, Edison listened to a “sounder,” which made the dots and dashes 
of Morse code audible. A skilled operator wrote out what he or she heard 
from the sounder at a pace of about forty words per minute. Edison wanted 
to slow down the sounder, and to do so he drew from an older technology 
in which a Morse register would punch the dots and dashes on paper. 
Edison linked this Morse register to a sounder so that the audible dots and 
dashes came out at a slower pace of about twenty-five or thirty words per 
minute. The invention was called the Morse repeater, and it slowed down 
reception and transcription to give time for longer news reports. It did not 
help with the intense messaging of breaking news events, so it suffered an 
early demise. Still, even this early failure reveals the reasons for Edison’s 
success: a skill with and interest in advancing practical technology for 
cutting-edge industries.6 

74	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
In 1867 Edison moved to Cincinnati and, at twenty, started to get 
more serious about his life as an inventor. There were a small number 
of cities that served as laboratories for new telegraph technology, and 
Cincinnati was one of them. It was there that Edison began his constant 
study of telegraph technology, reading about the science behind electric-
ity, including Faraday’s Experimental Researches in Electricity. With a life of 
invention in mind, Edison focused on two devices to improve the tele-
graph: relays and repeaters. A relay directed an incoming telegraph signal 
to the local sounder. A repeater was like a booster shot for a telegraph 
signal—it strengthened the signal as it went on to the next station. Edison 
also worked on duplex technology, which would allow two messages to be 
sent simultaneously over a single telegraph line.7 
In 1868 Edison moved to Boston. Local investors there financed two 
of his new inventions outside of the telegraph business: his electric vote 
recorder and his stock printer. In 1869 Edison filed his first patent applica-
tion for his vote recorder. It was not a commercial success, since legislators 
did not want to speed up the voting process; a slower pace gave them time 
to win over votes from their rivals. Edison did have some success with his 
gold and stock quotation service in Boston. However, his real success came 
after he moved to New York in 1869. 
A  F U L L - T I M E  I N V E N T O R
As is true today, New York financial houses needed information as fast as 
possible, and two of the companies competing in this field were Edward 
Calahan’s Gold and Stock Telegraph Company and Samuel Laws’ Gold 
and Stock Reporting Telegraph Company. Edison found his way to Laws’ 
company first, where he met with Franklin Pope, who knew of Edison’s stock 
printer in Boston. While Pope could not offer Edison a job, he did allow 
Edison to use the company’s shop for experiments and to sleep on a cot in 
the basement. As luck and skill would have it, Edison proved himself on one 
especially high-pressure day. In the early stages of Jay Gould’s attempt to 
corner the market for gold, Laws’ machinery suddenly stopped working, and 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
75
his clients panicked at the loss of information at such a critical time. Pope 
and Laws did not know what to do, but Edison calmly bent over the broken 
machine, found the problem, fixed it, and thereby earned a job that day.8 
After the sale of Laws’ company, Edison and Pope began the first elec-
trical engineering firm in America. Later, on his own, Edison found success 
selling their inventions to bigger companies like Western Union, and this 
created the financial foundation for the laboratory space that would rede-
fine the path to innovation and the electricity business to come. Edison and 
his partner found lab space in Newark, New Jersey, and formed the Newark 
Telegraph Works. There, Edison recruited a team of men who would 
become friends and fellow inventors for years to come. By 1876 Edison and 
his team had secured more than two hundred patents. Edison had risen 
from near failure when he first arrived in New York to great renown as an 
inventor and considerable financial success, though his rise was not without 
risk or controversy. During his career, Edison once had to give up his house 
to save the business, and he occasionally flirted with conflicts of interest. 
And in one instance, although Western Union had sponsored the develop-
ment of a technology, Edison sold the rights to Gould. Western Union sued, 
painting Edison as a traitor, and eventually won the suit.9
T H E  W I Z A R D  O F  M E N L O  P A R K
Edison once said, “My one ambition is to be able to work without regard 
to the expense . . . what I want is a perfect workshop.” In 1876 he took a 
big step toward the perfect workshop by creating his laboratory at Menlo 
Park, New Jersey. Menlo Park forever changed the invention process by 
becoming the first “invention factory.”10
Western Union was key to funding Menlo Park, as it hired Edison to 
invent a “speaking telegraph” to compete with the telephone Alexander 
Graham Bell patented. In 1877 Edison filed a patent for the speaking 
telegraph transmitter, and Western Union formed a subsidiary called 
the American Speaking Telegraph Company. How did an amateur 
and outsider like Bell beat the professional inventor Edison? Biographer 

76	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Paul Israel suggests that Bell won the race because he was an outsider; 
he brought a unique perspective to the field. Bell’s father had developed 
“Visible Speech” for the deaf, and later Bell created an “electromechani-
cal ear called the phonautograph to allow the deaf to see speech patterns.” 
Israel emphasizes that Bell was aiming to do something brand-new in 
transmitting speech while Edison was more narrowly trying to improve 
the existing technology of the telegraph. Edison did, however, make an 
important contribution to telephone technology. Bell’s receiver was better 
than Edison’s, but Edison’s transmitter was better than Bell’s.11 
In 1877 Edison pushed forward with experimentation that would 
lead him to inventing the phonograph. In the wake of news reports, an 
Edison assistant sent a letter and sketches of the invention, called the 
phonograph, to Scientific American. The editor then published the letter 
in the magazine, prefacing it with a note about how startling it was that 
speech had become “immortal.” Edison then asked his engineers to build 
the device. Edison shouted out the nursery rhyme “Mary Had a Little 
Lamb” into the recorder, and then startled his colleagues by playing it 
back to them from his new tinfoil device. It was the invention of the pho-
nograph, not the electric light, that first made Edison famous and won 
him his oft-repeated nickname: the Wizard of Menlo Park. But Edison 
soon put his first famous invention aside for ten years to turn to the chal-
lenge of inventing the electric lightbulb—as well as the electricity indus-
try as a whole.12
I N V E N T I N G  A N  I N D U S T R Y
Dead Aim on the Competing Technology 
At thirty-one, Edison was already a widely known, accomplished inventor. 
Exhausted from his work on other inventions, he jumped at the chance for 
a somewhat exotic vacation: he would travel to Rawlins, Wyoming, to 
observe the solar eclipse on July 29, 1878. One of his fellow travelers, 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
77
Professor George Barker of the University of Pennsylvania, suggested that 
Edison meet with William Wallace in Ansonia, Connecticut, who had 
been experimenting with electricity and had developed his first dynamo, 
or electric generator, in 1874. Later that year, Edison met with Wallace 
to witness firsthand the Wallace-Farmer dynamo and the lights it kept 
illuminated. It was at this meeting with Wallace that Edison got excited 
about electricity and decided to take on the challenge of developing an 
electric light. Edison said upon his return that, “[in Wallace’s shop] I saw 
for the first time everything in practical operation. It was all before me. I 
saw the thing had not gone so far but that I had a chance. I saw that what 
had been done had never been made practically useful. The intense light 
had not been sub-divided so that it could be brought into private houses.”13 
The established competitor to electric lighting was the gaslight, and 
throughout his work Edison took dead aim at the goal of beating the gas-
light on price and performance. Electric lighting had stalled with the arc 
light, developed first by Faraday’s mentor, Humphry Davy. It was called 
an arc light because when two pieces of carbon are held with a short gap 
between them and high-voltage electricity is put through both, a daz-
zling arc of light is created across the gap. In 1880 a part of New York’s 
Broadway was illuminated with arc lights and that is how the street earned 
its nickname as the Great White Way.14 
The problem with the arc light was that it was much too bright. Using 
a common measure of the day—candlepower—an arc light emitted thou-
sands of candlepower while the gaslight emitted around ten to twenty can-
dlepower. In the context of the arc light, there was talk of subdividing the 
light or splitting the arc light into smaller, less glaring pockets of light. This 
would require a new approach: incandescent lighting.15 
With incandescent light, a material is heated until it glows, which pro-
vides the required light. The primary technical concern for Edison was 
that most materials melt before they can reach the temperature at which 
incandescence would be achieved. Edison had to find a thin, light material 
or refine the process to provide light. Early on, Edison focused on creating 
a “regulator” for his lamp. A regulator would reduce electric current when 

78	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
the temperature approached the melting point of the incandescent mate-
rial being used. Edison also had a primary commercial concern. It was 
thought that a high electric current would be necessary to light Edison’s 
lights and a great deal of expensive copper would be needed to transmit 
that high current through copper wires that would run from the electric 
generator to lights in homes. To effectively commercialize his invention, it 
would have to make sense financially.16
To address these and other concerns, Edison needed money to fund 
research. He turned to Grosvenor Lowrey, his attorney, to arrange 
financing. Lowrey attracted two Western Union officials, Tracy Edson 
and Hamilton Twombly, as key investors, plus various members of the 
Vanderbilt family, which was also a major investor in both the telegraph 
and gas utilities. The deal involved the formation of a stock company 
with $300,000 of funding. Half of the funding came from Edison’s pat-
ents and the other half was in cash from the investors. It is interesting 
to note that Edison made much of the fact that the Vanderbilt family 
“is the largest gas stock owner in America.” By investing in Edison’s 
company, the Vanderbilts were, in effect, competing against their own 
companies, since Edison was out to beat the gaslight. Here is evidence 
that savvy private investors often have no emotional or political attach-
ment to inventions of the past; instead, they are ready to fund the tran-
sition to new, better ways. Friedel and Israel state, “The backing given 
[Edison] in 1878 and 1879, however, marked a new stage in the relation-
ship between money and invention in America—a glimpse of the era 
in which giant corporations would routinely expect technical expertise, 
backed by science and laboratory resources, to turn out newer and better 
products for profit.”17 
Edison’s efforts marked a new stage in history, but on the most essen-
tial level they marked a new stage of product development for the electric-
ity business. Regarding the latter, it is useful to think in terms of at least 
four stages of life for any product: research, development, demonstration, 
and commercialization. The pure scientific research had long ago been 
done by Franklin, Faraday, and Maxwell. Edison was well into product 
development with, for example, his testing of filaments. He would soon 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
79
step into demonstration with his Pearl Street Station and then into full 
commercialization with the proliferation of the Edison companies.
Name Dropping (Terminology)
An electric light is one of three parts of an electric circuit; it is itself the 
user of electricity. The second part is the electric power plant, which can 
be far from the electric light; it is the source of electricity. The third part 
is the pathway from the power plant to the light—typically metal wires 
that run along the highway to a home or business, including the copper 
wires in the walls of a building. When the light switch on the wall is on, the 
electricity flows in a circuit and the lamp lights. If a problem is detected, a 
circuit breaker intervenes to stop that flow.
To measure the electricity in a circuit, George Mason University 
physics professor James Trefil and earth science professor Robert M. 
Hazen offer an analogy between electrons that flow through a wire and 
water that flows through a pipe. For water, important measurements 
include the amount of water flowing and the pressure in the pipe. As to 
measuring the current of electrons “flowing” through wires, the metric is 
called the ampere—or amp, as we usually say—named after French phys-
icist André-Marie Ampère. The pressure behind the flow of electrons, 
meanwhile, is termed the voltage—or volts—named after Italian scientist 
Alessandro Volta. A third metric, the amount of power delivered to the 
electric lamp (or any other electrical device, such as a motor), is defined in 
watts, named after James Watt. The formula goes: power in watts equals 
current in amps times voltage in volts. So, more amps or more volts result 
in more power. Finally, the term resistance measures how hard it is to get 
electrons though wires. High resistance means that more of the electrical 
energy shows up as heat. This is why low-resistance metals like copper are 
used to transmit electricity over long distances, so less electricity is lost as 
heat. High-resistance materials are used in devices like toasters that have 
a good use for the heat. Resistance is measured in ohms, named after the 
German physicist Georg Simon Ohm.18

80	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Using Science 
Edison’s investors wanted to know the status of other efforts to produce 
electric lighting, and, fortuitously, Edison hired Francis Upton to find 
out. Upton would become one of Edison’s closest collaborators, and 
would be one of the few on his team with training and experience in pure 
science—an invaluable asset. In the end, Edison built original versions 
of just about everything needed to produce electricity (the dynamos, or 
generators), to deliver it (the underground copper conductors), and to use 
it (the electric lightbulb itself). One cannot overstate the extent to which 
Edison and his team created the electricity business from scratch, and 
their success was based on a unique mix of skills in science, technology, 
manufacturing, and finance. 
A great example is how Edison and Upton discovered that they could 
reduce the amount and cost of copper wiring if they used a high-resistance 
material for the filament inside their lightbulb. They made this discovery 
by applying science of the day—a combination of Joule’s and Ohm’s laws. 
Their thinking might best be explained with three equations. Start with 
the equation that electric power equals current times voltage. Then add 
the equation that voltage equals current times resistance. Finally insert 
the second equation into the first, showing that power equals current 
squared times resistance. So to get the same power Edison could lower 
current—which meant less copper was needed—and raise resistance. This 
discovery launched Edison’s worldwide search for the best high-resistance 
material for his filament.19
At the start Edison preferred platinum; a long platinum wire sat 
tightly spiraled in the center of a sealed glass globe, inside of which was 
a vacuum. The light looked very much like the lightbulbs used today. 
Edison’s platinum light failed, however, and he had to renew his search 
for the right material for the filament in his electric lightbulb; platinum 
was expensive and it had a low resistance. In October 1879, he and his 
team made an important breakthrough by finding that a carbon-based 
filament worked.20 Edison filed a patent for his carbon-based light on 
November 4, 1879.21 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
81
On December 21, 1879, an article in the New York Herald titled “Edison’s 
Light: The Great Inventor’s Triumph in Electric Illumination” created 
great anticipation in readers’ minds. In the article, Edison announced 
his first public demonstration for New Year’s Eve, 1879—ten days later. 
Marshall Fox, the Herald reporter, described that demonstration vividly: 
“Edison’s laboratory was tonight thrown open to the general public for 
the inspection of his electric light.” He reported that hundreds of people 
came despite the inclement weather. Edison’s offices were “brilliantly illu-
minated,” as was a path to the train depot. Edison and his team explained 
their new system and ran it through a “variety of tests.”22 
Before the event there were skeptics, and some scientists called the 
demonstration a fake. Others saw it as quite real; soon thereafter, the 
stocks of gaslight companies nosedived while the value of Edison’s com-
pany stock skyrocketed. To biographers Friedel and Israel, however, the 
most important reaction was that of the public, especially the throngs 
who came to Menlo Park that New Year’s Eve. Instead of evoking fear or 
distrust, Edison’s electric system was a source of hope. Specifically, these 
Edison scholars conclude that “this attitude toward the powers of science 
and technology is one of the nineteenth century’s most important lega-
cies, and no single instance exemplifies it better than the enthusiasm with 
which the crowds ushered in the new decade at Menlo Park.”23
B U I L D I N G  T H E  P E A R L  S T R E E T  S T A T I O N
Edison’s New Year’s Eve demonstration at Menlo Park took his electric 
lighting system up through two more of the stages in the research, devel-
opment, demonstration, and commercialization process. Still, commer-
cialization remained ahead of him. Almost three years after the Menlo 
Park demonstration, on September 4, 1882, Edison began to operate his 
commercial-scale power plant at 257 Pearl Street in New York City and 
illuminated lights in a one-quarter-square-mile radius in the Wall Street 
area, including J. P. Morgan’s offices. It is still one of the best-remembered 
commercialization efforts in American history.24 

82	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The Pearl Street station, however, was not the inaugural commercial 
project for Edison’s lighting system. A man by the name of Henry Villard 
saw the Menlo Park demonstration and was quite impressed. Villard was 
the head of the Oregon Railway and Navigation Company, and he asked 
Edison to install an electric lighting system on his company’s new steam-
ship, the Columbia, which was being built in Pennsylvania. Edison agreed 
and the system was installed in the spring of 1880, delighting passengers 
from the steamer’s first voyage.25 
In addition, Edison and his partners achieved fame in Europe. In 
1881 Edison’s electrical system was exhibited at the Paris International 
Electrical Exposition. Reviewers at the time reported the Edison sys-
tem was prominent because he, unlike other inventors in the same field, 
had figured out all the details and developed a completely functioning 
electrical lighting system. Edison’s system also was unveiled at a similar 
exhibition near London in 1882. The “Wizard” went even further there 
when he opened his full-scale lighting system in the center of London, 
at 57 Holborn Viaduct, with a generator, underground wires to deliver 
the electricity, and lamps. By April 1882 the Holborn Viaduct project 
consistently kept 938 lamps alight, and it served as something of a dress 
rehearsal for the Pearl Street station, which opened five months later.26 
Back in America, Edison turned his full attention to the Pearl Street 
project by focusing on the manufacture of all the necessary equipment. 
This did not mean, however, that further improvements on the technology 
ceased; Edison and his team filed for 256 patents in the period from 1880 
to 1882. The effort to demonstrate Edison’s electrical system through the 
Pearl Street project was impressive in its detail and depth. For example, 
Edison and his team persisted in seeking the best material for the fila-
ment in his electric lightbulb. In 1880 they finally settled on bamboo, but 
not just any bamboo—their preference was for Japanese bamboo, which 
outlasted the previously popular Calcutta bamboo. In addition, whatever 
choices were made on materials had to also work in a manufacturing set-
ting. There was some difficulty manufacturing the bamboo filaments, but 
the Edison team found that the problem could be addressed with a subtle 
change in the carbonization process by holding the bamboo “edgeways” 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
83
instead of “flatways.” The source of Edison’s competitive advantage was 
well illustrated with the bamboo filament because he had the resources 
to search worldwide for the best material, and he recruited people who 
had the patience and the perceptiveness to find the subtle differences that 
solved problems. Today, filaments are made of tungsten, a rare metallic 
element with a high melting point.27
No less impressive was the array of new companies Edison estab-
lished. With the Pearl Street project, Edison created a corporate structure 
that assigned key responsibilities among his team and key risks among 
investors. The parent corporation was formed in 1878 as The Edison 
Electric Light Company; it was used to finance the invention of the full 
lighting system. The Edison Electric Illuminating Company of New York 
was formed in 1880 to build the Pearl Street project, and Edison Machine 
Works was formed in 1881 to build the “Jumbo” dynamos for the Pearl 
Street station and elsewhere. The Electric Tube Company was formed 
in 1881 to produce the copper conductors for the underground delivery 
of electricity from the generator to the electric lamps. The Edison Lamp 
Works was formed in 1880 to manufacture the electric lamps themselves, 
and Bergmann and Company was formed in 1881 to manufacture acces-
sories, such as lamp sockets and switches.28 
With all these advances in technology and the development of a sophis-
ticated corporate structure, the tangible result—the Pearl Street power 
plant—might seem slightly anticlimactic. Edison bought the buildings at 
255 and 257 Pearl Street for $65,000. Coal was stored in the basement, 
and a conveyor transported the coal to the first floor, where it was burned 
in four Babcock & Wilcox boilers to make steam. The Jumbo generators 
were on the next floor up, each measuring 168 by 105 inches and weighing 
thirty tons. Each had the capability to produce about 51,500 watts and 
could light seven hundred class A lamps. The next floor housed a set of 
electric lamps for testing and to measure performance.29 
While the Pearl Street building itself was relatively unremarkable, 
what went on inside the building must be recognized as a triumph for 
Edison and for mankind. Within that building an amazing transformation 
of energy occurred, as burning coal unlocked the chemical energy that 

84	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
had been forming in the coal for thousands of years and transformed it to 
steam in the Babcock & Wilcox boilers. Inside the Porter Allen engines, 
the steam was transformed to mechanical energy, and, finally, that 
mechanical energy pushed and pulled the magnet inside the generator to 
induce the flow of electricity in a coil of wire—just as Faraday proved it 
would. From the Pearl Street power plant, electricity flowed through over 
eighty thousand feet of underground wire conductors that Edison’s team 
had laid. Those wires were laid to compete for the business of about 1,500 
customers in the Pearl Street District, who used a total of about twenty 
thousand gas lamps. With the electric lights aglow on September 4, 1882, 
Edison’s reply to a reporter neatly summed up what he had done: “I have 
accomplished all I promised.”30
P U S H E D  O U T 
Indeed, Edison had done all that he promised and, in the process, invented 
an entire industry. Not long after the Pearl Street triumph, however, Edison 
suffered a defeat that pushed him out of the industry he invented. He had 
a preview of what was to come when he asked Villard to sort out a few 
problems with his European enterprises. Under Villard’s plan in 1887, the 
name of Edison’s Company in Germany, the German Edison Company, 
was changed to AEG or Allgemeine Elektricitäts-Gesellschaft—in 
English, the General Electric Company. The Edison name had disap-
peared from the German enterprise. Villard returned to the United States 
with the purpose of negotiating with Drexel, Morgan and Company on 
behalf of German banks looking for investments in American industries, 
including the electricity business. In 1889 Villard helped reorganize all the 
Edison Companies into a new company called Edison General Electric 
Company. Over half of the money to consolidate the Edison companies 
came from German banks and interests. Villard became the head of the 
new Edison General Electric Company, which combined all the compa-
nies that helped create the Pearl Street project. Edison apparently signed 
www.ebook3000.com

	
T h o m a s  E d i s o n ’ s  L i g h t 	
85
off on this because it would allow him to get back to inventing. Ultimately, 
his trust was misplaced.31 
At the same time that these financial deals were being made, the electric-
ity industry was embroiled in what was termed the “Battle of the Currents.” 
Edison backed a system based on direct-current (DC) power, while oth-
ers, most notably George Westinghouse and the Thomson-Houston firm, 
backed a system based on alternating-current (AC) power. Edison’s DC 
power eventually lost the battle and this loss was partly the reason Edison 
lost his company. A merger was eventually proposed between Edison 
General Electric and Thomson-Houston. In 1892 Morgan and Vanderbilt 
interests took over the negotiations on the merger and closed the deal; 
the new company was simply named General Electric. At age forty-five, 
Edison was no longer a key businessman in the industry he had created, 
and his name had been erased from the company he built. While it was 
the end for Edison, it was the beginning for General Electric, a company 
still central to the science and technology of the electricity business today.32
E D I S O N ’ S  L E G A C Y
Thomas Edison invented the electricity business from top to bottom—from 
lightbulb to dynamo. The business needed to prove that it could employ 
the science of electricity and magnetism on a commercial scale, and that 
is precisely what Edison did at the Pearl Street Station and with several 
other projects thereafter. He succeeded because he was a practical genius 
who could travel in three worlds: science and technology, manufacturing 
and business, and, at least for a time, high finance. Edison connected the 
dots within and between these three contexts. The effort he expended, the 
bet-it-all risks he took, and the clarity of and commitment to his vision set 
a high standard for the entrepreneurs of any age. 
Despite his genius, Edison’s judgment was not infallible. At a crucial fork 
in the road he chose the wrong way—direct current instead of alternating 
current. That turn does not diminish his legacy, however, because being 

86	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
proved wrong is not the same as being proved useless. In addition, despite 
his reputation and savvy, he was not invincible against attacks from finan-
ciers. Being pushed out of his own company must have felt catastrophic, but 
it is often a consequence of using private investment, especially in a time of 
concentrated wealth. It is to Edison’s credit (and to his investors’) that funds 
were directed toward his laboratory to launch a new industry. 
Edison’s legacy, of course, goes well beyond the electricity business. 
He was among the most important inventors in American history. He 
showed a versatility and can-do attitude that were essential to invention in 
his time, or any time for that matter. He must still be an inspiration to any 
individual with an idea. Yet that inspiration can be felt beyond the indi-
vidual because Edison fostered research and development that climbed to 
a new level, creating a template for corporate labs moving forward. He 
essentially created corporate R&D, and his model is still used to this day. 
In 1928, to honor his mentor and friend and celebrate the fiftieth 
anniversary of the incandescent bulb, automaker Henry Ford began the 
construction of a museum in Dearborn, Michigan. It would contain a 
painstaking recreation of Edison’s lab from Menlo Park. A report from 
the Detroit Free Press captured the moment by reporting that at his own 
commemoration Edison “sat there, silent, his arms folded, an indescrib-
ably lonely figure, lonely in the loneliness of genius, of one who, somehow, 
has passed the others, who no longer has equals to share his world, his 
thoughts, his feelings.”33 
On October 18, 1931, at the age of eighty-four, Edison died at his home 
in Glenmont, New Jersey. On the day of his memorial service, October 21, 
1931, at about 10:00 pm eastern time, all but essential lights were turned 
off for one minute across America, including those on Broadway and the 
Statue of Liberty. Time magazine quoted Ford, who observed, “It has 
sometimes been said that we live in an industrial age. It might better be 
said we live in the age of Edison.”34 
www.ebook3000.com

87
C H A P T E R  6
George Westinghouse’s 
and Nikola Tesla’s 
Alternative 
Mr. Edison does not hesitate to say: “My personal desire 
would be to prohibit entirely the use of alternating currents.”
—George Westinghouse Jr. (1889)1
Thomas Edison must be given his due: he invented the electric lightbulb and 
commercialized the fi rst full system for electric lighting. He was con-
vinced, however, that electricity should be delivered with a direct-current 
(DC) power system, which meant that power would be delivered econom-
ically only within a one-mile radius or so of the centralized dynamos he 
wanted to build. To Edison a direct-current system was safe, allowing the 
use of low-voltage electricity; but the limited reach of his DC power plants 
meant the plants would be small and their costs would be high. 
George Westinghouse had an alternative to Edison’s DC system. He 
believed in an alternating-current (AC) power system, which could deliver 

88	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
power economically over hundreds of miles. This ability to transmit elec-
tricity over great distances meant that power could be generated from 
remote sources, such as the great hydroelectric dam at Niagara Falls, 
and power plants could be larger since they would serve a much broader 
geographic region. Edison chose direct current because he believed the 
high-voltage power of the Westinghouse system was dangerous. 
Since alternating-current systems dominate today, it is fair to say 
that Westinghouse, not Edison, had the last word on the technological 
foundation for modern electricity systems around the world. In addition, 
Westinghouse established the economic foundation for the electricity busi-
ness by demonstrating that bigger was better because economies of scale 
meant lower costs. Economies of scale would become a critical concept in 
the modern electricity business with profound consequences. Westinghouse 
demonstrated the superiority of alternating current in high-profile events 
such as the 1893 World’s Fair in Chicago and the hydropower developed 
at Niagara Falls.
Westinghouse was already a successful inventor and businessman 
when he came to the electricity business; he had invented the air brake for 
the railroad industry, which dramatically improved safety. Westinghouse 
clearly had the intelligence to achieve great things, and he even matched 
Edison in his people skills; he, too, developed a team of loyal, devoted 
colleagues. He was equal to Edison in vision as well—he envisioned the 
full AC system that he planned to establish, just as Edison had done with 
the DC system. Westinghouse, however, was not a “wizard”; he did not 
develop surprising new technology from scratch, as Edison seemed mag-
ically able to do, at least in the eyes of the public. Westinghouse often, 
and without hesitation, built upon the ideas of others. There is no more 
important example of this than his reliance on Nikola Tesla, the brilliant, 
quirky engineer who gave Westinghouse the science for the AC system and 
the essential crown jewel of that system: the AC electric motor. 
Although Westinghouse and Tesla won the Battle of the Currents, it 
is Edison who gets credit when the electric lightbulb and the invention 
of electric systems come to mind. Westinghouse never experienced the 
name recognition that Edison enjoyed. Mainstream history often neglects 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
89
Tesla as well, although he made crucial contributions to creating today’s 
electricity system. In this chapter we’ll turn to these two lesser-known but 
equally intriguing—and in some ways more successful—figures.
T E S L A ’ S  P A T H  T O  D I S C O V E R Y
Nikola Tesla was born in 1856 in what is now part of Croatia. According 
to the family legend, a powerful lightning storm marked the night of his 
birth. The midwife thought this a bad omen, declaring that he would be a 
child of darkness. His mother, as would any mother, disagreed—he would 
be a child of light. It might be most fitting to call Tesla a child of lightning. 
He surely kept faith with the science of Franklin that proved lightning was 
an electrical phenomenon; Tesla himself would eventually make his own 
artificial lightning in spectacular experiments.2 
His father, Milutin Tesla, was a priest in the Serbian Orthodox 
Church, and his mother, Georgina Mandić, was bright but unschooled. 
Nikola benefited from his mother’s inventiveness and his father’s daily test-
ing to strengthen his memory and reason. His father expected him to fol-
low in his footsteps as a cleric, but Tesla’s passion was in engineering. After 
he survived an attack of cholera, his father relented and let him pursue his 
studies in engineering at the Austrian Polytechnic School in Graz. 
In 1884, at the age of twenty-eight, Nikola Tesla arrived in America 
and, having worked for Edison’s company in Paris, he was eager to 
continue working for the Wizard. Tesla was tall, slender, and elegantly 
dressed. Edison was “rumpled, weary,” and in need of some help. He had, 
at that time, built isolated electric systems for mansions belonging to the 
wealthy, including J. P. Morgan and Cornelius Vanderbilt, and, as with 
all new technologies, there were problems. Morgan employed a full-time 
engineer at his house to ensure he had light in the evenings, yet short 
circuits still set the drapes afire, and the lights frequently flickered. Not 
unlike neighbors of electric power plants today, Morgan’s neighbors com-
plained of the noise, vibrations, and soot from the coal used to generate 
electricity. Mrs. Vanderbilt had even called to demand that the Edison 

90	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
system be removed from her house after it had caused a fire that she had 
to extinguish herself. As if that was not enough, a major ship using the 
Edison electric system—the SS Oregon—had been delayed in port in need 
of electrical repairs. Edison sent Tesla out to the ship to do the repairs, 
which he successfully completed. This won Tesla a job as a part of the 
Edison team.3 
Tesla did not stay with the Edison team for long. He offered to make 
Edison’s direct-current electric generators more efficient, and Edison said 
he would give Tesla $50,000 if he could. Tesla succeeded after months 
of hard work on his own, but when he went to Edison for the $50,000, 
Edison backtracked and said he’d meant the offer as a joke. Tesla quit 
Edison’s company the same day. But he needed money, and for a time 
he resorted to literally digging ditches; he could not have relished the 
work, since they were intended to bury the transmission lines for Edison’s 
direct-current systems. News got around, however, that the talented Tesla 
had ideas.4 
Investors approached Tesla to develop an improved arc lighting 
system. In 1885 he formed the Tesla Electric Light & Manufacturing 
Company with headquarters in Rahway, New Jersey. It was not focused 
on the alternating-current system he wanted to work on, but it was work 
nonetheless. Tesla succeeded in improving the arc light system, but soon 
was pushed out of the company and struck out on his own. 
T E S L A ’ S  A C  P O W E R  S Y S T E M
To understand Tesla’s major contribution, it is important to define the dif-
ference between direct-current and alternating-current power. Electricity 
is most easily thought of as a flow of electrons. With direct current, the 
flow of electrons goes in one direction, but with alternating current, the 
direction of the flow alternates—it moves first in one direction, and then in 
the reverse direction. In an article written in 1890, George Westinghouse 
explained why the reversal occurred, writing that when “a coil of wire 
with united ends is caused to approach a magnet,” then “a pulsation 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
91
of electricity” is produced in the wire “flowing in a definite direction.” 
Westinghouse went on to explain that “when the coil is withdrawn from 
the magnet” another “pulsation” is created in the wire “but this time in 
the opposite direction.” This was an exact match to Faraday’s experi-
ments, which showed the induced electric current occurring only when 
the wire moved back and forth within a magnetic field.5 
For electric motors, this alternating current is exactly what works best. 
Why is that? As noted earlier, the purpose of an electric motor is to take 
electrical power and convert it into mechanical power so that work can 
be done. Writer David Bodanis offers a clever way to think about how an 
alternating-current electric motor works. He imagines “a clock face with 
only a single long minute hand, pointing straight up to twelve o’clock.” He 
then inserts an electromagnet on the face of the clock at the three o’clock 
mark and does the same at nine o’clock. He turns on the electromagnet 
at the three o’clock position, which attracts the minute hand. Then, just 
before the minute hand reaches three o’clock, he shuts the electromagnet 
off and turns on the electromagnet at the nine o’clock position. The min-
ute hand spins with attraction to nine o’clock. If that on-off sequence is 
repeated, the minute hand whirls around clockwise, and that movement 
can do all sorts of work. If the magnets are strong enough, the motor could 
“drag a ton or more of elevator straight up a shaft in a tall building,” or 
spin the “wheels of electric street cars,” in Bodanis’ words.6
If motors work best with alternating current, how did direct-current 
motors work? Direct-current motors worked by mechanically changing 
the direction of the current flow with a device called a commutator. One 
of Tesla’s professors at Graz scoffed at him for suggesting that one day he 
would eliminate the commutator and make the electric motor much more 
efficient, but that is exactly what Tesla did.7
The impact of Tesla’s discovery and invention did not stop at the electric 
motor; it traveled back through all the elements of an alternating-current 
electrical system. Most important, alternating-current power could be 
transmitted over long distances because the voltages of alternating-current 
power could easily be changed from higher to lower as needed—that is, 
the voltages could be transformed. Transformers change the voltage of 

92	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
electricity passing through the power lines, for example, as they enter a 
home. Transformers lower the voltage from a high level, which facilitates 
the transmission of electricity, down to a low one, which makes electricity 
safe for home use.8
Tesla wasn’t careless about the business side of his scientific work. In 
1887 he filed for seven patents for his polyphase AC motor and transmis-
sion system. The following year, Tesla, then thirty-one years old, gave a 
speech at Columbia University before the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers titled “A New System of Alternate Current Motors and 
Transformers.” George Westinghouse, the successful industrialist from 
Pittsburgh, was not in the audience for Tesla’s speech, but he arranged 
a visit to Tesla’s lab. Impressed by what he saw, he paid $5,000 in cash, 
$55,000 in Westinghouse Corporation stock, and a promise of royalties 
equal to $2.50 per horsepower of electrical capacity sold.9 
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  P A T H  T O  S U C C E S S
Westinghouse was born in upstate New York on October 6, 1846. His 
father, George Westinghouse Sr., owned a machine shop that designed 
and made farm equipment; he also was something of an inventor, having 
seven patents to his name. It was in his father’s machine shop that young 
George Jr. got his first hands-on experience with machines, including the 
all-important steam engine. By the time he was twelve, Westinghouse 
knew how to assemble a steam engine and developed a great interest in 
building a rotary version. The steam engines of his time were reciprocat-
ing engines, in which the steam pushed pistons up and down to facilitate 
mechanical work. This vertical motion had to be converted with rods and 
shafts into the rotary power needed for manufacturing, and this conver-
sion meant that a lot of the steam power was wasted. In 1865, at age 
nineteen, Westinghouse won his first patent for a rotary engine that would 
help avoid wasted energy. It was the first of many; he went on to win 361 
patents of his own and his companies held more than three thousand pat-
ents in total.10 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
93
The Air Brake
The growth of railroads empowered the American economy in the second 
half of the nineteenth century, as it set off explosive growth in coal, steel, 
machinery, and mining. It was in the railroad business that the young 
Westinghouse found his first technological and commercial successes. 
Railroad accidents were a major problem, both in terms of lost lives and 
lost revenue. It was time-consuming to right trains that had been derailed, 
meaning a tedious delay for travelers and businesses. Westinghouse’s first 
invention for the railroad industry was the “rerailing frog,” which effi-
ciently put derailed trains back on the tracks. To manufacture his rerail-
ing frogs, Westinghouse needed a steel foundry and he chose Pittsburgh’s 
Cook & Anderson.11 
The Civil War had transformed Pittsburgh into America’s leading 
center of steel production. It was a powerhouse: 45 percent of the nation’s 
iron was produced there, and 50 percent of its glass. This is why leaders in 
business, such as Andrew Carnegie, Benjamin Jones, and James Laughlin 
set up their businesses there. Pittsburgh thrived on industry, growth, and 
innovation.12 
Westinghouse’s greatest contribution to the railroad industry was not, 
however, in rerailing cars after accidents. Rather, it was in preventing 
train wrecks in the first place with his new braking system and new sig-
naling and switching devices. Westinghouse first got the idea for his air 
brake when he was delayed by a train wreck near Troy, New York. At the 
time, braking power was applied physically to the individual train cars 
by brakemen every few cars. The core of the new air brake idea was that 
the train engineer alone could apply brakes with enough power to dis-
tribute to every train car. At first, steam was considered for the job since 
it was already being produced to power the train by burning coal in boil-
ers. Steam could potentially be distributed to brake cylinders on each car 
through pipe, but the problem was that steam condensed and weakened as 
it traveled through the pipe.13 
Westinghouse decided to try an alternative to steam after reading a 
European magazine article about a mine project where the builders had 

94	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
switched from steam to compressed air. The compression sped up the 
drilling significantly for the Mont Cenis Tunnel connecting the railroads 
of Italy and France. From this, Westinghouse saw the application to rail-
road brakes. In 1868 Westinghouse filed a patent for a compressed-air ver-
sion of a brake called the “straight-air brake”; steam was used to compress 
air. The locomotive would then have a reservoir of compressed air, and 
when braking was required, the engineer would release the compressed 
air to each of the cars through a flexible pipe. When released, the com-
pressed air would push the brake shoes against the train wheels and stop 
the train. His concept was met with skepticism from investors, but the 
brake did what it was supposed to do; it cut the average stopping distance 
from 1,600 feet to just 500 feet.14 
In 1869 Westinghouse formed Westinghouse Air Brake Company 
with capital of $500,000.15 He struggled to keep up with orders for his 
new air brake, so he made important efforts to standardize the manufac-
turing process. By 1881 the air brake dominated the passenger railroad 
brake business worldwide, and Westinghouse had manufacturing facil-
ities in England, France, Germany, Belgium, and Russia. This made 
him one of the nation’s largest international manufacturers, as well as 
a multimillionaire. More to the point here, it gave him important expe-
rience in mass-producing a technology that was in high demand. That 
experience would serve him well when he jumped into the electricity 
business.16 
The air brake was used widely for passenger trains, but it took longer 
to catch on with freight trains. The obstacle was that freight trains, unlike 
passenger trains, frequently had to switch cars from one railroad com-
pany to another, so air brakes could be used only if all companies used 
them or if railroad equipment became standardized. In 1886 the rail-
road industry called for trials of competing brake systems, pitting the air 
brake against a competing technology, the vacuum brake. By 1889 the air 
brake became the standard recommendation by the Master Car Builders 
Association, and 90 percent of all cars had Westinghouse brakes by 1920. 
Westinghouse’s success was founded on technological innovation and his 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
95
Garrison Alley research facility in Pittsburgh was a vibrant, productive 
place. Impressively, Westinghouse had achieved success without invest-
ment from the big banks.17
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  B U S I N E S S
Westinghouse made his move into the still-young electricity business in 
1885. That year, Guido Pantaleoni, a Westinghouse employee who was 
also the son of a Westinghouse family friend, traveled to Italy and met 
with two men, Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs. Gaulard had 
installed an alternating-current distribution system, and the two men 
held the relevant patents. Westinghouse became especially interested 
in the transformer they had used, and, in 1885, Westinghouse asked 
Pantaleoni to secure the rights to the technologies for the US market 
on Westinghouse’s behalf. Biographer Quentin Skrabec believes that 
Westinghouse’s interest in electricity evolved from his use of electric 
power in his railroad signals and switches. Westinghouse built his new 
electric company using his Garrison Alley lab, which rivaled Edison’s 
Menlo Park facility.18 
The Westinghouse Electric Company was formed in 1886 with $1 mil-
lion in capital plus twenty-seven patents as assets, including the US rights 
to the Gaulard and Gibbs technology. Westinghouse put two of his most 
enterprising people in charge of the development of alternating-current 
power, Albert Schmid and Oliver B. Shallenberger. He also began a 
three-part research endeavor covering the alternating-current generator, 
alternating-current incandescent bulb, and alternating-current motor. He 
had already built three very successful businesses without the big banks, 
and he had substantial cash flow from his successes—Air Brake, Union 
Switch and Signal,19 and Philadelphia Company (a natural gas supplier). 
Unfortunately, the electricity business demanded more investment capital 
than Westinghouse could muster on his own. He had to rely on the banks, 
which eventually led to financial crisis.20

96	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Dirty Tricks in the Battle of the Currents
With the success of Westinghouse’s alternating-current power system, the 
Battle of the Currents heated up. It was in this context that an odd side-
show emerged. In 1888 Harold Brown, a consulting electrician, wrote 
a letter to the New York Evening Post arguing that laws should be adopted 
to block the use of high-voltage alternating-current power because it was 
dangerous. A proposal to limit voltages was brought before the New York 
Board of Electrical Control, and Brown approached none other than 
Thomas Edison to help prove that alternating-current power was dan-
gerous. Edison agreed to help Brown and assigned his colleague Arthur 
E. Kennelly to the task. Later that year, at the Columbia College School 
of Mines, Brown put on a spectacle by executing a seventy-six-pound dog 
with alternating-current power. In later demonstrations, he did more of 
the same. In addition, around this time, New York was looking for an 
alternative to hanging as a form of capital punishment; in light of Brown’s 
spectacles, electrocution was proposed. Edison spoke in favor of this 
idea, and in the end the commission agreed to recommend the use of 
alternating-current power for electrocution, but left the logistical details 
to a panel of experts.21 
When electrocution became the legal means for capital punishment 
in New York, Brown eagerly—and successfully—sought help from the 
Edison Electric Light Company and the Thomson-Houston Electric 
Company to have Westinghouse generators shipped to Auburn Prison to 
be used for executions. A man named William Kemmler was sentenced to 
electrocution there, but his legal counsel challenged his sentence, arguing 
that electrocution was cruel and unusual punishment. Edison testified that 
electrocution with one thousand volts of alternating-current power would 
bring a quick and painless death. The judge ruled in favor of Edison’s 
testimony, and Kemmler was executed in August 1890. However, the pro-
cess was neither quick nor painless. A New York Times headline read, “Far 
Worse than Hanging: Kemmler’s Death Proves an Awful Spectacle.” The 
first seventeen-second application of voltage did not kill Kemmler and 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
97
the second sixty-second application had gruesome results, bursting blood 
vessels and singeing his body.22
Brown and Edison’s efforts did nothing to stop the victory of 
alternating-current power. They did tarnish Edison’s image, how-
ever, because he tried to impede the full commercialization of the 
alternating-current system, the eventual winner in the Battle of the 
Currents. Westinghouse’s reputation and character were enhanced by the 
way he handled Edison’s dirty tricks. In an article titled “A Reply to Mr. 
Edison,” published in the North American Review in 1889, Westinghouse 
calmly put forth substantive proof of why alternating-current systems 
were safe. Westinghouse’s transformers were at the heart of his arguments 
on safety. In essence, he said the lines that delivered electricity through 
the streets—the street mains—were completely separate from the lines that 
delivered electricity into a home, the house mains. Westinghouse wrote that 
“one of the most beautiful features” of an alternating-current system is 
the fact that the electricity sent through a “coil of thin wire” induces “an 
equivalent amount of electrical energy” in a “neighboring coil of thicker 
wire”—just as Faraday had proved. And those separate wires could be 
designed to have fundamentally different voltages.23 
Success at the 1893 Chicago World’s Fair
Although Westinghouse had secured the rights to Tesla’s patents and 
worked diligently on the alternating-current system, he had no major 
commercial success for five years. Some of the delay was caused by tech-
nical choices the Westinghouse team made. At last, Westinghouse won 
his first major victory in the Battle of the Currents at the 1893 Chicago 
World’s Fair, or the Columbian Exposition. Electricity took center stage 
at the fair, and it was Westinghouse’s alternating-current power that 
made the show. After an aggressive competition with General Electric, 
Westinghouse won the lighting contract for the fair itself. Westinghouse 
was able to come in at about half the General Electric bid of $1 million 

98	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
because his alternating-current system used less copper wire, and a single 
system, with transformers, served both motors and lighting. In retalia-
tion, General Electric won a court order that blocked Westinghouse from 
using Edison lamps of any type, so Westinghouse was forced to use the 
inferior “stopper lamp.” This was a lamp designed and manufactured 
by Westinghouse to avoid infringing on the Edison incandescent bulb. It 
used inert nitrogen gas within the bulb rather than making a vacuum as 
Edison did. The stopper lamp had a shorter lifespan, but it was the quick 
fix needed to meet the demands of the World’s Fair.24 
Victory at Niagara Falls
The alternating-current system triumphed in an even more compelling 
way by winning the right to capture the power of Niagara Falls. There 
had been several failed plans to accomplish this over the years. In 1889, 
however, a group of bankers formed the Cataract Construction Company 
and finally garnered enough interest from investors including Morgan, 
Vanderbilt, and Baron Rothschild.25 
To reach a sufficiently large market, the power had to be transported 
from the falls to Buffalo, New York. However, there was no consensus on 
how to move it over the twenty miles between the two. The options for 
what form the power should take included water under pressure, com-
pressed air, and electricity. It soon became clear that the scientists and 
engineers favored the electricity option, but the choice between alternat-
ing current and direct current still hadn’t been made.26 
The Cataract Construction Company invited bids from compa-
nies around the world. By March of 1893 both Westinghouse Electric 
and the newly formed General Electric (the result of the merger of 
Edison General Electric and Thomson-Houston) submitted propos-
als for an alternating-current system. Initially, both bids were rejected 
because Cataract decided to design its own generators. In the end, 
Westinghouse modified the design of the Cataract company turbines 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
99
before manufacturing them, and electric power was flowing in Niagara 
Falls by 1895 and to Buffalo by 1896.27 
With the engineering and financial success at Niagara Falls and the 
Chicago World’s Fair, Tesla and Westinghouse had decisively won the 
Battle of the Currents with their alternating-current system.28 
T E S L A ’ S  W I R E L E S S  W O N D E R S
After the victory at Niagara Falls, Tesla was famous. His contribution to 
alternating-current power was widely celebrated, and yet all was not well. 
In March 1895, Tesla’s lab and all his records had been lost in a fire, and 
while Niagara Falls made him famous, it did not make him rich. Tesla’s 
deal with Westinghouse called for a royalty of $2.50 per horsepower for 
the alternating-current systems actually developed with Tesla’s design; 
he should have profited handsomely. But at the time, Westinghouse was 
opposing Morgan’s effort to form an electricity trust, and his finances were 
on shaky ground. Westinghouse told Tesla he could not afford to pay the 
royalty and asked him to waive the contractual requirement. Purely out of 
gratitude for Westinghouse’s faith in him from the beginning, Tesla nul-
lified the royalty requirement. It was a decision that ultimately left Tesla 
struggling financially for the rest of his life.29 
Tesla was eager for a new lab and funding; he wanted to get back to 
his work on wireless transmission. In 1895 he found additional incentive to 
do so because of advances in wireless communication. Guglielmo Marconi 
had built a wireless system that could send and receive Morse code over 
a distance of one and a half miles, but Tesla was convinced he was ahead 
of Marconi in creating what would be, in essence, radio transmission. In 
1893 Tesla had demonstrated his own system, which had all the elements 
of modern radio technology, and he received his first patent for it in 1900. 
Marconi, meanwhile, filed his first patent in England in 1896 and another 
in the United States in 1900. For three years the US Patent Office refused 
to grant Marconi a patent, arguing that Tesla’s patent preempted it, but 

100	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
in 1904, the Patent Office reversed its decision and granted Marconi’s 
request for reasons never made clear. In 1909 Marconi won the Nobel 
Prize, and an embittered Tesla sued for patent infringement in 1915. He 
had no funds to pursue the case, but in 1943, many years after Tesla’s 
death, the US Supreme Court named Tesla the primary inventor of the 
radio. Why did the court take up the case at this time? A popular expla-
nation is that the Marconi Company sued the US government for using 
its patents in World War I. By restoring Tesla’s patent, the court avoided 
the case.30
Tesla’s radio work is germane to the history of electricity because he 
believed that, just as he had invented wireless transmission of radio waves, 
he could invent a mechanism for the wireless transmission of electrical 
energy. It was this belief that led to two amazing experiments; one in 
Colorado Springs, Colorado, the other in Long Island, New York. Tesla 
attracted $30,000 of funding from Colonel John Jacob Astor, owner of the 
Waldorf Astoria in New York, and his friend Leonard E. Curtis helped 
secure land and power for this work in Colorado. Tesla set up an exper-
imental station with a few assistants in Colorado Springs in May 1899. 
There, he built an ordinary-looking, barnlike building with an extraor-
dinary eighty-foot wooden tower resembling an old-fashioned oil derrick 
protruding out of the roof. Attached to the tower was a skinny 142-foot-tall 
mast with a copper ball on the end.31 
Inside the barnlike building lay a large Tesla coil. In 1891 Tesla had 
patented his coil, which was a type of transformer that could take elec-
tricity at an ordinary frequency (sixty cycles) and increase it to frequen-
cies of hundreds of thousands of cycles. The Tesla coil could also increase 
voltage to extremely high levels, so it was central to Tesla’s research on 
high-frequency, high-voltage electric currents. This research set the pat-
tern for his ultimately futile attempts to achieve wireless transmission of 
electrical energy.32 
Tesla predicted that, far beyond transmitting wireless telegraphic 
messages, man could “transmit power in unlimited amounts to any terres-
trial distance and almost without any loss.” Tesla’s biographers Margaret 
Cheney and Robert Uth point to one report that Tesla successfully tested 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
101
his views by lighting two hundred incandescent bulbs from a distance of 
twenty-six miles from his lab. They conclude, however, that there is no 
evidence of such success and, moreover, no one recreated the alleged feat. 
The same way natural lightning can cause a blackout, Tesla’s first 
man-made lightning caused the entire city of Colorado Springs to lose 
power when it burned out the local generator. Tesla spent nine months on 
his experiments in Colorado Springs, and though there is little evidence 
he actually transmitted electricity wirelessly there, he seemed pleased with 
what he learned. Before his return to New York in 1900 he said, “The 
practicability of the system is thoroughly demonstrated.”33 
Tesla’s friends Robert and Katharine Johnson were intrigued by his 
tales of the Colorado Springs experiments. Robert asked Tesla to write an 
article for Century magazine, which Tesla titled “The Problem of Increasing 
Human Energy.” In it he painted a futuristic view of the importance of 
electric power; his ideas on energy ranged from capturing and storing the 
energy from lightning strikes to solar power. Tesla’s article caught J. P. 
Morgan’s attention, and, with the promise of major improvements in com-
munication speed, Morgan funded Tesla with $150,000 to build a power 
plant and tower. Tesla used Wardenclyffe, a two-hundred-acre site near 
Shoreham on Long Island. Construction started in 1901 on an enormous 
tower that extended 187 feet into the sky with a fifty-five-ton ball made of 
steel at the top.34 
Unfortunately, Morgan withdrew his support as suddenly as he had 
granted it. When Marconi successfully established wireless communica-
tion across the Atlantic in 1901, Morgan became skeptical of Tesla’s focus 
on the great tower he was building with Morgan’s money. When Tesla 
inevitably ran out of funds, he turned to Morgan in 1902 for more, and 
Morgan simply said no. By 1905, beset by financial problems, Tesla had to 
stop work, and with $20,000 in unpaid hotel bills, he turned over the deed 
for Wardenclyffe to the Waldorf Astoria.35
In 1916 Tesla was almost sixty years old and so broke that he had to 
file for bankruptcy. With Tesla’s financial troubles as a contributing factor, 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers awarded him the Edison 
Medal. Tesla was furious when first approached about the award: the fact 

102	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
that it was the Edison Medal must have felt like a provocation. Hamstrung 
by his financial difficulties, Tesla ultimately agreed to accept the award, 
and the ceremony took place in 1917.36 
In 1931 a seventy-fifth birthday celebration was arranged for Tesla, 
and Time magazine put on its cover a reproduction of the Blue Portrait 
of Tesla. The portrait was painted in 1916 by Princess Lwoff-Parlaghy, 
a noted portrait painter and short-term wife to a Russian prince. It was 
painted under artificial light suggested by Tesla; the light from a strong 
incandescent bulb was filtered through blue glass.37 
In 1937, on his way to feed the pigeons at Bryant Park, Tesla was 
struck by a taxi; refusing help, he made his way back to his hotel alone. 
Former colleagues at Westinghouse’s company, worried about Tesla’s 
finances, arranged a $125 monthly stipend from the company. Still, in 
1942, a friend was alarmed to find him surviving on warm milk and 
crackers. On January 7, 1943, Tesla died in his sleep in his room at the 
New Yorker Hotel. 
P U S H E D  O U T
Westinghouse continued to make significant contributions to lowering the 
cost of electricity generation with advances in the steam turbine as a sub-
stitute for steam engines. The steam turbine was first developed by Sir 
Charles Parsons in England in 1884. Westinghouse licensed the Parsons 
technology for manufacturing in the United States, and he became the 
first to manufacture steam turbines in America. 
Westinghouse, as already noted, generally tried to avoid the big banks 
when financing his enterprises. Instead, he sought loans and equity invest-
ment from a relatively small circle of friends and associates. He also invested 
his own money heavily, if not exclusively, in his own endeavors. In 1907 
a nationwide financial crisis led to his small circle of investors requesting 
repayment for many of the loans. As a result, three of his companies went 
into bankruptcy or receivership: the Westinghouse Electric Company, the 
Machine Company, and the Security Investment Company. Two of his 
www.ebook3000.com

	
W E S T I N G H O U S E ’ S  A N D  T E S L A ’ S  A LT E R N A T I V E 	
103
other companies had no debt and survived the financial crisis: Air Brake 
and Union Switch and Signal. 
Westinghouse Electric had borrowed a great deal of money from 
banks and, by 1908, needed a reorganization plan in which the debt from 
Westinghouse Electric was converted to stock ownership. This increase 
in outside stock ownership brought a new board of directors. While 
Westinghouse was retained as the president of Westinghouse Electric, his 
power was drastically limited. By 1911 Westinghouse was pushed out of 
the business altogether, his ouster a striking parallel to Edison’s fall.38 
T H E  W E S T I N G H O U S E - T E S L A  L E G A C Y
As in Edison’s case, Westinghouse’s and Tesla’s contributions to the com-
mercialization of the electricity business cannot be overstated. Together 
they built a commercial-scale alternating-current power system from end 
to end, just as Edison had done with the direct-current system. Notably, 
and also like Edison, they started to create their system by perfecting a 
technology for the use of electricity. Edison started with the lightbulb, while 
Westinghouse and Tesla started with the electric motor. This primary 
focus on inventions that transformed daily life and livelihoods would be 
lost as electric utilities made a shift to focus on the generation of electricity.
Who made the more important contribution to the history of elec-
tricity: Edison or Westinghouse and Tesla? It is crucial to remember that 
the last step in a journey is no more important than the first. Yes, Tesla 
and Westinghouse were right in taking the alternating-current fork in the 
road, but Edison’s choice of the direct-current path was an essential point 
of comparison for proving the alternating-current path was better. The 
electricity business would not have developed at the same pace had they 
not both made important contributions. Indeed, as is often the case, the 
competition between these two efforts prodded them to move faster and 
take more risks than they might have otherwise. 
Westinghouse was arguably better at recognizing and winning over 
talent than Edison; their respective treatments of Nikola Tesla are a case 

104	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
in point. Moreover, the dedication plaque on the Westinghouse Memorial 
in Schenley Park in Pittsburgh reads, “This memorial unveiled October 6, 
1930, in honor of George Westinghouse is an enduring testimonial to the 
esteem, affection and loyalty of 60,000 employees of the great industrial 
organizations of which he was the founder.”39
In a survey published in 2003, fifty-eight professors of history and 
management were asked to name “the greatest entrepreneurs and busi-
nesspeople in American history.” The top five were Henry Ford, Bill 
Gates, J. D. Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, and Thomas Edison. George 
Westinghouse was ranked twentieth, which is not bad, but it is too far 
behind Edison. Westinghouse deserves better for what he accomplished 
and how he did it. He achieved enormous impact in two new, big indus-
tries of his time: rail transport and electricity.40 
Importantly, Westinghouse won the Battle of the Currents by betting 
on Tesla’s science; Westinghouse then merged Tesla’s scientific genius 
with his own technological and business know-how. His technology, with 
its large scale and wide reach, powered the economics of the electric-
ity business for many decades to come. As we’ll see in the next chapter, 
Westinghouse’s technology was the means by which Samuel Insull cap-
tured economies of scale and scope to electrify more homes and businesses 
than ever before. 
www.ebook3000.com

105
C H A P T E R  7
Samuel Insull’s 
Electric City, Chicago
. . . the Ishmael or Insull whose hand is against every man’s.
—Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)1
Edison, westinghouse, and Tesla created the electricity industry by commer-
cializing the full range of technologies, from power plants to lightbulbs to 
electric motors. Samuel Insull created the electricity business by establish-
ing the practices that made electricity available and aff ordable to all. 
Insull immigrated to America from England in 1881, at the age of 
twenty-one, expressly to serve as the private secretary for Thomas Edison. 
He became a trusted member of the Edison team, bringing rationality and 
sound fi nancial practices to Edison’s enterprise. Although Edison himself 
was eventually pushed out of the company that bore his name, Edison 
General Electric, Insull was asked to stay on in a top position at the newly 
created General Electric Company. Insull rejected the off er, however, and 
in 1892 he chose instead to move to Chicago to become president of a 
much smaller business called Chicago Edison. Insull believed the future of 

106	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
the industry was in selling electricity through electric utilities like Chicago 
Edison, which would generate and deliver electricity to homes and busi-
nesses, rather than in companies like General Electric that manufactured 
equipment. Chicago was fertile ground for Insull to test his ideas about the 
potential importance of electricity to America because it was one of the 
largest and most important commercial cities. Insull soon became one of 
its most prominent citizens.
From his new base in Chicago, Insull began to identify and implement 
the business and regulatory practices that would dramatically cut the cost 
and, consequently, the price of electricity. He was eager to gain new elec-
tricity customers because the more customers he had to share the fixed 
cost of generating and delivering power, the lower the average price of 
electricity per customer would be. These were the economies of scale and 
scope that Insull and others would use to justify the concept of a natural 
monopoly for local electric utilities. 
Insull wanted and achieved a monopoly on electricity sales in Chicago 
(and elsewhere), but unlike the profit-hungry businessperson who would 
use a monopoly to raise prices, Insull used his monopoly to lower them. 
This is where his influence on regulatory practices comes in: Insull did not 
want an unbridled monopoly, and he actually requested that electricity 
prices be regulated by state government. 
From his modest beginnings at Chicago Edison, Insull enjoyed a 
meteoric rise into Chicago’s electricity business and then nationwide. 
However, it is his spectacular fall for which he is most remembered. 
Insull’s financial downfall was brought on by a combination of his own 
strategic mistakes and the hard line taken by Chicago and New York 
banks during the Great Depression. On top of his financial ruin, politi-
cians big and small contributed to Insull’s political and personal losses. 
The collapse of his investment holding companies in the early years of the 
Great Depression made Insull a target for politicians looking for someone 
to blame for the nation’s economic collapse. Among the most notable pol-
iticians was then Governor Franklin Roosevelt, who dragged Insull into 
a biblical tale when he railed against “the Ishmael or Insull whose hand 
is against every man’s.”2
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
107
Insull traveled to Europe for a rest, and while in Paris he heard of 
federal and local indictments against him for mail fraud, violations of the 
bankruptcy laws, and embezzlement, so he fled to Greece to avoid extra-
dition. The US Congress brought international pressure to bear on Insull, 
and he was brought back for trial in Chicago. He took the stand in his own 
defense and told the remarkable story of his life, including his early years 
with Edison, and his push to make his companies big enough to make 
electricity affordable to all. His story—the story retold below—won him 
acquittal on all counts.
S H O U L D E R  T O  S H O U L D E R  W I T H  E D I S O N
In 1874, at age fourteen, Insull started his career as an office boy for an 
auctioneer in London. In preparing to give a talk, Insull read an article 
in Scribner’s Monthly about a young inventor named Thomas Edison, and 
from that moment on Edison was Insull’s idol. At nineteen, Insull was 
fired unfairly to make room for a client’s son. He came across an ad in 
which an American banker was seeking a secretary. Insull won the posi-
tion when he offered to do the job for the lowest salary. As it turned out, 
his new employer was Colonel George E. Gouraud, Edison’s European 
representative.3 
Not long after Insull started his new job, Edison’s chief engineer, 
Edward Johnson, came to London. Insull impressed Johnson with his 
willingness to work hard and with his in-depth knowledge of Edison’s 
European ventures. As a result, Johnson convinced Edison to hire Insull 
as his private secretary, and Insull began his new position in New York 
in 1881. Forrest McDonald, Insull’s biographer, reports that at their first 
meeting, Edison and Insull were disappointed with each other. To Edison, 
Insull looked too young, and his accent made it difficult for Edison to 
understand him. Edison also looked askance at Insull’s impeccable dress. 
To Insull, Edison was poorly shaven and shabbily dressed, and his mid-
western accent was equally hard for Insull to understand. But regardless 
of his appearance, Edison had invented the stock ticker, the multiplex 

108	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
telegraph, the phonograph, and the telephone transmitter, all by the age 
of thirty-four, and Insull was impressed.4 
Edison’s dilemma was that he needed money to build out his electric 
system; his investors had put $500,000 into his effort, which he spent on 
the research and development phase, without offering further funds for 
manufacturing or equipment. To raise the cash, Edison decided to sell the 
most valuable of his European securities—those in the telephone business. 
Insull, having come from the London office, had all the necessary infor-
mation in his head, and by 4 am on his first day in New York, Insull had 
written up a detailed plan to sell these assets. With this inaugural effort, 
Insull became the Wizard’s financial wizard.5 
Another reason why Edison had to find his own cash for his work was 
that, while he firmly believed in larger, central station electric generation 
in which one large power plant would serve a neighborhood of customers, 
many banks thought it was a safer financial bet to build smaller, more iso-
lated power plants for each customer; they were hesitant to fund Edison’s 
larger central stations. Edison asked Insull to take control of this central 
station endeavor, and by 1886, there was an explosion of growth in central 
station service. Edison would need to manufacture a lot more equipment, 
and to that end Insull found an unused locomotive factory in Schenectady, 
New York. Edison moved much of his manufacturing there and sent Insull 
off to run the whole manufacturing effort with the admonition, “Do it big, 
Sammy. Make it either a big success or a big failure.” Insull managed to 
make it a big success; he started with two hundred employees in 1886 and 
drove that to six thousand by 1892.6
I N S U L L’ S  I N N O V A T I V E  P R I C I N G
From the start, Insull made it clear that he wanted the lowest possible 
price so that electricity could become a product for all people. In 1892 
Chicago had a population of one million, but only five thousand were elec-
tricity customers. Insull, more than anyone else at the time, understood 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
109
the pricing problem faced by an electric utility that wanted to win over 
new customers. The issue stemmed from the physical fact that electricity 
could not be efficiently stored on a large scale, which made it different 
from other forms of energy commodities. For example, gasoline for a car 
can be produced from crude oil at an oil refinery and then stored to be 
used in the future, something that could not be readily done with elec-
tricity. With few exceptions, electricity must be used the moment it is pro-
duced, and it must be produced the moment it is needed. The consequence 
of the lack of effective storage is substantial. It means that a large number 
of power plants and extensive transmission line capability would have to 
be built to meet the maximum or peak demand for electricity, and much 
of that capability would sit idle at times other than at that peak moment.7 
Still, Insull was determined to decrease the price of power. The best 
way to do this was to sell more electricity from the same power plants 
using the same transmission and distribution lines, so the fixed cost could 
be spread over more units of electricity and thus be cheaper for everyone. 
Selling more electricity using the same equipment was central to Insull’s plan 
to decrease price, and having customers that needed electricity at different 
times of day or times of year was essential to using the same equipment. 
Electric-lighting customers needed electricity at night because of the dark. 
On the other hand, transit customers who operated the electric streetcars 
did so during the day, so they were perfect for diversification with residen-
tial customers. Large factories were the ideal customers when they used 
electricity to run motors around the clock. Insull pursued these customers 
with vigor to make his business model work. One challenge was that elec-
tric streetcar companies and large industrial customers often generated 
their own power; Insull worked hard to get these customers to buy elec-
tricity from the utility instead.8
Next, Insull had to price electricity in a way that encouraged custom-
ers to sign up with his utility and then to use more and more electricity 
over more and more hours of the day. On a trip to London in 1894 Insull 
learned of something called the two-part price from a man named Arthur 
Wright. One part of the price would recover the fixed costs of generating 

110	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
and delivering electricity, such as the monthly payments on loans that 
were used to build the power plants. The other part would recover the 
variable costs of electricity, like the cost of the coal burned to make the 
power plant run. Large industrial customers found the two-part pricing 
especially attractive. It allowed them to use as much electricity as they 
wanted to around the clock, and to spread the fixed cost over a substan-
tial number of kilowatt-hours (kWh) of actual electricity use, thus making 
the average cost quite low. For this same reason, transit customers found 
two-part pricing attractive, too. Think of it in terms of an all-you-can-eat 
buffet. Insull was inviting customers to come on in and, for a fixed fee per 
month, eat as often and as much as they wanted.9
In assembling a diversified set of customers and by implementing an 
innovative, two-part pricing structure, Insull created two essential ele-
ments for his plan to make utility electric service available and affordable 
to all.
B I G G E R  A N D  B E T T E R  E Q U I P M E N T
Insull then created the third essential element by buying and installing 
bigger and better equipment to generate and deliver the electricity he 
sold. One of Insull’s first steps was to build an innovative power plant 
in Chicago, located where Harrison Street crossed the Chicago River. 
He increased the efficiency with which coal was turned into electricity, 
thereby cutting coal use in half.10 
Next, Insull strived to change the fundamental technology of gener-
ation by switching from steam engines to steam turbines. Here, Insull truly 
pushed the technology envelope. General Electric agreed to build the 
5,000 kW steam turbine Insull wanted, but if and only if Insull shared 
the risk of its development. Within ten years, he was pushing for even 
larger-scale generation with 35,000 kW steam turbines. By pushing 
larger-scale plants, Insull was achieving the economies of scale that would 
push electricity prices down.11 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
111
O L D  P O L I T I C S  L E A D S  T O  N E W  R E G U L A T I O N
Local politics in Chicago suffered from its share of corruption in Insull’s 
day, and city council votes were routinely bought and sold. The city 
council was also known to extort funds from electric utilities by setting 
up fake, competing utilities that were secretly owned by the city coun-
cil members. These fake companies were never operational, but they 
were granted long-term monopoly franchises, which meant the existing 
local utilities had to buy them out. The city council employed this tac-
tic against Insull in 1897 when its members created a company called 
Commonwealth Electric and granted it a fifty-year franchise to serve the 
public. Had the extortion worked, Insull would have been compelled to 
buy Commonwealth Electric, but Insull had the upper hand. Unknown 
to the city council, Insull had won an exclusive right to buy equipment 
from every US manufacturer for the Chicago area. Since the city coun-
cil’s fake company was not worth much if it could not buy equipment, 
Insull bought out the city council members for a small sum and secured a 
fifty-year franchise.12 
Insull then proposed that the prices charged by electric utilities like 
his be regulated by state governments. Yes, Insull actually asked for state 
government regulation and in exchange utilities would receive an exclu-
sive “monopoly” franchise—that is, the exclusive right to serve a city or 
another local area. The state would set the prices or “rates” the utility 
could charge its customers based on costs actually incurred by that utility, 
plus a normal profit; that’s why they are called cost-plus rates. Cost-plus 
regulation was the fourth essential element Insull set in place for the elec-
tricity business.13
Surprising as it may seem, Insull was not alone in his support for 
cost-plus regulation. The National Electric Light Association, the lobby-
ing group for electric utilities, promoted regulation both as an antidote for 
political corruption and as an alternative to city takeovers of utilities. In 
1907 the National Civic Federation, another high-profile group in which 
Insull was prominent, issued a three-volume study on the principles of 

112	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
regulation. The study became the general blueprint for state regulatory 
laws and led directly to the regulatory commission in Wisconsin, the 
Wisconsin Railroad Commission. John R. Commons, then a prominent 
economist from the University of Wisconsin and Insull’s colleague at the 
National Civic Federation, wrote the law. After Wisconsin, Massachusetts 
and New York established laws for utility regulation in 1907; thirty more 
states followed within the next nine years.14 
The creation of local monopolies governed by cost-plus regulation by 
the states was crucial to Insull’s strategy. A monopoly allowed the utility 
to get big enough to achieve economies of scale. This, in turn, allowed 
costs to fall. Falling costs meant lower prices for customers, and allowed 
the monopoly to grow, which created even more opportunities to realize 
economies of scale and scope. It was a virtuous cycle of sorts. This was a 
beneficial strategy as long as economies of scale remained and the goal 
was higher and higher electricity sales.
Insull offered to lower electricity rates if Chicago would approve 
the merger of his two companies, Chicago Edison and Commonwealth 
Electric.15 In 1907 Insull went forward with his merger to create the 
Commonwealth Edison Company—a company that today still serves 
70 percent of Illinois’s customers. (It is part of the Exelon family of 
companies.)
I N S U L L’ S  R I S E
In 1907, just forty-eight years old, Insull had achieved a great deal. His 
own electric companies were a success, as was the electricity business 
across America. It was Insull’s vision that served as the business model 
for this success. He pushed for monopoly regulation that allowed econo-
mies of scale to be realized, and in so doing he had started on the quest 
to make electricity available and affordable to all—“as natural and nec-
essary as breathing.”16 
Insull pushed forward with his plan to expand service and cut prices. 
In 1910, through his Lake County experiments, he showed that he could 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
113
cut the cost of power to even sparsely populated rural areas by using 
long-distance transmission lines to deliver power from central station gen-
erators. In 1911 Insull saw the potential for substantial cost savings for 
customers outside the Chicago area and he formed the Public Service 
Company of Northern Illinois to reach those households. Insull had cal-
culated that, for Illinois outside Cook County with its diversified electric 
needs, a single company could serve the area with 38 percent less generat-
ing capacity, cutting costs in half.17 
In 1912 Insull’s companies had $90 million in assets centered on 
electric service in the Chicago area, but by 1917 his assets had more 
than quadrupled to $400 million and included electric, gas, and tran-
sit service in thirteen different states. In 1912 Insull formed his first 
holding company, the Middle West Utilities Company. In that same 
year, Middle West acquired Central Illinois Public Service Company, 
which operated a transit company and a small electric utility. Insull 
rapidly grew the company by providing service to communities that 
previously did not have any. Starting with about 15,000 customers who 
used 15 million kWh of electricity, the company expanded to 150,000 
customers with 400 million kWh by the time Insull was finished. To 
be sure, holding companies brought with them complicated ownership 
and financial structures that could easily raise suspicions when scru-
tinized, and they would be put under a microscope during the Great 
Depression. Those suspicions included concerns that stock prices were 
inflated and fees charged by the holding company to its subsidiaries 
were too high. For Insull, however, in the early years the holding com-
panies were simply a vehicle for growth that meant he could offer lower 
electricity prices.18 
On top of his other successes, Insull was asked to serve as the chair-
man of the board of Peoples Gas Light & Coke Company to clean up the 
corruption within the company and restore its credibility.19 Insull was also 
very active in community service during World War I and supported the 
war effort as chairman of the Illinois State Council of Defense, winning 
praise from the Illinois governor for making the organization innovative 
and effective.20 Insull’s actions during World War I helped to cement his 

114	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
reputation and shape his empire. Soon after the United States entered the 
war, the price of coal skyrocketed.21 To his credit, Insull was insulated 
from this price spike and supply disruption because he had negotiated 
long-term contracts with Peabody Coal.22 Again, Insull, a leading busi-
nessman, invited government regulation by encouraging the federal gov-
ernment to control coal prices, which it did by setting a price cap to cut 
the price of coal in half.23 
In 1914 the Illinois Public Utility Commission was created as a key 
governing body in the state regulation that Insull had fought to put in 
place.24 Almost immediately, however, Chicago and other municipali-
ties started to lobby for a return to “home rule”—city regulation of utili-
ties.25 The new state commission soon was caught up in another sweeping 
change in politics once America went to war. Those leading the antiwar 
campaign turned it into a campaign against war profiteering, and utili-
ties were at the top of the list of targeted companies.26 Progressive leaders 
all over the Midwest—including well-known figures like Robert M. La 
Follette, a senator from and former governor of Wisconsin, and George 
W. Norris, a senator from Nebraska, joined in.27 
Utilities of all sorts kept coming to the regulatory commission to win 
rate increases after the war; when denied, many went into bankruptcy. 
Calls to abolish the Illinois Commission grew, and in the face of home 
rule fervor in 1920 the Illinois Public Utility Commission was disman-
tled by the state legislature. Once the public denunciations ended, Insull 
worked quickly to reestablish state regulation, at first by simply renaming 
the commission; it would be called the Illinois Commerce Commission, a 
name that persists today.28 
Insull’s star rose in the postwar era. As McDonald puts it, “In the 
hero-worshipping postwar decade, Insull became the Babe Ruth, the Jack 
Dempsey, the Red Grange of the business world. The people—butchers, 
bakers, candlestick-makers who invested in his stocks—fairly idolized 
him, and even titans viewed him with awe. He measured up to America’s 
image of itself: a rich, powerful, self-made giant, ruthless in smashing ene-
mies, generous and softhearted in dealing with the weak.”29 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
115
I N S U L L’ S  F I N A N C I A L  F A L L
The beginning of Insull’s financial fall came when he responded to a 
threat from a corporate raider named Cyrus Eaton. Eaton started to buy 
Insull’s operating companies’ stock, and to defend against Eaton accu-
mulating too many shares, Insull created a trust company in 1928 called 
Insull Utility Investments (IUI). Insull and his friends sold all their stock 
in the operating companies to IUI in exchange for its stock. They would 
then attempt to buy, through IUI, enough voting shares of the four big 
operating companies to achieve voting control and fend off Eaton. Insull 
set the initial value of the IUI stock at twelve dollars per share, and he 
then secured the option to buy a large block of additional shares at fif-
teen dollars per share. In the months that followed, the price of IUI stock 
skyrocketed to $150 per share. Stock prices for the operating companies 
soared, too. These high stock prices stifled Insull’s plan to gain voting con-
trol; it became too expensive to buy enough stock. Insull set up a second 
trust in 1929, the Corporation Securities Company of Chicago, or simply 
Corp. IUI and Corp also owned each other’s shares, and this became 
another level of protection against the corporate raider.30 
But these measures reached their limits. Ultimately, Insull agreed to 
buy Eaton’s shares and had to borrow money to do so. His bank loans 
were secured by IUI and Corp stock. Since the value of IUI and Corp 
stock was driven by the stock prices for the operating companies, the stock 
prices for IUI and Corp would fall accordingly if the operating company’s 
stocks fell. This was exactly what happened as the Great Depression took 
hold, and since IUI and Corp stock were the collateral for the bank loans, 
as stock prices fell, more and more of the IUI and Corp shares became 
collateral. In this way, the banks slowly began to control more and more 
of Insull’s companies. By mid-December 1931, all of IUI and Corp’s stock 
had turned into collateral for Insull’s bank loans.31 
In April 1932, Insull went to New York to discuss refinancing 
$10  ­million of debt for Middle West.32 According to McDonald, men 
from the House of Morgan entered the room and, after asking Insull to 

116	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
wait outside, declared that the banks would not refinance. For a paltry 
$10 ­million loan, Middle West, a $1.5 billion company, was forced into 
receivership, and IUI and Corp went under, too. By June 1932 Insull was 
forced to resign from his other operating companies. As Insull saw it, the 
banks “had ceased to find me of use to them, and had decided that the 
time had come to throw me overboard.”33 
I N S U L L’ S  P O L I T I C A L  F A L L
After the banks were through with Insull, having taken his money and 
gained control of his companies, the politicians saw their chance to 
attack. Insull’s political mishaps had originally begun much earlier, in 
the mid-1920s, when he gave a great deal of money to Frank Smith, head 
of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to finance Smith’s campaign for 
the US Senate. Insull had given $125,000 directly and financed $33,735 
in what today might be called “issue ads” related to the World Court. 
US Senator James Reed of Missouri subsequently opened an investiga-
tion into utility contributions to campaigns in Illinois and Pennsylvania. 
After joining forces with Senator La Follette, the Reed Commission held 
hearings in Chicago in 1926, and Insull was attacked almost daily in the 
press. Ultimately, the Senate declined to seat Smith because of the Insull 
contributions to his campaign.34 
Worse yet for Insull was the fact that 1932 was an election year. John 
Swanson, Illinois’ attorney for Cook County and a Republican, faced a 
tough reelection battle. Despite his apparent respect for Insull, Swanson 
announced an investigation into the collapse of Insull’s business to help his 
reelection bid. In the wake of Swanson’s investigations and the headlines 
it spawned, politicians nationwide jumped into the fray. The threat of fed-
eral indictments was added to Insull’s burdens when US Attorney Dwight 
H. Green announced that the US Department of Justice had begun its 
own investigation.35 
For his Cook County investigation, and to add a spark to his reelec-
tion campaign, Swanson released a secret list he had of who got to buy 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
117
IUI shares for the bargain price of twelve dollars per share. The list was 
pretty routine; mostly people known to be friends of Insull’s, but it also 
included Anton Cermak, the Democratic mayor of Chicago. Others who 
appeared on the ever-growing list were the speaker of the state house of 
representatives, a former lieutenant governor of Illinois, and a number 
of state and federal judges. With the list and press reports as a dramatic 
backdrop, Swanson won grand jury indictments of Insull and his brother 
for “embezzlement, larceny, and larceny by bailee” in October 1932.36 
Before the indictments, in June 1932, Insull had left quietly for Paris 
with the hope of finding some peace after his defeat by the banks. The 
financiers had cut a pension deal in which he would receive $50,000 a 
year for life. With news of possible indictments, Insull’s son, Samuel Jr., 
pleaded with him to leave Paris, so he escaped to Athens because his law-
yer told him that the United States did not have an extradition treaty with 
Greece. Samuel Jr., age thirty-two, did most of the fighting against both 
the Illinois and federal governments while Insull was abroad. His son bore 
the brunt of the anger and hatred from all sides, and later he, too, would 
be indicted for mail fraud and violation of bankruptcy laws.37 
As Insull’s lawyer had hoped, Greece refused to extradite Insull. To 
persuade the Greek government, however, the US government put pres-
sure on the Greek American Merchants Association. These well-to-do 
merchants sent substantial funds home to Greece, so the federal gov-
ernment threatened to block the transfer of those funds. Faced with 
this ultimatum from the United States, Greece asked Insull to leave the 
country in March 1934. Both chambers of the US Congress passed a 
bill ordering Insull’s arrest in any country with a treaty agreement that 
would allow them to do so. Insull chartered a ship and spent two weeks 
in the eastern Mediterranean, but when the ship docked in Turkey for 
provisions, the Turkish government arrested him and turned him over 
to the US embassy.38
Insull was jailed at the Cook County jail upon his return to America. 
His lawyer, former Illinois Supreme Court judge Floyd Thompson, had 
arranged bail at $100,000, but the amount was doubled when Insull actu-
ally got to the jail. In his memoirs, Insull noted that his bail was four times 

118	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
higher than that set for the infamous gangster Al Capone. Foreshadowing 
what would become the core of his defense at trial, in a brief statement to 
the press Insull said, “I have erred but my greatest error was in underesti-
mating the effects of the financial panic on American securities and par-
ticularly on the companies I was trying to build . . . I worked with all of my 
energy to save those companies. I made mistakes—but they were honest 
mistakes. They were errors in judgment but not dishonest manipulations.” 
From the start, Insull’s defense was that he was being “persecuted for the 
sins of his generation,” and that his trial would be “persecution” rather 
than “prosecution.”39 
T H E  T R I A L  O F  A N  E R A
The federal indictment on mail fraud was the first to be brought to trial 
on October 2, 1934. The core of the fraud allegations was the claim that 
Insull and his codefendants induced buyers to purchase Corp stock at 
inflated prices. According to the federal government, this fraud was perpe-
trated primarily through a nationwide sales campaign in which the value 
of Corp holdings was deliberately and significantly overstated. Francis X. 
Busch, who chronicled the trial, reports that it was a complicated indict-
ment that the jurors might have had trouble following in detail. However, 
it is certain that the jurors got the gist: the federal government was alleg-
ing that Insull had swindled the “little people.”40 
The allegations concerning Insull’s Middle West Utilities are illustra-
tive of the type of transaction causing scandal. Insull had fundamentally 
reorganized the financial structure of Middle West and two elements of 
that reorganization were relevant to the government’s case. First, Middle 
West was aggressively selling stock, which was purchased by Insull, his 
agents, and companies he controlled, like Corp. Importantly, its value 
was then marked up in Corp’s books to a value higher than the pur-
chase price. For example, shares of Middle West Utilities were purchased 
for $12.7 ­million, but valued on Corp’s books at a much higher price of 
$23 ­million, which was the value at the current stock market price. The 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
119
government referred to the increase from $12.7 million to $23 million as a 
“write-up”; today, this would be called a mark-to-market valuation, which 
is widely used and still problematic at times (as will be seen in the story of 
Enron). Insull and his codefendants were always on both sides of the trans-
action, and the write-up looked suspicious, so it is understandable that 
people began to question him. The government argued that the efforts 
to sell Corp stock were fraudulent because the value of the assets in Corp 
were wildly overstated, and they pointed to the write-ups as evidence.41
The second element of the Middle West reorganization was that, going 
forward, Middle West stock would pay dividends in stock rather than in 
cash. The government charged that the way Corp treated the stock divi-
dends from Middle West as current income was fraudulent because stock 
dividends could not be income until the stock was sold. If these stock div-
idends could not be counted as income, Corp was not only unprofitable, 
it suffered a loss as well. In 1930, for example, if stock dividends were 
erased from income and some losses on stock transactions were shown as 
an expense, the government alleged that Corp suffered a loss of $550,000 
instead of the $6.8 million profit it showed on its books. This meant it was 
fraudulent to have claimed that Corp was a “sound” company when pro-
moting stock sales, since technically it suffered a large loss.42 
Once the government rested its case, Insull, at age seventy-five, had to 
testify to rebut the charges against him. The core of his testimony was sim-
ply the honest story of his life, and with that story he refuted every claim 
against him. Busch says that Insull captivated the courtroom with the 
narrative of his arrival in America and his role as Edison’s most trusted 
adviser. He told of how he built the then-small Chicago Edison into a big 
company, and how he wanted to grow his companies in order to lower 
electricity rates for customers. 
Insull spoke of how investment trusts like Cyrus Eaton’s were a real 
threat to control of the operating companies he had built up to serve cus-
tomers in Chicago and elsewhere in Illinois. Insull Utility Investment, he 
explained, was formed to combat the Eaton threat. 
Insull went on to say that all the mechanics of the Middle West Utilities 
reorganization were sound and accepted accounting practices.43 Defending 

120	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
himself more broadly, he conceded that stock prices of his companies had 
fallen with the Depression, but so had the prices of blue-chip stocks; the 
stocks for companies such as GE and GM lost 90 percent of their 1929 val-
ues. Insull had held on to his stock and lost everything as a result: his Lake 
County estate, his wife’s dowry, even a life insurance policy.44 
In his summation, Insull’s lawyer stated there had been no fraud 
because all Insull’s alleged fraudulent actions were shown clearly on the 
books of his companies. Surely, the lawyer argued, Insull’s actions were 
motivated by attempts to save the operating companies from the Eaton 
menace and not to seek a profit. Insull and the others saw these as “good 
investments.” Insull’s lawyer argued that the federal government brought 
the case solely to lay blame for a “tragic era.” In truth, said the defense 
attorney, it was only “Old Man Depression” who got all that money that 
was lost. Judge Wilkerson in his instructions to the jury said that the jurors 
must find intent to defraud, and that Insull could not be convicted for hon-
est mistakes. In a bit over two hours the jury returned a verdict acquitting 
Insull and his codefendants of all charges.45 
In the early years of the twenty-first century, Insull’s trial found an 
echo—and a stark contrast—in the proceedings against Enron. 
I N S U L L’ S  L E G A C Y
The editor of Insull’s memoirs put it this way: “Single-handedly, Insull 
brought the industry from the status of an experiment that served the rich 
to a major industry and utility that served everyone.” It is in this sense that 
Insull democratized electricity. He achieved this by relentlessly pursuing econ-
omies of scale and scope, which drove electricity prices down dramatically. 
And to create the incentives to pursue these economies, he invited cost-plus 
regulation of local monopolies by state governments. That regulation, with 
profits dictated by size, was a hugely effective incentive to get big.46 
As long as the overarching goal was availability and affordability, and 
economies of scale were not exhausted, Insull’s strategy was a remarkable 
success. The choice to invite state regulation was not ideological; it was a 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
121
specific means to a specific end, and it worked. It is also worth noting that 
cost-plus regulation had a known downside: it diminished the incentive 
to take the risks necessary to make further advances on the science and 
technology that made the electricity business possible in the first place. In 
this sense, it killed the goose that had laid the golden egg.
Insull’s career also set the pattern for the spectacular rise and igno-
minious fall of a high-profile businessperson. With his rise from the small 
platform of Chicago Edison in 1892, Insull created one of the two larg-
est conglomerates of electricity companies in America. In 1930, by one 
count, the Insull holding companies accounted for 12.3 percent of all elec-
tric revenue in the United States. Insull’s group then was equal in size 
to the conglomerate of companies controlled by Electric Bond & Share, 
General Electric’s holding company. Adding in his gas utilities, at the time 
of his fall in 1932 the public held over $2.6 billion of Insull company stocks 
and bonds. His companies had more than 600,000 shareholders, 500,000 
bondholders, and served 5,000 communities in thirty-two different states.47
With his fall, Insull himself lost everything, but how much was lost 
by the public who owned stocks and bonds in his companies? By one esti-
mate, they lost far less than might be presumed based on the headlines 
of the day or the exaggerated references in the decades that followed. It 
is estimated that of the $2.6 billion in publicly held securities in 1932, 
investors lost $638 million or about 24 percent of the money they put into 
Insull’s companies. These losses were not in the operating companies, the 
core of what Insull created; they were in the investment or holding com-
panies, or in the transit and railway companies.48 
Moreover, when the allegations of fraud and other wrongdoings were 
judged by a jury, Insull was acquitted in all three cases against him. The 
jurors’ ultimate role was to weigh the good and bad of Samuel Insull. And 
there surely were both—the good being his democratization of electricity 
and the bad being his murky accounting and use of vast holding compa-
nies. Also central to his acquittal was the fact that the jurors abided by 
the judge’s instructions that, to find him guilty, there must be evidence of 
intent to defraud the public. No such intent could be proved. 

122	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
In 1938, at the age of seventy-eight, about four years after his acquit-
tal, Insull died of a heart attack in a Paris subway. 
E L E C T R I C I T Y ’ S  M A R C H  A C R O S S  A M E R I C A
Americans are greatly impressed by technology entrepreneurs and venture 
capitalists who invent, finance, and manufacture products that sell to huge 
numbers of people and businesses. They affirm the American Dream: that 
ingenuity and hard work, rather than inherited wealth and status, lead to 
worldly success. Electricity became one of those products. The electric-
ity business used a brand-new technology to provide a brand-new prod-
uct that sold spectacularly. In twenty years, from about 1902 to 1922, 
American electricity generation grew at a rate of over 12 percent per year. 
Another measure of success for this new product was market penetration 
in residential electricity use: only 8 percent of homes had electric service in 
1907, but that grew to 35 percent in 1920, and then to 90 percent in 1948. 
Equally impressive was that each of these homes continually increased 
the amount of electricity it used. In 1912, the Census reported that, on 
average, a household used 264 kWh each year. By 1920 each household 
used 339 kWh per year on average, or about 28 percent more. By 1948 
the average electricity use per household was 1,563 kWh, almost six times 
larger than use per residence in 1912. In sum, over the first half of the 
twentieth century, electricity became something that no home could do 
without, and each home found ways to use more and more of it.49 
A dramatic decrease in the price of electricity to residences drove, or 
at least enabled, increased market penetration and use of electricity by 
each residence. In 1902 the average price of electricity to a residential 
customer was 16.2 cents per kWh. By 1920 the average price decreased by 
more than half to 7.45 cents per kWh. By 1948, the average price for res-
idential customers was 3.01 cents per kWh, an 81 percent decrease from 
the price in 1902. Economies of scale and scope did, as Insull calculated, 
make electricity far more affordable.50 
www.ebook3000.com

	
S a m u e l  I n s u l l’ s  E l e c t r i c  C i t y,  C h i c a g o  	
123
The new electricity business had a significant impact on the American 
economy because it drove what historians define as a second industrial 
revolution. The term is apt because the electric motor replaced the steam 
engine, which had powered the first Industrial Revolution. As was true 
with the steam engine, the payoff of the new technology of the electric 
motor was a surge in productivity throughout the manufacturing sector. 
The advent of electric motors allowed a dramatic redesign of the entire 
manufacturing process. With that redesign, the productivity of American 
workers and machines soared and helped make America a world power.

www.ebook3000.com

P A R T  T H R E E
The Age 
of Big
Big Government, 
Big Power Plants

www.ebook3000.com

127
C H A P T E R  8
FDR’s New Deal 
(for Electricity)
I do not hold with those who advocate Government 
ownership or Government operation of all utilities. 
—Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)1
In september 1932 the democratic candidate for the presidency of the United 
States, then New York governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt, traveled to 
Portland, Oregon, to give a campaign speech entirely about electricity. 
What was most surprising about Roosevelt’s speech was his admission 
that he did not believe the government should take over the electricity 
business. In the midst of the Great Depression, which many viewed as a 
great failure of capitalism, and after the fi nancial collapse of giant utility 
holding companies, the leap to government ownership was an obvious, 
attractive option in the stressful context of the time. Instead, Roosevelt 
went on to defi ne and implement a three-prong New Deal policy for 
electricity: “fund major federal [hydroelectric] power projects, bolster 

128	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
the threat of municipal competition, and dismantle holding company 
systems.”2
When he emphasized funding federal hydroelectric power projects, 
Roosevelt certainly was aware of his audience; he told the people of 
Portland that the “next great hydro-electric development to be undertaken 
by the federal government must be that on the Columbia River,” in the 
Pacific Northwest. As will be discussed in subsequent chapters, two other 
federal hydroelectric projects with their roots in the pre-Depression 1920s 
came alive in the midst of the Great Depression: what Roosevelt called 
the Boulder Dam—now the Hoover Dam—and the Tennessee Valley 
Authority. Roosevelt would keep his promise for the Pacific Northwest 
with the construction of the Bonneville Dam in 1938 and the Grand 
Coulee in 1942.3
When Roosevelt addressed municipal development, the intent was to 
give the investor-owned utilities some potential competition. Roosevelt 
spoke of establishing a “yardstick” for the rates and other terms of service 
offered by private utilities through the development of federal hydroelec-
tric projects. He also spoke of potential municipal utilities as a disciplinary 
force that could be brought out when a “mere scolding” was not enough to 
get private utilities to improve their service or rates.4
The dismantling of holding companies, meanwhile, began in dra-
matic fashion with the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935. One 
scholar concluded, “Except in wartime, the federal government never 
before assumed such total control over any industry.” In 1935 a com-
panion piece of legislation was passed by the US Congress, the Federal 
Power Act (FPA). At the time, it was likely considered the lesser of the two 
laws; however, it was put in place to address an additional problem cre-
ated by the holding companies. The problem was that interstate holding 
companies were beyond the reach of state regulators. Under the FPA, the 
Federal Power Commission (FPC) would regulate interstate transmission 
and wholesale sales of electricity. Roosevelt understood this would trigger 
a political problem with states’ rights.5 
Today, the FPA is the primary source of the federal government’s 
jurisdiction to regulate the electricity business. This federal regulation is a 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
129
significant legacy of the Great Depression; it was born at a time in which 
most people wanted the federal government to intervene aggressively to 
stop the worst economic crisis in American history. National regulation 
born of crisis is not necessarily the regulation needed for the long term; 
it most likely isn’t designed for when there is no crisis, or when there is a 
different crisis. And if national regulation is standardized, it runs the risk 
of undermining America’s great strength: the diversity of ideas and oppor-
tunities across the states. 
B A C K D R O P  T O  T H E  N E W  D E A L
Two high-profile studies done in the 1920s provide an interesting back-
drop to President Roosevelt’s New Deal for electricity in the 1930s. The 
purported impetus for these studies was the near shortage of electricity 
during World War I and the concurrent coal price spike. Both studies also 
reflected Insull’s call for economies of scale; bigger power plants would 
cut the cost of electricity (as well as coal use). And, to accommodate these 
bigger power plants, long-distance, high-voltage transmission lines would 
be built.
The two studies were the Super Power study and Giant Power study; 
their names alone reflect that they were dreamed up in the Age of Big. 
The two differed in their recommendations of who would control this net-
work of big power plants and big transmission lines: the existing electric 
utilities (Super Power) or state government (Giant Power). That made a 
big difference in how the electricity business would operate. With utility 
control, the plan was that all the utilities would be interconnected, but the 
decision on whether to use that interconnection to buy power from neigh-
boring utilities would be at the discretion of the utilities themselves. The 
alternative was to assure that interconnection meant integration—that is, 
all the power plants would be integrated and run as one system.
Super Power and Giant Power have historical importance for two 
other reasons. First, holding companies like Insull’s Middle West Utilities 
were achieving lower prices through economies of scale and integrated 

130	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
operation in the 1920s and, despite this, concerns over large utility control 
of the business were already emerging. By 1935 the dismantling of those 
holding companies became the central goal of the federal government. 
Second, neither the Super Power nor Giant Power proposals made prog-
ress in either federal or state legislatures. However, together, they started a 
slow process toward the development of a template for how a competitive 
electricity business should work. Traces of Super Power and Giant Power 
proposals can be discerned in the gold standard for competitive markets 
today, the PJM Interconnection.
The acronym PJM is driven by the original geographic coverage, 
which included Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and later Maryland. Today 
the coverage extends west to include Chicago. PJM is one of the six large 
regional electric markets in the United States, called regional trans-
mission organizations (RTOs) or independent system operators (ISOs). 
Within the boundaries of these markets, competition among electricity 
suppliers is promoted by assuring all suppliers have fair access to the 
transmission system and by operating transparent markets for electricity 
sales. While the promotion of competition is new, these RTOs and ISOs 
relate directly to Insull’s vision in the sense that they also promote the 
capture of economies of scale by including widely dispersed customers 
and suppliers.
Super Power 
The request for funding for the Super Power study covering power supply 
in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic first came in 1918. Congress ultimately 
provided $125,000 for the study and an advisory board was established, 
which included Herbert Hoover, then secretary of commerce.6 
The rhetoric in the Super Power report was muted. Other than ref-
erence to extreme power shortages being narrowly avoided during World 
War I, there was little appeal to the reader’s emotions to win support. The 
report made it clear that Super Power was not intended to compete with 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
131
the existing electric utilities but was intended only to “coordinate and sup-
plement these utilities.”7 
As is typical of proposals for power systems in any era, there is plenty of 
mind-numbing data describing the physical reality of the system as it was 
in 1919 and also as the proponents of Super Power hoped it would be by 
1930. The Super Power “zone” covered an area from Maine to Maryland 
that included 25 percent of the American population. The report claimed 
that the effect of the Super Power plan would be to decrease the number 
and to increase the size of the power plants serving the zone. The report 
found that utilities had 558 power plants with a small average size of just 
7.9 megawatts (MW). Regarding the future, with Super Power in place 
in 1930, the report claimed that a total of only 273 power plants would 
be needed, with 218 belonging to existing utilities. And the base load 
plants—those intended to run all the time—would be significantly bigger, 
ranging from 60 MW to 300 MW.8 
For all the reasons Insull noted, the payoff of going big would be dra-
matic cost decreases. The Super Power study estimated that by 1930, there 
would be a 46 percent drop in cost, a savings of $278.5 million. With the 
importance of coal conservation in the wake of wartime coal shortages, 
Super Power promised a significant decrease in the amount of coal used 
to generate electricity. According to the proposal, new power plants were 
expected to cut coal use by 48 percent per kWh by 1930.9
Giant Power
In contrast to the muted rhetoric of the Super Power report, the tone of 
Giant Power was piercing, especially the sections by Gifford Pinchot, 
then governor of Pennsylvania and one of the proposal’s originators. No 
less ardent in his support for the proposal was Morris Llewellyn Cooke, 
a prominent engineer. Drawing a distinction between his proposal and 
Super Power, Pinchot argued, “Giant Power and Super Power are as dif-
ferent as a tame elephant and a wild one . . . The place for the public is 

132	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
on the neck of the elephant, guiding its movements, not on the ground 
helpless under its knees.” Carrying on with his case against Super Power, 
Pinchot wrote, “The main object of the superpower idea is greater profit 
to the companies. The main object of the Giant Power idea is greater 
advantage to the people.”10
Pinchot went on to claim that the electricity business was a “natural 
monopoly”; that is, it could not be regulated by competition, and instead 
had to “be regulated by public control.” And yet Pinchot was clearly not 
proposing public ownership when he wrote, “The Giant Power Plan takes 
no account of public ownership.” However, Pinchot warned that public 
ownership would come if the utility companies “opposed and prevented 
reasonable and effective regulation by the states and by the nation.”11 
The substance of the Giant Power proposal began with Cooke’s pro-
posal to construct only very large power plants in an effort to conserve 
coal. To make his point that big power plants used less coal, he estimated 
that a 1,000-horsepower generator used 4 pounds of coal per horsepower, 
while a 50,000-horsepower generator used less than 1.5 pounds of coal 
per horsepower. Cooke called for power plants of no less than 650,000 
horsepower or about 488,000 kW—a dramatic increase in size for the 
time. He also proposed that these power plants be built on top of the coal 
mines—called “mine-mouth” coal-fired generation—so that railroads 
would not be needed to deliver the coal; this would conserve coal, since 
the railroads would not need coal for fuel as they traveled to deliver the 
fuel itself. Cooke also argued that by electrifying all the rails in the United 
States, even more coal would be saved.12 
In his proposed improvements to the electric transmission system, 
Cooke wanted to build a backbone, or “trunk line,” electric transmission 
network. In this pattern, high-voltage lines would become a “common 
carrier”; that is, the lines would be open for use by any power plant, not 
just the power plants owned by the existing electric utilities who typi-
cally owned transmission lines. Giant Power, however, went beyond the 
interconnection. The proposal pushed forward to integration. The intent 
was to coordinate the operation of all power plants across the state to 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
133
minimize the cost of power at each moment. This practice is referred to 
as “economic dispatch,” in which, at each moment, as demand for elec-
tricity increases, the dispatcher surveys all the power plants that are not 
operating at full capacity to find the next lowest-cost kWh among them. 
By always choosing the next lowest-cost kWh, the dispatcher is guaran-
teed to minimize total fuel cost of electricity supply. As a payoff for all the 
important changes in his Giant Power proposal, Cooke promised “radical 
reductions in rates.”13 
Pinchot proposed a three-part regulatory jurisdiction. A Giant Power 
board would grant charters for the new large power plants envisioned, 
which would allow it to share regulatory authority with the state commis-
sion. This reflected Pinchot’s and Cooke’s views that the state commission 
was too close to the holding companies to be trusted with Giant Power’s 
implementation. Also, the split of federal and state regulation would be 
clarified by allowing the federal government to intervene only when mul-
tiple states were implicated and those states could not agree on what to do.
Both Giant Power and Super Power were precursors to deregulation 
or, using today’s apt terms, “competitive reform” or “restructuring” of 
the electricity business. Those reforms wouldn’t begin to be seen until 
the 1990s, but, despite the distance in time, it is important to note that 
most of the foundational elements of competitive reform in the 1990s 
took root in the 1920s. Giant Power and Super Power’s vision of regional 
interconnection came true. Giant Power predicted that there would be 
a single interconnected system with a single dispatcher for the area from 
“Chicago to the Gulf, and from the Atlantic Coast to the Great Plains.” 
Today, the Eastern Interconnection is a single system serving much of 
the country east of the Mississippi River. Moreover, the roots of PJM 
Interconnection are in actions taken by utilities in the 1920s in response 
to the Super Power and Giant Power proposals; the first form of PJM 
Interconnection was created in 1927 as the Pennsylvania–New Jersey 
or PNJ Interconnection. Again the PJM Interconnection now sets the 
gold standard for designing competitive markets through integration and 
coordination.14

134	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
R O O S E V E L T ’ S  P L A N  F O R  P O W E R
Candidate Roosevelt in 1932
In his Portland speech Roosevelt made it clear that he saw power as a 
major issue. He began, “I have strengthened the belief that I have had for 
a long time and that I have constantly set forth in my speeches and papers 
in my work as Governor of the State of New York, that the question of 
power, of electrical development and distribution, is primarily a national 
problem.” Taken alone, this opening statement might have caused some 
concern about a nationalization of the power business, but toward the end 
of his speech Roosevelt emphatically said, “I do not hold with those who 
advocate Government ownership or Government operation of all utilities. 
I state to you categorically that as a broad general rule the development 
of utilities should remain, with certain exceptions, a function for private 
initiative and private capital.”15
Roosevelt simply did not trust Samuel Insull and the others who ran 
the large holding companies. His principle was that “when the interests 
of the many are concerned, the interests of the few must yield.” It soon 
became obvious that “the few” he was talking about were those asso-
ciated with the holding companies. He explicitly referenced a Federal 
Trade Commission (FTC) study, which he said revealed “a system-
atic, subtle, deliberate and unprincipled campaign of misinformation, 
of propaganda, and, if I may use the words, of lies and falsehoods.” 
Roosevelt used the FTC study as evidence of an increasing concen-
tration of control of power plants and power sales by a few big compa-
nies, and in the end that motivated legislation to dismantle the holding 
companies.16 
Roosevelt opined that while regulation had been imposed by state 
public utility commissions, too many state commissions had failed. He 
felt that state commissions saw themselves as an “arbitrator” or “umpire” 
when they should be an “agent of the public” that proactively and aggres-
sively ensured “adequate service” and “reasonable rates.”17
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
135
Continuing with his speech, Roosevelt made mention of Senator 
George Norris, who had used the FTC study to show how the holding 
companies overstated their investment in order to charge excessive rates. 
Taking a shot at Roosevelt’s opponent in the upcoming presidential elec-
tion, Norris said that President Hoover wanted to shut down the FTC 
study. Roosevelt also poked at his opponent for saying, back in 1925 when 
he was secretary of commerce, that “nothing could be [a] more hideous 
extension of centralization in Federal Government than to undermine 
State utility commissions and state responsibility.” President Hoover 
believed that there had been “outrageous exaggeration of the probable 
extent of interstate power.” Again, in sharp contrast, Roosevelt believed 
state regulation had failed to control the holding companies effectively.18 
Roosevelt’s stance made it clear that “electricity is no longer a lux-
ury. It is a definite necessity.” Noting that Canadian homes used twice as 
much electricity as American homes, he concluded that American power 
was “certainly backward.” Roosevelt believed that “selfish interests” in the 
power business had “not been sufficiently far-sighted to establish rates low 
enough to encourage widespread public use.” He targeted the “Insull mon-
strosity” and went on to say that the “Insull failure has done more to open 
the eyes of the American public to the truth than anything that has hap-
pened.” Ironically, as we saw in the previous chapters, Insull was indeed 
establishing “rates low enough to encourage widespread public use.”19
With respect to his reference to Canada, that nation had created 
large public utilities early on and per capita electricity use was higher. 
However, the difference could have causes other than backwardness. For 
example, by 1920, Canada produced 97 percent of its power from a single, 
often less expensive source—hydroelectric power. The same opportunity 
did not exist in the United States. Differences in weather and industrial 
use could explain higher use, too. Note that Canada’s higher per capita 
use persists today.
Roosevelt called for a “new deal” for the “relationship between the 
electric utilities on the one side, and the consumer and the investor on 
the other,” and then listed what he saw as the necessary reforms. Business 

136	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
must become more transparent and “turn on the light” on all financial 
information from public utilities, on who owned the stock in these com-
panies, and on all intercompany contracts. He called for regulation of 
holding companies by the FPC, and for cooperation between the FPC and 
state commissions. Regulation was also needed for all issuance of stocks 
and bonds by the holding companies, and consumer-paid rates should be 
based on the actual dollar value of the investment made—the so-called 
“prudent investment” principle. And he wanted to ensure that it was made 
“a crime to publish or circulate false or deceptive matter relating to public 
utilities.”20
Roosevelt said he was not an advocate of government ownership but 
that there were exceptions. If a locality felt it was not getting adequate 
service or fair rates, that municipal government should be free to hold a 
referendum asking for a municipal utility. He argued that this right would 
allow the locals to create a yardstick by which other utilities’ service and 
rates could be judged. He also called the right “a ‘birch rod’ in the cup-
board to be taken out and used only when the ‘child’ gets beyond the point 
where a mere scolding does no good.”21 Thus, the “birch rod” was a tool 
of last resort for municipal governments when the “child”—the private 
utility company—was not acting fairly.22
Large hydroelectric power projects were another exception to his 
hesitance on government ownership. He pointed to the work already 
under way on what he called the Boulder Dam on the Colorado River. 
In this context, he foresaw four yardsticks to “prevent extortion against 
the public”: “the St. Lawrence River in the Northeast, Muscle Shoals in 
the Southeast, the Boulder Dam project in the Southwest, and . . . the 
Columbia River in the Northwest.”23
In closing, Roosevelt told the crowd, “Judge me by the enemies I have 
made,” referring to those in the investor-owned utility business, like Insull, 
who many believed were corrupt and greedy.24
A contemporary account reported that Governor Roosevelt was 
cheered by the Portland crowd both before and after his speech on util-
ities. Big crowds and loud cheers, however, were the norm for Roosevelt 
no matter what topic he chose. He drew thirty thousand at Columbus, 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
137
Ohio, for a speech that included proposals for more federal control over 
stock exchanges and banks. He drew one hundred thousand at a rally in 
Sea Girt, New Jersey, where he spoke about ending Prohibition. Cheering 
crowds greeted him in Topeka, Kansas, where he spoke of reforming agri-
cultural policy and tariffs. In the wake of economic crisis, Americans were 
ready for change and ready for the federal government to take control to 
end that crisis.25
President Roosevelt’s Report in 1935
On January 4, 1935, Roosevelt—now President Roosevelt—delivered 
his State of the Union address to Congress. He said, “We have under-
taken a new order of things”—although he clarified that this new order 
was pursued “under the framework and in the spirit and intent of the 
American Constitution.” To justify his proposals for change and renewal, 
he said that “masters of old practice and theory were unprepared” for the 
economic problems confronted around the world and that “a distinction 
between recovery and reform” should not be made. Much as one would 
treat a sick man, there was the need to seek not only a “cure” for the 
symptoms but “also removal of their cause.” Among the major programs, 
Roosevelt listed “the restoration of sound conditions in the public utilities 
field through abolition of the evil features of holding companies.”26
Was the president right? The United States was in an unprecedented 
economic crisis and aggressive action by a federal government could 
readily be justified. What might be questioned is the president’s apparent 
presumption that holding companies caused the Great Depression. It is 
probably closer to the truth that holding company practices magnified 
the harm of the Depression, and that high levels of debt and other tac-
tics made these companies especially vulnerable to failure in a financial 
downturn.27
In March of the same year, Roosevelt transmitted to Congress “A 
Report of the National Power Policy Committee with Respect to the 
Treatment of Holding Companies.” In his transmittal letter, he noted that 

138	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
many of the recommendations in the committee’s report had already been 
incorporated in the House and Senate versions of the Public Utility Holding 
Company Act. Not mincing words, the president pushed back against “the 
propaganda” with the intent to “make the investor believe that the efforts 
of Government to protect him are designed to defraud him.” The holding 
company law would “not destroy a penny of actual value of those operating 
properties which holding companies now control.” If holding companies 
could not “prove to the Securities and Exchange Commission that their 
existence is necessary for the achievement of the public ends which private 
utility companies are supposed to serve,” then their “disappearance at the 
end of 5 years” was the best end result. Regulation, he said, had “small 
chance of ultimate success against the kind of concentrated wealth and 
economic power” that the holding companies had created. Stating that 
he was against socialism of any kind, he concluded that the “destruction 
of private socialism [of the holding companies] is utterly essential to avoid 
governmental socialism.”28
To show that there was a precedent for the federal government inter-
vening in other businesses, the committee report drew parallels between 
the holding companies in the power business and those addressed in the 
railroad industry by the Interstate Commerce Act, and in the banking 
industry by the Banking Act, both passed in 1933. The committee’s report 
went on to list the holding companies’ wrongdoings, as well as the actions 
that had to be taken to rein them in. In so doing, it was laying out the 
content for legislation Roosevelt wanted in order to dismantle the holding 
companies.29 
T H E  B I R T H  O F  B I G  G O V E R N M E N T
The FTC’s Report on Holding Companies
Edwin L. Davis, then chairman of the FTC, submitted the summary 
report on holding companies to the US Senate in June 1935. Davis 
reminded the Senate that the report was prepared pursuant to a Senate 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
139
request that had been approved in February 1928, more than seven years 
earlier. The early pages of the report documented the rapid growth and 
increasing importance of electric (and gas) utilities. This was a golden age 
for the electricity business, with sales increasing rapidly while cost and, 
consequently, prices fell substantially.30 
It was the concentration of control by a few holding companies, how-
ever, that became the headline of the FTC report, and that was clearly 
the major problem the FTC believed had to be addressed. By 1932 just 
three corporate groups controlled 44.5 percent of all electricity generation 
in America. Largest among the top three was the United Corporation 
Group, created by Morgan interests; United controlled 19.8 percent of 
all generation in 1932, through five affiliated holding companies. In sec-
ond place was Electric Bond and Share, created by General Electric; it 
controlled 13.6 percent of all electricity generation in that year, through 
four affiliated holding companies. In third place were the Insull interests, 
which controlled 11.1 percent of nationwide generation through seven 
holding companies, including Commonwealth Edison and Middle West 
Utilities. Another thirteen holding companies controlled another 32 per-
cent of generation, bringing the total control for the top sixteen holding 
companies to over 76 percent.31
The FTC then turned to the question of how much of the holding 
companies’ electricity sales were interstate; this evidence on interstate sales 
would lead to the significant increase in federal regulation of both elec-
tricity and gas over the long term. The FTC found an “almost unbroken 
chain” of interconnected electricity companies stretching across ten states, 
from Boston, Massachusetts, to Tampa, Florida; thirteen companies con-
trolled this chain along the Eastern Seaboard. Another chain went from 
Chicago to Mississippi.32 
The report then went into more detail on holding company control 
of interstate sales. Notably, the FTC reported that 98.5 percent of all 
interstate transfers were controlled by twenty holding companies. Electric 
Bond and Share alone accounted for 21.9 percent and the Insull inter-
ests accounted for another 19.7 percent. The United companies controlled 
28.3 percent—bringing the top three to a total of almost 70 percent. 

140	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The FTC also reported the number of states in which holding compa-
nies distributed electricity in the year 1930, and the geographic breadth is 
compelling. General Electric’s Electric Bond and Share distributed elec-
tricity in thirty-one states, while Insull’s Middle West Utilities did so in 
twenty-nine.33 
While the finding on control of interstate sales of electricity by hold-
ing companies was persuasive on its own, the share of all electricity sales 
traced to interstate transactions was not. The FTC reported that inter-
state trade of electricity accounted for just 14.4 percent of all public and 
private electric generation in 1930. In other words, holding companies 
handled the majority of interstate sales, but those sales were not a partic-
ularly large part of the market. This is telling because interstate sales (of 
both electricity and stock) were the principal justification for the federal 
government to expand its regulatory role substantially and thereby dimin-
ish the role of state regulation.34
The Public Utility Act of 1935
To address concerns about the concentration of ownership and the control 
of interstate sales by the holding companies, Congress passed the Public 
Utility Act of 1935. As often happens, the Senate passed one version and 
the House passed another, so the final conference report reflects how the 
two chambers of Congress came together. Title I was the Public Utility 
Holding Company Act (PUHCA). Title II was the Federal Power Act. 
This is the moment when aggressive federal regulation began. The con-
sequence was a proliferation of laws, regulations, reports, and acronyms 
. . . lots of acronyms. Congress gave the legal basis for federal govern-
ment intervention by stating that holding companies were “affected with 
a national public interest” for several reasons. Primary among these was 
the fact that their securities were sold through the mail—the same fact 
that sparked Insull’s indictment for mail fraud—and through the “instru-
mentalities of interstate commerce.” Moreover, the conference report 
found that holding company “activities extending over many States are 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
141
not susceptible to effective control by any State and make difficult, if not 
impossible, effective State regulation of public-utility companies.”35
The FTC report to Congress had listed both pros and cons for hold-
ing companies and thus gave a sense of what Congress had to address. 
Holding companies did help with beneficial integration, said the FTC; 
once formed, they extended service to share cheap electricity. Because 
of their large size, holding companies could give small operating com-
panies access to lower-cost financing, but that also meant that a holding 
company could force a deal on smaller utilities. So, too, operating compa-
nies got better price and contract conditions for new equipment because 
holding companies bought on a larger scale and were experienced buy-
ers. Holding companies gave smaller operating companies the constant 
attention of in-house experts, rather than the intermittent attention of 
outside consultants; in this way, operating companies got better access to 
technical and managerial expertise. However, the fees for these services 
were too high: the FTC found that fees charged by the biggest holding 
company, Electric Bond and Share, constituted up to 30 percent of its 
gross income.36 
The FTC pointed to additional cons, such as writing up asset values 
to be greater than actual costs; in a sample audit, the FTC found a 22 per-
cent write-up on average. These write-ups increased rates to consumers. 
In addition, holding companies understated depreciation, thus understat-
ing expenses and overstating profits. This detailed evidence from the FTC 
was used both to prove the allegations of wrongdoing by the holding com-
panies and to dictate what practices would be prohibited by the law itself.37 
Dismantling the Holding Companies
With the case made and the law passed, implementation began. It was 
expansive and successful—so successful that anyone who came to the 
electricity business in the 1970s or later wouldn’t know of any great con-
troversy surrounding PUHCA. Most would not have been aware of just 
how aggressively the government intervened through PUHCA into one 

142	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
of America’s most important industries. That is because by the 1970s, 
holding companies were either completely gone or completely regulated. 
In this context, the most important action was the implementation of 
section  11 of PUHCA, which required the “physical interconnection” 
of holding companies and the “simplification” of “corporate structure.” 
Three moments in history illustrate the implementation of PUHCA over 
the 1935 to 1959 period.38 
On June 5, 1941, as World War II raged in Europe, Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) chairman Edward C. Eicher spoke at the 
annual convention of the Edison Electric Institute, a trade association for 
electric utilities. He intended to push back on what he called “loose and 
dangerous talk in holding company circles” about the commission’s imple-
mentation of section 11 of PUHCA. That talk had been “calculated to 
generate the fear that the enforcement of Section 11 would result in the 
distress sale of assets.” Calling all that propaganda, he declared that he 
had come to tell the truth.39
The first part of the truth was that the SEC intended to enforce sec-
tion 11, about which Eicher said, “let there be no question about that.” He 
quickly added, however, that there was nothing in the law that required 
a sale of holding company assets at “unfair or inequitable prices.” The 
third part—one that contributed to the second—was that the SEC would 
be flexible on the timing of the sales. The fourth, said Eicher, was that 
the sale of assets was not “a losing proposition” for the holding companies 
because, in the eyes of the financial community, the “break up” value of 
many holding companies is substantially greater than the “‘present going’ 
value.” In short, Eicher said that the holding companies would not be 
“smashed by sudden explosions of dynamite.”40
There were protests that section 11 enforcement should be slowed due 
to the war effort, but Eicher made it clear that that would not be the 
case. He spoke of the need to clear the “debris” of holding companies. 
Operating companies must be freed of holding companies, he said, so 
“that they can go full speed ahead in serving the nation’s needs.” What 
was needed was “all-out production” by operating companies to meet the 
“all-out-war-making of the totalitarian states.”41 He added that it “might 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
143
be fatal to our national existence if we should experience the power short-
ages” of World War I.42
In March 1950, almost a decade later and with the war over, SEC 
commissioner Donald Cook spoke to the New York Society of Security 
Analysts to express the view that the culprit in the bankruptcies of hold-
ing companies in the 1930s was “frenzied finance,” not the fundamental 
reality of the electric utility business. Cook believed that the PUHCA was 
“one of the great and enduring New Deal reforms” and that it was opposed 
by those in favor of “radical finance.” He cited several metrics of success 
for PUHCA implementation. For example, fixed payment coverage—the 
amount of operating income available to pay fixed-loan payments and 
preferred dividends—went from 1.9 to 2.7 times the necessary amount. 
The higher this ratio, the more open banks would be about loaning money 
to a utility. And, most important, Cook reported that, in the 1937 to 1948 
time frame, generating capacity increased by 42 percent and kWh gener-
ation was up 107 percent—all during the time of PUHCA enforcement.43
Because the implementation of PUHCA made utility investments far 
more stable and secure, new sources of investment came to the electricity 
business. Specifically, Cook reported that as a result, “capital from savings 
banks, life insurance companies, and personal trusts is becoming available 
for investment in this industry in ever-increasing amounts.” All this flow 
of capital was needed to finance the growth industry the electric utility 
business had become.44
The scale and aggressiveness of the federal government’s effort to dis-
mantle holding companies under section 11 was documented in a report 
by the SEC staff in 1959. The staff found that 2,387 companies had been 
“subject to the act as registered holding companies or subsidiaries thereof 
during the period from June 15, 1938, to June 30, 1959.” Over that 
twenty-year period, 2,064, or 86 percent, had been “released” from regu-
lations under the act or ceased to exist. Of these, 924 were divested. Of the 
rest, 777 were released from regulation because of “dissolutions, mergers 
and consolidations,” and 363 were granted exemptions from PUHCA. 
Of the 323 companies not released, 176 were part of the 18 active holding 
companies at the time and the remainder was made up of parts of three 

144	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
small holding companies. In sum, PUHCA restructured the electricity 
business, company by company.45 
PUHCA marked a significant change in government involvement in 
the electricity business. The government’s role became politically charged, 
with a focus on allegations of bad behavior that were blamed as a root 
cause of the Great Depression. In the eyes of big business, meanwhile, 
government began to be seen as an existential threat—it could determine 
whether a corporation existed or not. And it was the federal government, 
not the states, driving all this intervention. 
T H E  F E D E R A L  P O W E R  A C T :  
T H E  L E S S E R  P A R T
The FPA can be judged to be the lesser of the two major titles in the 
Public Utility Act of 1935. While its importance faded from memory in 
the 1970s, and it was actually repealed in 2005, PUHCA was the more 
important provision at the time, since dismantling the holding companies 
was Congress’ primary goal. The FPA addressed the related problem that 
multistate holding companies were beyond the reach of state regulation; in 
general, the reason the courts gave was that state regulation was judged to 
impede interstate commerce, which is not allowed under the Commerce 
Clause of the US Constitution. For that reason, the law gave the FPC 
regulatory authority over wholesale power sales in interstate commerce. 
Federal Power Commission Responsibilities  
and States’ Rights
In its annual report to Congress in 1935, the FPC explained that it was 
first created under the Federal Water Power Act of 1920 and given author-
ity over hydroelectric power. The Federal Water Power Act was renamed 
the Federal Power Act as part of the Public Utility Act of 1935, and the 
FPC noted that this law “greatly enlarged [the commission’s] functions and 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
145
duties.” The FPC described its new roles as follows: “The Congress has 
established regulatory control over the interstate activities of electric utili-
ties which were beyond the constitutional or effective administrative control 
of the States, and has set up machinery for Federal assistance to State reg-
ulatory bodies in their efforts to accomplish effective public regulation.”46 
The commission explained further that it would have “the authority 
to fix rates over that part of interstate energy which is sold wholesale for 
resale.” In this way, the 1935 FPA would, in effect, “fill in the gap” the 
Supreme Court found in its 1927 decision on Public Utilities Commission 
v. Attleboro Company, the gap, of course, being that interstate sales were 
beyond the reach of state regulators. It is interesting to consider that 
Westinghouse and Tesla provided the technological underpinnings of 
federal regulations; only with alternating-current systems would the geo-
graphic reach of a utility be likely to cross state lines—to be an “inter-
state sale.”47 
Adding to the established theme that the FPC would only supplement, 
not replace, state regulators, the FPC emphasized that its intent was to 
cooperate with the states. The FPC quoted a commissioner, saying, “This 
legislation sets up a new milestone on that highway which leads to com-
plete cooperation between State and Nation in the solution of one of the 
most serious problems that has thus far presented itself to our dual system 
of government.” Congress, in the FPA itself, went out of its way to say it 
would not have the federal government intrude on state regulations. The 
FPA stated, “The Commission shall have jurisdiction over all facilities for 
such transmission or sale of electric energy, but shall not have jurisdiction 
. . . over facilities used for the generation of electric energy or over facilities 
used in local distribution or only for the transmission of electric energy 
in intrastate commerce, or over facilities for the transmission of electric 
energy consumed wholly by the transmitter.” Despite this plainly stated 
deference to the states, the battle between state and federal jurisdiction 
rages on even today.48
The FPA gave the commission other specific regulatory powers over 
electric utilities. The FPC had to approve the sale, lease, or other dis-
position of facilities under its jurisdiction; however, the FPC could not 

146	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
duplicate the actions of the SEC in oversight of these transactions. Other 
sections established crucial policy standards for rates. All rates, for exam-
ple, had to be “just and reasonable”; this is a standard that still motivates 
most federal regulatory actions today. Further, the FPC could not give any 
“undue preference or advantage to any person.” This later was phrased as 
a prohibition on “undue discrimination,” again, a term used to motivate 
major federal action in the electricity business today.49 
Implementation of the FPA: In Depression and War
Five years after the 1935 Act was passed by Congress, the Federal Power 
Commission’s annual report to Congress added more context and per-
spective on the emerging role of the federal government in regulating 
America’s electricity business. The FPC started with data showing the 
huge growth in electricity sales over the twenty years from the FPC’s 
creation in 1920 to the time of the report’s publication in 1940. It then 
explained how, in the five years from 1935 to 1940, the commission played 
its substantially expanded role under the FPA.50
The commission also noted its greatly expanded role in the natural 
gas business, instituted by Congress’ Natural Gas Act of 1938. The FPC 
stated, “The Commission has authority to regulate rates charged for the 
transportation and wholesaling of natural gas in interstate commerce, 
to grant certificates of convenience for proposed new pipe lines extend-
ing into the market area of existing companies, to direct extensions of 
existing pipe lines where existing markets will not be adversely affected, 
and to control the flow of natural gas over the nation’s boundaries.” This 
expansion to natural gas is not an unimportant tangent. To this day, the 
fortunes of the electricity and natural gas businesses are joined at the 
hip. This is because natural gas is an important fuel for electricity gen-
eration, and because regulatory practices in one industry set a standard 
for the other.51
In another major theme that has grown even more prominent 
today, the FPC argued that regulation was a substitute for competition. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
147
Specifically, it stated, “The regulation of privately owned public utilities 
came into being in large measure as a substitute for competition in a field 
which had come to be considered as adapted to ‘natural monopoly.’” A 
natural monopoly occurs when “a single firm is able to serve the market 
at less cost than two or more firms.” Persistent economies of scale are 
presumed to be the reason average cost continues to fall until only a sin-
gle utility remains. Decades later, deregulation or “competitive reform” 
would be proposed by the FPC’s successor precisely because such econo-
mies of scale were no longer thought to prevail in the generation segment 
of the electricity business. 52
Reflecting the demands of war mobilization, a letter from President 
Roosevelt was appended to the FPC’s 1940 report. It asked that the FPC, 
working with the National Power Policy Committee and the Advisory 
Commission to the Council of National Defense, undertake efforts to be 
up to date on the full power needs of the military, the supply of power 
available to meet those needs, and the equipment needed to build new 
power stations. Six years later, the FPC documented that a boom in both 
electricity and natural gas production was necessary to fit the needs of 
a wartime economy. Thus, on the heels of an expansion of the govern-
ment’s role necessitated by the Great Depression came a new motivation 
for expansion: World War II.53 
T H E  N E W  D E A L’ S  L E G A C Y  
( F O R  E L E C T R I C I T Y )
Federal regulation of the electricity business was born in the midst of the 
collapse of capitalism during the Great Depression. If ever there was a 
moment to consider government ownership of power plants and trans-
mission lines, this was it. And, yet, public ownership was not proposed by 
President Roosevelt or by anyone with the political sway to make it hap-
pen. From this perspective, one legacy of the New Deal for the electricity 
business was an explicit choice of regulation of private business over public 
ownership. This reveals a certain restraint.

148	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
There was nothing restrained, however, about the big-government 
regulation that came out of the Great Depression. The dismantling of the 
holding companies under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 
must be one of the largest interventions in any American business. Big 
government set its sights on the big holding companies—they were public 
enemy number one—and ripped them apart. In addition, these new reg-
ulations plugged a hole in state regulation—the federal government would 
regulate the 14 percent of electricity sales that crossed state lines. This was 
the start of ongoing federal regulation of interstate sales and, though writ-
ten with great deference to the states at the time, the new policy triggered 
a fight over states’ rights that continues undiminished today. 
From the start, big-government regulation had an awkward, love-hate 
relationship with big business. That awkwardness might best be reflected 
in what happened to Samuel Insull. Insull’s big business was admired 
because it dramatically reduced electricity prices through economies of 
scale. Insull himself, however, was blamed for the financial and account-
ing scandals that contributed to the collapse of the stock market. This 
love-hate attitude has grown more moderate because circumstances are 
less dire, but it persists today. For example, mergers that create bigger 
companies and promise big savings are rarely rejected, but allegations of 
market power abuse by big companies are still common.
FDR’s presidency caused a significant change in the government’s role 
in the electricity business and added a new twist to the narrative. FDR 
created far-reaching federal regulation, which focused on the fundamental 
structure of the business. His actions were politically charged, driven by 
allegations of bad behavior leading to the financial crisis—not allegations 
of inadequate electricity supply or cost overruns. FDR’s regulation was 
born out of crisis—the Great Depression, but also, later, World War II. 
Since these were national and international crises, actions by the national 
government were warranted at the time. Aggressive intervention is to be 
expected in times of crisis or war, but action inspired by these exceptional 
and urgent situations is not necessarily the best policy for the long term. 
Some in the industry would argue that the real danger of national 
regulation—federalization—is that it leads to standardization. America is 
www.ebook3000.com

	
F D R ’ s  N e w  D e a l  ( f o r  E l e c t r i c i t y )  	
149
a big, diverse nation, and diversity is a strength. The future is uncertain 
and different states have different views on how to mitigate the risk. Much 
like a diversified portfolio of stocks, a diverse set of state policies assure 
America as a whole that someone will try all the options and that, out of 
this variety and innovation, the best options will emerge. Diversity also 
allows actions to be tailored to local needs and opportunities. There are 
concerns that federalization may undermine the strengths of diversity. 
However, others will say even the two most visible symbols of 
FDR’s Depression-era actions—Hoover Dam and the Tennessee Valley 
Authority—reflect the value of diversity regardless of their federal origins. 
As we will discover in the next chapter, Hoover Dam was an investment 
that took advantage of a unique regional opportunity, which itself grew 
out of a bottom-up compact among the western states. The Tennessee 
Valley Authority, meanwhile, was a first-of-a-kind experiment with state 
capitalism, but, it, too, was tailored to unique regional circumstances. 

150
C H A P T E R  9
Herbert Hoover’s Dam
This morning I came, I saw and I was conquered, as everyone 
would be who sees for the fi rst time this great feat of mankind.
 —President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1935)1
Hoover dam has been called “the great pyramid of the American west.” Like the 
pyramids, Hoover Dam rose out of the bleak desert, and it is a monument 
to the ingenuity and skill of the Americans who built it. As Hoover Dam 
historian Joseph Stevens writes, it was built at “a time when the engineer 
and the builder were romantic fi gures, when taming a wild river was a 
heroic endeavor, when holding a job and feeding one’s family was a feat 
of honor.”2 
Hoover Dam is the perfect physical symbol of the Age of Big. Located 
southeast of Las Vegas on the Arizona-Nevada state line, Hoover Dam 
was a big project in every sense of the word. When it was completed in 
1935, it was the tallest dam in the world, at a height of 726 feet, more than 
twice as tall as the next tallest dam, the Arrowrock Dam in Idaho. The 
scale of electricity generation was big, too; from 1938 to 1948, Hoover 
Dam was the biggest producer of hydroelectric power in the world. Most 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
151
important, success at Hoover Dam proved to many that big government 
was the only entity that could successfully complete such a big project and 
produce big benefits like flood control, water supply, and electric power 
production on such a scale. This point was buttressed by the fact that the 
private sector had tried over many years to achieve at least the first two 
of these benefits, and not only did it fail but it caused one of the largest 
environmental disasters in history.
The timing of this big project by big government could not have been 
better. The political compromise and engineering design needed to make 
it happen had been achieved over the preceding decades, so Hoover Dam 
was ready to start construction in 1931, just as the Great Depression deep-
ened in severity. Three Republican presidents—Teddy Roosevelt, Calvin 
Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover—contributed significantly toward making 
the dam a reality, but it was President Franklin D. Roosevelt who claimed 
it as a symbol of his New Deal. On September 30, 1935, with his next pres-
idential election looming, FDR traveled to the newly built Hoover Dam 
for its dedication.3 Historian Michael Hiltzik writes, “He aimed to appro-
priate as a tangible symbol of the New Deal, his Democratic administra-
tion’s economic recovery program, a great dam on the Colorado River 
conceived and launched by Republicans.”4 
The story of why and how Hoover Dam was built is fascinating in and 
of itself, but its telling in detail here is justified for a deeper reason: Hoover 
Dam raised and resolved many of the issues that confront the choice of 
electricity technology even today. It shows how the culture of the day drove 
technology choice, just as it does now. It also resolved the ideological debate 
on federal versus state government control by involving both in the ways 
that best ensured the project’s success—an ability to coexist and cooperate 
that is sometimes forgotten by the federal courts today. Hoover Dam was 
built by the federal government, but it was tailored to regional opportuni-
ties for power production, water supply, and flood control. It resolved the 
debate of government versus private enterprise by assigning responsibility 
to each in a way that best served the project. It also used straightforward 
tools such as pay-for-performance contracts to give the right incentives 

152	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
to private enterprise—something that had to be relearned four decades 
later. And, perhaps because it got the incentives right, Hoover Dam was a 
first-of-a-kind project that came on line on time, and on budget—in sharp 
contrast to first-of-a-kind projects in more recent times.
Hoover Dam also fit well into Franklin Roosevelt’s three-prong plan 
for electricity; big hydro was the third prong. And it helped fulfill the man-
ifest destiny of electricity: to cover all of America by pushing into the West.
E A R LY  E F F O R T S  T O  T A M E  
T H E  C O L O R A D O  R I V E R
Success at Hoover Dam came via many failures. Geologist William P. 
Blake wrote of the potential to use Colorado River water for irrigation 
in 1853, when he was a member of a survey team for the Pierce admin-
istration that was sent to find a southern route for an intercontinental 
railroad. His most notable discovery, however, was the then-dry bed of 
a large ancient sea in Southern California. He said the soil could grow 
anything if a supply of water was found, and that supply could come from 
the Colorado River, which was over one hundred miles away. The next 
man to pursue this dream was Oliver M. Wozencraft, a physician from 
Ohio. In 1859 Wozencraft sought and won a grant from the California 
legislature for ten million acres of land in the area, but he also had to win 
the approval of Congress. Indeed, Wozencraft made his last journey to 
Congress in 1887 only to see the bill he was counting on lose another vote 
in the House. After that vote, Wozencraft returned to his rooming house 
and died a few days later, having lost both his wealth and health to his 
dream for the Colorado River.5 
Charles Robinson Rockwood was next. He told his story of great hope 
and disappointment in his 1909 book Born of the Desert. Like the others, 
Rockwood wanted to make the California “desert bloom” with irriga-
tion water from the Colorado. Soon after he attracted an investor, as 
Stevens put it, “[The] sinister names Colorado Desert and Salton Sink 
were replaced with the grandiose title Imperial Valley.” Rockwood’s idea 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
153
was that settlers would buy land at a very low price per acre but would also 
be required to buy the irrigation water needed to make that land worth 
anything. In 1901 the first settlers came to the Imperial Valley, and the 
first water flowed to them from the Colorado River through the Mexican 
Canal. Despite all that was working against it, by about 1904 the Imperial 
Valley’s population numbered about seven thousand and by 1905 the land 
produced dairy products and crops, such as barley, alfalfa, and cattle feed, 
valued at over $2 million in total.6
Unfortunately, Rockwood’s firm, the California Development 
Company, was built on a rickety financial structure. It did not directly own 
the land the settlers lived on because that was sold to them by the federal 
government, so the company didn’t make money on land. What the com-
pany did own was the canal and the water it carried. Unfortunately, the 
Colorado River carried so much silt that locals joked it was “too thick to 
drink and too thin to plow,” and it clogged the canal that carried water to 
the Imperial Valley. The best way to take care of this problem would have 
been through constant dredging of the canal, but Rockwood’s company 
did not have the money for that. Instead, their remedy was to divert the 
river farther south from the original diversion in Mexico at Pilot Knob. 
With no cash, Rockwood cut the new diversion site at what would become 
known as Disaster Island.7
In 1905 a series of heavy rains and floods on the Colorado River 
changed everything. Rockwood could not control the diversions or con-
trol the river water, which flooded into the Salton Sink, the ancient basin 
that Blake had discovered—a basin that had been dry for four hundred 
years. Rockwood inadvertently transformed the dry Salton Sink into the 
60-foot deep, 150-square-mile Salton Sea. He realized he had created an 
environmental disaster and was overwhelmed, so he turned to Edward H. 
Harriman, the powerful owner of the Southern Pacific Railroad, which 
was profiting from shipments out of the Imperial Valley. Thinking only 
of the theoretical value of irrigated land, and not aware of the environ-
mental crisis, Harriman demanded a controlling 51 percent share of the 
company in return for a $200,000 loan. With this uninformed negoti-
ation completed, Harriman unwittingly took on the full liability of the 

154	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
environmental disaster and eventually the full brunt of President Teddy 
Roosevelt’s wrath. Only when Epes Randolph, one of Harriman’s chief 
engineers, finally got to the site did he see the scope of the disaster. It 
would take the Southern Pacific more than eighteen months and more 
than $3 million to attempt to fix it.8 
Rockwood’s mistakes had created the largest lake in California, and 
they also set in motion all that was needed to motivate the Hoover Dam. 
The dream to make the desert bloom was the same, whether a private 
enterprise or the government was in control. Private enterprise had been 
given its chance, and it failed. President Theodore Roosevelt would keep 
the dream alive but made it clear that a comprehensive plan to tame the 
Colorado River was now a matter for the federal government. Electricity 
would be an important part of that plan. The science Benjamin Franklin 
had discovered through study of one untamed natural force—lightning—
would be used to tame another: the raging Colorado River.
T H E  F I R S T  S T E P S  T O W A R D  H O O V E R  D A M
In 1920 Philip D. Swing, a Republican, was elected as a congressman 
from California. He sought a $30 million loan guarantee for the Imperial 
Irrigation District to cover the cost of building an All-American Canal. 
Around the same time, Arthur Powell Davis, head of the Bureau of 
Reclamation, sought congressional approval for a study of a comprehen-
sive flood control program for the Colorado River. Davis had his geologists 
search for sites suitable for a high dam—the term high indicated it would 
be suitable for electricity generation. Three sites at Boulder Canyon were 
proposed, as well as two at Black Canyon. All five were on the Colorado 
River, at the border between Nevada and Arizona.9 
In 1922 Davis presented his report to Congress, where it became 
known as the Fall-Davis report. The report proposed the Boulder Canyon 
Project, which would provide flood control and water storage, and con-
cluded that it should be financed with electric power sales; an all-American 
canal would also be built. Oddly, the Bureau of Reclamation’s survey of 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
155
the sites ultimately concluded that the Black Canyon sites were superior 
to the Boulder Canyon ones, and Hoover Dam was actually built at Black 
Canyon, despite still being called the Boulder Canyon Project. 
The essential political foundation for Hoover Dam would be agree-
ment on the allocation of the water diverted from the Colorado River. 
President Warren G. Harding appointed his secretary of commerce, 
Herbert Hoover, as chairman of the Colorado River Commission. This 
was the first step in the journey to naming the Hoover Dam. Political 
heavyweights from seven states were sent to the commission; the four 
“upper basin” states were Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, and New Mexico, 
and the three “lower basin” states were Nevada, Arizona, and California. 
The commission’s objective was to establish an interstate compact that 
would distribute Colorado River water equitably to all seven. The US 
Constitution had always allowed interstate compacts subject to congres-
sional approval, but such compacts had never involved more than two 
states at a time.10 
At first, a wide range of allocation methods to determine how to dis-
tribute this common resource made sense to the different states. Pressure 
mounted for a compromise when a Supreme Court ruling seemed to favor 
the lower basin states. In addition, if federal funds were won, the federal 
government might impose an allocation. The crucial first compromise 
came with the proposal to have the upper and lower basins split water 
rights fifty-fifty. The allocation among the states in each basin would 
come later. Finally, in 1922, representatives from the seven states signed 
the Colorado River Compact. After fraught negotiations, this agreement 
was still only a first step: the seven state legislatures as well as Congress 
would have to approve it, too.11 
T H E  S T A R S  A L I G N  F O R  L E G I S L A T I O N 
As the agreement sought approval by the state legislatures, five of the 
states were relatively easy; the real battles were in California and Arizona. 
Hoover lobbied hard and finally won approval from the California 

156	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Legislature. In Arizona the opposition was led by a party motivated by a 
competing project. 
In Congress, Swing joined forces with the powerful Senator Hiram 
Warren Johnson, also from California, to introduce legislation: The 
Swing-Johnson bill would fund the construction of a high dam in the 
vicinity of Boulder Canyon as well as the All-American Canal. Historian 
Michael Hiltzik points to two factors that pushed the Swing-Johnson leg-
islation toward approval. The first factor, sadly, was the Midwest flood of 
1927, which killed 246 people along the Mississippi River. As Congress 
got ready to vote on the Flood Control Act of 1928, Swing made it clear 
that the same kind of risk loomed for his constituents from the untamed 
Colorado River. The second factor was a report showing the full extent of 
the campaign against municipal power by private electric utilities. Hiltzik 
writes, “In all, the utilities were revealed to have spent $1 million a year to 
turn public opinion against public power, and another $400,000 specifi-
cally to torpedo the Boulder Canyon bill.”12
Pushing against approval was another tragic event: in 1928, at a criti-
cal moment for Swing-Johnson, the Saint Francis Dam burst, killing over 
four hundred people in Southern California. William Mulholland, head of 
the Los Angeles Department of Water, took the blame. By many accounts, 
he was indeed largely responsible, but no charges were made. The House 
of Representatives had trusted his engineering endorsement of the site and 
the design of the Boulder Canyon Project. When Mulholland’s reputation 
was undermined by the Saint Francis collapse, the judgment of his political 
supporters was called into question, too. To mitigate this and avert future 
disasters, the Swing-Johnson bill added a requirement for a “blue-ribbon” 
panel of experts to review engineering designs. Swing-Johnson also added 
provisions to win support in California on the water allocation issue: 
California would get 58 percent of the allocation of the three lower basin 
states and would also be allowed to use Arizona’s and Nevada’s allocations 
until their water needs grew. The House passed the Swing-Johnson bill in 
May 1928. The Senate then passed it by a vote of sixty-four to eleven and, 
on December 21, 1928, President Coolidge signed it into law.13 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
157
To determine the allocation of the electricity to be generated at 
Hoover Dam, Secretary of the Interior Ray Lyman Wilbur conducted 
a competitive solicitation: in other words, he requested bids. But the bids 
to buy electricity from Hoover Dam far exceeded the amount available. 
Indeed, two entities—Southern California Edison, a private utility, and 
the city of Los Angeles—each offered to buy 100 percent of what was 
available. The project had an ambitious cost-recovery plan, so maximiz-
ing sales was absolutely key. The revenue from power sales had to be suf-
ficient to repay the federal investments as well as to pay all expenses plus 
interest over fifty years.14
“ S I X  C O M P A N I E S ”
President Herbert Hoover saw an urgent need for public works spend-
ing, and so he pushed for the start of Hoover Dam. By 1930 the effects 
of the Great Depression were catastrophic and Hoover was looking for 
what today would be called “shovel ready” public works projects; Hoover 
Dam was one of the few megascale projects that was shovel ready. Its total 
estimated cost of $165 million was a big investment, given the fact that 
the total budget for federal construction was typically $150 million a year. 
The scope of the federal government was much smaller than it is today, 
with its spending equaling 3.4 percent of gross domestic product in 1930, 
compared to 20.7 percent in 2015.15 
The Bureau of Reclamation next invited bids from private compa-
nies to build Hoover Dam, surely the largest such effort in American his-
tory. The winning bidder would have to submit a $5 million performance 
bond—a substantial sum to put at risk at any time, made even bigger by 
the context of the Great Depression. This approach assumed that “the 
government would provide all the materials entering into the completed 
work, such as cement and steel, but it was up to the contractor to furnish 
all the machinery, tools, vehicles, and supplies needed to carry out con-
struction.” Bidders also took on the risk of pay-for-performance penalties 

158	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
for missing deadlines. For example, a $3,000-a-day penalty would be 
imposed if the four diversion tunnels were not completed by October 
1933, and a further penalty would be imposed if the dam’s final height for 
power generation was not achieved by August 1936.16
There were only three compliant bids. In the end, the winner was 
a consortium of bidders calling themselves Six Companies. Incredibly, 
Six Companies would complete the Hoover Dam two years early. Every 
leader in the Six Companies team brought something important to the 
effort; most had built their companies from the ground up by successfully 
completing major projects in the West. Utah Construction, headquartered 
in Ogden, Utah, was created by the Wattis brothers. As its business grew, 
it formed a partnership with Harry Morrison of Morrison-Knudsen. All 
would agree that, for the Hoover Dam bid, Morrison-Knudsen’s most 
desirable feature was that its team included America’s foremost dam 
builder, engineer Frank T. Crowe.17
Morrison approached the J. F. Shea Company in Portland, Oregon, 
the biggest tunnel and sewer builder on the West Coast. Shea suggested 
Portland’s Pacific Bridge Company as another member of the consortium. 
Morrison then went to San Francisco and won over McDonald & Kahn, 
another successful construction firm. Next was Henry Kaiser and his firm 
Kaiser Paving in Oakland, California. Kaiser’s big break came when 
Warren Bechtel, an influential San Francisco contractor, became Kaiser’s 
mentor and invited him into joint ventures. Kaiser and Bechtel were in, 
and they brought along the only eastern firm in Six Companies, Warren 
Brothers.18 
When it came time to bid, the consortium took Crowe’s cost estimates, 
added a profit of about 25 percent, and bid $48.9 million. Six Companies 
won handily. Stevens, the Hoover Dam historian, paints the scene with 
the press crowded into William Wattis’ room at the St. Francis Hospital, 
where he was being treated for cancer. His wife made him presentable, 
sitting in his robe puffing a cigar. The victory had put him in a positive 
frame of mind. Wattis, one of the brothers behind Utah Construction, 
quipped, “Now this dam is just a dam but it’s a damn big dam.”19
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
159
C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  I N N O V A T I O N S
The start of the project brought a new set of challenges. It was difficult to 
get workers to the construction site, as well as to get materials and elec-
tricity into and out of the site. To meet the challenge, three major parts of 
the infrastructure were under construction by the time Crowe got there: 
the Union Pacific railroad spur; Southern California Edison’s 200-mile, 
90 kV power line from Victorville, California, to Boulder City; and the 
road and rail lines from Boulder City to the work site.20
After the Saint Francis Dam catastrophe, a blue-ribbon panel 
had recommended tougher standards. One of these required that the 
maximum stress allowed on the dam be cut. In the end, the bureau 
sidestepped this standard. On many other technical design decisions, 
however, the bureau was methodical and precise. Expert science and 
engineering lay behind many of the decisions made for the Hoover 
Dam. The bureau conducted substantial practical research on several 
elements, most notably on the concrete used and the shape of the dam. 
Between 1931 and 1933, the bureau experimented with as many as fif-
teen thousand concrete samples in ninety-four different formulations. 
When a major design issue was discovered, the bureau pursued a solu-
tion with real intellectual vigor. A Swedish engineer argued that an 
“arched dam” would be more stable and also would be much thinner; 
it would be more cost effective because less concrete would be needed. 
The bureau looked seriously at both the stability issue and the prom-
ise of cost reductions claimed for the arched dam. In partnership with 
Southern California Edison, it built the Stevenson Creek test dam on 
the San Joaquin River in California. The test dam showed that huge 
savings in concrete could be achieved safely with the arched dam, but 
still the bureau did not go that way in the end. One major reason was 
that the Saint Francis Dam had been an arched dam, and memory of 
that dam’s failure was still fresh.21 
Crowe was under pressure to get the four diversion tunnels for the 
dam completed by October 1933. Practical innovations let him meet that 

160	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
tight deadline. The best single innovation was the “William Jumbo.” This 
was scaffolding mounted on a truck along with drilling equipment, an 
efficient way to make scaffolding mobile. It could quickly be pulled away 
when dynamite was to be detonated, and just as quickly put back into the 
tunnel to continue drilling.22 
Hoover Dam reflects America’s scientific and engineering might. 
Surely the successful design and construction of this dam is among the 
great engineering accomplishments, in a time rife with great engineering 
feats. This America might surface again and perhaps it already has in the 
shale gas and oil revolution at the turn of the twenty-first century.23 
H A R D  W O R K  A N D  H A R D S H I P 
The Great Depression created a nation of desperate people seeking work. 
Before Hoover Dam even began construction, hundreds of workers and 
their families moved to the Nevada desert and set up camp to be first in 
line for jobs. They formed what was known as “Ragtown,” a small, impro-
vised settlement on the scorched landscape. Once construction began, 
Boulder City housed the workers, but it was only a marginal improvement 
from Ragtown. Housing was often unfinished, lacking plumbing and, 
ironically, electricity; rules were strictly enforced, including prohibitions 
on gambling, liquor, and dance halls within city boundaries. Of course, 
all these vices were readily available outside Boulder City, especially in 
Las Vegas.24 
Amenities were scarce. Residents pushed the federal government 
and Six Companies to build a school, and Boulder City School was 
completed in 1932. It was given some guidance by the Las Vegas School 
Board, although because it was on federal land it could not be funded 
by the state. A hospital was set up a year after construction began, but 
only dam workers could get treatment—their families had to “fend for 
themselves.” Still, workers clamored for a job on Hoover Dam because 
the average annual salary was $1,825. According to the Bureau of 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
161
Reclamation, that meant dam builders were paid better on average than 
steel workers ($423 a year), coal miners ($723 a year), and civil service 
employees ($1,284).25
Although the pay was good for the times, workers were pushed to the 
limit while building Hoover Dam. Most worked eight-hour shifts seven 
days a week, and enjoyed only two optional, unpaid vacation days a year: 
the Fourth of July and Christmas Day. But while living conditions were 
difficult, the weather and working conditions were extreme; Hoover Dam 
workers were true unsung heroes. Men generally worked from either 4 am 
to noon or from 4 pm to midnight, since by noon it was so hot that they 
would pass out from the heat. “It was so hot we used to soak sheets and 
crawl inside them to try and get a little sleep,” one man reported. Night 
workers who slept during the scorching-hot day had to endure suffocating 
heat in their dormitories. The desert heat was a leading cause of death 
at Hoover Dam. In 1931 alone, sixteen died of the heat as temperatures 
rose to 120 degrees. One worker recalled that in one month temperatures 
never went below 100 degrees at night, and at times topped out at 138 
degrees. In the summer months, it was normal to send ten to twelve men 
to the hospital each day, “unconscious and incontinent,” their body tem-
peratures measuring up to 112 degrees. Sadly, these men had about a 50 
percent chance of survival until doctors adapted and began to immedi-
ately submerge the overheated men in ice baths and then give them intra-
venous fluids.26
The heat was rivaled by the dangerous work conditions. Industrial 
accidents, rock slides, drownings, blasting accidents, truck accidents, can-
yon walls collapsing, electrocutions, and accidental falls were just some 
of the causes of death recorded at the time. Oddly, pneumonia shows up 
as one of the leading causes of death among workers at Hoover Dam. It 
is likely that the hospital recorded pneumonia as the cause of death when 
the real culprit was carbon monoxide poisoning, which resulted from 
machinery being operated in improperly ventilated tunnels and other 
tight spaces. Perhaps the most dangerous of all jobs was that of the “high 
scalers.” These courageous men, often Native Americans, would descend 

162	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
canyon walls on ropes and use forty-four-pound jackhammers and dyna-
mite to strip away loose rocks. This job was so dangerous that a special hat 
called a hard-boiled hat was created for them by coating their cloth hats 
with tar. This crude hard hat proved highly effective; men struck by fall-
ing objects did not suffer skull fractures or death quite as frequently—just 
broken jaws.27
The hard work and hardship of these workers is an important part 
of the story of Hoover Dam. The workers were physically responsible for 
the successful construction, and it is they and their families who are at the 
heart of this accomplishment.
P R O T E C T I N G  P R O G R E S S  O N  T H E  D A M
Crowe’s speed earned him the nickname “Hurry-Up Crowe,” but it also 
created another kind of challenge. The workforce was much larger than 
the bureau had expected, and it quickly ran through its budget alloca-
tion for the year. It would be a great challenge to get more money from 
Congress in the middle of the Great Depression. Indeed, the federal gov-
ernment was determined to balance its overall budget, and it had already 
planned to cut funds in 1932. Crowe pushed the speed because he knew he 
would be at the mercy of the spring floods, and if he did not complete the 
work before the floods there was the danger that the partially completed 
work would be swept away.28 
Elwood Mead, head of the Bureau of Reclamation, testified to 
Congress that he needed $7 million immediately or the work would be 
shut down, but unfortunately Mead was an unconvincing witness and 
may have done more harm than good. It was ­Henry J. Kaiser from Six 
Companies who saved the day with an argument focused on job losses. 
He immediately pointed to the damage that would result from a failure to 
provide the $7 million: “It will kill the possibility of the Government [con-
tinuing] to employ the 3,000 men who are now employed . . . It will kill 
the possibility of the Government to profit from the extent of six or more 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
163
millions of dollars through a 1-year earlier completion . . . It will kill the 
opportunity of the Government to remove the hazard to life and property 
for one whole year of the thousands and thousands of people living in the 
Imperial Valley.” If Congress were to shut down Hoover Dam, Kaiser 
went on to say, “You will force about 7,000 citizens of the United States 
out on that desert.”29 Soon after Kaiser made his case, Congress restored 
all the money it had planned to cut from the Hoover Dam budget and 
added more.30 
Despite the jobs Hoover had created, during the election of 1932, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt criticized him for “wasteful spending on public 
works.” Roosevelt soundly beat Hoover in the contest, winning forty-two 
states to Hoover’s six. Even in Boulder City, Roosevelt easily beat Hoover 
by 1,620 to 454 votes. After Roosevelt’s election there would be no more 
coddling of Six Companies. Harold Ickes took over at the Department 
of the Interior, and one of his first moves was to remove any possibility 
that the dam would be credited to Hoover; he ordered that it be named 
Boulder Dam. He also took aim at the cement cartel. Ten suppliers had 
colluded and come in with exactly the same price, which was 20 percent 
higher than it had been a few months earlier. Ickes negotiated a winning 
price at a 10 percent discount. Next, he ended the Six Companies’ prac-
tice of paying the workers in company scrip, which forced the workers to 
buy necessities at the company store and denied independent stores a fair 
chance to compete. Finally, Ickes promoted hiring black workers to com-
bat racial discrimination.31 
Still, Six Companies continued to play hardball with the workers. 
A battle over the diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning, for exam-
ple, continued into 1935, the year in which President Roosevelt would 
give his dedication speech. To rebut claims of disability, Six Companies’ 
experts testified that “victims of carbon monoxide poisoning ‘either die or 
get well.’” Given the “die or get well” standard, the very presence of the 
complainant in court would rebut their claims of harm. The human costs 
mounted as workers hammered the dam into existence.32 

164	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
P R E S I D E N T  R O O S E V E L T ’ S  D E D I C A T I O N 
S P E E C H
On September 30, 1935, President Roosevelt gave the dedication day 
speech at Hoover Dam. He was eager to claim the dam as a success for his 
New Deal, despite the fact that three other presidents over thirty years had 
helped the project reach important milestones. He wanted to show that 
progress was being made in economic recovery through big public works 
projects like the dam, and he reflected the attitude of his time toward 
the physical environment, which was that nature exists for mankind to 
make it productive. Electricity was central to both showing progress and 
making nature productive. Sales of electricity would pay for the dam and 
powerhouse, and electricity would pump the water to make the California 
desert bloom. Electricity was both tangibly and symbolically the source of 
the progress called for by the times. 
Roosevelt began his speech with a twist, more clever than apt, on 
Julius Caesar’s veni, vidi, vici: “This morning I came, I saw and I was con-
quered, as everyone would be who sees for the first time this great feat of 
mankind.” He noted how barren the site had been: “Ten years ago the 
place where we are gathered was an unpeopled, forbidding desert.” He 
called what had been done at Boulder City “a twentieth-century marvel.” 
Appropriately for the Age of Big, he celebrated Hoover Dam’s size. Most 
directly relevant to the history of electricity, he told his audience that the 
Hoover Dam power system, yet to be completed at that point, “will contain 
the largest generators and turbines yet installed in this country,” capable 
of generating “nearly two million horsepower of electric energy”—that is, 
about 1,500 MW of electricity.33
Emphasizing the efficiency and hard work that went into the project, 
he noted that the work had been completed two years ahead of the con-
tract deadline and expressed the nation’s “gratitude to the thousands of 
workers who gave brain and brawn to this great work of construction.” 
Going beyond the impressive feat of construction, Roosevelt celebrated 
the “agricultural and industrial development” that the dam would bring 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
165
and the contribution to “health and comfort” to citizens in the Southwest. 
He noted the federal and state cooperation that had settled the issue of 
water allocation, and he gave credit to Congressman Phil Swing and 
Senator Hiram Johnson, but he made no mention of Herbert Hoover, 
who had negotiated the all-important deal on water allocation. Again, 
reflecting the cultural attitude toward the physical environment, he said 
that the Colorado River had been “an unregulated river” that added little 
value to the region. Indeed, said the president, the “people of Imperial 
Valley had lived in the shadow of disaster.” Roosevelt credited the dam 
with stopping a flood in June 1935 because the water was “safely held 
behind the Boulder Dam” and believed that if the dam had been com-
pleted one year earlier, it could have prevented the drought suffered then. 
Rightfully, jobs were center stage and he celebrated that in the midst of 
the Great Depression, the project hired “4,000 men, most of them heads 
of families,” plus “many thousands more were enabled to earn a livelihood 
through manufacture of materials and machinery.”34 
Absent from Roosevelt’s speech, however, was a big-picture view of 
what Hoover Dam meant to America’s future. Back on October 30, 1932, 
President Hoover had pushed back on his opponent, Roosevelt, with such 
a view. President Hoover said, “This campaign is more than a contest 
between two men . . . It is a contest between two philosophies of govern-
ment.” Roosevelt and his big-government philosophy won in the 1932 elec-
tion in the depths of the Great Depression. To the man on the street, there 
could be no better evidence that Roosevelt’s philosophy worked than the 
jobs, the water, and the electricity brought by the newly completed Hoover 
Dam.35 
After the speech, construction on Hoover Dam moved quickly to 
cross the finish line. In December 1935, a 1,180-foot roadway built over 
the dam was first opened to traffic. In March 1936, the federal govern-
ment took possession of the dam from Six Companies. Change Orders 
added about $5.8 million to what Six Companies was paid—a relatively 
small increase of about 12 percent above the bid. Six Companies earned a 
profit of $10.4 million after taxes. The first electric power was delivered to 
California in October 1936.36

166	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
T H E  L E G A C Y  O F  H O O V E R  D A M
Hoover Dam was a big project by any measure: it was the tallest dam in 
the world when it was completed in 1935, and it was the largest hydro-
electric power generator in the world for many years thereafter. Because 
its large scale made Hoover Dam a first-of-a-kind technology, its suc-
cess was never guaranteed. The fact that it began generating power on 
time and on budget, and performed as promised, makes it a significant 
success in the history of the electricity business. First-of-a-kind nuclear 
plants did not have the same success in the 1980s, nor did today’s clean 
coal projects. 
Hoover Dam’s construction nicely balanced the competing ideologies 
of big government and big business. The dam could have been all about 
big government with big business left out of the equation. After all, the 
dam was built after private business failed to provide much-needed water 
supply and flood control. Indeed, private investors had caused a massive 
environmental crisis—the inadvertent creation of the Salton Sea. Big 
business could have been pushed aside by the broad brush of concern over 
the collapse of capitalism in the Great Depression. It was not. A partner-
ship between government and business was sought from the start. 
Too often, business and government are portrayed as black-and-white 
alternatives. Hoover Dam was built under what today would be called a 
public-private partnership. As it should, the government tackled the thorn-
iest political issue, water supply allocation, through an interstate compact 
initiated by all seven affected states; there was no pitched battle over states’ 
rights. Roosevelt rushed to the dedication in 1935 to claim Hoover Dam 
as the symbol of the success of his New Deal, but as we have seen, business 
played a major role. More broadly and more important to history, hav-
ing a precedent for successful public-private partnerships must have given 
Roosevelt confidence when he turned to big business to produce the arma-
ments that would be used by American soldiers in World War II. These 
experiences would persuade Roosevelt to shift to the right politically by 
teaming with big business—a shift with significant consequences. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
H e r b e r t  H o o v e r ’ s  D a m 	
167
Another part of the legacy of Hoover Dam is the guidance it gives 
to those looking to understand the past or predict the future of any 
power-generation technology. Hoover Dam was driven by overarching 
goals well beyond the existing demand for electricity. The purpose of 
Hoover Dam was to provide water supply and flood control for the west-
ern states—power generation was part of the equation mainly to pay the 
bills. America must look for this overarching goal in every technology 
going forward, from nuclear power to wind power to solar power and 
beyond. The example of Hoover Dam also inspires us to look for the cul-
tural beliefs that support or undermine new technologies and projects. 
Hoover Dam would not have been built except by a culture that cele-
brated the use of science and technology to serve human needs and tame 
the environment. 
The culture of the time was deeply affected by the need for job cre-
ation. The harsh treatment of workers on Hoover Dam reflected how des-
perate many workers were. Notably, the harshness was not mitigated by 
government’s involvement. What historian Michael Hiltzik calls “mor-
dant book ends” illustrate the sacrifices of the workers. The first bookend 
was the first person to die for the project; J. Gregory Tierney, part of a 
survey crew, drowned in the Colorado River on December 20, 1922. The 
second bookend was that his son, Patrick, was the last to die, thirteen 
years later on exactly the same day. Physical risk is part of progress, but 
the consequent human losses should never be forgotten.37 
Hoover Dam might best be seen as the third of a four-stage manifest 
destiny for electricity, each with its own impetus and imprint. In the East, 
Franklin, Edison, and Westinghouse brought both the concept for and 
commercialization of electricity technology. In the Midwest, Insull paved 
the way for electricity to be available and affordable to all. In the West, 
Hoover Dam showed how electricity could tame nature and make it pro-
ductive in the eyes of that era; the giant dams in the Northwest followed. 
The fourth and final stage would take place in the South, with Roosevelt’s 
Tennessee Valley Authority. 

168
C H A P T E R  1 0
David Lilienthal’s 
Tennessee Valley 
Authority
A Promised Land, bathed in golden sunlight, is rising out 
of the grey shadows of want and squalor and wretchedness 
down here in the Tennessee Valley these days.
— Lorena Hickok (1934)1
As he had done with Hoover dam, President Franklin Roosevelt furthered the 
manifest destiny of electric service by creating the Tennessee Valley 
Authority (TVA) early in his presidency. Where Hoover Dam had pushed 
electricity service to the West, TVA pushed service into the South. The 
two furthered the same national goal, yet they were distinctly diff erent in 
their methods. The details of that diff erence are essential to the history 
of electricity. They show that, while federal action was central to both 
Hoover Dam and TVA, federalization did not mean a one-size-fi ts-all tem-
plate was imposed, nor did it mean local or regional voices were silenced. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
169
Roosevelt was just thirty-seven days into his first term when he sent 
Congress his proposal to create TVA. Roosevelt signed the TVA Act soon 
thereafter, on May 18, 1933. The president’s New Deal led to a torrent of 
new legislation, which created new government agencies that aggressively 
intervened in the American economy and American lives. No legislation, 
however, better reflected the president’s faith in the good that might be 
done by the right kind of government agency with the right kind of plan-
ning. Roosevelt claimed TVA would be “a corporation clothed with the 
power of government but possessed of the flexibility and initiative of a 
private enterprise.” The TVA Act reflected faith in the good electricity 
could do, too; electricity would make life easier and attract new business 
with new jobs.2 
Later, TVA’s electricity was crucial to America’s effort to win World 
War II. Well established by 1940, TVA was in an ideal position to expand 
its generation to provide electricity at Alcoa, Tennessee, for the aluminum 
that went into aircraft, and at Muscle Shoals, Alabama, for the nitrates 
that went into munitions and fertilizer. TVA also powered the Manhattan 
Project, the research and development project that created the first nuclear 
weapons, by supplying electricity to the lab in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. With 
this surge in electricity production during the war, TVA transformed itself 
from a regional agency focused on waterway navigation and agricultural 
development—with electricity supply as a third priority—to a very large 
electric power monopoly. Its interests went well beyond the hydroelectric 
power that was envisioned at the time of its creation. TVA aggressively 
moved to produce electricity from coal, and it was among the first to build 
nuclear power plants. In time, TVA grew to be the largest public power 
supplier in the United States.3 
While it took Roosevelt’s political mandate and skill to launch the idea 
of TVA, it was David Lilienthal who made the idea a reality. Even today, 
TVA itself refers to Lilienthal as the “Father of TVA.” Author Steven 
Neuse, meanwhile, offers another apt characterization in the subtitle 
for his biography of Lilienthal: The Journey of an American Liberal (1997). 
Neuse found that, at TVA, Lilienthal was transformed from a typical 

170	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
progressive calling for regulatory reform for the electricity business into 
a state capitalist calling for government ownership and operation. In this 
sense, Lilienthal’s TVA was a unique, bold experiment on the governance 
of an industrial democracy. That is, the TVA experiment addressed this 
question head on: on the spectrum from complete private enterprise to 
complete government direction, how should the American economy, in 
general, and the electric power business, in particular, be driven? Only 
with the right person—Lilienthal—at the right moments—the Great 
Depression and World War II—could America have conducted such an 
experiment.4 
A  S E E D  P L A N T E D  B E F O R E  T H E  N E W  D E A L 
TVA’s origins lay in the turmoil of World War I. In 1916 the National 
Defense Act authorized the production of nitrates for munitions develop-
ment at Muscle Shoals, Alabama. By the end of the war, the federal gov-
ernment had spent $100 million on a yet-to-be-finished facility with two 
nitrate plants, for use in munitions or fertilizer production, and a hydro-
electric dam. Roscoe Martin, a professor of political science at Syracuse 
University, writes that after 1918 there ensued a fifteen-year battle over 
the disposition of the government’s holdings at Muscle Shoals; after the 
war, President Harding wanted to privatize federal projects and the 
Muscle Shoals facility was put out for bid. None other than Henry Ford 
offered $5 million for Muscle Shoals and went to visit the site with his 
equally famous friend, Thomas Edison. A not-so-famous Senator George 
William Norris, a Republican from Nebraska, put a stop to Ford’s bid 
in 1924.5
Norris’ interest in the Tennessee Valley was piqued, and in 1926 
he introduced a bill to have the federal government expand Muscle 
Shoals and to build other dams along the Tennessee River. The bill 
made no progress under President Coolidge and a later bill was vetoed 
by President Hoover. In 1929 Theodore Roosevelt, then the governor of 
New York, proposed the construction of publicly owned dams and power 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
171
plants along the St. Lawrence waterway in New York; momentum for 
Norris’ idea was building. In January 1933, President-Elect Roosevelt 
and Norris went together to Muscle Shoals. The president-elect spoke of 
Muscle Shoals being part of a greater effort for the Tennessee River that 
would benefit “generations to come” and “millions yet unborn.” When 
the senator asked Roosevelt how he would describe the nature of this 
federal corporation he intended to create, Roosevelt said, “I’ll tell them 
it’s neither fish nor fowl, but whatever it is, it will taste awfully good to 
the people of the Tennessee Valley.”6
T H E  T V A  A C T  O F  1 9 3 3
Roosevelt’s famously productive Hundred Days started on March 5, 1933, 
the day after his inauguration. He signed the TVA Act on May 18, 1933. 
The act set both a direction for and the boundaries of TVA’s actions. The 
long-term goals for TVA in the “Tennessee drainage basin and adjoin-
ing territory” were listed, in order, as maximum flood control, maximum 
development for navigation, and “maximum electric power generation 
consistent with flood control and navigation.”7 
Crucially, TVA would be run by an independent board of directors 
consisting of three members, all appointed by the president with the advice 
and consent of the Senate. To eliminate any conflicts of interest, board 
members were required to have no financial interests in public utilities 
and other related companies. TVA was given the authority to construct 
dams and reservoirs in addition to “power houses, power structures, trans-
mission lines, navigation projects, and incidental works in the Tennessee 
River and its tributaries, and to unite the various power installations 
into one or more systems by transmission lines.” TVA also was given the 
authority “to produce, distribute, and sell electric power.” It had the right 
to sell “surplus power . . . to States, counties, municipalities, corporations, 
partnerships, or individuals,” though a preference was to be given to non-
profits. The right to raise funds with power sales or the sale of bonds also 
was included. The act made it clear (at least implicitly) that TVA did not 

172	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
have to limit itself to hydroelectric power; it spoke of raising funds for the 
“construction of any future dam, steam plant, or other facility.”8
L I L I E N T H A L’ S  P A T H  T O  T V A
Early Years
David Lilienthal’s New York Times obituary summed him up this way: “Keen 
but relaxed, Mr. Lilienthal was an athlete, intellectual and executive. A 
professional boxer trained him when he was in high school. He left college 
with a Phi Beta Kappa key and a reputation as a light-heavyweight boxer.” 
He continued to fight throughout his high-profile career because he was 
pressured by opponents at every stage. He did not fight, of course, with his 
fists; instead he deployed the spoken and written word. Lilienthal’s lifelong 
passion for public life began in high school in Michigan City, Indiana, 
where he gave a speech titled “The Predatory Rich.” Later, Lilienthal 
attended DePauw College in Indiana, where his academic record was sat-
isfactory but not exceptional. However, he kept sharpening his speaking 
skills by entering oratory competitions and seeking out opportunities to 
speak.9 
Lilienthal became impressed with the role lawyers played in progres-
sive politics and decided he wanted to join that profession. He went on 
to Harvard Law School, where he did well in Felix Frankfurter’s public 
utility law course. Frankfurter, a Roosevelt adviser and eventual Supreme 
Court justice, became one of Lilienthal’s key mentors. Louis D. Brandeis 
was also among Lilienthal’s heroes. In 1923 Lilienthal wrote his first arti-
cle in the New Republic, titled “Labor and the Courts,” in which he picked 
up Brandeis’ call for “socially-minded, creative judge[s].” Frank Walsh, 
another Harvard law professor, encouraged Lilienthal to go to Chicago 
after graduation and work with Donald R. Richberg. Richberg was a 
labor lawyer who worked on behalf of the railroad unions and helped write 
the Railway Labor Act in 1926. He later became a prominent adviser to 
President Roosevelt and helped write the National Industrial Recovery 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
173
Act. Lilienthal’s practice of cultivating and working with prominent pro-
gressives soon put him on a path to meeting Roosevelt.10
At Work 
Lilienthal worked for Richberg for three years and contributed to two 
labor cases that Richberg won at the US Supreme Court. He also got 
exposure to important utility issues, such as how to value assets when deter-
mining rates, including the “prudent investment” versus replacement cost 
debate. If the original cost of an asset—say a small power generator—was 
$100,000, the prudent investment method would base the rate customers 
pay on this original cost. In contrast, if the cost to replace this small gener-
ator rose over time to $110,000, the replacement cost method would base 
rates on the $110,000.11 
With the courts taking aim at labor, and his interest in utility issues 
whetted, Lilienthal decided to drop labor law and move more fully into 
public utility law. Around the time he made the transition, in 1929 and 
1931, he wrote two articles on state regulation of public utility holding 
companies, both published in the Columbia Law Review. Reflecting the 
concerns of the time, he called for closely monitoring contracts between 
the holding company and the utilities it owned as well as closely scru-
tinizing the securities issued by them. The Progressives in Wisconsin 
then provided him with a high-profile opening to public utility issues: in 
1931, Governor Philip La Follette asked Lilienthal to join the Wisconsin 
Railroad Commission.12 
Although Wisconsin was among the first states to establish utility reg-
ulatory commissions in 1907, Neuse, Lilienthal’s biographer, concludes 
that La Follette saw big opportunities for reform. In the midst of the 
Depression, prices and profits were falling everywhere, but utility profits 
remained high. One of the reasons was that replacement cost had been 
widely used as the basis for setting rates and profits; that would be chal-
lenged now. Reformers were elected in many states across the country, and 
Lilienthal became the de facto chairman of the Wisconsin Commission. 

174	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Under Lilienthal, the commission would no longer wait for a complaint to 
be filed but rather would investigate any utility’s rates at its own initiative, 
and the utility would pay for the investigation. The commission got a new 
name as well: the Wisconsin Public Service Commission.13
Lilienthal promoted new ways to set the price, or rates, for prod-
ucts from utilities. In a telephone utility case, Lilienthal championed a 
rationale for cutting rates that pragmatically reflected the reality of the 
Great Depression. His core argument was that because prices were fall-
ing economy-wide, holding electricity rates steady meant that those rates 
were increasing in real terms—that is, they were higher after adjusting 
for the deflation. Prominent economists, like James Bonbright from the 
Columbia University School of Business, one of the foremost experts on 
utilities, supported Lilienthal’s arguments.14
Lilienthal became nationally known when he served on the Committee 
on Public Utilities in 1931, which was initiated by, among others, Senator 
Robert La Follette Jr. and Senator George Norris. By 1932, however, 
Lilienthal was in political trouble because of his aggressive style and the 
declining popularity of Governor La Follette, who had appointed him. 
In stepped Justice Brandeis, who recommended Lilienthal to President 
Roosevelt. FDR nominated him for the TVA board in June 1933.15
B R E A K I N G  T H E  S T A L E M A T E
As Lilienthal took up his job at TVA, he noted that “in many states instead 
of the regulators regulating the utilities, the utilities are regulating the 
regulators.” TVA would regulate public utilities in a fundamentally differ-
ent way. Lilienthal believed that TVA “represents an attempt to regulate 
public utilities not by quasi-judicial commissions, but by competition. The 
act definitely puts the Federal Government into the business of rendering 
electric service.” The results would be “intended to serve as a ‘yardstick’ 
by which to measure the fairness of rates of private utilities, and to pre-
vent destructive financial practices.” With TVA in operation, Lilienthal 
was saying that government would not restrict itself to courtroom debates 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
175
about what honest electricity rates should be, but would define honest elec-
tricity rates in the real world by producing electricity itself.16
Lilienthal saw a major obstacle holding back progress on lowering elec-
tricity rates. He wrote, “Here we have a picture of a complete business 
stalemate. The electric utilities’ position is that until the use of electricity 
is greatly increased, the rates cannot be drastically decreased. Nor will the 
use of electricity be greatly increased, they urge, unless electric-using appli-
ances come into general use.” To combat this catch-22, the Electric Home 
and Farm Authority, a subsidiary of TVA, would get appliance manufac-
turers to produce lower-cost appliances and the new Authority would sub-
sidize the purchase of these appliances by electricity customers.17 
A T  T V A
Lilienthal sat alongside the two other TVA board members, who, coin-
cidentally, shared the same last name. A. E. Morgan was the appointed 
chairman. He had been the president of Antioch College in Ohio and 
was a follower of both the utopian thinker Edward Bellamy and the 
management guru Frederick Taylor. In 1888 Bellamy wrote a novel that 
promoted his utopian ideals titled Looking Backward, 2000–1887. It was a 
direct, strong indictment of capitalism and strongly favored government 
management of all aspects of life. A. E. Morgan’s interest in Bellamy was 
strong enough that he wrote a biography, but in practice he seemed to take 
Bellamy’s utopian ideals with a grain of salt. Neuse characterizes Morgan 
as “a master engineer, dam builder, and social visionary” who had little 
interest in bureaucratic order and political maneuverings.18 
A. E. Morgan and Lilienthal were both outsiders to Tennessee, but 
H. A. Morgan, the third of the three board members, had been a local 
for fifty years. He had been the dean of Tennessee’s School of Agriculture, 
and his broad vision centered on the interconnectedness of the “soil, air, 
water, and all of life.” Lilienthal joked that he was the only board member 
that was not named Morgan, did not hold a doctorate, and had not been 
a college president.19

176	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The three board members allocated responsibilities: A. E. Morgan 
would be responsible for dams, navigation, “social experiments,” and 
overall “integration” of the disparate goals of the TVA. H. A. Morgan 
would be responsible for agricultural programs, while Lilienthal would 
be responsible for electric power and legal issues. From the start, there 
was tension among the board members, with many meetings enlivened by 
“shouting matches.” To Lilienthal, TVA was all about electric power, and 
his goal was to make power cheap and abundant. He saw the opportunity 
to make life easier for people who couldn’t afford much; for example, he 
said the introduction of public power would mean a 60 percent rate cut 
in Tupelo, Mississippi. Interestingly, this motive was much like Insull’s, in 
the sense that he saw low prices leading to higher use, which in turn led 
to even lower prices as the fixed costs were spread over a larger number 
of customers. With this theme, Lilienthal was heading toward a confron-
tation with A. E. Morgan, who envisioned a lesser role for power and 
wanted to limit the sale of TVA power to private electric utilities rather 
than compete with those utilities for customers.20
Lilienthal clashed with A. E. Morgan over power sales, but he also 
had to battle Wendell Willkie, the president of the Commonwealth and 
Southern Holding Company, the private electric utility that served the 
Tennessee Valley. Willkie was in a tough spot. If he sold local electric 
transmission and distribution facilities to TVA, as Lilienthal proposed, 
then TVA would get bigger and be an even more formidable competitor. 
If Willkie did not sell, however, TVA would use federal money to build 
competing transmission and distribution facilities anyway. Moreover, 
while Lilienthal’s (and Roosevelt’s) notion of having a public yardstick 
for comparison to the prices of private utilities sounded right, there were 
several reasons it was not a fair comparison. Willkie could not compete 
on price because TVA enjoyed subsidies from the federal government 
that lowered its costs. In addition, TVA used mostly low-cost hydro-
electric power, and TVA’s price did not include distribution costs, as 
Willkie’s did.21
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
177
T V A  A N D  T H E  C O U R T S
Lilienthal had to fight the private electric utility companies in court. The 
courts were seen as a place to fight by those who opposed Roosevelt’s 
New Deal programs in general and that was true with TVA, too. The 
constitutionality of TVA power sales and the use of federal government 
money to help communities build transmission and distribution facilities 
were challenged in the case Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority. TVA lost 
the challenge in Alabama courts, but the Alabama ruling was overturned 
by the federal court. In 1935 the US Supreme Court upheld the federal 
court’s decision. That decision was narrowly focused on allowing power 
sales from just the Wilson Dam at Muscle Shoals.22
The constitutionality of TVA power sales was challenged again in a 
case involving the Tennessee Electric Power Company. The US Supreme 
Court eventually ruled that the utilities had no standing to sue because 
they had not been guaranteed a monopoly. While the court did not rule 
on the constitutionality of TVA, per se, the cumulative impact of the 
losses in court meant that Willkie finally realized that TVA was “there to 
stay.” He agreed to sell to TVA substantially all of Commonwealth and 
Southern’s facilities in Tennessee as well as some facilities in Alabama 
and Mississippi. Congress appropriated funds for the purchase and, sig-
nificantly, did not put any territorial limit on TVA.23 Cases like this are 
important because the Supreme Court allowed state capitalism to displace 
regulated private capitalism.24 
The very public battle between Lilienthal and A. E. Morgan contin-
ued, with dueling articles in the Atlantic Monthly and the New York Times. 
In his Atlantic Monthly article A. E. Morgan defended public power, but 
said that some—namely Lilienthal—actively hated private utilities and 
wanted nothing short of an all-out war. An article by Wendell Willkie 
appeared in the same publication before A. E. Morgan’s, and Lilienthal 
used this fact, along with a detailed comparison of the two articles, to 
imply that A. E. was somehow controlled by private utilities.25 

178	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The battle came to a head after A. E. Morgan accused Lilienthal of 
improprieties, such as alleged bias against private utilities regardless of the 
circumstance, and called for a congressional investigation. Roosevelt grew 
tired of A. E. Morgan’s allegations and demanded that he substantiate any 
charges. When he could not, or would not, Roosevelt fired him. Still, the 
congressional investigation went on with seventy days of hearings in the 
period from May to December 1938, but in the end six of ten people on 
the panel exonerated TVA and Lilienthal of any wrongdoing.26 
T V A  G O E S  B I G  A N D  G O E S  T O  W A R
TVA was big from the start simply because of its geographic footprint. 
It served the Tennessee Valley that drains the Tennessee River and its 
tributaries, covering parts of seven states: Tennessee, Kentucky, Virginia, 
North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi. In his landmark book 
TVA: Democracy on the March (1944), Lilienthal reported that TVA then con-
trolled twenty-one dams, sixteen of them newly built, and that $700 mil-
lion had been invested in the TVA system. Of that total, he attributed 65 
percent to electric power generation, 20 percent to flood control, and the 
remaining 15 percent to navigation. Lilienthal then ticked off what he saw 
as the important impacts the TVA investment had had on the Tennessee 
Valley over the ten years from 1933 to 1943. Given all this investment, 
how did TVA now compare to the rest of the country? Lilienthal proudly 
concluded that TVA was the United States’ second largest electric gener-
ator, providing 1 billion kWh per month in 1944. Ten years earlier, per 
capita electricity production in the TVA footprint had fallen well short 
of the US average. After a decade of investment, that per capita electric-
ity production was about 50 percent higher than the national average. 
Lilienthal had made electricity the priority of TVA, and these results were 
ample evidence of his success.27
Looking at all that had been accomplished by TVA, Lilienthal could 
not help but compare his dams to the great dams of the West: Hoover 
and Grand Coulee. In terms of the concrete used alone, he found that 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
179
TVA, in building all its new dams, used four times as much concrete 
as Hoover Dam had. Moreover, he recalled that it took six major pri-
vate firms to build Hoover Dam and ten such firms to build Grand 
Coulee, but it was just a single agency, TVA, that built all the dams in 
the Tennessee Valley system.28 
Even more noteworthy was TVA’s importance to America’s victory in 
World War II. TVA’s key role in the war developed in four ways, according 
to Lilienthal. First, TVA supplied plentiful electricity to the Alcoa alumi-
num plant south of Knoxville; the Alcoa plant was the largest aluminum 
plant in the world, and it was central to achieving the fifty-thousand-plane 
air force President Roosevelt had called for. Second, it was the assured 
supply of electricity, as well as its ample supply of water for cooling, that 
enticed the federal government to secretly build an entire city called Oak 
Ridge in Tennessee. Electricity supplied to Oak Ridge was used to pro-
duce nuclear material to make the atomic bombs that would ultimately be 
dropped on Japan. Specifically, the electricity was used to run the “cen-
trifuge and the electromagnetic and gaseous-diffusion processes”; such 
equipment is central to the development of nuclear weapons, as evidenced 
by the fact that it is part of the debate on the Iranian nuclear deal today. 
Third, the nitrate output at Muscle Shoals was used both as material for 
making munitions and as material for making fertilizer, much of it sent 
to America’s allies in Europe. Fourth, TVA had advanced aerial recon-
naissance and other mapping techniques in the Tennessee Valley, and 
these techniques were implemented in Europe to create maps for Allied 
aviators.29 
While TVA was invaluable to the war effort, Erwin C. Hargrove, pro-
fessor emeritus at Vanderbilt, shows that the war was equally important 
to TVA. It was the war that allowed TVA to go far beyond the navigation 
and flood-control mandates in the original TVA Act. TVA became the 
largest integrated electricity system in the United States, and at one point 
75 percent of its power went toward the war effort. Employment there 
grew significantly, from fourteen thousand in 1940 to forty-two thousand 
in 1942. The war gave justification to TVA building its first nonhydro unit, 
a steam unit, at Watts Bar in Tennessee. With this steam plant, TVA was 

180	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
no longer solely focused on the Tennessee River and hydroelectric power; 
it was transformed from a regional river basin manager to a major power 
monopoly. It used the power needs at the federal facilities in Oak Ridge, 
Tennessee, and Paducah, Kentucky, devoted to atomic development to 
justify building many more steam generation facilities. Most important, 
it was TVA’s contribution during the war that gave it the reputation as a 
government agency that worked.30
T V A ’ S  I D E O L O G I C A L  F O O T P R I N T 
For many people, TVA was always about much more than concrete, water, 
and electricity. The project had a spectacular impact on the well-being of 
people in the Tennessee Valley. TVA was a symbol of American progress 
and expertise in the field of electricity and could serve as a model for eco-
nomic and political development around the globe. Publicity about TVA’s 
spectacular impact started not more than a year after TVA began. In 
the depths of the Great Depression, Harry Hopkins, Roosevelt’s trusted 
adviser, sent Lorena Hickok, a pathbreaking journalist and close friend to 
Eleanor Roosevelt, to report on the effects of the New Deal. 
In 1934 Hickok wrote to Hopkins to tell him what she had found out 
about TVA. She wrote, “A Promised Land, bathed in golden sunlight, 
is rising out of the grey shadows of want and squalor and wretchedness 
down here in the Tennessee Valley these days.” She continued, “Ten thou-
sand men are at work, building with timber and steel and concrete the 
New Deal’s most magnificent project, creating an empire with potentiali-
ties so tremendous and so dazzling that they make one gasp.” She visited 
the sites of the Norris and Wheeler Dams as well as the Wilson Dam. 
She marveled that the men working on the Norris and Wheeler Dams 
were “working five and a half hours a day, five days a week, for a really 
LIVING wage. Houses are going up for them to live in—better houses 
than they have ever had in their lives before. And in their leisure time they 
are studying—farming, trades, the art of living, preparing themselves for 
the fuller lives they are to lead in that Promised Land.” Contrast this 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
181
with the hardship at Hoover Dam. Hopkins deployed correspondents like 
Hickok to keep him informed about the needs and mood of Americans. 
Although they had an audience of one, Hickok and the others gave eyewit-
ness accounts that are a valuable part of the historical record.31
Lilienthal also wrote passionately about TVA’s impact. He modestly 
described his book as merely a report to the stockholders, but he went on 
to claim that all Americans owned TVA. He said, “This is a book about 
tomorrow.” In assessing TVA’s impact, Lilienthal said that “men and sci-
ence and organizing skills applied to the resources of waters, land, forests, 
and minerals have yielded great benefits for the people,” and chief among 
those benefits was a change of attitude for the future: “No longer do men 
look upon poverty as inevitable, nor think that drudgery, disease, filth, 
famine, floods, and physical exhaustion are visitations of the devil or pun-
ishment by a deity.” Lilienthal wrote that, after ten years, the Tennessee 
Valley and surrounding areas had become “an entirely different region.”32 
These powerful pronouncements by Hickok and Lilienthal go 
far beyond political spin. They reflect a fundamental cultural view: 
electricity was a good thing because it modernized and civilized the 
Tennessee Valley. In the end, success or failure can be judged only in 
the context of a nation’s stated goals. With a goal of making electric-
ity available and affordable to all, including rural areas, TVA was an 
important success. When the goal changes, however, so can the judg-
ment on success or failure. 
Lilienthal also freely referred to TVA in terms of a moral or spiritual 
purpose. He wrote, “The physical achievements that science and technol-
ogy now make possible may bring no benefits . . . unless they have a moral 
purpose.” And that moral purpose must be reflected in unified resource 
development “governed by the unity of nature herself.” Plus, he put forth 
that resource development must ensure grassroots participation by all the 
people affected. Speaking of meetings held by electric cooperatives for the 
people who were both consumers and owners, he claimed that they often 
had an “emotional overtone” and “spiritual meaning.” Here we might 
compare Lilienthal’s secular faith to the spiritual faith of Faraday, both 
centered on a unity found in nature.33

182	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
TVA is a government-owned entity; it is not a private utility regulated 
by government. Its unique status would become ever more pronounced 
during the Cold War, in which free market capitalism was at war with the 
centrally planned, state-run industries under communism. As if anticipat-
ing this, Lilienthal said he feared overcentralization in both government 
and business, and rather than aligning with big business or big govern-
ment, he instead offered the TVA model, which he believed balanced the 
two by establishing centralized electric power production with decentral-
ized delivery through the local distributors TVA served. He argued that 
control from distant Washington, DC, by the federal government would 
have been no better than control from New York City by electric holding 
companies. And anticipating curiosity about his politics, Lilienthal said 
plainly that politics had to be kept out of TVA; as he put it, “A river has 
no politics.”34 
Lilienthal’s TVA: Democracy on the March got plenty of good reviews, but 
there were also skeptics. One of the old guard of the New Deal, Rexford 
Guy Tugwell, a famous member of Roosevelt’s brain trust, referred to the 
project as “democracy in retreat.” Donald Davidson, poet and founding 
member of the Southern Agrarians, pointed to the seventy thousand peo-
ple displaced by TVA’s dam building, and said TVA was more “paternal-
istic” than “participatory.” William Chandler, author of The Myth of TVA 
(1984), believes that, because Lilienthal’s book was so widely used as the 
source of information on TVA, his book kept honest critiques of TVA at 
bay until the 1970s. Only then did problems with TVA’s nuclear energy 
program cause scholars to look more critically at Lilienthal and his model 
of government ownership.35
A S S E S S I N G  T V A  A F T E R  T W E N T Y  Y E A R S
In the early 1950s, two respected academics looked back at the original 
goals for TVA compared to its actual achievements. Each came up with 
somewhat different assessments of the path TVA had taken, but Norman 
Wengert of the City College of New York and the aforementioned Roscoe 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
183
Martin of the University of Syracuse came to similar conclusions. In 
short, TVA had accomplished a lot, but by the end of World War II, it had 
evolved into simply another large electric utility. 
The title of Wengert’s article hints at his conclusion: “TVA—Symbol 
and Reality.” Wengert concludes that TVA’s “symbolic significance may 
be more lasting and more important than its actual accomplishments in 
the development of the Tennessee Valley, however impressive the latter 
might be.” To document the high hopes for TVA, he quotes the noted 
historian Henry Steele Commager, who wrote, “Here [at TVA] were 
tested the broad construction of the Constitution, large-scale planning, 
the recasting of federalism along regional lines, new techniques of admin-
istration, and new standards of civil service, the alliance of science and 
politics, and the revitalization of democracy through a calculated pro-
gram of economic and social reconstruction.”36 
After the “collapse of the ‘free enterprise system,’” the hope for 
broad-based government planning was understandable—though Wengert 
concludes TVA did not fulfill that hope. Wengert offers many reasons for 
the narrow planning actually done at TVA. The first is that the early 
battles of the board of directors hurt such efforts. The congressional 
investigation triggered by A. E. Morgan’s allegations hurt, too, as did the 
hard-won litigation victories. Another factor was that electric power out-
sized the other TVA functions. Moreover, according to Wengert there was 
no political support for broad, region-wide economic planning by TVA 
because such planning was essentially a political goal-setting process and 
there was no regional political body to handle such goal setting; TVA 
could not fill this political role because its board and its managers were 
not elected. Thus, TVA settled into a narrow “preoccupation with power 
and chemical development.”37 
Martin comes to essentially the same conclusion: TVA achieved a lot 
in flood control and navigation early on, but looking back from the 1950s, 
it had become just another large electric power utility. He sees TVA’s 
roots in the fifteen-year battle over what to do with the Muscle Shoals 
munitions plants and power facilities—essentially an ideological battle 
between public and private development. Norris tried and failed seven 

184	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
times with legislation to initiate TVA, but, finally, the Great Depression 
and Roosevelt’s election created the context in which Norris’ dream could 
come true in the form of the TVA Act. Still, the act was blunt in its nar-
row focus on flood control, navigation, and power production; Supreme 
Court rulings furthered this narrow focus by establishing TVA’s right to 
sell power.38 
L I L I E N T H A L’ S  ( A N D  T V A ’ S )  L E G A C Y
Like Hoover Dam, TVA furthered electricity’s march across America. It 
did so, however, in a way that reflected local or regional aspirations and 
opportunities. At the start, TVA was meant to be all about an ambitious 
effort to jump-start economic development in the impoverished Tennessee 
River Basin—with electricity playing an important but not dominant role. 
Such an effort would have reflected the desires of Roosevelt and Norris 
as well as those of the two Morgans who served on the original TVA 
board of directors. Quickly, though, factors conspired to turn the project 
into an ambitious effort to make TVA-generated electricity available and 
affordable to all the businesses and homes in the Basin, and this created 
far-reaching consequences for economic development. The most influen-
tial “factor” driving TVA in that direction was Lilienthal himself. Under 
his direction, TVA became a rare and large-scale experiment in state cap-
italism in America.
The TVA experiment could have significantly changed the path 
forward for the American electricity business. What emerged was a 
head-to-head battle between Lilienthal’s state capitalism and regulated, 
private capitalism, as embodied in Wendell Willkie’s Commonwealth 
and Southern Holding Company. Private capitalism, even of the regu-
lated variety originated by Insull, did not really have a chance to win in 
the Basin. It could not duplicate the advantages bequeathed by the fed-
eral government and, without federal financing, private capitalism surely 
would not have moved as fast given the risks. And if it did not move fast, it 
www.ebook3000.com

	
D a v i d  L i l i e n t h a l’ s  T e n n e s s e e  V a l l e y  A u t h o r i t y 	
185
would not have achieved the economic impact that Lorena Hickok wrote 
about and thousands more experienced. 
Notably, the goals and tactics of Lilienthal’s state capitalism and 
Insull’s private capitalism were the same: increase the scale and scope of 
the electricity system to capture economies of scale and lower the price of 
electricity. That lower price would increase demand, which would set in 
motion another round of cost and price declines. Attracting new custom-
ers was central to the effort, and TVA was in a perfect position to do so 
during World War II. 
It is surprising that Roosevelt let the experiment go forward, given his 
words and actions on other occasions. In his Portland speech, he said elec-
tricity should be mostly a matter for private business. And with Hoover 
Dam, there was no broad effort at state capitalism: the power was sold 
to other private and public utilities. The TVA experiment might indicate 
that Roosevelt was no ideologue but rather a pragmatist looking for what 
worked.
Had TVA shown itself to be a reliable, beneficial alternative to pri-
vate capitalism, the American electricity business would look quite dif-
ferent today. In the end, however, TVA was (and is) a large public utility 
with all the attendant opportunities to do good or bad, just like a private 
utility. Like many private utilities, TVA’s later failure with nuclear power 
would undermine its political support because it lost touch with its pur-
suit of abundant and affordable power. Also like any private utility, TVA 
would face charges that it caused environmental harm, ranging from 
threatening endangered species (such as the snail darter, a fish discov-
ered during TVA’s construction of the Tennessee Dam) to causing global 
climate change with carbon dioxide emissions from its large coal-fired 
power plants. By the time this ultimate equivalence of TVA to a large 
private utility became clear, however, TVA was simply too big to go away. 
Despite its emphatic rhetoric, and the substantial belief engendered by 
that rhetoric, TVA did not prove to be either transformative or replicable 
as a new form of governance for an industrial democracy in general, or for 
the electricity business in particular.

186
C H A P T E R  1 1
King Coal’s Reign
For within coal is man’s industrial holy 
trinity of light, heat, and power.
— Saul Alinsky (1949)1
The term king Coal seems to stick no matter the actual conditions of the coal 
industry. In 1917 Upton Sinclair wrote a novel titled King Coal that details 
the harsh conditions coal miners faced; his sequel The Coal War was pub-
lished posthumously in 1976. Even today, with vastly diff erent conditions 
in the coal business, King Coal is a frequent and prominent characteri-
zation in the newspaper headlines from the New York Times, the Economist, 
and many others.2 
Coal was not always king. By 1850 coal production and delivery had 
become a fully commercialized business in America, but coal still faced 
substantial competition from the primary fuel of the day, wood. Coal’s 
share of all energy use in 1850 was just under 10 percent, with wood 
accounting for much of the rest. Coal eventually pushed wood aside so 
that, by 1920, coal accounted for three-quarters of all energy use. That 
rise to dominance is what earned it the title of King Coal. Coal’s rise was 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
187
driven by falling coal prices and the fact coal proved to be more effective 
in the industrial processes of the day.3
Writing in 1949, community organizer and writer Saul Alinsky elo-
quently described the breadth of coal’s reign: “Coal is the prime mover of 
our life. In these black chunks of the earth’s history is the energy that pours 
power into our gigantic industrial empire . . . This Gargantuan industrial 
scene reveals interlaced speeding railroads, giant whirring dynamos light-
ing up the nation, and overwhelming surges of power spun from steam . . . 
For within coal is man’s industrial holy trinity of light, heat, and power.” 
Alinsky’s powerful writing reveals how coal was used to power the mighty 
steam engines that, in turn, powered many of the mightiest industries. 
Coal was essential to iron and steel making as both a fuel and a catalyst, 
and was also used to power America’s railroads and to heat homes.4 
And, of course, coal was used to generate electricity. However, the 
crowning of King Coal cannot be attributed to the use of coal in the elec-
tricity business alone. In 1920, with coal’s market share at its peak, only 7.3 
percent of all coal went to electric utilities. As the coal business lost its broad 
customer base, however, it grew more and more dependent on the elec-
tricity market. By 1955 the share of coal sold for electricity generation had 
increased to 32 percent. By 2015 the electricity business had become coal’s 
primary customer: 93 percent of the coal consumed in America was used to 
generate electricity. While the electricity business is certainly important to 
the coal business, there is another side to the coin, too: coal has been and, 
for the moment, still is quite important to the electricity business. By 1950 
coal was used to generate 46 percent of all electricity in America. Even as 
recently as 2015, coal was used for 33 percent of all electric generation.5
The history of electricity, then, is intertwined with that of coal, and 
the story of one cannot be told without the story of the other. Coal directly 
fueled the industrial and subsequent military rise of America. Then, 
although it lost much of its direct sales, coal continued to fuel America’s 
rise indirectly by emerging as a preferred fuel for electric power generation. 
It achieved that preference by virtue of the cost-plus regulatory scheme 
chosen for electricity. 

188	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
So, too, the intertwined history of electricity and coal cannot be told 
without some perspective on the headline-grabbing drama of violence 
and labor unrest in the coal business. Central to that drama, in turn, is 
the larger-than-life character of John L. Lewis, the famous (or infamous) 
labor leader.
T H E  C R O W N I N G  O F  K I N G  C O A L
Coal Caused a Revolution
Business historian Alfred Chandler posed an interesting question 
that illuminates how coal transformed American life. He begins with 
a premise that most historians agree on: factories, and the division 
of labor they employed, were essential for early industrialization. 
Further, there were many factories in England by the late 1700s. Why 
then, he asked, was there a delay until the 1840s in the widespread 
development of factories in America? A clue to the answer, Chandler 
said, could be found in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Pittsburgh was the 
exception, and the reason was that it had access to sufficient reserves 
of coal to meet both home and business needs. That, in turn, gave 
Pittsburgh manufacturers an inexpensive source of steam power and 
an inexpensive way to manufacture iron, which were necessary for the 
prolific rise of factories.6
In time, coal suppliers finally delivered those same two 
resources—inexpensive steam and inexpensive iron—to the rest of 
America’s big cities in the Northeast. Coal created America’s early Industrial 
Revolution, after which factories quickly proliferated. Metal works began 
to produce “shovels, saws, scythes, stoves, pots, pans, wire, plows,” and 
many other products that were necessary for homes, farms, and other busi-
nesses. The revolution then extended to other industries, from glass and 
paper to wood and leather making. And the revolution was so effective that 
eventually the British came to America to study American manufacturing 
techniques, not the other way around.7 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
189
King Coal by the Numbers 
By 1850 coal was a fully commercialized business, and two surges in coal 
production growth ensued. The period from 1850 to 1885 was the first 
period of rapid growth for coal production. From just 8.4 million tons in 
1850, coal production grew in America to 110 million tons by 1885—a 
thirteenfold increase over thirty-five years. In the second period, from 
1885 through World War I to 1920, growth spiked again, with coal pro-
duction increasing sixfold to 658 million tons.8
The reason for this rapid growth might aptly be termed the iron-rail-steam 
interdependence on the basis of research by Sam Schurr, the former direc-
tor of the Energy and Mineral Resources program at Resources for the 
Future, and his colleagues. Coke, which is almost entirely carbon, is made 
by heating coal to high temperatures to drive out impurities. Coke and 
iron ore are mixed in a blast furnace to create molten or pig iron. That 
pig iron is the primary material from which a range of steel products are 
made. Early on, the railroads needed the rails that were made from pig 
iron. Then, as the Bessemer process for making low-cost steel from iron 
came into wider use, it provided another market for the coke made from 
bituminous coal. Railroads, however, were even more important to coal’s 
rise, because coal was used to make the steam that powered locomotives.9
In 1850 coal’s market share was just about 9 percent of all energy, and 
wood was still the dominant fuel with a 91 percent market share. By 1885 
coal’s share had increased to 50 percent and wood’s share had decreased 
to 47 percent; the small, 3–4 percent remaining share was served by oil 
and natural gas. By 1920 King Coal was dominant with a 75 percent 
share of all energy use; wood’s share had fallen to just 7 percent, while oil, 
natural gas, and hydro took about 18 percent. King Coal was crowned.10 
S T A G N A T I O N
The crowning of King Coal, surprisingly, also marked the beginning of a 
decline for coal in the face of competition. American coal production had 

190	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
reached its peak in 1918 during World War I, when annual production 
reached 678 million tons. With the onset of the Great Depression, coal 
production fell. Then, during World War II, coal production resumed its 
rise and reached a slightly higher peak of 683 million tons in 1944. In 
the post–World War II period, coal production kept level at first, in part 
because of coal exports to a devastated Europe. By the mid-1950s, how-
ever, it had declined again.11
Crucial competitive changes largely explain this decline. Railroad 
demand for coal dropped precipitously from 135 million tons in 1920 to 
just 15 million tons in 1955. Schurr concludes that coal’s decline was the 
“direct result of oil’s invasion of the railroad fuel market.” Oil’s rise and 
coal’s fall can be seen more broadly, too. Indeed, the fortunes of oil and 
coal rose and fell in inverse proportion to each other. In 1920 coal’s share 
of all energy use stood at 75 percent and the oil and natural gas share was 
just 15 percent, but by 1955 coal’s share fell to 32 percent, while oil and 
natural gas rose to 62 percent.12
Another important competitor of sorts was the efficiency of coal use. 
As time and technology progressed, America got more and more useful 
work out of each ton of coal. Schurr points out, “Thirty years earlier at 
least five pounds of coal had to be burned in a steam boiler to produce one 
horsepower hour of mechanical work, whereas the most modern internal 
combustion engines run with coal gas could produce one horsepower hour 
with as little as one pound of coal.” Even as electric utilities became coal’s 
most important customer, they did so despite steady, substantial improve-
ments in efficiency. Schurr reports that 7 pounds of coal were needed to 
produce 1 kWh of electricity in 1900, but by 1950, that had been cut to 
just 1.19 pounds. Still, rapid growth in coal use by electric utilities offset 
to some extent the loss of important customers like railroads. To wit, coal 
use by electric utilities rose from 37 million tons in 1920 to 141 million 
tons in 1955.13
With the two peak-coal years (1918 and 1947) looking like equal-sized 
bookends, it could be said that coal was left behind by a growing America. 
In that same time frame, America’s population increased by 31 percent and 
its gross national product increased by 130 percent, while manufacturing 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
191
activity had increased by 225 percent. Despite economic growth, coal pro-
duction, even looking at just the peaks, had stayed flat.14 
C O A L’ S  D R A M A :  C U L T U R E  A N D  P O L I T I C S
While the numbers are essential to the story, they cannot capture all 
its dimensions. In particular, the numbers do not describe the culture 
and politics that caused much of the drama and garnered most of the 
headlines about coal in the first half of the twentieth century. This side 
of the story is best discussed in the context of the life of John L. Lewis, 
the leader of the United Mine Workers, because he acted out the drama 
on a prominent national stage. Saul Alinsky published an unauthorized 
biography of Lewis in 1949, and it is a uniquely valuable source about 
Lewis’ life and times—which were so well publicized then, and are 
little-known today.15
“Where Death Never Takes a Holiday”
On no topic is Alinsky more blunt than on the culture of the coal miners. 
He writes that the miners are a “mystery to the overwhelming majority 
of our nation.” The miner has a “bitterness bordering on hatred for the 
outside world” and has the “indifference of men who work down below 
where death never takes a holiday.” This is why it is said that Lewis and 
his miners cared little about what anyone said to them or about them. 
Alinsky drives home his point about miner culture by vividly evoking their 
daily life. He describes the breakfast a miner eats compared to what a city 
worker might eat. Most of us, he writes, eat the “morning ceremonial of 
toast and coffee.” In sharp contrast, “the miner’s breakfast may be fried 
chicken or ham with potatoes, hot cakes, biscuits, and endless steaming 
coffee, or as they say, ‘the kind of eats that sticks to a man’s ribs.’” The 
miners need this hefty meal to beat the physical and mental exhaustion 
their works brings.16 

192	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Alinsky describes the difficulty and danger of a miner’s day in detail. 
A miner might have to travel miles underground to get to the “face” of the 
coal, where the coal seam is sandwiched in between layers of rock above 
and below. A coal-cutting machine could rip the coal from the seam. At 
the time, explosives were used to break the coal up into pieces. Those 
pieces were loaded—by hand or by machine—onto a railcar to be car-
ried to the surface. Alinsky describes the mining process as “the ripping 
of the undercutting machine, the whir of drills, the blast of explosives, 
the crash of the coal face, and the clatter of loading.” Collapsed roofs 
and errant explosives were frequent killers. The Mine Safety and Health 
Administration reports that 68,835 miners were killed and over two mil-
lion injured in the thirty-five years from 1910 to 1945.17
Those who use the electricity made with coal, then and now, should 
never forget the human cost. Later, this same point would apply for the envi-
ronmental impact of coal-fired electric generation. Those who use electric-
ity should be aware of the consequences along the full path of production. 
“One of the Bleakest and Blackest Episodes  
of American Labor History”
Sadly, the history of coal contains frequent reference to massacres. A 
prime example of this was the infamous Ludlow, Colorado, massacre in 
1914, which novelist and historian Wallace Stegner called “one of the 
bleakest and blackest episodes of American labor history.” In September 
1913 miners working at the Rockefeller-owned Colorado Fuel and Iron 
Company went on strike to protest low pay and deplorable working con-
ditions. Striking miners were evicted from their company-controlled 
homes, so they built tent encampments as temporary housing. Everything 
was calm until the National Guard was brought in to break up the strike 
once and for all. In spring 1914 a war broke out between the strikers and 
the National Guard.18
That April, the National Guard enticed labor leader Louis Tikas to 
come out of his tent to discuss a truce. An eyewitness recounted seeing 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
193
Tikas walk out of his tent when “suddenly an officer raised his rifle, grip-
ping the barrel, and felled Tikas with the butt. Tikas fell face downward. 
As he lay there we saw the militiamen fall back. Then they aimed their 
rifles and deliberately fired them into the unconscious man’s body. It was 
the first murder I had ever seen, for it was a murder and nothing less.” The 
National Guard did not stop there; witnesses said that the “militia dragged 
up their machine guns and poured a murderous fire” into the camps and 
then set fire to the tents. In total, sixty-six fell as a result of the massacre 
and ensuing riots. The stage had been set for a bloody twentieth-century 
power struggle between mine owners and striking workers. Eventually 
this conflict would reach the highest office in the land, as John L. Lewis 
and Franklin D. Roosevelt squared off over strikes that could have under-
mined America’s efforts in World War II.19
Lewis’ United Mine Workers
With the constant tension between miners and mine operators, a strong 
union would seem to be inevitable. Unions and union leaders, however, 
did not have an easy rise to power. In 1890 the United Mine Workers of 
America (UMW) was created in Columbus, Ohio, through the merger of 
two other labor organizations. The UMW then affiliated itself with the 
nationwide craft unions under the American Federation of Labor (AFL). 
UMW members were not easy to lead, or to please. Even John Mitchell, 
a founding member of the UMW and its president, considered a “patron 
saint” of organized labor, was pushed out by the rank and file in 1908. The 
UMW needed a strong leader and they got one in John L. Lewis, who took 
the reins in 1920 and kept them firmly in his hands for the next forty years.20 
Lewis had solid roots in mining. His father, Thomas, was among the 
Welsh miners who immigrated to America in the 1870s. Thomas Lewis 
settled in Iowa, then a hotbed of populism, and joined the Knights of 
Labor. The family tale is that much later Thomas led and won his first 
strike against the coal companies. The price he paid was being blacklisted 
by those companies and not being able to find work—a difficult situation 

194	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
with, by then, eight children. John L. Lewis had no chance for even a 
high school education. He began working in the mines at age fifteen and 
inherited his father’s hatred for mine owners.21 
Chronic Turmoil and Disorder
As Lewis began his career in the 1920s and early 1930s, the coal busi-
ness was in a period of upheaval and anxiety. Writing in 1935, the Yale 
Law Journal spoke of the “chronic state of turmoil and disorder” in the 
American coal industry. This was the case despite the hopeful claim 
by the journal that America had huge advantages with coal. In 1929 
the United States accounted for 40 percent of the world’s coal produc-
tion, and it was believed that America held within its borders half of 
all the coal that remained to be mined in the world. The core problem, 
wrote the journal, was excess mine capacity; the capacity to produce 
coal persistently exceeded the demand for coal. The journal listed the 
varied causes of this excess, including, among others, seasonal demand, 
railroad subsidies for long-distance transport of coal, and the increasing 
productivity of mine workers.22 
The journal reported that the excess capacity was consistently in the 
40–50 percent range in the years that followed. Equally important was 
the fact that, to compensate for the decline in coal prices due to the excess 
capacity, coal mine operators chose cuts in wages as the primary busi-
ness tactic. That, consequently, led to strikes in both union and nonunion 
mines. In 1919 and 1922 the strikes caused coal shortages, and several 
unions lost their gamble. By 1930, 80 percent of coal mines were non-
union, up fourfold.23
The Great Depression: Great for the UMW
The Great Depression completely reversed the prospects of the UMW. A 
major reason for that was the passage of pro-labor legislation such as the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
195
Norris-LaGuardia Act, which dramatically curtailed the use of court injunc-
tions to combat strikes and said that companies could not ask their employ-
ees to sign a contract that prohibited union membership. The short-lived 
National Recovery Act also gave labor a shot in the arm and helped bol-
ster unions before being found unconstitutional in 1935. Section 7 of the 
National Recovery Act said, “Employees shall have the right to organize 
and bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing . . . 
employers shall comply with the maximum hours of labor, minimum rates 
of pay, and other conditions of employment.” After section 7 became law in 
1933, UMW membership exploded to over five hundred thousand in just 
two years from a low of about seventy-five thousand.24 
Although the UMW would be his top priority throughout his life, 
Lewis had big plans for unions nationwide. In 1921 Lewis challenged 
Samuel Gompers for the presidency of the AFL. Gompers was the first 
and, ultimately, the longest-serving president of the AFL. With his leader-
ship the group grew to be the biggest labor organization in the world, with 
three million members in 1924. 
Lewis lost the election but garnered one-third of the votes. He kept up 
his criticism of the AFL into the 1930s. The UMW soon was out of the 
AFL, and Lewis began his effort to create a rival nationwide union orga-
nization named the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). Through 
the CIO, Lewis took the dramatic step of taking on General Motors—a 
part of Detroit’s auto industry long considered the “greatest genii of indus-
trial power known to mankind.” The General Motors strike showed just 
how influential Lewis had become on a national stage. It also showed that, 
beyond coal, the war between capital and labor had many fronts, and that 
Lewis’ powerful tactics and personal charisma significantly affected every 
one of them.25 
The result of the General Motors battle in particular depended on 
whether Michigan governor Frank Murphy would call the National Guard 
to evict the sit-down strikers from General Motors factories. Governor 
Murphy told Lewis that, indeed, he would call the National Guard because 
he had a duty to uphold the law. Lewis fired back that if Murphy used the 
National Guard to evict the strikers he would be “giving complete victory 

196	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
to General Motors” and would betray the workers. He reminded Murphy 
of his own family’s plight in Ireland. Lewis asked Murphy if he would 
choose to “uphold the law” when his father was imprisoned by the British, 
or when Murphy’s Irish grandfather was hung. The inspired arguments 
worked. After that conversation, the governor did not order the troops 
to evict the strikers. GM signed a contract with the United Automobile 
Workers to end the sit-down strike, which had lasted over forty days.26
Lewis’ Break with FDR (and America) 
Lewis had doubled down on his bet on Franklin Roosevelt in the 1936 
presidential election; UMW contributed more than $500,000 to the 
Roosevelt campaign. Trouble began to brew early in Roosevelt’s presi-
dency, however; in Lewis’ mind, labor had not yet gotten any quid pro quo 
for their money or their votes. The Lewis-Roosevelt rift began when, in 
the midst of the General Motors strike, FDR told the Michigan governor 
to “disregard whatever Mr. Lewis tells you.” Lewis said he would sup-
port the Republican presidential nominee, Wendell Willkie, in the 1940 
election—the same Wendell Willkie who had battled David Lilienthal at 
TVA less than ten years earlier. Lewis pulled no punches. In a major radio 
address, he said FDR “means War! War! War!” and was trying to create 
a “political dictatorship.” Finally, Lewis threatened to quit the CIO if the 
members did not turn away from Roosevelt. He said, “Sustain me now, or 
repudiate me.” Roosevelt did win, of course, and Lewis did stay true to his 
word—he resigned the presidency of the CIO.27 
After resigning, Lewis returned to the UMW, saying, “Coal min-
ers of America have the first call and the first right on whatever John L. 
Lewis has to contribute.” As his first big issue there, Lewis chose captive 
mines; these are the mines run by the big consumers of coal such as steel 
mills. Captive coal mines employed fifty-three thousand mine workers 
and 95 percent of them already were unionized. Still, Lewis wanted to 
raise that proportion to 100 percent. In 1941, to that end, Lewis ordered 
a strike. FDR came out against the strike, claiming he was saying no to a 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
197
“dangerous minority of industrial magnates” and to “a small but danger-
ous minority of labor leaders.” On December 7, 1941, Lewis won his cam-
paign for the captive coal mines. And on that day of infamy, the Japanese 
bombed Pearl Harbor.28 
War economics created the backdrop for Lewis’ next strike. His min-
ers faced flat wages, and yet the prices they paid at the stores were ris-
ing because of wartime shortages. Lewis argued that mine workers were 
struggling to pay food prices that had increased 125 percent since 1939. In 
a full-throttle attack, he called the current pay level “substandard starva-
tion wages,” and he claimed the miners’ children “cry for bread.” Tension 
mounted again between Lewis and President Roosevelt. In April 1943 
Lewis threatened that his 450,000 miners would walk out if a wage increase 
was not achieved by May 1. Shockingly, on May 1, 1943, in the middle of 
the war, 450,000 coal miners went on strike in defiance of the president. 
They achieved little popular support; on the whole, the American public 
took offense at Lewis’ strike. In response to theater newsreels about the 
strike, audiences would hiss and boo. High school students picketed Lewis’ 
home in Alexandria, Virginia, with posters calling him “Hitler’s helper.” 
One political cartoon showed Lewis “stabbing the American soldier in 
the back.” The military newspaper Stars and Stripes said, “Speaking for the 
American soldier, John L. Lewis, damn your coal black soul!”29 
On May 2, President Roosevelt delivered his fireside chat “On the Coal 
Crisis” to plead for the miners to return to work for the sake of America’s 
war effort. Addressing the striking miners directly, he said, “No matter 
how sincere his motives, no matter how legitimate he may believe his griev-
ances to be—every idle miner directly and individually is obstructing our 
war effort.” More bluntly, the president said, “A stopping of the coal supply, 
even for a short time, would involve a gamble with the lives of American 
soldiers and sailors and the future security of our whole people.” He then 
spoke to the miners about their own sons. He cited stories he had heard of 
miners’ sons from Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and Illinois who were serving 
in the military. He said he was appealing to the “essential patriotism of the 
miners” and made clear that the “three great labor organizations”—the 
AFL, CIO, and the Railroad Brotherhoods—had a no-strike pledge and 

198	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
that the UMW “was a party to that assurance.” On June 23, 1943, govern-
ment control of the mines ended as the coal strikes that had started on May 
1, 1943, were tentatively resolved.30
But the wave of strikes was not over. On April 12, 1945, President 
Roosevelt died. Nineteen days after the president’s death, on May 1, 1945, 
Lewis called another strike. In March 1946, Lewis again called a strike and 
then, because of the shortage of coal, railroads laid off 51,000 workers and 
Ford, with 110,000 employees, began to shut down. Lewis had not been 
tamed by powerful politicians. He would be tamed somewhat by the tech-
nological progress and geographic shift in the aftermath of these strikes.31
T H E  A F T E R M A T H  B Y  N U M B E R S 
Major shifts in the coal business diminished Lewis and the UMW, and 
these reveal themselves in industry statistics from the 1950s into the 2000s. 
One shift shows the decline in the percentage of all coal mined under-
ground. In 1950, 75 percent of American coal was mined underground; 
by 2010 that was cut to 31 percent. The alternative to underground min-
ing is surface mining, which requires fewer miners. If only 31 percent of 
total coal production is mined with underground technology, then by defi-
nition the rest of the coal—69 percent—was mined with surface mining 
technologies in 2010. The shift to surface mining also meant a change in 
location to the West. In 1950 mines east of the Mississippi accounted for 
94 percent of all coal production. By 2010 eastern coal accounted for just 
41 percent. Western coal then accounted for 59 percent of all coal in 2010. 
Most of the western coal mining is in Wyoming, which alone accounts for 
40 percent of total US production.32
Labor productivity also rose steadily with the move to surface min-
ing out in the West. Even in 1950, before the shift, surface mining was 
almost three times more productive. By 2010 a miner in an underground 
mine produced 2.89 tons of coal an hour, on average, as compared to 9.46 
tons an hour in a surface mine. In surface mines in the western United 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
199
States alone, a miner could produce over twenty tons per hour. All of this 
reduced the need for mine workers. In 1920 employment of coal miners 
was at 784,621, but by 1950, that number had dropped to 483,239, and by 
2010 it had plummeted again to just 135,500.33
This drop in employment occurred despite the fact that there was sub-
stantial growth in coal use and in coal prices. In the 1950 to 2010 time 
frame, American coal production almost doubled from 560 million tons to 
1.08 billion tons. Average prices in nominal terms increased at a pace of 
about 3.26 percent a year. At the same time, the electricity business became 
coal’s primary customer. In 1950 electric power accounted for 19 percent 
of all coal consumption, while in 2010, it accounted for 93 percent.34
Looking at this plentiful data with a wide-angle lens reveals all that 
has changed as a consequence. The state-by-state political center of grav-
ity shifted to the West. Wyoming, as noted, accounts for 40 percent of 
total US coal production while West Virginia accounts for just 11 percent. 
The shift to the West meant long-distance rail transport was required; rail 
transport prices now drive coal prices and, thereby, electricity prices, as 
much as coal mining costs do. Western coal has a significantly lower sulfur 
content, so sulfur dioxide emissions are lower when that coal is burned, 
garnering it an environmental preference. Most notably, the drop in total 
employment has diminished the political power of the coal business and its 
unions. The significance of this last point has become clear more recently, 
as concerns about global climate change have led environmentalists to 
push for the shutdown of all coal-fueled power plants.35
Sadly, one circumstance has not changed. Coal mining, despite all 
its progress as an industry, is still dangerous. On April 5, 2010, at Massey 
Energy Company’s Upper Big Branch Mine in West Virginia, an explo-
sion killed twenty-nine men. In 2016 Massey Energy’s chief executive, 
Don Blankenship, was convicted of conspiracy to violate federal mine 
safety laws, but was acquitted of more serious charges. He received a sen-
tence of one year in jail, the maximum under the law.36 
As Mr. Blankenship left the court, a family member of one of the vic-
tims said to him, “You don’t miss your kids like we miss ours.”37

200	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
C O A L’ S  L E G A C Y 
Clearly, the history of electricity is inextricably intertwined with that of 
coal. It is important, however, to get the story straight in terms of when 
and how the electricity business and the coal industry started to matter to 
each other. This dynamic was hardly expected in the early days as coal 
was being crowned king. Coal’s rise to provide 75 percent of all energy in 
1920 was driven by a broad base of customers: Schurr’s iron-rail-steam 
interdependence involving the iron and steel industries, railroads, and the 
many other industries using coal-fired steam engines. The electricity busi-
ness played only a small role in coal’s initial rise because it accounted for 
only 7.3 percent of use.38 
The symbiotic relationship between the coal and electricity businesses 
began in a time of relative decline for coal, in terms of its economy-wide 
market share. The loss of railroads to oil and the competitive inroads 
made by both oil and natural gas elsewhere explain this decline. But how 
did it happen that, in 2015, 93 percent of all coal was used to generate 
electricity and from the 1950s on, coal often accounted for more than 40 
percent of all fuels used to generate electricity? Why did coal rise in the 
electricity market while falling elsewhere? Why did the necessarily staid 
and stable electricity business latch on to a fuel source with a history of 
dramatic instability?39
The answer is that each got what they wanted most from the other. 
Because of the incentives of cost-plus pricing, electric utilities wanted to invest 
in big, capital-intensive generation technologies: coal-fired power plants rep-
resent exactly that. The arithmetic of this incentive to build big coal power 
plants is clear. A great deal more equipment is needed to burn coal to pro-
duce electricity than, say, for natural gas. If it takes $3,000 of equipment to 
turn a unit of coal into electricity, and the allowed return on investment is 10 
percent, Insull’s cost-plus pricing gives the utility $300 of profit—10 ­percent 
of $3,000. If, instead, it takes only $1,000 of equipment to turn natural gas 
into electricity, then the profit is just $100. From a profit perspective, it follows 
that a utility would prefer building coal-fired power plants. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
K i n g  C o a l’ s  R e i g n 	
201
The utility practice of economic dispatch gives further incentive to 
build coal power plants. Once a power plant is built, its equipment cost is 
put out of consideration; these costs are said to be “sunk costs.” Now only 
the fuel cost is considered when determining how often to run a power 
plant. Since the cost of the coal itself historically was lower than other 
fuels, coal plants would be run 24-7 if possible. That meant the equipment 
costs could be spread across many more kWh of electricity, thereby driv-
ing down the per unit cost of coal power. Cost-plus pricing and economic 
dispatch worked together to favor coal.
Lewis’ coal miners, however, had to provide stable prices for coal. The 
most important, long-term impact that Lewis and his union had on the price 
of coal was by virtue of something they did not do: they did not block the use 
of new technology or the “mechanization” of coal mines. Mechanization 
meant there were fewer and fewer miners to pay at each mine, which, in 
turn, helped mine owners keep coal price increases to a minimum. At 
the same time, mechanization meant each of the miners who remained 
produced more and more coal. So, even with stable coal prices, there was 
more money to pay each worker higher wages and benefits.
It might be expected that the controversial history of the coal 
business—the horrific violence and strikes, even in a time of war—would 
have a detrimental effect on the industry, but in the end, it did not. Instead, 
the drama hastened the development of new mining techniques (surface 
mines) and the move from the eastern to the western coal fields. It must 
also have given some pause to electric utilities and their government reg-
ulators. However, stable coal prices—and the ability to store great piles of 
coal in case of a strike—perhaps made them willing to tolerate the threat 
of further strikes. Another reassuring factor was the potential for a com-
petitive fuel. If another energy source could bring both low fuel cost and 
low capital cost, then coal was vulnerable to being displaced. As will be 
seen later in the book, that is exactly what natural gas did in the throes of 
the shale gas revolution.
As for Lewis himself, his commitment to wartime strikes makes for 
a mixed legacy. In 1960 Lewis retired as president of the UMW after 

202	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
forty years at that post. In 1964 President Johnson awarded Lewis the 
Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor in the United 
States. Writing at Lewis’ death in 1969, Saul Alinsky felt compelled to try 
to rationalize the 1943 strike in opposition to the president in the middle 
of World War II. Alinsky wrote, “His defiance of every power was a note 
of reassurance for the security of the democratic idea, that his dissonance 
was part of our national music.”40 The American warriors who fought 
in World War II, and their families, could be forgiven for not liking that 
particular music. 
As a fitting tribute, upon Lewis’ death, UMW members walked off 
their jobs for four days.41
www.ebook3000.com

203
C H A P T E R  1 2
Albert Einstein’s Equation 
(E = mc2)
According to the theory of relat ivity, there is no essential 
distinction between mass and energy. Energy has mass 
and mass represents energy. Instead of two conservation 
laws, we have only one, that of mass-energy.
—Albert Einstein (1938)1
Albert Einstein, like Thomas Edison, is a name that just about everyone recog-
nizes. While Edison has become a synonym for inventiveness, Einstein has 
become a synonym for genius. The four portraits Einstein hung on the wall 
of his home offi  ce in Princeton provide a clue to the infl uences on his genius. 
They featured Isaac Newton, Michael Faraday, James Clerk Maxwell, and 
Mahatma Gandhi. Einstein’s scientifi c breakthroughs were the culmination 
of Newton’s work on gravity and Faraday’s and Maxwell’s work on electric-
ity and magnetism. And, like Gandhi, Einstein was a pacifi st—despite the 
enduring connection between his science and nuclear weapons.2

204	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
In 1905, what scientists collectively termed his “miracle year,” 
Einstein revolutionized the science of physics with five technical papers. 
At just twenty-six, he wrote these revolutionary papers not as a professor 
at one of Europe’s prestigious universities but rather while working as a 
patent officer in Bern, Switzerland. Through his papers he demonstrated 
that Newtonian physics, the theory accepted worldwide for more than two 
centuries, was a special case within the broader framework built on the 
great work of Faraday and Maxwell.3 
In his fifth paper Einstein laid out the science for his famous equa-
tion: E = mc2. The significance of this equation is that a small amount 
of mass—say, a handful of uranium fuel—could be converted into a 
massive of amount of energy because, in the course of the conversion, 
the mass would be magnified by a factor equal to the speed of light 
squared. It is this equation that led European scientists to conclude that 
the energy released by a nuclear reaction could be used for the purposes 
of war.4
Einstein’s famous equation also links him to the modern electricity 
business. If a small amount of matter can be converted into a massive 
amount of energy with a nuclear reaction, that energy could also be used 
for peaceful purposes, such as the generation of electricity. Einstein is rel-
evant to the story told here because he shows once again that the technol-
ogy used to generate electricity—in this case, a nuclear power plant—is 
inextricably linked to the most advanced science of the age. 
The link between electricity and advanced science, however, goes far 
beyond nuclear power technology alone. The study of the science of elec-
tricity played a leading and enduring role in the great scientific advances 
of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: from Newton’s mechanics, 
to Faraday’s electric and magnetic fields, to Maxwell’s electromagnetic 
waves, to Einstein’s theory of relativity to quantum theory. As Einstein 
himself explained, the study of the science of electricity was not just an 
event on the path to scientific breakthroughs, but was itself that path. 
Much of this chapter is dedicated to describing the journey Einstein and 
these other great scientists made along this path. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
205
T H E  E A R LY  Y E A R S
Albert Einstein was born on March 14, 1879, in the city of Ulm in 
Germany; the town motto, presciently, was “the people of Ulm are 
mathematicians.” As explained in Walter Isaacson’s 2007 biography, 
early encouragement in science came from a young medical student, 
Max Talmud, who dined with the Einstein family once a week. Talmud 
introduced Einstein to a series of science books written by Aaron 
Bernstein, a popular science writer of the day, which seemed to have 
made a lasting impression. One influential Bernstein story involved 
the reader imagining he was on a speeding train and a bullet was shot 
through the window. Einstein later used thought experiments similar to 
Bernstein’s railcar.5
Once Einstein outran Talmud’s knowledge of science, Talmud 
switched to philosophy, giving Einstein, at age thirteen, his first taste 
of Immanuel Kant through the Critique of Pure Reason. This early expo-
sure to Kant may help in understanding the philosophical bent of 
Einstein’s later writing for the public. As was true with Faraday, there 
are differences of opinion on whether Einstein’s revolutionary science 
was influenced by his reading of Kant. Did Kant’s view of unity in 
nature drive Einstein’s search for unity of forces and of the sciences? Or 
was it driven more by Maxwell’s work unifying electricity, magnetism, 
and light, which in turn was inspired by Faraday? The most intriguing 
speculation is that Kant’s secular philosophy of science led Einstein to 
the same view—a unity of forces—that religious faith had defined for 
Faraday.6 
Einstein tried for around two years to gain admission to Zurich 
Polytechnic. While he easily passed the parts of the entrance exam on 
math and science, he failed other subjects such as literature and French. 
In 1896 Einstein finally succeeded and enrolled there, though he did not 
immediately impress anyone; one professor referred to him as a “lazy 
dog” for his lack of hard work at mathematics. Einstein wanted to learn 
more about James Clerk Maxwell, but such material was not covered in 

206	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
any course of study there. Instead, Einstein read the latest in physics with 
Marcel Grossmann, a classmate who would become a lifelong friend, and 
his other friends while often skipping class. In 1900 Einstein graduated 
fourth out of five graduates.7
At twenty-one, Einstein had achieved nothing extraordinary and 
given no indication of genius. However, he did pursue science and began 
to publish papers. His first published paper concerned the interaction of 
atoms and molecules. He addressed the issue of what force explained the 
attraction of molecules in a liquid and wondered whether the attraction 
among molecules might be analogous to the attraction of planets in the 
universe—that is, directly related to mass and inversely related to dis-
tance, as Newtonian physics held. In 1901 Einstein submitted a proposal 
for his dissertation to the University of Zurich; it was rejected. All in all, 
Einstein’s early career hardly presaged his later fame.8
T H E  S W I S S  P A T E N T  O F F I C E
Marcel Grossmann helped Einstein get a job at the Swiss patent office in 
Bern in 1902. Einstein was at his desk for eight hours a day but accom-
plished his work so quickly that he could spend over half of his time 
working on science. He tutored for another hour each day and did addi-
tional scientific research at night. Although this schedule would seem 
to be a disadvantage for one trying to make scientific breakthroughs, 
Isaacson writes that it had one big advantage: it made it easier for 
Einstein to be unconventional. Had Einstein been in an academic set-
ting, his published work would have been vetted—and perhaps changed 
or discouraged—by those who established the conventional wisdom of 
the time.9
Einstein and his friends read widely and thought deeply about the 
philosophy of science. Together they read important works such as David 
Hume’s A Treatise of Human Nature and Baruch Spinoza’s Ethics. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
207
T H E  M I R A C L E  Y E A R  ( 1 9 0 5 )
In his article “Five Papers That Shook the World,” published in Physics 
World in 2005, Matthew Chalmers reported the awe-inspiring fact that 
a century earlier, in 1905, given “little more than eight months” and 
in his “spare time,” Einstein “completed five papers that would change 
the world forever.” That is why 1905 is considered Einstein’s “miracle 
year.” His work covered a remarkable breadth of material—his papers 
spanned “three quite distinct topics—relativity, the photoelectric effect 
and Brownian motion.” Chalmers adds, “Perhaps even more remarkably, 
Einstein’s 1905 papers were based neither on hard experimental evidence 
nor sophisticated mathematics. Instead, he presented elegant arguments 
and conclusions based on physical intuition.” Chalmers quoted Gerard ’t 
Hooft, winner of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Physics, saying, “Einstein made 
the world realize, for the first time, that pure thought can change our 
understanding of nature.”10
The first of the five papers, “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning 
the Production and Transformation of Light,” was submitted to the lead-
ing German journal Annalen der Physik on March 17, 1905. This paper con-
tained Einstein’s contribution on the photoelectric effect, and it is cited as 
the basis for his 1921 Nobel Prize. A photoelectric effect occurs when light 
hits one side of, say, a thin metal sheet, and electrons are ejected out the 
other side. Thus, the photoelectric effect converts light into electricity—a 
flow of electrons. The effect is used in a range of technologies including 
light detectors for alarms, in which a steady light shines on a surface and 
produces electricity until an intruder blocks the light and the lessening of 
the electric current triggers the alarm. More consequential for the elec-
tricity business is the use of photovoltaic or solar cells to convert light to 
electricity.11 
His second paper was based on his successful dissertation at the 
University of Zurich, which was accepted at last on April 30, 1905. It 
addressed topics including how to calculate “the size of molecules by 

208	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
studying their motion in a solution.” Next, Einstein submitted a third 
paper on Brownian motion, which refers to the constant movement of 
particles suspended in a liquid. Einstein concluded that the movement 
resulted from the random collisions of atoms; the broad importance of 
Einstein’s work is that, once confirmed by experiment, it convinced scien-
tists that atoms were real.12 
Einstein’s fourth paper was received by the journal on June 30. “On the 
Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies” detailed what would become known 
as his special theory of relativity.13 The word special was used because his 
theory applies “only to non-accelerating frames” of reference. Among the 
implications of the theory were that independent time and distance did 
not exist. As Chalmers puts it, “The length of an object becomes shorter 
when it travels at a constant velocity, and a moving clock runs slower than 
a stationary clock.”14 
The fifth paper was a three-page “afterthought” drawing out another 
implication of the special theory of relativity. The article “Does the Inertia 
of a Body Depend upon its Energy Content?” is the source of the most 
famous equation in all science: E=mc2.15 
How did the world react to the results of Einstein’s miracle year? 
Isaacson reports that the five papers now seen as miraculous and revolu-
tionary were initially met with “icy silence.” The German scientist Max 
Planck supplied one exception, as he actually began to build on Einstein’s 
special theory. Remarkably, after all that he had accomplished in 1905, 
Einstein continued working in the Bern patent office. Even after 1905, 
Einstein could not win a bottom-rung job at the University of Bern. In 
1908 he was even rejected for a position as a high school teacher. Einstein’s 
experience shows the path to scientific breakthrough can be long and diffi-
cult; it takes time to overturn entrenched paradigms. Patience and a com-
mitment to the scientific process are essential.16
Then, in 1909, four years after his revolutionary papers, Einstein won 
a post as a junior professor at the University of Zurich. In that same year, 
he gained recognition with a speech at a Salzburg conference in which 
he fused the competing theories of light as particles and light as waves. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
209
Einstein’s reputation grew at an accelerating pace thereafter, as reflected 
in his many professional moves. In 1911 Einstein accepted an appoint-
ment as a professor in Prague. He reached out to meet with scientists of 
the caliber of Ernst Mach and Hendrik Lorentz. Mach was an Austrian 
physicist who studied supersonic motion; today, his name is the metric for 
the speed of sound. According to Einstein, Mach helped inspire the theory 
of relativity. Lorentz was a Dutch physicist who shared the Nobel Prize in 
1902 and focused on extending Maxwell’s theories.
In 1915 Einstein generalized the special theory of relativity he had 
developed in 1905; this important advance took a decade of effort. In 
1919, with the war over, there was an opportunity to test Einstein’s rel-
ativity theory’s prediction that gravity bent light. Arthur Eddington, 
the director of the Cambridge Observatory, took up the cause, focus-
ing on the next solar eclipse, which would be on May 29, 1919. The 
results showed Einstein was right, and Britain’s Astronomer Royal, Sir 
Frank Dyson, then confirmed them. There were more than six hundred 
books and articles written on the theory of relativity in the six years 
following that first proof. At age forty, Einstein became an international 
celebrity.17 
In 1921 Einstein traveled to the United States for the first time. On 
that trip, the press began the habit of asking interviewees if they under-
stood the special theory of relativity. Einstein had traveled by ocean liner 
with Chaim Weizmann, then president of the World Zionist Organization, 
and Weizmann was asked whether he understood the theory. Weizmann 
joked in response, “During the crossing, Einstein explained his theory to 
me every day, and by the time we arrived I was fully convinced that he 
really understands it.”18 
Einstein traveled to America again in 1930 and 1931. In 1933 Hitler 
became chancellor of Germany. The Nazis raided Einstein’s Berlin apart-
ment and his second home at Caputh in Germany. Fortunately, his papers 
had already been secretly taken to the French embassy. That same year, 
Einstein traveled to America once again, accepting a position at Princeton’s 
Institute for Advanced Study; he would never return to Europe. 

210	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
E L E C T R I C I T Y  A S  T H E  P A T H  T O  D I S C O V E R Y
In 1938 the world received a unique opportunity to read the story of 
the exciting breakthroughs in physics by one of the field’s most import-
ant revolutionaries—Einstein himself. The Evolution of Physics: From Early 
Concepts to Relativity and Quanta was coauthored with Leopold Infeld. It is 
unique in its accessibility to the layperson. Indeed, Einstein and Infeld 
described it as a “simple chat” between the reader and themselves. While 
the authors did not shy away from the more challenging parts of the 
story, they narrated them via thought experiments or analogies rather 
than with mathematical equations. The book was unique, too, because 
Einstein and Infeld were explaining not only what was happening but 
also why. That is, the book was about how the new theories evolved 
from problems or shortcomings in the previous theories as they were 
used to explain reality. In taking this step, Einstein and Infeld revealed 
a great deal about the intellectual process of scientific advance.19
The story has four parts. It begins with the origins of modern sci-
ence founded in Newton’s mechanical theory, about which Einstein wrote, 
“The reality of our outer world consisted of particles with simple forces 
acting between them and depending only on the distance.” The next part 
came with Faraday and Maxwell’s electromagnetic field theory. Einstein 
summed up field theory by stating a “courageous scientific imagination 
was needed to realize fully that not the behavior of bodies, but the behavior 
of something between them, that is, the field, may be essential for ordering 
and understanding events.” Then came Einstein’s own special relativity 
theory; it destroyed old concepts such as “absolute time” and created new 
concepts, including the view that the observer’s frame of reference mat-
tered in the description and explanation of events. Quantum theory was 
the fourth part; “instead of laws governing individuals,” Einstein wrote, it 
brought “probability laws.”20
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
211
Newton’s Mechanics (and His Shadow)
Newton’s quest was to explain motion; it was a more complex task than he 
perhaps anticipated. Einstein noted, “A stone thrown into the air, a ship sail-
ing the sea, a cart pushed along the street, are in reality very intricate.” For 
a body at rest, say a cart at a standstill, it takes some action or force to move 
it; that is, someone must “push it or lift it, or let other bodies . . . act upon it.” 
Reflecting this need for force, Newton’s law of inertia asserts, “Every body 
perseveres in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, unless it is 
compelled to change that state by forces impressed thereon.”21
One of the early and most important intricacies Einstein attributed 
to Newton is this: a force is reflected not in the speed (or velocity) of the 
body observed but rather in the change in that velocity. Put another way, 
observing the velocity of the cart does not show that a force is acting on 
the cart. Rather it is an observation of a change in velocity that shows 
the presence of that force. If a stone is dropped from a tower, the velocity 
increases as it falls toward the ground. If this stone is thrown into the air, 
its velocity decreases—the moment it leaves the hand the upward force 
is very strong, but as the stone proceeds upward that velocity slows as 
gravity pushes the stone back toward the ground. From those changes in 
velocity one can conclude that a force—gravity—is acting on the stone. 
Einstein said the intricate or subtle point that force is reflected in a change 
in velocity, and not in the velocity itself, is the “basis of classical mechanics 
as formulated by Newton.”22 
Newton’s laws are meant to apply to all phenomena, but gravity is the 
most prevalent force in daily life. Newton’s law of universal gravitation 
states that between any two objects there is an attractive force called grav-
ity. This force is proportional to the masses of the objects and inversely 
proportional to the square distance between the two objects. The bigger 
the object, the stronger the force will be, and the more distant the object, 
the weaker the force will be. This is the law that casts Newton’s shadow. 
That is, it would incline all scientists after him to think of attractive force 

212	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
depending on the object’s heft (mass) and the distance between the objects. 
What is so inspiring about Faraday and Maxwell is that they questioned 
that inclination and went a different way when explaining the attractive 
forces of electricity and magnetism. Einstein followed their example. 
Faraday’s and Maxwell’s Waves
The hardest test for classical mechanics was to explain “all phenomena,” 
not just gravity. When Newton’s mechanical view failed to explain elec-
tricity, magnetism, and light, new science was needed. Einstein recalled 
Coulomb’s attempt to make Newton’s mechanics work for electricity by con-
cluding that electrical force depends on distance and mass. Electrical force 
between two objects is stronger if the distance between them is shorter and 
the charges are larger. However, Einstein found that Coulomb’s effort did 
not fully explain electrical phenomena because of the apparent differences 
in electrical force and gravitational force. Gravitational force already exists, 
but electrical force must be created. Further, gravitational force manifests 
as attraction, but electrical force manifests as both attraction and repulsion. 
Einstein showed that the link discovered between electricity and magnetism 
ultimately undermined the Newtonian mechanical explanation of electric-
ity. For example, the magnetic force created by the electrical charge is per-
pendicular to the charge—the force does not act along a straight line as in 
mechanical theory. Further, the magnetic force created increases with the 
velocity of the electrical charge, so the force is more than a function of dis-
tance and mass (or charge) as Newton and Coulomb suggested.23 
Einstein highlighted that “revolutionary ideas were introduced into 
physics” by Faraday, Maxwell, and Hertz. To illustrate the essential focal 
point for these ideas, Einstein concluded, “The new concepts originated 
in connection with the phenomena of electricity.” Not only did electric-
ity revolutionize how modern society worked, it also revolutionized man’s 
basic understanding of how nature works.24 
Next, Einstein explained why field theory was superior to the mechan-
ical view when explaining electricity and magnetism. He recalled the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
213
effect of the electric current on a magnet and asked, how does this current 
exert its force on the magnet? In answering this question, he suggested, 
“The field proved a very helpful concept. It began as something placed 
between the source and the magnetic needle in order to describe the act-
ing force.” And if the empty space between objects was not empty but 
rather packed with lines of force of electric and magnetic fields, how could 
Newton’s mechanics be right? How could the attraction depend only on 
the mass of objects and the distance between them?25 
The ultimate payoff to field theory comes through its link to wave 
theory. Specifically, Einstein reports that the “outcome” of “mathematical 
deduction” from Maxwell’s equations “is the electromagnetic wave . . . Every 
change of an electric field produces a magnetic field; every change of this 
magnetic field produces an electric field . . . and so on.” Finally, Einstein 
asks another question: “With what speed does the electromagnetic wave 
spread in empty space?” The answer is: “The velocity of an electromagnetic 
wave is equal to the velocity of light.” Einstein states, “The theoretical discovery 
of an electromagnetic wave spreading with the speed of light is one of the 
greatest achievements in the history of science.” Electricity is unique in its 
ability to serve the practical day-to-day needs of man while at the same 
time serving as the focal point for revolutionary scientific advances.26 
Einstein’s Relativity
Einstein’s theories of relativity were, of course, landmark scientific break-
throughs. The crucial link to the study of electricity is that Faraday’s 
vision and Maxwell’s equations led Einstein to consider the implications 
of a constant speed of light. The special theory of relativity was one result 
of that consideration. 
Einstein illustrated his science with a number of simple cases that each 
show how an observation can vary by what Einstein called the coordi-
nate system, or, more simply, the frame of reference of the observer. In 
one illustration, Einstein puts this idea in terms of a person walking on 
a moving ship at a pace of three miles per hour. If asked, an observer on 

214	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
the ship would confirm that the man’s speed is three miles per hour. What 
about an observer on shore rather than on the ship? If the ship itself were 
moving at thirty miles per hour, then the on-shore observer would say 
the man walking on the ship is moving at a pace of thirty-three miles per 
hour—the sum of the speed of the walking man and that of the ship itself. 
In Newton’s classical mechanics, the difference between the two observa-
tions can be fully understood. Indeed, the observation from one observer 
can be “transformed” into the other observation as has already been done 
here—just add the two speeds.27 
But problems arose when scientists turned to measuring the speed of 
light. Did the speed of light vary with the frame of reference? If the man on 
the ship were walking at the speed of light, would his speed be the speed of 
light plus the thirty miles per hour speed of the ship from the frame of ref-
erence of a man onshore? If Maxwell’s equations are to apply, the answer 
must be no. As Einstein put it, “The velocity of light is always the same in all CS 
[coordinate systems or frames of reference] independent of whether or not the 
emitting source moves, or how it moves.” If the speed of light must be the same 
in all frames of reference, Einstein concluded, “[Newton’s] transformation 
law is in contradiction.”28 
The implications of this are startling because if the speed of light is 
constant across frames of reference, then the measurement of time and 
distance must vary by frame of reference. Einstein wrote, “If the velocity 
of light is the same in all CS, then moving rods must change their length, 
moving clocks must change their rhythm.” This is the famous outcome of 
relativity: the measurement of time and distance varies with the motion 
related to the observer. The consequent bedrock of Einstein’s view, then, 
is that the speed of light is a constant that does not change.29 
Next, Einstein compared the concept of force under Newtonian laws 
to that under his relativity theory and thus moved quickly toward his 
famous equation. With Newton, force was indicated by a change in veloc-
ity and that change in velocity would be the same whatever the starting 
point—that is, whatever the original speed. With relativity, that is no lon-
ger true. The change in velocity for a given force varies depending on the 
original speed: it takes more force to change the velocity from 100 miles 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
215
per hour to 101 miles per hour than from 10 miles per hour to 11 miles per 
hour. That is, it takes more force to increase speed when starting from a 
higher speed. This allows for the rule that the closer a speed is to the speed 
of light, the harder it is to increase its velocity, and if the speed of light is 
achieved, the object cannot go faster.30 
Einstein then turned to mass and considered the effect of motion and 
frame of reference. The Newtonian view was that more mass meant more 
resistance to change in motion: put simply, it takes more force to push and 
move a cart that is fully laden than it does to move an empty cart. Relativity 
contributes the concept that resistance to a change in motion also increases 
with speed. This allowed Einstein to link energy to mass. He wrote, “A 
body at rest has mass but no kinetic energy, that is, energy of motion. A 
moving body has both mass and kinetic energy. It resists change of velocity 
more strongly than the resting body . . . If two bodies have the same rest 
mass, the one with the greater kinetic energy resists the action of an exter-
nal force more strongly.” He pushed forward to a dramatic conclusion by 
stating, “All energy resists change of motion; all energy behaves like matter.”31
Finally, he contrasted the fundamental view of Newton’s mechanics 
with his own relativity when he wrote, “Classical physics introduced two 
substances: matter and energy . . . In classical physics, we had two conser-
vation laws: one for matter, the other for energy . . . According to the the-
ory of relativity, there is no essential distinction between mass and energy. 
Energy has mass and mass has energy. Instead of two conservation laws, 
we have only one, that of mass-energy.”32
For the science of electricity, the direct implications of this mass-energy 
equivalence were big. Out of the special theory of relativity came the 
famous equation that enabled nuclear power technology, E=mc2. Einstein’s 
path to the scientific breakthrough was equally important. It was founded 
on Faraday’s and Maxwell’s studies of electricity and magnetism, which 
led to the discovery of electromagnetic waves that required a constant 
speed of light. The constant speed of light, in turn, is the basis for finding 
the equivalence of energy and mass that is embedded in E=mc2. This 
equation had the potential to change the world, and the electricity busi-
ness along with it. 

216	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
A Quantum Leap
At the end of his section on field theory and relativity, Einstein suggested 
the beginning of the fourth part of his story of the revolution of physics. 
He wrote, “Fundamental problems are still before us. We know that all 
matter is constructed from a few kinds of particles only. How are the var-
ious forms of matter built from these elementary particles? How do these 
elementary particles interact with the field? By the search for an answer to 
these questions new ideas have been introduced into physics, the ideas of 
quantum theory.” Quantum mechanics is the study of the motion of objects 
that come in tiny bundles called quanta.33 
What Einstein wrote about quantum mechanics in 1938 further sup-
ports the view that electricity played a central role in this major advance 
in physics. For Einstein, the fundamental links between electricity and 
quantum mechanics came from the “realization that the electron, the ele-
mentary quantum of the negative electric fluid, is also one of the compo-
nents of the atom, one of the elementary bricks from which all matter is 
built.” He noted that the renowned scientist J. J. Thomson proved that 
“the negative electric fluid is constructed of grains, just as the beach is 
composed of grains of sand, or a house built of bricks.” For electricity, the 
grains of sand, or, more precisely, the elementary quanta, are called elec-
trons. He emphasized the importance of electricity once again by writing, 
“This result closely connecting the problem of the structure of matter with 
that of electricity follows, beyond any doubt, from very many independent 
experimental facts.”34
T H E  P A T H  T O  N U C L E A R  W E A P O N S
Einstein’s equation has a biography of its own; one told well by science 
writer David Bodanis in E=mc2: A Biography of the World’s Most Famous 
Equation (2000). In setting the course for that equation’s influence, Einstein 
made one very important cameo appearance in 1939, but other scientists 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
217
forged the path from Einstein’s great insight in the fifth of his papers in 
1905 to the development and use of nuclear weapons in the 1940s. 
The journey to nuclear weapons began, at least in part, with research 
on atoms in the early twentieth century. Around 1910 Ernest Rutherford’s 
research found that atoms were mostly empty, with a nucleus at the core 
and negatively charged electrons orbiting at the outer edges. The nucleus 
had positively charged protons and, as later discovered in 1932 by James 
Chadwick, it also contained neutrons with a neutral charge. Chadwick 
bombarded the nucleus with neutrons in an attempt to see what happened 
when more neutrons were added, but bombardment at high speeds did not 
work. In 1934 Enrico Fermi found that slower-moving neutrons could be 
pushed into the nucleus.35
The next major discovery in this line of study was made by Lise Meitner 
in 1938. Meitner had been one of the leading scientists in Germany, where 
she had formed a productive scientific partnership with Otto Hahn at the 
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute. When Hitler rose to power, Meitner was first 
pushed out of the University of Berlin in 1933 because she was Jewish, 
and later pushed out of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, sadly with the help 
of Hahn. Still, Meitner continued collaborating with Hahn from her exile 
in Stockholm.36
Meitner focused on the heaviest natural element, uranium, which has 
a nucleus already brimming with neutrons. She wanted to know what 
happened when the uranium nucleus was bombarded with neutrons. 
What was created? Would it be something much heavier? On a Christmas 
holiday in Sweden, Meitner received a letter from Hahn reporting some 
unusual results. Meitner’s nephew, Robert Frisch, a physicist working with 
Niels Bohr in Denmark, was with her for the holiday. Hahn reported that 
the bombardment of the uranium nucleus had resulted in radioactivity—a 
“spraying out of energy streams.” It was not entirely a surprise result. 
Bohr’s view of the atom was that the nucleus was always ready to burst, 
since the positively charged protons would repel each other—like repels 
like. The question was whether the addition of neutrons could tip the bal-
ance in favor of the nucleus splitting apart.37

218	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
What Meitner and Frisch discovered was that the bombardment of 
neutrons actually split the nucleus. Adding neutrons did not make the 
nucleus bigger; it broke the nucleus apart. Borrowing a word from biol-
ogy, Meitner and Frisch termed this process fission. The link to Einstein’s 
famous equation was crucial. In the creation of two smaller nuclei, the 
mass that was lost was converted into energy as Einstein’s equation pre-
dicted. Bodanis explains how, at another time, this finding might have 
taken decades to work its way through the scientific community, “but in 
1939, the world had just begun its largest war ever. The race was on to see 
in which country the equation’s power would emerge first.” The race was 
on to build the first nuclear weapon.38
In 1939 Einstein was approached by an old friend, Leó Szilárd, a 
Hungarian physicist then at Columbia University. Szilárd readily con-
vinced Einstein of the dangerous potential of the discovery of fission 
using uranium. With some constructive guidance from Alexander Sachs, 
an economist at Lehman Brothers, Einstein wrote a letter to President 
Roosevelt. Einstein’s letter stated in part: “This new phenomenon would 
lead also to the construction of bombs, and it is conceivable—though much 
less certain—that extremely powerful bombs of a new type may thus be 
constructed. A single bomb of this type, carried by boat and exploded in 
a port, might very well destroy the whole port together with some of the 
surrounding territory.” Sachs was unable to deliver the letter for almost 
two months, and when he did, President Roosevelt did not make it a top 
priority, despite the fact that Einstein was the most famous scientist in the 
world. After reading the letter, the president set up an ad hoc committee 
headed by Dr. Lyman Briggs, director of the Bureau of Standards, the 
country’s physics laboratory.39 
By 1940, however, Meitner’s nephew, Frisch, had convinced the British 
of the potential for nuclear weapons. The Germans believed it, too. They 
picked Werner Heisenberg, the second-most-famous scientist in the world, 
to lead the effort. In 1940 Heisenberg conducted his first tests using ura-
nium from the Czech mines Hitler had captured. Fermi had already found 
that the trick was to slow down the neutrons, if the goal was to split the 
nucleus to convert mass into massive amounts of energy. But what would 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
219
slow down the neutrons? Water would help, but heavy water—water with 
more deuterium—would be best. Deuterium is a variant, or isotope, of 
hydrogen that has twice the mass of ordinary hydrogen. The supply of 
heavy water was a weak spot for the Germans. They relied on a facility in 
Norway that became the target for Allied sabotage attempts; some were 
successful in slowing the supply of heavy water to German scientists.40
Heisenberg’s first test failed, but by 1942 he had succeeded in find-
ing a way to release the energy Einstein claimed was trapped in mass. 
Meanwhile, after the Pearl Harbor bombing on December 7, 1941, the 
United States pushed forward with what became known as the Manhattan 
Project. In August 1945 nuclear bombs were loaded on a plane destined 
for the skies over Japan. It was there that Einstein’s famous equation had 
its first impact on man, with devastating consequences.
Einstein was not informed of nor invited to participate in the 
Manhattan Project because the FBI considered him to be a security risk. 
J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, wrote that Einstein posed a potential 
liability because of his actions supporting pacifism. Still, Time magazine 
later ran an issue with Einstein, his famous equation, and atomic bombs 
on its cover. Time acknowledged that Einstein did not work directly on the 
atomic bomb, but argued that the project had started upon his initiative, 
and it was based on his equation. Einstein said that, had he known the 
Germans would not succeed with nuclear weapons, he would not have 
helped. He made a plea for a world government that would have a “monop-
oly on military power.” Einstein noted that Alfred Nobel “atoned” for his 
discovery of dynamite with the Nobel Prize, and Einstein felt that he and 
the other contributors must atone for making atomic weapons. Einstein 
said, “I do not know how the Third World War will be fought . . . but I can 
tell you what they will use in the Fourth—rocks.”41
E I N S T E I N ’ S  L E G A C Y
Einstein’s most direct legacy for the history of electricity began in the last 
of his five papers from 1905, the miracle year. That fifth paper gave the 

220	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
world E = mc2, which was the scientific underpinning of the technology 
for both nuclear weapons and nuclear power. Einstein does not deserve 
full blame for the bad or full credit for the good done by these technolo-
gies, but he certainly enabled their emergence. 
Even more profound for the history of electricity is that the great sci-
entific advances in physics in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, in 
substantial part, came out of the study of the nature of electricity and its 
intimate links to magnetism and light. Newton’s shadow inclined scientists 
to use his pathbreaking understanding of gravitational force to explain the 
other major forces of nature. It was the failure of Newtonian mechanics to 
explain electricity, magnetism, and light that opened the door to Faraday’s 
and Maxwell’s major advances with field theories. Not only did Maxwell’s 
work improve on the past but by showing that the speed of light must be 
constant, he set the stage for the next great advance—Einstein’s theory 
of relativity. Remarkably, electricity continued its central role in scientific 
advances by virtue of the central role of the electron in quantum mechanics. 
Sadly, efforts to further explore the scientific path of electricity have 
given way to efforts focused on other key drivers in the electricity business, 
including law, regulation, and, most notably, politics. Listen in on con-
versations about electricity today and few references will be heard to the 
great scientific revolutions born of the study of electricity, much less any 
mention that those revolutions, in turn, have advanced the technology for 
the production and use of electricity. Surely, the potential for science to 
lead to new revolutions has not been exhausted. It is essential for mankind 
to get back on this path of discovery. 
Einstein’s legacy also encompasses the standard he set for how a pro-
fessional scientist should act. He was respectful, accessible, and humble. 
He appreciated the scientists who came before him and those who were his 
contemporaries. And he showed a deep regard for the scientific process, 
saying, “To raise new questions, new possibilities, to regard old problems 
from a new angle, requires creative imagination and marks real advance 
in science.”42 
He was down to earth, as evidenced by the book he coauthored with 
Infeld. In 1916 he wrote another layperson-friendly book titled Relativity: 
www.ebook3000.com

	
A L B E R T  E I N S T E I N ’ S  E Q U A T I O N  ( E  =  m c 2) 	
221
The Special and General Theory, and he was also the author of a collection of 
writings titled Ideas and Opinions. Einstein wrote widely, not only on science 
but also on politics, government, pacifism, education, friends, and reli-
gion. He was not narrowly focused on science alone but on what science 
meant to the world in his time.
Regarding his sense of humility, Einstein wrote, “My religion con-
sists of a humble admiration of the illimitable superior spirit who reveals 
himself in the slight details we are able to perceive with our frail and 
feeble minds.” He spoke further and freely about the interplay of science 
and religion. Speaking at the Princeton Theological Seminary in 1939, 
Einstein acknowledged that it was “widely held that there was an irrecon-
cilable conflict between knowledge and belief.” However, he said, “science 
can only ascertain what is, but not what should be.”43 
Einstein died at the age of seventy-six in April 1955. A Time obituary 
titled “Death of a Genius” suggested that if one were to look beyond the 
surface of “a self-effacing little man, careless-clad in baggy pants and a 
blue stocking cap,” who for twenty-two years “stepped down from the 
front porch of a modest frame house at 112 Mercer Street, Princeton, 
N.J.,” one would find “a compound of soaring intellect and wide-ranging 
imagination that carried Albert Einstein past the confines of man’s old 
scientific certitudes and deeper into the material mysteries of the universe 
than any man before.”44 
Einstein’s respectfulness, accessibility, and humility were traits that 
built trust at a time in which the public had to agree with the propos-
als of scientists concerning such “material mysteries,” even if they could 
not independently judge the evidence offered in support. Today, that 
trust—and scientists in Einstein’s mold—are needed more than ever.45

www.ebook3000.com

P A R T  F O U R
The Age 
of Harm
Crisis, Change, and Scandal

www.ebook3000.com

225
C H A P T  E R  1 3
Eisenhower’s Atoms for 
Peace (and War)
The United States pledges before you . . . to devote 
its entire heart and mind to fi nd the way by which 
the miraculous inventiveness of man shall not be 
dedicated to his death, but consecrated to his life. 
—President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953)1
The urgency created by Hitler’s (and Heisenberg’s) agenda in world war II meant 
that global confl ict governed the deployment of Einstein’s famous equa-
tion. His revolutionary theory would be used to make nuclear weapons in 
a very real, dangerous, “hot” war. 
That the fi rst nuclear technology was intended for war meant that all 
nuclear technology would forever bear that association. Even when nuclear 
experimentation turned to peaceful purposes, the link remained. It is still 
common to hear questions such as, “Can a conventional nuclear power 
plant explode like a nuclear bomb?” (It cannot.) Or, “Can nuclear power 
plants help to create materials that can be used to make nuclear weapons?” 

226	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
(They can.) Nuclear power technology was born of war, and that will likely 
never be forgotten.2
After nuclear power technology was born of a “hot” war, it was nur-
tured to serve as a weapon in a brand-new type of global conflict: the Cold 
War. The federal government was the major proponent of nuclear power, 
not because it was a low-cost source of electricity, but because it was valu-
able in the Cold War effort. President Dwight D. Eisenhower promoted 
nuclear power as an economic weapon in his high-profile speech before 
the United Nations General Assembly in 1953. In addition, Admiral 
Hyman Rickover used nuclear power to create a military weapon for the 
Cold War with the nuclear navy; nuclear reactors would be used to power 
submarines and other war ships. Somehow, Rickover’s choice of technol-
ogy for a small-scale nuclear reactor on ships later became the technology 
of choice for large-scale, commercial nuclear power.3
The story of nuclear power technology is the story of a rise and fall 
over five decades. The rise, of course, began by tapping into some of the 
most important science of the century: Einstein’s famous equation and the 
science and engineering of the Manhattan Project. In this sense, nuclear 
power could have taken America back to the Age of Franklin, a time of 
awe and discovery. Unfortunately, as it has turned out, nuclear power fits 
better into the Age of Harm: a time when the public stopped thinking 
solely of the benefits of abundant, affordable electricity for all, and instead 
focused as much, or more, on the harm electricity generation might do. 
Three major accidents punctuated the Age of Harm: first at Pennsylvania’s 
Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in 1979, then at Soviet Ukraine’s 
Chernobyl plant in 1986, and at Japan’s Fukushima plant in 2011.
Regarding the fall of nuclear power, the discussion must be put in 
perspective: nuclear power still provides about 20 percent of America’s 
electricity. Clearly, a “fall” did not mean an end to nuclear power. Rather, 
the “fall” has meant an end to new nuclear reactors. Until recently, no 
new nuclear reactor had been licensed in America for decades. However, 
unlike coal and other fossil fuels, nuclear power plants emit virtually 
no greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide. Some now speak of a 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
227
renaissance for nuclear power, in large part because of concerns about 
global climate change.4 
T H E  S C I E N C E  O F  N U C L E A R  P O W E R  
( A N D  W E A P O N S ) 
The basic physics of nuclear power and nuclear weapons is the same. In 
both technologies a neutron is shot into the nucleus of an atom, causing 
it to break apart. For the public this was often put in terms of “splitting 
the atom”; scientists call it nuclear fission. Einstein’s landmark equation 
(E=mc2) predicts that the result of nuclear fission—that is, the result of 
breaking mass apart—is the release of a massive amount of energy. To 
get a sense of the scale involved, consider that the energy released with 
one gram of refined nuclear material that undergoes fission is “2.5 mil-
lion times the energy released in burning one gram of coal.” Along with 
that massive amount of energy is the release of additional neutrons, which 
cause additional fissions. The intent is to create a sustainable chain reac-
tion; that is, more and more neutrons hitting more and more nuclei.5
While the basic physics is the same, the purpose of achieving the 
chain reaction is different with nuclear weapons than with nuclear power. 
This difference in purpose creates an important and fundamental fork in 
the road between the two technologies. For nuclear weapons the goal is 
to get lots of neutrons hitting lots of nuclei at the same moment to cause 
an explosion. Fast neutrons are what are needed for nuclear weapons. To 
get these fast neutrons, highly purified or “enriched” uranium is needed. 
Ninety-nine percent of the naturally occurring uranium that can serve as 
the starting point for the fuel for both nuclear weapons and nuclear power 
is designated as U-238. “Enrichment,” for nuclear weapons, means that 
the U-238 must be converted into U-235, so that the weapon contains over 
90 percent U-235. The terms U-235 and U-238 refer to two variations 
(isotopes) of uranium. The numbers come from the sum of protons and 
neutrons in the nucleus of each.6

228	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
For nuclear power, by contrast, “slow neutrons” are needed instead 
of the “fast neutrons” needed for nuclear weapons. Nuclear power needs 
a steady source of heat from the fission and that heat is used for the mun-
dane task of making water boil into steam. Once the steam is created, 
it is back to conventional power generation in the sense that the steam 
drives a steam turbine, and that turbine is connected to an electric gener-
ator that produces electricity. The central point is that the version of ura-
nium needed for power production is usually enriched so that only about 
3 percent of the uranium fuel is U-235. It is this fact that leads to a very 
comforting conclusion by Berkeley physicist Richard Muller in his book 
Physics for Future Presidents (2008): “A nuclear reactor cannot explode like an 
atomic bomb. The public image is not correct.”7
The link between nuclear power and nuclear weapons has gained 
intense attention more recently because of the US-Iran nuclear deal of 
2015. Iran claimed to be developing peaceful nuclear power, but the 
United States and others feared Iran was on the path to nuclear weapons. 
Part of the deal reflects the discussion of enrichment above. For example, 
the negotiated agreement includes a provision by which “for 15 years, Iran 
will keep its level of uranium enrichment at up to 3.67%”; the deal notes 
that Iran had “enriched uranium to near 20%.” Iran also agreed to limit 
its access to the equipment for enrichment. For example, Iran will reduce 
the number of one class of centrifuges to 5,060 at Natanz. Iran had nine-
teen thousand of these and will now store the excess.8 
An alternative way a power plant can yield bomb-grade material is 
through “reprocessing” spent fuel. Plutonium is in the “waste” product of 
a nuclear reactor and, if separated from other reactor waste during repro-
cessing, bomb-grade material can be made from it. More than any other 
power technology, nuclear power depends on advanced science both to 
make it work and to make it safe. 
This book is not the place for a full and fair assessment of the US-Iran 
nuclear deal. However, true to the fundamental premise of the narrative 
here, there is much more driving the ultimate outcome of the Iranian deal 
than nuclear science and technology. Culture will also be a central force in 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
229
the sense that some might be betting on Iranian youth coming of age, com-
ing to power, and seeking to join the world community. Others will disagree. 
T H E  A T O M S  F O R  P E A C E  S P E E C H
On December 8, 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower stood before the 
General Assembly of the United Nations to deliver what is known as his 
Atoms for Peace speech. Reading his speech today is somewhat surpris-
ing and considerably encouraging, because this famous and victorious 
American general from World War II proceeded to give what he called 
his “recital of atomic danger and power.” The United States had “set off 
the world’s first atomic explosion” on July 16, 1945, he recalled, and, since 
then, had set off another forty-two test explosions. The president reported 
that contemporary bombs were twenty-five times more powerful than the 
initial bombs and tests, and that the United States’ “stockpile of atomic 
weapons . . . exceeds by many times the explosive equivalent of the total 
of all bombs and all shells that came from every plane and every gun in 
every theatre of war in all the years of World War II.” Eisenhower warned 
that America no longer had a monopoly on the “the dread secret and 
the fearful engines of atomic might.” Addressing fears of a nuclear war, 
he said that even the possibility of a “devastating retaliation” would not 
guarantee that such a war would never occur. And yet he made it clear 
that, if attacked, the United States would retaliate even though there is no 
“victory in such desolation” or in a “civilization destroyed.”9 
With this backdrop, President Eisenhower declared that America pre-
ferred “to be constructive, not destructive,” and wanted “agreements, not 
wars, among nations.” Here his speech turned more hopeful. The presi-
dent said that “it is not enough to take this weapon out of the hands of the 
soldiers. It must be put into the hands of those who will know how to strip 
its military casing and adapt it to the arts of peace.” America could do that 
right away because it already had the technology; in his words, “peaceful 
power from atomic energy is no dream of the future.”10 

230	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Eisenhower then called for the creation of an International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) under control of the UN to take control of all the 
“fissionable material” to be shared with the world. The IAEA would pro-
mote the use of this material to “serve the peaceful pursuits of mankind.” 
Atomic energy would be used for “the needs of agriculture, medicine, and 
other peaceful activities.” He called attention to the “special purpose” of 
providing “abundant electrical energy in the power-starved areas of the 
world.” All this would be done “to serve the needs rather than the fears of 
mankind.” In closing, he pledged that America would “devote its entire 
heart and mind to find the way by which the miraculous inventiveness of 
man shall not be dedicated to his death, but consecrated to his life.”11 
Writing in 1954, soon after the president’s speech, Gordon Dean, the 
former chairman of the US Atomic Energy Commission, or the AEC, 
continued along the lines Eisenhower laid out and argued for sharing 
America’s nuclear know-how unrelated to nuclear weapons with other 
countries. After World War II, secrecy had been built into the 1946 
Atomic Energy Act to prevent businesses from sharing commercial knowl-
edge of nuclear technology overseas. However, America was now ready to 
promote a “bold interchange of information and materials pertaining to 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy.”12 
Robert McKinney was another contemporary who wrote of the signif-
icant benefits of spreading peaceful nuclear technology across the globe. 
He was the chairman of a nonpartisan citizens’ panel which reported to 
the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy on the impact of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. In 1957 McKinney wrote of the great contributions 
that nuclear power could make to world peace. His first major example 
was that it had the potential to greatly reduce the dependence of western 
Europe and other regions on Middle Eastern oil, and another was that it 
could spur economic development in the world’s undeveloped countries.13 
Clearly, Atoms for Peace was part of a much broader geopolitical 
strategy influenced by the end of World War II and the beginning of the 
Cold War. The promotion of nuclear energy around the globe, and the 
related sharing of nuclear know-how, was a central part of the Cold War 
strategy of the United States and the USSR. While the arms race and 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
231
space race were clear avenues of competition, the push to use nuclear 
energy knowledge to gain allies is often overlooked. However, its legacy 
is just as important. John Krige, a professor of science and technology 
at Georgia Institute of Technology, writes: “For the United States (and 
the Soviet Union) a demonstration of scientific and technological gener-
osity and prowess on the international stage was intended to win hearts 
and minds and to confirm the legitimacy or even the superiority of rival 
politico-economic systems.” Furthermore, a key tactic with undeveloped 
countries was to engender a dependence on American technology as well 
as to embed surveillance through technological sharing.14 
J U M P - S T A R T I N G  A N  I N D U S T R Y 
From the start, the Atomic Energy Commission, created by the Atomic 
Energy Act of 1946, faced two conflicts. The first was the trade-off between 
keeping nuclear weapons secret and the desire to promote nuclear energy. 
The second was the tension between promoting nuclear energy and the 
responsibility of regulating it for safety. After the president’s Atoms for Peace 
speech the United States hoped to share scientific and commercial knowl-
edge in order to help grow a private export industry in nuclear energy, but 
protections were put in place to prevent military uses. The most tangible 
evidence that promotion was winning out was the effort by the AEC to 
team with private businesses to demonstrate nuclear power technology. 
In the early stages, the AEC pushed the development of facilities to 
serve the dual goals of producing plutonium for nuclear weapons and 
producing nuclear power, but the AEC’s industrial partnerships did not 
flourish under this mandate. So the AEC decided to build five power 
plants with private partners. Shippingport was the first nuclear reactor 
to serve the sole purpose of producing electric power. Key to its location 
near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, was the pledge of a local utility, Duquesne 
Light Company, to provide the site as well as $5 million in funding. 
Shippingport started construction in September 1954 and came on line in 
December 1957. It operated until 1982.15

232	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Shippingport was a high-profile project throughout. For the ground-
breaking ceremony, President Eisenhower waved a symbolic wand to sig-
nal a bulldozer to begin construction. Admiral Rickover supervised the 
construction of the plant. At its start, Phillip A. Fleger, chairman of the 
Duquesne Light Company, said it was fitting that the first nuclear plant 
was built not far from the birthplace of the oil industry and on top of vast 
coal reserves, signaling that nuclear was the fuel of the future. By the 
1960s, when plant owners were accused of covering up a radiation leak, a 
more unfortunate signal began to be heard.16 
In 1955 the AEC began a series of efforts to promote nuclear power. 
The first round resulted in the choice of four demonstration-scale power 
plants and four different technologies used. Not all efforts succeeded, as 
should be expected with demonstration projects. Round two of the AEC’s 
demonstrations resulted in two efforts chosen out of seven proposals, but 
both failed. In round three, the AEC limited applicants to proven technol-
ogies. In a fourth stage of demonstration projects the AEC received two 
more proposals and accepted one: the 575-MW project in Connecticut 
sponsored by Connecticut Yankee Atomic Power Company, a consor-
tium of utilities. It was the largest power plant built under the AEC Power 
Reactor Demonstration Program, and the last. These demonstration 
projects were substantially subsidized by the AEC as well as by private 
industry trying to jump-start the nuclear power business. Connecticut 
Yankee enjoyed an AEC subsidy for about 15 percent of its cost plus a 
Westinghouse subsidy equivalent to about 30 percent of its cost.17 
With the end of the AEC demonstration program in 1963, pri-
vate enterprise was expected to more fully advance nuclear power. The 
Westinghouse technology was winning against General Electric’s technol-
ogy, so to beat the competition, General Electric began to offer fixed-price 
“turnkey” contracts. That meant General Electric would be fully respon-
sible for building the nuclear power plant, making sure it worked, and 
then turning the plant over to the utility for the payment of a fixed amount 
of money.18 
These turnkey contracts assigned a significant risk to General 
Electric: they required the company to shoulder the risk of cost overruns 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
233
in the project. Because of these turnkey projects, the subsidies to nuclear 
power did not stop when the private sector took the lead in promot-
ing nuclear technology. If the actual cost of a nuclear power plant was 
$150 million, but the guaranteed turnkey price was $100 million, GE or 
Westinghouse absorbed the cost overrun, thus subsidizing the electric 
utility by $50 ­million. General Electric sold seven turnkey plants, while 
Westinghouse secured contracts for six. The effect of the implicit subsidy 
is remarkable. The average subsidy for General Electric’s turnkey proj-
ects was 50 percent of construction costs, while the average subsidy for 
Westinghouse was not far behind at 43 percent.19 
The early history of nuclear power was characterized by strong gov-
ernment promotion and major subsidies both public and private. This 
“commercialization” did not achieve commercial feasibility as it should 
have. It did, however, reflect a faith won at Hoover Dam and throughout 
World War II. There was a deep-seated trust that big government working 
with big corporations could succeed at big projects. 
T H E  R I C K O V E R  F A C T O R
New products that win market share typically do so by offering a bet-
ter deal in terms of price and performance. Nuclear power introduced its 
own complications into that basic model. How did nuclear power secure 
a 20 ­percent market share in the American electricity business? At least 
in large part, it was because the federal government set the use of nuclear 
power as a strategic goal to help win the Cold War. Furthermore, the gov-
ernment, through the AEC, subsidized the technological development of 
civilian nuclear reactors. Private businesses, specifically Westinghouse and 
GE, then subsidized commercialization with loss-leader turnkey deals. 
A related question is, how did “light water” nuclear power technology 
secure a 100 percent market share among commercial nuclear power plants? 
To answer this question, it is crucial to consider the role played by then 
Captain, later Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, often called the father of the 
nuclear navy. Rickover was the first to build a nuclear reactor that produced 

234	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
substantial electricity. That reactor was called the Submarine Thermal 
Reactor (STR) Mark I. It was first operated in May 1953. Rickover then 
developed the STR Mark II, which was the reactor actually used in the first 
nuclear-powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, which made its first voyage in 
1955. His STR Mark II reactor also served as the basis for the first nuclear 
power plant in America, the Shippingport Plant near Pittsburgh. One his-
torian concluded, “Much of the success achieved at Shippingport is directly 
attributed to the highly disciplined planning and execution of Admiral 
Rickover.” That is, Rickover is credited with the leap from small-scale 
nuclear reactors in ships to large-scale commercial electric generation.20 
Rickover’s path to nuclear-powered ships started after World War II, 
in 1946, when he was assigned to what is now the Oak Ridge National Lab 
to study the fundamentals of nuclear power. It was clear from the start that 
the Navy needed nuclear submarines. The submarines of the time could 
not stay submerged for long periods of time because they had to surface to 
recharge their batteries with diesel engines. This diminished the primary 
military advantage of a submarine, which was to sneak up on an enemy. 
The introduction of nuclear power had the potential to revolutionize naval 
warfare. There was also the concern that the Navy was in danger of becom-
ing irrelevant in a world of nuclear weapons; the Navy would have to launch 
nuclear weapons from the sea to compete with the capability on land and 
in the air. Given all this context, it is not surprising that in 1947 Admiral 
Chester W. Nimitz, then acting chief of naval operations and former subma-
rine officer, approved the development of a nuclear-powered submarine.21 
The Navy was in a hurry to develop this capability, so Rickover was in 
a hurry, too. He set a goal for the production of the first nuclear-powered 
submarine in 1955, which meant the first test of the STR Mark I had to be 
in 1953. A colleague wrote of the risks Rickover took with his own career 
by pushing so hard for rapid progress. One episode involved a planned 
forty-eight-hour test of the Mark I. After just twenty-four hours, engi-
neers on the project recommended that the test end right then and there 
due to safety concerns. Rickover said no; he wanted to test it for the time 
needed to cross the Atlantic Ocean. The test went to forty-eight hours and 
then beyond, on to sixty hours and then to sixty-five, with Westinghouse’s 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
235
engineers and Rickover’s own technical staff protesting. Rickover pushed 
forward, and, as a result, he was able to predict that the Nautilus would be 
capable of crossing the ocean fully submerged and at full speed.22 
In addition, with his self-imposed deadline looming, Rickover 
chose to push the light-water reactor—it uses regular water, rather 
than “heavy,” deuterium-containing water, as both the coolant and the 
moderator—and Westinghouse was the company with the lead in that 
technology.23 However, Rickover did give a parallel try to another tech-
nology. The Mark A reactor was developed by General Electric, and it 
used a sodium-cooled reactor. This competing model was used in the sec-
ond nuclear submarine, the Seawolf, but problems arose, thus supporting 
Rickover’s initial choice of light-water technology.24
Rickover’s successful effort with a nuclear submarine has been the sub-
ject of studies on the nature of scientific and technological development. 
Looking back on that period, sociologist Scott Frickel wrote in 1996 of the 
holistic nature of such development; the stars must be aligned in the sense 
that the full range of forces must work in the same direction. Politics and 
public policy have to set the strategy for the effort, the science has to be 
right, the technology has to work, and the costs and performance must be 
on target. Moreover, there must be champions, the “engineer-sociologists,” 
who are the glue of these networks that bring about change. Rickover was 
the champion who ensured that all the relevant parties were brought in. 
Another lesson, however, is that narrowly focused efforts get equally nar-
row results. Rickover’s goal was not to build a nuclear reactor. Rather, it 
was to build a nuclear reactor on a submarine. And the central goal was not 
necessarily to do this on the cheap; cost mattered, but no one in the Navy 
was asking for the lowest-cost nuclear reactor.25
Rickover’s accomplishment was impressive, and its impact was felt well 
into the future. By the late 1990s, the Navy had built 240 reactors and had 
safely decommissioned 50 of them. However, today there are those who say 
that, while the decisions might have been right for the Navy, the choice of 
light-water technology was not the best for the creation of a civilian nuclear 
power business. The question of whether America made a wrong turn in 
picking a preferred technology for nuclear power has not yet been answered 

236	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
in full. Three broad conceptual doubts come to mind. First, it was the 
nation’s and the Navy’s strategic needs that created the demand for new 
nuclear reactors. A military need is different from a civilian or commercial 
need; no one was asking for a technology for civilians that was the best deal 
for consumers in terms of price and performance. Second, the urgency cre-
ated by the Cold War set the fast pace for the effort to build a new reactor, 
but developing fast is not always best for a commercial business. Third, 
subsidies were always necessary. Subsidies for the light-water reactor came 
from both the Navy and the AEC, plus from private companies in the form 
of the turnkey projects by Westinghouse and General Electric. At some 
point, a technology must demonstrate it can make it on its own.26
T H E  “ F A L L”  O F  N U C L E A R  P O W E R
The “fall” of nuclear power took place mainly in comparison to the 
expectations for the technology. The most-cited indicator is the number of 
plants canceled: one estimate is that, of the 253 orders placed, 114 of them, 
or 45 percent, were canceled. The fall is also evidenced by the fact that 
America stopped building new nuclear plants: among the hundred oper-
ating reactors today, the date of the last construction license granted was 
1978. Indeed, almost all the operating reactors received their construction 
licenses in the narrow window between 1964 and 1978.27 
Any reference to nuclear power’s “fall” must be put in proper con-
text. Nuclear power is not going away. The data make this clear: The 
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) reported that the United 
States had one hundred commercial nuclear power reactors operating at 
sixty-two different sites across thirty-one states in 2014. The NRC reported 
that about 20 percent of America’s electricity generation in 2016 came 
from nuclear power. Global data reflect a similar state of affairs; nuclear 
power is a key resource, and phasing it out would be a complex challenge. 
The United Nation’s IAEA reports that there are 450 operating reactors 
in thirty countries around the world. In 2012 nuclear power provided 11 
percent of total worldwide electric generation.28
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
237
Rapidly Rising Costs
With this context in mind, what caused the cancelations and the long 
drought in nuclear licenses in America? The major reasons were financial. 
The rapidly rising costs of building nuclear power plants have significantly 
undermined the nuclear power business. Construction costs rose for coal, 
too, which was nuclear power’s main competition for base load service, 
but the costs to build new coal plants did not rise as steeply as they did for 
nuclear power; base load refers here to the fact that coal and nuclear plants 
run around the clock because of their low fuel costs. A statistical study to 
document these cost increases for both new nuclear and new coal-fired 
power plants was done for plants built in the 1971 to 1978 time frame. 
The resulting estimate was that the cost of building a new coal plant over 
those years increased by 68 percent in real terms. But the real cost for new 
nuclear plants increased even more: by 142 percent. With these increases, 
nuclear power lost its ability to compete with coal on a cost basis alone. 
This study estimated that a nuclear power plant cost just under 6 percent 
more to build than coal in 1971, but it was 52 percent more expensive to 
build by 1978.29
Charles Komanoff, activist, analyst, and author of the study, attempted 
to sort out the causes of the construction cost increases for both coal and 
nuclear power. It is telling that he was able to point to specific regulations to 
explain most of the increase for coal, but could not do the same for nuclear. 
For coal, he reported that 90 percent of the increase was statistically linked 
to the “new equipment to reduce the environmental impact of coal plants.” 
Komanoff did not find a similar correlation between the cost change for 
nuclear power and specific regulations. Instead, he looked for indirect evi-
dence in the form of a “seven-fold” increase in “regulatory guides” issued 
by the AEC, and then the NRC, during the 1971 to 1978 period. He also 
cited the fact that the result of such regulatory guides was a doubling of “the 
amounts of materials, equipment, and labor” going into new nuclear power 
plants, plus a tripling of the “design engineering effort” needed. Nuclear 
plant owners built in an “environment of constant change,” and there was 
an inherent reason for this: Komanoff concluded that, as the number of 

238	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
nuclear power plants grew, the probability of an accident at each plant must 
be reduced; he wrote, “otherwise, nuclear expansion could lead to such a 
high rate of accidents per year that the public’s confidence in nuclear power 
would collapse and plants would be forced to close.”30
Not only were costs rising but they were unpredictable, too, and cost 
overruns persisted through the 1960s and 1970s. For all the plants ini-
tiated from 1966 to 1977, cost overruns averaged 207 percent. And the 
costs kept rising rapidly well after the first two decades of nuclear power 
development. A comparison of construction costs for nuclear plants first 
operating from 1975 to 1979 to those first operating from 1990 to 1995 
shows that construction costs rose threefold.31 
Steve Cohn, a professor of economics at Knox College in Illinois, 
argues against thinking of new technologies as coming from out of the 
blue. Rather, he recommends a “holistic analysis of technical change,” 
and he introduces the concept of an “official technology.” An official tech-
nology enjoys “strong state support, the promoted image of the coming 
technology, and capture of ‘critical mass’ . . . such as scale economies.” 
Cohn concludes that nuclear power expansion in the 1960s and 1970s 
should be understood in the context of its status as an official technology. 
Nuclear’s success was not a matter of it having known “ex ante technical 
superiority over available alternatives,” nor was nuclear’s status as an offi-
cial technology based on any “prescient anticipation of future energy or 
environmental crises.”32
In broad terms, what is most important to see here is that nuclear 
failed even before its first public incident: the March 28, 1979, accident 
at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant near Middletown, Pennsylvania. 
Although many might attribute nuclear’s fall to that event, it was in fact 
rooted in nuclear’s failure to be cost competitive with coal-fired power 
plants. Moreover, the failure to be cost competitive might best be traced 
to nuclear’s designation as an official technology. That designation prob-
ably meant that commercialization came too soon. Rickover’s success 
was impressive, but it served a particular purpose—creating a nuclear 
navy—not large-scale commercialization. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
239
The Three Mile Island Accident
This is not to say that accidents at nuclear power plants and other nuclear 
facilities did not play a compounding, crucial role in the fall of the nuclear 
power business in America. They did. And the accident at the Three Mile 
Island nuclear power plant is the one that many in the United States recall 
when the issue of safety is debated. There were two nuclear units at Three 
Mile Island. The first came on line in 1974 and had about 775 MW of 
generating capacity. The second unit had just been put into service a few 
months before the accident and it had 880 MW of capacity. It was the 
second unit that was destroyed in the accident; the first unit continues to 
operate today.33 
Looking back at that accident some thirty years later, the World 
Nuclear Association published a blow-by-blow account. The accident 
started at 4 am on March 28, 1979, with “a relatively minor malfunc-
tion” in the cooling system. The temperature of the coolant rose and, 
as designed, the reactor shut down automatically. Another malfunction 
involved a valve that should have closed, but stayed open. That open 
valve allowed the loss of reactor coolant water. Operators did not know 
the valve remained open because there was no instrument to report the 
actual position of that valve alone. Because cooling water was leaking, 
another cooling system pumped water into the reactor system. Mistakenly, 
the operators thought what was happening was that too much water was in 
the system, so they reduced the flow of replacement water. By this time, 
with the loss of coolant, “the reactor’s fuel core was uncovered . . . the fuel 
rods were damaged and released radioactive material into the cooling 
water.” Another primary concern was the buildup of hydrogen gas caused 
by a chemical reaction of water and the uncovered fuel rods. It took “an 
anxious month” for operators to bring the cooling issue under control.34
The President’s Commission on the Accident at Three Mile Island 
delivered its report to President Carter on October 30, 1979. The commis-
sion characterized the Three Mile Island incident as the country’s “worst 
accident in the history of commercial nuclear power generation,” and 

240	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
concluded that it was “human failures,” not equipment failures, which pri-
marily caused the accident. Specifically: “The equipment was sufficiently 
good that, except for human failures, the major accident at Three Mile 
Island would have been a minor incident.”35 
Emphasizing that President Carter tasked the commission with mak-
ing recommendations that would “prevent any future nuclear accidents,” 
the commission made it clear that sweeping changes were needed. The 
commission stated: “To prevent nuclear accidents as serious as Three Mile 
Island, fundamental changes will be necessary in the organization, pro-
cedures, and practices—and above all—in the attitudes of the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission and, to the extent that the institutions we inves-
tigated are typical, of the nuclear industry.”36
What about the immediate impact on people living nearby? The 
evacuation ordered by Pennsylvania governor Richard Thornburgh had 
a major impact on what people did and on what they thought. There was 
terrible uncertainty and fear over the four-day period in which the pres-
ident’s commission wrote that the severity of the accident was unknown. 
Two days after the accident, the governor ordered the evacuation of 
pregnant women and small children within a five-mile radius. At the 
same time, federal agencies planned for the worst. The Food and Drug 
Administration, for example, requested 250,000 bottles of potassium 
iodide solution from manufacturers, which would block the absorption of 
radioactive iodine related to cancer.37
The US Nuclear Regulation Commission still calls Three Mile Island 
the most serious US nuclear accident. It concludes, however, that “its small 
radioactive releases had no detectable health effects on plant workers or 
the public.”38
Shoreham: The First “Stillborn” Nuclear Power Plant
The Shoreham Nuclear Power plant built by Long Island Lighting 
Company (LILCO) suffered the most famous cancelation in the industry, 
and it may be nuclear power’s most expensive failure. It is the most famous 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
241
because the plant had been fully constructed when it was abandoned by 
its owners as part of a deal negotiated with New York’s governor, Mario 
Cuomo. The Long Island Power Authority (LIPA), a specially created 
entity, subsequently bought Shoreham for one dollar and then proceeded 
to dismantle it. Even though Shoreham produced no electricity, ratepay-
ers still had to pay for a substantial part of the construction costs with a 
premium on their monthly bills.39
In 1965 LILCO had decided to build a 500 MW nuclear power plant 
on New York’s Long Island. LILCO made that proposal at a time when its 
customers’ power needs were growing at 10 percent per year and the AEC 
was heavily promoting nuclear power. By 1968 needs had grown even 
more, and LILCO decided to make the plant 52 percent bigger. Early indi-
cations of the popular opposition to nuclear power were seen in 1970 when 
local residents successfully opposed the construction of two other nuclear 
plants proposed by LILCO. Still, construction of Shoreham started in 
1973 with the intent to have it in operation by 1979. LILCO missed that 
initial on-line date and, of course, 1979 was the year of the Three Mile 
Island nuclear accident in Pennsylvania, which had a profound effect on 
the licensing of Shoreham, including protests by local residents fearful of 
having a power plant open up in their backyard. Despite the opposition, 
Shoreham forged ahead, and in 1985, a fully built Shoreham nuclear 
power plant was allowed to do some low-level tests. Then, in 1986, the 
Chernobyl nuclear power accident happened in Ukraine.40 
In addition to facing the aftermath of two infamous nuclear accidents, 
the cost estimates for completing Shoreham skyrocketed and there were 
significant delays. In 1970 the construction cost estimate was $250 million 
and commercial operation was expected to begin in 1975. By 1980 the 
cost estimate had risen to $2.2 billion and the on-line date was pushed out 
to 1982. By 1989 the cost estimate had grown to $5.5 billion.41 
The stated cause of the abandonment of Shoreham was the failure to 
develop an evacuation plan in the event an accident happened. There was 
a deeper fear of an accident itself. The New York Times reported on Nora 
Bredes, “the primary organizer of the grass-roots campaign that kept the 
Shoreham nuclear power plant” from opening. In 1987, just eight months 

242	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
after the Chernobyl accident, Ms. Bredes testified at a public hearing on 
Shoreham. She held up a picture of her two-year-old son and said, “Along 
with all the other evidence you collect and weigh, you should weigh this.” 
The photo, she said, “argues that Shoreham shouldn’t be opened, and it 
reminds you what you are risking if you allow it to operate.” Bredes died in 
2011 at age sixty. After his mother’s death, Nathan, the son in the photo, 
told another New York Times reporter that the recent Fukushima Daiichi 
nuclear power plant accident in Japan “was exactly what they were trying 
to avoid on Long Island.”42 
The Shoreham nuclear power plant was started and completed 
because it made sense for LILCO. The utility wanted a nuclear power 
plant because with cost-plus rate making, it would make a big profit on 
such a big plant. Moreover, the company probably believed it did not face 
a risk of failure; under traditional cost-plus regulation, it may have pre-
sumed that as long as its decision-making process was prudent, it would 
recover its costs. Surprisingly, LILCO’s presumption turned out to be 
largely right.
Shoreham was abandoned, however, because it was not something 
the utility’s customers wanted. The accidents at Three Mile Island and 
Chernobyl proved there was danger and without an effective evacuation 
plan, there would be no way to escape that danger. Well after Shoreham’s 
abandonment, on March 11, 2011, Fukushima only confirmed those fears. 
The regulatory bargain is also a major factor in explaining the spec-
tacular failure. Specifically, it was the improper allocation of risk that 
caused it. No private company in another business would presume that 
customers would cover its costs no matter what the costs turned out to be; 
there is no cost-plus pricing in private business as there is under electric 
utility regulation. No private company would presume it faced no risk of 
failure. And it is unlikely that any private company would have wanted 
to locate itself where thousands of its customers opposed it. That is where 
the contrast with a regulated utility comes in. Shoreham was as much 
or more a failure of traditional cost-plus regulation as it was a failure of 
technology. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
243
T H E  L O N G  G O O D B Y E :  
S T O R I N G  N U C L E A R  W A S T E
With nuclear power plants supplying up to 20 percent of America’s elec-
tricity, substantial radioactive nuclear waste has already accumulated. 
Business consulting group Navigant reports that there are about 65,000 
tons of waste stored at seventy-six sites across America, all but one a 
nuclear reactor site.43 The United States faces a relatively more challeng-
ing nuclear waste issue because it does not reprocess its spent fuel.44 
Congress passed the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, requiring the 
US Department of Energy to “accept and dispose of spent nuclear fuel and 
high-level radioactive waste beginning no later than January 31, 1998.” 
The department selected ten possible sites and, in 1987, Congress narrowed 
that to a single site: Yucca Mountain in Nevada, about ninety miles from 
Las Vegas. In 2002 Congress and President George W. Bush approved the 
choice of Yucca Mountain, but they did so “over the State of Nevada’s veto.” 
By 2010 the political situation had been reversed and President Obama and 
the Congress defunded the development of Yucca Mountain.45
Federal courts have another opinion on Yucca Mountain. They have 
found the US Department of Energy to have breached its contract to provide 
storage, a contract under which it has collected $750 million a year from 
nuclear utilities. A blue-ribbon panel, created by the secretary of energy 
in 2010, recommended “an independent waste management organization” 
and “a consent-based siting policy” among other guidelines. Given all this, 
centralized nuclear waste storage is stalled politically. The unresolved stor-
age issue only adds to the fear of harm from nuclear power.46 
F U K U S H I M A
On March 11, 2011, Japan was hit with the largest magnitude earthquake 
in its recorded history, the Great East Japan earthquake. Forty-one min-
utes after the earthquake, the first of several massive tsunami waves made 

244	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
landfall. Adding to this tragedy was the severe accident at the Fukushima 
Daiichi nuclear power plant about 163 miles northeast of Tokyo. The 
earthquake led to the emergency shutdown of the operating units, and the 
tsunami led to the total loss of off-site electric power for the plant because 
transmission lines were downed. In addition, the tsunami destroyed onsite 
backup power including diesel engines as well as the seawater cooling 
system.47
The facts of what happened are not the core of the dispute; the dis-
pute is concerned with why it happened. In the government’s report to the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, Fukushima was distinguished from 
the other two modern, famous nuclear accidents, Three Mile Island and 
Chernobyl: Fukushima was preceded by a massive natural disaster. The 
report then detailed extensive lessons learned such as “strengthen mea-
sures against earthquakes and tsunamis,” “ensure power supplies,” and 
“ensure reliable cooling function[s].”48
A blunter answer came from the Independent Investigation 
Commission formed by the Japanese legislature, the National Diet of 
Japan. As an indicator of the seriousness of the accident, the commis-
sion noted that it was the “first independent commission chartered by the 
Diet in the history of Japan’s constitutional government.” The devastating 
critique of all those associated with nuclear power—in government, reg-
ulatory agencies, and the utility (TEPCO)—began with the chairman’s 
message: The accident was not a “natural disaster,” it was a “manmade 
disaster.” And, further, it was a disaster “that could and should have been 
foreseen and prevented.” Even more pointedly, the chairman said, “What 
must be admitted—very painfully—is that this was a disaster ‘Made in 
Japan.’ Its fundamental causes are to be found in the ingrained conven-
tions of Japanese culture: our reflective obedience; our reluctance to ques-
tion authority . . . and our insularity.”49 
The criticism does not fade after the chairman’s introductory message. 
The main text is just as hard-hitting and it gets more specific. Ultimately, 
the commission points to an old-fashioned cause: regulatory capture. 
The government, regulators, and TEPCO were focused on promotion of 
nuclear power, not nuclear safety. The concern over regulatory capture 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E i s e n h o w e r ’ s  A t o m s  f o r  P e a c e  ( a n d  W a r ) 	
245
would seem to be heightened by the designation of nuclear as an official 
technology. It accentuated the difference between the patriotic promotion 
of that official technology versus strict regulation for safety.50 
N U C L E A R  P O W E R ’ S  L E G A C Y
The scientific pedigree of nuclear power is unmatched: it was born of 
Einstein’s amazing science as well as that from the Manhattan Project. 
In this sense, nuclear power could have marked a return to the excite-
ment about scientific discovery that predominated in the time of Franklin. 
Great science, however, is not enough to make a technology successful, 
and nuclear power, from the start, belonged more to a time preoccupied 
with the harm the science could cause. One reason is that the first appli-
cation of this science was to nuclear weapons. The link between nuclear 
power and nuclear weapons grabs headlines even today, as seen in the 
heated debate on Iran’s nuclear power plan as a path to nuclear weapons. 
No other electric generation technology has such an explicit link to weap-
ons and the fear of war. 
Another reason nuclear power belongs in the Age of Harm is the fear 
of accidental harm inherent to it. Despite the calming, clear-eyed risk 
assessment of Richard Muller in Physics for Future Presidents, the possibility 
of other kinds of harm from nuclear power was confirmed in the minds 
of the general public with the accidents at Three Mile Island in 1979 and 
Chernobyl in 1986. No historical event better reflects the concern about 
harm than the fact that the Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, built at a 
cost of $5.5 billion, was dismantled before ever starting to generate power 
due to the fear of another nuclear accident. The tragic accident at the 
Fukushima nuclear power plant in 2011 in Japan gave further support to 
the public’s fear of accidental harm. Indeed, it raised it to the level of a 
“black swan risk,” as defined by economist and scholar Nassim Nicholas 
Taleb—the risk of an improbable event with catastrophic consequences.51 
The demonstrated black swan risk of nuclear power sets it apart from 
other technologies and, ultimately, places it squarely in the Age of Harm. 

246	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Given all this, how can the rise of nuclear power be best explained? 
How did nuclear power lay claim to a 20 percent market share in America? 
Cohn seems to be nearest to the truth when he argues that nuclear rose 
because it was designated as an “official technology.” Official technologies 
are promoted to serve broad, overarching goals. For nuclear power, one 
overarching goal was to serve as an economic weapon for the Cold War—it 
was meant to show the economic prowess of capitalism as compared to 
communism. Another such goal was to serve as a military weapon in the 
Cold War—small-scale nuclear reactors were designed by Rickover to 
fuel the nuclear navy. 
Given these roles in the Cold War, it seems that few focused on the 
essential question of whether nuclear power was the best deal for electric-
ity ratepayers in terms of low cost, low risk, and high reliability, which are 
generally the right qualifications for choosing technologies for America’s 
electricity business. Nuclear power lost to competing technologies because 
of its rising and unpredictable costs—a turn that began even before the 
accident at Three Mile Island. Its designation as an official technology 
aggravated this. There was a rush to commercialize the technology, and 
little vetting of alternative technologies or management techniques to 
assure nuclear power was on the right path. 
Because of its 20 percent market share in America, nuclear power is 
best characterized as an industry that has become “too big to go away.” 
It will not go away because of the steep costs involved in shutting down a 
power source responsible for a large share of electricity generation. Also, 
America has yet to find an alternative to on-site nuclear waste storage. 
Finally, there is today a second attempt to designate nuclear power as an 
official technology because it does not emit greenhouse gases and can have 
a big impact in this regard because it has been built to a large scale; that, 
too, may preserve nuclear power as a viable option around the world. 
www.ebook3000.com

247
C H A P T E R  1 4
Rachel Carson’s 
Silent Spring
There was once a town in the heart of America where all 
life seemed to live in harmony with its surroundings . . . 
Then a strange blight crept over the area . . . No witchcraft, 
no enemy action had silenced the rebirth of new li fe in 
this stricken world. The people had done it themselves. 
—Rachel Carson (1962)1
Rachel Carson did not write about electricity in her best-selling books,
including her most famous work, Silent Spring, published in 1962. 
Regardless, few people have had a bigger impact on the electricity busi-
ness than Carson; with that book, she launched the modern environmen-
tal movement. That movement took the world much deeper into the Age 
of Harm.2 
Many factors contributed to Carson’s impact, but fi rst and foremost 
was her writing. Carson had written three popular books about nature 
and the sea before writing Silent Spring. Her writing is beautiful; however, 

248	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
it would be a mistake to come to Silent Spring expecting only beauty. Silent 
Spring is replete with direct punches to the gut, aimed at those in indus-
try and government who allowed, in her view, the indiscriminate use of 
deadly pesticides and insecticides. 
The other factors that explain her impact include the barrage of 
case-by-case evidence she launched concerning the damage done to 
nature and to man and her placing the burden of proof squarely on the 
shoulders of business. And then there was Carson’s very character: it took 
great personal courage to take on big industry and big government, and it 
took great conviction to testify before Congress when she was gravely ill, 
dying from cancer. 
What were the major milestones of the Carson-inspired environmental 
movement? Even before Carson, there was clear and accessible evidence 
of harm from what are simply called the “episodes.” These were extreme 
air pollution events that sickened and killed large numbers of people in 
cities as diverse as Donora, Pennsylvania; London, England; and New 
York City. Next there was the historic Clean Air Act of 1970, which came 
abruptly and from an unlikely source—the Republican president Richard 
Nixon. The 1970 act created the command-and-control mechanics for air 
pollution regulation, and these allowed the federal government to tell busi-
nesses, such as large electric power plants, which air pollution emissions 
to control and which control technology to use. The 1990 amendments 
to the Clean Air Act, proposed by President George H. W. Bush, created 
market-based regulations as an alternative to the command-and-control 
approach. The most famous (or infamous) market-based approach that 
emerged was cap-and-trade, the centerpiece of proposed 2009 legislation 
addressing global climate change. Today, command-and-control regula-
tions still predominate, but market-based approaches have taken a foot-
hold, too. 
Carson inspired these later milestones primarily by setting a template 
for environmental advocacy. This template consisted of compelling writ-
ing, overwhelming case-by-case evidence, and a burden of proof placed 
fully on industries to prove they do not cause harm; Carson also gave no 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
249
quarter to possible offsetting benefits. The electricity business has been 
and still is a principal target for such advocacy.
T H E  B O O K  R E A D  R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
Carson began Silent Spring with a section titled “A Fable for Tomorrow.” 
In vivid language, her fable reveals a foreboding for man’s future; she 
opens, “There was once a town in the heart of America where all life 
seemed to live in harmony with its surroundings.” Ominously, Carson 
continues, “Then a strange blight crept over the area and everything 
began to change.” She concludes, “No witchcraft, no enemy action had 
silenced the rebirth of new life in this stricken world. The people had done 
it themselves.”3 
That is the end of the fable and the end of any impression that her book 
might have a light touch. From that point onward, Carson hits big and 
hard. She warns that America has experienced an epochal change. Only 
in the twentieth century had “one species—man—acquired significant 
power to alter the nature of his world.” She writes of “lethal materials” and 
man-made pollution as a “chain of evil.” Strategically, she links modern 
chemicals to a prominent object of fear of the time—nuclear weapons. In 
the end, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) is the chemical Carson 
attacks most frequently and vehemently; she notes with irony that the dis-
coverer of DDT, Paul Müller, a Swiss chemist, won the Nobel Prize.4 
Harming Nature
Chapter by chapter Carson takes the reader through all of the elements 
of nature that have been harmed: surface waters, soil, birds, and a host 
of other living things. After reviewing a US Fish and Wildlife Service 
report from 1960, Carson concludes that surface waters are “universally 
contaminated.” Robins were indirectly harmed by an effort to control 

250	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Dutch elm disease because they ate earthworms after DDT was sprayed 
on the trees. Salmon were harmed on the east coast of Canada when DDT 
was used to combat the spruce budworm. In 1956 in an effort to eradi-
cate the gypsy moth, Carson recounts that “nearly a million acres were 
sprayed [with DDT] in the states of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Michigan, 
and New York.” On Long Island citizens led by ornithologist Robert 
Cushman Murphy asked for a court injunction against the liberal use of 
DDT, but the spraying went on. The legal case went on, too, all the way 
to the Supreme Court, which decided not to hear it. Justice William O. 
Douglas dissented, saying that “the alarms that many experts and respon-
sible officials have raised about the perils of DDT underline the public 
importance of this case.”5
Carson passionately questions our passive consensus on who makes 
the decisions to weigh the costs and benefits of chemical use: “Who has 
placed in one pan of the scales the leaves that might have been eaten by 
the beetles and in the other . . . the lifeless remains of the birds that fell 
before the unselective bludgeon of insecticidal poisons?” Carson’s answer 
is that bureaucrats in government and corporations make that judgment, 
while millions of people who might differ attend to their daily chores.6 
Harming Man
For Carson, it is clear that harm to nature was enough of a motive to push 
back on the use of chemicals. For many readers, however, then and now, 
harm to man is more compelling, and Carson provides strong evidence 
on that front as well. She first quotes Dr. Arnold Lehman, an expert phar-
macologist at the Food and Drug Administration, who found chlordane 
to be “one of the most toxic of insecticides.” Carson says lawn treatments 
containing chlordane were used widely. She then relays the story of “one 
victim who accidentally spilled a 25 per cent industrial solution on the 
skin developed symptoms of poisoning within 40 minutes and died before 
medical help could be obtained.” Another chemical, endrin, is the “most 
toxic of all the chlorinated hydrocarbons.” Endrin was also used widely 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
251
as an insecticide. In Venezuela, a little boy and his dog had been taken 
out of their home while insecticides with endrin were applied, and then 
the house was thoroughly cleaned before their return. Despite this, one 
hour after they came back, the dog died, and later that night the small 
boy “lost consciousness” and was left, in Carson’s words, “little more than 
a vegetable.”7 
With great disdain reflected in her words, Carson recalls how easy it 
was to get these chemicals and how plainly they were promoted, despite, 
she said, their known capacity to sicken and to kill us. She states, “So 
thoroughly has the age of poisons become established that anyone may 
walk into a store and, without questions being asked, buy substances of far 
greater death-dealing power than the medicinal drug for which he may be 
required to sign a ‘poison book’ in the pharmacy next door.”8 
Carson was alerting readers to the fact that not every technological 
advance was good, and that some could do grievous harm. This change 
in mentality would soon be brought to the electricity business. No longer 
would more electricity be automatically seen as a good thing; the possible 
environmental harm from electricity generation would get equal or more 
attention. 
The Science of Harm
Carson convincingly shows that a great deal of hard science must be 
understood to discern what harm actually results from any given chemical. 
She demonstrates her grasp on that science throughout the book, which 
increases the credibility of her allegations. At the cellular level, Carson 
explains, the threat comes in the form of a chemical assault on the produc-
tion of energy for all the functions of our body. Carson goes on to describe 
the cellular creation of energy in more detail. She writes that the “trans-
formation of matter into energy in the cell is an ever-flowing process,” and 
each step of that process is “controlled by an enzyme of so specialized a 
function that it does this one thing and nothing else.” She reports that this 
energy production through oxidation is achieved “in tiny granules within 

252	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
the cell called mitochondria.” These are the “Mighty Mitochondria” we 
learn about in school, “tiny packets of enzymes” that serve as the “‘power­
houses’ in which most of the energy-producing reactions [of the human 
body] occur.” This energy production within the body can be irreversibly 
disrupted by radiation and chemicals like insecticides and weed killers.9 
The Author and the Aftermath
Rachel Carson’s most impressive trait was her personal courage. She 
demonstrated this courage by facing up to big industry and big govern-
ment. New York Times journalist Eliza Griswold provides especially com-
pelling evidence on this front; while Carson kept on with her commitment 
to protect the lives of creatures as diverse as robins and man, she knew she 
was dying of cancer. Griswold describes Carson’s condition a year after 
publishing Silent Spring: “She was 56 and dying of breast cancer. She told 
almost no one. She’d already survived a radical mastectomy. Her pelvis 
was so riddled with fractures that it was nearly impossible for her to walk 
to her seat at the wooden table before the Congressional panel. To hide 
her baldness, she wore a dark brown wig.”10 
As her biographer Linda Lear has written, Carson was an “improba-
ble revolutionary, even an unlikely reformer.” She was born in Springdale, 
Pennsylvania, a town north of Pittsburgh, in 1907. Her mother, Maria, 
was the “most important influence on her intellect and outlook.” Included 
in that outlook was an interest in and a respect for nature honed by walks 
through “the woods, wetlands, and river flats” near the Allegheny River. In 
1925 Carson entered the Pennsylvania College for Women, now Chatham 
University in Pittsburgh. While there, she won a fellowship at the presti-
gious Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. She 
then earned a master’s of arts in zoology from Johns Hopkins University. 
Her first job was with the Bureau of Fisheries, then in the Department of 
Commerce. She worked for the next sixteen years in the Fish and Wildlife 
Service, rising to editor-in-chief of all service publications in 1949. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
253
Somewhat surprisingly, this is where and how Carson’s literary career 
blossomed.11
In 1941 she published the first of three books on the natural wonders 
of the sea, Under the Sea Wind. She later won the George Westinghouse 
Science Writing Award and a Guggenheim Fellowship. Following that, 
The Sea Around Us was published in 1951. Carson gained an international 
reputation with this second book after it was serialized in the New Yorker 
magazine and won the National Book Award. It also was a selection of the 
Book of the Month Club, and remained on the New York Times best-seller 
list for almost two years. In 1952 Carson retired from the Fish and 
Wildlife Service to write full time, and in 1955, her third “sea biography” 
appeared, The Edge of the Sea.12
Her success as a writer gave her the skills, reputation, and credibility 
to speak out, but her years at Fish and Wildlife gave her the experience 
with nature that would shape each of her books. Lear writes that Carson 
had been climbing the ladder at “the one agency in the government, 
which by the mid-1950s, had a long standing record of concern about the 
widespread use of synthetic pesticides.” By virtue of her job, Carson was 
already highly attuned to the implications of the rise in toxic chemicals 
used in daily life and on the natural environment.13 
Silent Spring was a sensation: six hundred thousand copies sold soon 
after publication, and it became an enduring best seller. (As of today, more 
than two million copies have been sold.) However, it should not be forgot-
ten that Silent Spring was an indictment of three powerful groups: the indus-
try that made these synthetic chemicals, the governments who used them, 
and the scientists who claimed they did no harm. There was pushback, of 
course. An agricultural lobby spent $25,000 to refute Carson’s allegations 
while another chemical company, Velsicol, threatened Carson’s publisher, 
Houghton Mifflin, with a libel suit.14 
Carson, however, had even more powerful supporters won over by her 
book. President John F. Kennedy saw the importance of the political issue 
and ordered his science adviser, Jerome Wiesner, to investigate Carson’s 
charges. The president’s advisory report was issued in May 1963 as Senate 

254	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
hearings began. Equally important, CBS ran a prime-time special titled 
“The Silent Spring of Rachel Carson” on April 13, 1963. Although very 
ill, the calm and competent Carson appeared to be winning the debate 
against the volatile corporate scientist sent to rebut her by the chemical 
industry. One corporate scientist even foresaw a return to the “dark ages” 
if the use of pesticides were restricted.15 
In the Senate hearings in June 1963, Senator Abraham Ribicoff, a 
Democrat from Connecticut, opened by paraphrasing Abraham Lincoln’s 
remark to Harriet Beecher Stowe, the author of Uncle Tom’s Cabin. The 
senator said, “Miss Carson . . . we welcome you here. You are the lady 
who started all this.” “All this” was the modern environmental movement. 
Carson made environmental concern a topic of policy that the voting pub-
lic wanted to hear more about. No longer would communities accept proj-
ects on the basis of their being “big,” “more,” or “new,” unless attention 
was paid to potential risks. That new view would be applied to the elec-
tricity business and soon meant that environmental concerns became a 
major factor driving decisions about electric power.16 
Rachel Carson died on April 14, 1964, not quite a year after the 
Senate hearing. 
T H E  E P I S O D E S
Major incidents before and after Silent Spring showed that air pollution 
could sicken and kill. The first of these episodes that brought air pollution 
to the headlines in America occurred in Donora, Pennsylvania, in 1948: 
six thousand people fell ill and twenty died. Quick on its heels, London 
experienced a smog in 1952 during which at least four thousand people 
died of respiratory and heart ailments. Throughout the 1960s there were 
other internationally reported pollution incidents, like the deadly smog 
that killed 169 people in New York City in 1966.17 
All these episodes had common culprits. There were, of course, air 
pollution emissions from sources ranging from zinc factories to home 
furnaces. In addition, due to climate conditions, the air at the ground 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
255
level was colder than the air above it; thus the air at the ground level was 
trapped and could not disperse. This is called an inversion; the warm air 
higher up creates a “lid” trapping ground-level air, which was heavily 
polluted in these incidents. The result is that people are exposed to pol-
lution for extended periods of time until the temperature level allows the 
air to dissipate. Terrain contributed, too, with riverbed valleys and moun-
tains making matters worse. The episodes revealed the damage that could 
result from severe levels of air pollution, and they also revealed early on 
the complexities of understanding what happened, who was to blame, and 
what should be done. 
Donora: “Hell with a Lid On”
Donora is a factory town about thirty miles southeast of Pittsburgh along 
the Monongahela River. The Zinc Works in Donora was center stage in 
this episode. It had been built in 1915 and was run by the American Steel 
& Wire Company, an affiliate of U.S. Steel; steel mills were the major con-
sumer for the zinc produced there. Writing in 1994, policy analyst Lynne 
Page Snyder notes that air pollution concerns were not new; American 
Steel & Wire paid its first fine for air pollution soon after it opened in 1918, 
with more suits following.18 
The “mysterious, death-dealing smog” started in Donora on Tuesday, 
October 26, 1948. By Friday, hospitalizations began. Doctors ordered that 
those with heart or respiratory disorders be evacuated, but the smog and 
clogged roads had made that impossible. National news soon picked up the 
story, with Walter Winchell leading the way. Dr. William Rongaus of the 
local Board of Health walked an ambulance through the darkened town 
in order to deliver the sick to the hospital and the dead to the morgue. 
Later he would say that what happened was “just plain murder.”19
American Steel & Wire retained scientific experts led by Dr. Robert 
Kehoe at the Kettering Laboratory to defend it from blame for the disas-
ter. Kehoe concluded, “The crux of the problem is the cost of control. 
Control is possible in most cases now, but the cost is exorbitant.” In the 

256	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
end, Kehoe’s recommendation was not to control the emission of pollut-
ants but to adjust the timing of the industrial processes at the Zinc Works 
to avoid dangerous weather conditions.20
Dr. Clarence Mills, from the College of Medicine at the University of 
Cincinnati, conducted some of the early studies on Donora as well, and he 
pushed back on the government health agency report for several reasons. 
In the end he concluded that Donora was “America’s first mass killing 
from industrial air pollution.” Though a study by the US Public Health 
Service report “relieved” the Zinc Works of responsibility, the Donora 
episode demonstrated the danger of air pollution and started the debates 
on whether and how to mitigate the danger.21 
“Hell Is a City Much like London” 
Sadly, when the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley wrote in 1839 that “Hell is a 
city much like London,” he presciently gave an apt description of London 
in early December 1952. With four thousand deaths reported at the time, 
this was the world’s worst air pollution episode. Again, it had the typical 
interrelated culprits: temperature inversion and polluted air trapped at the 
surface. London had high emissions levels because the city’s homes used 
a large amount of coal to fuel home furnaces. The effects, however, were 
dire, even for a city noted for its fog and smog: visibility was so poor that an 
indoor performance of La Traviata had to be cut short because the audience 
could not see the stage, and nurses at hospitals could not see “from one end 
of their wards to another.” Undertakers reported a shortage of caskets.22 
The London episode reveals the challenge of estimating the number 
of deaths caused by a single episode. The general impression held for many 
years was that the spike in deaths in the first months of 1953 was caused by 
an influenza epidemic. However, in 2001, researchers started to discount 
the impact of the influenza. Michelle Bell, a professor at Johns Hopkins 
at the time, and Devra Lee Davis, then a visiting professor at Carnegie 
Mellon, concluded that a more accurate estimate of the death toll was not 
4,000 but in fact “about 12,000 excess deaths occurred from December 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
257
1952 through February 1953 because of acute and persisting effects of the 
1952 London smog.”23
Another look at unique physical evidence from the London episode 
helped to better define how air pollution kills. In 2003 researchers used 
autopsy tissue samples from the 1952 London episode to support the more 
recent view that among the most dangerous air pollutants for human health 
is inhalable (or fine) particulate matter. The smallest form is PM2.5, which 
is particulate matter in tiny particles no more than 2.5 microns in width; 
to give a sense of just how tiny they are, there are 25,000 microns in an 
inch. Noting that “massive mortality events such as that in London in 1952 
no longer occur,” the authors conclude that these autopsy samples provide 
unique evidence of pollution’s effects. It is unique evidence that PM2.5 can be 
an invisible killer. As it turns out, today, concerns about PM2.5 are a major 
issue in environmental regulations for the electricity business.24 
New York City suffered an episode only a year later, and then again 
in Thanksgiving week of 1966. There was a temperature inversion at 
the time, as was the case with the episodes elsewhere, and air pollution 
concentrations spiked. Sulfur dioxide averaged forty-six parts per hun-
dred million in the worst three days, which was three times the stan-
dard set by regulators. In all, a total of 169 deaths were attributed to the 
Thanksgiving episode.25 
T H E  1 9 7 0  C L E A N  A I R  A C T
With the backdrop of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring and the mounting 
number of episodes (and resulting deaths), the federal government became 
more directly and substantially involved in environmental regulation 
during the 1960s. Congress passed the Clean Air Act of 1963, which 
gave the federal government added “authority to enforce existing state 
laws” and to promote adding state laws on air pollution. The federal gov-
ernment also regulated interstate pollution. In 1965 Congress added the 
Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act, which controlled emissions from 
new vehicles.26 

258	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
More legislation quickly followed. In 1967 Congress added the Air 
Quality Act, which allowed the federal government to define “air qual-
ity control areas” and “recommend pollution control techniques.” With 
few measurable results through these laws, however, the president and 
Congress ultimately took aggressive action to give the federal government 
“primary responsibility” for regulation of pollution. President Nixon cre-
ated the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970, and Congress 
passed the Clean Air Act that same year.27
Looking back, MIT professor Judith A. Layzer found in her 2006 book, 
The Environmental Case, that “the surge in environmental policymaking in 
the early 1970s was not a response to a sudden deterioration in the condition 
of the nation’s air and water.” Rather, it was the result of “redefining, or 
reframing” the issue, which gained support and popularity from the public 
for environmental regulation; that public support pressured politicians to 
take action. Layzer pointed to Carson’s Silent Spring and Paul Ehrlich’s The 
Population Bomb (1968) as two major works that shaped public opinion and 
popularized environmentalism. Events such as the oil spill off the California 
coast at Santa Barbara, the Cuyahoga River in Ohio catching fire, and 
increasing concern about mercury in seafood also contributed to the envi-
ronmental movement. Finally, a wealthier and better-educated population 
contributed to the demand for regulation. This trend toward environmental 
awareness culminated with the inaugural Earth Day on April 22, 1970.28
The political backstory to President Nixon’s proposal for the cre-
ation of the EPA and the 1970 Clean Air Act was his expectation that 
he would face Senator Edmund Muskie of Maine in the presidential race 
of 1972. Indeed, the senator submitted a rival act, which, among other 
things, proposed a strict 90 percent cut in auto emissions from new cars by 
1975. The Senate passed the Clean Air Act and the president signed it on 
December 31, 1970. In Environmental Law and Policy, their book from 2007, 
James Salzman and Barton H. Thompson Jr., law professors at Duke and 
Stanford, respectively, at the time, call the 1970 Clean Air Act “historic,” 
a “massive law” that “stand[s] apart.” They write that the act “boasted 
uniform, national standards covering a wide range of pollutants and sources.” 
The authors conclude that the 1970 act was the “first truly comprehensive 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
259
national pollution law.” Similarly, Helen Ingram sees the 1970 Clean Air 
Act as a big leap forward, not just an “evolution” in policy. The goals for 
air pollution got more demanding as the legislative process went on. And 
those goals were not limited to what could be achieved with current tech-
nology or with only limited cost increases.29 
The Clean Air Act of 1970 imposed several layers of regulation. It 
established both primary and secondary National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards (NAAQS). Primary standards were to protect public health. 
Secondary standards were aimed at protecting visibility and the ecology. 
NAAQS were set for six “criteria pollutants”: smog (or ozone, O3), nitro-
gen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), lead, and 
soot or “fine particles.” The act required the states to meet the NAAQS 
through State Implementation Plans by 1975. If the EPA did not approve 
a state plan, then a federal implementation plan would be imposed on that 
state. It also set New Source Performance Standards for stationary sources 
of emissions like power plants and other manufacturing plants; the federal 
regulations would set the rules for new sources, meaning the states were left 
with control only over older facilities.30
Despite the sudden support for environmental regulations, it was not 
all clear sailing for the act. By 1975 not one State Implementation Plan 
had been approved. The 1977 Clean Air Act codified postponement by 
extending compliance deadlines to 1982 for most places and to 1987 for 
others, such as California. In addition, the plans now had to consider the 
effect on jobs and broader economic impacts. Still, just about every nook 
and cranny of this regulatory structure would affect the electricity busi-
ness. Power plants were a clear and immediate focus of concern because 
they emitted air pollutants and were accessible politically.31 
T H E  1 9 9 0  C L E A N  A I R  A C T 
Looking back at the 1990 Clean Air Act, Richard Schmalensee and 
Robert Stavins, professors at MIT and Harvard, respectively, published 
the intriguingly titled “The SO2 Allowance Trading System: The Ironic 

260	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
History of a Grand Policy Experiment.” Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air 
Act established an acid rain program, which the authors characterize as 
“a grand experiment in market-based environmental policy.” This was 
the first large-scale cap-and-trade program and was seen as “quite novel.” 
Acid rain occurs because of air pollution emissions—sulfur dioxide and 
nitric oxides—reacting in the atmosphere to form sulfuric and nitric acids. 
This acid rain then damages forests, lakes, and rivers, and concern over its 
negative effects heightened in the 1980s.32
The acid rain program was implemented in two phases and aimed 
precisely at the electricity business. Phase I (1995–99) focused on the 
263 coal-fired power plants with the highest sulfur dioxide emissions. 
Phase II, beginning in 2000, would regulate a much broader range of 
power plants—3,200 in all. The goal of the acid rain program was to ulti-
mately cut sulfur dioxide emissions by 50 percent as compared to emis-
sions in 1980. Again, the means to this end was a novel cap-and-trade 
program. The cap set the total allowed sulfur dioxide emissions, and 
it would be steadily reduced over time to achieve the desired 50 per-
cent reduction. Sulfur dioxide allowances—each giving the right to emit 
one ton of sulfur dioxide—were allocated to existing sources of such 
pollution. As to “trading,” the hope was that those power plants that 
could reduce emissions cheaply would do so and then sell their excess 
allowances to a power plant for which emission reduction was expensive. 
The goal was to minimize the overall cost of emissions reduction for the 
industry.33 
The results were good in terms of achieving the planned emission 
reduction. Schmalensee and Stavins report that emissions fell by 36 per-
cent from 1990 through 2004 despite coal-fired power generation increas-
ing 25 percent. And they conclude further that the cap-and-trade program 
reduced emissions at a lower cost than would have been incurred with 
command-and-control regulation.34
However, and importantly, if “results” are defined not strictly in terms 
of emission reductions, but rather in terms of the reduction in acid rain 
and reductions in acidic lakes, a different story emerges. Indeed, it is an 
ironic one; perhaps, in the end, the acid rain program did the right thing 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
261
for the wrong reason. The program did not solve the acid rain problem. 
However, say the authors, it mitigated a new problem that had emerged 
over time to become an urgent concern: the emission of PM2.5, which can 
get deep inside the lungs, as already discussed here relating to the London 
episode.35
A second irony was that the lower cost of reducing emissions was 
caused, in part, by an unexpected source: the unrelated deregulation of 
railroad rates. Most of the polluting coal-fired power plants were located 
east of the Mississippi River. The cheapest low-sulfur coal, however, came 
from mines in the West; specifically, in the Powder River Basin in Montana 
and Wyoming. The expensive part of using Powder River Basin coal lay 
in the transportation from the mine to the power plant. Deregulation of 
railroads cut that cost by 50 percent.36 
A third irony was that sulfur dioxide emissions were reduced with 
other programs that, in effect, sidestepped the cap-and-trade program. 
These other programs undermined the demand for allowances so that, by 
2012, the price of an allowance had fallen to near zero. As Schmalensee 
and Stavins conclude, “When the government creates a market, it can also 
destroy it.”37 
Looking at the acid rain program now, it is hard to call it an unequiv-
ocal success. The stated goals for acid rain mitigation were not achieved. 
The mechanics of cap-and-trade were successfully demonstrated, and the 
fact that it opened the door broadly to other sources of cost cutting (lower 
rail rates) is a plus. In the end, however, the cap-and-trade mechanism was 
undermined by another parallel regulation. 
M E A S U R I N G  S U C C E S S 
More than fifty years have passed since Silent Spring inspired the modern 
environmental movement. It would be hard to identify a subsequent book 
with the same impact in this field. It is not hard, though, to find studies that 
go well beyond the case evidence Carson used to sound the alarm. Today, 
researchers use far more rigorous methods to assess the links between 

262	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
death or illness and air pollution. However, their published studies are, 
most of the time, addressed to a scholarly audience. Rigorous analysis is 
essential, but it has also put a greater distance between the person on the 
street and the case for air pollution controls. Moreover, there is still great 
uncertainty in estimating the health benefits of cutting emissions. 
Sorting out the causes of illness and death is a challenge. There is no 
official designation at the hospital or morgue that an illness or death was 
caused by air pollution. In a rigorous study of PM2.5 emissions published 
in the Journal of the American Medical Association, for example, the authors are 
cautious but clear about their results. They are careful to say their studies 
find an “association” rather than a clear cause and effect. However, they 
do say that their study is the “strongest evidence to date that long-term 
exposure” to PM2.5 is an “important risk factor for cardiopulmonary mor-
tality.” And the researchers emphasize their efforts to control for other fac-
tors affecting human health when they state, “The associations between 
fine particulate air pollution and lung cancer mortality, as well as car-
diopulmonary mortality, are observed even after controlling for cigarette 
smoking, BMI [body mass index], diet, occupational exposure, [and] 
other individual risk factors.” Another uncertainty lies in whether other 
public investments might have more direct and substantial health benefits 
than the investments made to cut emissions.38 
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  L E G A C Y
Rachel Carson served as the herald for the Age of Harm for the electricity 
business. Her work spoke to an age when Americans stopped thinking 
solely of the benefits of abundant, affordable electricity for all and, instead, 
focused much more on the harm electricity generation might be doing to 
the physical environment or, more compellingly, to human health. Carson 
created a template for environmental activism that included persuasive 
and moving writing, a barrage of case evidence, the use of hard science 
to explain how the harm might have occurred, and a burden of proof 
placed squarely on business. More importantly, that burden of proof often 
www.ebook3000.com

	
R A C H E L  C A R S O N ’ S  S I L E N T  S P R I N G 	
263
implied a standard of zero risk of harm to human health—a standard to 
be met at any price. Critics claim that the template also included a seri-
ous deficiency: Carson seldom acknowledged the possible benefits of the 
pesticides she railed against, and surely never considered that the benefits 
might outweigh the costs. 
Carson’s template had huge implications for the electricity business as 
time went on and attention turned to air pollution. The well-publicized 
episodes in Donora, London, and New York City gave clear and accessi-
ble physical evidence that air pollution can kill and sicken. Even though 
environmental regulators and activists have had to shift from physical 
evidence to less compelling statistical studies to prove harm, tightening 
of emission limits has become all but inevitable. As an example, between 
1980 and 2014 national concentrations for sulfur dioxide were cut 80 per-
cent. Still, regulations have been proposed, and are pending in the courts, 
that would cut those remaining emissions significantly for electric power. 
It is interesting, too, that the template still works decades after Carson first 
used it. Former vice president Al Gore’s award-winning 2006 documen-
tary, An Inconvenient Truth, followed in Carson’s tracks as it warned of the 
dangers of global climate change.39 
The debate has moved from whether environmental regulations 
should be tightened to how to tighten them. Command-and-control reg-
ulation was the core of the effort established in the 1970 Clean Air Act. 
Complex layers of regulation and constant litigation are the main legacy 
of the 1970 Act, but so is a significant reduction in air pollution emissions. 
The 1990 Clean Air Act offered an alternative to command-and-control 
mechanics called market-based regulations. Where the market kicks in is 
in determining how that government-created demand for reduction will 
be supplied; this makes sense since markets are good at minimizing the 
cost of supply, but much still depends on an administrative determination 
of demand. 
In a very short time environmental regulations became a pow-
erful factor driving the electricity business. As will be seen even more 
clearly in later chapters, by 2010, environmental regulation evolved from 
being a powerful factor to being the dominant factor in the electricity 

264	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
business—most notably in terms of dictating the types of power plants to 
build. Concern about air pollution has become so deeply embedded in 
American culture and law that there is no electricity policy per se; one 
might say that there is only environmental policy. No longer do regula-
tions ask “how do we minimize the cost of electricity.” Rather, they seek 
to minimize the harm electricity generation might cause. 
www.ebook3000.com

265
C H A P T E R  1 5
California’s Electricity 
Crisis (and Enron’s Greed)
We emphasize tha t the trading strategies—while bearing 
Enron’s name—were not limited to Enron but appear to 
have been widely engaged in by numerous parties.
—Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Staff  (March 2003)1
In 1994 California embarked on an effort to change the way the electricity busi-
ness had been regulated for almost ninety years. The old way had been 
originally defi ned by Samuel Insull when he formed Commonwealth 
Edison in Chicago in 1907. By 1996 California governor Pete Wilson 
claimed, “We’ve pulled the plug on another outdated monopoly and 
replaced it with the promise of a new era of competition.” It was not the 
only state to change the rules around this time, but, as is California’s wont, 
it was the fi rst and the most provocative. Sadly, soon after the structure 
California had built started to operate, it collapsed. This collapse and its 
repercussions became known as the California electricity crisis.2

266	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
As does any collapse of a major industry, this one harmed a great num-
ber of people, and the harm came in many forms. Prices increased dra-
matically in the short-term or “spot” electricity market that California had 
created. A constant threat of rotating blackouts of electric service loomed 
over consumers across the state for months at a time. Pacific Gas and 
Electric (PG&E), the largest electric utility in the state, went bankrupt. The 
state government had to take over electricity purchases because the elec-
tric utilities were not creditworthy. And California governor Gray Davis 
became the first governor in California history to be recalled and removed 
from office—the second ever in the United States to suffer this fate.3
Two assertions are often made about the causes behind this crisis: 
first, that Enron caused the California electricity crisis, and second, that 
Enron’s dirty deals in the deregulated electricity business in California 
caused Enron’s collapse. Regarding the first assertion, Enron did not 
cause the California electricity crisis. The crisis had three major causes: 
bad market design, bad market conditions, and bad market behavior. 
Enron was certainly part of the story with respect to bad market behavior, 
but Enron did not act alone. However, a smoking gun exists for Enron’s 
role in the form of a memo that lays out in considerable detail the schemes 
Enron used to manipulate California’s electricity markets.
As to the second assertion, Enron’s dubious deals in a deregulated 
electricity business were not the proximate cause of Enron’s collapse. The 
major causes were the far-too-aggressive accounting and financial moves 
that the Enron board and outside auditors failed to, or refused to, see.
Of course, Enron’s rise and fall is a big story no matter what its link 
to the electricity business. Enron’s bankruptcy in December 2001 was, at 
the time, the largest bankruptcy in US history, involving $65.5 billion of 
assets. That bankruptcy marked a fall from the highest heights: Enron was 
ranked seventh on the Fortune 500 list in 2001 with over $100 billion in 
revenue, up from $40 billion just a year earlier. Enron’s fall is a big story, 
too, because few, if any, saw it coming. In their widely read 2003 book on 
the fall of Enron, The Smartest Guys in the Room, Bethany McLean and Peter 
Elkind cleverly sum up Enron’s reputation in its heyday with the chapter 
title “Everybody Loves Enron.”4 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
267
C A U S E S  O F  T H E  D I S A S T E R 
Bad Market Design 
Since Samuel Insull’s day, the electricity business had been run as a col-
lection of local monopoly franchises. That is, the United States was essen-
tially carved up into areas in which a single electric utility was given the 
exclusive right to supply all the electricity. That utility would be “verti-
cally integrated”; that is, it would control all phases of the business in that 
franchise area: generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity. 
Having been granted that monopoly, the local utility took on the responsi-
bility to assure sufficient and reasonably priced electricity was available to 
all ratepayers. That utility took on what was characterized as an “obliga-
tion to serve” with cost-plus rates, reflecting actual costs plus a fair return 
on investment. 
With California Assembly Bill 1890 (AB1890), all that would change. 
In most of its features, the deregulation prescribed in the bill followed a 
standard template. The electricity business would be “unbundled” into 
its three parts: generation, transmission, and distribution. Generation 
was the segment that would become competitive; that is, individual 
customers—homes and businesses of all sorts—would be free to choose 
their generation supplier. This is termed retail choice or direct access. If a 
customer chose not to buy electricity from a particular supplier, the local 
utility would procure electricity on that customer’s behalf from a newly 
created competitive marketplace. In California, this competitive market 
would be managed by a new organization, called the California Power 
Exchange or simply the PX.5
To ensure there would be competitors other than the incumbent util-
ities, the law required that the two biggest utilities divest at least half of 
the fossil-fueled power plants that they owned; in the end, the utilities 
actually divested 100 percent of these plants for reasons ranging from pro-
moting competition to taking advantage of the expected favorable market 
for sale of these assets. Notably, the natural gas–fired power plants were 

268	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
divested to five independent generators. Another important feature was 
“open access” to the electric transmission system. Any generator would 
have access to the long-distance transmission lines owned by the regulated 
utilities to get its electricity to market. To ensure that the access was fair 
or “non-discriminatory,” a brand-new institution called the California 
Independent System Operator, or California ISO, would take operational 
control of the transmission system from the utilities.6 
California went well beyond the template, however, with one fea-
ture that became the primary cause of the crisis: the state-mandated 
deregulation was based on the presumption that market prices would 
always stay below $65. The law required the utilities to sell power at a 
fixed price of about $65 per MWh, but to buy power in the newly cre-
ated competitive market, the PX, the utilities had to pay whatever the 
market price might be. These prices varied freely, hour by hour, day by 
day. At the start, these hourly or “spot” prices were well below the limit, 
but no one could guarantee that would continue. When the spot price 
went above $65, the utilities would be selling at a loss, with obvious 
consequences.7 
Paul Joskow, an economics professor at MIT and a highly respected 
expert on the electricity business, concluded in his paper “California’s 
Energy Crisis” for the Oxford Review of Economic Policy that California 
was “an accident waiting to happen.” He was right. In both 1998 and 
1999 the weighted average price across all hours in the real-time and 
day-ahead markets was low, at about $30 per MWh. By May 2000 the 
average price ticked up to $50. By June the price was up to $132 per 
MWh, which was a fivefold increase from June 1999. Then, in December 
2000, the PX price increased to $386—almost thirteen times higher 
than the price in December 1999. In January 2001 the PX had to close 
its doors; it was simply not getting paid for the power transacted in its 
market, a circumstance that the bill had not anticipated. Transactions 
shifted to the California ISO’s market. In February, March, April, and 
May of 2001 the prices per MWh in the California ISO market were 
$363, $314, $370, and $275, respectively. Clearly, the utilities were losing 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
269
a lot of money selling at $65 per MWh and buying at these very high 
real-time prices.8
Bad Market Conditions
Joskow identifies five interrelated reasons for the price spike. (Another 
well-respected entity, the US Congressional Budget Office [CBO], also 
addressed the motives, methods, and results of California’s restructuring 
plan. CBO’s diagnosis of the California electricity crisis in its 2001 report 
overlaps significantly with Joskow’s.) The first was an increase in natural 
gas prices. These prices were up nationwide, but California’s were up five 
times higher than the rest of the country’s. Natural gas–fired power is 
usually the most expensive, so it is the last to be called upon and, therefore, 
sets the spot market price.9 
The second reason was the increase in the demand for electricity due 
to economic growth and hot weather. Joskow points out that it was not 
that the peak demand in one or a few hours increased but rather that 
the average demand across all hours of the month increased. In May, 
June, July, and August of 2000, the average demand was up 10.8 percent, 
12.7 percent, 2.2 percent, and 7.1 percent, respectively, as compared to 
average demand in those same months in the previous year.10 
The third reason for the price spikes was that imports of electricity 
into California from outside the state were lower in 2000 than in 1999. In 
May, June, July, and August of 2000, as compared to the same months in 
the previous year, net imports into California had decreased by 27 per-
cent, 41 percent, 67 percent, and 75 percent, respectively. This decline in 
imports reflected a decline in the availability of hydroelectric power across 
the West.11
The fourth reason cited by Joskow was a tightening of the requirements 
for an air pollution program in Southern California called RECLAIM. 
The goal was to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions from both electric power 
plants and oil refineries. It was one of the first attempts at a cap-and-trade 

270	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
program for pollution control. Under this regulatory scheme, a power 
plant must have a permit or an “allowance” to emit pollutants. In 2000 
the price for nitrogen oxide emission allowances increased almost ten-
fold. Because it was a cost incurred by natural gas–fired power plants, 
that increase, in turn, increased the spot market price for electricity in 
California.12 
Joskow’s fifth reason was the exercise of market power. He points 
out that this was not the classic antitrust situation in which suppliers join 
together in a scheme to fix a high market price. It was not the exercise of 
market power through collusion. Rather this was unilateral market power, 
with each supplier acting on its own. That is, a supplier raises its bid price, 
betting it can earn more overall by receiving a high price for the MWh 
it does sell, despite the loss of revenue from selling fewer MWh. Joskow 
finds “at least a third of the wholesale price can be attributed to market 
power during June, July, August, and September 2000, after accounting 
for changes in fundamental supply and demand conditions.”13 
Another reason, however, got the greatest attention from the press 
and politicians. It was the reduction of supply due to increased outages 
of existing power plants. These power plants were simply not available 
anymore to generate power. Joskow reports that between November 2000 
and May 2001, as much as 35 percent of the generating capacity within 
the California ISO area was out of service. The generators themselves 
attributed the increase to the fact that these plants had broken down 
because they had overworked in the summer months, or that they had 
to be off line so new nitrogen oxide emission controls could be installed. 
In sharp contrast, Joskow writes, “California government officials argued 
that the plants had been withdrawn from service at least partially for stra-
tegic reasons.”14
Soon the biggest problem facing California was the creditworthi-
ness of the major utilities: because of the fixed price of $65 per MWh, 
they could not pay their bills at the PX or to the California ISO. PG&E 
and another large electricity supplier, Southern California Edison (SCE), 
were technically insolvent. In April 2001 PG&E, the largest utility in 
California, actually went into bankruptcy. Ultimately, to address the lack 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
271
of a creditworthy buyer, California ordered a state agency, the California 
Department of Water Resources, to buy power under long-term contracts 
to serve consumers. Finally, the fever broke in late summer 2001, and 
market prices fell back to normal levels seen before the crisis.15 
Bad Market Behavior
In March 2003 the staff of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
(FERC) published the results of its investigation into the California crisis. 
The discussion so far had reflected a balanced attribution of the crisis to 
bad market design, bad market conditions, and bad market behavior. The 
FERC assessment marked a big change because it narrowed in on only bad 
market behavior and it named companies at fault, including Enron, the 
most infamous of all. The FERC found “significant market manipulation.”16 
Another important change with this FERC report was the greatly 
sharpened focus on natural gas prices in the diagnosis of the causes of the 
California electricity crisis. The FERC report starts by stating that elec-
tricity and natural gas prices are “inextricably linked” in California, and 
goes on to say that the natural gas spot price “rose to extraordinary levels, 
facilitating the unprecedented price increase in the electricity market.” 
Turning to the bad market behavior that caused natural gas prices to rise, 
FERC concludes that the price increases “appear to stem, at least in part, 
from efforts to manipulate price indices compiled by trade publications.” 
The link between these published price indices and actual natural gas 
prices is straightforward: it is common to see a contract to buy natural 
gas that sets the price equal to the index prices. The reasoning is that the 
index—an average or the midpoint of prices reported by buyers and sell-
ers to trade publications—would be an objective reflection of true market 
prices. According to FERC, the manipulation of natural gas price indices 
included reports of false data. The report unequivocally states that “false 
reporting became epidemic.” Only with honest information can a market 
offer buyers and sellers an honest chance to win or lose, which is the essen-
tial ethic of free markets.17 

272	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
FERC soon zoomed in on one company for its “high-volume, rapid-fire 
trading strategy”—a strategy that FERC characterized as “churning.” 
Churning is pushing up the market price by buying a large volume of 
natural gas with no intention of actually using that gas. A company can 
profit from churning in several ways. One is by increasing the electricity 
price in California by artificially increasing the natural gas price and then 
profiting on spot electricity sales. A second is buying the natural gas it 
actually needs to supply its customers at low prices in the morning, but 
then driving up the index price—the price it charges those customers—by 
artificially buying and selling natural gas in the afternoon. A third takes 
advantage of a feature in Enron’s trading platform that also allows a sup-
plier to artificially create a gap between the prices for buying and selling. 
FERC says the company “often bought and sold many times its needs in 
quick bursts, which significantly increased the price of gas” at one point 
in that market.18 
Importantly, FERC concluded that the company’s churning did not 
violate the rules under which it sold natural gas because, in essence, there 
were no rules to cover such tactics. Still, churning fails to comply with the 
implicit, underlying ethic of free markets.19 
Addressing the real-world consequences of churning, FERC notes 
that had churning by specific companies increased the price for all nat-
ural gas bought at the California-Arizona border, the cost increase for 
the eight-month period was $1.15 billion. The possible impact on the 
California electricity prices was not straightforward to calculate; making 
some simplifying assumptions, FERC estimates that the churning could 
have increased what was paid for spot electricity by $1.6 billion. If these 
are accurate estimates of the impact of churning, they constitute a signif-
icant harm.20 
The other way FERC found that market participants manipulated the 
natural gas price index is by knowingly submitting false information to the 
trade press. FERC mentions that five companies had already admitted to 
manipulating natural gas prices, including “fabricating trades, inflating 
the volume of trades, omitting trades, and adjusting the price of trades.” 
The report goes on to say that it was “particularly troubling” to find 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
273
that “everyone knew that everyone else was manipulating the indices by 
reporting false prices and volumes.”21 
FERC conceded that market conditions had also driven natural gas 
prices up but quickly added that manipulation “contributed significantly” 
to the price increase, too. In the interests of fairness, however, the report 
said that it “cannot calculate the portion” of the price increases “due to 
manipulation.” Besides, market conditions were pushing natural gas prices 
up; FERC pointed to the fact that the use of natural gas for electricity gen-
eration in California had increased by 44 percent in the May to October 
time frame in the year 2000, as compared to the same period in 1999. 
In the western United States as a whole, that demand had gone up by a 
comparable amount—about 46 percent. These are substantial increases 
in demand that increased natural gas prices, but also increased both the 
opportunity for bad behavior and the magnitude of the harm it caused.22 
E N R O N ’ S  G R E E D
A Brazen Trade
Today, Enron has become the poster child for bad market behavior. It 
showed its true colors early on in its effect on the new California electric-
ity markets. In an article titled “Brazen Trade Marks New Path of Enron 
Probe for Regulators,” the Wall Street Journal highlighted one proposed 
transaction by an Enron energy trader, Timothy Belden, on May 24, 
1999. On that day, a series of offers proposed that Enron sell 2,900 MW 
into the PX market. The trouble was that he proposed the 2,900 MW be 
sent across a part of the transmission system with the capability of trans-
mitting just 15 MW. His aim was, in fact, to cause transmission “conges-
tion” that Enron would then be paid to relieve, and also to drive up the 
price for power sold into the market by cutting off lower-cost bids.23 
The PX found the proposal to be “pretty interesting” and even “odd,” 
so much so that the PX marked it for further investigation. The Wall 
Street Journal reported that a state investigation showed that “California 

274	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
electricity customers were overcharged by $4.6 million to $7 million that 
day as a result of Mr. Belden’s scheme.” Still, Enron would be fined only 
$25,000 for the incident. Fast-forward to October 2002, when Belden 
faced far more serious consequences for this and other trading schemes. It 
was then that Belden signed a plea agreement with the federal government 
in which he pled guilty to one count of “conspiracy to commit wire fraud.” 
With that plea Belden faced up to five years in prison, a fine of $250,000, 
and a restitution payment of at least $2.1 million for his schemes in the 
California markets.24 
A Smoking Gun
On May 6, 2002, in the context of the FERC investigation of possible 
manipulation of electricity and natural gas prices in California, counsel 
for Enron handed three memos to FERC staff. Although the memos were 
marked clearly with the stamp “Attorney/Client privilege”—the legal 
equivalent of a No Trespassing sign and barbed wire—Enron counsel 
waived all privilege. Two of the memos are titled “Traders’ Strategies 
in the California Wholesale Power Markets/ISO Sanctions,” and they 
appear to be near duplicates. The memos are dated December 6, 2000, 
and December 8, 2000. The purpose of the memos appeared to be for 
Enron to get ready for the investigations into the bad behavior that con-
tributed to the California electricity crisis.25
The memos describe strategies actually used by Enron in California. 
One was called “Inc-ing” or “Fat Boy”; the California market rules have 
to be well understood to make Fat Boy workable. Enron (or any market 
participant) would have to come into the market with what is termed a 
balanced schedule, which means the electricity Enron intended to generate 
would need to be equal to the electricity it intended to provide to its cus-
tomers: generation must equal customer need or what insiders call load. 
What Enron did was to essentially lie about how much customer load it 
had to serve. The memo gives an example: Say that Enron, a day ahead, 
claimed it had generation and customer load of 1,000 MW, when it knew 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
275
the actual load would be only 500 MW. The next day Enron delivered the 
1,000 MW of generation, then found that its load was just 500 MW, leav-
ing 500 MW of excess generation. Enron would be paid for the excess gen-
eration in the real-time market, so it would artificially overstate its load 
only on days in which it believed the real-time price would be high. The 
payoff to overstating load a day ahead lay in the high-priced sales Enron 
would achieve in the real-time market the following day. How would 
Enron know that the real-time price the next day would be higher? Well, 
it would be likely if, while Enron was overstating its load, other market par-
ticipants were actually understating theirs. And, in fact, the big California 
utilities were doing just that.26 
This is intricate manipulation. Again, implementing Fat Boy took a 
deep understanding of the rules that were to be gamed as well as the 
insight that false information submitted by the utilities was necessary to 
make the strategy profitable. Consistent with the view that Enron was not 
alone, the memos suggest that Enron implemented the Fat Boy scheme 
on behalf of others. The memos name other companies that joined in, 
including government-owned power companies in both the United States 
and Canada.27
The Enron memos describe several other schemes. One outlines its 
“Export of California Power” scheme as follows: “As a result of the price 
caps in the PX and ISO (currently $250), Enron has been able to take 
advantage of arbitrage opportunities by buying energy at the PX for 
export outside California. For example, yesterday (December 5, 2000), 
prices at Mid-C [a major trading hub in the Northwest] peaked at $1200, 
while California was capped at $250. Thus, traders could buy power at 
$250 and sell it for $1200.”28 
There were further clever names and blunt admissions. “Death Star” 
was one scheme. Enron says that the net effect of Death Star was that 
“Enron gets paid for moving energy to relieve congestion without actually 
moving any energy or relieving any congestion.” “Get Shorty” came next. 
The upshot of this one was that Enron sold something that it did not have 
to sell—essentially a specific power plant sitting idle, ready to quickly pro-
vide more power if customer needs soared. Enron itself recognized that 

276	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
this was explicitly against the rules. “Ricochet” was another scheme out-
lined in the memos. With this strategy, “Enron buys energy from the PX 
in the Day Of market, and schedules it for export. The energy is sent out 
of California to another party, which charges a small fee per MW, and 
then Enron buys it back to sell the energy to the ISO real-time market” at 
a higher price.29 
Pointing to the smoking gun memos, FERC investigators noted that 
Enron exhibited “great eagerness to experiment,” to “game the system,” 
or to “simply provide false information.” FERC added, “We emphasize 
that the trading strategies—while bearing Enron’s name—were not lim-
ited to Enron but appear to have been widely engaged in by numerous 
parties. Indeed, it would appear to Staff that the majority of public utility 
entities and some nonpublic utilities engaged in at least some of the trad-
ing strategies at some time during the 2-year review period.” The staff 
goes on to list thirty-seven entities that “should be required to show cause 
why their behaviors did not constitute gaming.”30
A C C O U N T I N G  F O R  S C A R C I T Y
Beyond the increase in demand there was, in fact, an actual physical scar-
city of natural gas in California at the time. In August of 2000 a major 
natural gas pipeline into Southern California ruptured. It was the El 
Paso Natural Gas Company line, which was one of three major interstate 
pipelines; it alone accounted for 65 percent of the transport capacity into 
Southern California. El Paso lost about one-third of its capacity for about 
two weeks in August, and then, under orders from the US Department of 
Transportation, it had to further reduce its capacity by about 8 percent for 
a prolonged period into the winter of 2000/2001.31 
What happens to prices for any commodity—natural gas, electric-
ity, copper, corn, and so on—when there is a physical shortage of either 
the commodity or the means to transport it? Let’s assume that in the 
calm of the market equilibrium, the quantity of supply and demand are 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
277
equal at one hundred units. Let us assume further that a shortage cuts 
that supply abruptly to sixty units. The central question is, who gets the 
sixty units? 
There are two ways to allocate the supply. For convenience, we can 
call one way the “policymaker’s way” and the other the “economist’s way.” 
With the policymaker’s way, a government agency steps in to determine 
which of the original customers for the one hundred units actually gets a 
share of what they want; that is, some share of the sixty units that can be 
produced and delivered with the shortage. The government agency pre-
sumes the sixty units will be sold at the old market price. The economist’s 
way is to let the market price do the allocating. This sounds coldhearted, 
but the way it works is that the price keeps rising until a critical mass of 
people say, “Enough, it is not worth it to me at that high of a price.” It is 
necessary that customers who would have bought forty units drop out in 
this way. The crucial distinction is that the price in a market suffering a 
shortage will reflect the willingness of customer to pay, not the cost of supply. In 
a shortage, if the economist’s approach is followed, the price needed to 
allocate the shortfall is well above the old market price. 
Both the policymaker’s and the economist’s ways have merit. The pol-
icymaker’s approach emphasizes fairness. The premise is that everyone is 
in this crisis together and should pay the same price, which should not nec-
essarily increase because of the crisis. However, the economist’s approach 
has advantages, too. If prices rise to clear the market, the people who get 
the sixty units are, in theory, the ones who value them most; that is, the 
ones willing to pay the most. Moreover, the economist’s approach has in 
it the seeds of a solution to the crisis. Not only does the higher price drive 
customers to reduce their demand but it also drives suppliers to find ways 
to increase their supply. Reducing demand or increasing supply are ulti-
mately the only ways to actually resolve a shortage. 
A deliberate, balanced weighing of the economist’s approach and the 
policymaker’s approach can readily give way in a crisis to a full-throated 
politicization. The tale of how that happened in California is briefly out-
lined in this chapter, but a thorough version can be found in Arthur J. 

278	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
O’Donnell’s 2003 book, Soul of the Grid: A Cultural Biography of the California 
Independent System Operator.
G O V E R N O R  D A V I S  I S  R E C A L L E D
In 2001, with California well into its electricity crisis, an interesting 
exchange appeared on the op-ed page of the Sacramento Bee, between two 
men deeply involved in the original California deregulation legislation 
and its implementation. The first was former governor Pete Wilson, who 
had signed AB1890. The other was David Freeman, the man asked to 
jump-start the implementation of AB1890 and the former general man-
ager of the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power. 
Governor Wilson’s opinion was printed first, on June 3. He wrote, 
“State Government cannot ignore the law of supply and demand,” and 
the “plain and simple reason” that California would “suffer hundreds of 
hours of blackouts” in the coming summer was that the state “will not have 
a sufficient supply of electrical power to meet demand.” He faulted his suc-
cessor, Governor Davis, for not acting decisively once the crisis hit. Wilson 
argued that Davis should have used his emergency powers to suspend the 
rate cap to allow utilities to secure long-term contracts, and speed the per-
mitting process for new power plants. Had enough new power plants been 
built, according to Wilson, the state would have avoided the blackouts as 
well as the bankruptcy of Pacific Gas and Electric.32 
A week later, David Freeman responded. He started by saying it was 
“embarrassing” for Governor Wilson to “absolve himself of blame” for 
the crisis with “his current who-me? campaign.” He said that Governor 
Wilson could not “wash his hands” of the deregulation plan that had 
become California’s “Frankenstein.” The fatal flaws of the Wilson effort, 
wrote Freeman, included forcing the utilities to divest their fossil-fuel 
plants, which were bought by “out-of-state energy companies—several in 
Texas” who demanded “excessive prices.” Another fatal flaw in the Wilson 
effort was to give control to the “toothless” FERC, which failed to impose 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
279
needed price caps. He applauded Governor Davis’ energy conservation 
efforts, which achieved an “11 percent reduction in electricity use in May,” 
and for finalizing “nearly 50 long-term power supply contracts.” Freeman 
argued that it was Governor Davis who successfully got power plants to 
be proposed and to start construction under “fast-track” process rules. 
Governor Davis also had created a “California public power authority” 
that could build power plants if the private sector did not.33 
Freeman closed by calling Governor Wilson a “free-market ideo-
logue” who pushed a deregulation plan that he “acknowledged was 
screwed up.” Then he asked Governor Wilson to help Governor Davis 
by calling on President George W. Bush “to support the governor’s effort 
to bring sanity to the wholesale power market by cracking down on the 
gouging out-of-state generators.”34 
These op-eds offer a succinct example of the conflicting views held 
by those on the ground during the crisis. They reveal the philosophical 
divide between those who attribute the crisis to bad market design and 
bad market conditions (Wilson) and those who see only bad market behav-
ior (Freeman). So, too, they reflect the divide between the economist’s 
approach to resolving a shortage (Wilson’s call for an end to the rate caps) 
and the policymaker’s approach (Freeman’s focus on conservation). 
In October 2003, just over two years after this op-ed exchange, 
Governor Davis lost a recall election and was replaced as governor by 
Arnold Schwarzenegger. It was the first-ever recall election of a governor 
in California; although several other governors had been threatened with 
a recall, proponents had not previously acquired the requisite number of 
signatures on the petition. At the time it was only the second gubernato-
rial recall in United States history. 
E N R O N ’ S  D I R T Y  D E A L S
There is widespread perception that the financial collapse of Enron was 
caused by Enron’s dirty deals during the California electricity crisis. This 

280	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
is inaccurate for three reasons. First, Enron’s bankruptcy was triggered 
by the significant restatement—meaning, revision and publication—of 
its financial accounts. Those restatements, in turn, were triggered by the 
unraveling of long-term financial deals. The bankruptcy, therefore, had 
little if anything to do with Enron’s attempts to manipulate electricity 
markets in California or elsewhere. Second, the faulty accounting treat-
ments of these long-term deals could have been and were readily applied 
to any business—there was nothing peculiar to the electricity business. 
Third, in the trial of Enron’s two top executives, the argument made by 
the winning prosecutors was that the collapse of Enron was “not about 
accounting, it is about lies and choices.” That is, it was about those execu-
tives covering up the true financial condition of the firm.35 
The restatement of Enron’s accounts deserves further elaboration 
here, as it had far-reaching effects on the rest of the American economy. 
On October 16, 2001, Enron announced large reductions in Enron’s 
financial stature related to transactions between Enron and an investment 
vehicle called LJM2, which had been created by Andrew Fastow, Enron’s 
chief financial officer. The acronym stood for Lea Jeffrey Michael, the 
names of Fastow’s wife and children, and the number symbolized that 
this was the second in the series of entities created by Fastow for Enron. 
On October 22 storm clouds began to gather when the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission started to ask questions about LJM2. Two days 
later Enron announced that Fastow would take a leave of absence and be 
replaced. The board of directors then announced its own investigation 
of the “related-party transactions” like JLM2, to be led by William C. 
Powers Jr., the dean of the University of Texas School of Law.36 
The Powers Report used plain language, but it did not mince words 
when presenting its findings. It started by naming Enron employees who 
enriched themselves at the expense of the company. The report then went 
after the accounting schemes, which “were used by Enron Management 
to enter into transactions that it could not, or would not, do with unrelated 
commercial entities.” Had there been unrelated commercial entities on 
the two sides of these transactions, that would have been evidence that 
the transaction did something real to benefit both partners. With Enron 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
281
on both sides, the transactions were used only to artificially make Enron 
financial statements appear healthy.37 
As an example of faulty accounting, the Powers Report pointed to 
the “Chewco” transaction, Fastow’s use of a special-purpose entity (SPE) run 
by Enron personnel to keep an investment off its balance sheet. SPEs are 
common in the electricity business as well as in other businesses. When 
deployed appropriately they are used to allocate and isolate risk, but the 
Powers Report found they were not used to that end. Moreover, the Powers 
Report stated that to legally use an SPE, the transaction must meet two 
straightforward standards. The first is that “an owner independent of the 
company [independent of Enron] must make a substantive equity invest-
ment of at least 3% of the SPE’s assets, and that 3% must remain at risk 
throughout the transaction.” The second is that “the independent owner 
must exercise control of the SPE.” The Powers Report makes it clear that 
Enron’s SPEs did not meet these two basic requirements.38
The US Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, of the 
Committee on Governmental Affairs, issued its own report on July 8, 
2002. The subcommittee framed it as an expansion of the Powers Report, 
and the title of the report says a lot about the focus of the Senate’s investiga-
tion: it is called “The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse.” 
The Senate panel started by documenting the extensive experience and 
credentials of the members of the board. Then the panel concluded, in 
no uncertain terms, that the Enron board failed to do its job. Specifically, 
the Senate report stated the board allowed “Enron to engage in high 
risk accounting, inappropriate conflict of interest transactions, extensive 
undisclosed off-the-books activities, and excessive executive compensa-
tion.” They noted that Enron’s accounting schemes were so aggressive 
that even the company’s independent auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, 
debated whether keeping Enron as a client was prudent.39 
The Senate makes it clear that the collapse was not about missing 
the 3 percent equity requirement for an SPE. It was about transactions 
that fundamentally had no true value, certainly not in terms of shield-
ing Enron shareholders and employees from risk. And it showed that the 
standard protections against financial manipulation did not, in practice, 

282	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
protect anyone. Specifically, having an independent board and an inde-
pendent auditor did not protect against Enron’s financial collapse.40 
A R T H U R  A N D E R S E N ’ S  C O L L A P S E
Enron’s auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, was one of the largest professional 
service companies in the world with eighty-five thousand employees and 
$9.3 billion in revenue. Its ninety-year run ended when it was convicted of 
obstruction of justice on June 2002; its downfall was directly related to its 
shredding documents relevant to the investigation of Enron’s bankruptcy 
and collapse. Describing the extent of the shredding, the Chicago Tribune 
reported that Andersen’s “housecleaning would go on virtually around 
the clock.”41
The Chicago Tribune further noted that Enron came at the end of a 
“decade of sliding standards and audit debacles” at Andersen. The arti-
cle points to the conflict of interest between Andersen auditing the books 
and, at the same time, doing other consulting work for the client, as was 
the norm with Andersen and Enron. In hindsight, both the lucrative con-
sulting fees and the closeness of Andersen and Enron employees contrib-
uted to lax accounting standards when Andersen was asked to approve 
special-purpose entities. Even worse, it seemed that Enron had the power 
to push out those at Andersen who did not support the accounting schemes 
Enron wanted to use.42
Andersen argued all along that their conviction was the result of “over-
zealous prosecutors and a dishonest client.” And, indeed, in June 2005, 
the New York Times reported that the US Supreme Court, in “a pointed 
and unanimous opinion . . . overturned Arthur Andersen’s conviction for 
shredding Enron accounting documents as that company was collapsing 
in one of the nation’s biggest corporate scandals.” The Times went on to 
report that the reason for the reversal was that “the court held that the 
trial judge’s instructions to the jury failed to require the necessary proof 
that Andersen knew its actions were wrong.”43
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
283
T H E  T R I A L :  “ A B O U T  L I E S  A N D  C H O I C E S ”
In his opening statement in the trial of Enron’s top two executives, the fed-
eral prosecutor, John Hueston, said, “This is a simple case. It is not about 
accounting, it is about lies and choices.” That set the tone. The prosecutor’s 
case would not be a painful lesson in accounting and finance; the jurors 
would not be asked to go through a primer on SPEs and the like. Rather it 
would be about bad guys doing bad things to unwitting investors.44 
Hueston told the jury he would take them “inside the doors of what 
was once the seventh largest corporation in this country, Enron.” And 
once inside those doors the jury would find that the two people at the 
very top, Ken Lay and Jeff Skilling, lied repeatedly. Hueston said, “In the 
year before Enron declared bankruptcy, two men at the helm of the com-
pany told lie after lie about the true financial condition of Enron, lies that 
propped up the value of their own stock holdings and lies that deprived the 
common investors of information that they needed to make fully informed 
decisions about their own Enron stock.”45 
Hueston briefly mentioned the LJM deals to the jury, but mainly 
to make the point that these were not deals with people independent of 
Enron. Hueston cleverly came up with a simple image for the asset sales 
in special-purpose entities. He likened one kind of transaction to the pur-
chase of a truck for $25,000 that gets put on the books. He went on to 
explain, “The truck gets driven around. It gets into an accident, blows 
out a couple of tires and starts to rust . . . It’s now worth about $5,000.” 
Hueston explained that central to the “magic” was the fact that Fastow, 
who ran the deals, never wanted to see the true value of the assets. He was 
not a true independent buyer who would put the assets through a legiti-
mate test to verify what their value really was.46
Hueston, asking for guilty verdicts on all counts against Lay and 
Skilling, closed with the same point he made at the beginning: “Ladies 
and gentlemen, lies and choices. It’s a simple case.”47
Separate counsel represented Lay and Skilling, with Mike Ramsey 
speaking for Ken Lay. He had a clear explanation for Enron’s bankruptcy. 

284	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
In its wholesale division, Enron did transactions worth “literally millions 
of dollars a day” and did so “with the trust of a phone call.” “When that 
trust was eroded,” Ramsey said, “that machine froze up.” With the uncer-
tainty surrounding Enron in the fall of 2001, Enron’s trading partners said, 
“We’re not going to trade with you on a phone call anymore. You’re going 
to have to post full collateral.” No company in America, opined Ramsey, 
“could have withstood that call for cash.” Enron was no exception.48
In defending Ken Lay against charges of criminal behavior, Ramsey 
said it was all about Fastow and his inner circle; only the Fastow gang 
had known about the accounting gimmicks. Ramsey asserted, “He hid 
it. He hid it from the board of directors. He hid it from Ken. He hid it 
from Jeff. He hid it from everybody . . . He was a crook. He was a liar. 
He was deceitful.” Even though Fastow really only stole the equivalent of 
“coffee money,” Ramsey argued, it was enough to cause trading partners 
to “stampede.”49 
Responding to the prosecutor’s central point that Lay and Skilling 
deceived everyone because of their “choices and lies,” Ramsey pointed 
out that a lot of other people were involved and “70 percent of them are 
very, very sophisticated people.” He added that the auditor, Andersen, 
“actually existed and officed in the Enron building.”50 
In the wake of its financial collapse, Enron’s two highest-ranking 
corporate officers were convicted on multiple criminal counts. Ken Lay, 
Enron’s founder, was found guilty on six counts of fraud and conspir-
acy and four counts of bank fraud. While awaiting sentencing, Lay, age 
sixty-four, died of coronary artery disease just about forty days after his 
conviction. Jeff Skilling, who resigned as Enron’s chief executive officer 
just before Enron plunged into bankruptcy, was convicted on eighteen 
counts of fraud and conspiracy and on one count of insider trading; he was 
acquitted on nine other counts of insider trading. Skilling was sentenced 
to twenty-four years; his sentence was later reduced by ten years. 
The Houston Chronicle reported that thirty-two people and one 
company had federal charges brought against them. Skilling received 
the longest sentence by far. Andrew Fastow, the chief financial officer 
said to have created many of the financial schemes that led to Enron’s 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
285
bankruptcy, ultimately received a six-year sentence in a plea deal that 
covered both him and his wife and required him to testify against Lay 
and Skilling.51
T H E  L E G A C Y  O F  T H E  C R I S I S  
A N D  T H E  C O L L A P S E
The primary legacy of the California crisis and the collapse of Enron is 
a prejudice against efforts to create a competitive electricity business—in 
particular, efforts to deregulate at least the generation sector of that busi-
ness. That prejudice persists today. It is unfairly placed, since it seems 
clear that bad behavior by Enron and others was not the only cause of 
the California crisis. The wide-angle lens of history shows that there were 
three major causes; bad market design and bad market conditions should 
be taken into account, too.
Yes, bad market behavior played a role. And that should remind the 
country of the famous line attributed to Herbert Hoover: “The trouble 
with capitalism is capitalists; they’re too damn greedy.” Hoover’s quote, 
sadly, is still an apt way to characterize the behavior of some in the crisis. 
What kind of businessperson deliberately “churns” sales and purchases 
and knowingly provides false information to manipulate price indices 
that, in turn, are used widely as the prices charged in natural gas and 
electricity supply contracts? If businesses of any sort want consumers to 
trust markets—to trust capitalism—the businesses themselves must be 
trustworthy.52 
A consequence of this bad behavior is that, today, both federal and 
state regulators focus on tighter market rules and more aggressive enforce-
ment to catch the bad guys. While enforcement has merit, this focus diverts 
attention from ensuring good market conditions prevail—essentially, 
making sure enough of the right kind of power plants are in place and 
able to operate. To this end, regulators must balance the interests of power 
plant development against the possible impediments of more and more 
detailed market rules. 

286	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Another lesson of the California crisis is that presumptions can do 
great harm. The most serious mistake in market design—forcing the utili-
ties to sell to their customers at a fixed price and to buy from their suppliers 
at a volatile price—was based on the presumption that the electricity price 
in the spot market would always be below the price cap of sixty-five dol-
lars. Clearly, someone should have tested the system under the presump-
tion that the opposite might happen—just as it did in reality. 
The taint of the crisis, however, did not derail deregulation. 
Restructuring of the electricity business to allow for competition con-
tinued apace in large parts of the United States. Indeed—perhaps 
amazingly—California is one of those parts. Why didn’t the California 
electricity crisis derail deregulation elsewhere? One reason may be that 
the evidence identified the crisis as inherent to a particular time and place. 
The most persuasive evidence is that similar crises did not occur else-
where, even though markets were restructured elsewhere. 
Also important is the fact that Enron’s financial collapse was not solely 
because of its participation in deregulated markets in California or else-
where. Enron’s collapse was driven by accounting gimmicks that could 
have been and were readily used on commodity businesses other than 
electricity. The open space of a partially deregulated electricity business 
was not more fertile ground for abuse than any other commodity market. 
Another lesson of Enron’s collapse is that the protections put in place 
did not protect against the far-reaching fallout of the crisis. Auditing by 
one of the world’s largest accounting firms—Arthur Andersen—did not 
protect the public from the consequences of Enron’s far-too-aggressive 
accounting and financial moves. An experienced board of directors gave 
no protection, either. 
More important, though, is the fact that the typical protections did 
not protect the bad guys. The defense attorney in the Enron case said that 
nothing Enron did should be judged to be illegal because everything it did 
was checked by very smart outside lawyers, accountants, and investors. 
The jury must have tossed out that view from the start. The verdicts sent a 
clear warning to those who rely on procedural protections rather than on 
creating value for customers. Looking back to Samuel Insull’s acquittals 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C A L I F O R N I A ’ S  E L E C T R I C I T Y  C R I S I S 	
287
only makes this warning even clearer. The acquittals in Insull’s trials were 
based on a much simpler accounting of good offsetting bad. Insull’s good 
was that he made electricity available and affordable to all. The jury must 
have valued this highly enough to offset the bad of the murky accounting 
he used for his holding companies. It is the absence of this kind of public 
good that, in the end, led to many of the Enron convictions.

288
C H A P T E R  1 6
Competition’s Steady Rise
The literature of public regulation is so vast that it must 
touch on everything, but it touches seldom and lightly on 
the most basic question one can ask about regulation: Does 
it make a diff erence in the behavior of an industry?
— George Stigler and Claire Friedland (1962)1
The 2003 electric blackout followed hard on the heels of the California crisis and 
Enron’s collapse. It shut off  power to fi fty million people, bringing the num-
ber of deregulation-related disasters to three. Why was  deregulation—
better termed competitive reform—not killed off  by these three signifi cant, 
negative events? Did people conclude that what happened in California 
and to Enron was the exception, not the rule? Did they discern that the 
2003 blackout was due to long-standing problems with trees, tools, and 
training, not competitive reform? Or was there a compelling logic to 
competitive reform that gave it political, economic, technological, or cul-
tural momentum? What’s clear is that, for whatever reason, competitive 
reform did have momentum. It marched forward nationwide for decades 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
289
before the California crisis, Enron’s collapse, and the blackout and, 
although stalled in some ways, the march continues today. This chapter 
tells the story of the steady rise of competition in America’s electricity 
business.2
T H E  E N D  O F  E C O N O M I E S  O F  S C A L E
A belief in and regulation of economies of scale produced the golden age 
of regulated, monopoly electric utilities. Fittingly, the end of economies of 
scale ushered in an era marking the end of those monopolies.
The FERC writes that the story began with the Federal Power Act 
of 1935, which was “enacted in an age of mostly self-sufficient, vertically 
integrated electric utilities.” Into the 1960s, the FERC reports that price 
increases were not necessary because of economies of scale, technological 
change, and tame input prices. Given this, there was “no pressure” to 
restructure the electricity business to allow competition.3
Major change came in the late 1960s and 1970s when electricity con-
sumers faced rising electricity bills in an era of inflation and high interest 
rates. FERC noted that nuclear power cost overruns also pushed rates up, as 
did the fact that utilities overestimated demand, leaving excess capacity to be 
paid for and thus driving rates up even more. FERC reported that “between 
1970 and 1985, average residential electricity prices more than tripled in 
nominal terms, and increased by 25% after adjusting for general inflation.” 
For industrial customers it was even worse: a quadrupling in nominal terms 
and an 86 percent increase in inflation-adjusted or “real” terms.4 
By FERC’s reckoning the 1970s marked the end of economies of scale. 
In the 1960s bigger meant cheaper. Therefore, big, vertically integrated 
utilities were able to build big and gain a competitive price advantage over 
smaller entities. In the following decade bigger utilities hit the ceiling of 
economies of scale, and bigger began to mean higher operating costs and 
longer downtime. As FERC put it, “Bigger was no longer better.”5

290	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
C R E A T I N G  C O M P E T I T O R S
The Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) was the first 
major milestone for competitive reform. Interestingly, reform was not its 
intent. PURPA came out of the upheaval caused by the Arab oil embargo 
in the early 1970s. The embargo put Americans into long gasoline lines 
because of shortages, and it threw Americans out of work because of the 
recession it caused. Suddenly, energy policy became important, and its 
central motive was to cut US dependence on foreign oil and thereby make 
the United States less vulnerable to another embargo. Thus, geopoli-
tics drove energy policy. PURPA was a small part of President Carter’s 
National Energy Act and, as such, a small part of the effort to reduce 
dependence on foreign oil. It was meant to motivate the use of designated 
technologies to produce electricity that either used oil and natural gas 
more efficiently or those that did not use oil at all—solar, wind, and waste 
power, for example.6 
Power plants using any of the designated technologies were called 
qualifying facilities (QFs). They included cogenerators: often big industrial 
plants that cogenerated in the sense that they could use the same fuel to 
make both steam needed for industrial processes as well as electricity used 
at the industrial site or sold back to a local utility. The incentive for QF 
investment was that the local utility was required to buy that electricity 
at “avoided cost”—the cost the utility would incur had it produced the 
electricity itself.
The controversy over setting these avoided-cost prices can be readily 
imagined: the local utility would want that number to be low, while the 
QFs would want it to be high, and any price estimate would be based on a 
lot of assumptions that could be challenged. In this context, it is important 
to discern another motive for PURPA: the search for an alternative to util-
ity monopolies building nuclear power plants with the attendant cost over-
runs and poor performance. Sometimes that motive would be revealed in 
the form of high avoided costs based on the high cost of nuclear power. 
More important was the fact that many states would willingly endorse 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
291
long-term contracts for power sales from QFs based on forecasted avoided 
costs that would be locked in for ten or twenty years. Those power pur-
chase contracts became an essential element for financing a QF. They 
literally could be “taken to the bank.” 
PURPA’s success in attracting new entrants made it the first major 
step to opening the electricity business to competition, but this opening 
was inadvertent. Soon after developing QFs became popular in the early 
1980s, states would find that far more QF power capacity was being offered 
than was needed, sometimes at a ratio of ten to one. So, rather than offer-
ing to pay full avoided cost, the states asked that the QFs compete on price 
by having them bid a discount off avoided costs. This is what brought forth 
the most basic element of any competitive market: competition on price.
PURPA also ushered in a complete change in the preferred technol-
ogy. Under traditional cost-plus-profit regulation, the preferred technolo-
gies were those with the highest capital costs because the larger the capital 
cost, the higher the basis on which profit would be calculated. Coal and 
nuclear power plants were built with this model in mind. With PURPA, 
all of that changed. The preferred technology now became one with a 
relatively low capital cost: a natural gas–fired combined-cycle power 
plant. With combined-cycle technology, electricity can be produced twice 
with the same fuel, which fit well with PURPA’s goal of promoting more 
fuel-efficient technology. In the first phase (or cycle), electricity is produced 
by burning natural gas in a combustion turbine—akin to a jet engine. 
That combustion turbine is hooked into an electric generator, thus creat-
ing the first round of electricity. The second phase, or second cycle, would 
take the exhaust heat from the turbine, which came out at a very high 
temperature, and use it to make steam from water in what is called a waste 
heat boiler. Then that steam would be sent through a steam turbine, also 
connected to an electric generator, to make electricity a second time. 
Natural gas–fired combined-cycle technology mitigated many of 
the problems of the times: the 1973–74 Arab oil embargo, nuclear power 
cost overruns and poor performance, and an increasing concern with air 
pollution. Combined-cycle technology used natural gas (or oil) far more 

292	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
efficiently than other technologies, making it appealing to policymakers 
eager to do damage control following the Arab oil embargo. To address the 
concerns about the soaring costs of nuclear power, combined-cycle proj-
ect developers were quite willing to offer a fixed price or a fixed-formula 
price. By offering a fixed price, these new entrants took on the risk of 
capital cost overruns; that is, the price simply stayed fixed and would go 
no higher if the developer suffered higher costs. A fixed price also meant 
the supplier took on the risk of poor performance and only got paid if the 
combined-cycle plant reliably delivered electricity. 
To be fair about the risk of capital cost overruns, it was a lot easier 
for a combined-cycle plant than a nuclear power plant to take respon-
sibility for this risk. Just one-third of the total cost of electricity from a 
combined-cycle plant can be traced to capital cost while that share for a 
nuclear power plant is much greater. The other two-thirds were attributed 
to the cost of the natural gas used in the facility. While the capital cost 
portion of the price might be fixed, the combined-cycle facility typically 
offered a price to cover fuel costs that would go up and down with the mar-
ket price of natural gas. That “indexed” or “floating” price to cover fuel 
costs was seen as a good thing because it reflected the up-to-the-minute 
market price of natural gas; however, it also meant that a rapid rise in 
natural gas market prices would mean a rapid rise in electricity prices—as 
evidenced by the price spikes during the California crisis.
From an environmental perspective, combined-cycle facilities have 
far fewer air pollution emissions than coal-fired power plants. They 
emit virtually no sulfur dioxide nor the particulates emitted with coal. 
And, while combined-cycle plants do emit nitrogen oxides, equip-
ment manufacturers—including Westinghouse, General Electric, and 
Siemens—were able to make steady reductions in such emissions during 
the late 1980s and into the 1990s.
PURPA was crucial to starting competitive reform because it created 
competitors—the QFs. There can be no competition without competitors. 
Moreover, those competitors offered solutions to the energy supply and 
environmental concerns of the time. And these new competitors became 
an interest group that could push for even more competitive reforms.7 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
293
O P E N I N G  A C C E S S
The next frontier for these newly created competitors was to secure the 
transmission service needed to deliver the electricity they generated. Their 
competitors—the vertically integrated utilities—controlled the transmis-
sion system, both in terms of how it was operated (for example, who got to 
use it) and whether it would be expanded to accommodate new generators. 
Vertically integrated utilities were the norm; they could be found across 
the country—Southern California Edison, Middle South Utilities, New 
England Power, and so on. The primary complaint against them was that 
vertically integrated utilities used their control of the transmission system 
to favor their own electric generation when competing against generation 
by the new competitors. To put that complaint in perspective, consider the 
case of a municipal utility that agreed to buy electricity under a long-term 
contract with a new competitor. If the local utility wanted to serve that 
municipality instead, it effectively could deny transmission service to the 
new competitor by claiming that the transmission system was fully booked 
and that the cost to expand the system made the competitor’s power too 
expensive. There was no law or regulation at the time that required the 
utility to give competitors equal access to transmission service.
It was clear from the start that, to enable the newly created competi-
tors to compete, some form of open-access transmission policy would have 
to be put in place. In the late 1980s, FERC began a campaign to cre-
ate open access on a case-by-case basis. If, for example, two vertically 
integrated utilities came to the FERC seeking approval for a merger—an 
approval required under the Federal Power Act—FERC would condi-
tion its approval of the merger with a requirement that the utilities give 
at least a rudimentary form of transmission open access to all parties, 
including new competitors. FERC also used utility requests for so-called 
market-based rates to promote open access. If FERC granted a request 
for market-based rates, a utility would be allowed to charge a price other 
than the cost-based price under traditional regulation—but it had to offer 
open access first.

294	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
FERC’s case-by-case push for open-access transmission helped build 
the momentum behind competitive reform. Congress contributed to that 
momentum during the same time frame with the Energy Policy Act of 
1992 (EPAct 1992). This widened the range of technologies that new 
entrants could use to compete. Instead of being limited to the QF tech-
nologies under PURPA, a new category of competitors, called exempt 
wholesale generators (EWGs) was created and they could build a full 
array of stand-alone power plants. Now, for example, a new entrant could 
build a stand-alone natural gas–fired combined-cycle power plant and 
not be limited to the small size or unique design required for a cogenera-
tion plant.8 
By 1996 FERC was ready to codify the open-access transmission 
requirements that it had been establishing case by case. It formalized that 
with its Order 888. The choice of the numerical designation 888 showed, 
in an insider’s way, that this order was a big deal; FERC’s address for 
its brand-new headquarters building in Washington, DC, was 888 First 
Street, N.E. Before FERC announced its draft order in 1995, it reported 
that “38 public utilities had filed wholesale open access transmission tar-
iffs.” Presumably, this was the progress made under its case-by-case cam-
paign. In the first year after the draft of Order 888 had been announced, 
the tally had grown substantially: FERC reported, “106 of the approxi-
mately 166 public utilities that own, control, or operate transmission facil-
ities used in interstate commerce have filed some form of wholesale open 
access tariff.” This evidence showed that even the promise of a commis-
sion order was faster than a case-by-case approach.9
The purpose of Order 888 was to ensure that public utilities “cannot 
use monopoly power over transmission to unduly discriminate against 
others.”10 Preventing undue discrimination was, and is, the “legal and 
policy cornerstone” of Order 888. To do that, Order 888 required all 
public utilities that owned or controlled transmission lines to file an 
open-access transmission tariff. And, importantly, those public utilities 
would have to take transmission service under the same tariff and abide 
by the same rules.11 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
295
As always, states’ rights were a central concern. FERC noted that the 
Order “clarifie[d] Federal/state jurisdiction over transmission in interstate 
commerce,” and claimed to provide “deference to certain state recom-
mendations.” Later in the order, FERC added that while “jurisdictional 
boundaries may shift,” the order would not “change fundamental state 
regulatory authorities.” Specifically, states would continue “to regulate 
the vast majority of generation asset costs” as well as “the siting of gener-
ation and transmission facilities.”12
Four years later, FERC was ready to take the next step to promote 
competitive reform in the electricity business by taking open access to the 
next level. This was achieved with Order 2000. FERC took this major 
next step because the open-access transmission tariffs from individual 
utilities were not enough to end discrimination in granting transmission 
service. For example, FERC pointed to the inconsistencies in determining 
how much transmission capability was available. The remedy in Order 
2000 was to take operational control of the transmission system from indi-
vidual utilities and place it in the hands of a new, independent entity: a 
regional transmission organization (RTO). 13 
RTOs are a remarkable step forward in competitive reform. They 
break down the walls separating the old monopolies and create something 
akin to a large free-trade zone for electricity. Everyone plays by the same 
rules in that free-trade zone and everyone has a say in what those rules 
should be. In addition to transparent rules for gaining transmission access, 
RTOs also create a transparent market for real-time or “spot” electricity 
sales. Importantly, that spot market creates essential liquidity in the sense 
that a supplier always has the opportunity to sell into the RTO’s transpar-
ent spot electricity market, rather than having to negotiate with a utility 
for a bilateral sales contract.
Still, RTOs do not mean deregulation. They bring another layer of 
governance to the regional market with an independent board of direc-
tors. That board takes votes and FERC gives considerable weight to those 
votes, but FERC has the ultimate say. 

296	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
F U E L I N G  R E F O R M
Natural gas plays a central, supporting role in regulatory reform of the 
electricity business in two ways. First, regulatory reform of the natural 
gas business was a template for reform in the electricity business. Second, 
from the start, and continuing to today, natural gas is the fuel of choice for 
the new competitors that made reform happen in the electricity business. 
Natural gas regulation began and evolved at essentially the same pace 
and in the same way as electricity regulation. Very early on, when gas was 
mostly manufactured from coal and was therefore a local affair, municipal 
governments regulated the industry. As sales of that manufactured gas 
crossed municipal boundaries, the states took over the regulatory role. 
Then, when natural gas supply and transport crossed state lines, the states 
were told by the US Supreme Court that they could not regulate interstate 
sales of natural gas—the same ruling the Supreme Court gave regarding 
interstate electricity sales. And as with the electricity business, it was the 
FTC’s report that substantiated concerns about concentrated ownership 
and the potential for unnecessarily high natural gas prices. 
The Natural Gas Act of 1938 began the regulation of interstate sales 
and transport of natural gas. It did so by requiring just and reasonable 
rates for interstate natural gas sales including sales for resale. The act also 
required that all new natural gas pipelines win approval from the Federal 
Power Commission—the predecessor of the FERC.
However, it took several court cases to get the federal government 
more fully into the regulation of natural gas prices at the source—or, 
as was commonly said, at the “wellhead.” The Supreme Court ruled in 
Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Wisconsin that all natural gas sold into interstate 
pipelines would be regulated. Three failed efforts to regulate natural gas 
prices at the wellhead followed, and these failures led ultimately to the 
deregulation of those prices. In the first, the federal government attempted 
to regulate price supplier by supplier; the sheer number of suppliers led to 
failure. In the second, the federal government attempted price regulation 
by region, but this, too, failed because cost-plus regulation did not work 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
297
for natural gas supply. Not every well drilled will produce usable natural 
gas, which changes the game entirely. If the cost-plus rate is based only 
on the cost of successful wells, the added cost of failed exploration would 
be ignored and no one would explore for natural gas. The third attempt 
was to set a nationwide price for natural gas—at forty-two cents per mil-
lion cubic feet. While that price was double the previous regulated price, 
it still was well below the price a free market would yield. And for that 
reason it led to continued shortages—an artificial gap between demand 
and supply.14
The Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 was Congress’ response to the 
shortages. This act was part of the same National Energy Act that included 
PURPA. The Natural Gas Policy Act set in motion the forces that would 
lead to the full deregulation of natural gas prices at the wellhead. To start, 
it took the tactic of setting prices by vintage. That is, prices for new nat-
ural gas supply were higher than prices for natural gas developed before 
the act. Having been starved for natural gas in the era of shortages, pipe-
lines rushed to sign long-term, fixed-quantity, fixed-price contracts with 
suppliers—called take-or-pay contracts. At first, prices increased after the 
act, but those high prices decreased demand and increased supply so that 
natural gas prices then fell. Over time the spot market price fell well below 
the high prices in the take-or-pay contracts. With this take-or-pay over-
hang, customers clamored for the right to buy their natural gas on their 
own so they could access lower spot prices.15
In response to this clamor, FERC issued Order 436 in 1985. This 
important order allowed the major interstate pipelines to voluntarily offer 
unbundled natural gas transport service; that is, interstate transport would 
be offered separately from the supply of the natural gas commodity as well 
as independent of other related services such as gas storage. Order 436 
became known as the “Open Access Order.” The change brought on by 
Order 436 was immediate and important. FERC reported that, in 1984, 
only 8 percent of the throughput of natural gas in pipelines was shipped 
with unbundled pipeline service. After Order 436, however, that share 
rose to 79 percent by the early 1990s. Congress then passed the Natural 

298	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act in 1989; this legislation ultimately would 
fully deregulate wellhead prices.16 
In 1992 FERC’s Order 636 addressed the remaining obstacle to nat-
ural gas competition. The obstacle was that pipeline service taken under 
open-access rules was not equivalent to that embedded in bundled service. 
Order 636 fully unbundled pipeline transport from commodity sales and 
also required comparable service from transmission-line owners to all gas 
suppliers.17 
The data overwhelmingly showed that natural gas had become the 
fuel of choice for new competitors. By 1995 electric utilities used natural 
gas for just 10.3 percent of their electricity generation. By sharp contrast, 
the new entrants—termed nonutility producers—used natural gas for 56.2 
percent of their electric generation. As for other fuels, electric utilities used 
coal for 55.2 percent of their generation that year, and nuclear for 22 per-
cent. Again, in sharp contrast, the second-ranked fuel source for nonutil-
ities was renewables, which accounted for 22.9 percent of generation, and 
the third was coal, which accounted for 15.4 percent.18 
These statistics give powerful, real-world evidence that the method 
of price regulation drives fuel choice for electric suppliers. Regulations 
are not neutral because cost-plus rates give big incentives to build huge 
coal and nuclear power plants. Market-based rates give incentive for 
smaller-scale, versatile natural gas–fueled power plants; combined with 
significant tax incentives, they also provide incentives for nonrenewable 
fuels. New regulations mean new fuels, and that understanding is essential 
when designing policies for the future. 
W R I T I N G  D O W N  T H E  U N W R I T T E N 
Competitive reform is, as we have seen, different from hands-off dereg-
ulation. What changed with competitive reform, and what remained the 
same? The short answer for the latter question is that with or without 
competitive reform, a complicated electric system must be operated at the 
knife’s edge; the amount of power supplied must equal exactly the amount 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
299
of power demanded moment to moment. As long as we use a transmission 
grid to connect distant power plants to serve dispersed customers—as long 
as we use system power—this will be true and rules will be needed. When 
the system was operated by one company, the local monopoly, few people 
knew the rules. Decisions about whether and how to run each of the power 
plants and how full to allow transmission lines to get were made in secure 
control rooms deep inside each monopoly’s headquarters. There were 
rules, of course, but not rules that were frequently subject to public scrutiny.
What changed with competitive reform is that companies that owned 
power plants rightfully wanted to know how the decisions affecting their 
power plants would be made. Specifically, they wanted to know that the 
system would be run in a way that gave their power plants a fair chance 
to win or lose in the marketplace. Because of all these new players, the 
rules that were once unwritten now had to be written out, subjected to a 
thorough public vetting, and approved by regulators. The written rules for 
a competitively reformed electric system go into excruciating detail, but 
each detail has a purpose. The overall purpose is the same as it was with 
the monopoly control: to reliably keep the lights on and to do so at the 
lowest reasonable cost to the customers. The hoped-for payoff to opening 
the door to new competitors, of course, is that they will come up with new 
ideas that increase reliability and decrease costs.19
T H E  C H I C A G O  S C H O O L
Does Regulation Make a Difference?
A broad, analytic assessment of the effectiveness of regulation also con-
tributed to the momentum of deregulation in America. It is at least some-
what ironic that the intellectual roots of deregulation would be planted in 
Chicago, the place where the roots of cost-plus regulation were planted 
several decades earlier by Samuel Insull. However, many of the central 
writings for the reassessment nevertheless appeared in the University of 
Chicago’s Journal of Law and Economics.

300	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
One of the earliest and most important articles was written in 1962 by 
George Stigler and Claire Friedland of the University of Chicago; it was 
titled “What Can Regulators Regulate? The Case of Electricity.” The 
authors start with a provocative, straightforward claim that the most basic 
question about regulation was seldom asked: Did regulation make a dif-
ference? Specifically, they asked: “The literature of public regulation is 
so vast that it must touch on everything, but it touches seldom and lightly 
on the most basic question one can ask about regulation: Does it make a 
difference in the behavior of an industry?” After extensive analysis, their 
conclusion was no, it does not make a difference in the case of the elec-
tricity business. Part of the problem, they wrote, was that observers assess 
regulation too often on what it does rather than what it achieves. Specifically, 
does it affect prices paid by ratepayers?20
Stigler and Friedland asserted that the price of electricity can only 
be affected by regulation if regulation affects supply and demand. The 
authors proceeded to conduct three quantitative tests of the effect of regu-
lation by comparing results with and without—or, more precisely, before 
and after—regulation across the states. In the end, they wrote, “We con-
clude that no effect of regulation can be found in the average level of 
rates.”21 
An Unrelenting Reassessment 
That article was the first in what would become an unrelenting series of 
studies questioning regulation, especially as applied to large utilities. In his 
notable 1968 article, “Why Regulate Utilities?” Harold Demsetz of the 
University of Chicago undermined the presumption that regulation was 
necessary because utilities were natural monopolies. He argued, in short, 
that a large number of bidders for the original monopoly franchise could 
lead to a competitive price even if the bidding resulted in a single supplier.22 
In 1971 Stigler wrote another, equally influential article in the 
Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science titled “The Theory 
of Economic Regulation.” This time, his scope went far beyond 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
301
regulation of the electricity business to include a wide range of govern-
ment interventions—money subsidies, tariffs, price controls, and the like. 
One of his insights was to write of the supply of and demand for regu-
lation. In this second article, Stigler undermined the presumption that 
regulation was designed to benefit the public interest, arguing, “as a rule, 
regulation is acquired by the industry and is designed and operated pri-
marily for its benefit.”23
In 1974 Richard Posner, professor of law at the University of Chicago, 
picked up where Stigler left off. Posner focused on the challenge of finding 
a theory to explain “economic regulation”—more broadly, the pattern 
of “government intervention in the market.” The options were a “public 
interest” theory, in which regulation comes from a public demand to cor-
rect “inefficient or inequitable market practices,” or a “capture” theory, 
in which “interest groups” call for regulation that benefits them econom-
ically. Posner cited Stigler as the source of a new, improved, and more 
elegantly stated capture theory—the “economic theory of regulation.”24 
Writing in 1993, George Priest, a professor of law and economics at 
Yale, revisited the decades-long debate triggered by Stigler and Posner. 
While he offered reasons to challenge the work, Priest found that the 
debate “has exerted an extraordinary influence on public policy.” The 
real-world experience in the electricity industry supports his conclusion. 
Over the ensuing twenty years public policy opened the door wide for 
competitive reform. It started by creating competitors in the 1970s and, 
at the time of his writing, by expanding the range of technologies these 
competitors could use while giving them fair access to the transmission 
grid. Extraordinary influence indeed.25 
T H E  B L A C K O U T  O F  2 0 0 3
On August 14, 2003, a large portion of the US Northeast and Midwest as 
well as Ontario, Canada, suffered a major electric power blackout. The 
blackout affected fifty million people. Electric customers in eight states 
(Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, 

302	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Connecticut, and New Jersey) were caught up in it, many of them left 
without light, refrigeration, air conditioning, or any of the many other 
benefits of electricity taken for granted. It took up to four days to restore 
power in the United States and outages persisted in Ontario for more than 
a week. The cost of the blackout in the United States was estimated to be 
in the $4 billion to $10 billion range.26 
The 2003 blackout is important to the narrative here because some 
attributed it to the deregulation of the American electricity business. 
President George W. Bush and Canadian prime minister Jean Chrétien 
called for an investigation by a joint US-Canadian task force; their report 
was issued in April 2004, and it ultimately concluded that “restructuring 
was not the cause of the August 14, 2003 blackout.” Still, even after this 
conclusion was made public, opinions varied.27 
In a follow-up report, The Relationship between Competitive Power Markets 
and Grid Reliability, the task force called on ten diverse industry leaders 
and technical experts to write issue papers. As expected, the range of 
opinions was diverse. The first issue paper was written by three authors 
who added to their bylines the designation “Power Engineers Supporting 
Truth.” Their conclusion was simply and boldly stated: “Deregulation 
and the concomitant restructuring of the electric power industry in the 
US have had a devastating effect on the reliability of North American 
power systems, and constitute the ultimate root cause of the August 14, 
2003 blackout.”28 
In contrast, the North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC), 
the long-standing industry group running the then-voluntary program 
for grid reliability, was much more optimistic about the future. Still, 
NERC acknowledged challenges and the need for change. For example, 
it noted that “construction of new transmission has been inhibited by the 
uncertainty associated with financing and cost recovery as well as local 
resistance to siting and building new transmission facilities.” Most impor-
tantly, NERC concluded that the old voluntary system could not ensure 
reliability: “NERC rules must be mandatory for all users of the bulk elec-
tric system.”29
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
303
What were the actual causes of the blackout? As analysis around it 
grew, a catchphrase emerged; it became popular to say that the causes 
were “the three t’s: trees, training, and tools.” For example, in its inves-
tigations of the 2003 blackout NERC concluded that the utility “did not 
adequately manage tree growth in its transmission rights-of-way.” NERC 
pointed to “training deficiency,” which meant there was not enough “situ-
ational awareness” of the emergency. And it cited the failure of the utility 
to “control computers and alarm systems” and the regional transmission 
organization’s “incomplete tool set.” While the task force acquitted dereg-
ulation, its conclusions were troubling nonetheless. The neat phrase “trees, 
training, and tools” suggests that the blackout was caused by fundamental 
problems.30 
T H E  E N E R G Y  P O L I C Y  A C T  O F  2 0 0 5
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct 2005) was Congress’ response to 
a pile-up of crises. It was meant to address the 2003 blackout as well as 
the California electricity crisis and the collapse of Enron (related to the 
manipulation of electricity markets). The FERC certainly saw the law as 
a major milestone. It wrote, “The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct) is 
the first major energy law enacted in more than a decade, and makes the 
most significant changes in Commission authority since the New Deal’s 
Federal Power Act of 1935 and the Natural Gas Act of 1938.” In addition, 
it wrote that, with the act, “Congress signaled a strong vote of confidence 
in the Commission.”31
That confidence was reflected in new responsibilities for FERC to 
oversee “the reliability of the nation’s electricity transmission grid” in the 
wake of the 2003 blackout. As FERC wrote, “Today’s rulemaking her-
alds a historic new turn in the Commission’s regulatory responsibilities.” 
FERC emphasized that the problem had been that reliability standards 
were voluntary in the past, but going forward would be mandatory and 
enforceable: “Every major regional blackout since the 1960s was caused in 

304	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
part by violations of voluntary, unenforceable reliability standards.” The 
1965 blackout was the largest to date, affecting thirty million people with 
outages lasting up to thirteen hours, and it led to the creation of a volun-
tary NERC. Proposals for mandatory federal standards came in the wake 
of the New York City blackout in 1977 and the major blackouts in the 
western United States in 1996, but the proposals were unheeded. FERC 
said that “with these important new rules from EPAct 2005, compliance 
with reliability standards is not optional, but a legal requirement subject 
to substantial civil penalties.”32
To define and enforce reliability standards, FERC established a new 
institutional framework. Overseeing all of this would be a newly formed 
Electric Reliability Organization (ERO). In July 2006, FERC certified 
the North American Electric Reliability Corp. as the ERO. FERC also 
defined a regional aspect to the new institutional framework. In part to 
allow regional flexibility, NERC would work with eight regional entities. 
FERC had to approve all reliability standards proposed through the insti-
tutional framework, and began by reviewing 102 reliability standards pro-
posed by the ERO.33 
FERC also gained enhanced powers to address the kind of bad behav-
ior seen in the California electricity crisis. For example, FERC made it 
clear that government-owned utilities were now included under its enforce-
ment. The new law, wrote FERC, covered any manipulation with respect 
to commodities or transport. Notably, the act increased FERC’s enforce-
ment authority by “increasing the maximum civil penalty under these 
statutes to $1 million per day per violation.” Finally, as if to note a new era, 
FERC explained that the act also repealed the seventy-year-old Holding 
Company Act and also allowed “termination of the PURPA mandatory 
purchase obligation.”34 
EPAct 2005 sent two distinctly different messages. To keep the lights 
on—to assure reliability—more federal law and regulation was needed. 
However, to keep electricity prices low and to encourage innovation, 
old-school federal regulation of generators should be scrapped in favor 
of using competitive markets governed by the threat of huge penalties for 
bad behavior. It was not immediately clear how these two messages—one 
www.ebook3000.com

	
C o m p e t i t i o n ’ s  S t e a d y  R i s e 	
305
calling for more regulation and the other less—could be reconciled and 
put into action.
T H E  L E G A C Y  O F  C O M P E T I T I V E  R E F O R M
Einstein wrote that new theories gained currency when old theories failed 
to work. Something akin to that happened in the electricity business. After 
decades of regulated monopolies delivering lower rates, in the 1970s and 
1980s rates went up. Bigger was no longer better because the monopoly 
utilities had no ready solutions for the problems of the day: cost overruns 
and poor performance at nuclear power plants, the Arab oil embargo, and 
growing concerns over air pollution.
Apart from these burgeoning challenges, three widely publicized, 
negative events could have derailed the deregulation of America’s elec-
tricity business: the California electricity crisis, the collapse of Enron, or 
the 2003 blackout. Taken together, it would seem that derailment should 
have been a sure bet, but it was not. The major reason is that substantial 
momentum had been built up in the decades preceding these events. That 
momentum had at least three sources: the US Congress, FERC, and the 
University of Chicago. In the nearly three decades between 1978 and 
2005 Congress passed three laws that promoted competitive reform. The 
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 was the first; its promotion 
of competition was in large part inadvertent. The next two—the Energy 
Policy Acts of 1992 and 2005—explicitly promoted competition by eas-
ing the regulation of new competitors and by facilitating their access to 
electric transmission systems. What is most interesting is the fact that the 
last of these three—the Energy Policy Act of 2005—promoted compet-
itive reform at the same moment it was addressing what some would say 
were the three crises of competitive reform: California, Enron, and the 
2003 blackout. 
In this same period, often spurred by the congressional legislation, 
FERC issued rulings that added to the momentum toward open-access 
electric transmission. The start was its case-by-case effort to require open 

306	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
access as a condition of approval for transactions such as utility mergers. 
Then open access was codified by FERC’s Order 888 in 1996 and taken 
to a new, higher level by its Order 2000 in the year 2000. Congress and 
FERC teamed up to literally fuel competitive reform with the Natural Gas 
Policy Act of 1978 and the subsequent Orders 436 and 636. 
Finally, the University of Chicago added intellectual fuel to the fire. 
They did so by publishing, in the 1960s and 1970s, an unrelenting and 
thoughtful attack on the effectiveness of economic regulation of all sorts, 
including specifically the economic regulation of the electricity business. 
The broadest legacy of this momentum is that, today, over 60 percent 
of Americans get their electricity through six region-wide markets created 
to achieve competitive reform. That is, they live in the footprint of one 
of the five regional transmission organizations created and overseen by 
FERC, plus one exclusive to the state of Texas.35
In a period of about twenty-five years (1980 to 2005), America dis-
mantled the monopoly regulation that had prevailed for decades. The 
electricity business was permanently altered, and together, government 
and business created momentum for competitive reform. Still, at the start 
of the new millennium, more change was to come. 
www.ebook3000.com

P A R T  F I V E
The Age of 
Uncompromising 
Belief

www.ebook3000.com

309
C H A P T E R  1 7
President Obama’s 
Clean Power Plan
But I am convinced that no challenge poses a greater 
threat to our future and future generations than a changing 
climate. And that’s what brings us here today.
 —President Obama (2015)1
The nobel Peace Prize for 2007 was awarded jointly to former vice president Al 
Gore and the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). The Norwegian Nobel Committee said that the award 
was made for “their eff orts to build up and disseminate greater knowl-
edge about man-made climate change, and to lay the foundations for the 
measures that are needed to counteract such change.” Of Vice President 
Gore in particular, they said, “[He] is probably the single individual who 
has done the most to create greater worldwide understanding of the mea-
sures that need to be adopted.” To complete an awards hat trick of sorts, 
along with his Nobel Prize, Vice President Gore’s documentary on cli-
mate change, An Inconvenient Truth (2006), won two Oscars in that same 

310	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
year, for best documentary and best original song, as well as a Grammy 
for the audiobook version.2 
The Nobel and acclaimed film together reveal the high-profile sta-
tus conferred on the issue of global climate change in the first decade of 
the twenty-first century. Global climate change or, to use the narrower 
term, global warming, was a subject for scientific research for decades, 
and although well understood in its simplest form, it garnered little or no 
attention outside a small circle of experts. Indeed, until well into the 1970s, 
the focus of climate science was on the chance of another ice age­—global 
cooling, not global warming. 
The basic science has been well understood for a long time: the sun 
shines on Earth, and some of that sunlight and heat is reflected back into 
space. Some heat, however, is trapped by elements in our atmosphere, 
and that is a good thing since Earth would be too cold for humans if this 
greenhouse-like trapping of heat did not occur. However, Earth can have 
too little or too much of a good thing: too much of a greenhouse effect 
leads to higher average global temperatures and too little would result in 
average temperatures falling. Carbon dioxide is one of the more import-
ant elements in the atmosphere that traps the heat and also is one of the 
most abundant “greenhouse gases.”
The direct link to the electricity business is clear: when fossil fuels like 
coal, oil, and natural gas are burned to generate electricity, the power 
plants emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. Indeed, around 
30 percent of all the greenhouse gases emitted each year in the United 
States can be traced to producing electricity. If America was to decide that 
carbon dioxide emissions had to be cut significantly—as Vice President 
Gore and the IPCC recommend—the electricity business would have to 
change fundamentally.3 
Major legislation almost made its way through Congress that would 
have required an 83 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions 
from 2005 levels and, in so doing, would have touched every aspect of 
American life. The Waxman-Markey bill passed in the US House of 
Representatives in 2009 but was never brought to a vote in the Senate, 
for reasons explained later in the chapter. With the legislative route 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
311
blocked, environmentalists simply shifted to an alternate route through 
the courts to gain the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions. 
The result was President Obama’s Clean Power Plan, first introduced in 
August 2015.4 
T H E  S L O W  R I S E  O F  C L I M A T E  S C I E N C E  
A N D  P O L I T I C S
All the Right Questions, Early On
The science of global climate change was first formalized early in the 
1800s. Between 1824 and 1827 French scientist and mathematician Joseph 
Fourier conducted a series of mathematical studies on Earth’s atmosphere; 
it was Fourier who first suggested the gases that trapped heat on Earth 
had a greenhouse effect. John Tyndall, a British scientist, also studied 
the absorption of heat by gases in the atmosphere. Ironically, considering 
today’s context, Tyndall’s studies were aimed at trying to understand ice 
ages and looked favorably upon the absorptive powers of greenhouse gases. 
In 1896 a Swedish scientist, Svante Arrhenius, worked on a paper that cal-
culated the impact of carbon dioxide on global warming. Arrhenius con-
cluded that a reduction of carbon in the atmosphere by 55–62 percent of 
then-current levels would lead to a decrease in temperature of 4–5 degrees 
Celsius in inhabited regions (7.2–9 degrees Fahrenheit). He, too, focused 
on ice ages. Why the emphasis on ice ages at the time? Ice ages were per-
ceived as a proximate threat because they caused poor harvests, which in 
turn would cause famines.5
By 1910, presaging an important element of the scientific debate today, 
some scientists were saying that Arrhenius’ calculations were wrong. They 
believed Earth already contained the maximum amount of greenhouse 
gases possible. In addition, they said carbon dioxide would not build up 
in the atmosphere because it would be absorbed by the oceans. This early 
scientific debate asked all the major questions that have persisted into 
today’s theories on global climate change.6 

312	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Can Man Change the Global Climate?
One of the most persistent and difficult questions is whether man can 
affect global climate in the first place. In the 1920s a Russian geochem-
ist, Vladimir Vernadsky, concluded that “Mankind taken as a whole is 
becoming a powerful geological force.” In 1938 Guy Stewart Callendar, 
a British scientist, came to the same conclusion, because an increase in 
carbon dioxide caused by man could, he said, increase temperature. He 
added, however, that there was no reason for alarm since the increase 
could even be beneficial for agriculture in colder regions. Gilbert Plass, 
at the US Office of Naval Research, in a 1955 article titled “The Carbon 
Dioxide Theory of Climate Change,” concluded that human “activ-
ities” increased global temperature by 1.1 degree Celsius (1.98 degrees 
Fahrenheit) every hundred years.7
Other scientists pursued further lines of inquiry, most notably about 
whether carbon dioxide emitted by man through fossil fuel combus-
tion would be absorbed by the oceans. In 1957 Hans Seuss and Roger 
Revelle published an influential paper while at the Scripps Institution 
of Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego. The two 
found that from the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the middle 
of the nineteenth century to about 1950, the amount of CO2 “added to 
the atmosphere through consumption of fossil fuels” per decade increased 
almost twelvefold. Revelle would later serve as a member of the commit-
tee that produced “Restoring the Quality of Our Environment,” a report 
to President Johnson’s Science Advisory Committee in 1965. The report 
echoes the Revelle-Seuss article in its warning that “man is unwittingly 
conducting a vast geophysical experiment.”8
Keeling’s Curve
Charles David Keeling is one of the most respected authorities on the 
greenhouse effect and worked at the Scripps Institution for most of his 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
313
career. His primary contribution to the science of global climate change 
was to develop a precise way to measure carbon dioxide concentrations in 
the atmosphere. This was a substantial feat because it enabled scientists to 
test central hypotheses, such as the Revelle-Seuss question on whether the 
carbon emissions are all or only partly absorbed by the oceans. Keeling’s 
measurements at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii are the basis for 
the Keeling Curve, which began tracking the carbon dioxide concentra-
tion in the atmosphere in the 1950s and continues on through today. The 
concentration he found was 310 parts per million (ppm) in 1958. By 2005 
that had increased to 378 ppm, and it has since crossed over 400 ppm. 
The recorded rise in the concentration of carbon dioxide is at the heart of 
the concern over rising global temperatures and climate change.9
In 1963 Keeling, Plass, and other experts issued a report through the 
Conservation Foundation that gave one of the first blunt warnings about 
climate change. It found that a doubling of carbon dioxide concentra-
tion could increase average global temperatures by more than 3.8 degrees 
Fahrenheit. In 1966 came a recommendation by NASA for an extended 
research plan and an expansion of the research budget from $5 million to 
$30 million.10
Keeling was recognized for his contribution by those on both sides of 
the aisle. In 1997 Vice President Gore gave Keeling a special-achievement 
award at a White House ceremony. In 2002 President George W. Bush 
selected Keeling for the National Medal of Science, America’s highest life-
time achievement award for science. 
Hard “Core” Evidence
Most people would prefer to have physical evidence of global warming 
rather than output from computer models. Some of the best physical evi-
dence comparing today’s carbon dioxide concentrations and temperatures 
to the past comes from cores drilled in the layers of ice in both Greenland 
and Antarctica, and cores drilled in seabeds and lakebeds. This “core” 

314	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
evidence allows scientists to compare carbon dioxide concentrations 
today to those hundreds of thousands of years ago; to detect the num-
ber, intensity, and pace of temperature changes in history; and to judge 
which theory might best explain the variation in climate over time. Each 
layer of ice was formed at a specific point in time, so the cores yield some-
thing akin to a stacked set of time capsules. Some of the best ice core data 
came from the cores drilled by a Soviet-French team at Vostok Station in 
Antarctica, which provided data from four hundred thousand years ago. 
A 1969 report on the ice cores from Greenland and Antarctica said that 
scientists had found variations in average global temperature of up to 10 
degrees Celsius (18 degrees Fahrenheit). This hard scientific evidence of 
temperature change was among the first to reveal increasing carbon diox-
ide concentrations.11 
A Staccato Call for Action
What came next from some in this small club of scientists was a staccato 
awareness campaign: a series of small-scale, distinct calls to action that 
together told the world that the scientists believed danger lay ahead and 
something must be done. In 1971, a conference was held in Stockholm 
with the title “Study of Man’s Impact on Climate.” Further concern was 
driven in the mid-1970s by Reid Bryson at the University of Wisconsin, 
who concluded that climate change could happen in hundreds of years, 
not thousands. In 1976 a congressional committee held hearings and 
heard scientists warn of the effect of carbon dioxide emissions. In 1977 the 
New York Times ran a front-page story entitled “Scientists Fear Heavy Use 
of Coal May Bring Adverse Shift in Climate.” In 1978 Congress passed 
the National Climate Act. Spencer Weart, at the Center for the History 
of Physics, concluded, however, that “nobody of consequence proposed to 
regulate CO2 emissions or make any other significant policy changes to 
deal directly with greenhouse gases.”12 
The 1970s was not a time of consensus on global warming. It is often 
pointed out that the concern was “alarmism” over global cooling at the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
315
time. The proffered evidence of this is reflected in headlines throughout the 
decade. In 1970, for example, the Washington Post wrote, “Colder Winters 
Held Dawn of New Ice Age—Scientists See Ice Age in the Future.” In 
1974 Time Magazine asked, “Another Ice Age?” In 1979 the Christian Science 
Monitor worried, “New Ice Age Almost Upon Us?”13
Still, the staccato beat went on, and the focus of concern shifted 
from the possibility of an ice age to global warming. In 1977 the 
National Academy of Sciences concluded that the correct concern was 
warming—not cooling. Jim Hansen, a scientist at NASA’s Goddard 
Institute for Space Studies, concluded that, while temperatures had been 
cooling up through the 1970s, in the 1980s the reverse was occurring. 
Hansen said he was convinced that clear evidence of warming should be 
seen by the year 2000. In time, Hansen would become one of the major 
scientific voices raising alarm about global warming.14 
The Montreal Protocol
The public debate and policy surrounding chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
helped make global climate concerns more credible to the general pop-
ulation. The mechanics of the CFC policy also may have set a template 
for how to address global climate change through an international agree-
ment. CFCs are man-made chemicals that were thought to be safe, in 
part, because they occurred in small amounts and were chemically stable. 
They were commonly used in aerosol sprays for bug sprays and paint. 
Their stability—they didn’t react with plants or animals—turned out to 
be a problem, because it meant they stayed in the atmosphere for long 
periods of time, long enough to drift into the stratosphere where they were 
activated by the sun’s ultraviolet light. Once activated, they catalyzed a 
reaction that destroyed the layer of ozone; the ozone layer actually pro-
tects Earth from ultraviolet light, which can cause skin cancer. In 1987, 
forty-six governments signed the Montreal Protocol pledging to control 
the chemicals that destroyed the protective ozone layer, and by 2009 these 
treaties were the first to have been universally ratified by all 196 nations.15 

316	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Importantly, the Montreal Protocol gave evidence to the fact that, 
though man was harming the delicate balance of Earth’s atmosphere, 
nations could come together to mitigate that harm. 
T H E  U N I T E D  N A T I O N S ’ 
I N T E R G O V E R N M E N T A L  P A N E L  O N  
C L I M A T E  C H A N G E
Reports in the 1990s
In 1988 the issue of global climate change was taken to another level 
when the United Nations formed the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). The IPCC was intended to combine science, govern-
ment, and politics, in order to deal with the issue of man-made global 
climate change. The IPCC’s first report was issued in 1990. One major 
conclusion was that, if nothing changed—if the IPCC’s business-as-usual 
scenario prevailed—that would “result in a likely increase in global mean 
temperature of about 1°C above the present value by 2025 and 3°C before 
the end of the next century,” in 2100. The IPCC openly acknowledged 
“uncertainties in our predictions” and wrote that the uncertainties were 
due to “our incomplete understanding” of clouds, oceans, and polar ice 
sheets. And, further, the IPCC in 1990 did not rule out that the warming 
“could be largely due to . . . natural variability” in climate. 16
In 1992, at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, one hundred nations 
signed the “Convention on Climate Change” as well as agreements on 
biological diversity, forest principles, and Agenda 21, a “plan for achieving 
sustainable development in the 21st century.” Everyone looked to 1995 for 
the next IPCC report. Ultimately, that report concluded that “the balance 
of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate.”17 
The next big event for the IPCC was the UN Conference on Climate 
Change held in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997. There, the United States proposed 
cuts in carbon dioxide emissions that would take its emissions back to 1990 
levels, but Europeans wanted deeper cuts, and China wanted an exemp-
tion, saying it and other developing countries should not pay for a problem 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
317
caused by developed countries’ industrialization. This changed the issue 
into a political battle between rich countries that had already achieved 
high levels of industrialization and poorer nations that were looking to 
catch up through rapid industrialization. Vice President Gore flew to 
Kyoto to help finalize a deal, which became known as the Kyoto Protocol. 
Under the Kyoto Protocol, the developed countries pledged to cut average 
emissions to 5 percent below 1990 levels by 2008–2012, but the developing 
countries were exempt. They had only to report their emissions and come 
up with “mitigation” plans. Vice President Gore’s deal did not get a warm 
reception back home: The US Senate voted ninety-five to zero on a reso-
lution saying that they would not accept Kyoto if the developing countries 
were exempt.18 
The 2014 Report
IPCC research and reports are looked upon by policymakers as the 
definitive source of information on the cause and impact of global cli-
mate change. Even the US EPA relied on IPCC evidence when mak-
ing its “Endangerment Finding”—the foundation of its authority today 
to regulate greenhouse gas emissions under existing law. Climate Change 
2014: Mitigation of Climate Change includes a Summary for Policymakers, with 
boldly stated conclusions. Overall, the conclusions suggest that the nega-
tive impacts of global climate change are already being seen, that human 
activity is a substantial cause of those impacts, and that to prevent even 
more serious impacts would require significant reductions in emissions.19
Specifically, the IPCC states, “Warming of the climate system is 
unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are 
unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean 
have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, and sea 
level has risen.” Regarding any question about human activity being the 
cause, the IPCC highlights that “human influence on the climate system 
is clear . . . anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions have increased since 
the pre-industrial era, driven largely by economic and population growth, 
and are now higher than ever. This has led to atmospheric concentrations 

318	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide that are unprecedented in 
at least the last 800,000 years.” It is an unambiguous conclusion.20
Linking global warming to a human cause is central because it implies 
there is a human cure: cutting carbon dioxide emissions from human activ-
ity. To specify the precise human cause, the IPCC stands firm with the 
oft-stated claim that greenhouse gas emissions that keep carbon dioxide 
concentrations at or below 450 parts per million in the year 2100 would, 
in turn, keep temperature increases at about 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees 
Fahrenheit). That is a threshold that the IPCC does not want to cross. To 
avoid crossing this threshold, the IPCC reports that “anthropogenic” green-
house gas emissions—those related to human activity—would have to be 
cut by 40 percent to 70 percent by the year 2050 as compared to emissions in 
2010. In addition, even more aggressive emission control would be required 
by 2100—by that year, emissions would have to be near zero or below.21 
These bold conclusions are backed up by arguments and evidence, but 
those cannot be found in the summary; all of that is in the remainder of the 
report—and it is a massive report. The Economist called it “a behemoth of an 
undertaking. It runs to thousands of pages, involved hundreds of scientists 
and was exhaustively checked and triple-checked by hundreds of other bof-
fins and government officials to whom they report.” What is found through-
out the summary, however, is an honest but awkward attempt to give the 
reader a sense of the confidence the IPCC has in each of the conclusions.22 
The IPCC reports are not without their critics and controversy. For 
example, in January 2010 the chair and vice chair of the IPCC acknowl-
edged a mistake in its fourth assessment in 2007. They first say the broad 
conclusion about stress on water resources, including accelerating loss of 
glaciers, is robust. However, they express regret about “poorly substanti-
ated estimates” of the pace at which the Himalayan glaciers would recede. 
The 2007 report concludes that the Himalayan glacier could disappear in 
2035, but that is unfounded.23
In the wake of this criticism, the secretary-general of the United 
Nations, Ban Ki-Moon, asked in 2010 for a review of the IPCC process 
by the InterAcademy Council. The council concluded that the IPCC pro-
cess needed to be updated since the issue of global climate change had 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
319
become ever more complex and “increased transparency” was required. 
The recommended remedies included better “governance and manage-
ment” and improvements in the “review process.” Since the council is an 
international organization of science academies, perhaps it would have 
been inspiring to remind all of us of the great commitment to the scientific 
method and personal integrity of the scientists who have gone before us: 
Franklin, Faraday, Maxwell, Tesla, and Einstein.24 
A N  I N C O N V E N I E N T  T R U T H
In 2006 former vice president Gore brought mainstream attention to what 
he saw as an inconvenient truth. And that view was ominous: as he argued, 
man’s emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases since the 
Industrial Revolution in the 1700s caused global warming, and the con-
sequences of that warming could be disastrous. The inconvenience of this 
truth stemmed from the fact that, to avert disaster, America and the entire 
world would have to fundamentally change the way energy is produced 
and used in homes, cars, and factories. The film, An Inconvenient Truth, is an 
onslaught of visual and verbal evidence that leads to his unequivocal con-
clusion that global warming is already upon us, and drastic action must be 
taken now. In this sense Gore is fully faithful to the template set by Rachel 
Carson with her indelible Silent Spring.
This was not Gore’s first involvement with environmental activism. 
In 1992 Gore published a book titled Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the 
Human Spirit. The book was a full-throated call for enviro-centric thinking 
that placed environmental concerns at the center of the world agenda. 
Taking a different view, Cool It is a 2010 documentary film and book 
by Bjorn Lomborg that responds to Gore’s An Inconvenient Truth. Lomborg 
does not attempt to refute the claim that global warming is happening 
and that it is caused in part by man. Rather, Lomborg’s most distinc-
tive contribution to the debate on global climate change is to tee up the 
choice between prevention and adaptation. He offers human adaptability 
to problems as an alternative to preventing global climate change.25 

320	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
T H E  W A X M A N - M A R K E Y  B I L L
Those who wanted the American government to take action to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions were tremendously encouraged when the House 
of Representatives passed the American Clean Energy and Security Act 
of 2009. This act is more often referred to as the Waxman-Markey bill 
because its sponsors were Representatives Henry Waxman, Democrat 
from California, and Ed Markey, Democrat from Massachusetts. The 
vote in the House was quite close: 219 for versus 212 against.26 
The centerpiece of the bill was a cap-and-trade policy that was first 
used nationwide as part of acid rain legislation in 1990. The cap meant 
that carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions would have a 
limit or “cap” put on them across the nation. That cap would be reduced 
over the years so as to reduce emissions to lower and lower levels. By 2020 
the cap would require emissions to be 17 percent below 2005 emission 
levels and 83 percent below that level by 2050. The 83 percent reduction 
apparently was motivated by the aforementioned IPCC goal of keeping 
the increase in global average temperature, as compared to pre–Industrial 
Revolution levels, to about 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit).27 
The “trade” part of the deal was meant to signal that a market-based 
approach to regulation would be used, rather than a command-and-control 
approach. As with the acid rain legislation, to start there would be a 
requirement to hold permits to emit, and each permit would allow the 
holder to send one ton of carbon dioxide emissions into the air; for this 
reason, individual permits are called allowances. The hope was that the 
ability to sell or “trade” allowances at a profit would keep the cost of meet-
ing the cap as low as possible. As an additional step to keep the costs of 
compliance as low as possible, the Waxman-Markey bill allowed “offsets.” 
An offset was created when a source of greenhouse gas emissions that was 
not regulated by the bill agreed to cut its emissions anyway. Suffice it to 
say that the bill had further features that made it somewhat challenging to 
understand and complex to implement. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
321
The Waxman-Markey bill, as passed by the House, was sent to the 
Senate on July 6, 2009, but no vote was ever taken. Bryan Walsh wrote a 
postmortem titled “Why the Climate Bill Died” for Time magazine. The 
bottom line is that the public was not demanding change. The lack of such 
a demand was reflected in the fact that the White House wanted to sell the 
bill with a green-jobs argument, not as a full-out attack on global climate 
change. Unable to win the necessary sixty votes in the Senate, proponents 
simply went to another place to fight for what they wanted—the courts.28
E P A ’ S  E N D A N G E R M E N T  F I N D I N G
For both those disappointed and those overjoyed that the Senate did not 
take action, there was a plan B to contend with. Waxman-Markey may 
have been dead, but greenhouse gas regulation was not. There was another 
route to regulating greenhouse gases through the court system. For propo-
nents of greenhouse gas regulation, the prize was to get the courts to con-
clude that the US EPA already had the right to regulate under the existing 
Clean Air Act—that is, there was no need for Congress to pass a new law.
In 2003 President George W. Bush’s administration ruled that the 
EPA lacked the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions under the 
Clean Air Act. Twelve states and other environmental groups appealed 
the ruling, and in April 2007 the Supreme Court remanded to the EPA 
the question of whether greenhouse gases could in fact be regulated 
under the Clean Air Act. Specifically, the EPA was ordered to determine 
whether emissions of greenhouse gases from new motor vehicles “cause, or 
contribute to, air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endan-
ger public health or welfare” or explain why “scientific uncertainty is so 
profound that it precludes EPA from making a reasoned judgment.”29 
These questions took time to address—about two and a half years, to be 
precise. In December 2009, under President Obama’s administration, the 
EPA found that eleven greenhouse gases taken in combination endanger both 
the public health and the public welfare of current and future generations. In 

322	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
this “endangerment finding” the EPA listed and explained the harm caused 
by increased concentrations of greenhouse gases including harm from “heat 
waves,” “extreme weather events,” “wildfires, flooding, drought,” and “wide-
spread melting of snow and ice.” The EPA also gave weight to “the fact that 
. . . children, the elderly, and the poor, are most vulnerable.”30 
The endangerment finding was an essential first step toward regulat-
ing these emissions. Because of it, the EPA expanded coverage not just to 
cars but to any major stationary source or major emitting facility. That is 
how the EPA made the great leap from regulating greenhouse gas emis-
sions for new cars to also regulating them for power plants.31 
The EPA also found that “warming of the climate system is unequiv-
ocal” as evidenced by “increases in global average air and ocean tempera-
tures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising global average sea 
level.” The EPA reported that “eight of the 10 warmest years on record 
have occurred since 2001.” Looking to the future, using IPCC model 
output, the EPA noted, “By the end of the 21st century, projected average 
global warming (compared to average temperature around 1990) varies 
significantly depending on the emission scenario and climate sensitivity 
assumptions, ranging from 1.8 to 4.0°C (3.2 to 7.2°F).” Most of these sce-
narios exceed the IPCC’s threshold of 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit (2 degrees 
Celsius) for change in average temperatures and, therefore, most would 
trigger significant global climate change impacts.32 
In the same month—December 2009—as the publication of the EPA’s 
endangerment finding, the fifteenth session under the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change was held in Copenhagen, Denmark. On 
the last day of the meeting, President Obama negotiated a deal with leaders 
of some developing nations. Those leaders included Premier Wen Jiabao of 
China, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India, President Luiz Inácio 
Lula of Brazil, and President Jacob Zuma of South Africa. However, in its 
assessment of the deal, the Pew Center concluded that it “charts no clear 
path toward a treaty with binding commitments.” In its cover story in 
November 2010, the Economist reported, “In the wake of the Copenhagen 
Summit, there is a growing acceptance that the effort to avert serious cli-
mate change has run out of steam.” The article then proceeded to discuss 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
323
“how to live with climate change,” and espoused a shift from prevention 
to adaptation to the new climate—in other words, the Cool It model, rather 
than the great change inspired by An Inconvenient Truth.33
T H E  P A R I S  A C C O R D
In December 2015 the UN held its twenty-first climate change confer-
ence since 1995. The progress represented by the conference’s major 
outcome—the Paris Accord—depends a lot on what the person issuing 
the verdict expected before the meeting began. Two op-eds on December 
16, 2015, from two widely respected writers make the point. The headline 
for the syndicated columnist George F. Will read: “The Paris agreement 
is another false ‘turning point’ on the climate.” The opposing view came 
from syndicated columnist Thomas L. Friedman, whose headline read: 
“Paris Climate Accord Is a Big, Big Deal.”34 
Notably, both writers had low expectations for the conference. Will 
wrote that any agreement that got almost two hundred countries to sign 
on must “be primarily aspirational, exhorting voluntary compliance 
with inconsequential expectations.” Friedman also thought expectations 
should be low, and in the end he concluded that those low expectations 
had been met “beautifully.”35
The two writers came at the Paris Accord from fundamentally differ-
ent perspectives. Will wrote from the vantage point of the Age of Franklin 
and Edison. That is, he focused on the good fossil fuels had done, citing 
a source that said that they were needed for “sustained economic growth, 
a necessary prerequisite for scientific and technological dynamism.” Will 
concluded even more broadly that the “environmental toll from burning 
coal (it emits carbon dioxide, radioactivity and mercury) has been slight 
relative to the environmental and other blessings from burning it.”36 
In sharp contrast, Friedman wrote from the perspective of the Age of 
Harm and focused on the need to prevent the worst of the harm caused 
by burning fossil fuels. And yet he had great hope from the final accord. 
He thought that the “willingness” of so many countries “to offer plans to 

324	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
steadily and verifiably reduce their carbon emissions” meant there was 
a “chance” that the world would keep carbon concentrations below the 
level that would trigger temperature increases greater than 3.6 degrees 
Fahrenheit. He also hoped that all would use the Paris Accord to get back 
to “constructive engagement” that would lead to a phasing out of all fossil 
fuels by roughly 2050. And interestingly, he hoped that the means to that 
end was the market—specifically, putting a price on carbon.37 
The Wall Street Journal opined that the claimed success at Paris “is 
rooted in a conceit and a bribe.” The conceit was that the Paris Accord 
would actually achieve anything when it was “voluntary with no enforce-
ment mechanism”; China and India, the Journal pointed out, would prior-
itize bringing millions out of poverty over reducing CO2 emissions. The 
bribe identified by the journal was the $100 billion per year in promised 
climate aid to the developing world.38 
The breadth of factors and beliefs motivating opinions on global climate 
change cannot be overstated. President Obama said there was no greater 
challenge than addressing climate change and equated it to recovery from 
America’s financial collapse and ending war in Iraq and Afghanistan.39 
Even Pope Francis felt compelled to weigh in through his encyclical 
letter On the Care of Our Common Home (or Laudato sì), given on May 24, 2015. 
He found that the advances on climate change have been “regrettably few” 
and that fossil fuels need “to be progressively replaced without delay.” The 
pope placed these comments in a much broader context and presented 
them in a deeply prayerful structure and tone. He spoke of a full range of 
environmental concerns, including biodiversity. He linked environmental 
concern to poverty, too, writing that “the same mindset which stands in 
the way of making radical decisions to reverse the trend of global warming 
also stands in the way of achieving the goal of eliminating poverty.”40 
P R E S I D E N T  O B A M A ’ S  C L E A N  P O W E R  P L A N
What would President Obama do with the authority to address global 
climate change given to the EPA by the Supreme Court? And, given the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
325
failure by the IPCC to create a global policy, would the president take 
action unilaterally? One indication came on August 3, 2015, when the EPA 
published a draft of its Clean Power Plan (CPP). Calling it “a historic and 
important step,” the EPA went on to say, “These are the first-ever national 
standards that address carbon pollution from power plants.” Separately, 
but on the same day, the EPA had issued new source-performance stan-
dards for new large-base-load power plants. Those standards meant that 
conventional coal-fired power plants were a thing of the past; given the 
state of technology, the EPA’s rules meant any new coal-fired power plant 
would have to use new technologies, such as high-efficiency coal-fired 
power plus some carbon capture and sequestration.41 
The draft CPP runs 1,500 pages; it is a document that few have 
actually read but many support or oppose ferociously. Under the CPP, 
electric power suppliers would have to cut carbon dioxide emissions 
from existing power plants by 32 percent of 2005 levels by 2030. As 
required by the Clean Air Act for existing facilities, the effort to reach 
the 32 percent cut had to be a joint federal and state effort. Essentially, 
the federal government would determine how much each state must 
reduce emissions, and the states would propose a plan to achieve that 
reduction. To that end, the EPA kicked off the process. It issued both 
an emissions rate in terms of pounds of carbon dioxide per MWh and 
total emissions reduction in terms of tons of carbon dioxide emitted for 
the state as a whole.42
The EPA explained its rationale for the emissions rate and total 
emissions in terms of three “building blocks.” First was the reduction 
in carbon dioxide emissions achieved “by improving the heat rate at 
affected coal-fired power plants.” Second was the reduction achieved 
by substituting electricity from “lower-emitting existing natural gas 
plants” for that from existing coal-fired plants. Third was the reduc-
tion achieved by substituting electricity from “new zero-emitting renew-
able energy” sources (like wind and solar) for generation by existing 
coal-fired plants.43
Also addressed was the need for the CPP. The EPA tends to point 
to other credible entities who support aggressive action to address global 

326	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
climate change. In its own endangerment finding it relied heavily on the 
IPCC evidence. Here, it points to the endangerment finding but also 
to other reports. For example, it cites the 2014 report of the US Global 
Change Research Program and summarizes the bottom line of that report 
by stating “climate change driven by human emissions of [greenhouse 
gases] is already happening now and it is happening in the U.S.”44 
Physical evidence is preferred when it can be found. One example of 
such evidence is a chart offered by NASA. The chart plots CO2 concen-
tration over hundreds of thousands of years. This physical evidence comes 
from ice cores. It shows that CO2 concentrations were historically in the 
200–300 ppm range until climbing to today’s 400 ppm. These findings 
send a clear message that the world is now in uncharted waters.
A legal justification of the CPP is also provided. The legal arguments 
are quite detailed and expansive. As evidence of the legal challenges, on 
February 9, 2016, the US Supreme Court stayed implementation of the 
CPP pending disposition of the petition for review in the US Court of 
Appeals for the DC Circuit as well as the Supreme Court’s own review if 
granted. The Wall Street Journal called the stay an “unexpected move,” and 
the New York Times called it an “extraordinary decision.”45
Bruce Nilles, a Sierra Club lawyer, said, “It is unprecedented for the 
Supreme Court to stay a rule at this point in litigation. They do this in 
death-penalty cases.” Nilles’ comment suggests the court’s rationale for 
the stay. If the court does not stop EPA, it may proceed to implement a 
plan—the CPP—that ultimately was found to be unconstitutional. As in a 
death penalty case, it would have been too late for justice.46
T H E  L E G A C Y  O F  A  H E A T E D  D E B A T E
Global climate change policy now dominates the electricity business. 
Through the Clean Power Plan for existing power plants and the new 
source-performance standards for new power plants—presuming 
that they weather the court challenges as well as those from the new 
president—EPA will drive all major resource decisions in the electricity 
www.ebook3000.com

	
P r e s i d e n t  O b a m a ’ s  C l e a n  P o w e r  P l a n  	
327
business. In particular, new source standards and the CPP will define 
whether any new coal power plants will be built and whether and when 
existing coal-fired power plants will be retired. In addition, the CPP greatly 
influences the nature and extent of the additions of new renewable power 
plants; substituting renewables would need to be a major source of the 
planned 32 percent reduction in emissions from 2005 levels. And the CPP 
will be one more incentive for natural gas–fired combined-cycle power 
plants—already the technology of choice. 
It is disappointing that this dominance was achieved without a public 
vote on how to address global climate change concerns, let alone a wider 
debate regarding the aggressive approach embedded in the CPP and new 
source-performance standards. Without a vote by Congress, there will 
be no debate on critical issues such as the crucial policy choice between 
prevention and adaptation. Moreover, the danger of pursuing aggressive 
prevention unilaterally is that the American people could end up paying 
twice to address global climate change. First, Americans would pay for 
a unilateral effort to cut America’s emissions in an effort to prevent global 
climate change. Second, Americans would pay to adapt to global climate 
change because, inevitably, a US-only policy could never prevent climate 
change; that is, if other nations, China in particular, do not do their part, 
the consequences of global climate change would be realized anyway. 
And if forces other than carbon emissions meant global climate change 
occurred anyway, Americans would have to pay for adaptation regardless 
of whether others did their part or not. 
The question of what to do about global climate change deserves 
an open debate and a vote by the US Congress. This is not a decision 
for the courts alone. What is needed most is an openness to respectful, 
effective compromise; something that is nowhere in sight in the Age of 
Uncompromising Belief.
On March 28, 2017, President Trump signed an Executive Order 
requiring, among several other items, a review of the CPP that could lead 
to its withdrawal or replacement. No matter the outcome of the President’s 
review, it is likely that global climate change will be a contested issue for 
the electricity business well into the future.

328
C H A P T E R  1 8
George Mitchell’s Shale 
Gas Revolution
Few businesspeople  have done as much to 
change the world as George Mitchell.
—Economist (2013)1
George mitchell is not a household name, but he should be. what he achieved 
could aff ect the availability and cost of energy for decades to come in 
households across America and possibly around the world. Through 
painstaking trial and error, over a twenty-year span, Mitchell developed 
an innovative way to tap into natural gas trapped in shale rock formations 
deep under the earth’s surface and to produce that natural gas for cus-
tomers at a historically low price. Combining his innovation with Devon 
Energy’s horizontal-drilling technology and advances in seismic mapping, 
Mitchell unleashed what is now called the shale gas revolution.
It deserves to be known as a revolution because it created an abun-
dant supply of one of the most versatile forms of energy. As recently as 
2007 experts warned that North American natural gas production would 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
329
decline to the point that the United States would eventually have to import 
natural gas from overseas, much as it imports oil. Since Mitchell’s revolu-
tion, the new view is that Americans have enough natural gas under their 
feet to sustain current levels of consumption for years to come. Indeed, 
some expect that the United States will export natural gas, not import it.2
The link between natural gas and electricity is direct and important. 
Natural gas is the fuel of choice for electricity production, both because of 
the opportunities created by opening the electricity business to competi-
tion and the challenges presented by global climate change. As the fuel of 
choice, natural gas often sets the market price for electricity, and natural 
gas prices have fallen to historical lows in and around the 2010–15 time 
frame. Many expect the shale gas revolution to keep natural gas prices low 
and thereby keep electricity prices low, too.3
T H E  P A T H  T O  R E V O L U T I O N
It is crucial to see George Mitchell in the context of his everyday business. 
In 1953 Mitchell and his partners drilled for natural gas in North Texas, 
and the well turned out to be one of the most productive wells ever. In 1954 
they won a contract to supply natural gas to Chicago through the Natural 
Gas Pipeline Company of America. This sale was critical to Mitchell’s 
career; indeed, it was the need to sustain supplies for his Chicago contract 
that led Mitchell to look for new gas resources on his home turf. And that, 
in turn, helped incite the shale gas revolution.
Mitchell Energy and Development Corporation was established in 
1971 and made its initial public offering of stock on the American Stock 
Exchange the following year. In the late 1970s, faced with his continuing 
need to fill the Chicago contract, Mitchell pushed his colleagues to find 
more gas resources on the leases he already had. A geologist with the com-
pany wrote a paper suggesting that the Barnett Shale in Denton County, 
Texas, might be such a source.4 Despite the protests of his own engineers 
against using unconventional drilling techniques, Mitchell began experi-
menting with hydraulic fracturing in the shale. 

330	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The International Energy Agency succinctly describes hydraulic 
fracturing—often called hydrofracking, or simply fracking—as the pro-
cess of pumping fluid into rock formations at high pressure to release 
trapped gas. Typically, that fluid is 99 percent water and sand, where 
the sand serves as a proppant—a material that will keep the fractures 
open after they are made. Small amounts of chemicals are used as part 
of the fluid, called slick water, to serve several purposes like keeping the 
proppant suspended and minimizing friction, so the fluid can enter the 
well more easily.5
By Mitchell’s own reckoning, he spent $7–8 million on well experi-
ments in shale, and it took him over twenty years to get it all figured out. 
According to his colleague Dan Steward, the author of a history of the 
Barnett Shale, Mitchell’s first well was drilled in 1981, and “from 1982 
through 1986, 41 wells were deepened.” By 1989 Steward said that enough 
wells had been drilled and enough seismic data had been collected to know 
the basic structure of the Barnett formation. From an initial area of 15 
square miles, Mitchell then expanded the area to cover 115 square miles 
in the late 1990s. Still, a lot of trial and error had to be completed to find 
a commercially viable fracturing fluid. By 1998 Mitchell finished testing 
slick water, which cut the treatment cost by 80 percent as well as increasing 
the gas flow. Denton is now considered the center of the Barnett Shale.6 
T H E  M E A S U R E  O F  A  R E V O L U T I O N
Abundance
The consensus of energy forecasts in the early 2000s warned that America 
would have to turn to imports of natural gas from overseas to sustain 
current levels of consumption. Indeed, energy expert and author Daniel 
Yergin himself expressed this view in a Wall Street Journal op-ed in January 
2007. He warned that “North American supply has flattened out. Yet 
large amounts of new natural-gas-fired electric power generation have 
been added over the last decade, which means that demand will increase.” 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
331
Yergin concluded that the result would be “growing imports of liquefied 
natural gas—LNG—rising from 3% of our current demand to more than 
25% by 2020.”7
Yergin’s op-ed reflected the consensus view. Accordingly, from 2000 
to 2009, investors financed a dramatic increase in the capacity to import 
LNG. To transport natural gas from countries overseas, the natural gas 
must first be made into a liquid. Then, once it reaches its destination port, 
it must be reconverted into a gaseous form to be delivered inland through 
pipelines. In 2000 America had the capacity to convert about 2.3 billion 
cubic feet per day of LNG into a gaseous form—that is, to import it into 
the United States. By 2009 that capacity had increased almost tenfold to 
22.7 billion cubic feet per day.8
Then, suddenly, the view was reversed from shortage to abundance. 
In November 2009, Yergin coauthored another op-ed in the Wall Street 
Journal titled “America’s Natural Gas Revolution.” He wrote that the new-
found abundance of shale gas “transforms the debate over generating elec-
tricity.” Yergin suggested that, in the face of global climate concerns, the 
lower prices of natural gas would make it the fuel of choice for generating 
electricity. What caused this complete reversal in view, from shortage to 
abundance? The primary reason was the new accessibility of shale gas, 
but, more specifically, the cause was the melding of technological innova-
tions by Mitchell and Devon Energy: hydraulic fracturing and horizontal 
drilling, plus three-dimensional seismic imaging. The shale gas revolution 
was, at its origins, a technological revolution.9
In 2000 shale gas contributed just 1 percent of all natural gas pro-
duced in the continental United States. By 2009 shale’s contribution was 
14 percent, and by 2014 it was 48 percent. The optimism over shale gas 
can also be found in the ever-changing estimates of how much natural 
gas still lies beneath the surface in America. For two decades, from about 
1984 to 2004, America’s proved reserves of natural gas were estimated to 
be at or below two hundred trillion cubic feet. From 2004 to 2014, those 
estimates doubled, reaching almost four hundred trillion cubic feet. It is 
this dramatic change in the United States’ energy outlook that justifies 
using the term revolution.10 

332	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Low-Cost Shale Gas
In the well-publicized price spike in 2008, natural gas prices got as high 
as $13.31 per million British thermal units (MMBtu).11 By 2012 the spot 
price for natural gas had dropped as low as $1.82 per MMBtu—down 86 
percent. Prices were not expected to stay in the two-dollar range, because 
some of the factors for the steep decline were attributed to short-term cir-
cumstances. For example, some leases for shale required the lessee to use 
it or lose it—that is, drill for shale gas or lose the lease. Another factor 
pushing drilling at the time was that many natural gas wells also produce 
oil-like liquids—ethane, propane, and butane. With oil prices relatively 
high at that time, the value of these liquids was high as well, so drilling 
remained profitable. However, despite a significant drop in oil prices, nat-
ural gas prices were still low, averaging just $2.62 per MMBtu in 2015.12
Much of the time, we make use of forecasts by assuming a smooth path 
of prices going forward. But history warns against relying on such patterns 
because there are substantial risks. The nature of risk can change over 
time, too. In the past, with conventional sources of natural gas, the risk 
was primarily in finding the resource. With shale gas, the risk of not find-
ing gas is lower, but the risk around how much it will cost to produce the 
gas is much higher. This is because not all shale gas sources are the same. 
An MIT study from 2010 shows this in terms of the likely production costs 
for wells drilled in different places, or plays. The cost of production varies 
within plays, too. To illustrate these points, for the Barnett Shale play in 
Texas, MIT presented estimates of production costs ranging widely from 
about $4.27 per MMBtu to $11.46 per MMBtu. For the Marcellus Shale 
play in Pennsylvania, MIT presented estimates ranging from $2.88 per 
MMBtu to $6.31 per MMBtu.13
Low-Cost Electricity
Given its research, MIT concluded that the bulk of the shale gas in America 
can be produced in the $4–8 per MMBtu range. Importantly, prices at 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
333
these levels make natural gas–fired electricity the technology to beat. 
Although single-point estimates of costs fail to give a sense of the inherent 
uncertainty of the industry, MIT estimates the cost of electricity generated 
with natural gas–fired combined-cycle technology to be about $56 per 
MWh. This is much lower than MIT estimates for nuclear power plants, 
at $88 per MWh, and those for coal with carbon emission controls, at $92 
per MWh. As for electricity generated with renewable fuel, if the expense 
of making each technology able to produce electricity around-the-clock is 
added, rather than allowing intermittent generation, MIT estimated that 
wind with backup would cost $100 per MWh and solar would be at $193 
per MWh. In other words, fully reliable, around-the-clock renewables 
were not competitive on a cost basis alone.14 
A similarly aimed study, published in Daedalus in 2012 by Adam 
Looney and Michael Greenstone of the Hamilton Project at the Brookings 
Institution, came to a similar conclusion: looking at new power plants, 
new natural gas­–fired generation is now the cheapest way to generate 
around-the-clock power. Even adding estimates of “social costs”—includ-
ing the cost of harm from carbon dioxide emissions—natural gas–fired 
combined-cycle power cost $65 per MWh, still the lowest-cost technology, 
while coal was almost double at $115 per MWh. New nuclear was in the 
range of $82–105 per MWh, with or without social costs because it has no 
carbon emissions. New around-the-clock wind cost $97 per MWh, while 
around-the-clock solar photovoltaics (solar panels) cost $132 per MWh.15
By the 2010–12 time frame, the consensus was that natural gas–fueled 
electricity was the low-cost option when taking into account both environ-
mental performance and reliability.
Credible Doubters (and Optimists)
The US government’s Energy Information Administration (EIA) pro-
vides widely accessible projections of energy production, use, and 
prices—including natural gas prices. The EIA runs alternative scenarios 
to reveal risk, as it should, but its “reference” scenario in 2014 reflects 

334	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
assumptions that natural gas reserves are “abundant,” while production 
costs are expected to increase as “producers move into areas where the 
recovery of natural gas is more difficult and expensive.” Underlying this 
price projection is the expectation of a 56 percent increase in total natural 
gas production through 2040. Shale gas production drives this growth.16
One credible doubter of this scenario is David Hughes, a geoscientist 
who spent thirty-two years with the Geological Survey of Canada. He is 
highly critical of the EIA projections, especially the shale gas reserves and 
production estimates. Hughes conducted an independent analysis of seven 
shale gas plays that he sees accounting for 88 percent of future shale gas 
production through 2040. His conclusion is that “shale gas production 
from the top seven plays will underperform the EIA’s reference case fore-
cast by 39% from 2014 to 2040.” Indeed, he expects shale gas from these 
seven plays will peak as early as 2020, and production in 2040 will be just 
one-third of that forecast by EIA.17 
In sharp contrast to Hughes, some experts are optimistic that the 
technological advances with shale gas production will continue, and 
they give specific reasons for their optimism. Mark P. Mills at the 
Manhattan Institute is one of them. Mills’ bottom line is that the shale 
gas revolution has created massive amounts of data on the performance 
of thousands of wells. He argues that “big-data analytics” of that infor-
mation will lead to dramatic productivity gains and cost reductions 
going forward. Another theme is that, while big-data analysis will allow 
best practices to be discovered and used widely, that same analysis will 
allow the producers to tailor their approach to drilling and production 
to the circumstances at a particular site. As a broad policy guide Mills 
suggests that, rather than looking for alternatives to oil and natural gas, 
the focus should be on developing new technology to keep oil and gas 
abundant and priced low.18
The debate might best be characterized as man’s innovation versus 
geology’s limitations. So far, in the early years of the revolution, man 
has been winning. New wells are becoming more and more productive 
because technological advance continues. Still, it must be remembered 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
335
that a fundamental change in a forecast, such as the reversal of fortunes 
brought on by the shale gas revolution, reveals risk; it does not remove risk. 
Uncertainty remains. 
A D D R E S S I N G  E N V I R O N M E N T A L  C O N C E R N S
An Evenhanded View
In the Age of Uncompromising Belief, it is hard to find evenhanded anal-
yses of the environmental impacts of shale gas. One rare example that 
considers both sides of the issue is a 2012 report by the International 
Energy Agency (IEA) titled “Golden Rules for a Golden Age of Gas.” 
IEA starts with the basic point that the world will realize this golden age 
of gas if and only if the unconventional sources of natural gas “can be 
developed profitably and in an environmentally acceptable manner.” The 
agency readily acknowledges that unconventional sources may have “a 
larger environmental footprint than conventional gas development” but 
concludes that “the technologies and know-how exist for unconventional 
gas to be produced in a way that satisfactorily meets these challenges.” 
The IEA lists “golden rules” that are meant to win popular support for 
shale gas development or, as IEA puts it, to “earn the industry a ‘social 
license to operate.’”19 
The golden rules are principles for all involved to follow as environ-
mental and social impacts are addressed. The principles reflect common 
sense that can lead to common or best practices. For example, “Watch 
where you drill” should lead shale gas producers to avoid drilling where 
geologic factors make an area vulnerable to earthquakes when storing 
wastewater. Similarly, “Isolate wells and prevent leaks” should lead to 
robust rules for well design and construction and to choosing a drilling 
depth that keeps impacts away from drinking water reserves. IEA esti-
mates that following these principles would increase shale gas costs by 
only 7 percent.20

336	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Can You Light Your Water on Fire?
Other advocacy-driven assessments of the environmental impact of 
shale gas development have gotten much more attention than the IEA 
study. Josh Fox’s film Gasland is one such effort. It was nominated for an 
Academy Award for Best Documentary in 2011. Gasland is self-described 
as “part expose, part mystery, part bluegrass banjo meltdown,” and it is 
noted that the film drew Fox into “uncovering a trail of secrets, lies and 
contamination.” Also on the packaging is a quote from Yoko Ono, which 
reads, “Josh Fox’s film Gasland will save the American water, air, and soil 
from being abused by corporate greed.”21
The subtitle of Gasland, “Can You Light Your Water on Fire?”, comes 
from the most dramatic scene in the film: A Colorado homeowner lights 
the water coming out of the kitchen sink by holding a cigarette lighter to 
the faucet. The cause of contaminated, flammable water is implied to be 
nearby drilling and hydraulic fracturing for shale gas.22
The EPA’s Acquittal (for Now) 
The possibility of danger to drinking water is a matter of serious concern. A 
front-page article in the Sunday New York Times in February 2011 provides 
a good example of another alarm sounded about the possible environmen-
tal impacts on water supply from drilling for and producing shale gas. The 
headline read “Regulation Lax as Gas Wells’ Tainted Water Hits Rivers.” 
Inside, the section headlines kept up the alarmist tone: “Overwhelmed, 
Underprepared,” “Little Testing for Radioactivity,” and “Plant Operators 
in the Dark.” The reporter got right to his point, which linked wastewater 
from shale gas wells to the danger of contaminated drinking water. He 
wrote, “With hydrofracking, a well can produce over a million gallons of 
wastewater that is often laced with highly corrosive salts, carcinogens like 
benzene and radioactive elements like radium.” His specific concern was 
that the wastewater “is sometimes hauled to sewage plants not designed 
to treat it and then discharged into rivers that supply drinking water.”23
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
337
Reports like this led Congress to ask the EPA to study the issue 
of drinking water contamination. The EPA mapped a comprehensive 
scope for the study including every one of the five stages of the water 
cycle for shale gas production. Emphasizing that it was just a draft and 
not “agency policy,” the EPA issued a draft report for public review in 
June 2015. The report first acknowledged that there were indeed ways 
or “mechanisms” by which harm could be done: “We conclude there 
are above and below ground mechanisms by which hydraulic fracturing 
activities have the potential to impact drinking water resources.” For 
example, the EPA cited “spills of hydraulic fracturing fluids and chem-
icals” and “inadequate treatment and discharge of hydraulic fracturing 
wastewater.”24 
However, as its major finding—one that surprised many on both 
sides of the issue—the EPA wrote, “We did not find evidence that these 
mechanisms have led to widespread, systemic impacts on drinking water 
resources in the United States.” It was not that there were no problems or 
that there was zero risk of environmental harm from shale gas production. 
Rather, it was that, having reviewed data for thousands of wells, there was 
no evidence of widespread systemic harm. The EPA stated, “The number 
of identified cases [of harm], however, was small compared to the number 
of hydraulically fractured wells.”25 
This acquittal was given grudgingly and just for the time being. The 
EPA pointed out potential limitations of the study, including “insufficient 
pre- and post-fracking data” and “the paucity of long-term systematic 
studies.” For some, the EPA finding made no difference to their view. 
In the wake of the EPA study, for example, businesses asked Governor 
Andrew Cuomo of New York to lift the state’s ban on fracking. The gov-
ernor is, thus far, refusing to lift it based on broader concerns than the 
impact on drinking water.26
The EPA issued its final report in December 2016, and it came with a 
change in tone. The report was offered as a tool for others to identify fac-
tors that “influence the frequency and severity” of the impacts of hydrau-
lic fracturing. And it emphasized the “data gaps and uncertainties” that 
made EPA “unable to form conclusions” about these impacts. This new 

338	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
tone undermined somewhat the acquittal in the draft and thus restored 
some of the uncertainty about the future of fracking.27 
“Is Shale Gas Good for Climate Change?” 
Today, environmentalists look at all energy developments through the lens 
of global climate change. For them, the question about shale gas might be 
summed up nicely in the article “Is Shale Gas Good for Climate Change?” 
It was written in 2012 by Daniel P. Schrag, director of the Center for 
the Environment at Harvard as well as a member of President Obama’s 
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology.28 
Schrag readily acknowledges the economic and environmental ben-
efits of the surge in shale gas. Regarding economic benefits, he says, 
“There are enormous benefits in having cheap, abundant natural gas for 
the United States in terms of the competitiveness of US industry and eco-
nomic growth in general.” As to environmental benefits, he notes that 
natural gas use is beginning to displace coal use; he concludes that from 
2007 to 2011, natural gas use had increased by 15 percent and coal use 
had decreased by 10 percent. He goes on to say that displacement of coal 
by natural gas reduces emissions of carbon dioxide, sulfur, and mercury. 
But while Schrag points out the environmental benefits when natural gas 
is used in power plants instead of coal, he by no means ignores possi-
ble environmental concerns at the well site, including the potential for 
groundwater contamination and methane emissions.29 
Interestingly, for Schrag the answer to the question he poses in the 
title of his article is not found in an assessment of short-term emissions 
by power plants. Instead, it lies mostly in politics. Schrag conveys this 
perspective when he says, “By leveraging the financial self-interest of the 
natural gas industry to broaden political support for anti-coal policies, 
environmental groups can simultaneously use a grassroots campaign 
to pressure existing coal-fired power plants to shut down.” For Schrag, 
“The success of this [anti-coal] strategy will determine whether shale 
gas is indeed good for climate change.” One other dimension affects the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
339
question of whether shale helps or hurts the cause of climate change: 
What if its low price and abundance slow the move to low-or-no-carbon 
technologies like wind and solar?30 
Still More
Further regulations stemming from the concern over environmental 
impacts have been proposed. For example, President Obama called for 
more control of methane emissions from natural gas production. The 
goal is to cut emissions of this potent greenhouse gas by 40–45 percent 
by 2025.31 
Earthquakes are another matter. There does seem to be a clear link 
between seismic activity and wastewater injection, which can be part of 
the hydraulic fracturing process. Wastewater injection, done by shale 
gas producers and others, can cause seismic activity, which in turn can 
cause damage. The surge in earthquakes in Oklahoma is valid evidence. 
According to the United States Geological Survey, from 1978 to 1999, 
earthquakes of magnitude 3.0 or higher averaged about 1.6 per year. The 
same low level persisted to 2008. By 2013, however, the number of such 
earthquakes was 109, and in 2015 the number was 890.32 
A  R O L E  F O R  G O V E R N M E N T ?
Because energy innovations can have far-reaching effects and set prec-
edents for the future, several key questions should be asked about a 
potentially revolutionary technology like shale gas production. One such 
question is whether government research and development efforts also 
helped launch the shale gas revolution. The issue was teed up at the high-
est levels when President Obama, in his 2012 State of the Union address, 
first praised the innovation reflected in the shale gas revolution and then 
implied that the federal government had a lot to do with it. The president 
said: “And by the way, it was public research dollars, over the course of 

340	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
thirty years, that helped develop the technologies to extract all this natu-
ral gas out of shale rock—reminding us that government support is critical 
in helping businesses get new energy ideas off the ground.”33
To get a clear picture of the motives for and methods of the revolution, 
it is helpful to look back to the 1970s. Energy markets in the 1970s were 
buffeted by at least four major concerns: the oil price spikes due primar-
ily to the Arab oil embargo, coal mine safety, new air pollution regula-
tions, and a natural gas shortage. Research into new technologies became 
a major focus of government efforts. A result of this focus was that the 
Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) was created 
in 1974. On ERDA’s agenda was the exploration of “mysterious unconven-
tional natural-gas reservoirs.” With the oil embargo fresh in their minds, 
researchers focused on the disappointing fact that just 32 percent of the 
oil under the surface could be extracted with the exploration and drilling 
methods the industry used at the time. As early as 1973, Congress gave 
$1.3 million to ERDA predecessors to study new methods—including the 
fracturing of underground rock formations.34 
A 2012 report on the history of government energy research titled 
A Century of Innovation cites examples of ERDA and its predecessors con-
ducting research on the early stages and elements of fracturing; the 
report was prepared by Sherie Mershon and Tim Palucka of the National 
Energy Technology Laboratory. While the authors conclude that many of 
ERDA’s efforts led to “dismal failures,” the research went on. Ultimately, 
the report found, ERDA signed “nine new cost-sharing contracts in which 
representatives of government and industry would further investigate 
massive hydraulic fracturing and chemical explosive fracturing.”35 
These investigations could not proceed fast enough. American natu-
ral gas production fell, and there were natural gas shortages in 1976 and 
1977. In response, ERDA focused its attention on “four seldom-explored 
geological settings that might yield natural gas in large quantities.” The 
eastern shale gas project is one oft-cited example of government interest 
in shale gas development. Still, for full commercialization of any technol-
ogy, the private sector must be convinced the technology will work and 
be profitable. To their credit, the authors of this report on the history 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
341
of government innovation make this very point and give ample credit to 
Mitchell’s role in the revolution.36
L E G A C Y  O F  A  R E V O L U T I O N
The shale gas revolution has been a game changer for both the natural 
gas and electricity businesses; the new abundance of shale gas has driven 
prices down significantly for both of these commodities (and oil, too) and 
promises abundance for decades to come. More broadly, the revolution has 
changed America’s perspective on its own energy resources, from shortages 
to abundance, and from the fear over imports of natural gas to excitement 
over exports. The revolution may also help to revitalize the US economy 
by creating jobs directly in shale gas and oil production and indirectly as 
consumers who spend less on energy have more money to spend on other 
goods and services. Only new technologies that actually lower the cost of 
energy can assure net job creation like this over the long run.
The shale gas revolution can be transformative for combating global 
climate change, too. In George Mitchell’s words, “Natural gas is the per-
fect bridge fuel on the way to a less carbon-dependent economy.” Using 
natural gas, rather than coal, to produce electricity can cut carbon diox-
ide emissions by at least half. Flexible natural gas–fired combined-cycle 
power plants are able to further optimize energy production by accom-
modating the intermittent electricity generation by renewable fuels, like 
wind and solar.37 
These benefits cannot continue, however, if the revolution does not 
continue. The revolution is at risk both belowground and aboveground. 
Belowground there is the threat that improvements in the technology stop; 
constantly improving technology will be needed as the resources become 
more and more difficult to tap. Aboveground, meanwhile, new or tight-
ened environmental regulations could potentially make production more 
expensive. 
There are legitimate environmental concerns with shale gas produc-
tion that must be fairly balanced against the economic and environmental 

342	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
benefits. The underlying danger is that the United States is in no mood to 
adopt such a balanced view. In one of his columns in the New York Times, 
David Brooks writes: “The country is more divided and more clogged by 
special interests. Now we groan to absorb even the most wondrous gifts.” 
The gift being, in this case, George Mitchell’s innovation. Brooks worries 
that the United States “is polarized between ‘drill, baby, drill’ conserva-
tives, who seem suspicious of most regulation, and environmentalists, who 
seem to regard fossil fuels as morally corrupt and imagine we can switch 
to wind and solar overnight.” This is an era of uncompromising belief on 
both sides.38
The shale gas revolution has demonstrated an essential truth about 
the nature of innovation. George Mitchell’s skill and persistence were cen-
tral drivers in the revolution. When he died on July 26, 2013, at the age 
of ninety-four, the Economist called him the “Father of Fracking” and said, 
“Few businesspeople have done as much to change the world as George 
Mitchell.” However, the cliché has it right: success happens at the point 
where skill and opportunity collide. Looking through the wide-angle lens 
of history, it is important to see that the opportunity for Mitchell was 
created by the deregulation of the natural gas and the electricity busi-
nesses in the 1970s through the 1990s. Without the deregulation of the 
natural gas business there would have been no opportunity for Mitchell 
to earn a profit and, therefore, no incentive for innovation. Without com-
petitive reform in the electricity business there would not have been the 
full commercialization of the natural gas–fired combined-cycle plants 
that became an important customer for shale gas and a central means 
of mitigating global climate change concerns. People matter, but policy 
matters, too.39
Mitchell was not alone in bringing about the transformed energy 
landscape. It has been said that Aubrey McClendon “wasn’t the inventor 
of fracking, but he was its chief apostle.” McClendon was the cofounder 
and chief executive of Chesapeake Energy, a major shale gas producer. He 
has a much more mixed reputation than Mitchell, as he was ousted as the 
chief executive of Chesapeake in 2013 and was indicted in 2016 for “con-
spiring to rig the price of oil and gas leases.” The day after his indictment 
www.ebook3000.com

	
G e o r g e  M i t c h e l l’ s  S h a l e  G a s  R e v o l u t i o n 	
343
he was killed when his car went into a bridge embankment. As it was with 
Insull, the public will have to balance the allegations of wrongdoing with 
his important contribution to the shale gas revolution.40
With the echo of warnings about America becoming dependent 
on overseas imports still audible, Reuters reported the first exports of 
American liquefied natural gas on February 24, 2016. Mitchell’s and 
Devon’s technologies have changed everything.41 

344
C H A P T E R  1 9
Elon Musk’s Vision 
(and History’s Lessons)
That men do not learn ver y much from the lessons of history is 
the most important of all the lessons that history has to teach.
—Aldous Huxley (1959)1
Understanding the lessons of history is an essential first step in anticipating 
the future. Aldous Huxley, however, warns, “That men do not learn very 
much from the lessons of history is the most important of all the lessons 
that history has to teach.” The question, then, should be: What are the 
lessons of history and is anyone paying attention to them? One good 
test of Huxley’s assertion today is to check whether history’s lessons are 
refl ected, intentionally or not, in the vision of the charismatic and some-
times controversial business leader Elon Musk. Two of the three corpo-
rations he created are squarely in the electricity business, and both are 
squarely focused on revolution. Musk has become a celebrity because of 
his ambitious goals, his narrow escapes from failure, and, more import-
ant, his successes.2 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
345
E L O N  M U S K ’ S  V I S I O N
Musk had two early successes with start-up ventures. The first was Zip2, 
which started out as a business directory tied to maps­—what Musk 
describes as “a really advanced blogging system.” When Zip2 was sold 
to Compaq, Musk and his brother, Kimbal, walked away with an esti-
mated $37 million. His second successful venture was into disruptive tech-
nology for internet banking, which later morphed through a merger into 
PayPal. Although Musk was pushed out after a leadership coup, he still 
walked away with an estimated $250 million when PayPal was sold to 
eBay. What’s most impressive is that Musk then put most of that money at 
risk through three other potentially revolutionary ventures: SpaceX, Tesla 
Motors, and SolarCity.3
SpaceX builds and launches rockets into space to place satellites in 
orbit for both public and private customers and to resupply the interna-
tional space station. Reflecting what would become a core business strat-
egy, Musk builds his rockets from scratch in America, and he fully intends 
to be the lowest-cost supplier. After three failures, and six years of constant 
work, SpaceX had its first successful launch in September 2008, becoming 
the first private company in space to orbit Earth using a liquid-fuel rocket. 
Elon Musk said, “We [SpaceX] want to be the Southwest Airlines of space 
launches . . . They offer flights for a heck of a lot less, have a strong safety 
record, and are on time.” The ultimate cost savings for SpaceX were to 
come from the development of a reusable rocket. However, low-cost rockets 
are only an interim goal. The ultimate purpose of SpaceX is to colonize 
Mars. Yes, that is the intent—to create a backup planet of sorts if all does 
not go well on Earth. It is easy to see why Musk is known for setting ambi-
tious goals.4
Tesla Motors manufactures electric vehicles. Musk’s motives here are 
more down to earth, but no less ambitious: sustainably mitigating global 
climate change. As with SpaceX rockets, Tesla developed its cars from 
scratch and started by building them in America; in addition, Tesla ben-
efited from some of the innovative manufacturing practices developed 

346	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
by SpaceX. Lithium-ion batteries power the Tesla cars; ultimately, Musk 
plans to build his own batteries at full capacity in 2020 at what he calls 
his Gigafactory in Nevada. With Tesla and those specially built batteries, 
Musk hopes to achieve economies of scale in manufacturing, thereby cut-
ting the costs of batteries dramatically.5 
SolarCity is a venture created by Musk’s cousins Peter and Lyndon 
Rive, and Musk is a major investor and leader for the company. SolarCity 
started as an installer and innovative financier for rooftop solar photo-
voltaics, or solar panels, for homes and commercial buildings. At first, 
SolarCity purchased its solar devices, taking advantage of the worldwide 
glut and the resulting depressed prices. However, like its sister ventures, 
SolarCity now intends to build its own solar devices in America. On April 
30, 2015, Musk announced another device closely linked to SolarCity (as 
well as to Tesla): an electricity storage device for homes called Powerwall, 
based on lithium-ion batteries. A larger version for utilities, Powerpack, is 
also available.6 
Musk’s importance for the electricity business is manifested in two 
ways, through two of his companies. One is a demand-side revolution: he 
will create new customers for electricity with his battery-driven Tesla cars, 
which can be recharged from the existing centralized power system—the 
electric “grid”—or from solar and other devices separate from the grid. 
The second is a supply-side revolution: he will create an alternative to the 
traditional electricity grid. Musk made it clear that ultimately a home-
owner or owner of a commercial building may cut its tie to the grid by 
combining rooftop solar and storage. The combined devices would serve 
electric needs when the sun shines and then use any excess electricity gen-
erated at that time to store power in the Powerwall device; the stored 
power would then be used to serve electricity needs when the sun does 
not shine. The rooftop solar combined with Powerwall storage creates an 
entirely new system of what can be termed personal power, and someday it 
may compete with the grid.
Musk is not without his critics, and success is not guaranteed for any 
of the three ambitious ventures. In his 2015 biography of Musk, Ashlee 
Vance cites some of the rhetoric from critics. One calls the Tesla car 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
347
“nothing but an utterly derivative overhyped toy for showoffs.” (Tesla 
has since announced its Model 3 at a starting price of $35,000, as com-
pared to about $75,000 and up for Tesla’s Model S.) Many others point 
to the subsidies supporting the manufacture and sale of products by Tesla 
and SolarCity, implying that those subsidies invalidate Musk’s success. 
However, others put Musk in a larger context relative to other current 
inventors and draw more flattering conclusions. Peter Thiel, one of the 
founders of PayPal, bemoans the decline of true innovation, saying, “We 
wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 characters.” No one could say that 
Musk did not go big in this regard with his focus on rockets, electric cars, 
and solar energy, and by risking all his wealth in the process.7
Musk is best characterized as a hero without guarantees. He is a 
hero—even an old-fashioned American hero—because of what he is try-
ing to do and how he does it. He is trying to revolutionize space trans-
port with reusable rockets, road transport with sleek and powerful electric 
vehicles, and home heating and cooling with electricity generated by roof-
top solar panels backed up by storage. Moreover, all his devices are built 
from scratch and (for now) built in America. And he did it as the classic 
entrepreneur; he started with nothing, made his early fortune, and then 
bet that fortune on three new ventures.
It is impossible not to admire him for these heroics. However, his 
success is not guaranteed. There are substantial risks made plain by the 
day-to-day press coverage Musk receives. Here are four examples. First, 
standard financial risk confronts him. In 2016 he proposed merging Tesla 
and SolarCity. Some saw danger here in that he was combining two 
companies that both needed huge cash investment. Some worried that a 
SolarCity bankruptcy would bring Tesla down.8
Second, if the ultimate success for electric vehicles depends on driv-
erless vehicles, the widely publicized death of a person in a driver-assisted 
Tesla vehicle in Florida in 2016 reflects that risk. The broader risk is 
whether consumers want to give up car ownership and hands-on driving 
as required for the world according to Uber, Lyft, and others.9
Third, Musk has bet heavily on lithium-ion batteries with his 
Gigafactory. The risk of fire with those batteries was given significant 

348	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
attention because of the 2016 Samsung recall of some of its smartphones 
as well as the headlines in 2013 about the new Boeing 787 Dreamliner 
being grounded for fire problems with lithium-ion batteries. (Tesla has a 
cooling system to address this risk.) Fourth, in September 2016, a SpaceX 
rocket exploded on the launchpad.10
Still, in the face of these risks, Musk marches on with a new mas-
ter plan issued in June 2016 that sums up his goals as follows: “Create 
stunning solar roofs with seamlessly integrated battery storage. Expand 
the electric vehicle product line to address all major segments. Develop 
a self-driving capability that is 10X safer than manual via massive fleet 
learning. Enable your car to make money for you when you aren’t using 
it.” And all the while Musk keeps up with his ambitious goal to colonize 
Mars—he believes people will reach Mars within ten years.11
With the rapid-fire technological developments, and hyperbolic 
media attention, it is hard sometimes to see the enduring legacy Musk is 
building. It is possible that Musk is leading a revolution in the electricity 
business—one that will democratize electricity in a fundamentally new 
way. To judge this, however, it is important to see Musk’s efforts in the 
context of the lessons of history. 
H I S T O R Y ’ S  L E S S O N S
Does Musk’s vision reflect history’s lessons for truly revolutionary inven-
tors? Generally, the answer is yes. Indeed, he may be channeling Edison, 
Westinghouse, and Tesla with his vision for technology, and Insull with 
his policy vision and, perhaps, his financing strategy. In addition, Musk 
shows, in his own way, a respect for science and scientists that was at the 
core of the breakthroughs by Franklin, Faraday, Maxwell, and Einstein. 
Although Musk’s vision offers solutions to only a particular subset of 
problems, it is still fascinating to find that Musk’s ambitions reflect the 
lessons learned in the most important events in the discovery and appli-
cation of electricity.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
349
Start at the End 
In the Age of Edison, both Edison with his direct-current system and 
Westinghouse with his alternating-current system started their design at 
the end; that is, they first focused on the actual use or “end use” for elec-
tricity. Edison focused first on his lightbulb with painstaking research 
on the best material to use. He then backtracked to create all the ele-
ments of his system from the dynamo (his power plant) to the trans-
mission lines that brought the power to light his bulb. Westinghouse 
focused first on the alternating-current electric motor that Nikola Tesla 
conceived and built. He worked back from there, especially on the 
alternating-current transmission system that would carry the power 
from his power plants, however distant, and deliver it to his customers, 
however widely dispersed. 
The electricity business lost that focus on end use over the years 
because cost-plus rate making centered the profits on big power plants; 
that is where the money was made and that is where the attention was 
paid. Less, if any, attention was paid to innovative ways to serve particu-
lar end uses. In the Age of Harm, attention refocused on end use but only 
because the goal was to use less electricity given the harm electricity gen-
eration was thought to cause the environment. Attention even returned 
to lightbulbs: indeed, Edison’s incandescent bulb was banned under new 
federal law because it was deemed to be less efficient than alternatives like 
compact fluorescent bulbs.12
Until Musk’s ventures, however, few innovators in the electricity 
business had successfully focused on end use in a positive way. Now 
Musk has revived and developed technologies to create a new end 
use—even a new customer—in Tesla Motors’ electric vehicles and the 
people who invest in them. He also brought the focus back to end use 
with the combination of solar rooftops from SolarCity, plus storage with 
Powerwall—thus creating a modern version of “personal” power gen-
eration. In this sense, Musk started at the end and found the greatest 
motivation for innovation there. 

350	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Cross-Pollinate and Collaborate (a Culture of Invention)
Edison and Westinghouse each filled their laboratories with people who 
contributed either general genius or specific experience. Edison created 
a new culture of invention at his Menlo Park lab, and, of course, made 
major contributions to the technology for a wide range of businesses: 
the telegraph, the telephone, and motion pictures, in addition to elec-
tricity. Westinghouse also created a culture of invention at his Garrison 
Alley lab and, in addition to his own genius, he cultivated the talents of, 
among others, Nikola Tesla, who felt cheated by Edison. Westinghouse 
similarly served a range of businesses, making especially important 
contributions to railroad safety. That experience gave him an under-
standing of long-distance power transmission, which is central to the 
alternating-current system. These early efforts established a culture that 
promoted cross-pollination and collaboration. They also brought us tech-
nologies that have become permanently woven into ordinary life. 
Musk has since brought his own genius to the business and, at the 
same time, has cultivated the talents of others. It could be argued that his 
form of cultivation is a bit tougher than the mentorship of gentle genius 
Westinghouse, but it is cultivation nonetheless. 
Dolly Singh, who headed SpaceX’s recruitment for five years, makes 
the point with this metaphor: “Diamonds are created under pressure, and 
Elon Musk is a master diamond maker.” Yes, she admits, Musk applies 
the pressure directly and forcefully on everyone, but he inspires many. 
Singh tells the story of what happened immediately after the SpaceX 
rocket failed on August 2, 2008. Musk walked right past the press to talk 
to his team. He reminded them that they all knew it was hard—literally, 
it was rocket science. He reassured them that SpaceX had the financial 
backing to try again, and again. And he inspired them by saying, “For my 
part, I will never give up and I mean never.” In less than two months, on 
September 28, 2008, SpaceX became the first private company to orbit 
Earth with a liquid-fueled rocket. Leadership is not about being liked by 
everyone; it is about achieving success for everyone.13
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
351
Musk has also cross-pollinated industry-specific knowledge, as advances 
in lithium-ion batteries in laptop computers and other mobile devices clearly 
gave him a powerful foundation for both his electric vehicles and his electric 
storage devices. Now he intends to realize economies of scale in manufac-
turing at his Gigafactory. That strategy will serve both Tesla Motors and 
Powerwall, inevitably leading to technological overlap between both com-
panies. The cross-pollination goes even further: Musk already took some 
of the major manufacturing innovations used by SpaceX to inspire and 
inform the manufacture of his electric vehicles. As we take a wide-angle lens 
on the history of invention and electricity, it seems that Elon Musk has the 
ability to inspire his team and to draw inspiration across his ventures just as 
Edison and Westinghouse did more than a century before him.14 
Make Science (and Scientists) Matter
Man’s understanding of electricity is based on some of the most stunning 
scientific discoveries of all time. That alone makes it different from other 
conventional energy forms; not that science did not and does not matter to 
oil, coal, and natural gas, but scientific endeavor is not the essence of these 
as it is with electricity. As Einstein showed, electricity was not just one stop 
along the path of scientific discovery in the nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies; the study of electricity was the path itself. This gives even greater 
hope for scientific discovery with electricity. The first burst of scientific 
discovery for electricity was in the Age of Franklin and encompassed 
Franklin, Faraday, and Maxwell. After a long hiatus, in the Age of Edison 
and the Age of Big, Tesla and Einstein led two further surges in scientific 
breakthroughs. Along the way, the electricity business continued to moti-
vate technological innovation even as it became embattled on the regula-
tory front. In 2016 Elon Musk is perhaps the most fitting torchbearer for 
our latest revolution in both the science and business of electricity. 
Today, out of the thousands of pages written on the electricity business, 
few even mention science. It is as if all that groundbreaking science has 

352	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
been tapped out, as if there can be no further bursts of discovery. Surely 
this cannot be true. As we face challenges around the United States’ grow-
ing energy consumption and concerns over environmental sustainability, 
we cannot presume this deep well is dry. Science did and does matter to 
the electricity business, and serious respect for and interest in it must be 
revived.
Scientists matter, too. There is no more compelling example of this 
than Franklin. His stature as a scientist was, in large part, the reason he 
could negotiate with the French, and those negotiations led to an alli-
ance that eventually ensured the American colonies’ victory at Yorktown. 
Perhaps such a far-reaching public payoff cannot be expected ever 
again, but the manner in which scientists conduct themselves still mat-
ters. Signature examples lie in Maxwell’s great respect for Faraday, and 
Einstein’s respect for both Faraday and Maxwell. The manner and tone 
of scientists reflect whether society can maintain a civil discourse on mat-
ters of importance. With Franklin, Faraday, Maxwell, and Einstein, scien-
tists were thought to bring wisdom to scientific inquiry; their inventions, 
meanwhile, deeply affected many other debates and conflicts of the day. 
Just think what might be achieved through a nuanced and civil discourse 
on issues such as global climate change and shale gas development. Add 
the breakthroughs in medical sciences and the development of artificial 
intelligence and it is clear that science and scientists may matter to society 
today more than ever before. 
Like Edison, Musk is committed to using science to develop his prod-
ucts rather than developing science as an end in itself. Those products, 
in their very ambition, embed advanced scientific thought, from rocket 
science to personal power storage. Even Musk’s motives are based in sci-
ence, as far as we can tell. For him, SpaceX is a path to colonizing Mars, 
while Tesla Motors and SolarCity contribute to mitigating global cli-
mate change. His choice of solar photovoltaics is an additional bet on the 
advancement of science; the hoped-for dramatic reduction in cost in the 
future depends on significant advances in the science of manufacturing 
and materials in the present. Musk seems to have doubled down on sci-
ence with SolarCity’s business strategy of building, rather than buying, its 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
353
solar panels. Furthermore, Musk is not shy about speaking out as a scien-
tist on the major issues of the day—including, interestingly, his opposition 
to the development of artificial intelligence.15
Open a Door to Outsized Economic Impact
The economic impact of new electricity technologies is not demonstrated 
strictly by the amount of money spent on electricity. Technological 
change is not all about getting cheaper energy. Economic impact is also 
tied up with how that new technology transforms the economy. The 
move from water power to steam power transformed the economy as 
factories no longer had to be situated next to water; instead, the fac-
tory could be located much closer to both customers and to employees. 
The same indirect, outsized economic impact was realized with Morse’s 
telegraph—the “Victorian Internet”; the telegraph allowed the scale 
and scope of many other industries to grow. The significant economic 
impact of Nikola Tesla’s alternating-current motor was that it allowed 
the redesign of the factory floor. No longer were workers tethered to the 
steam engine in the basement; the work flow would be designed instead 
around what is best for product manufacture. On the national stage, the 
government-created Hoover Dam brought water to allow the California 
desert to bloom, while the private innovation of George Mitchell altered 
the geopolitics of energy and built a bridge to future mitigation for global 
climate change. 
However, predicting the impact of technological change is more diffi-
cult in the Age of Harm than it was in the Age of Edison and the Age of 
Big. The driving force for change in the Age of Harm is to minimize the 
environmental harm caused by air pollutants. Given that, it is important 
to ask whether there will be any positive economic impact from these new 
technologies. In the Age of Uncompromising Belief—more an age of par-
tisanship and outrage than an approach to science—it can be challenging 
to locate evenhanded assessments of the benefits versus the harms of new 
technologies. 

354	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Musk’s approach does not immediately promise outsized economic 
impact, but it may open the door to it. The most enticing opportunity 
for such change might occur because the new technologies are designed 
with particular end uses in mind and built from scratch. For example, 
Musk is producing a new vehicle, not just a new electric vehicle. Vance 
notes that Tesla’s “Model S was named Motor Trend’s Car of the Year” 
in 2012, and concludes that “the Model S was not just the best electric 
car; it was the best car, period, and the car people desired.” Moreover, 
Tesla is a strategic competitor to the current industry leaders because its 
cars are built on a completely different platform, and, therefore, can be 
manufactured in a fundamentally new way, including the manufacture 
of the “engine,” the lithium-ion battery. The broader impact of this new 
platform isn’t known yet, but it could lead to an interest in new materials 
and new manufacturing methods that could stimulate new industries. 
The ultimate, outsized economic impact, however, may come from the 
fact that the Tesla and other electric cars are the essential tool for a 
revolution in the transportation industry: the emergence of driverless or 
autonomous vehicles.16
Moreover, Musk (for now) manufactures in the United States. This 
means all three of his businesses are meant to gain competitive advan-
tage for America in industries targeted by strategic competitors in other 
countries—China in particular. For rockets, Musk asserts, “Our primary 
long-term competition is in China.” China also has targeted electric vehi-
cles and solar panels. There are no guarantees, but there may be a sig-
nificant economic impact from Musk reviving American manufacturing 
with a unique mix, as Vance puts it, of “software, electronics, advanced 
materials, and computing horsepower.”17
Count on an Intrinsic Trust in Business
Edison and Westinghouse used private capital and private companies to 
achieve their technological breakthroughs. This gave good reason for the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
355
public to trust private investment in the electricity business during the 
Age of Edison. Insull circumscribed that trust when he asked for geo-
graphic monopolies to be carved out and invited regulation of the profit 
of those monopolies. The monopolization ended competition within the 
geographic area covered by each regional monopoly, but, still, these were 
privately owned, not government-owned, companies.
The Great Depression had the potential to tip the scales toward 
government ownership of the electricity business; after all, the Great 
Depression was seen as the result of a great failure of capitalism in the 
1920s. President Franklin D. Roosevelt put the blame for the Depression 
on big business owners, including Insull, but he did not call for govern-
ment ownership; indeed, he spoke against it. While President Roosevelt 
broke apart all the major electric holding companies of the day, he was 
restrained in his explicit choice not to seek government ownership. The 
TVA (Tennessee Valley Authority) project was one major exception: it was 
a rare, large-scale experiment with state capitalism, but it never was repli-
cated, and it did not set a template for government control. 
The 1970s and 1980s brought successful efforts to deregulate the elec-
tricity business, or, at least, to open the door to some competition through 
regulatory reform. Then confidence in that competitive reform was 
undermined by three high-profile events: the California crisis in 2000, the 
collapse of Enron in 2001, and the blackout of 2003. These three events 
may have comprised the biggest challenge to the intrinsic trust in private 
business—an even greater specific challenge than the Great Depression. 
Any one of these events could have derailed competitive reform and, yet, 
not even the three in combination did that.
All three of Musk’s corporations embody direct, disruptive compe-
tition for established industries: SpaceX in the aerospace industry, Tesla 
Motors in the automobile industry, and SolarCity plus Powerwall in the 
electricity industry. Moreover, each of these companies pursues explicit, 
strategic competitive advantage; effective strategic competition is at the 
core of Musk’s success. In this way Musk is counting on the American 
public’s continued, intrinsic trust in private business. 

356	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Acknowledge That Environmental Policy Will Dominate
The tragic “episodes” of pollution in Donora, New York City, and 
London in the mid-twentieth century were the early impetus for envi-
ronmental regulation; they gave dramatic, physical evidence of the harm 
industry could cause. Next came Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring in 1962, 
which created a template for environmental activism. It, too, emphasized 
physical evidence and added an implied burden of proof on industry to 
show that its operations caused no harm. In this sense Rachel Carson is 
the mother of the modern environmental movement and the herald of 
the Age of Harm.
Recent efforts to combat global climate change prove the resil-
ience of environmentalists in the Age of Harm. The most widely known 
effort came in the form of the Waxman-Markey bill calling for an elab-
orate cap-and-trade program to cut carbon dioxide emissions. Those 
opposed to action to combat global climate change thought the defeat 
of cap-and-trade was the end of the story, but environmentalists sim-
ply followed a plan B that went through the courts. This avenue, which 
included the US Supreme Court, gave the US EPA the right to regulate 
carbon dioxide emissions from all sources, cars as well as power plants, 
under existing law. President Obama’s Clean Power Plan is one result of 
this plan B. Beyond resilience, the environmentalists’ success shows that 
the tightening of environmental regulations for the electricity business 
may be inevitable—with or without a vote by the people or their elected 
representatives. 
Musk’s enterprises are based on this inevitability of tighter regula-
tions for greenhouse gas emissions. Both Tesla Motors and SolarCity are 
businesses driven in large part by global climate concerns, as well as 
the money and mandates offered in the name of those concerns. That 
is, these two ventures are betting on the view that environmental pol-
icy will drive the electricity business. That bet, however, may be jeop-
ardized by pending court challenges and by the policies of the Trump 
administration.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
357
Draw a New Jurisdictional Boundary
State regulation of the electricity business was Insull’s idea, and it soon 
was the norm across America. Over time, however, the courts would not 
allow the states to regulate transactions that crossed state lines—so-called 
interstate sales. The holding companies were the real concern in this 
regard; the three largest controlled 44.5 percent of US generation in 
1932. They also controlled the bulk of the interstate sales of electricity, 
although those sales accounted for only about 14 percent of all electricity 
generation. In 1935 with the Public Utility Holding Company Act and the 
Federal Power Act, the federal government gained the authority to both 
dismantle the holding companies and regulate any remaining interstate 
sales. These laws then set the jurisdictional boundary between the federal 
and state governments: generally, the federal government had jurisdiction 
over interstate sales, and states had jurisdiction over all the rest.18
The placement of that boundary has been argued out in the courts 
over many years, and the jurisdictional boundary has moved accordingly. 
Then, in 2013, two federal courts ruled that two state commissions in 
Maryland and New Jersey did not have the right to order their utilities 
to conduct competitive solicitations to get new power plants built that 
the states thought were needed to assure reliable electricity service. The 
Supreme Court ruled on the Maryland case in April 2016 and upheld the 
lower courts. 
With all the uncertainty looming over the future, and all the technol-
ogies that can compete to serve future needs, the United States’ priority is 
to achieve a diversified portfolio of technologies for the electricity business. 
If the states retained their jurisdiction to order utilities to build or buy new 
power resources of the sort the state preferred, the United States would be 
assured of a diversified portfolio of technologies simply because the states 
are so different.19 The Supreme Court ruling puts that diversity in doubt. 
Moreover, had the court applied the same principles it had applied just 
three months earlier, in another federal preemption case, it might have 
reversed the lower court and restored states’ rights.20 

358	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
The jurisdictional boundary matters for Elon Musk’s companies 
because they participate in both state and federal programs that give 
substantial incentives to technologies including electric vehicles, solar 
photo­voltaics, and electric storage. These preemption cases threaten to an 
unknown extent the state programs that give incentives for products from 
Tesla Motors, SolarCity, and Powerwall. Moreover, the cases tee up the 
issue of when courts should defer to elected officials on matters of policy, 
rather than rush to judge solely on matters of law. The right policy is that 
federal and state programs can coexist. 
Discern a Purposeful Role for Government
A long-held theory of the business world is that the role of government, if 
such a role is needed, should be larger in the early stages of technological 
development and smaller in the later stages. Specifically, the theory holds 
that technologies evolve through research, development, demonstration, 
and commercialization—an RDD&C process—and the government’s 
role should be largest in the research stage and taper off from there. It 
should be more involved in research because the uncertainties of a payoff 
make private investment in research less likely. Looking at the history of 
the electricity business, however, it seems clear that this theory has been 
implemented backward.
Government involvement, at least historically, was lightest in the 
early stages. In the Age of Franklin, the science poured out of Franklin, 
Faraday, and Maxwell at their own initiative. The same was true for 
the Age of Edison: both Edison and Westinghouse (with Tesla) either 
funded their own efforts or secured private investors. This may have sim-
ply reflected the tone of the times—it was before the role of government 
was expanded significantly in the Great Depression—but it is worth 
highlighting here because it undermines the widely accepted RDD&C 
process view.
The first major expansion of government involvement came with 
Insull’s regulatory deal. With this arrangement, the country was carved 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
359
into geographic monopolies that would then charge for electricity at 
cost-plus-profit prices. So the expanded government involvement not only 
came later in the RDD&C process—actually in the commercialization 
stage—but also came in a fundamentally different form. This was not gov-
ernment funding of any stage of the development process; it was economic 
regulation governing who got to sell electricity and at what price. Insull 
discerned this role for state government because he believed—correctly, 
as it turns out—that the resulting economies of scale and scope would help 
to achieve the overarching goal of the day: making electricity available 
and affordable to all. 
That goal has changed over time and so have the tactics to pursue it. 
The most frequently stated overarching goal today is to mitigate global 
climate change. The most common tactic, meanwhile, is designation of 
“official technologies” along with the use of a wide range of direct and 
indirect subsidies. Today, renewable technologies such as wind and solar 
are the official technologies, and they are subsidized with both money 
from the federal government and mandates from the states.
Musk’s companies have employed and enjoyed the full benefit of this 
money and these mandates, and they have been criticized heavily for 
doing so. The Los Angeles Times claimed the government subsidies to all 
three of Musk’s companies added up over time to $4.9 billion. Musk dis-
putes how the article implies that subsidies are the reason for his success, 
and he argues that the subsidies he enjoys are not out of line with subsidies 
he sees in other energy industries. Still, legitimate concern exists about the 
government “picking winners” rather than allowing competitors to win or 
lose on a level playing field. A new purposeful role for government has to 
be discerned with the overall goal well stated and with tactics that serve 
that goal fully specified.21
Use a Wide-Angle Lens 
To understand the past and to anticipate the future, it is essential that 
decision makers consider events (and possible eventualities) through a 

360	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
wide-angle lens. Hopefully the previous eighteen chapters have illustrated 
the value of this proposition.
For Musk and his ventures, that means several, less immediately evi-
dent factors must be taken into account to understand their significance. 
Tesla’s electric vehicles represent more than a head-to-head competition 
between conventional internal combustion engines and the lithium-ion 
battery “engine.” The industry-altering possibilities for buying electric 
vehicles include the broad move to driverless vehicles; electricity may turn 
out to be the preferred fuel for these vehicles, and their success would then 
drive Tesla’s sales.22
Law, policy, geopolitics, and finance matter, too. Tesla’s direct sales 
to retail customers have been challenged in the courts by traditional auto 
distributors; the grounds are that long-standing state law requires man-
ufacturers to sell their cars through franchised dealerships. In policy, 
meanwhile, ever tightening fuel efficiency standards for conventional cars 
create a competitive advantage for electric vehicles, and Musk supports 
them. Around the world, surging demand for lithium raises concern about 
the sources of supply. Some say 70 percent of long-term lithium supplies 
are located in three countries—Chile, Argentina, and Bolivia—while 
others point to new sources emerging, including some in America. There 
is also increasing attention on China’s interest in lithium and, as a con-
sequence, the possible negative effects on availability and price. Finally, 
given the history of personal financial involvement by Insull and Enron, 
some have raised questions about Musk’s generous investment in his 
companies—despite the fact that much of his early profits were benefi-
cially put at risk when they went toward his ambitious new projects.23 
A  P A T H  F O R W A R D 
A Second Battle of the Systems (a Second Democratization)
Besides the Huxley quotation at the start of this chapter, there are two 
other famous thoughts on the lessons of history that are illustrative of the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
361
story here. The first is George Santayana’s view that “those who cannot 
remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” A counter of sorts is 
attributed to Mark Twain, in which he supposedly said, “History does not 
repeat itself but it rhymes.” The two most intriguing rhymes in the context 
of the electricity industry would be a second Battle of the Currents and a 
second democratization of electricity.24
Decades ago the titans of technology in the electricity business—Edison 
and Westinghouse with Tesla—fought it out to see whose system would 
rule. Westinghouse and Tesla won, with their alternating-current system 
proving more valuable than Edison’s direct-current system. An important 
subplot to the story is that the Westinghouse and Tesla system, imple-
mented by Insull, also defeated self-generation by big customers such 
as the trolley cars and manufacturing plants. The alternating-current 
system won because it gave customers what they wanted: electricity 
available and affordable to all. The price of electricity was lowered dra-
matically by the system’s economies of scale and scope, and the choice of 
cost-plus regulation accommodated the realization of those economies. 
The alternating-current system was a big success in this regard, and it 
was a big success even if one focuses just on the engineering: in 2003 the 
National Academy of Engineers chose electrification as the number one 
engineering achievement of the twentieth century.25
Assuming that today’s emerging system technologies prove them-
selves, will customers still turn to the alternating-current system? Is that 
system, with its far-flung power plants and an intricate transmission grid, 
still the best? Customers will continue to turn to that system if it continues 
to provide what they want. Today customers still want electricity to be 
available and affordable, but they also want more. These new demands 
include more local—or “doorstep”—reliability, better environmental per-
formance, and a clear choice between options. 
Doorstep reliability is a concern exacerbated by extreme weather 
events. While the alternating-current system has been remarkably reliable 
overall, today’s customers want to be assured that the lights will stay on 
at their homes, offices, and factories even in the middle of a storm. People 
point to the damage done in 2012 by Superstorm Sandy in New Jersey 

362	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
as an example, including the damage due to the loss of electric service. 
Despite the widespread awareness of this damage, when one local utility 
proposed an expensive plan to prevent loss of region-wide electric service 
in the future, consumer groups settled on giving only 31 percent of the 
funds requested. It might be that the consumer groups simply did not see 
a payoff for doorstep reliability from investment in the region-wide grid. 
More broadly, the media feeds these doubts about the region-wide grid 
with frequent stories about possible electric service outages due to volatile 
weather, cyber attacks, and even low-tech terrorist attacks.26 
How do the competitors to the grid score on these three customer 
demands? One alternative is often referred to as the microgrid. It is still 
a grid—it matches a need for electricity with resources to supply that 
electricity—but it operates on a much smaller scale. The microgrid at 
Princeton University has gotten substantial attention in recent years. On 
the doorstep reliability front, it scores well; that microgrid kept the lights 
on during Superstorm Sandy. In terms of environmental performance, 
microgrids including Princeton’s appear to score well because they are 
open to using a full range of resources to serve customers. The resources 
include renewables like solar, demand-side resources like shutting off 
power use when supplies are tight, and conventional resources like mod-
ern natural gas–fired power plants. Consumer choice, meanwhile, was 
the primary motivation for the Princeton microgrid: the university can 
choose whether to take power from the grid or the microgrid.27
Personal power, another competitor to the grid, also scores well; Musk’s 
companies are prominent examples. As we have seen, the combination 
of SolarCity rooftop solar and Powerwall would function as a personal 
power source. In terms of local reliability, the intent of Powerwall is to be 
ready when power from the grid is curtailed, so personal power scores well 
on this basis. Personal power scores well in terms of environmental per-
formance, too, if the bulk of the power is solar rooftop. Consumer choice 
is inherent to this system because the customer can choose to buy power 
from the grid or take it from the personal power system.
These emerging technologies create the opportunity for a second bat-
tle of the systems. Indeed, it is something of a rematch between the smaller, 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
363
local power of Edison’s system (now represented by modern microgrids 
and personal power) and Westinghouse’s expansive grid. The first such 
battle marked a major, beneficial move to the alternating-current system. 
Clearing a path for a second battle of the systems may bring the same 
magnitude of beneficial gain because it improves doorstep reliability and 
environmental performance in the customer’s eye and, by definition, 
offers customers choice. This is not to say microgrids and personal power 
are inexpensive or that all the technology and policy issues have been 
worked out—or that they are likely to win. However, history shows that 
regulation and law must make way for a fair fight.
This second battle of the systems may also be characterized as a sec-
ond democratization of electricity. Insull drove the first by producing elec-
tricity for everyone. In the near future, microgrids and personal power 
might democratize electricity in the sense that they allow individual cus-
tomers to “vote for” the level of local reliability, environmental perfor-
mance, and choice that is tailored to their needs.
Carbon Tax, Tax Reform, and Policy Sweep
Cost-plus-profit prices eliminated the incentive to invest in the develop-
ment of a full range of new technologies. Why would a utility make a risky 
investment in new technology if the utility could earn no more than a stan-
dard profit if the new technology worked, and possibly earn no profit at all 
or suffer a loss if the technology did not work? In response to this lack of 
incentive, governments designated “official technologies.” Nuclear power 
was once such technology. The government subsidized the development of 
nuclear power consistent with the overarching goal expressed by President 
Eisenhower in his Atoms for Peace speech at the United Nations: nuclear 
power was to be an economic weapon in the Cold War.
The overarching goal has changed since then and, as already noted, 
is now best defined as mitigation of global climate change. There are new 
official technologies today, too, ranging from wind to solar to clean coal 
to demand reduction to microgrids and personal power. The tools used 

364	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
to implement this designation of official technologies also are wide rang-
ing. In terms of money, they include tax incentives such as production tax 
credits or investment tax credits, loan guaranties, direct cash subsidies, 
and some research and development funds. Beyond the money, there are 
mandates. For example, twenty-nine states plus the District of Columbia 
have rules that require their local utilities to produce a specified share of 
their electricity from renewable fuels.28 
Placing a price—a tax—on carbon would be an alternative to the 
subsidies and mandates from federal and state governments. Shifting 
from money and mandates to a carbon tax would address head-on the 
concern about government “picking winners” when so many of those 
“winners” actually fail. These oft-cited failures cut across the spectrum 
of technologies from electric vehicles to solar photovoltaics to clean coal. 
So, too, a carbon tax puts in place a uniform incentive to control carbon 
emissions—rather than one that varies widely across the official technol-
ogies. And, notably, it allows a choice between investing in preventive 
controls now or just paying the tax and waiting to adapt if and when it is 
necessary later.
For those greatly concerned about global climate change, a carbon 
tax would establish a broad and permanent incentive to cut carbon diox-
ide emissions. Equally important, those less concerned with global climate 
change might be brought into a compromise if the funds from the carbon 
tax were used to fund income tax reform; that is, a new tax placed on 
something undesirable—carbon emissions—could be substituted for an 
old tax on something that is wanted—smart investment and hard work. 
In the wake of this carbon-tax-and-tax-reform compromise, a third prong 
of the policy could emerge: a “policy sweep” by the federal and state gov-
ernments. That is, the mandates and the money targeted to official tech-
nologies would be swept away.
Influential parties ranging from Bill Gates to ExxonMobil to George 
P. Shultz and James A. Baker III have suggested putting a price on car-
bon. The carbon tax, tax reform, and policy sweep concept are just a 
few of many policy visions for the future. It is important to move past 
the stymied ideological fight in the Age of Uncompromising Belief. The 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
365
government must take on a positive role, based solely on what works to 
achieve the goals of the day, and not based on abstractions about the right 
size of government. Similarly, as reflected in Gates’ proposals, the future 
must be based on a full range of new technologies—some unimagined as 
of yet—not limited to today’s wind and solar technologies.29 
History’s Legacy (How It Helps)
History can help decision makers in business and government by lead-
ing them to take a broader view. This can function in two ways: history 
leads decision makers to look across time; surely what happened yester-
day influences what happens today. History also leads decision makers to 
look across all the factors that drive change, including those documented 
in this book: science and technology; politics and geopolitics; regulatory 
policy; law and the courts; business strategy; economics; and the catchall 
factor called “culture.” 
Examples of the benefits of such broadness are plentiful in the electric-
ity business. If the narrative of electricity was wrongly said to begin with 
Edison, it would have missed the heart and soul of the original story—the 
science of Franklin, Faraday, and Maxwell. Failing to consider that sci-
ence would lead to a faulty understanding of the past as well as an inability 
to see the great hope of the future. 
The full significance of Watt’s steam engine cannot be gauged until 
Nikola Tesla’s electric motor comes into view. Watt’s steam engine made 
manufacturers dependent upon—some might say addicted to—using 
mechanical power. That addiction meant manufacturers were eager to 
try new and better sources of such power; Tesla’s alternating-current elec-
tric motor was just that. In this sense, Watt’s innovation set the table for 
Tesla’s innovation. Untethered from the steam engine in the basement, the 
electric motor allowed a productive redesign of the factory floor, which, in 
turn, led to dramatic economic impact. 
Similarly, one cannot support an intrinsic trust in business without 
considering a lengthy series of historical events, ranging from the first 

366	
S I M P LY  E L E C T R I F Y I N G
Battle of the Currents to Enron’s collapse. This broadening perspective 
reveals that it took four decades to gain traction for the deregulation of 
the electricity business, extending from the Chicago School’s intellectual 
pressure in the 1960s to the Arab oil embargo in the 1970s to the surge 
of mergers in the early 1990s to the call for regional transmission orga-
nizations in the 2000s. Nor without a broadened view could the roots of 
today’s shale gas revolution be seen in the deregulation of natural gas and 
electricity in the 1980s. 
So, too, a look back can give access to unique evidence on a particular 
point. For instance, some say that science and spiritual faith cannot coexist 
and, further, that faith impedes scientific progress. Michael Faraday’s life 
and work give ample counterevidence to the claim. Faraday’s faith was 
hardly an impediment to his groundbreaking scientific advances. Indeed, 
his faith in one God led him to search with all his heart and skill to find one 
force. The link Faraday discovered between electricity and magnetism is still 
the foundation of both the electricity and telecommunication businesses. 
Diversity of views of every sort is needed to create fundamental change. 
To many, too much of the money spent in science and technology 
is aimed at toys by the rich and for the rich. This criticism is directed at 
Musk’s ventures, for instance. But a broader view shows that what might 
start as toys by the rich, for the rich, can end up as significant advances 
in science and technology for everybody. Franklin’s wealth allowed him 
to retire and devote five years to the science of electricity—leading to 
breakthroughs that made his views the accepted standard. Edison placed 
some of his first power plants in the homes and even in a ship owned 
by rich investors. And, of course, in that era nearly all investment came 
from the wealthy. Musk has argued that the development of the expensive 
Tesla Model S will lead to the development of more affordable electric 
vehicles—and it has. It is not how and where the revolution begins that 
matters; it is whether it ends with true advances, judged in the cultural 
context of the times.30 
Similarly, the ideological battle over the role of government might be 
defused if evidence from the history of electricity was considered. That role 
has varied greatly over time and, yet, across these variations, government 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E l o n  M u s k ’ s  V i s i o n  ( a n d  H i s t o r y ’ s  L e s s o n s )  	
367
was frequently successful in defining and serving the overarching goal of 
the day. The key question is what works, and the answers are far more 
nuanced than a purely partisan ideological debate allows. 
The history told here shows how the electricity business arrived at the 
present through both successes and failures. It can serve as a guide to the 
future if it is assessed through civil discourse that reflects a wide-angle lens 
on history. Still, there is no way to accurately predict how the future will 
unfold, nor is it guaranteed that man will try to know and apply history’s 
lessons. The only guarantee is that whatever happens will be, well . . . 
simply electrifying. 

www.ebook3000.com

369
E P I L O G U E
Just Imagine 
We Need Energy Miracles
—Bill Gates (2014)1
Benjamin Franklin accepted the challenge to see the unseen—to imagine elec-
tricity. Today’s challenge is no diff erent: to imagine the uses and sources of 
electricity in the future. To create a second Age of Franklin, a time of awe 
and discovery, the same boundless imagination is required, unconstrained 
by past ideologies of science, technology, politics, government policy, eco-
nomics, business strategy, and culture. The one legitimate constraint is to 
pursue only what works to achieve clearly stated goals. 
A n  A B U n d A n C E  O F  T E C H n O L O G I E s
Thankfully there is no shortage of imagination around the world. One 
reason is that visionary, hardworking scientists like Faraday and Maxwell 
forged a path. They showed how to make electricity by simply pushing 
and pulling a magnet inside a coil of wire. The mechanical power to 

370	
E P I L O G U E
do the pushing and pulling most often comes from steam produced by 
a range of methods, from burning coal to incinerating garbage to con-
trolling a nuclear reaction. Compressing natural gas to drive a combustion 
turbine—essentially a jet engine—is well understood and widely applied 
today, too. And the push and pull can be driven just as easily by other 
forces; wind, or ocean waves, or river currents, for example.2 
Some suggest an old technology can be taught new tricks. Specifically, 
the old technology is nuclear power and the new trick is to manufacture 
small reactors. A University of Chicago study in 2011 constructively and 
carefully made the case for small modular reactors (SMRs). The strongest 
case is that nuclear power has no carbon emissions and can be built on a large 
scale. The challenges to SMRs were laid out fairly by the authors: “safety, 
nonproliferation, waste management, and economic competitiveness.3
Readily understood and available, but a bit harder to explain, are 
technologies such as solar photovoltaics and fuel cells. Photovoltaics 
convert light into electricity at an atomic level. This technology echoes 
Einstein, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the 
photoelectric effect. The space program was the first serious use of the 
technology to provide power on spacecraft. Solar photovoltaics rely on 
the same types of semiconductor material used in computers; indeed, the 
link to the science of computers is part of the reason for optimism for solar 
photovoltaics to greatly improve performance and lower costs.4 
A fuel cell converts hydrogen and oxygen into water and, by doing 
that, produces electricity: a “flow” of electrons. Since it is a chemical reac-
tion, it produces few of the air pollution emissions that occur with fossil 
fuel combustion—and that is a primary appeal. However, the full impact 
on emissions, including greenhouse gases, depends importantly on the 
source of the hydrogen for the fuel cell. Also appealing is the fact that cells 
can be stacked to meet any scale of electric demand. What is less appeal-
ing is the relatively high cost.5 
Photovoltaics and fuel cells could be important warriors in the second 
Battle of the Currents because both can be used at a scale suitable for 
personal power. They are important, too, in the sense that the potential 
for dramatic performance improvements and cost reductions lies in the 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J u s t  I m a g i n e  	
371
manufacture of the devices themselves—economies of scale in manufac-
turing, not in the power plant. 
New science is at the heart of new technology. Consider as one exam-
ple the newly created material called graphene. The 2010 Nobel Prize in 
Physics was awarded to Andre K. Geim and Konstantin S. Novoselov for 
“producing, isolating, identifying and characterizing graphene.” Graphene 
is a single atomic layer of carbon. The Royal Swedish Academy of Science 
calls carbon “the most fascinating element in the periodic table,” with 
graphite being the most common form; graphite is used in the ordinary 
pencil, and the academy points out that anyone who has used such a pencil 
“has probably produced graphene-like structures without knowing it.” The 
excitement is palpable, with the two Nobel winners themselves writing that 
graphene “has already revealed a cornucopia of new physics and potential 
applications.” For the purposes of this narrative, the potential application 
for electricity technology is most important—and the excitement remains 
undiminished since the Nobel win. The University of Manchester asks us 
to “imagine fully charging a smartphone in seconds, or an electric car in 
minutes. That’s the power of graphene.” And further, that “graphene mem-
branes could be used to sieve hydrogen gas from the atmosphere—a devel-
opment that could pave the way for electric generation powered by air.”6 
Another example is the work of Jean-Pierre Sauvage, Sir J. Fraser 
Stoddart, and Bernard L. Feringa, who together won the 2016 Nobel 
Prize in Chemistry “for the design and synthesis of molecular machines.” 
In awarding the prize, the Academy went on to liken the advance to the 
science behind the electric motor: “In terms of development, the molec-
ular motor is at the same stage as the electric motor was in the 1830s, 
when scientists displayed various spinning cranks and wheels, unaware 
that they would lead to washing machines, fans and food processors. 
Molecular machines will most likely be used in the development of things 
such as new materials, sensors and energy storage systems.”
The stories of graphene and molecular machines are meant only to 
illustrate the possible impact of new science; these are by no means the 
only paths forward, but they show what can be done if we step back and 
just imagine.7 

372	
E P I L O G U E
O P E N  T H E  D O O R  T O  A L L
This history is focused on the technologies used to produce and distrib-
ute electricity. And yet it would clearly be wrong to identify technology 
alone as the driving force behind the electricity industry. The choice of 
technology is itself driven by so many factors, including government laws, 
policies, and regulations. A wide-angle lens must be used to fully see the 
nature of the choices made in the past. The Edison versus Westinghouse/
Tesla Battle of the Currents was perhaps the clearest instance of the more 
advantageous technology emerging victorious, while its competitor was 
abandoned. The alternating-current system won because it best served 
the goals of the day and, therefore, was encouraged and accommodated 
by policies such as establishing geographic monopolies. 
After that fair fight, the choice of technology was driven substantially 
by Insull’s cost-plus rate making. This structure promoted capital-intensive 
technologies like coal-fired power, although oil and natural gas–fired 
power plants remained a constructive, competitive threat. 
The designation of official technologies then began. Nuclear power 
is the prime example. Although it is still used for up to 20 percent of 
America’s electricity generation, in the end, nuclear did not help make 
electricity available and affordable to all. The designation of nuclear as 
an official technology was probably misguided in the long run, because it 
may have pushed nuclear to come on line too fast and at too big of a scale; 
after all, it was born small-scale and used to power submarines.8
Today, wind and solar have been designated official technologies. 
State governments mandate their use and the federal government pro-
vides financial subsidies. One significant, positive difference is that, unlike 
with nuclear power, the states typically require wind and solar producers 
to compete on price and performance to win the mandates; the competi-
tion has driven improvements in performance and price. 
No one designated shale gas as an official technology, yet today it is the 
most important technological innovation for the electricity business. It is a 
true innovation—it made natural gas abundant and cheap and, thereby, 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J u s t  I m a g i n e  	
373
has kept electricity prices lower than they would have been. For shale gas, 
government policy simply opened the door through the deregulation of nat-
ural gas production and electricity generation. Deregulation then opened 
the door to Mitchell’s and Devon Energy’s hard work and smart invest-
ment. Despite or perhaps because it was not an official technology, shale 
gas–fired power helped achieve America’s long-standing goal of making 
electricity available and affordable to all. Moreover, it is positioned to help 
achieve the added goals of doorstep reliability, environmental protection, 
and choice—at least as a bridge to a fundamentally different future. 
T H E  R I C H E S T  M A N  I N  T H E  W O R L D 
Even with the abundance of technologies we have today, we cannot claim 
to have opened the door to all technologies. There are always forks in the 
road and choices to be made. What matters—a lot—is who chooses and 
how the choices are made. 
What would the richest man in the world do? We can guess at that 
with some precision because Bill Gates has committed both his money 
and his genius to addressing global climate change. His plan for the future 
includes both the “pull” of a carbon tax and the “push” of accelerated 
research and development. In between his pull and push are a great num-
ber of bets on deployment of specific technologies by private investors.9 
What are Gates’ bets? He sets ambitious standards for the ultimate 
winning technologies: they must have zero carbon emissions, be reliable 
around the clock, and cost less than fossil fuels (presumably with the car-
bon tax in place). Gates says bluntly that, while progress has been made, 
current technologies, including wind and solar, don’t do the job. And nei-
ther is shale gas a final solution. In this spirit of frankness, Gates even 
warns about exaggeration when ascribing today’s weather events solely to 
global climate change; El Niño is a bigger factor right now.10 
Gates has invested about $1 billion so far, with direct investments in 
fifteen ventures and thirty indirect investments through venture capital. 

374	
E P I L O G U E
Four investments reveal the type and range of his choices. First, nuclear 
power, because it is the only technology with zero carbon emissions that is 
already built at a large scale. The technology Gates backs is the Traveling 
Wave Reactor by TerraPower. It uses “waste” nuclear fuel without 
enrichment—so proliferation concerns are addressed. TerraPower claims 
its automatic safety features make a Fukushima incident impossible and 
the technology is ready to build now.11 
A second bet is solar-chemical power. Gates points to Nate Lewis, at 
the California Institute of Technology, who uses artificial photosynthesis 
to produce hydrogen fuel from water. A third bet is high-altitude wind, 
which taps into the energy of the jet stream. A fourth bet is on carbon 
engineering that pulls carbon dioxide out of the air as an alternative to 
carbon capture and sequestration.12
Gates and other billionaires have also generously committed to new 
technology through the creation of the Breakthrough Energy Coalition.13 
No plan opens all doors to the future. Choosing mitigation of global 
climate change as the overarching goal cuts out some technologies: those 
that would improve rather than remove fossil fuels. Moreover, the broad 
policies that set the stage for new technologies must actually be put in 
place. Cost-plus rate making has to be eliminated; it has been a disincen-
tive to invest in new technologies for a hundred years. The temptation and 
ability to designate official technologies has to be eliminated, too. A way 
to productively tap into both old and new basic science has to be devel-
oped. And, most broadly, the arena for a second battle of the currents and 
a second democratization must be built. 
An essential part of that arena is environmental policy. Can a con-
structive compromise on climate change policy be struck in the Age 
of Uncompromising Belief? Those who say no may point to President 
Trump’s cabinet appointments: Oklahoma attorney general Scott Pruitt to 
head the EPA; former Texas governor Rick Perry to lead the Department 
of Energy; and ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson as secretary of state. The 
lessons of history, however, tell us now is the time for compromise. The 
2010 derailment of the Waxman-Markey bill was such a time, too, but 
those opposed to climate change policy chose to savor the tactical win 
www.ebook3000.com

	
J u s t  I m a g i n e  	
375
and let the strategic opportunity pass. The result was President Obama’s 
Clean Power Plan. Recollection of this lost opportunity by those on both 
sides of the issue might lead to a true compromise built, perhaps, on inno-
vative ideas such as the mix of a carbon tax, tax reform, and policy sweep. 
With the right policies in place, plus an open door to new technologies, we 
can look forward to a fundamentally and remarkably improved electricity 
business for the twenty-first century. 

376
L I S T  O F  A C R O N Y M S 
AC—alternating current
AEC—US Atomic Energy Commission
AFL—American Federation of Labor
CBO—Congressional Budget Offi  ce
CFCs—chlorofl uorocarbons
CIO—Congress of Industrial Organizations
CPP—Clean Power Plan
CS—coordinate systems
DC—direct current
DDT—dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
EIA—Energy Information Administration
EPA—Environmental Protection Agency
EPAct of 1992—Energy Policy Act of 1992
EPAct of 2005—Energy Policy Act of 2005
ERDA—Energy Research and Development Administration
ERO—Electric Reliability Organization
EWGs—exempt wholesale generators
FERC—Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
FPA—Federal Power Act
FPC—Federal Power Commission
FTC—Federal Trade Commission
GE—General Electric
GHGs—greenhouse gases
IAEA—International Atomic Energy Agency
IEA—International Energy Agency
IPCC—United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISO—independent system operator
IUI—Insull Utility Investments
kW—kilowatt
kWh—kilowatt-hour
LILCO—Long Island Lighting Company
LIPA—Long Island Power Authority
www.ebook3000.com

	
L i s t  o f  A c r o n y m s 	
377
LNG—liquefied natural gas
MIT—Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MMBtu—Million British thermal units
MW—megawatt
NAAQS—National Ambient Air Quality Standards
NASA—National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NERC—North American Electric Reliability Council
NOAA—National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NRC—National Research Council
PG&E—Pacific Gas & Electric
PM2.5—particulate materials no more than 2.5 microns in width
PUHCA—Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935
PURPA—Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978
PX—California Power Exchange
QFs—qualifying facilities
RDD&C—research, development, demonstration, and commercialization
RTO—regional transmission organization
SCE—Southern California Edison
SEC—Securities and Exchange Commission
SMR—small modular reactor
SPE—special-purpose entity
STR—Submarine Thermal Reactor
TVA—Tennessee Valley Authority
UMW—United Mine Workers of America

378
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
s E L E C T  P R I m A R Y,  I n s T I T U T I O n A L ,  A n d 
U n I Q U E  s O U R C E s 
“An Account of the Death of Mr. George William Richman, Professor of 
Experimental Philosophy, a Member of the Imperial Academy of Sciences at 
Petersburg. Translated from the High-Dutch.” Philosophical Transactions 1755–1756, 
no. 49 (1755): 61–69.
Addison, Joseph. Spectator 1, no. 10, 1711.
“American Electromagnetic Telegraph: A Classic Invention.” The Science News 18 
(1930): 54–55.
“Apology for Printers.” The Pennsylvania Gazette, June 10, 1731. 
Arrhenius, Svante. “On the Infl uence of Carbonic Acid in the Air upon the 
Temperature of the Ground.” Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 41 (1896): 
237–76. 
Bell, Michelle L., and Devra Lee Davis. “Reassessment of the Lethal London Fog of 
1952: Novel Indicators of Acute and Chronic Consequences of Acute Exposure to 
Air Pollution.” Environmental Health Perspectives 109 (2001): 389–94. 
Bill Number: AB 1890 (passed Sept. 23, 1996). California Legislative Information. Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <ftp://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/95-96/bill/asm/ab_1851-1900/ab
_1890_bill_960924_chaptered.html>
Birol, Fatih. “Golden Rules for a Golden Age of Gas: World Energy Outlook 
Special Report on Unconventional Gas.” International Energy Agency, May 29, 
2012. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media
/weowebsite/2012/goldenrules/WEO2012_GoldenRulesReport.pdf>
“The Bituminous Coal Conservation Act of 1935.” Yale Journal of Law XLV (1935): 
293–314.
Bush, George W. “Letter to Members of the Senate on the Kyoto Protocol on 
Climate Change.” The American Presidency Project, March 13, 2001. <http://www
.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=45811> 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
379
Callendar, G. S. “The Artificial Production of Carbon Dioxide and Its Influence on 
Temperature.” Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 64 (1937): 223–40. 
Cawley, Kim. “The Federal Government’s Responsibilities and Liabilities 
Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act.” Congressional Budget Office, December 
3, 2014. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files 
/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/51035-NuclearWaste_Testimony.pdf>
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. “Comparison Chart of Waxman-Markey 
and Kerry-Lieberman.” Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. Accessed October 1, 
2016. <http://www.c2es.org/federal/congress/111/comparison-waxman-markey 
-kerry-lieberman> 
“Coal Strike Is Called Off.” Chicago Daily Tribune, June 23, 1943.
The Conservation Foundation. Implications of Rising Carbon Dioxide Content of the 
Atmosphere. New York: The Conservation Foundation, 1963.
Cook, Donald C. “Some Comments on the Current Utility Scene, New York Society 
of Security Analysts, New York City, New York.” Speech, March 29, 1950. 
Securities and Exchange Commission. <http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/speech 
archive/1950speech.shtml>
Cornell 
University 
Law 
School. 
“Sixteen 
U.S. 
Code 
Chapter 
Twelve—Federal Regulation and Development of Power.” Cornell University Law 
School. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/16 
/chapter-12?qt-us>
Critic. Vol. 29 (1896).
Davis, Devra L., Michelle L. Bell, and Tony Fletcher. “A Look Back at the London 
Smog of 1952 and the Half Century Since.” Environmental Health Perspectives 110 
(2002): A734–A735. 
“Death of a Genius,” Time, May 2, 1955.
“Death of a Titan.” Time, October 26, 1931.
Dewar, James A. “The Information Age and the Printing Press: Looking Backward 
to See Ahead.” Rand Corporation, 2005. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www 
.rand.org/pubs/papers/P8014/index2.html#fn0>
“Edison’s U.S. Patents, 1880–1882.” Thomas Edison Papers, Rutgers University. Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <http://edison.rutgers.edu/patente2.htm> 
Eicher, Edward C. “Address, Annual Convention, Edison Electric Institute, Buffalo, 
New York.” June 5, 1941. Securities and Exchange Commission. <https://www.sec.gov 
/news/speech/1941/060541eicher.pdf>
Einstein, Albert. “Does the Inertia of a Body Depend upon Its Energy Content?” 
Annalen der Physik 18 (1905): 639–41.
      . “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies.” Annalen der Physik 17 (1905): 
891–921.
      . “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production and 
Transformation of Light.” Annalen der Physik 17 (1905): 132–48.
      . “On the Movement of Small Particles Suspended in Stationary Liquids 
Required by the Molecular-Kinetic Theory of Heat.” Annalen der Physik 17 (1905): 
549–60.

380	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Eisenhower, Dwight. “Atoms for Peace Speech.” New York, NY, December 8, 1953. 
Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home. <http://www 
.eisenhower.archives.gov/all_about_ike/speeches/atoms_for_peace.pdf> 
Electric Energy Market Competition Task Force. “Report to Congress on 
Competition in Wholesale and Retail Markets for Electric Energy.” Electric 
Energy Market Competition Task Force. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www 
.ferc.gov/legal/fed-sta/ene-pol-act/epact-final-rpt.pdf>
“Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under 
Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act.” Environmental Protection Agency, 2009. Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <www.epa.gov/climatechange/endangerment/> 
Energy Information Administration. “Annual Energy Review.” Accessed October 1, 
2016. <www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/> 
Energy Information Administration. “International Energy Outlook 2016.” Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/mer.pdf>
Energy Information Administration. “Monthly Energy Review.” Accessed October 1, 
2016. <www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/mer.pdf> 
“Enron Trial Exhibits and Releases.” Department of Justice. Accessed June 31, 2006. 
<https://www.justice.gov/archive/index-enron.html>
Environmental Protection Agency. “Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic 
Fracturing for Oil and Gas on Drinking Water Resources.” Environmental Protection 
Agency, June 2015. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www2.epa.gov/sites 
/production/files/2015-07/documents/hf_es_erd_jun2015.pdf>
      . “Clean Power Plan for Existing Power Plants.” Environmental Protection 
Agency. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www2.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/clean 
-power-plan-existing-power-plants> 
      . “Clean Power Plan State-Specific Fact Sheets.” Environmental Protection 
Agency, September 16, 2016. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.epa.gov 
/cleanpowerplantoolbox/clean-power-plan-state-specific-fact-sheets> 
      . “Fact Sheet: Overview of the Clean Power Plan,” Environmental Protection 
Agency. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.epa.gov/airquality/cpp/fs-cpp 
-overview.pdf> 
“Eyewitness to Murder: Recounting the Ludlow Massacre.” History Matters, George 
Mason University. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://historymatters.gmu.edu 
/d/5737/>
“Far Worse Than Hanging; Kemmler’s Death Proves an Awful Spectacle. The 
Electric Current Had to Be Turned On Twice before the Deed Was Fully 
Accomplished.” New York Times, August 7, 1890.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Docket No. RM99-2-000; Order No. 
2000. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, December 20, 1999. Accessed October 
1, 2016. <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs/RM99-2A.pdf>
      . “Energy Policy Act of 2005.” Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Fact 
Sheet, August 8, 2006. Accessed October 1, 2016. <www.ferc.gov/legal/fed-sta 
/epact-fact-sheet.pdf>
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
381
      . “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets: Fact-Finding 
Investigation of Potential Manipulation of Electric and Natural Gas Prices.” 
Docket No. PA02-2-000. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, March 2003. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs 
/part-2-03-26-03.pdf> 
      . Order No. 636: Restructuring of Pipeline Services (1992). Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj 
-ord-reg/land-docs/restruct.asp>
      . Order No. 888: Final Rule (1996). Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs 
/rm95-8-00w.txt> 
      . “Technical and Support Document for Endangerment and Cause or 
Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases.” Environmental Protection Agency. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/Downloads 
/endangerment/TSD_Endangerment.pdf>
      . “Twentieth Annual Report.” No. 21 (1940).
      . “Twenty-Sixth Annual Report.” No. 23 (1946). 
Franklin, Benjamin. Experiment and Observations on Electricity. London, 1751. 
Smithsonian Institution. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://library.si.edu/digital 
-library/book/experimentsobser00fran> 
      . “A Letter of Benjamin Franklin, Esq; to Mr. Peter Collinson, F.R.S. con-
cerning an electrical Kite.” Philosophical Transactions 47 (1752): 565–67. Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/47/565>
      . “The Papers of Benjamin Franklin.” Yale University. Accessed October 1, 
2016. <franklinpapers.yale.edu/>
Franklin Institute. Thomas P. Jones (ed). “Journal of the Franklin Institute Volumes 
25–26.” Franklin Institute, 1838.
Fukushima Nuclear Accident Independent Investigation Commission. Official 
Report. National Diet of Japan, 2012. Accessed October 1, 2016. <www.nirs.org 
/fukushima/naiic_report.pdf>
“A Full and True Relation of the Death and Slaughter of a Man and His Son at 
Plough together with Four Horses . . . Slain by the Thunder and Lightning.” 
London (1680).
Gates, Bill. “We Need Energy Miracles.” Gatesnotes (blog), June 25, 2014. Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <https://www.gatesnotes.com/Energy/Energy-Miracles>
Geim, A. K., and K. S. Novoselov. “The Rise of Graphene.” Nature Materials 6 (2007): 
183–91. Accessed October 1, 2016. doi: 10.1038/nmat1849. 
Gelinas, Donald J. [Associate Director, FERC Office of Markets, Tariffs, and Rates]. 
Memo to Sam Behrends, LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae LLP [Enron 
Counsel]. May 6, 2002. 
Gore, Al, Lawrence Bender, Davis Guggenheim, Laurie David, Scott Z. Burns, 
Jeff Skoll, and Laurie Chilcott. An Inconvenient Truth: A Global Warning. DVD. 
Hollywood, CA: Paramount Classics, 2006.

382	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Greenburg, Leonard, Morris B. Jacobs, Bernadette M. Drolette, Franklyn Field, 
and M. M. Braverman. “Report of an Air Pollution Incident in New York City, 
November 1953.” Public Health Reports 77 (1962): 7–16.
Healy, Robert E. “Section 11 of the Public Utility Holding Company Act.” Speech, 
November 5, 1941. Securities and Exchange Commission. <www.sec.gov/news/speech 
/1940/091040healy.pdf>
Heap, David Porter. “Report on the International Exhibition of Electricity, Paris.” 
Engineer Department, U.S. Army, 1884. Accessed October 1, 2016. <archive.org/
stream/reportoninterna01heapgoog#page/n194/mode/2up>
Holly, Israel. “Youth liable to sudden death; excited seriously to consider thereof, and 
speedily to prepare therefor. The substance of a discourse, delivered on the day of 
the funeral of three young men, who were killed by lightning, at Suffield,” printed 
by Thomas Green (1766).
Holt, Mark, and Gene Whitney. “Greenhouse Gas Legislation: Summary and 
Analysis of H.R. 2454 as Passed by the House of Representatives.” Congressional 
Research Service. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://research.policyarchive.org 
/18878.pdf>
Holzworth, George. “Vertical Temperature Structure during the 1966 Thanksgiving 
Week Air Pollution Episode in New York City.” Monthly Weather Review 100 (1972): 
445–50. 
“Hoover Dam: Fatalities at Hoover Dam.” Reclamation: Managing Water in the West. 
Last updated March 12, 2015. <http://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/history 
/essays/fatal.html>
Hoover, Herbert. “Address at Madison Square Garden in New York City.” The 
American Presidency Project, October 31, 1932. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu 
/ws/?pid=23317>
      . “Statement on a National Tribute to Thomas Alva Edison.” The American 
Presidency Project, October 20, 1931. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid 
=22861>
Hughes, J. David. “Drilling Deeper: A Reality Check on U.S. Government Forecasts 
for a Lasting Tight Oil & Shale Gas Boom.” Post Carbon Institute, October 
2014. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.postcarbon.org/wp-content 
/uploads/2014/10/Drilling-Deeper_FULL.pdf> 
Hunt, Andrew, Jerrold L. Abraham, Bret Judson, and Colin L. Berry. “Toxicologic 
and Epidemiologic Clues from the Characterization of the 1952 London Smog 
Fine Particulate Matter in Archival Autopsy Lung Tissues.” Environmental Health 
Perspectives 111 (2003): 1209–14.
Insull, Samuel. The Memoirs of Samuel Insull: An Autobiography. Edited by Larry Plachno. 
Polo, IL: Transportation Trails, 1992.
InterAcademy Council. “Climate Change Assessments, Review of the Processes and 
Procedures of the IPCC.” InterAcademy Council, October 2010. Accessed October 
1, 2016. <http://reviewipcc.interacademycouncil.net/report.html>
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
383
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/far/wg_I/ipcc_far_wg_I_full_report.pdf>
      . Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2014. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.ipcc.ch/report/
ar5/wg3/>
      . IPCC Second Assessment: Climate Change 1995. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/climate-changes-1995/ipcc-2nd-assessment/2nd-assessment 
-en.pdf>
      . “IPCC Statement on the Melting of Himalayan Glaciers.” January 20, 2010. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/presentations/himalaya 
-statement-20january2010.pdf>
International Atomic Energy Agency. “Additional Report of Japanese Government 
to IAEA—Accident at TEPCO’s Fukushima Power Stations, 15 September 2011.” 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/focus/fukushima 
/additional-japan-report>
      . “Operational & Long-Term Shutdown Reactors.” International Atomic Energy 
Agency, September 24, 2016. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.iaea.org 
/PRIS/WorldStatistics/OperationalReactorsByCountry.aspx>
Jickling, Mark. “The Enron Collapse: An Overview of Financial Issues.” CRS Report 
for Congress, March 28, 2002. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://fpc.state.gov 
/documents/organization/9267.pdf>
Johnson, Lyndon B. “Remarks at the Presentation of the 1964 Presidential Medal of 
Freedom Awards.” Speech, Washington, DC, September 14, 1964. The American 
Presidency Project. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=26496> 
Kemeny, John G. “Report of the President’s Commission on the Accident at Three 
Mile Island.” 1979.
Komanoff, Charles. Power Plant Cost Escalation: Nuclear and Capital Costs, Regulation, and 
Economics. New York: Van Nostrand Reinholdt Publishing, 1981.
Larabee, Leonard W., Ralph L. Ketcham, Helen C. Boatfield, and Helene H. 
Fineman, eds. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1964.
Lay, George C. “Benjamin Franklin.” Godey’s Magazine CXXXIII (1796).
Lilienthal, David E. “Business and Government in the Tennessee Valley.” Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science 172 (1934): 45–49.
      . TVA: Democracy on the March. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1944.
Massachusetts et al. v. Environmental Protection Agency et al. 05 U.S. 1120 (2007). 
Maxwell, James Clerk. “A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field.” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 155 (1865): 459–512. 
Mershon, Sherie, and Tim Palucka. A Century of Innovation: From the U.S. Bureau of 
Mines to the National Energy Technology Laboratory. National Energy Technology 
Laboratory. October 2010.
Mills, Clarence A. “The Donora Episode.” Science 111 (1950): 67–68.

384	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Mills, Mark P. “SHALE 2.0: Technology and the Coming Big-Data Revolution in 
America’s Shale Oil Fields.” Manhattan Institute, May 2015. Accessed October 1, 
2016. <http://www.manhattan-institute.org/pdf/eper_16.pdf>
MIT. “The Future of Nuclear Power.” MIT, 2003. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://web.mit.edu/nuclearpower/>
Mitchell, George P., and Mark D. Zoback. “George Mitchell: The Duty to Fracture 
Responsibly.” Fuelfix, February 20, 2012. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://
fuelfix.com/blog/2012/02/20/opinion-the-duty-to-fracture-responsibly/>
Moniz, Ernest J., Henry D. Jacoby, and Anthony J. M. Meggs. “The Future of 
Natural Gas: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study.” MIT Energy Initiative, June 9, 
2011. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.mit.edu/~jparsons/publications 
/NaturalGas_Report_Final.pdf> 
Morens, David M. “Death of a President,” New England Journal of Medicine 341 (1999): 
1845–50. Accessed October 1, 2016. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199912093412413.
Morse, Samuel F. B. Imminent Dangers to the Free Institutions of the United States through 
Foreign Immigration. 1835.
      . “Samuel F. B. Morse Papers at the Library of Congress, 1793 to 1919.” 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <www.loc.gov/collections/samuel-morse-papers 
/articles-and-essays/timeline/1791-1839/>
Murray, W. S. A Superpower System for the Region between Boston and Washington. 
Washington: Government Printing Office, 1921.
Musk, Elon. “Master Plan, Part Deux.” Tesla (blog), July 20, 2016. Accessed October 
1, 2016. <https://www.tesla.com/blog/master-plan-part-deux>
Nathanson, Milton N. “Updating the Hoover Dam Documents.” U.S. Department 
of the Interior, 1978. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.onthecolorado.com 
/Resources/LawOfTheRiver/HooverDamDocumentsUpdated.pdf>
National Assembly of France. “To George Washington from the National 
Assembly of France, 20 June 1790.” National Archives, Founders Online, Franklin 
Papers. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://founders.archives.gov/documents 
/Washington/05-05-02-0348>
National Center for Public Policy Research. “Byrd-Hagel Resolution.” The National 
Center for Public Policy Research. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.national 
center.org/KyotoSenate.html> 
National Park Service. “Shippingport Atomic Power Station.” Historic American 
Engineering Record, HAER No. PA-81. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://cdn.loc.
gov/master/pnp/habshaer/pa/pa1600/pa1658/data/pa1658data.pdf>
National Power Policy Committee. “Report with Respect to the Treatment of 
Holding Companies.” H.R. Rep. No. 137 (1935).
Navigant Consulting. Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry. July 2013. Accessed October 1, 
2016. <http://pubs.naruc.org/pub/536D6E09-2354-D714-5175-4F938E94ADB5> 
New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. “Madison Square North 
Historic District Designation Report.” New York City Landmarks Preservation 
Commission, June 26, 2011. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.nyc.gov/html 
/lpc/downloads/pdf/reports/MadisonSquareNorth.pdf> 
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
385
Nuclear Energy Institute. “World Statistics,” Nuclear Energy Institute, May 2016. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.nei.org/Knowledge-Center/Nuclear 
-Statistics/World-Statistics>
Obama, Barack. “Full Transcript: Obama’s 2012 State of the Union Address.” 
Washington, DC, January 25, 2012. USA Today. <http://www.usatoday.com/
news/washington/story/2012-01-24/state-of-the-union-transcript/52780694/1>
      . “Remarks by the President in Announcing the Clean Power Plan.” August 3, 
2015. Whitehouse.org. <https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/08/03 
/remarks-president-announcing-clean-power-plan>
Office of Management and Budget, White House. “Table 1.2—Summary of Receipts, 
Outlays, and Surpluses or Deficits (-) as Percentages of GDP: 1930–2021.” Office 
of Management and Budget, White House. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/omb/budget/Historicals> 
Office of the Secretary of Energy and Environment, Oklahoma. “Earthquakes in 
Oklahoma.” Office of the Secretary of Energy and Environment, Oklahoma. Accessed 
October 1, 2016. <https://earthquakes.ok.gov/>
O’Reilly et al. v. Morse et al. 56 U.S. 62 (1853). <https://supreme.justia.com/cases 
/federal/us/56/62/case.html>
Pew Center on Global Climate Change. “Fifteenth Session of the Conference of 
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and Fifth Session of the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol.” Center for 
Climate and Energy Solutions. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.c2es.org 
/docUploads/copenhagen-cop15-summary.pdf> 
Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Wisconsin 347 U.S. 672 (1954). 
Plass, Gilbert. “The Carbon Dioxide Theory of Climatic Change.” Tellus 8 (1955): 
140–54. 
Pope, C. Arden III, Richard T. Burnett, Michael J. Thun, Eugenia E. Calle, 
Daniel Krewski, Kazuhiko Ito, and George D. Thurston. “Lung Cancer, 
Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate Air 
Pollution.” Journal of the American Medical Association 287 (2002): 1132–41.
Pope Francis. Laudato sì. May 24, 2015. Libreria Editrice Vaticana. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco 
_20150524_enciclica-laudato-si.html> 
Powers, William C. Report of Investigation by the Special Investigative Committee of the Board 
of Directors of Enron Corp. February 1, 2002. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://
picker.uchicago.edu/Enron/PowersReport(2-2-02).pdf>
President’s Science Advisory Committee (PSAC). Pesticides report, 15 May 1963. 
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<https://www.jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/Archives/JFKPOF-087-003.aspx>
“Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act of 1978.” United States Bureau of Reclamation, 
November 9, 1978. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.usbr.gov/power 
/legislation/purpa.pdf> 
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935: Hearings before the Committee on 
Interstate Commerce. 1935.

386	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
“Restoring the Quality of Our Environment.” President’s Science Advisory Committee, 
1965.
Revelle, Roger, and Hans E. Seuss. “Carbon Dioxide Exchange Between Atmosphere 
and Ocean and the Question of an Increase of Atmospheric CO2 during the Past 
Decades.” Tellus (1957): 18–27.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. “Address at the Dedication of Boulder Dam.” The American 
Presidency Project, September 30, 1945. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/ 
?pid=14952>
      . “Annual Message to Congress.” The American Presidency Project, January 4, 
1935. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=14890> 
      . “Campaign Address in Portland, Oregon on Public Utilities and 
Development of Hydro-Electric Power.” The American Presidency Project, September 
21, 1932. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=88390> 
      . “Campaign Address on Progressive Government at the Commonwealth 
Club in San Francisco, California.” The American Presidency Project, September 23, 
1932. <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=88391>
      . “Fireside Chat 24: On the Coal Crisis.” Speech, May 2, 1943. Miller 
Center: University of Virginia. <millercenter.org/president/fdroosevelt/speeches 
/speech-3330> 
Rosner, Robert, and Stephen Goldberg. “Small Modular Reactors—Key to Future 
Nuclear Power Generation in the U.S.” Energy Policy Institute at Chicago, November 
2011. Accessed October 1, 2016. <www.eenews.net/assets/2013/03/13/document 
_gw_01.pdf> 
The Royal Swedish Academy of Science. “Scientific Background on the Nobel Prize 
in Physics 2010: Graphene.” The Royal Swedish Academy of Science, November 29, 
2010. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes 
/physics/laureates/2010/advanced-physicsprize2010.pdf>
Rutgers University. “Electric Lamp.” The Thomas Edison Papers. Accessed October 1, 
2016. <http://edison.rutgers.edu/lamp.htm>
“Samuel Insull Will Make Fight for Complete Vindication.” Ottawa Citizen, May 7, 
1934.
Securities and Exchange Commission. “The Regulation of Public-Utility 
Companies.” Securities and Exchange Commission, 1995. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/puhc.txt>
Securities and Exchange Commission. “Twenty-Fifth Annual Report of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission: Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1959.” 
Securities and Exchange Commission, January 6, 1960. <https://www.sec.gov/about 
/annual_report/1959.pdf>
SpaceX. “Completed Missions.” SpaceX. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www 
.spacex.com/missions>
      . “SpaceX Successfully Launches Falcon 1 to Orbit.” SpaceX, September 28, 
2008. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.spacex.com/press/2012/12/19 
/spacex-successfully-launches-falcon-1-orbit>.
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
387
State of West Virginia, State of Texas, et al. v. United States Environmental 
Protection Agency and Regina A. McCarthy. Application February 9, 2016. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads 
/2016/01/15A773-application.pdf>
Steward, Dan B. “George P. Mitchell and the Barnett Shale.” Journal of Petroleum 
Technology (2013). Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.mydigitalpublication 
.com/article/George_P._Mitchell_And_The_Barnett_Shale/1535436/179598 
/article.html> 
Tesla, Nikola. “A New System of Alternate Current—Motors and Transformers.” 
Speech, New York, NY, May 16, 1888. PBS. <http://www.pbs.org/tesla/res/res 
_art02.html>
      . “The Transmission of Electrical Energy without Wires.” Electrical World and 
Engineer (1904).
Townsend, Jonathan. “God’s terrible doings are to be observed. A sermon preach’d 
at Needham, and occasion’d by the sudden and awful death of Mr. Thomas 
Gardner, by Lightning.” Printed for Kneeland and Green (1746).
Toynbee, Arnold. Lectures on the Industrial Revolution of the Eighteenth Century in England: 
Popular Addresses, Notes and Other Fragments. New York: Longmans, Green, and 
Company, 1908.
Tyndall, John. “The Bakerian Lecture: On the Absorption and Radiation of Heat 
by Gases and Vapours, and on the Physical Connexion of Radiation, Absorption, 
and Conduction.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 151 (1861): 
1–36. 
United Nations Environment Programme. “Brief Primer on the Montreal Protocol.” 
United Nations Environment Programme. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://ozone.unep 
.org/Publications/MP_Brief_Primer_on_MP-E.pdf> 
United States of America v. Timothy N. Belden. Plea agreement. Findlaw. Accessed 
October 
1, 
2016. 
<http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/enron/usbelden 
101702plea.pdf>
United States Congress. Memorial of Samuel Finley Breese Morse, Including Appropriate 
Ceremonies of Respect at the National Capitol, and Elsewhere. Published by Order of 
Congress. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1875.
United States Geological Survey. “Oklahoma Earthquakes Magnitude 3.0 and 
Greater.” United States Geological Survey, February 17, 2016. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/states/oklahoma/images/Oklahoma 
EQsBarGraph.png>
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. “Information Digest, 2014–2015: 
Appendix A: U.S. Commercial Nuclear Power Reactors—Operating Reactors.” 
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, August 2014. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/nuregs/staff/sr1350/> 
United States Senate. “The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse.” 
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee of Governmental Affairs United 
States Senate, July 8, 2002. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www.gpo.gov 
/fdsys/pkg/CPRT-107SPRT80393/pdf/CPRT-107SPRT80393.pdf>

388	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force. “Final Report on the August 14, 
2003, Blackout on the United States and Canada: Causes and Recommendations.” 
U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force, April 2004. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/oeprod/DocumentsandMedia/Blackout 
Final-Web.pdf>
U.S. Department of Commerce. “Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial 
Times to 1970.” U.S. Department of Commerce, 1975. Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://www2.census.gov/library/publications/1975/compendia/hist_stats 
_colonial-1970/hist_stats_colonial-1970p2-chS.pdf>
U.S. Department of Energy and Natural Resources Canada. “The Relationship 
between Competitive Power Markets and Grid Reliability.” Office of Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy, July 2006. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://
energy.gov/sites/prod/files/oeprod/DocumentsandMedia/Blackout_Rec_12 
_Final_Report_and_Transmittal.pdf>
“Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission.” 
Document 92, part 72-A. 1935.
West Virginia Office of Miner’s Health Safety and Training. “Upper Big Branch 
Mine Disaster Investigative Report Summary.” Accessed October 1, 2016. 
<http://www.wvminesafety.org/PDFs/Performance/EXECUTIVE%20
SUMMARY.pdf>
Westinghouse, George, Jr. “A Reply to Mr. Edison.” The North American Review 149 
(1889): 653–64.
      . “Sir Wm. Thomson and Electric Lighting.” The North American Review 150 
(1890): 321–29.
White House Office of the Press Secretary. “Key Excerpts of the Joint Comprehensive 
Plan of Action (JCPOA).” July 14, 2015. Accessed October 1, 2016. <https://www 
.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/07/14/key-excerpts-joint-comprehensive 
-plan-action-jcpoa> 
World Nuclear Association. “Three Mile Accident.” World Nuclear Association, 
January 2012. Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://www.world-nuclear.org/info 
/Safety-and-Security/Safety-of-Plants/Three-Mile-Island-accident/>
Yoder, Christian [of Enron Power Marketing], and Steven Hall [of Stoel Rives, LLP]. 
Memoranda to Richard Saunders [of Enron] from Christian Yoder. December 6, 
2000.
Zanobetti, Antonella, and Joel Schwartz. “The Effect of Fine and Coarse Particulate 
Air Pollution on Mortality: A National Analysis.” Environmental Health Perspectives 
117 (2009): 898–903.
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
389
S E L E C T  J O U R N A L  A R T I C L E S
Bernanke, Ben S. “The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative 
Approach.” National Bureau of Economic Research 4813 (1994): 1–28. doi: 10.3386 
/w4814.
Bishop, Morris. “Franklin in France.” Daedalus 86 (1957): 214–30.
Bragg, William H. “Michael Faraday.” The Scientific Monthly 33 (1931): 481–99.
Buchanan, Norman S. “The Origin and Development of the Public Utility Holding 
Company.” The Journal of Political Economy 44 (1936): 31–53.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. “Anthracite Coal and the Beginnings of the Industrial 
Revolution in the United States.” The Business History Review 46 (1972): 141–81.
Cohen, I. Bernard. “Benjamin Franklin: An Experimental Newtonian Scientist.” 
Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 5 (1952): 2–6.
      . “The Two Hundredth Anniversary of Benjamin Franklin’s Two Lightning 
Experiments and the Introduction of the Lightning Rod.” Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society 96 (1952): 331–66.
Cohn, Steve. “The Political Economy of Nuclear Power (1945–1990): The Rise and 
Fall of an Official Technology.” Journal of Economic Issues 24 (1990): 781–811.
Cowan, Robin. “Nuclear Power Reactors: A Study in Technological Lock-In.” The 
Journal of Economic History 50 (1990): 541–67.
Crafts, Nicholas. “Steam as a General Purpose Technology: A Growth Accounting 
Perspective.” The Economic Journal 114 (2004): 338–51.
Crawford, John W. and Steven L. Krahn. “The Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program: 
A Brief Case Study in Institutional Constancy.” Public Administration Review 58 
(1998): 159–66.
Dean, Gordon. “Atoms for Peace: An American View.” International Journal 9 (1954): 
253–60.
Debnath, Lokenath. “A Short Biography of Joseph Fourier and Historical 
Development of Fourier Series and Fourier Transforms.” International Journal 
of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology 43 (2011): 589–612. doi: 
10.1080/0020739X.2011.633712.
Demsetz, Harold. “Why Regulate Utilities?” The Journal of Law and Economics 11 
(April 1968): 55–65.
Dull, Jonathan R. “Franklin the Diplomat: The French Mission.” Transactions of the 
American Philosophical Society 72 (1982): 1–76.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. “In the Wake of the Printing Press.” The Quarterly Journal of 
the Library of Congress 35 (1978): 183–97.
Emmons III, William M. “Franklin D. Roosevelt. Electric Utilities and the Power of 
Competition.” The Journal of Economic History 53 (1993): 880–907.
Frickel, Scott. “Engineering Heterogeneous Accounts: The Case of Submarine 
Thermal Reactor Mark-I.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 21 (1996): 28–53.
Greenstone, Michael, and Adam Looney. “Paying Too Much for Energy? The True 
Costs of Our Energy Choices.” Daedalus 141 (2012): 10–30.

390	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Hare, E. H. “Michael Faraday’s Loss of Memory.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
Medicine 67 (1974): 617–18. 
Heilbron, J. L. “Plus and Minus: Franklin’s Zero-Sum Way of Thinking.” Proceedings 
of the American Philosophical Society 150 (2006): 607–17.
Hughes, Thomas P. “Harold P. Brown and the Executioner’s Current: An Incident in 
the AC-DC Controversy.” The Business History Review 32 (1958): 143–65.
      . “Technology and Public Policy: The Failure of Giant Power.” Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers 64 (1976): 1361–71. Accessed October 1, 2015. doi: 
10.1109/PROC.1976.10327.
Hulme, Mike. “On the Origin of ‘the Greenhouse Effect’: John Tyndall’s 1859 
Interrogation of Nature.” Weather, Royal Meteorological Society 64 (2009): 121–23. 
Accessed October 1, 2016. <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wea 
.386/pdf>
Joskow, Paul L. “California’s Electricity Crisis.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 17 
(2001): 365–88. Accessed October 1, 2016. doi: 10.1093/oxrep/17.3.365.
Krige, John. “Atoms for Peace. Scientific Internationalism and Scientific Intelligence.” 
Osiris 21 (2006): 161–81.
Lear, Linda. “Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring.” Environmental History Review 17 (1993): 
23–48.
Martin, Roscoe C. “The Tennessee Valley Authority: A Study of Federal Control.” 
Law and Contemporary Problems 22 (1957): 351–77.
McCormick, Blaine, and Burton W. Folsom Jr. “A Survey of Business Historians on 
America’s Greatest Entrepreneurs.” The Business History Review 77 (2003): 703–16.
McKinney, Robert. “Atomic Energy: Its Contribution to World Peace Through 
Economic Self-Help.” Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science 26 (1957): 72–82.
Nonnenmacher, Tomas. “State Promotion and Regulation of the Telegraph 
Industry.” The Journal of Economic History 61 (2001): 19–36.
Posner, Richard A. “Theories of Economic Regulation.” The Bell Journal of Economics 
and Management Science 5 (Autumn 1974): 335–58.
Priest, George L. “The Origins of Utility Regulation and the ‘Theories of Regulation’ 
Debate.” The Journal of Law and Economics 36 (1993): 289–323.
Rosenberg, Nathan, and Manuel Trajtenberg. “A General Purpose Technology at 
Work: The Corliss Steam Engine in the Late-Nineteenth-Century United States.” 
Journal of Economic History 64 (2004): 61–99.
Ross, Jerry, and Barry M. Staw. “Organizational Escalation and Exit: Lessons from 
the Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant.” The Academy of Management Journal 36 (1993): 
701–32.
Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. “The SO₂ Allowance Trading 
System: The Ironic History of a Grand Policy Experiment.” The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 27 (2013): 103–21.
Schrag, Daniel P. “Is Shale Gas Good for Climate Change?” Daedalus 141 (2012): 
72–80.
Sharlin, Harold I. “The First Niagara Falls Power Project.” The Business History 
Review 35 (1961): 59–74.
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
391
Shirk, Willis L. “‘Atoms for Peace’ in Pennsylvania.” Pennsylvania Heritage 35 (2009).
Snyder, Lynne Page. “The Death-Dealing Smog over Donora, Pennsylvania: Industrial 
Air Pollution, Public Health Policy, and the Politics of Expertise, 1948–1949.” 
Environmental History Review 18 (1994): 117–39.
Stigler, George J., and Claire Friedland. “What Can Regulators Regulate? The Case 
of Electricity.” The Journal of Law and Economics 5 (1962): 1–16.
Taylor, Arthur R. “Losses to the Public in the Insull Collapse: 1932–1946.” Business 
History Review 36 (1962): 188–204.
Thomas, John Meurig. “Faraday and Franklin.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society 150 (2006): 523–41.
Wengert, Norman. “TVA—Symbol and Reality.” The Journal of Politics 13 (1951): 
369–92.
Yates, JoAnne. “The Telegraph’s Effect on Nineteenth Century Markets and Firms.” 
Business and Economic History 15 (1986): 149–63.
S E L E C T  B O O K S
Alinsky, Saul D. John L. Lewis: An Unauthorized Biography. New York: Cornwall Press, 
1949.
Alvarado, Rudolph. Thomas Edison. Indianapolis: Alpha Books, 2002.
Banner, Stuart. The Death Penalty: An American History. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2009.
Bodanis, David. Electric Universe: The Shocking True Story of Electricity. New York: 
Random House, 2005. 
      . E=mc2: A Biography of the World’s Most Famous Equation. New York: Walker 
Publishing Company, 2000.
Brands, H. W. The First American: The Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin. New York: 
Doubleday, 2000.
Busch, Francis X. Guilty or Not Guilty: An Account of the Trials of the Leo Frank Case, 
the D.C. Stephenson Case, the Samuel Insull Case, the Alger Hiss Case. New York: The 
Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1952.
Carnegie, Andrew. James Watt. Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific, 1913.
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2002.
Chaplin, Joyce. The First Scientific American: Benjamin Franklin and the Pursuit of Genius. 
New York: Basic Books, 2006.
Cheney, Margaret. Tesla: Man Out of Time. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001.
Cheney, Margaret, and Robert Uth. Tesla: Master of Lightning. New York: MetroBooks, 
2001.
Cohen, I. Bernard. Science and the Founding Fathers: Science in the Political Thought of 
Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and James Madison. New York: W. 
W. Norton and Company, 1995.

392	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Doren, Carl Van. Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790). New York: Viking Press, 1938.
Dubofsky, Melvyn, and Warren Van Tine. John L. Lewis: A Biography. Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1986.
Dunar, Andrew J., and Dennis McBride, eds. Building Hoover Dam: An Oral History of 
the Great Depression. Reno: University of Nevada Press, 1993.
Einstein, Albert. Ideas and Opinions. New York: Three Rivers Press, 1954.
Einstein, Albert, and Leopold Infeld. The Evolution of Physics: The Growth of Ideas from 
Early Concepts to Relativity and Quanta. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1938.
Fisher, Howard J. Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity: Guide to First Reading. 
Santa Fe: Green Lion Press, 2001.
Friedel, Robert, and Paul Israel. Edison’s Electric Light. New Jersey: Rutgers University 
Press, 1987.
Hamilton, James. A Life of Discovery: Michael Faraday, Giant of the Scientific Revolution. 
New York: Random House, 2002.
Hargrove, Erwin C. Prisoners of Myth: The Leadership of the Tennessee Valley Authority 
1933–1990. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2001.
Heilbron, J. L. Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries: A Study in Early Modern Physics. 
New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1999.
Hiltzik, Michael. Colossus: The Turbulent, Thrilling Saga of the Building of Hoover Dam. 
New York: Free Press, 2010.
Hirsch, Robert F. Power Loss: The Origins of Deregulation and Restructuring in the American 
Electric Utility System. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Howard, Don, and John Stachel, eds. Einstein: The Formative Years 1879–1909. Boston: 
Birkhaüser, 2000.
Hughes, Thomas P. Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society 1880–1930. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983.
Huxley, Aldous. Collected Essays. New York: Harper Brothers, 1959.
Isaacson, Walter. Benjamin Franklin: An American Life. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
2004.
      . Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2007.
Israel, Paul. Edison: A Life of Invention. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
Komanoff, Charles. Power Plant Cost Escalation: Nuclear and Capital Costs, Regulation, and 
Economics. New York: Van Nostrand Reinholdt Publishing, 1981.
Layzer, Judith A. The Environmental Case: Translating Values into Policy, 2nd ed. 
Washington, DC: CQ Press, 2006.
Lear, Linda. Rachel Carson: Witness for Nature. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2009.
Lomborg, Bjorn. Cool It: The Skeptical Environmentalist’s Guide to Global Warming. New 
York: Vintage Books, 2007.
Lynn, Michael R. Popular Science and Public Opinion in 18th Century France. Manchester, 
UK: Manchester University Press, 2006.
Mabee, Carleton. The American Leonardo: A Life of Samuel F. B. Morse. New York: Purple 
Mountain Press, 2000.
www.ebook3000.com

	
B i b l i o g r a p h y 	
393
Mahon, Basil. The Man Who Changed Everything: The Life of James Clerk Maxwell. 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons, 2003.
McDonald, Forrest. Insull. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.
McLean, Bethany, and Peter Elkind. The Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise 
and Scandalous Fall of Enron. New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2003.
Muller, Richard A. Physics for Future Presidents: The Science Behind the Headlines. New 
York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2008.
Neuse, Steven M. David E. Lilienthal: The Journey of an American Liberal. Knoxville: 
University of Tennessee Press, 1996.
Olson, James Stuart. Historical Dictionary of the Great Depression, 1929–1940. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press, 2001.
Papanikolas, Zeese, and Wallace Stenger. Foreword to Buried Unsung: Louis Tikas and the 
Ludlow Massacre. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1991.
Prout, Henry Goslee. A Life of George Westinghouse. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 
1921.
Reid, James D. The Telegraph in America: Its Founders, Promoters, and Noted Men. New 
York: Derby Brothers, 1879.
Robinson, Eric, and A. E. Musson. James Watt and the Steam Revolution. New York: 
Augustus M. Kelley, 1969.
Salzman, James, and Barton H. Thompson Jr. Environmental Law and Policy. New 
York: Hudson Press, 2007.
Schiffer, Michael Brian. Draw the Lightning Down: Benjamin Franklin and Electrical 
Technology in the Age of Enlightenment. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
Schlozman, Daniel. When Movements Anchor Parties: Electoral Alignments in American 
History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Schurr, Sam H., and Bruce S. Netschert. Energy in the American Economy. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1960.
Silverman, Kenneth. Lightning Man: The Accursed Life of Samuel F. B. Morse. New York: 
Random House, 2003.
Simpson, Thomas K. Figures of Thought. Santa Fe: Green Lion Press, 2006.
Skrabec, Quentin, Jr. George Westinghouse: Gentle Genius. New York: Algora Publishing, 
2007.
Spulber, Daniel F. Regulation and Markets. Boston: MIT Press, 1989.
Standage, Tom. The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the 
Nineteenth Century’s On-Line Pioneers. New York: Walker Publishing Company, 1999.
Sternglass, Ernest. Secret Fallout: Low-Level Radiation from Hiroshima to Three-Mile Island. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981.
Stevens, Joseph E. Hoover Dam: An American Adventure. Norman, OK: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1988.
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. New York: 
Random House, 2007.
Thompson, Robert Luther. Wiring a Continent: The History of the Telegraph Industry in the 
United States 1832–1866. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1947.

394	
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Trefil, James, and Robert M. Hazen. The Sciences: An Integrated Approach. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2004.
Tucker, Tom. The Bolt of Fate: Benjamin Franklin & His Electric Kite Hoax. New York: 
Public Affairs, 2003.
Uglow, Jenny. The Lunar Men: Five Friends Whose Curiosity Changed the World. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2002.
Vance, Ashlee. Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future. New York: 
HarperCollins, 2015.
Walters, Kerry S. Benjamin Franklin and His Gods. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1999.
Weart, Spencer R. The Discovery of Global Warming. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2003.
Williams, L. Pierce. Michael Faraday: A Biography. London: Basic Books, 1965.
www.ebook3000.com

395
E N D N O T E S
Introduction
 1.  Carl Van Doren, Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) (New York: Viking Press, 1938), 
171. 
 2.  Assuming a 100-watt incandescent bulb has 1600-lumen output, and one 
candle power equals 12.57 lumens, the bulb is the equivalent of 127 candles.
 3.  Tom Tucker, Bolt of Fate: Benjamin Franklin & His Electric Kite Hoax (New York: 
Public Aff airs, 2003).
 4.  David M. Morens, MD, “Death of a President,” New England Journal of Medicine, 
341 (1999), accessed October 1, 2016. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199912093412413.
 5.  Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission, 
Document 92, Part 72-A, Introduction, 35–39; Franklin D. Roosevelt; 
“Campaign Address on Progressive Government at the Commonwealth Club 
in San Francisco, California,” The American Presidency Project, accessed August 30, 
2015, <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=88391>.
Chapter 1
 1.  I. Bernard Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers: Science in the Political Thought of 
Thomas Jeff erson, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, and James Madison (New York: W. 
W. Norton and Company, 1995), 184–85. 
 2.  “A Full and True Relation of the Death and Slaughter of a Man and His Son 
at Plough together with Four Horses . . . Slain by the Thunder and Lightning.” 
London (1680); Israel Holly, “Youth liable to sudden death; excited seriously to 
consider thereof, and speedily to prepare therefor. The substance of a discourse, 
delivered on the day of the funeral of three young men, who were killed by lightning, 
at Suffi  eld,” printed by Thomas Green (1766), accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
quod.lib.umich.edu/e/evans/N08338.0001.001/1:1?rgn=div1;view=fulltext>; 
Jonathan Townsend, “God’s terrible doings are to be observed. A sermon 
preach’d at Needham, and occasion’d by the sudden and awful death of Mr. 
Thomas Gardner, by Lightning,” printed for Kneeland and Green (Boston, 
1746): 10.

396	
E n d n o t e s
	 3.	 I. Bernard Cohen, “Benjamin Franklin: An Experimental Newtonian Scientist,” 
Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 5, no. 4 (January 1952): 2; Joyce 
Chaplin, The First Scientific American: Benjamin Franklin and the Pursuit of Genius 
(New York: Basic Books, 2006), 5; Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers, 174–95.
	 4.	 Michael R. Lynn, Popular Science and Public Opinion in 18th Century France 
(Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2006), 43–44. 
	 5.	 H. W. Brands, The First American: The Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin (New 
York: Doubleday Publishing Company, 2000), 22; James A. Dewar, “The 
Information Age and the Printing Press: Looking Backward to See Ahead.” 
Rand Corporation, 2005, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.rand.org/pubs 
/papers/P8014/index2.html#fn0>; Elizabeth L. Eisenstein, “In the Wake of 
the Printing Press,” The Quarterly Journal of the Library of Congress 35, no. 3 (July 
1978): 184, 187–191; “Apology for Printers,” The Pennsylvania Gazette, June 10, 
1731, online at National Humanities, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://nation-
alhumanitiescenter.org/pds/becomingamer/ideas/text5/franklinprinting 
.pdf>.
	 6.	 Brands, The First American, 33–34, 88, 166–67; Benjamin Franklin, “An 
Account of the New Invented Pennsylvanian Fire-Places,” 1744, online at 
National Archives, Founders Online, Franklin Papers, accessed October 
1, 
2016, 
<http://founders.archives.gov/documents/Franklin/01-02-02-011
4#BNFN-01-02-02-0114-fn-0027> .
	 7.	 George C. Lay, “Benjamin Franklin,” Godey’s Magazine, vol. 133, no. 796 
(October 1796): 339–43; Kerry S. Walters, Benjamin Franklin and His Gods 
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1999), 44–45. 
	 8.	 Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers, 136; Brands, The First American, 187–206; 
Benjamin Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, 2nd ed., ed. Leonard 
W. Larabee, Ralph L. Ketcham, Helen C. Boatfield, and Helene H. Fineman 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964), 240–44.
	 9.	 Chaplin, First Scientific American, 6, 18; J. L. Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 
18th Centuries: A Study in Early Modern Physics (New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 
1999), 1; Joseph Addison, Spectator 1, no. 10 (1711): 44.
	10.	 Chaplin, First Scientific American, 94; Franklin, Autobiography, 241–42.
	11.	 Cohen, “Benjamin Franklin: An Experimental Newtonian Scientist,” 4, 6. 
	12.	 Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers, 58; Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th 
Centuries, 5–6.
	13.	 Franklin, Autobiography, 241, note 4; Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers, 
141–42.
	14.	 Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers, 142; J. L. Heilbron, “Plus and Minus: 
Franklin’s Zero-Sum Way of Thinking,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society 150 (2006): 608; E. Philip Krider, “Benjamin Franklin and Lightning 
Rods,” Benjamin Franklin House, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.benjaminfranklinhouse.org/site/sections/about_franklin/physicstoday 
vol59no1p42_48.pdf>.
	15.	 Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 312–13; Heilbron, “Plus and 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
397
Minus: Franklin’s Zero-Sum Way of Thinking,” 608; “Journal of the Franklin 
Institute,” vol. 161 (January to June 1906): 253–56.
	16.	 Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 313.
	17.	 Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 287.
	18.	 Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 314.
	19.	 Cohen, Benjamin Franklin’s Science, 70; Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th 
Centuries, 340–41.
	20.	 Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 346–48.
	21.	 Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 349; Cohen, “Benjamin Franklin: 
An Experimental Newtonian Scientist,” 6.
	22.	 I. Bernard Cohen, “The Two Hundredth Anniversary of Benjamin Franklin’s 
Two Lightning Experiments and the Introduction of the Lightning Rod,” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 96, no. 3 (1952): 332–36; Cohen, 
Benjamin Franklin’s Science, 157.
	23.	 “A Letter of Benjamin Franklin, Esq; to Mr. Peter Collinson, F.R.S. con-
cerning an Electrical Kite,” October 1, 1752, online at Philosophical 
Transactions, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org 
/content/47/565>. 
	24.	 I. Bernard Cohen, “The Two Hundredth Anniversary,” 333–36.
	25.	 “An Account of the Death of Mr. George William Richman, Professor of 
Experimental Philosophy, a Member of the Imperial Academy of Sciences 
at Petersburg. Translated from the High-Dutch,” Philosophical Transactions 
1755–1756, no. 49 (1755): 62–63, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://rstl.royal 
societypublishing.org/content/49/61.full.pdf+html>. 
	26.	 Cohen, “The Two Hundredth Anniversary,” 331–36; Tucker, Bolt of Fate, 
135–56.
	27.	 Tucker, Bolt of Fate, 186–87.
	28.	 Tucker, Bolt of Fate, 186–87.
	29.	 Michael Brian Schiffer, Draw the Lightning Down: Benjamin Franklin and Electrical 
Technology in the Age of Enlightenment (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2003), 195–200; Heilbron, Electricity in the 17th and 18th Centuries, 380–82; Cohen, 
Science and the Founding Fathers, 169–70.
	30.	 Chaplin, First Scientific American, 5. 
	31.	 The full text of Experiment and Observations on Electricity is available online from the 
Smithsonian Institution, <http://library.si.edu/digital-library/book/experiment 
sobser00fran>.
	32.	 Chaplin, First Scientific American, 156–57, 177–78; Brands, First American, 302. 
	33.	 Brands, First American, 472–74; Chaplin, First Scientific American, 237.
	34.	 Jonathan R. Dull, “Franklin the Diplomat: The French Mission,” Transactions of 
the American Philosophical Society 72, no. 1 (1982): 26–27. 
	35.	 Morris Bishop, “Franklin in France,” Daedalus 86, no. 3 (May 1957): 228–30. 
	36.	 “Benjamin Franklin to William Franklin,” Franklin Papers, August 16, 1784, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://journals.psu.edu/phj/article/viewFile 
/25468/25237>.

398	
E n d n o t e s
	37.	 Cohen, Science and the Founding Fathers, 184–85.
	38.	 Thomas Fleming, “Greatness Speaks to Greatness, One Last Time,” Journal 
of the American Revolution, August 29, 2013, accessed August 26, 2015, <http://
allthingsliberty.com/2013/08/greatness-speaks-to-greatness-one-last-time/>.
	39.	 Brands, First American, 715; “To George Washington from the National 
Assembly of France, 20 June 1790.” National Archives, Founders Online, 
Franklin Papers, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://founders.archives.gov 
/documents/Washington/05-05-02-0348>.
Chapter 2
	 1.	 Andrew Carnegie, James Watt (Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific, 1913), 
91–2.
	 2.	 Eric Robinson and A. E. Musson, James Watt and the Steam Revolution (New York: 
Augustus M. Kelley Publishers, 1969), 22, 40.
	 3.	 Jenny Uglow, The Lunar Men: Five Friends Whose Curiosity Changed the World (New 
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2002), 26–31; Carnegie, James Watt, 19–20, 
35–36, 38.
	 4.	 Uglow, The Lunar Men, 27.
	 5.	 Uglow, The Lunar Men, 98–99; Carnegie, James Watt, 48–51.
	 6.	 Uglow, The Lunar Men, 101–102; Robinson, James Watt and the Steam Revolution, 
24–25.
	 7.	 Uglow, The Lunar Men, 103. 
	 8.	 Uglow, The Lunar Men, 68, 103–104, 132. 
	 9.	 Robinson, James Watt and the Steam Revolution, 11–13.
	10.	 “Time to Fix Patents,” Economist, August 8, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<www.economist.com/news/leaders/21660522-ideas-fuel-economy-todays 
-patent-systems-are-rotten-way-rewarding-them-time-fix>. 
	11.	 Carnegie, James Watt, 97, 105; Uglow, The Lunar Men, 17, 19, 21; Arnold 
Toynbee, Lectures on the Industrial Revolution of the Eighteenth Century in England: 
Popular Addresses, Notes and Other Fragments (New York: Longmans, Green, and 
Company, 1908), 52.
	12.	 Uglow, The Lunar Men, 252–53, 289–91; Samuel Smiles, Lives of Boulton and Watt 
(London: William Clowes and Sons, 1865), 205.
	13.	 Robinson, James Watt and the Steam Revolution, 62.
	14.	 Carnegie, James Watt, Preface.
	15.	 Robinson, James Watt and the Steam Revolution, 19; Nathan Rosenberg and Manuel 
Trajtenberg, “A General Purpose Technology at Work: The Corliss Steam 
Engine in the Late-Nineteenth-Century United States,” Journal of Economic History 
64, no. 1 (2004): 61, 63–65, 74–75, 92–94; “The Transcontinental Railroad: 
It’s All About Steam,” Linda Hall Library, accessed October 1, 2016, <http:// 
railroad.lindahall.org/essays/locomotives.html>; “A History of Steamboats,” 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.sam 
.usace.army.mil/Portals/46/docs/recreation/OPCO/montgomery/pdfs/10th 
and11th/ahistoryofsteamboats.pdf>.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
399
	16.	 Carnegie, James Watt, 195–96. 3.6 billion equals 150 million horsepower times 
24 men per horsepower.
	17.	 Nicholas Crafts, “Steam as a General Purpose Technology: A Growth 
Accounting Perspective,” The Economic Journal 114, no. 495 (April 2004): 342.
	18.	 Rosenberg, “A General Purpose Technology at Work,” 74–75.
	19.	 Rosenberg, “A General Purpose Technology at Work,” 62–63, 80–83.
	20.	 Carnegie, James Watt, 219.
	21.	 “Bank of England to Issue New £50 note in 2011,” Banknote News, June 22, 2009, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications 
/Pages/news/2014/072.aspx>.
	22.	 Robinson, James Watt and the Steam Revolution, 6, 8–9.
Chapter 3
	 1.	 L. Pierce Williams, Michael Faraday: A Biography (London: Basic Books, 1965), 
196.
	 2.	 John Meurig Thomas, “Faraday and Franklin,” Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society 150, no. 4 (2006): 532–33; William H. Bragg, “Michael 
Faraday,” The Scientific Monthly 33, no. 6 (1931): 487–89.
	 3.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, xi; James Hamilton, A Life of Discovery: Michael Faraday, 
Giant of the Scientific Revolution (New York: Random House, 2002), xi.
	 4.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 8, 14.
	 5.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 14–15.
	 6.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 10, 16.
	 7.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 16, 25–26.
	 8.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 20–25.
	 9.	 Howard J. Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity: Guide to First Reading 
(New Mexico: Green Lion Press, 2001), 15–16.
	10.	 Hamilton, A Life of Discovery, 37–38, 50; Williams, Michael Faraday, 19, 31, 40–41.
	11.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 31, 34–35, 42.
	12.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 138–44, 151–53.
	13.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 153–54, 156.
	14.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 153–54, 156; Hamilton, A Life of Discovery, 165–66.
	15.	 Hamilton, A Life of Discovery, 187–88; Williams, Michael Faraday, 160.
	16.	 Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity, 29–30.
	17.	 Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity, 29–31.
	18.	 Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity, 30–34.
	19.	 Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity, 37–38.
	20.	 Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity, 44.
	21.	 Fisher, Faraday’s Experimental Research in Electricity, 40–41, 44, 49.
	22.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 196.
	23.	 Bragg, “Michael Faraday,” 489–90; Williams, Michael Faraday, 211.
	24.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 242–44, 284.
	25.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 283–84, 286–87; Thomas, “Faraday and Franklin,” 
532–33.

400	
E n d n o t e s
	26.	 Bragg, “Michael Faraday,” 490; Thomas, “Faraday and Franklin,” 534. 
	27.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 2, 4; Hamilton, A Life of Discovery, 4.
	28.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 103–4, 341.
	29.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 105.
	30.	 E. H. Hare, “Michael Faraday’s Loss of Memory.” Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of Medicine 67 (1974): 618, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih 
.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1651719/>; Williams, Michael Faraday, 492–93, 497.
	31.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 499.
	32.	 Williams, Michael Faraday, 500.
	33.	 Basil Mahon, The Man Who Changed Everything: The Life of James Clerk Maxwell 
(UK: John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2003), 1.
	34.	 Mahon, Man Who Changed Everything, 15–16.
	35.	 Mahon, Man Who Changed Everything, 19–20.
	36.	 Mahon, Man Who Changed Everything, 23–24, 35–36, 49; Michael Atiyah, 
“Foreword to James Clerk Maxwell Commemorative Booklet,” James Clerk 
Maxwell Foundation, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.clerkmaxwell 
foundation.org/ForewordSirMA_Booklet.pdf>.
	37.	 Albert Einstein, Ideas and Opinions (New York: Three Rivers Press, 1954), 266–67, 
269.
	38.	 Mahon, Man Who Changed Everything, xv–xvi, 2.
	39.	 Mahon, Man Who Changed Everything, 57, 59–60, 65.
	40.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought (Santa Fe: Green Lion Press, 2006), 5, 
128–29.
	41.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 51–52, 56–57.
	42.	 James Trefil and Robert M. Hazen, The Sciences: An Integrated Approach (Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley and Sons, 2004), 126.
	43.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 64–65.
	44.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 67–68.
	45.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 68–71.
	46.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 70–71.
	47.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 70–71.
	48.	 Thomas K. Simpson, Figures of Thought, 118, 120–21.
	49.	 Mahon, The Man Who Changed Everything, 1–2, 126–28.
	50.	 James Clerk Maxwell, “A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 155 (1865): 466, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/155/459.full 
.pdf+html>.
Chapter 4
	 1.	 Memorial of Samuel Finley Breese Morse, Including Appropriate Ceremonies of Respect at 
the National Capitol, and Elsewhere, published by order of Congress (Washington: 
Government Printing Office, 1875), 258. 
	 2.	 Samuel F. B. Morse, “American Electromagnetic Telegraph: A Classic 
Invention,” Science News 18, no. 485 (1930): 54–55.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
401
	 3.	 O’Reilly et al. v. Morse et al. 56 U.S. 62 (1853), paragraph 434, accessed October 
1, 2016, <https://h2o.law.harvard.edu/collages/3986>. 
	 4.	 Kenneth Silverman, Lightning Man: The Accursed Life of Samuel F. B. Morse (New 
York: Random House, 2003) 4–6.
	 5.	 Silverman, Lightning Man, 37, 40–41, 47–48, 52, 60–61, 72–73; Carleton Mabee, 
The American Leonardo (New York: Purple Mountain Press, 2000), 47–48, 52. 
	 6.	 Silverman, Lightning Man, 122–25, 133–34; Samuel F. B. Morse, Imminent Dangers 
to the Free Institutions of the United States through Foreign Immigration (1835; New York: 
Arno Press, Inc., 1969), accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wwnorton.com 
/college/history/eamerica/media/ch12/resources/documents/morse.htm>; 
Mabee, The American Leonardo, 169–70. 
	 7.	 James D. Reid, The Telegraph in America: Its Founders, Promoters, and Noted Men (New 
York: Derby Brothers, 1879), 87. 
	 8.	 Mabee, The American Leonardo, 148–54. 
	 9.	 Mabee, The American Leonardo, 156–57, 189; O’Reilly v. Morse—56 U.S. 62 
(1853) Justia.com, paragraph 112, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://supreme 
.justia.com/cases/federal/us/56/62/case.html>; “Samuel F. B. Morse Papers at 
the Library of Congress, 1793 to 1919,” Library of Congress, accessed October 
1, 2016, <www.loc.gov/collections/samuel-morse-papers/articles-and-essays 
/timeline/1791-1839/>; Thomas P. Jones (ed.), “Journal of the Franklin 
Institute,” vols. 25–26, published by the Franklin Institute (1838): 108.
	10.	 Mabee, The American Leonardo, 189–90, 194–95; Silverman, Lightning Man, 169.
	11.	 Mabee, The American Leonardo, 210–11. 
	12.	 Silverman, Lightning Man, 174–78.
	13.	 Silverman, Lightning Man, 192, 220–21.
	14.	 “Invention of the Telegraph,” Library of Congress, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<www.loc.gov/collection/samuel-morse-papers/articles-and-essays/invention 
-of-the-telegraph/>; Silverman, Lightning Man, 236.
	15.	 Mabee, The American Leonardo, 277–78.
	16.	 “Samuel F. B. Morse Papers at the Library of Congress, 1793 to 1919,” Library 
of Congress, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.loc.gov/resource/mmorse 
.018001/?sp=324/>.
	17.	 Silverman, Lightning Man, 283–84, 293–95; “O’Reilly v. Morse—56 U.S. 62 
(1853)” paragraph 422.
	18.	 Mabee, The American Leonardo, 309, 311; Silverman, Lightning Man, 437.
	19.	 Tom Standage, The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the 
Nineteenth Century’s On-Line Pioneers (New York: Walker Publishing Company, 
1999), 72–78.
	20.	 Standage, The Victorian Internet, 79–80, 83–84; “The First Transatlantic Cable 
1858,” The Institution of Engineering and Technology, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.theiet.org/resources/library/archives/featured/trans-cable1858.cfm>.
	21.	 Standage, The Victorian Internet, 84–86, 88.
	22.	 Critic 29 (1896); Standage, The Victorian Internet, 89–90.
	23.	 Standage, The Victorian Internet, vii, 101–102, 106–107, 132, 136.

402	
E n d n o t e s
	24.	 Standage, The Victorian Internet, 150–63.
	25.	 Standage, The Victorian Internet, 114–15.
	26.	 Robert Luther Thompson, Wiring a Continent: The History of the Telegraph Industry 
in the United States 1832–1866 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1947), 
440. 
	27.	 JoAnne Yates, “The Telegraph’s Effect on Nineteenth Century Markets and 
Firms,” Business and Economic History 15 (1986): 151–52.
	28.	 Yates, “The Telegraph’s Effect,” 149–50.
	29.	 Yates, “The Telegraph’s Effect,” 155.
	30.	 Tomas Nonnenmacher, “History of the U.S. Telegraph Industry,” Economic History 
Association, EH.net, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://eh.net/encyclopedia 
/history-of-the-u-s-telegraph-industry>; Yates, “The Telegraph’s Effect,” 
154–58; Thompson, Wiring a Continent, 442–45. 
	31.	 Tomas Nonnenmacher, “State Promotion and Regulation of the Telegraph 
Industry,” The Journal of Economic History, 61, no. 1 (2001): 20, 24, 29.
	32.	 Nonnenmacher, “State Promotion and Regulation of the Telegraph Industry,” 
28; Nonnenmacher, “History of the U.S. Telegraph Industry”; Thompson, 
Wiring a Continent, 440–42. 
	33.	 Silverman, Lightning Man, 397, 441.
	34.	 Reid, The Telegraph in America, 665; “Apotheosis of Washington,” Architect 
of the Capitol, January 30, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.aoc.gov/capitol-hill/other-paintings-and-murals/apotheosis 
-washington>.
Chapter 5
	 1.	 “Death of a Titan,” Time, October 26, 1931.
	 2.	 Paul Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1998), vii.
	 3.	 Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 119–20; Robert Friedel and Paul Israel, Edison’s 
Electric Light (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1987), x.
	 4.	 Rudolph Alvarado, Thomas Edison (Indianapolis: Alpha Books, 2002), 4–7.
	 5.	 Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 8, 13–14; Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 11–12, 18.
	 6.	 Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 20, 26–27; Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 21.
	 7.	 Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 35, 37–39.
	 8.	 Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 45; Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 42–44.
	 9.	 Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 45–46, 49, 55–56.
	10.	 Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 59; Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 118–20.
	11.	 Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 66, 69; Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 130–32.
	12.	 Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 77, 79–80, 83.
	13.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 3–8.
	14.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 7; “Madison Square North Historic 
District Designation Report,” New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, 
June 26, 2011, 10–11, accessed October 1, 2016, <www.nyc.gov/html/lpc 
/downloads/pdf/reports/MadisonSquareNorth.pdf >.
	15.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 7.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
403
	16.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 10, 13, 16.
	17.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 19, 22, 40.
	18.	 Trefil, The Sciences: An Integrated Approach, 116–17.
	19.	 Thomas P. Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society 1880–1930 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983), 35–36.
	20.	 “Electric Lamp,” The Thomas Edison Papers, Rutgers University, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://edison.rutgers.edu/lamp.htm>; Friedel and Israel, Edison’s 
Electric Light, 100, 106.
	21.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 106.
	22.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 93, 112.
	23.	 “Edison’s First Successful Electric Lamp,” Spark Museum of Electrical Invention, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.sparkmuseum.org/collections/electricity 
-sparks-invention-(1800-1900)/edisons-first-successful-electric-lamp/>; Friedel 
and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 114.
	24.	 “Milestones: Pearl Street Station, 1882,” ETHW, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://ethw.org/Milestones:Pearl_Street_Station,_1882>; 
Austin 
Smith, 
“New York Post from Sept. 4, 1882,” New York Post, September 4, 2001, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://nypost.com/2001/09/04/new-york-post 
-from-sept-4-1882/>.
	25.	 “Promoting Edison’s Lamp,” Smithsonian Institution, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/lighting/19thcent/promo19.htm>; Electricity 
Journal 3, no. 2 (July 27, 1892): 15n21. 
	26.	 David Porter Heap, “Report on the International Exhibition of Electricity, 
Paris,” Engineer Department, U.S. Army, 1884, 188–89, accessed October 1, 
2016, 
<https://archive.org/stream/reportoninterna01heapgoog#page/n194 
/mode/2up>; Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 217.
	27.	 “Edison’s U.S. Patents, 1880–1882,” Thomas Edison Papers, Rutgers University, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://edison.rutgers.edu/patente2.htm>; Friedel 
and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 157, 165.
	28.	 “Edison Companies,” Thomas Edison Papers, Rutgers University, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://edison.rutgers.edu/list.htm>.
	29.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 211–14.
	30.	 Friedel and Israel, Edison’s Electric Light, 206–7, 219, 222.
	31.	 Hughes, Networks of Power, 76–77.
	32.	 Gilbert King, “Edison vs. Westinghouse: A Shocking Rivalry,” Smithsonian, 
October 11, 2011, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.smithsonianmag.com 
/ist/?next=/history/edison-vs-westinghouse-a-shocking-rivalry-102146036/>; 
Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention, 336.
	33.	 “Henry Ford Museum & Greenfield Village,” Library of Congress, The American 
Folklife Center, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://memory.loc.gov/dig 
lib/legacies/loc.afc.afc-legacies.200003161/>; Alvarado, Thomas Edison, 209.
	34.	 Herbert Hoover, “Statement on a National Tribute to Thomas Alva Edison,” 
The American Presidency Project, October 20, 1931, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=22861>; “Death of a Titan.”

404	
E n d n o t e s
Chapter 6
	 1.	 George Westinghouse Jr., “A Reply to Mr. Edison,” The North American Review 
149, no. 397 (1889): 656. 
	 2.	 Rebecca Jacobson, “8 Things You Didn’t Know About Nikola Tesla.” PBS 
Newshour, July 10, 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <www.pbs.org/newshour 
/rundown/5-things-you-didnt-know-about-nikola-tesla/>.
	 3.	 Margaret Cheney and Robert Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning (New York: Barnes 
& Noble, 2001), 16–20, 53.
	 4.	 “Tesla: Life and Legacy, Coming to America,” PBS, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<www.pbs.org/tesla/ll/ll_america.html>.
	 5.	 George Westinghouse Jr., “Sir Wm. Thomson and Electric Lighting,” The North 
American Review 150, no. 400 (1890): 323.
	 6.	 David Bodanis, Electric Universe: The Shocking True Story of Electricity (New York: 
Random House, 2005), 47–49. 
	 7.	 Margaret Cheney, Tesla: Man Out of Time (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001), 
40. 
	 8.	 Westinghouse Jr., “Sir Wm. Thomson and Electric Lighting,” 324.
	 9.	 “Tesla: Life and Legacy, War of the Currents,” PBS, accessed October 1, 
2016, <www.pbs.org/tesla/ll/ll_warcur.html>; A New System of Alternate 
Current—Motors and Transformers,” PBS, accessed October 1, 2016. 
Originally read before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, May 16, 
1888, accessed October 1, 2016, <www.pbs.org/tesla/res/res_art02.html>.
	10.	 Quentin Skrabec, George Westinghouse: Gentle Genius (New York: Algora Publishing, 
2007), 28–29, 32.
	11.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 33–38. 
	12.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 37–38. 
	13.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 39–41. 
	14.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 45. 
	15.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 42, 45, 47. 
	16.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 48, 68.
	17.	 Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 77–79, 82–83. 
	18.	 Henry Goslee Prout, A Life of George Westinghouse (Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan, 1921), 100–102; Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 89, 100.
	19.	 Prout, A Life of George Westinghouse, 10–11.
	20.	 Prout, A Life of George Westinghouse, 10, 11, 19, 113; Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 77, 103, 
106.
	21.	 Thomas P. Hughes, “Harold P. Brown and the Executioner’s Current: An 
Incident in the AC-DC Controversy.” The Business History Review 32, no. 2 (1958): 
146–58, 151.
	22.	 Hughes, “Executioner’s Current,” 156–61; Stuart Banner, The Death Penalty: 
An American History (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), 186. 
“Far Worse Than Hanging; Kemmler’s Death Proves an Awful Spectacle. 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
405
The Electric Current Had to Be Turned on Twice before the Deed Was Fully 
Accomplished,” New York Times, August 7, 1890.
	23.	 Westinghouse, “A Reply to Mr. Edison,” 658–59.
	24.	 Prout, A Life of George Westinghouse, 4, 134–37; Skrabec, Gentle Genius, 139–40.
	25.	 Harold I. Sharlin, “The First Niagara Falls Power Project,” The Business History 
Review 35, no. 1 (1961): 62–63. 
	26.	 Sharlin, “The First Niagara Falls Power Project,” 65–69. 
	27.	 Sharlin, “The First Niagara Falls Power Project,” 71–73. 
	28.	 Sharlin, “The First Niagara Falls Power Project,” 74. 
	29.	 Cheney and Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning, 53, 63. 
	30.	 “Tesla: Life and Legacy, Who Invented Radio?” PBS, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.pbs.org/tesla/ll/ll_whoradio.html>. 
	31.	 Cheney and Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning, 85–86, 93 (photo). 
	32.	 Cheney and Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning, 36–37, 86–87.
	33.	 Nikola Tesla. “The Transmission of Electrical Energy without Wires,” Scientific 
American, supplement 1483 (June 4, 1904), p. 23761; Cheney and Uth, Tesla: 
Master of Lightning, 89–93, 95.
	34.	 Cheney and Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning, 97–100; Nikola Tesla, “The Problem 
of Increasing Human Energy,” PBS, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.pbs.org/tesla/res/res_art09.html>.
	35.	 Cheney and Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning, 104–105, 107.
	36.	 Cheney and Uth, Tesla: Master of Lightning, 121–22.
	37.	 “Letters to Nikola Tesla on His 75th Birthday in 1931 from Pioneers in Science 
and Engineering,” Tesla Memorial Society of New York, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.teslasociety.com/letters.htm>; “Tesla’s Portrait Shown,” New York 
Times, March 2, 1916. 
	38.	 Prout, A Life of George Westinghouse, 280–81.
	39.	 “Westinghouse Memorial,” Westinghouse Memorial, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<www.westinghousememorial.org/story.htm>.
	40.	 Blaine McCormick and Burton W. Folsom Jr., “A Survey of Business Historians 
on America’s Greatest Entrepreneurs,” The Business History Review 77, no. 4 
(2003): 703–16. 
Chapter 7
	 1.	 Roosevelt, “Campaign Address on Progressive Government” 
	 2.	 Roosevelt, “Campaign Address on Progressive Government.”
	 3.	 Samuel Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull: An Autobiography, ed. Larry Plachno 
(Polo, IL: Transportation Trails, 1992), 10, 16–18; Forrest McDonald, Insull 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), 14–15.
	 4.	 McDonald, Insull, 20–21.
	 5.	 McDonald, Insull, 21–22.
	 6.	 McDonald, Insull, 26–27, 37–38; Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 46.
	 7.	 McDonald, Insull, 57, 63.

406	
E n d n o t e s
	 8.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 73; McDonald, Insull, 96–98, 103–5.
	 9.	 McDonald, Insull, 67–68, 103–5.
	10.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 76–77; McDonald, Insull, 58.
	11.	 McDonald, Insull, 99–100; Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 78–79.
	12.	 McDonald, Insull, 89.
	13.	 McDonald, Insull, 73, 113; Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 89–90.
	14.	 McDonald, Insull, 121.
	15.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 83.
	16.	 McDonald, Insull, 141.
	17.	 McDonald, Insull, 139–42. Assuming capacity cut from 437,000 kW to 270,000 
kW.
	18.	 McDonald, Insull, 148, 150–53.
	19.	 McDonald, Insull, 158–61.
	20.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 119.
	21.	 McDonald, Insull, 173.
	22.	 McDonald, Insull, 173.
	23.	 McDonald, Insull, 173–75.
	24.	 McDonald, Insull, 177.
	25.	 McDonald, Insull, 177.
	26.	 McDonald, Insull, 179.
	27.	 McDonald, Insull, 179.
	28.	 McDonald, Insull, 182.
	29.	 McDonald, Insull, 237.
	30.	 McDonald, Insull, 278–83.
	31.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 195–201; McDonald, Insull, 294.
	32.	 McDonald, Insull, 299.
	33.	 McDonald, Insull, 299–301; Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 222.
	34.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 151; McDonald, Insull, 263–65, 267. 
	35.	 McDonald, Insull, 308–12. 
	36.	 McDonald, Insull, 310–12. 
	37.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 233; McDonald, Insull, 308, 312–13, 315.
	38.	 McDonald, Insull, 316–17; Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 251, 264.
	39.	 McDonald, Insull, 319; Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, 268; “Samuel Insull 
Will Make Fight for Complete Vindication,” Ottawa Citizen, May 7, 1934.
	40.	 Francis X. Busch, Guilty or Not Guilty: An Account of the Trials of the Leo Frank Case, 
the D.C. Stephenson Case, the Samuel Insull Case, the Alger Hiss Case (New York: 
Bobbs-Merrill, 1952), 136–38.
	41.	 Busch, Guilty or Not Guilty, 143–44, 146, 150–52.
	42.	 Busch, Guilty or Not Guilty, 161–62.
	43.	 Busch, Guilty or Not Guilty, 173–74.
	44.	 Busch, Guilty or Not Guilty, 178–79.
	45.	 Busch, Guilty or Not Guilty, 186–88, 190–92.
	46.	 Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull, cclxxxvi.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
407
	47.	 Norman S. Buchanan, “The Origin and Development of the Public Utility 
Holding Company,” The Journal of Political Economy 44, no. 1 (1936): 52; Arthur 
R. Taylor, “Losses to the Public in the Insull Collapse: 1932–1946,” Business 
History Review 36, no. 2 (1962): 188–89.
	48.	 Taylor, “Losses to the Public in the Insull Collapse,” 188, 194.
	49.	 Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970. U.S. Department 
of Commerce (1975): 821, 827, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www2 
.census.gov/library/publications/1975/compendia/hist_stats_colonial-1970 
/hist_stats_colonial-1970p2-chS.pdf>.
	50.	 Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, 827.
Chapter 8
	 1.	 Franklin D. Roosevelt. “Campaign Address in Portland, Oregon on Public 
Utilities and Development of Hydro-electric Power,” The American Presidency 
Project, September 21, 1932, accessed July 20, 2014, <http://www.presidency 
.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=88390>.
	 2.	 Roosevelt, “Campaign Address in Portland, Oregon on Public Utilities and 
Development of Hydro-electric Power”; William M. Emmons III, “Franklin 
D. Roosevelt, Electric Utilities, and the Power of Competition,” The Journal of 
Economic History 53, 4 (1993): 880.
	 3.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.”
	 4.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.”
	 5.	 “The Regulation of Public-Utility Companies,” Securities and Exchange Commission, 
1995, 1, 19–20, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.sec.gov/news/studies 
/puhc.txt>. 
	 6.	 W. S. Murray, A Superpower System for the Region between Boston and Washington 
(Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1921), 9–10. 
	 7.	 Murray, A Superpower System, 14. 
	 8.	 Murray, A Superpower System, 13–14. 
	 9.	 Murray, A Superpower System, tables 71 and 63.
	10.	 Gifford Pinchot, “Introduction,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science 118 (1925): vii, ix.
	11.	 Pinchot, “Introduction,” ix–x.
	12.	 Morris Llewellyn Cooke, “Giant Power and Coal,” Annals of the American Academy 
of Political and Social Science 111 (1924): 213, 216–17; Thomas Park Hughes, 
“Technology and Public Policy: The Failure of Giant Power,” Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers 64, no. 9 (1976): 1363–64. 
	13.	 Cooke, “Giant Power and Coal,” 213; Hughes, “Technology and Public Policy,” 
1365.
	14.	 Pinchot, “Introduction,” ix–x.
	15.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	16.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	17.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 

408	
E n d n o t e s
	18.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	19.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	20.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	21.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	22.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	23.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	24.	 Roosevelt, “Hydro-electric Power.” 
	25.	 Loretto Mersh, “The Presidential Campaign of 1932” (master’s thesis, Loyola 
University Chicago, 1937), 79–80, 84–85, 87.
	26.	 Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Annual Message to Congress,” The American Presidency 
Project, January 4, 1935.
	27.	 Ben S. Bernanke, “The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative 
Approach,” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 4813, August 
1994, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nber.org/papers/w4814>. 
	28.	 “A Report of the National Power Policy Committee with Respect to the 
Treatment of Holding Companies,” Document 137, (March 12, 1935): 1–3.
	29.	 “A Report of the National Power Policy Committee with Respect to the 
Treatment of Holding Companies,” 4. 
	30.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
letter of transmittal, chapter two, Growth and Importance of Electric and Gas 
Industries.
	31.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
38, table 12.
	32.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
40.
	33.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
43, table 13, 44, 56.
	34.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
43.
	35.	 Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935: Hearings before the Committee 
on Interstate Commerce, 9.
	36.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
838, 840–41, 844.
	37.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
849.
	38.	 Robert E. Healy, “Section 11 of the Public Utility Holding Company Act,” 
Securities and Exchange Commission, November 5, 1941, 3–5.
	39.	 Edward C. Eicher, “Address, Annual Convention, Edison Electric Institute, 
Buffalo, New York,” Securities and Exchange Commission, June 5, 1941, 1–2, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/1941/060541e-
icher.pdf>.
	40.	 Eicher, “Address, Annual Convention” 2, 4, 6. 
	41.	 Eicher, “Address, Annual Convention” 7. 
	42.	 Eicher, “Address, Annual Convention” 6–8.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
409
	43.	 Donald C. Cook, “Some Comments on the Current Utility Scene, New York 
Society of Security Analysts, New York City, New York,” Securities and Exchange 
Commission, March 29, 1950, 1–2, 4, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.
sec.gov/news/speech/speecharchive/1950speech.shtml>.
	44.	 Cook, “Some Comments on the Current Utility Scene,” 10.
	45.	 “Twenty-Fifth Annual Report of the Securities and Exchange Commission Fiscal 
Year Ended June 30, 1959,” Securities and Exchange Commission, January 6, 1960, 
page 123, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.sec.gov/about/annual_report 
/1959.pdf>.
	46.	 “Fifteenth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” no. 332 (1935), 1.
	47.	 “Fifteenth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” 1 on the 
Attleboro Gap, see, for example, Frank R. Lindh and Thomas W. Bone Jr., 
“State Jurisdiction over Distributed Generators,” Energy Law Journal 34, no. 2 
(2013): 499–539.
	48.	 “Fifteenth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” 2; for origi-
nal law and language, see “16 U.S. Code Chapter 12—Federal Regulation 
and Development of Power,” Cornell University Law School, (hereafter 
FPA), accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode 
/text/16/824>. For updated language and amendments, see FPA at page 37, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/Federal%20
Power%20Act.pdf>. 
	49.	 “FPA,” 42, 45. 
	50.	 “Twentieth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” no. 21 (1940), 
1–2.
	51.	 “Twentieth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” 9–10.
	52.	 “Twentieth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” 13; Daniel F. 
Spulber, Regulation and Markets (Boston: MIT Press, 1989), 3–5.
	53.	 “Twentieth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission,” 147–48; 
Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the Federal Power Commission, no. 23 (1946): 
1–2.
Chapter 9
	 1.	 Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Address at the Dedication of Boulder Dam,” The 
American Presidency Project, September 30, 1945, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=14952>. 
	 2.	 Joseph E. Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure (University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1988), vii–viii.
	 3.	 Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Address at the Dedication of Boulder Dam.”
	 4.	 Michael Hiltzik, Colossus: The Turbulent, Thrilling Saga of the Building of Hoover Dam 
(New York: Free Press, 2010), ix.
	 5.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 8–12, 18. 
	 6.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 19, 30, 33; Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 11–12.
	 7.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 33–34, 36–39.
	 8.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 39–42; Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 14.

410	
E n d n o t e s
	 9.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 61–62; Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 17.
	10.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 73–75.
	11.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 81–84, 88; Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 26.
	12.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 109–11.
	13.	 Scott Harrison, “St. Francis Dam Collapse Left a Trail of Death and Destruction,” 
Los Angeles Times, March 19, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-stfrancis-dam-retrospective-20160319 
-story.html>; Matt Blitz, “On Occasions like This, I Envy the Dead: The St. 
Francis Dam Disaster,” Smithsonian, March 12, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/occasions-i-envy-dead-st-francis 
-dam-disaster-180954543/>; Hiltzik, Colossus, 113–15, 119. 
	14.	 Milton N. Nathanson, “Updating the Hoover Dam Documents,” U.S. Department 
of the Interior, 1978, 6, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.onthecolorado.com 
/Resources/LawOfTheRiver/HooverDamDocumentsUpdated.pdf>. 
	15.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 147; “Table 1.2—Summary of Receipts, Outlays, and 
Surpluses or Deficits (-) as Percentages of GDP: 1930–2021,” Office of Management 
and Budget White House, <https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/omb/budget/
Historicals> 
	16.	 Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 34; Hiltzik, Colossus, 161–62. 
	17.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 141; Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 38.
	18.	 Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 39–42.
	19.	 Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, 46.
	20.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 199.
	21.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 208–11. See also J. L. Savage and Ivan E. Houk, “Checking 
Arch Dam Designs with Models,” Civil Engineering, May 1931, accessed October 1, 
2016, <https://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/museum/clippings/clipart84.pdf>.
	22.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 275–76.
	23.	 Stevens, Hoover Dam: An American Adventure, viii.
	24.	 Boulder City: The Documentary, PBS, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.pbs.
org/bouldercity/script.htm>; Andrew J. Dunar and Dennis McBride, Building 
Hoover Dam: An Oral History of the Great Depression (Reno: University of Nevada Press, 
1993), 65; Building Boulder City, PBS American Experience, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/general-article 
/hoover-building-boulder-city/>; “Boulder City,” UNLV University Libraries, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://digital.library.unlv.edu/collections/hoover 
-dam/boulder-city>. 
	25.	 Boulder City; Building Boulder City; “Hoover Dam: Wages,” Reclamation: Managing 
Water in the West, March 12, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.usbr 
.gov/lc/hooverdam/history/essays/wages.html>. 
	26.	 Ed Koch, “‘Eighth Wonder of the World’ Workers Suffered Hardships, Death 
to Build Historic Hoover Dam,” Las Vegas Sun, May 15, 2008, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://lasvegassun.com/news/2008/may/15/what-dam-project/>; 
Dunar and McBride, Building Hoover Dam: An Oral History of the Great Depression, 
42–44.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
411
	27.	 “Hoover Dam: Fatalities at Hoover Dam.” Reclamation: Managing Water in the West, 
last updated March 12, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.usbr.gov 
/lc/hooverdam/history/essays/fatal.html>; “Lawsuit against Six Companies,” 
UNLV University Libraries, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://digital.library.unlv.
edu/collections/hoover-dam/lawsuit-against-six-companies>; “Hoover Dam: 
High Scalers.” Reclamation: Managing Water in the West, last updated March 12, 
2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.usbr.gov/lc/hooverdam/history 
/essays/hscaler.html>.
	28.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 127, 295–97.
	29.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 296–98.
	30.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 296–99.
	31.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 299, 303, 309–12, 315.
	32.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 340.
	33.	 Roosevelt, “Address at the Dedication of Boulder Dam.”
	34.	 Roosevelt, “Address at the Dedication of Boulder Dam.”
	35.	 Herbert Hoover, “Address at Madison Square Garden in New York City,” The 
American Presidency Project, October 31, 1932, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=23317>. 
	36.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 382–83.
	37.	 Hiltzik, Colossus, 382–83; Hiltzik, Colossus, 217.
Chapter 10
	 1.	 Lorena Hickok. “Dear Mr. Hopkins,” The New Deal Network, June 6, 1934, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://newdeal.feri.org/hopkins/hop15.htm>. 
	 2.	 “The Enduring Legacy,” Tennessee Valley Authority, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://152.87.4.98/heritage/fdr/index.htm/>; “The 1930s,” Tennessee Valley 
Authority, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our 
-History/The-1930s>; Lorena Hickok, “Dear Mr. Hopkins.” 
	 3.	 “TVA Goes to War,” Tennessee Valley Authority, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://152.87.4.98/heritage/war/index.htm>; “The 1950s,” Tennessee Valley 
Authority, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our 
-History/The-1950s>; “The 1960s,” Tennessee Valley Authority, accessed October 
1, 2016, <https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our-History/The-1960s>.
	 4.	 Steven M. Neuse, David E. Lilienthal: The Journey of an American Liberal (Knoxville: 
University of Tennessee Press, 1996).
	 5.	 Roscoe C. Martin, “The Tennessee Valley Authority: A Study of Federal 
Control,” Law and Contemporary Problems (1957): 353–54, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2721&context 
=lcp>; Erwin C. Hargrove, Prisoners of Myth: The Leadership of the Tennessee Valley 
Authority 1933–1990 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2001), 19; Jack 
Neely, “Clash of the Titans,” Tennessee Valley Authority, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://152.87.4.98/heritage/titans/index.htm>.
	 6.	 Neely, “Clash of the Titans”; “The Enduring Legacy.” 

412	
E n d n o t e s
	 7.	 “Tennessee Valley Authority Act,” U.S. National Archives Records Administration, 
Transcript of Tennessee Valley Authority Act (1933), section 23.
	 8.	 “Tennessee Valley Authority Act,” sections 2(a), 2(f), 4(i), 5(e), 10, 15.
	 9.	 “David E. Lilienthal Is Dead at 81; Led U.S. Effort in Atomic Power,” New 
York Times, January 16, 1981, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.
com/1981/01/16/obituaries/david-e-lilienthal-is-dead-aty-81-led-us-effort 
-in-atmoic-power.html?pagewanted=all>; Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 
6, 12.
	10.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 20, 23–25, 29; “Donald R. Richberg,” 
University of Minnesota, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://darrow.law.umn.edu 
/photo.php?pid=1312>. 
	11.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 27, 29, 32.
	12.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 37, 43.
	13.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 42, 44–47.
	14.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 51.
	15.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 55, 59–63.
	16.	 David E. Lilienthal, “Business and Government in the Tennessee Valley,” Annals 
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 172 (March 1934): 46.
	17.	 Lilienthal, “Business and Government in the Tennessee Valley,” 48.
	18.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 68, 70.
	19.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 70–71.
	20.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 74–76.
	21.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 82, 84–85.
	22.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 88–89.
	23.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 89, 110–11.
	24.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 89, 110–11.
	25.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 99–100.
	26.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 100–101, 103–5, 108.
	27.	 David Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March (New York: Harper & Brothers, 
1944) 11, 18, 45.
	28.	 Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March, 12.
	29.	 “TVA Goes to War.” 
	30.	 Hargrove, Prisoners of Myth, 60, 63; Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 104, 151, 
160.
	31.	 Lorena Hickok, “Dear Mr. Hopkins.” 
	32.	 Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March, dedication, ix, 3–4, 8.
	33.	 Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March, 6, 21.
	34.	 Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the March, 144–46, 155, 185.
	35.	 Neuse, Journey of an American Liberal, 139–46.
	36.	 Norman Wengert. “TVA—Symbol and Reality,” The Journal of Politics 13, no. 3 
(1951): 369–70.
	37.	 Wengert, “TVA—Symbol and Reality,” 378–80, 384–89, 391.
	38.	 Martin, “The Tennessee Valley Authority,” 353–56, 375.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
413
Chapter 11
	 1.	 Saul D. Alinsky, John L. Lewis: An Unauthorized Biography (New York: Cornwall 
Press, 1949), 3.
	 2.	 Sinclair’s most famous novel was and still is The Jungle (1906), which brought the 
dangerous practices of the meatpacking industry to light.
	 3.	 Sam H. Schurr and Bruce S. Netschert, Energy in the American Economy (Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1960), 500. 
	 4.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 3.
	 5.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 76, 500; “Monthly Energy Review,” 
Monthly Energy Review, Energy Information Administration, September 2016, 98, 109, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly 
/pdf/mer.pdf>.
	 6.	 Alfred D. Chandler Jr., “Anthracite Coal and the Beginnings of the Industrial 
Revolution in the United States,” The Business History Review 46, no. 2 (1972): 
141–42, 145–46.
	 7.	 Chandler, “Anthracite Coal and the Beginnings of the Industrial Revolution in 
the United States,” 147–49.
	 8.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 491–92, 500.
	 9.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 65–68, 77.
	10.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 500.
	11.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 492–93.
	12.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 76–77, 500.
	13.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 71, 81–82.
	14.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 74.
	15.	 See also Saul Alinsky, “John L: Something of a Man,” Nation, June 30, 1969, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.thenation.com/article/154512/john-l 
-something-man>. 
	16.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 4–5.
	17.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 5–7; “Coal Fatalities for 1900 Through 2013,” United 
States Department of Labor, Mine Safety and Health Administration, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.msha.gov/stats/centurystats/coalstats.asp>; Alinsky, John 
L. Lewis, 7.
	18.	 Wallace Stegner, foreword to Buried Unsung: Louis Tikas and the Ludlow Massacre, 
by Zeese Papanikolas (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1991), xvii; 
Ben Mauk, “The Ludlow Massacre Still Matters,” New Yorker, April 18, 2014, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/the 
-ludlow-massacre-still-matters>. 
	19.	 “Eyewitness to Murder: Recounting the Ludlow Massacre,” History Matters, 
George Mason University, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://historymatters.gmu 
.edu/d/5737/>; Mauk, “The Ludlow Massacre Still Matters.”
	20.	 Alinksy, John L. Lewis, 11–13.
	21.	 Alinksy, John L. Lewis, 14–16.

414	
E n d n o t e s
	22.	 “The Bituminous Coal Conservation Act of 1935,” Yale Journal of Law 45, no. 2 
(December 1935): 293–94.
	23.	 “The Bituminous Coal Conservation Act of 1935,” 295–96. 
	24.	 “Basic Labor Laws (United States of America): The Norris-LaGuardia Act 
(1932),” Industrial Workers of the World, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.iww.org/organize/laborlaw/Lynd/Lynd3.shtml>; Barbara Alexander, 
“The National Recovery Administration,” Economic History Association, EH.net, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://eh.net/encyclopedia/the-national-recovery 
-administration-2/>; Daniel Schlozman, When Movements Anchor Parties: Electoral 
Alignments in American History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015), 
56; James Stuart Olson, Historical Dictionary of the Great Depression, 1929–1940 
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2001), 174. 
	25.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 42, 73, 81–84, 98.
	26.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 111, 143–46.
	27.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 164, 177, 188–90, 219–20.
	28.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 224, 238–39, 241, 247.
	29.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 281, 287, 299–302.
	30.	 Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Fireside Chat 24: On the Coal Crisis,” Miller Center: 
University of Virginia, May 2, 1943, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://millercenter 
.org/president/fdroosevelt/speeches/speech-3330>; “Coal Strike Is Called Off,” 
Chicago Daily Tribune, June 23, 1943, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://archives 
.chicagotribune.com/1943/06/23/page/1/article/coal-strike-is-called-off>. 
	31.	 Alinsky, John L. Lewis, 327, 329. 
	32.	 “Annual Energy Review,” Energy Information Administration, 2011, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/>; “Which 
States Produce the Most Coal?” Energy Information Administration, updated April 
4, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm 
?id=69&t=2>. 
	33.	 “Annual Energy Review,” table 7.7, table 7.2; “Coal Fatalities for 1900 Through 
2015,” United States Department of Labor, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://arlweb 
.msha.gov/stats/centurystats/coalstats.asp>.
	34.	 “Annual Energy Review,” table 7.2, table 7.9, table 7.3.
	35.	 “Which States Produce the Most Coal?”; Timothy Cama, “Sierra Club 
Targets Half of US Coal-Fired plants,” Hill, April 18, 2015, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/238191-sierra-club 
-targets-half-of-us-coal-plants>. 
	36.	 “Upper Big Branch Mine Disaster Investigative Report Summary,” West 
Virginia Office of Miners’ Health, Safety and Training, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.wvminesafety.org/PDFs/Performance/EXECUTIVE%20
SUMMARY.pdf>; Alan Blinder, “Mixed Verdict for Donald Blankenship, 
Ex-Chief of Massey Energy, After Coal Mine Blast,” New York Times, December 
3, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04 
/us/donald-blankenship-massey-energy-upper-big-branch-mine.html>; Alan 
Blinder, “Donald Blankenship Sentenced to a Year in Prison in Mine Safety 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
415
Case,” New York Times, April 6, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/us/donald-blankenship-sentenced-to-a-year 
-in-prison-in-mine-safety-case.html?_r=0>. 
	37.	 Blinder, “Donald Blankenship Sentenced to a Year in Prison in Mine Safety 
Case.”
	38.	 Schurr, Energy in the American Economy, 76, 500. 
	39.	 “Monthly Energy Review: Table 6.2 Coal Consumption by Sector,” Monthly 
Energy Review, Energy Information Administration, September 2016, 98, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/mer 
.pdf>.
	40.	 Lyndon B. Johnson, “Remarks at the Presentation of the 1964 Presidential 
Medal of Freedom Awards,” The American Presidency Project, September 14, 1964, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=26496>; 
Alinksy, John L. Lewis, 372.
	41.	 Melvyn Dubofsky and Warren Van Tine, John L. Lewis: A Biography (Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1986), 377.
Chapter 12
	 1.	 Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld, The Evolution of Physics: The Growth of Ideas 
from Early Concepts to Relativity and Quanta (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1938), 
197–98. (With all due respect to Professor Infeld, and for convenience only, the 
remaining cites only Einstein in the text.)
	 2.	 Walter Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2007), 438; Kristen Rogheh Ghodsee, “Einstein’s Pacifism: A Conversation 
with Wolfram Wette,” Institute for Advanced Study, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.ias.edu/ideas/2015/ghodsee-einstein-pacifism>.
	 3.	 Matthew Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the World,” Physicsworld.com, 
January 5, 2005, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://physicsworld.com/cws 
/article/print/2005/jan/05/five-papers-that-shook-the-world> 
	 4.	 Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the World.” The speed of light is about 
186,000 miles per second.
	 5.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 10–11, 18–19.
	 6.	 Don Howard and John Stachel, eds., Einstein: The Formative Years, 1879–1909 
(Boston: Birkhaüser, 2000), 91–92. 
	 7.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 25, 32–34, 36, 48.
	 8.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 56–57, 71.
	 9.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 73, 77–79.
	10.	 Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the World.”
	11.	 Albert Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Production and 
Transformation of Light,” Annalen der Physik (1905), online at Princeton University 
Press Einstein Papers, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://einsteinpapers.press 
.princeton.edu/vol2-trans/100>; Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the 
World.”

416	
E n d n o t e s
	12.	 Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the World”; Albert Einstein, “On the 
Movement of Small Particles Suspended in Stationary Liquids Required by the 
Molecular-Kinetic Theory of Heat,” Annalen der Physik (1905), online at Princeton 
University Press Einstein Papers, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://einsteinpapers 
.press.princeton.edu/vol2-trans/137>.
	13.	 Albert Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,” Annalen der Physik 
(1905), online at Princeton University Press Einstein Papers, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu/vol2-trans/154>. 
	14.	 Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the World.”
	15.	 Chalmers, “Five Papers That Shook the World”; Albert Einstein, “Does the 
Inertia of a Body Depend upon Its Energy Content?,” Annalen der Physik (1905), 
online at Princeton University Press Einstein Papers, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu/vol2-trans/186?ajax>.
	16.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 140–41, 143–45, 149.
	17.	 Stephen Hawking, “A Brief History of Relativity,” CNN, December 27, 1999, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/time 
/1999/12/27/relativity.html>; “May 29, 1919: Eddington Observes Solar Eclipse 
to Test General Relativity,” American Physical Society, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.aps.org/publications/apsnews/201605/physicshistory.cfm>. 
	18.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 289, 292.
	19.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, xvi. 
	20.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 295–96. 
	21.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 5–6, 8. 
	22.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 9–11. 
	23.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 76, 121–22. 
	24.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 125. 
	25.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 134. 
	26.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 148–49. 
	27.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 156, 161–62. 
	28.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 169, 177. 
	29.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 186. 
	30.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 193–94.
	31.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 196–97. Emphasis added.
	32.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 197–98.
	33.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 243.
	34.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 253, 256.
	35.	 David Bodanis, E=mc2: A Biography of the World’s Most Famous Equation (New York: 
Walker Publishing Company, 2000), 96–99.
	36.	 Bodanis, E=mc2, 100–101, 103–106.
	37.	 Bodanis, E=mc2, 105–10.
	38.	 Bodanis, E=mc2, 112–13.
	39.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 471–73, 475–76; “Primary Resources: 
Letter from Albert Einstein to FDR, 8/2/39,” PBS American Experience, accessed 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
417
October 1, 2016, <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features 
/primary-resources/truman-ein39/>.
	40.	 Bodanis, E=mc2, 119–20, 124, 134–40.
	41.	 Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe, 477–78, 485, 489–90, 494; “July 1, 
1946, Cover,” Time, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://content.time.com/time 
/covers/0,16641,19460701,00.html>.
	42.	 Einstein, Evolution of Physics, 92.
	43.	 “Dr. Albert Einstein Dies in Sleep at 76; World Mourns Loss of Great Scientist,” 
New York Times, April 19, 1955, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ny 
times.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/0314.html>; Einstein, Ideas and 
Opinions, 41–42, 45.
	44.	 “Death of a Genius,” Time, May, 2, 1955.
	45.	 “Death of a Genius.”
Chapter 13
	 1.	 Dwight Eisenhower, “Atoms for Peace Speech,” Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential 
Library, Museum and Boyhood Home, December 8, 1953, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.eisenhower.archives.gov/all_about_ike/speeches/atoms_for 
_peace.pdf>. 
	 2.	 “Nuclear Reaction: Why Do Americans Fear Nuclear Power?” PBS Frontline, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows 
/reaction/etc/faqs.html>.
	 3.	 John W. Finney, “Rickover, Father of Nuclear Navy, Dies at 86,” New York Times, 
July 9, 1986, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com/1986/07/09 
/obituaries/rickover-father-of-nuclear-navy-dies-at-86.html?pagewanted=all>.
	 4.	 “What Is U.S. Electricity Generation by Energy Source?” Energy Information 
Administration, updated April 1, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www 
.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=427&t=3>; Steve Hargreaves, “First New Nuclear 
Reactors OK’d in over 30 Years,” CNN Money, February 9, 2012, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://money.cnn.com/2012/02/09/news/economy/nuclear_reactors/>; 
“The Nuclear Renaissance,” World Nuclear Association, updated September 2015, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library 
/current-and-future-generation/the-nuclear-renaissance.aspx>; John D. Sutter, 
“Bill Gates and the ‘Nuclear Renaissance,’” CNN, February 17, 2010, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.cnn.com/2010/TECH/02/17/bill.gates.nuclear/>. 
	 5.	 Richard A. Muller, Physics for Future Presidents: The Science Behind the Headlines 
(New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2008), 125–26; “The Future of Nuclear 
Power,” MIT, 2003, 102, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://web.mit.edu 
/nuclearpower/>.
	 6.	 Muller, Physics for Future Presidents, 155–58; “Uranium Enrichment,” United States 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, July 19, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.nrc.gov/materials/fuel-cycle-fac/ur-enrichment.html>; “The Future of Nuclear 
Power,” 102; “Uranium: Its Uses and Hazards,” Institute for Energy and Environmental 

418	
E n d n o t e s
Research, updated May 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://ieer.org/resource 
/factsheets/uranium-its-uses-and-hazards/>.
	 7.	 Muller, Physics for Future Presidents, 156–59; “Uranium Enrichment,” United States 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
	 8.	 “Key Excerpts of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),” White 
House, July 14, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.whitehouse.gov 
/the-press-office/2015/07/14/key-excerpts-joint-comprehensive-plan-action 
-jcpoa>. 
	 9.	 “Atoms for Peace Speech.” 
	10.	 “Atoms for Peace Speech.” 
	11.	 “Atoms for Peace Speech.” 
	12.	 Gordon Dean, “Atoms for Peace: An American View,” International Journal 9, no. 
4 (1954): 254–56.
	13.	 Robert McKinney, “Atomic Energy: Its Contribution to World Peace through 
Economic Self-Help,” Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science 26, no. 3 (1957): 
266, 269.
	14.	 John Krige, “Atoms for Peace, Scientific Internationalism, and Scientific 
Intelligence,” Osiris, 2nd ser., vol. 21 (2006): 180–81.
	15.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” Navigant Consulting, July 
2013, 9–11, 12–13, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://pubs.naruc.org/pub 
/536D6E09-2354-D714-5175-4F938E94ADB5>; Willis L. Shirk, “‘Atoms for 
Peace’ in Pennsylvania,” Pennsylvania Heritage 35, no. 2 (2009), accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.phmc.state.pa.us/portal/communities/pa-heritage/atoms-for 
-peace-pennsylvania.html>; “Shippingport Atomic Power Station,” Historic 
American Engineering Record, National Park Service, HAER No. PA-81, 8, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://cdn.loc.gov/master/pnp/habshaer/pa/pa1600/pa1658 
/data/pa1658data.pdf>.
	16.	 Shirk, “‘Atoms for Peace’ in Pennsylvania”; William Beaver, “Duquesne Light 
and Shippingport: Nuclear Power Is Born in Western Pennsylvania,” The Western 
Pennsylvania Historical Magazine 70, no. 4 (October 1987): 339; Ernest Sternglass, 
Secret Fallout: Low-Level Radiation from Hiroshima to Three-Mile Island (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1981), 104.
	17.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 13–17, 19.
	18.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 23.
	19.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 23–24. ($693/$1,381); Ibid. 
($525/$1,218).
	20.	 E. E. Kintner, “Admiral Rickover’s Gamble.” Atlantic, January 1, 1959, accessed Octo­
ber 1, 2016, <http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1959/01/admiral 
-rickovers-gamble/308436/>; Jason Reagle, “The First Icex: A Historical 
Journey by USS Nautilus (SSN-571),” Undersea Warfare 40, Summer 2009, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.public.navy.mil/subfor/underseawarfare 
magazine/Issues/Archives/issue_40/nautilus.html>; 
Shirk, 
“‘Atoms 
for 
Peace’ in Pennsylvania.” 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
419
	21.	 Kintner, “Admiral Rickover’s Gamble”; Scott Frickel, “Engineering 
Heterogeneous Accounts: The Case of Submarine Thermal Reactor Mark-I,” 
Science, Technology & Human Values 21, no. 1 (1996): 36–39. 
	22.	 Kintner, “Admiral Rickover’s Gamble.” 
	23.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 12.
	24.	 Frickel, “Engineering Heterogeneous Accounts,” 39­–40; Eric. P. Loewen, “The 
USS Seawolf Sodium-Cooled Reactor Submarine,” American Nuclear Society, May 
17, 2012. 
	25.	 Frickel, “Engineering Heterogeneous Accounts,” 42, 48.
	26.	 John W. Crawford and Steven L. Krahn, “The Naval Nuclear Propulsion 
Program: A Brief Case Study in Institutional Constancy,” Public Administration 
Review 58, no. 2 (1998): 159; Robin Cowan, “Nuclear Power Reactors: A Study 
in Technological Lock-In,” The Journal of Economic History 50, no. 3 (1990): 541.
	27.	 Steve Cohn, “The Political Economy of Nuclear Power (1945–1990): The Rise 
and Fall of an Official Technology,” Journal of Economic Issues 24, no. 3 (1990): 
800; Eyder Peralta, “U.S. Regulators Approve First Nuclear Power Plant in a 
Generation,” NPR, February 9, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2012/02/09/146646228/u-s-regulators-approve
-first-nuclear-power-plant-in-a-generation>; “Information Digest, 2014–2015: 
Appendix A: U.S. Commercial Nuclear Power Reactors—Operating Reactors,” 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, August 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/nuregs/staff/sr1350/>. 
	28.	 “Emergency Preparedness at Nuclear Power Plants,” United States Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission, April 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nrc.
gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-sheets/emerg-plan-prep-nuc-power.pdf>; 
“Power Reactors,” United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, updated June 28, 
2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/power.html>. 
	29.	 Charles Komanoff, Power Plant Cost Escalation: Nuclear and Capital Costs, Regulation, 
and Economics (New York: Van Nostrand Reinholdt Publishing, 1981), 16–17, 20; 
“Operational & Long-Term Shutdown Reactors,” International Atomic Energy 
Agency, updated September 24, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://
www.iaea.org/PRIS/WorldStatistics/OperationalReactorsByCountry 
.aspx>; “World Statistics,” Nuclear Energy Institute, May 2016, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.nei.org/Knowledge-Center/Nuclear-Statistics/World 
-Statistics>; “International Energy Outlook 2016,” chap. 5, “Electricity,” Energy 
Information Administration, released May 11, 2016, figures 5–3, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/electricity.cfm>.
	30.	 Komanoff, Power Plant Cost Escalation, 24–26.
	31.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 34, 58. 
	32.	 Cohn, “The Political Economy of Nuclear Power,” 781–83.
	33.	 “Three Mile Accident,” World Nuclear Association, January 2012, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/Safety-and-Security 
/Safety-of-Plants/Three-Mile-Island-accident/>.
	34.	 “Three Mile Accident.” 

420	
E n d n o t e s
	35.	 John G. Kemeny, “Report of the President’s Commission on the Accident at 
Three Mile Island,” 1979, 1, 8. 
	36.	 Kemeny, “Accident at Three Mile Island,” 7. Emphasis omitted.
	37.	 Kemeny, “Accident at Three Mile Island,” 18–19; “Backgrounder on the Three 
Mile Island Accident,” United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, December 
12, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc 
-collections/fact-sheets/3mile-isle.html>; “Three Mile Island: The Inside 
Story,” Smithsonian Natural Museum of American History, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/tmi/tmi12.htm>.
	38.	 “Emergency Preparedness at Nuclear Power Plants”; “Backgrounder on the 
Three Mile Island Accident.” 
	39.	 Clifford D. May, “Shoreham, Despite Plan to Scrap It, Gains Full License,” 
New York Times, April 21, 1989, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.
nytimes.com/1989/04/21/nyregion/shoreham-despite-plan-to-scrap-it-gains 
-full-license.html>; John Rather, “Planning the Fate of a Nuclear Plant’s Land,” 
New York Times, January 1, 2009, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.nytimes.com/2009/01/04/nyregion/long-island/04shorehamli.html?_r=0>.
	40.	 “Introduction & History of the Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant,” Long Island Power 
Authority, accessed September 4, 2013, <http://www.lipower.org/shoreham 
/history.html>. 
	41.	 Jerry Ross and Barry M. Staw, “Organizational Escalation and Exit: Lessons 
from the Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant,” The Academy of Management Journal 
36, no. 4 (August 1993): 708, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://citeseerx.ist.psu 
.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.657.7195&rep=rep1&type=pdf>.
	42.	 Dennis Hevesi, “Nora Bredes, Who Fought Long Island Nuclear Plant, Dies at 
60,” New York Times, August 22, 2011, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.
nytimes.com/2011/08/23/nyregion/nora-bredes-60-dies-fought-shoreham 
-nuclear-plant.html>.
	43.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 137.
	44.	 “Processing of Used Nuclear Fuel,” World Nuclear Association, September 2014, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/Nuclear 
-Fuel-Cycle/Fuel-Recycling/Processing-of-Used-Nuclear-Fuel/>; William F. 
Shughart II, “Why Doesn’t U.S. Recycle Nuclear Fuel?,” Forbes, October 1, 2014, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.forbes.com/sites/realspin/2014/10/01 
/why-doesnt-u-s-recycle-nuclear-fuel/#78330bfb7db4>. 
	45.	 “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 136–37; Ross and Staw, 
“Organizational Escalation and Exit,” 708.
	46.	 Kim Cawley, “The Federal Government’s Responsibilities and Liabilities 
Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act,” Congressional Budget Office, December 
3, 2014, 1, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default 
/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/51035-NuclearWaste_Testimony 
.pdf>; “Assessment of the Nuclear Power Industry,” 138. 
	47.	 “The Official Report of the Fukushima Nuclear Accident Independent 
Investigation Commission,” National Diet of Japan, 2012, 12, accessed October 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
421
1, 2016, <https://www.nirs.org/fukushima/naiic_report.pdf>; “Additional 
Report of Japanese Government to IAEA—Accident at TEPCO’s Fukushima 
Power Stations, 15 September 2011,” International Atomic Energy Agency, 5, accessed 
October 
1, 
2016, 
<https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/focus/fukushima/
additional-japan-report>.
	48.	 “Additional Report of Japanese Government to IAEA,” 25–26, 31.
	49.	 “The Official Report of the Fukushima Nuclear Accident Independent 
Investigation Commission,” 7, 9, 20. 
	50.	 “The Official Report of the Fukushima Nuclear Accident Independent 
Investigation Commission,” 7, 9, 20.
	51.	 Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (New 
York: Random House, 2007).
Chapter 14
	 1.	 Rachel Carson, Silent Spring, rev. ed. with a new introduction by Linda Lear 
and an afterword by Edward O. Wilson (1962; New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt Publishing Company, repr. 2002), 1–3. 
	 2.	 Eliza Griswold, “How Silent Spring Ignited the Environmental Movement,” New 
York Times, September 21, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes 
.com/2012/09/23/magazine/how-silent-spring-ignited-the-environmental 
-movement.html?_r=0>. 
	 3.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 1–3.
	 4.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 5, 6, 20.
	 5.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 41, 106–7, 133–35, 157–59.
	 6.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 127.
	 7.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 24, 26–27.
	 8.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 174.
	 9.	 Carson, Silent Spring, 201–4.
	10.	 Griswold, “How Silent Spring Ignited the Environmental Movement.” 
	11.	 Linda Lear, “Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring,” Environmental History Review 17, no. 2 
(1993): 23–25.
	12.	 Lear, “Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring,” 25, 27.
	13.	 Lear, “Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring,” 29.
	14.	 Lear, “Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring,” 37–38; Griswold, “How Silent Spring 
Ignited the Environmental Movement.”
	15.	 “President’s Science Advisory Committee (PSAC): Pesticides Report, 15 May 
1963,” John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/Archives/JFKPOF-087-003.aspx>; 
Lear, “Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring,” 39.
	16.	 Griswold, “How Silent Spring Ignited the Environmental Movement”; Linda 
Lear, Rachel Carson: Witness for Nature (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2009), 3. 
	17.	 Leonard Greenburg, MD, et al., “Report of an Air Pollution Incident in New York 
City, November 1953,” Public Health Reports 77, no. 1 (1962): 7, accessed October 

422	
E n d n o t e s
1, 2016, <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1914642/>; Devra 
L. Davis, Michelle L. Bell, and Tony Fletcher, “A Look Back at the London 
Smog of 1952 and the Half Century Since,” Environmental Health Perspectives 110, 
no. 12 (2002): A734, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 
/pmc/articles/PMC1241116/>.
	18.	 Don Hopey and David Templeton, “In 1948, Smog Left Deadly Legacy in 
Donora,” Pittsburgh Post Gazette,December 12, 2010, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.post-gazette.com/news/health/2010/12/12/In-1948-smog-left 
-deadly-legacy-in-Donora/stories/201012120248>; Lynne Page Snyder, “The 
Death-Dealing Smog over Donora, Pennsylvania: Industrial Air Pollution, 
Public Health Policy, and the Politics of Expertise, 1948–1949,” Environmental 
History Review 18, no. 1 (1994): 117, 119–120.
	19.	 Snyder, “The Death-Dealing Smog over Donora, Pennsylvania,”121–22.
	20.	 Snyder, “The Death-Dealing Smog over Donora, Pennsylvania,”124–25, 129.
	21.	 Snyder, “The Death-Dealing Smog over Donora, Pennsylvania,” 123, 131–32; 
Clarence A. Mills, “The Donora Episode,” Science 111 (1950): 67.
	22.	 Percy Bysshe Shelley, quoted in Geoffrey Lean, “The Great Smog of London: The 
Air Was Thick with Apathy,” The Telegraph, December 6, 2012, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/countryside/9727128/The 
-Great-Smog-of-London-the-air-was-thick-with-apathy.html>.
	23.	 Michelle L. Bell and Devra Lee Davis, “Reassessment of the Lethal London 
Fog of 1952: Novel Indicators of Acute and Chronic Consequences of Acute 
Exposure to Air Pollution,” Environmental Health Perspectives 109, supplement 3 
(June 2001): 389, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 
/pmc/articles/PMC1240556/>.
	24.	 Andrew Hunt, Jerrold L. Abraham, et al., “Toxicologic and Epidemiologic 
Clues from the Characterization of the 1952 London Smog Fine Particulate 
Matter in Archival Autopsy Lung Tissues,” Environmental Health Perspectives 111, 
no. 9 (July 2003): 1209–10, 1213, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ncbi 
.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1241576/>.
	25.	 George Holzworth, “Vertical Temperature Structure during the 1966 
Thanksgiving Week Air Pollution Episode in New York City,” Monthly Weather 
Review 100, no. 6 (June 1972): 445, 448–49, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
docs.lib.noaa.gov/rescue/mwr/100/mwr-100-06-0445.pdf>; Steve Tracton, 
“The Killer London Smog Event of December, 1952: A Reminder of Deadly 
Smog Events in U.S.,” Washington Post, December 20, 2012, accessed October 
1, 2016, <https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/capital-weather-gang/post 
/the-killer-london-smog-event-of-december-1952-a-reminder-of-deadly 
-smog-events-in-us/2012/12/19/452c66bc-498e-11e2-b6f0-e851e741d196_
blog.html>.
	26.	 Judith A. Layzer, The Environmental Case: Translating Values into Policy, Second 
Edition (Washington: CQ Press, 2006), 28. 
	27.	 Layzer, Environmental Case, 29, 34–37.
	28.	 Layzer, Environmental Case, 26, 30–31.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
423
	29.	 Layzer, Environmental Case, 35–37; David Gerard and Lester B. Lave, 
“Implementing Technology-Forcing Policies: The 1970 Clean Air Act 
Amendments and the Introduction of Advanced Automotive Emissions Controls 
in the United States,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 72 (2005): 766, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://faculty.lawrence.edu/gerardd/wp-content 
/uploads/sites/9/2014/02/18-TFSC-Gerard-Lave.pdf>; James Salzman and 
Barton H. Thompson Jr., Environmental Law and Policy (New York: Hudson Press, 
2007), 87–88. 
	30.	 Salzman, Environmental Law and Policy, 91, 94–97.
	31.	 Layzer, The Environmental Case, 45–46.
	32.	 Richard Schmalensee and Robert N. Stavins, “The SO2 Allowance Trading 
System: The Ironic History of a Grand Policy Experiment,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 27, no. 1 (2013): 103.
	33.	 Schmalensee, “The SO2 Allowance Trading System,” 105–6.
	34.	 Schmalensee, “The SO2 Allowance Trading System,” 106–7.
	35.	 Schmalensee, “The SO2 Allowance Trading System,” 109–10.
	36.	 Schmalensee, “The SO2 Allowance Trading System,” 111.
	37.	 Schmalensee, “The SO2 Allowance Trading System,” 116–17.
	38.	 C. Arden Pope III, PhD, et al., “Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and 
Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate Air Pollution,” Journal of the American 
Medical Association 287, no. 9 (March 2002), accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4037163/>; for further public health 
issues related to fine particulate matter and air pollution, see Antonella Zanobetti 
and Joel Schwartz, “The Effect of Fine and Coarse Particulate Air Pollution 
on Mortality: A National Analysis,” Environmental Health Perspectives 117, no. 6 
(June 2009), accessed October 1, 2016, <http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/0800108>; 
J. G. Ayres, “The Mortality Effects of Long-Term Exposure to Particulate Air 
Pollution in the United Kingdom,” Crown (2009), accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/304641/COMEAP_mortality_effects_of_long_term_exposure.pdf>. 
	39.	 “Progress Cleaning the Air and Improving People’s Health,” Environmental 
Protection Agency, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.epa.gov/clean-air 
-act-overview/progress-cleaning-air-and-improving-peoples-health>.
Chapter 15
	 1.	 Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets: Fact-Finding 
Investigation of Potential Manipulation of Electric and Natural Gas Prices, 
Docket No. PA02-2-000, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, March 2003, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs 
/part-2-03-26-03.pdf. VI-35>.
	 2.	 Dan Morain, “Deregulation Bill Signed by Wilson,” Los Angeles Times, September 
24, 1996, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://articles.latimes.com/1996-09-24 
/news/mn-47043_1_wilson-signed-legislation>.

424	
E n d n o t e s
	 3.	 Paul L. Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 
17, no. 3 (2001): 366–75; Pete Wilson and David Freeman, “Energy Crisis, 
Electricity: Who’s at Fault?” Cal-Tax Digest, July 2001, accessed October 10, 
2014, <http://www.caltax.org/member/digest/july2001/july01-04.htm>. 
	 4.	 “Fortune 500: 2001 Archive Full List 1–100,” CNN, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500_archive/full 
/2001/>; “Fortune 500: 2000 Archive Full List 1–100,” CNN, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500 
_archive/full/2000/>; Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, The Smartest Guys 
in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron (New York: Portfolio 
/Penguin, 2003).
	 5.	 Bill Number: AB 1890 (passed September 23, 1996), California Legislative Information, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <ftp://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/95-96/bill/asm 
/ab_1851-1900/ab_1890_bill_960924_chaptered.html>; Electricity: Provisions 
of AB 1890, Energy Information Administration, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.eia.gov/electricity/policies/legislation/california/assemblybill.html>. 
	 6.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 368­–69, 371; “Pacific Gas and 
Electric Company’s Divesture of Electric Assets: Environmental Review,” 
chap. 2, State of California Public Utilities Commission, updated February 26, 1999, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/Environment/info/esa 
/divest-pge-two/eir/chapters/02-projd.htm>; Order 888 (issued April 24, 
1996), Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs/order888.asp>.
	 7.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 375–77.
	 8.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 375, 377.
	 9.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 377–78.
	10.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 378–79.
	11.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 378–79.
	12.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 379–80.
	13.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 380–381.
	14.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 381.
	15.	 Joskow, “California’s Electricity Crisis,” 366, 383, 385–86.
	16.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets.” Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission, March 2003, vi, ES-1, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs/PART-I-3-26-03.pdf>.
	17.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” ES-1, ES-6.
	18.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” ES-4, ES-5, II-1, 
II-30, II-31, ES-5. 
	19.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” ES-5. 
	20.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” II-59, II-60.
	21.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” ES-6, III-15.
	22.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” I-1, I-2.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
425
	23.	 John R. Wilke and Robert Gavin, “Brazen Trade Marks New Path of Enron 
Probe for Regulators,” Wall Street Journal, October 21, 2002, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1035159011191352671>.
	24.	 Wilke, “Brazen Trade Marks New Path of Enron Probe for Regulators”; United 
States of America v. Timothy N. Belden, Findlaw, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/enron/usbelden101702plea.pdf>.
	25.	 Memo from Donald J. Gelinas [associate director, FERC Office of Markets, 
Tariffs, and Rates] to Sam Behrends, LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae LLP 
[Enron Counsel], May 6, 2002; Memoranda to Richard Saunders [of Enron] 
from Christian Yoder [of Enron Power Marketing, Inc.] and Stephen Hall [of 
Stoel Rives, LLP], December 6, 2000. Hereafter “Enron Smoking Gun Memo.” 
	26.	 “Enron Smoking Gun Memo,” p. 1 at A.1, page 2 at A.1, page 6 at 6.a.
	27.	 “Enron Smoking Gun Memo,” p. 2. 
	28.	 “Enron Smoking Gun Memo,” p. 3, p. 5 at 1.a. 
	29.	 “Enron Smoking Gun Memo,” p. 5 at 2.e, p. 6 at 4.e, p. 7 at 7.b. 
	30.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” VI-3, VI-35, VI-36.
	31.	 “Final Report on Price Manipulation in Western Markets,” I-13, I-14.
	32.	 Wilson, “Energy Crisis, Electricity: Who’s at Fault?” 
	33.	 Wilson, “Energy Crisis, Electricity: Who’s at Fault?” 
	34.	 Wilson, “Energy Crisis, Electricity: Who’s at Fault?” 
	35.	 Mark Jickling, “The Enron Collapse: An Overview of Financial Issues,” CRS 
Report for Congress, updated March 28, 2002, CRS-2, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://fpc.state.gov/documents/organization/9267.pdf>; Alexei Barrionuevo 
and Vikas Bajaj, “What’s at Heart of Enron Case, Accounting or ‘Lies and 
Choices’?,” New York Times, January 31, 2006, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.nytimes.com/2006/01/31/business/worldbusiness/31iht-enron.html>.
	36.	 William C. Powers, “Report of Investigation by the Special Investigative 
Committee of the Board of Directors of Enron Corp,” February 1, 2002, 2, 
30–31, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://picker.uchicago.edu/Enron/Powers 
Report(2-2-02).pdf>.
	37.	 Powers, “Report of Investigation of Enron Corp,” 3–4, 18.
	38.	 Powers, “Report of Investigation of Enron Corp,” 5. 
	39.	 “The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse,” Permanent Subcommittee 
on Investigations of the Committee of Governmental Affairs United States Senate, July 8, 2002, 
3, 18–19, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CPRT 
-107SPRT80393/pdf/CPRT-107SPRT80393.pdf>.
	40.	 “The Role of the Board of Directors in Enron’s Collapse,” 43–45. 
	41.	 Ken Brown and Ianthe Jeanne Dugan, “Arthur Andersen’s Fall from Grace Is a 
Sad Tale of Greed and Miscues,” Wall Street Journal, June 7, 2002, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1023409436545200>; “Ties to Enron 
Blinded Andersen,” Chicago Tribune, September 3, 2002, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/chi-0209030210sep03-story.html>.
	42.	 “Ties to Enron Blinded Andersen.” 

426	
E n d n o t e s
	43.	 “The Fall of Andersen,” Chicago Tribune, September 1, 2002, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/chi-0209010315sep01-story 
.html>; Linda Greenhouse, “Justices Unanimously Overturn Conviction of 
Arthur Andersen,” New York Times, May 31, 2005, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/31/business/justices-unanimously 
-overturn-conviction-of-arthur-andersen.html?mtrref=www.google.com&gwh 
=3DF84BC2B8AC837475FB2146444DCE95&gwt=pay>. 
	44.	 Barrionuevo and Bajaj, “What’s at Heart of Enron Case, Accounting or ‘Lies 
and Choices’?”
	45.	 “Enron Trial Exhibits and Releases,” Department of Justice, accessed June 31, 
2016, <https://www.justice.gov/archive/index-enron.html>.
	46.	 “Enron Trial,” Opening Statement of John Hueston, for the federal prosecutor, 
375–77.
	47.	 “Enron Trial,” Opening Statement of John Hueston, for the federal prosecutor, 
395.	
	48.	 “Enron Trial,” Opening Statement of Mike Ramsey defending Ken Lay, 
476–77.
	49.	 “Enron Trial,” Opening Statement of Mike Ramsey defending Ken Lay, 478.
	50.	 “Enron Trial,” Opening Statement of Mike Ramsey defending Ken Lay, 
488–89.
	51.	 Alexei Barrionuevo, “Enron’s Skilling Is Sentenced to 24 Years,” New York Times, 
October 24, 2006; “Enron: Where Are They Now?” Houston Chronicle, May 21, 
2012.
	52.	 David Shipley, “Editorial Notebook: Remembering Hoover,” New York Times, 
August 10, 1992, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com 
/1992/08/10/opinion/editorial-notebook-remembering-herbert-hoover.html>.
Chapter 16
	 1.	 George J. Stigler and Claire Friedland, “What Can Regulators Regulate? The 
Case of Electricity,” The Journal of Law and Economics 5 (1962): 1.
	 2.	 J. R. Minkel, “The 2003 Northeast Blackout—Five Years Later,” Scientific 
American, August 13, 2008, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.scientific 
american.com/article/2003-blackout-five-years-later/>.
	 3.	 Order 888 (issued April 24,1996), Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 13–14, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs 
/order888.asp>.
	 4.	 Order 888, 14–16.
	 5.	 Order 888, 17–18.
	 6.	 Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, United States Bureau of Reclamation, 
November 9, 1978, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.usbr.gov/power 
/legislation/purpa.pdf>.
	 7.	 Russell Ray, “A Report on Combined Cycle Projects in North America,” Power 
Engineering, February 3, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.power-eng 
.com/articles/2014/02/a-report-on-combined-cycle-projects-in-north-america 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
427
.html>; “Natural Gas 1998: Issues and Trends,” Energy Information Administration, 
53–54, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://news.duke-energy.com/releases 
/progress-energy-carolinas-to-retire-two-coal-fired-power-plants-oct-1>. 
	 8.	 Report to Congress on Competition in Wholesale and Retail Markets for Electric 
Energy, The Electric Energy Market Competition Task Force, 23–24, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/fed-sta/ene-pol-act/epact-final-rpt.pdf>.
	 9.	 Order No. 888: Final Rule, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 75 FERC 
61,080, 2, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg 
/land-docs/rm95-8-00w.txt>.
	10.	 Order No. 888: Final Rule, 1, 5–6. 
	11.	 Order No. 888: Final Rule, 1, 5–6. 
	12.	 Order No. 888: Final Rule, 4, 8. 
	13.	 Docket No. RM99-2-000; Order No. 2000, Federal Regulatory Commission, 
December 20, 1999, 426–27, 706, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ferc 
.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs/RM99-2A.pdf>.
	14.	 Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Wisconsin 347 U.S. 672 (1954), Justia.com, <https://
supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/347/672/>; “The History of Regulation,” 
Naturalgas.org, September 20, 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://natural 
gas.org/regulation/history/>.
	15.	 Paul W. McAvoy, “The Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978,” Natural Gas Resources 
Journal 19 (1979): 812, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://lawschool.unm.edu 
/nrj/volumes/19/4/03_macavoy_natural.pdf>; Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, 
Energy Information Administration, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.eia.gov 
/oil_gas/natural_gas/analysis_publications/ngmajorleg/ngact1978.html>. 
	16.	 Order No. 636—Restructuring of Pipeline Services, 17–20, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg/land-docs/restruct.asp>.
	17.	 Order No. 636—Restructuring of Pipeline Services, 9. 
	18.	 Robert F. Hirsch, Power Loss: The Origins of Deregulation and Restructuring in the 
American Electric Utility System (1999; Cambridge: MIT Press, repr. 2001), 
Appendix, tables A.2 and A.3. 
	19.	 Craig R. Roach, Stuart Rein, and Vincent Musco, A Review of the Southwest Power 
Pool’s Integrated Marketplace Proposal. Washington, DC: Boston Pacific, December 
30, 2010, 1–2.
	20.	 Stigler and Friedland, “What Can Regulators Regulate?” 1, 11.
	21.	 Stigler and Friedland, “What Can Regulators Regulate?” 8.
	22.	 Harold Demsetz, “Why Regulate Utilities?” The Journal of Law and Economics 11, 
no. 1 (April 1968): 55–57, 65.
	23.	 George J. Stigler, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of 
Economics and Management Science 2, no. 1 (1971): 3.
	24.	 Richard A. Posner, “Theories of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of 
Economics and Management Science 5 (Autumn 1974): 335–36, 343.
	25.	 George L. Priest, “The Origins of Utility Regulation and the ‘Theories of 
Regulation’ Debate,” The Journal of Law and Economics 36 (April 1993): 289–90.

428	
E n d n o t e s
	26.	 “Final Report on the August 14, 2003 Blackout on the United States and Canada: 
Causes and Recommendations,” U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force, April 
2004, ii, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/oeprod 
/DocumentsandMedia/BlackoutFinal-Web.pdf>.
	27.	 “The Relationship between Competitive Power Markets and Grid 
Reliability,” U.S. Department of Energy and Natural Resources Canada, July 2006, 
iii, xiii–xvii, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files 
/oeprod/DocumentsandMedia/Blackout_Rec_12_Final_Report_and 
_Transmittal.pdf>.
	28.	 “The Relationship between Competitive Power Markets and Grid Reliability,” 
17, 19. 
	29.	 “The Relationship between Competitive Power Markets and Grid Reliability,” 
123–24. 
	30.	 Minkel, “The 2003 Northeast Blackout—Five Years Later,” Scientific American, 
August 13, 2008; “Final Report on the August 14, 2003 Blackout on the United 
States and Canada,” 4, 10, 14. 
	31.	 Energy Policy Act of 2005, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Fact Sheet, 
August 8, 2006, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.ferc.gov/legal/fed 
-sta/epact-fact-sheet.pdf>.
	32.	 Energy Policy Act of 2005; “Commission Finalizes Electric Reliability 
Rulemaking Pursuant to the Energy Policy Act 2005,” Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, February 2, 2006, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.ferc.gov 
/media/news-releases/2006/2006-1/02-02-06-E-1.asp>; “History of NERC,” 
North American Electric Reliability Corporation, August 2013, 1–2, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.nerc.com/AboutNERC/Documents/History%20AUG 
13.pdf>.
	33.	 “History of NERC,” 4.
	34.	 “Commission Finalizes Rule Barring Market Manipulation”; “Final Rule 
Revises PURPA Mandatory Purchase Obligation for Electric Utilities, as 
Mandated by Energy Policy Act,” Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, October 19, 
2006, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.ferc.gov/media/news-releases 
/2006/2006-4/10-19-06-E-2.asp>; Energy Policy Act of 2005. 
	35.	 “About 60% of the U.S. Electric Power Supply Is Managed by RTOs,” Energy 
Information Administration, April 4, 2011, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=790>.
Chapter 17
	 1.	 “Remarks by the President in Announcing the Clean Power Plan,” 
Whitehouse.gov, August 3, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www 
.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/08/03/remarks-president-announcing 
-clean-power-plan>. 
	 2.	 “The Nobel Peace Prize 2007,” Nobelprize.org, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.
nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/2007/>; “Al Gore, Climate Panel 
Share Nobel Peace Prize,” National Geographic, October 12, 2007, accessed October 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
429
1, 2016, <http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2007/10/071012-peace 
-nobel.html>.
	 3.	 “Sources of Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Environmental Protection Agency, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas 
-emissions>. 
	 4.	 John M. Broder, “Obama to Go to Copenhagen with Emissions Target,” 
New York Times, November 25, 2009, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.nytimes.com/2009/11/26/us/politics/26climate.html?_r=0>; “The American 
Clean Energy and Security Act (Waxman-Markey Bill),” Center for Climate and 
Energy Solutions, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.c2es.org/federal 
/congress/111/acesa>. 
	 5.	 Lokenath Debnath, “A Short Biography of Joseph Fourier and Historical 
Development of Fourier Series and Fourier Transforms,” International Journal 
of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology 43, no. 5 (2012): 595; John 
Tyndall, “The Bakerian Lecture: On the Absorption and Radiation of 
Heat by Gases and Vapours, and on the Physical Connexion of Radiation, 
Absorption, and Conduction,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London 151 (1861), accessed October 1, 2016, <http://web.gps.caltech.edu 
/~vijay/Papers/Spectroscopy/tyndall-1861.pdf>; Mike Hulme, “On the 
Origin of ‘The Greenhouse Effect’: John Tyndall’s 1859 Interrogation of 
Nature,” Royal Meteorological Society 64 (2009): 123, accessed October 1, 2016, 
doi: 10.1002/wea.386; Svante Arrhenius, “On the Influence of Carbonic Acid 
in the Air upon the Temperature of the Ground,” Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, ser. 5, vol. 41 (April 1896): 267–69, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.rsc.org/images/Arrhenius1896_tcm18-173546.pdf>; Geoffrey 
Parker, “Lessons from the Little Ice Age,” New York Times, March 22, 2014, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/23/opinion 
/sunday/lessons-from-the-little-ice-age.html?_r=0>.
	 6.	 Spencer R. Weart, The Discovery of Global Warming (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2003), 8.
	 7.	 Andrew C. Revkin, “Earth Is Us,” New York Times, January 28, 2008, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/01/28 
/earth-is-us/?_r=0>; G. S. Callendar, “The Artificial Production of Carbon 
Dioxide and Its Influence on Temperature,” Journal of the Royal Meteorological 
Society, May 19, 1937, 223, 236, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://online 
library.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/qj.49706427503/epdf>; Leo Hickman, “How 
the Burning of Fossil Fuels Was Linked to a Warming World in 1938,” The 
Guardian, April 22, 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.theguardian 
.com/environment/blog/2013/apr/22/guy-callendar-climate-fossil-fuels>; 
Gilbert Plass, “The Carbon Dioxide Theory of Climatic Change,” Tellus 8, 
no. 2 (1955): 153, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com 
/doi/10.1111/j.2153-3490.1956.tb01206.x/pdf>.
	 8.	 Roger Revelle and Hans E. Seuss, “Carbon Dioxide Exchange Between 
Atmosphere and Ocean and the Question of an Increase of Atmospheric CO2 

430	
E n d n o t e s
during the Past Decades,” Tellus 9 (1957): table 1, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://uscentrist.org/platform/positions/environment/context-environment 
/docs/Revelle-Suess1957.pdf>; “Restoring the Quality of Our Environment,” 
President’s Science Advisory Committee (1965): v, 126, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://dge.stanford.edu/labs/caldeiralab/Caldeira%20downloads/
PSAC,%201965,%20Restoring%20the%20Quality%20of%20Our%20
Environment.pdf>.
	 9.	 “Charles David Keeling Biography,” Scripps Institution of Oceanography, accessed 
October 
1, 
2016, 
<http://scrippsco2.ucsd.edu/charles_david_keeling_ 
biography>; “Keeling Curve Lessons,” Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 
<http://scrippsco2.ucsd.edu/history_legacy/keeling_curve_lessons>; Andrea 
Thompson, “2015 Begins with CO2 above 400 PPM Mark,” Scientific American, 
January 12, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.scientificamerican 
.com/article/2015-begins-with-co2-above-400-ppm-mark/>.
	10.	 The Conservation Foundation, Implications of Rising Carbon Dioxide Content of the 
Atmosphere (New York: The Conservation Foundation, 1963), i; Howard E. 
Newell, “A Recommended National Program in Weather Modification,” National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (1966): I-3, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.geoengineeringwatch.org/documents/19680002906_1968002906.pdf>.
	11.	 Thomas H. Maugh II, “Willi Dansgaard Dies at 88; Scientist Who 
Recognized Climate Record in Ice Cap,” Los Angeles Times, February 7, 2011, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://articles.latimes.com/2011/feb/07/local 
/la-me-willi-dansgaard-20110207>; William Ferguson, “Ice Core Data 
Help Solve a Global Warming Mystery,” Scientific American, March 1, 2013, 
accessed 
October 
1, 
2016, 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article 
/ice-core-data-help-solve/>; Weart, Discovery of Global Warming, 130­–31. 
	12.	 Weart, Discovery of Global Warming, 71–72, 96–97; Spencer R. Weart, “Government: 
The View from Washington, DC,” American Institute of Physics, February 2016, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.aip.org/history/climate/Govt.htm>; 
“Bill Summary & Status: 95th Congress (1977–1978) H.R.6669,” Library of 
Congress, September 17, 1978, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://thomas.loc 
.gov/cgi bin/bdquery/z?d095:HR06669:@@@D&summ2=m&>.
	13.	 “Colder Winters Held Dawn of New Ice Age,” Washington Post, January 11, 
1970; “Another Ice Age?” Time, June 24, 1974; Robert C. Cowen, “New Ice Age 
Almost Upon Us?” Christian Science Monitor, November 14, 1979.
	14.	 Weart, Discovery of Global Warming, 114­–15, 120–21.
	15.	 “Brief Primer on the Montreal Protocol,” United Nations Environment Programme, accessed 
October 
1, 
2016, 
<http://ozone.unep.org/Publications/MP_Brief_Primer 
_on_MP-E.pdf>.
	16.	 “History,” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/organization/organization_history.shtml>; J. T. Houghton, 
G. J. Jenkins, and J. J. Ephraums, eds., Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990) xi–xii, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/far/wg_I/ipcc_far_wg_I_full_report.pdf>.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
431
	17.	 “General Information.” United Nations Earth Summit +5, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.un.org/esa/earthsummit/>; “IPCC Second Assessment: 
Climate Change 1995” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (1995): 22, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/climate-changes-1995 
/ipcc-2nd-assessment/2nd-assessment-en.pdf>.
	18.	 Weart, Discovery of Global Warming, 173–74; Richard N. Cooper, “The Kyoto 
Protocol: A Flawed Concept,” Harvard University Center for the Environment, 7–8, 
11–12, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.environment.harvard.edu/docs 
/faculty_pubs/cooper_kyoto.pdf>; 
“Byrd-Hagel 
Resolution,” 
National 
Center for Public Policy Research, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.nationalcenter.org/KyotoSenate.html>; George W. Bush, “Letter to Members 
of the Senate on the Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change,” The American 
Presidency Project, March 13, 2001, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=45811>.
	19.	 “Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases 
under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act,” Environmental Protection Agency, 
2009, 66497, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.epa.gov/climatechange 
/endangerment/>; “Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change,” 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg3/>.
	20.	 “Climate Change 2014” 1, SPM 1, SPM 1.1, 4, SPM 1.2, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg3/>.
	21.	 “Climate Change 2014” 21.
	22.	 J. P. Stockholm, “The IPCC Climate-Change Report: It’s Still Our Fault,” 
Economist, September 27, 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.economist 
.com/blogs/babbage/2013/09/ipcc-climate-change-report>. 
	23.	 “IPCC Statement on the Melting of Himalayan Glaciers,” Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, January 20, 2010, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www 
.ipcc.ch/pdf/presentations/himalaya-statement-20january2010.pdf>; 
Matthew Knight, “U.N. Climate Chiefs Apologize for Glacier Error,” CNN, 
January 20, 2010, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.cnn.com/2010 
/WORLD/asiapcf/01/20/glacier.himalayas.ipcc.error/>. 
	24.	 “Climate Change Assessments, Review of the Processes and Procedures of the 
IPCC,” InterAcademy Council, October 2010, xii–xiv, 59, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://reviewipcc.interacademycouncil.net/report.html>.
	25.	 Bjorn Lomborg, Cool It: The Skeptical Environmentalist’s Guide to Global Warming (New 
York: Vintage Books, 2007); Bjorn Lomborg, “Cost-Effective Ways to Address 
Climate Change,” Washington Post, November 17, 2010, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/11/16 
/AR2010111604973.html>. 
	26.	 Mark Holt and Gene Whitney, “Greenhouse Gas Legislation: Summary and 
Analysis of H.R. 2454 as Passed by the House of Representatives,” Congressional 
Research Service, summary, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://research.policy 
archive.org/18878.pdf>. 

432	
E n d n o t e s
	27.	 “Comparison Chart of Waxman-Markey and Kerry-Lieberman,” Center for 
Climate and Energy Solutions, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.c2es.org 
/federal/congress/111/comparison-waxman-markey-kerry-lieberman>. 
	28.	 Bryan Walsh, “Why the Climate Bill Died,” Time, July 26, 2010, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://science.time.com/2010/07/26/why-the-climate-bill-died/>. 
	29.	 “EPA Denies Petition to Regulate Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Motor 
Vehicles,” Environmental Protection Agency, August 28, 2003, accessed October 1, 
2016, <https://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/b1ab9f485b098972852562 
e7004dc686/694c8f3b7c16ff6085256d900065fdad!OpenDocument>; 
Massachusetts et al. v. Environmental Protection Agency et al., 05 U.S. 1120 
(2007), accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/05 
-1120.ZS.html>. 
	30.	 “Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases,” 40 
CFR, chap. 1 at 66496 to 66498, 66517.
	31.	 “Clean Air Act Permitting for Greenhouse Gas Emissions—Final Rules Fact 
Sheet,” Environmental Protection Agency, April 17, 2009, 5, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-12/documents/20101223 
factsheet.pdf>. 
	32.	 “Technical and Support Document for Endangerment and Cause or Contribute 
Findings for Greenhouse Gases,” Environmental Protection Agency, ES-2, ES-3, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/Downloads 
/endangerment/TSD_Endangerment.pdf>.
	33.	 “Fifteenth Session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change and Fifth Session of the 
Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol,” Pew Center on Global Climate 
Change, 
accessed 
October 
1, 
2016, 
<http://www.c2es.org/docUploads 
/copenhagen-cop15-summary.pdf>; “How to Live with Climate Change,” 
Economist, November 25, 2010, <http://www.economist.com/node/17575027>.
	34.	 George F. Will, “The Paris Agreement Is Another False ‘Turning Point’ on the 
Climate,” Washington Post, December 16, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/another-false-urning-point-on-the 
-climate/2015/12/16/e16dbc36-a35b-11e5-9c4e-be37f66848bb_story.html>; 
Thomas L. Friedman, “Paris Climate Accord Is a Big, Big Deal,” New York Times, 
December 16, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com 
/2015/12/16/opinion/paris-climate-accord-is-a-big-big-deal.html>.
	35.	 Will, “The Paris Agreement Is Another False ‘Turning Point’ on the Climate”; 
Friedman, “Paris Climate Accord Is a Big, Big Deal.”
	36.	 Will, “The Paris Agreement Is Another False ‘Turning Point’ on the Climate.”
	37.	 Friedman, “Paris Climate Accord Is a Big, Big Deal.”
	38.	 “Paris Climate of Conformity,” Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2015, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles/paris-climate-of-conformity 
-1450048095>. 
	39.	 “Remarks by the President in Announcing the Clean Power Plan.”
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
433
	40.	 Pope Francis, “Laudato sì,” Libreria Editrice Vaticana, May 24, 2015, para-
graphs 32–34, 165, 169, 175, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://w2.vatican.va 
/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco_20150524 
_enciclica-laudato-si.html>.
	41.	 “Clean Power Plan for Existing Power Plants,” Environmental Protection Agency, October 
23, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www2.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/
clean-power-plan-existing-power-plants>; “Fact Sheet: Overview of the Clean 
Power Plan,” Environmental Protection Agency, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.epa.gov/airquality/cpp/fs-cpp-overview.pdf>; Van Ness Feldman LLP, “EPA 
Issues Regulations to Control Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the Power 
Sector,” August 5, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.vnf.com/epa 
-regulations-to-control-carbon-dioxide-emissions-from>. 
	42.	 “Clean Power Plan for Existing Power Plants,” 64665; “Clean Power Plan 
State-Specific Fact Sheets,” Environmental Protection Agency, updated September 16, 
2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.epa.gov/cleanpowerplantoolbox 
/clean-power-plan-state-specific-fact-sheets>.
	43.	 “Clean Power Plan for Existing Power Plants,” 64667. 
	44.	 “Clean Power Plan for Existing Power Plants,” 64685. 
	45.	 Craig R. Roach, PhD, and Vincent Musco, Southwest Power Pool Annual Looking Forward 
Report: Strategic Issues Facing the Electricity Business, Washington, DC: Boston Pacific, April 
15, 2016, 29–34; Jonathan H. Adler, “Supreme Court Puts the Brakes on the EPA’s 
Clean Power Plan,” Washington Post, February 9, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2016/02/09 
/supreme-court-puts-the-brakes-on-the-epas-clean-power-plan/>; State of West 
Virginia, State of Texas et al. v. United States Environmental Protection 
Agency and Regina A. McCarthy, application, February 9, 2016, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01 
/15A773-application.pdf> and <http://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/court 
orders/020916zr3_hf5m.pdf>; Amy Harder and Brent Kendall, “Carbon-Rule 
Stay Puts Obama Environmental Legacy on the Line,” Wall Street Journal, 
February 10, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles 
/carbon-rule-stay-puts-obama-environmental-legacy-on-the-line-1455150933>; 
Editorial Board, “The Court Blocks Efforts to Slow Climate Change,” New York 
Times, February 11, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com 
/2016/02/11/opinion/the-court-blocks-efforts-to-slow-climate-change.html>.
	46.	 Robert Barnes and Steven Mufson, “Supreme Court Freezes Obama Plan to 
Limit Carbon Emissions,” Washington Post, February 9, 2016, accessed October 1, 
2016, <https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/courts_law/supreme-court 
-freezes-obama-plan-to-limit-carbon-emissions/2016/02/09/ac9dfad8-cf85 
-11e5-abc9-ea152f0b9561_story.html>.

434	
E n d n o t e s
Chapter 18
	 1.	 “The Father of Fracking,” The Economist, August 3, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.economist.com/news/business/21582482-few-businesspeople-have 
-done-much-change-world-george-mitchell-father>. 
	 2.	 Daniel Yergin, “‘Energy Independence,’” Wall Street Journal, January 23, 2007, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB11695195473928 
4514>; “How Much Natural Gas Does the United States Have, and How Long 
Will It Last?,” Energy Information Administration, November 18, 2015, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=58&t=8>; Alan 
Neuhauser, “The New U.S. Energy Era Will Be a Gas,” U.S. News, May, 16, 2016, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2016-05-15 
/us-gas-exports-poised-to-surpass-imports-for-first-time-since-1957>. 
	 3.	 “Natural Gas: Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price,” Energy Information 
Administration, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng 
/hist/rngwhhdm.htm>; Chris Mooney, “How Super Low Natural Gas 
Prices Are Reshaping How We Get Our Power,” Washington Post, October 28, 
2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.washingtonpost.com/news 
/energy-environment/wp/2015/10/28/how-super-low-natural-gas-prices 
-are-reshaping-how-we-get-our-power/?utm_term=.9b397144a37a>. 
	 4.	 Tom Fowler, “Exec Mitchell Laid Groundwork for Shale Gas Surge,” Houston 
Chronicle, November 15, 2009, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.chron 
.com/business/energy/article/Exec-Mitchell-laid-groundwork-for-shale 
-gas-surge-1742206.php>.
	 5.	 Fatih Birol, “Golden Rules for a Golden Age of Gas: World Energy Outlook 
Special Report on Unconventional Gas,” International Energy Agency, May 29, 2012, 
25–26, 33–34, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.worldenergyoutlook 
.org/media/weowebsite/2012/goldenrules/WEO2012_GoldenRulesReport 
.pdf>; Ernest J. Moniz, Henry D. Jacoby, and Anthony J. M. Meggs, “The 
Future of Natural Gas: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study,” MIT Energy Initiative, 
June 9, 2011, 42, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.mit.edu/~jparsons 
/publications/NaturalGas_Report_Final.pdf>.
	 6.	 Fowler, “Exec Mitchell Laid Groundwork for Shale Gas Surge”; Dan B. 
Steward, “George P. Mitchell and the Barnett Shale,” Journal of Petroleum 
Technology, November 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.mydigital 
publication.com/article/George_P._Mitchell_And_The_Barnett_Shale 
/1535436/179598/article.html>.
	 7.	 Yergin, “‘Energy Independence.’”
	 8.	 Moniz, Jacoby, and Meggs, “The Future of Natural Gas,” 5.
	 9.	 Daniel Yergin and Robert Ineson, “America’s Natural Gas Revolution,” Wall 
Street Journal, November 2, 2009, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com 
/articles/SB10001424052748703399204574507440795971268>.
	10.	 Moniz, Jacoby, and Meggs, “Future of Natural Gas,” 29; “How Much Shale 
Gas Is Produced in the United States?,” Energy Information Administration, June 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
435
14, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq 
.cfm?id=907&t=8>; “U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Proved Reserves, 
Year-End 2015,” Energy Information Administration, released November 23, 2015, 
figure 5, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/crude 
oilreserves/>; “U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Proved Reserves,” Table 9: U.S. 
Proved Reserves of Total Natural Gas, Wet after Lease Separation, 2001–14, Energy 
Information Administration, November 23, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.eia.gov/naturalgas/crudeoilreserves/pdf/table_9.pdf>.
	11.	 “Natural Gas: Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price.” 
	12.	 An MMBtu is a standard measure of energy content with a Btu defined as the 
amount of heat required to increase the temperature of a pound of water by 
one degree Fahrenheit; “Natural Gas: Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price”; 
Clifford Krauss and Eric Lipton, “After the Boom in Natural Gas,” New York 
Times, October 20, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes 
.com/2012/10/21/business/energy-environment/in-a-natural-gas-glut-big 
-winners-and-losers.html>.
	13.	 Moniz, Jacoby, and Meggs, “The Future of Natural Gas,” 33.
	14.	 Moniz, Jacoby, and Meggs, “The Future of Natural Gas,” 31, 54.
	15.	 Michael Greenstone and Adam Looney, “Paying Too Much for Energy? The True 
Costs of Our Energy Choices,” Daedalus 141, no. 2 (Spring 2012) 19, 24, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://ceepr.mit.edu/files/papers/Reprint_243_WC.pdf>.
	16.	 “Annual Energy Outlook 2014 with Projection to 2040,” Energy Information 
Administration, April 2014, MT-21, MT-23, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.eia.gov/forecasts/aeo/pdf/0383(2014).pdf>.
	17.	 J. David Hughes, “Drilling Deeper: A Reality Check on U.S. Government 
Forecasts for a Lasting Tight Oil & Shale Gas Boom,” Post Carbon Institute, 
October 2014, 6, 11, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.postcarbon.org 
/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Drilling-Deeper_FULL.pdf>.
	18.	 Mark P. Mills, “SHALE 2.0: Technology and the Coming Big-Data Revolution in 
America’s Shale Oil Fields,” Manhattan Institute, May 2015, Executive Summary, 
6–9, 12–13, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.manhattan-institute.org/pdf 
/eper_16.pdf>.
	19.	 Birol, “Golden Rules,” 9–10. 
	20.	 Birol, “Golden Rules,” 13–14, 17.
	21.	 Gasland, dir. Josh Fox (HBO Documentary Films, 2011), DVD; “Gasland: About 
the Film,” Gasland, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://one.gaslandthemovie 
.com/about-the-film>. 
	22.	 Chris Tucker, “EID Statement on GasLand Academy Award Nod: ‘This 
nomination is fitting, as the Oscars are aimed at praising pure entertain-
ment,” Energy in Depth, January 25, 2011, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://
energyindepth.org/national/eid-statement-on-gasland-academy-award 
-nod-this-nomination-is-fitting-as-the-oscars-are-aimed-at-praising-pure 
-entertainment/>.

436	
E n d n o t e s
	23.	 Ian Urbina, “Regulation Lax as Gas Wells’ Tainted Water Hits Rivers,” 
New York Times, February 26, 2011, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.nytimes.com/2011/02/27/us/27gas.html?_r=1&sq=fracking&st=cse&scp 
=2&pagewanted=print>.
	24.	 “Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas 
on Drinking Water Resources,” Environmental Protection Agency, June 2015, ES-1, 
ES-6, ES-10, ES-23, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www2.epa.gov/sites 
/production/files/2015-07/documents/hf_es_erd_jun2015.pdf>. 
	25.	 “Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing,” ES-6, ES-23.
	26.	 “Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing,” ES-6.
	27.	 “Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas: Impacts from the Hydraulic Fracturing 
Water Cycle on Drinking Water Resources in the United States (Final Report),” 
Environmental Protection Agency, 2016: 40–41.
	28.	 Daniel P. Schrag, “Is Shale Gas Good for Climate Change?,” Daedalus 141, no. 
2 (Spring 2012): 72. 
	29.	 Schrag, “Is Shale Gas Good for Climate Change?,” 72–73, 77–78. 
	30.	 Schrag, “Is Shale Gas Good for Climate Change?,” 79. 
	31.	 “EPA Proposes New Commonsense Measures to Cut Methane Emissions from 
the Oil and Gas Sector/Proposal Cuts GHG Emissions, Reduces Smog-Forming 
Air Pollution and Provides Certainty for Industry,” EPA Newsroom, August, 
18, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases 
/epa-proposes-new-commonsense-measures-cut-methane-emissions-oil-and-gas 
-sectorproposal>. 
	32.	 “Earthquakes in Oklahoma,” Office of the Secretary of Energy and Environment, 
Oklahoma, 
accessed 
October 
1, 
2016, 
<https://earthquakes.ok.gov/>; 
Roach and Musco, Southwest Power Pool Annual Looking Forward Report, 20–22; 
“Oklahoma Earthquakes Magnitude 3.0 and Greater,” United States Geological 
Survey, February 17, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://earthquake.usgs 
.gov/earthquakes/states/oklahoma/images/OklahomaEQsBarGraph.png>. 
	33.	 “Full Transcript: Obama’s 2012 State of the Union Address,” USA Today, 
January 25, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.usatoday.com/news 
/washington/story/2012-01-24/state-of-the-union-transcript/52780694/1>.
	34.	 Sherie Mershon and Tim Palucka, A Century of Innovation: From the U.S Bureau 
Mines to the National Energy Technology Laboratory (National Energy Technology 
Laboratory, 2010), 247–48, 253, 256–57.
	35.	 Mershon and Palucka, A Century of Innovation, 260–61.
	36.	 Mershon and Palucka, A Century of Innovation, 260–61, 295–96.
	37.	 George P. Mitchell and Mark D. Zoback, “George Mitchell: The Duty to Fracture 
Responsibly,” Fuelfix, February 20, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
fuelfix.com/blog/2012/02/20/opinion-the-duty-to-fracture-responsibly/>. 
	38.	 David Brooks, “Shale Gas Revolution,” New York Times, November 3, 2011, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/04/opinion/brooks-the 
-shale-gas-revolution.html>.
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
437
	39.	 “George P. Mitchell Receives Lifetime Achievement Award from Gas Technology 
Institute,” PR Newswire, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.prnewswire 
.com/news-releases/george-p-mitchell-receives-lifetime-achievement-award 
-from-gas-technology-institute-96564819.html>; 
Douglas 
Martin, 
“George 
Mitchell, a Pioneer in Hydraulic Fracturing, Dies at 94,” New York Times, July 26, 
2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/27/business 
/george-mitchell-a-pioneer-in-hydraulic-fracturing-dies-at-94.html>. 
	40.	 Russell Gold, “How Aubrey McClendon Led Today’s Energy Revolution,” Wall 
Street Journal, March 4, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com 
/articles/how-aubrey-mcclendon-led-todays-energy-revolution-1457117234>. 
	41.	 Jacob Gronholt-Pedersen, “U.S. Exports First Shale Gas as LNG Tanker Sails 
from Sabine Pass Terminal,” Reuters, February 24, 2016, accessed October 1, 
2016, <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-shale-export-idUSKCN0VY08B>; 
Georgi Kantchev, “With U.S. Gas, Europe Seeks Escape from Russia’s 
Energy Grip,” Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/europes-escape-from-russian-energy-grip-u-s 
-gas-1456456892>.
Chapter 19
	 1.	 Aldous Huxley, “Case of Voluntary Ignorance,” in Collected Essays (New York: 
Harper Brothers, 1959).
	 2.	 Huxley, “Case of Voluntary Ignorance.”
	 3.	 “History of Zip2,” Ecorner: Stanford University’s Entrepreneurship Corner, 
October 8, 2003, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://ecorner.stanford.edu 
/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=397>; Ashlee Vance, Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, 
and the Quest for a Fantastic Future (New York: HarperCollins, 2015), 72, 84­–89; 
“Founding of PayPal,” Ecorner: Stanford University’s Entrepreneurship Corner. October 
8, 2004, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://ecorner.stanford.edu/videos/378/
Founding-of-Paypal>. 
	 4.	 “Completed Missions,” SpaceX, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.spacex.
com/missions>; Andrew Chaikin, “Is SpaceX Changing the Rocket Equation?,” 
Air & Space Smithsonian, January 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.airspacemag.com/space/is-spacex-changing-the-rocket-equation-132285884 
/?no-ist>; “SpaceX Successfully Launches Falcon 1 to Orbit,” SpaceX, 
September 28, 2008, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.spacex.com 
/press/2012/12/19/spacex-successfully-launches-falcon-1-orbit>; William Jacobs, 
“Launch Systems Rockets Priced to Move,” Popular Science 267, no. 5, November 
2004; William Harwood, “Experts Applaud SpaceX Rocket Landing, Potential 
Savings,” CBS News, December 22, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.cbsnews.com/news/experts-applaud-spacex-landing-cautious-about 
-outlook/>; Jeffrey Kluger, “Things to Know About SpaceX,” Time, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://time.com/space-x-ten-things-to-know/>; Vance, Elon 
Musk, 5.

438	
E n d n o t e s
	 5.	 Fred Lambert, “SpaceX Transferred Novel Welding Techniques and Equipment 
to Tesla Motors,” electrek, May 24, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://
electrek.co/2015/05/24/spacex-transferred-novel-welding-techniques-and 
-equipment-to-tesla-motors/>; “Tesla Gigafactory,” Tesla, accessed October 
1, 2016, <https://www.tesla.com/gigafactory>; Jonathan O’Connell, “The 
Gamble on Tesla’s Gigafactory in the Nevada Desert,” Washington Post, April 
10, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.washingtonpost.com/business 
/capitalbusiness/the-gamble-on-teslas-gigafactory-is-a-big-one--in-many 
-fashions/2015/04/10/50e9de40-d4c8-11e4-a62f-ee745911a4ff_story.html>.
	 6.	 Maria Galucci, “SolarCity to Build World’s Largest Solar Panel Plant on U.S. 
Turf, Spurring Solar Manufacturing Revival,” International Business Times, 
June 17, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ibtimes.com/solarcity 
-build-worlds-largest-solar-panel-plant-us-turf-spurring-solar-manufacturing 
-1603556>; Apurba Sakti, Raanan Miller, and Fikile Brushett, “What’s Cost 
Got to Do with It? An Assessment of Tesla’s Powerwall,” MIT Energy Initiative, 
June 12, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://energy.mit.edu/news 
/whats-cost-got-to-do-with-it/>; Dana Hull, “Tesla Powerwalls for Home Energy 
Storage Hit U.S. Market,” Bloomberg, May 4, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-05-04/tesla-powerwalls-for 
-home-energy-storage-are-hitting-u-s-market>.
	 7.	 Vance, Elon Musk, 349; Jerry Hirsch, “Elon Musk’s Growing Empire Is Fueled by 
$4.9 Billion in Government Subsidies,” LA Times, June 1, 2015, accessed October 
1, 2016, <http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-hy-musk-subsidies-20150531 
-story.html#page=1>; Daniel Wiesfield, “Peter Thiel at Yale: We Wanted Flying 
Cars, Instead We Got 140 Characters,” Yale School of Management, April 27, 2013, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://som.yale.edu/peter-thiel-yale-we-wanted-flying 
-cars-instead-we-got-140-characters>; see, for example, Nicole Allan, “Who Will 
Tomorrow’s Historians Consider Today’s Greatest Inventors?,” Atlantic, November 
2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine 
/archive/2013/11/the-inventors/309534/>.
	 8.	 Charley Grant, “More Than Money at Stake in Tesla’s SolarCity Deal,” Wall 
Street Journal, September 26, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj 
.com/articles/more-than-money-at-stake-in-teslas-solarcity-deal-1474903454>; 
Adam Hartung, “Why Investors Should Support the Tesla-SolarCity Merger,” 
Forbes, September 23, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.forbes.com 
/sites/adamhartung/2016/09/23/why-investors-should-support-the-tesla 
-solarcity-merger/#33263c784c32>. 
	 9.	 Dana Hull, “Tesla Breakup with Mobileye Turns Ugly,” Bloomberg, September 
16, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles 
/2016-09-16/tesla-says-mobileye-tried-to-block-its-auto-vision-capability>. 
	10.	 Seth Fiegerman, “Samsung Won’t Be the Last to Have Exploding Batteries,” 
CNN, September 13, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://money.cnn 
.com/2016/09/13/technology/samsung-lithium-batteries/>; Katie Fehrenbacher, 
“Why Tesla’s New Battery Pack Is Important,” Fortune, August 24, 2016, 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
439
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://fortune.com/2016/08/24/tesla-100kwh 
-battery-pack/>; Alex Knapp, “SpaceX Identifies Possible Cause of 
Rocket Explosion, Anticipates November Launch,” Forbes, September 23, 
2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.forbes.com/sites/alexknapp 
/2016/09/23/spacex-identifies-possible-cause-of-rocket-explosion-anticipates 
-november-launch/#617c2aa27c62>.
	11.	 Elon Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux,” July 20, 2016, accessed October 
1, 2016, <https://www.tesla.com/blog/master-plan-part-deux>; Rebecca 
Hersher and Camila Domonoske, “Elon Musk Unveils His Plan for Colonizing 
Mars,” The Two-Way, September 27, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/09/27/495622695/this 
-afternoon-elon-musk-unveils-his-plan-for-colonizing-mars>. 
	12.	 See, for example, Patrick J. Kiger, “U.S. Phase-Out of Incandescent Light 
Bulbs Continues in 2014 with 40-, 60-Watt Varieties,” National Geographic Society, 
December 31, 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://energyblog.national 
geographic.com/2013/12/31/u-s-phase-out-of-incandescent-light-bulbs-continues 
-in-2014-with-40-60-watt-varieties/>. 
	13.	 “Former SpaceX Employee Explains What It’s Like to Work for Elon Musk,” 
Business Insider, June 24, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.businessinsider.com/what-its-like-to-work-for-elon-musk-2014-6>. 
	14.	 “Meet the Battery-Powered Home: Tesla Joins the Race to Help Homeowners 
Unplug from the Grid,” Economist, May 14, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.economist.com/news/science-and-technology/21651106-tesla 
-joins-race-help-homeowners-unplug-grid-dawn-battery-powered-home>; 
Lambert, “SpaceX Transferred Novel Welding Techniques and Equipment to 
Tesla Motors.”
	15.	 “Photovoltaics.” U.S. Department of Energy, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/08/f18/2014SunShotPortfolio_PV.pdf>; 
Eric Mack, “Why Elon Musk Spent $10 Million to Keep Artificial Intelligence 
Friendly,” Forbes, January 15, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.forbes.com/sites/ericmack/2015/01/15/elon-musk-puts-down-10-million 
-to-fight-skynet/>.
	16.	 Vance, Elon Musk, 267–68.
	17.	 Kim Bhasin, “Elon Musk: ‘If We Published Patents, It Would Be Farcical,’” 
Business Insider, November 9, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www 
.businessinsider.com/elon-musk-patents-2012-11#ixzz3ekSUvPCn>; Vance, Elon 
Musk, 22. 
	18.	 “Utility Corporations: Summary Report of the Federal Trade Commission,” 
38, 43.
	19.	 Craig R. Roach, Frank Mossburg, and Vincent Musco, “Partnership, Not Preemption: 
How State-Sponsored Planning Can Fit with FERC’s Capacity Markets,” Public 
Utilities Fortnightly, December 2013, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.fort 
nightly.com/fortnightly/2013/12/partnership-not-preemption>. 

440	
E n d n o t e s
	20.	 Craig R. Roach and Vincent Musco, “Federal Versus State Jurisdiction in the 
Electricity Business: Two Back-to-Back Decisions in 2016 Will Fundamentally 
Re-define the Jurisdictional Split,” Public Utilities Fortnightly, May 2016, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www.fortnightly.com/fortnightly/2016/05 
/federal-versus-state-jurisdiction-electricity-business>. 
	21.	 Hirsch, “Elon Musk’s Growing Empire Is Fueled by $4.9 Billion in Government 
Subsidies”; Reem Nasr, “Elon Musk: Incentives Not Necessary, but Helpful,” CNBC, 
June 1, 2015, accessed January 5, 2017, <http://www.cnbc.com/2015/06/01 
/elon-musk-we-are-not-getting-a-check-from-the-govt.html>.
	22.	 Craig R. Roach and Vincent Musco, “Electric Vehicles (Update),” Southwest 
Power Pool Annual Looking Forward Report: Strategic Issues Facing the Electricity Business, 
April 15, 2016. 
	23.	 Brian Fung, “Why Tesla Keeps Fighting for Direct Sales When It Could Just 
Work with Dealers,” Washington Post, October 22, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2014/10/22/why 
-tesla-keeps-fighting-for-direct-sales-when-it-could-just-work-with-dealers/>; 
Mike Ramsey, “Tesla Weighs New Challenge to State Direct-Sales Ban,” Wall 
Street Journal, March 28, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com 
/articles/tesla-weighs-new-challenge-to-state-direct-sales-bans-1459189069>; 
Mike Ramsey, “Tesla Presses Its Case on Fuel Standards,” Wall Street Journal, 
August 2, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles 
/tesla-presses-its-case-on-fuel-standards-1438559469>; Henry Sanderson, “Tesla 
in Stand-Off over Lithium Supply,” Financial Times, December 15, 2015, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/4a924a64-99df-11e5-987b 
-d6cdef1b205c.html#axzz47bErNWW4>; Susan Pulliam, Mike Ramsey, 
and Brody Mullins, “Elon Musk Supports His Business Empire with Unusual 
Financial Moves,” Wall Street Journal, April 27, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/elon-musk-supports-his-business-empire-with 
-unusual-financial-moves-1461781962>. 
	24.	 George Santayana, The Life of Reason (New York: Prometheus Books, 1998), 82; 
“A Likely Story . . . And That’s Precisely the Problem,” Washington Post, April 
17, 2005, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn 
/content/article/2005/04/16/AR2005041600154.html>. 
	25.	 “Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century,” National Academy of 
Engineering, 2003, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.greatachievements 
.org/>. 
	26.	 Kayla Webley, “Hurricane Sandy by the Numbers: A Superstorm’s Statistics, 
One Month Later,” Time, November 26, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://nation.time.com/2012/11/26/hurricane-sandy-one-month-later/>; 
“PSE&G Reaches $1.22 Billion Settlement in Energy Strong Proceeding,” 
Transmission & Distribution World Magazine, May 7, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://tdworld.com/distribution/pseg-reaches-122-billion-settlement-energy 
-strong-proceeding>; PG&E sought $3.9 billion and only received $1.22 billion; 
Rebecca Smith, “Assault on California Power Station Raises Alarm on Potential 
www.ebook3000.com

	
E n d n o t e s 	
441
for Terrorism,” Wall Street Journal, February 5, 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230485110457935914194
1621778>; “Smart Grid Cyber Security Market & Electrical Energy Storage 
Technology in the Intelligent Grid Analyzed in New Market Research Reports,” 
PR Newswire, September 17, 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.prnews 
wire.com/news-releases/smart-grid-cyber-security-market--electrical-energy 
-storage-technology-in-the-intelligent-grid-analyzed-in-new-market-research 
-reports-170005586.html>; Roach and Musco, Southwest Power Pool Annual 
Looking Forward Report (Washington, DC: Boston Pacific Company, Inc., April 
23, 2013) 62.
	27.	 Morgan Kelly, “Two Years after Hurricane Sandy, Recognition of Princeton’s 
Microgrid Still Surges,” Princeton University, October 23, 2014, accessed October 1, 
2016, <https://www.princeton.edu/main/news/archive/S41/40/10C78/index 
.xml?section=featured>. 
	28.	 “Renewable Portfolio Standard Policies,” Database of State Incentives for Renewables 
& Efficiency, September 2014, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.dsireusa 
.org/resources/detailed-summary-maps/>.
	29.	 James Bennet, “Bill Gates: ‘We Need an Energy Miracle,’” Atlantic, November 
16, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine 
/archive/2015/11/we-need-an-energy-miracle/407881/>; Amy Harder and 
Bradley Olson, “Exxon Touts Carbon Tax to Oil Industry,” Wall Street Journal, 
June 30, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.wsj.com/articles/exxon 
-touts-carbon-tax-to-oil-industry-1467279004>; George P. Shultz and James 
A. Baker III, “A Conservative Answer to Climate Change,” Wall Street Journal, 
February 7, 2017, <https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-conservative-answer-to 
-climate-change-1486512334>. 
	30.	 Jack Stewart, “Tesla’s Plan for World Domination Includes Buses and Semis,” 
Wired, July 20, 2016. <https://www.wired.com/2016/07/teslas-plan-world 
-domination-includes-buses-semis/>.
Epilogue
	 1.	 Bill Gates, “We Need Energy Miracles,” Gatesnotes (blog), June 25, 2014. 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/Energy/Energy-Miracles>.
	 2.	 See, for example, Debbie Sniderman, “Harnessing Power from Slow Moving 
Currents,” ASME, February 2012, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://
www.asme.org/engineering-topics/articles/mechanisms-systems-devices 
/harnessing-power-from-slow-moving-currents>. 
	 3.	 Robert Rosner and Stephen Goldberg, “Small Modular Reactors—Key to 
Future Nuclear Power Generation in the U.S.,” Energy Policy Institute at Chicago, 
November 2011, 1, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.eenews.net/assets 
/2013/03/13/document_gw_01.pdf>. 
	 4.	 “How Do Photovoltaics Work?,” NASA Science, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://science.nasa.gov/science-news/science-at-nasa/2002/solarcells/>.

442	
E n d n o t e s
	 5.	 “Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicles,” Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, accessed 
October 1, 2016, <http://www.c2es.org/technology/factsheet/HydrogenFuel 
CellVehicles>. 
	 6.	 Both Geim and Novoselov are at the University of Manchester, UK; “Scientific 
Background on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2010: Graphene,” The Royal Swedish 
Academy of Science, revised November 29, 2010, 1, 2, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2010/advanced 
-physicsprize2010.pdf>; A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, “The Rise of Graphene,” 
Nature Materials 6 (2007): 183; “The Home of Graphene: Energy,” The University 
of Manchester, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.graphene.manchester 
.ac.uk/explore/the-applications/energy/>; Peter Shadbolt, “Wonder Material Could 
Harvest Energy from Thin Air,” CNN, November 3, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/12/23/tech/innovation/tomorrow-transformed 
-graphene-battery>. 
	 7.	 “Press Release: The Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 2016.” The Royal Swedish Academy 
of Sciences, October 5, 2016, accessed December 31, 2016, <https://www.nobel 
prize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2016/press.html>.
	 8.	 “What Is U.S. Electricity Generation by Energy Source?,” Energy Information 
Administration, updated April 1, 2016, accessed October 1, 2016, <https://www 
.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=427&t=3>.
	 9.	 Bennet, “We Need an Energy Miracle”; Christopher Adams and John 
Thornhill, “Gates to Double Investment in Renewable Energy Projects,” 
Financial Times, June 25, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.ft.com 
/cms/s/2/4f66ff5c-1a47-11e5-a130-2e7db721f996.html#axzz4FiVaQ67b>; 
Christopher Martin, “Google Is Making Its Biggest Ever Bet on Renewable 
Energy,” Bloomberg, February 26, 2015, accessed October 1, 2016, <http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-26/google-makes-biggest-bet-on 
-renewables-to-fund-solarcity>. 
	10.	 Bennet, “We Need an Energy Miracle.” 
	11.	 Bennet, “We Need an Energy Miracle”; Adams, “Gates to Double Investment 
in Renewable Energy Projects.”
	12.	 Adams, “Gates to Double Investment in Renewable Energy Projects.”
	13.	 “Introducing the Breakthrough Energy Coalition,” Breakthrough Energy Coalition, 
accessed October 1, 2016, <http://www.breakthroughenergycoalition.com/en 
/index.html>.
www.ebook3000.com

443
I N D E X
acid rain, 260–61, 320
Addison, Joseph, 7
Age of Big, 129, 150, 164, 351, 353
Age of Edison, 86, 349, 351, 353, 355, 358
Age of Franklin, 51, 226, 323, 351, 358, 369
Age of Harm, 226, 245, 247, 262, 323, 349, 
353, 356
Age of Uncompromising Belief, 327, 335, 
342, 353, 364, 374
air brake, invention of, 88, 93–95
air pollution, 248, 254–64, 269–70, 291–92, 
321
Air Quality Act of 1967, 258
Alcoa, 169, 179
Alinsky, Saul, 187, 191–92, 202
alternating-current (AC), 85, 87–88, 90–92, 
95–99, 103–4, 145, 349–50, 353, 
361–63, 365, 372
American Clean Energy and Security Act of 
2009, 320. See also Waxman-Markey 
bill
American Federation of Labor (AFL), 195, 
197
Ampère, André-Marie, 36–37, 58, 79
amperes (amps), 79
An Inconvenient Truth (fi lm), 263, 309, 319, 323
Anderson, John, 23–24
animal electricity, 35
Annals of Philosophy, 36–37
Arab oil embargo, 290–92, 305, 340, 366
arc lighting, 77, 90
Arrhenius, Svante, 311
Arthur Andersen LLP, 281–82, 284, 286
Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 177
Astor, John Jacob, 100
Atlantic Telegraph Company, 63
Atomic Energy Act of 1946, 230–31
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), 230–
33, 237, 241
atoms
electrical charge, 20
electrons, 20, 22, 47–48, 72, 79, 90, 207, 
216–17, 220, 370
neutrons, 217–19, 227–28
and nuclear power, 227–28
and nuclear weapons, 217–19, 227–28
protons, 20, 217, 227
Atoms for Peace speech, 229–31, 363
avoided costs, 290–91
Banking Act of 1933, 138
Barker, George, 77
Barnett Shale, 329–30, 332
batteries
Faraday’s experiments, 38–39
lithium-ion, 346–48, 351, 354, 360
voltaic battery, invention of, 35
Battle of the Currents, 85, 87–88, 96–99, 
104, 361–63, 372
battle of the systems, emerging, 361–65, 374
Bechtel, Warren, 158
Belden, Timothy, 273–74
Bell, Alexander Graham, 71, 75–76
Bellamy, Edward, 175
Bernstein, Aaron, 205
big business
and big government, 148, 151–52, 165–
66, 182, 233
and the Great Depression, 355
big government
and big business, 151–52, 165–66, 182, 233
and Great Depression, 138–49, 151, 355, 
358
regulation, 140, 146–48

444	
I N D E X
Birmingham, England, 25–26
Bishop, Morris, 18–19
Black, Joseph, 23–25
Blackburn, Hugh, 44
blackout of 2003, 288–89, 301–3, 305, 355
blackouts, 266, 278, 303–4. See also blackout 
of 2003
Blake, William P., 152–53
Blankenship, Don, 199
Bodanis, David, 91
Bohr, Niels, 217
Bolt of Fate: Benjamin Franklin and His Electric 
Kite Hoax (Tucker), 14
Bonbright, James, 174
Born of the Desert (Rockwood), 152
Boulder Canyon Dam, 128, 136. See also 
Hoover Dam
Boulton, Matthew, 25–27, 30, 56
Brandeis, Louis D., 172, 174
Brands, H. W., 17
Breakthrough Energy Coalition, 374
Brett, John, 62–63
Briggs, Lyman, 218
Bright, John, 64
Brooks, David, 342
Brown, Harold, 96–97
Brownian motion, 207–8
Bryson, Reid, 314
Buffon, Comte de, 12
Bush, George H. W., 248
Bush, George W., 243, 279, 302, 313, 321
California electricity crisis
and air pollution, 269–70
allocation of scarce commodities, meth-
ods for, 276–77
blackouts, 266, 278
deregulation, 266–68, 278–79, 285–86, 
305, 355
Enron, role of, 266, 272–76, 285
and Federal Energy Regulatory Commis­
sion (FERC), 271–74, 276, 278–79
legacy of, 285–86
and natural gas prices, 269, 271–73, 276, 
292
political blame, 278–79
and power outages, 270
reasons for, 266–73, 285
and spot market, 266, 268–72, 286
California Independent System Operator 
(ISO), 268, 270, 274–76
California Power Exchange (PX), 267–68, 
270, 273–76
Callendar, Guy Stewart, 312
cap-and-trade, 248, 260–61, 269–70, 320, 
356. See also Waxman-Markey bill
capital punishment, electrocution as means 
of, 96–97
carbon dioxide (CO2), 185, 226, 310–14, 
316–20, 323, 325–27, 333, 338, 341, 
356, 364, 374. See also greenhouse 
gases
carbon engineering, 374
carbon tax, 364
Carnegie, Andrew, 27–30, 104
Carson, Rachel
awards, 253
books, 247–48, 253
career, 252–53
childhood, 252
courage, 248, 252
death, 248, 252, 254
education, 252
and environmental contamination, 249– 
51, 258
and environmental movement, 247–48, 
254, 258, 261, 356
industry response to, 253
legacy of, 262–64
and mitochondria, harm to, 251–52
and nuclear weapons, 249
Silent Spring, 247–49, 252–54, 257–58, 261, 
319, 356
supporters, 253–54
Carter, Jimmy, 239–40, 290
Cataract Construction Company, 98
Cermak, Anton, 117
Chadwick, James, 217
Chalmers, Matthew, 207
Chandler, Alfred, 188
Chandler, William, 182
Chaplin, Joyce, 15–16
Chernobyl accident, 226, 241–42, 244–45
Chesapeake Energy, 342
Chicago Edison, 105–6, 112, 119, 121
Chicago World’s Fair (Columbian Expo­
sition), 88, 97–99
China, 316–17, 322, 324, 327, 354, 360
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 315
Chrétien, Jean, 302
Clean Air Act of 1963, 257
Clean Air Act of 1970, 248, 258–59
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
445
Clean Air Act of 1977, 259
Clean Air Act of 1990, 259–61, 321, 325
Clean Power Plan (CPP), 311, 324–27, 356, 
375
coal industry
captive mines, 196–97
dangers faced by miners, 192, 199, 201
and electric power generation. See coal- 
fired power plants
and global climate change, 199
and Great Depression, 190, 194–95
growth of, 189, 199
and Industrial Revolution, 188
iron-rail-steam interdependence, 187, 189, 
199–200
King Coal, 186
labor productivity, 198, 201
legacy of, 200–202
Lewis, John L., 188, 191, 193–98, 201–2
mechanization of mines, 201
miners, 191–93, 197–99, 201
and oil and gas industry, 190, 200–201, 
338
peaks and declines, 189–91, 194, 199–200
and railroads, 187, 189–90, 194, 198–200, 
261
strikes and massacres, 188, 192–94, 
196–98, 201–2
surface mining, 198–99, 201
underground mining, 191–92, 198
United 
Mine 
Workers 
of 
America 
(UMW), 193–98, 201–2
and wood as fuel, 186–87, 189
and World War II, 190, 197–98, 202
The Coal War (Sinclair), 186
coal-fired power plants
acid rain program, 260
and Clean Power Plan (CPP), 325–27
and climate change, 314. See also global 
climate change
and coal industry, 187, 190, 199–200
construction costs, 237
cost comparisons for generating electric-
ity, 333
and cost-plus rates for electricity, 187, 200– 
201, 291, 298, 372
and deregulation of railroads, 261
emissions, 260–61, 292, 310, 314, 323, 325
and natural gas industry, 338
Super Power and Giant Power studies, 
129–33
TVA. See Tennessee Valley Authority 
(TVA)
Cohen, I. Bernard, 7–8, 13–15
Cold War, 182, 226, 230–31, 233, 236, 246, 
363
Collinson, Peter, 7–9, 11–12
Colorado Fuel and Iron Company, 192
combined-cycle power plants, 291–92, 294, 
327, 333, 341–42
combustion engine, 190, 360
combustion turbine, 291, 370
Commonwealth and Southern Holding 
Company, 176–77, 184
Commonwealth Edison Company, 112, 139, 
265
Commonwealth Electric, 111–12
competitive reform
and blackout of 2003, 288–89, 301–3, 
305, 355
and California electricity crisis. See Cali­
fornia electricity crisis
competition, creating, 290–92
cost-plus rates for electricity, 291, 298–99
and economies of scale, 147, 289
Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct 2005), 
303–5
and Enron. See Enron
Giant Power and Super Power as precur-
sors to, 133
legacy of, 305–6
and natural gas, 296–98, 342
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 
1978 (PURPA), 290–92, 294, 297, 
304–5
and regional transmission organizations 
(RTOs), 295, 366
regulation, University of Chicago assess-
ment of, 299–301, 305–6
reliability standards, 303–5
transmission service, 293–95, 305–6
written rules, 298–99
Conference on Climate Change, 316–17
Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), 
195–97
contact theory, 35
Convention on Climate Change, 316
Cooke, Morris Llewellyn, 131–33
Cool It (film), 319, 323
Coolidge, Calvin, 151, 156, 170
Copenhagen Summit, 322
Corliss, George, 29

446	
I N D E X
Corporation 
Securities 
Company 
of 
Chicago (Corp), 115–16, 118–19
cost-plus rates for electricity
and coal, 187, 200–201, 291, 298. See also 
coal industry
and competitive reform, 291, 298–99
and innovation, 121, 363, 374
and Insull, Samuel, 111–12, 120–21, 200, 
267, 299, 358–59, 361, 372
nuclear power plants, 242, 291, 298
cost-plus rates for natural gas, 296–97
Coulomb, Charles-Augustin de, 40, 212
Coulomb’s Law, 40
Critique of Pure Reason (Kant), 205
cross-pollination of ideas, 27, 40, 350
Crowe, Frank T., 158–59, 162
Cuomo, Mario, 241, 337
Curtis, Leonard E., 100
Dalibard, Jean-François, 12, 14
Davidson, Donald, 182
Davis, Arthur Powell, 154
Davis, Edwin L., 138
Davis, Gray, 266, 278–79
Davy, Humphry, 34–37, 77
DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), 249– 
50
Dean, Gordon, 230
Demsetz, Harold, 300–301
deregulation. See also competitive reform
and blackout of 2003, 288–89, 301–3, 
305, 355
California. See California electricity crisis
Giant Power and Super Power as precur-
sors to, 133
natural gas, 296–97, 342, 366, 373
railroads, 261
shale gas, 342, 373
and University of Chicago analysis of reg-
ulation, 299–301, 305–6, 366
Descartes, René, 44
deuterium, 219, 235
Devon Energy, 328, 331, 343, 373
Dick, Robert, 23
direct-current (DC), 85, 87–88, 90–91, 
96–97, 361. See also Battle of the 
Currents
Donora, Pennsylvania air pollution inci-
dent, 248, 254–56, 263, 356
doorstep reliability, 361–63, 373
Duquesne Light Company, 231–32
Dyson, Frank, 209
E = mc2, 204, 208, 215–16, 220, 226–27
Earth in the Balance (Gore), 319
earthquakes
Great East Japan earthquake, 243–44
and nuclear power plants, 243–44
and shale gas production, 335, 339
Eastern Interconnection, 133
Eaton, Cyrus, 115, 119–20
economies of scale
and competitive reform, 147, 289
and federal regulation, 147, 289, 359
independent system operators (ISOs), 130
and Insull, Samuel, 106, 109–10, 112, 
120, 122, 129, 185, 359, 361
in manufacturing, 371
and Musk, Elon, 351
regional 
transmission 
organizations 
(RTOs), 130, 295, 303, 306
and Westinghouse, George, 88, 104
economies of scope, 104, 106, 112, 120, 123, 
185, 359, 361
Eddington, Arthur, 209
Edison, Thomas Alva
Battle of the Currents, 85, 87–88, 96–99, 
104, 361–63, 372
and Bell, Alexander Graham, 75–76
childhood, 72–73
commercialization of electricity, 72, 76– 
87, 97, 103, 105
commercialization of inventions, 79, 81– 
82
corporate structure, 83–85
culture of invention, 350
death, 86
direct-current (DC) versus alternating- 
current (AC) systems, 85, 87–88, 
90–91, 96–97, 361
education, 73
electric lighting, public reaction to, 81
electrical lighting, research and develop-
ment of, 72, 77–86
electrical systems in private homes, 77, 
89–90
electricity, interest in, 77
end use for electricity, focus on, 349
European electrical lighting systems, 82
European ventures, 84–85
funding for building electric system, 108
funding for research, 72, 74, 78, 86, 108, 
355
importance of as entrepreneur, 104
and Insull, Samuel, 105–8
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
447
inventions, 41, 71–76, 107–8, 350
legacy of, 85–86
lightbulbs, invention of, 72, 76–79, 82–83, 
349
Menlo Park, 75–76, 86, 95, 350
Muscle Shoals project, 170
museum, 86
Newark Telegraph Works, 75
patents, 71, 74–75, 78, 80, 82
Pearl Street Station, 81–85
research laboratory, 71, 75–76, 86, 350
telegraph-related inventions, 71, 73
and Tesla, Nikola, 89–90, 350
and Western Union, 75
Wizard of Menlo Park, 76, 82
work ethic, 72
Edison Electric Illuminating Company of 
New York, 83
Edison Electric Light Company, 83
Edison General Electric Company, 72, 
84–85, 98, 105
Edison Lamp Works, 83
Edison Machine Works, 83
Edson, Tracy, 78
Eicher, Edward C., 142
Einstein, Albert
books by, 210, 220–21
Brownian motion, 207–8
childhood, 205
death, 221
E = mc2, 204, 208, 215–16, 220, 226–27
education, 205–6
and electricity business, 204, 220
and electromagnetic field theory, 40, 210, 
212–13, 216, 220
The Evolution of Physics, 210–16
and FBI, 219
general theory of relativity, 209, 221
humility, 220–21
influences on, 40, 43, 45, 51, 203–5, 209, 
220, 352
legacy, 219–20
miracle year, 207–8
and Nazi Germany, 209
and Newton’s mechanical theory, 210–15
Nobel Prize, 207, 370
and nuclear power, 204, 220, 225–27, 245
and nuclear weapons, 216–20, 225–26
as pacifist, 203, 219
papers, 204, 206–8, 219–20
philosophy studies, 205–6
photoelectric effect, 207, 370
pure thought versus experimental evi-
dence, 207
quantum theory, 204, 210, 216, 220
religion, 221
and scientific process, 208, 210, 220, 319, 
351
special theory of relativity, 204, 207–10, 
213–16, 220–21
and speed of light, 213–15
Swiss patent office job, 206, 208
United States, travel to, 209
university positions, 208–9
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 225–26, 229–30, 
232, 363
Electric Bond and Share, 121, 139–41
electric motors
and alternating current, 88, 91, 365
and Industrial Revolution, 22, 365
invention of, 31–32, 36–37, 50
and molecular motor, 371
and second industrial revolution, 123
Electric Reliability Organization (ERO), 304
Electric Tube Company, 83
electricity
and advancement of science, 50–51, 
203–4, 212–13, 351–52
Age of Big, 129, 150, 164, 351, 353
Age of Edison, 86, 349, 351, 353, 355, 358
Age of Franklin, 51, 226, 323, 351, 358, 
369
Age of Harm, 226, 245, 247, 262, 323, 
349, 353, 356
Age of Uncompromising Belief, 327, 335, 
342, 353, 364, 374
alternating-current (AC), 85, 87–88, 
90–92, 95–99, 103–4, 145, 349–50, 
353, 361–63, 365, 372
animal electricity, 35
Battle of the Currents, 85, 87–88, 96–99, 
104, 361, 363, 372
commercialization of, 64, 68–69, 72, 
76–87, 97, 103, 105
contact theory, 35
direct-current (DC), 85, 87–88, 90–91, 
96–97, 361
history of, learning from, 365–67. See also 
lessons of history
and magnetism, 32, 36–40
measurements of, 79
modern theory, 19–20
new technologies, 353–54, 361–63
Nollet’s theory of, 10

448	
I N D E X
elecricity (continued)
and quantum mechanics, 216
and religious beliefs, 3–4
Tytler’s theory of, 34
electricity business
and air pollution, 259–64
and coal industry, 187–88, 190, 199–201
coal-fired power plants. See coal-fired 
power plants
combined-cycle power plants, 291–92, 
294, 327, 333, 341–42
and consumer demands, 361–62
cost-plus rates. See cost-plus rates for 
electricity
deregulation. See deregulation
doorstep reliability, 361–63, 373
economic dispatch, 133, 201
environmental movement, impact of, 
247–48, 251, 263–64
federal regulation of. See federal regula-
tion of electricity business
government, role of, 358–59, 366–67
growth of, 122
independent system operators (ISOs), 
130, 268, 270, 274–76
and lessons from history, 365–67
microgrid, 362–63
monopolies. See monopolies
and Musk, Elon, 344, 346
new technologies, 353–54, 361–63
nuclear power plants. See nuclear power
official technologies, 238, 245–46, 359, 
363–64, 372–74
open access. See open access transmission
rate setting, 173
regional markets, 306
reliability, 302–5, 333, 361–63, 373
rising rates, 289
state regulation. See state regulation
electrochemistry, 35
electrocution, 96–97, 161
electromagnetic field theory, 40, 210, 
212–13, 216, 220
electromagnetic theory of light, 43, 46, 50– 
51
electromagnetic wave theory, 32, 34, 39–41, 
43, 46–50
electrons, 20, 22, 47–48, 72, 79, 90, 207, 
216–17, 220, 370
Ellsworth, Annie, 60–61
end use for electricity, focus on, 349, 352
Energy Information Administration (EIA), 
333–34
Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct 1992), 
294, 305
Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct 2005), 
303–5
Energy Research and Development Admin­
is­tration (ERDA), 340
Enron
auditing firm (Arthur Andersen LLP), 
281–82, 284, 286
bankruptcy, 266, 280, 284
California electricity crisis, role in, 266, 
272–76, 285
financial collapse, reasons for, 266, 
279–82, 286
legacy of, 285–87
LJM deals, 280, 283
market manipulation (bad market behav-
ior), 266, 271–76, 285
Powers report, 280–81
special-purpose entities (SPEs), use of, 281
trials, 280, 283–87
environmental concerns. See also environ-
mental movement
air pollution. See air pollution
global climate change. See global climate 
change
golden rules, 335
and Musk’s businesses, 356
shale gas production, 335–39
environmental movement. See also Carson, 
Rachel
air pollution. See air pollution
beginning of, 247–48, 254, 258, 261
electricity business, impact on, 247–48, 
251, 263–64
environmental advocacy, template for, 
248–49, 262–63, 356
legislation and regulations, 257–61, 263
science of harm, 251–52
studies, 261–62
environmental policy, 258–60, 264, 337–38, 
356, 374–75. See also global climate 
change
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
creation of, 258
Endangerment Finding, 317, 322, 326
and global climate change, 317, 321–23, 
325–26, 356
and 
hydraulic 
fracturing 
(fracking), 
337–38
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
449
National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
(NAAQS), 259
under Trump administration, 374
Ethics (Spinoza), 206
The Evolution of Physics (Einstein and Infeld), 
210–16
exempt wholesale generators (EWGs), 294
Experimental Researches in Electricity (Faraday), 
74
Experiments 
and 
Observations 
on 
Elec­tri­
city (Franklin), 12, 16
ExxonMobil, 364, 374
Faraday, Michael
biographers, 33
British government, recognition of, 43
and Davy, Humphry, 34–37, 77
education, 5, 33–36, 50
Einstein, influence on, 40, 45, 51, 203–5, 
352
electric generator (dynamo), invention of, 
32, 37–39, 50
electric motor, invention of, 32, 36–37, 50
electromagnetic wave theory, 32, 34, 
39–41, 46–47
honors and awards, 40
humility, 42, 51
legacy of, 50–51
Maxwell, influence on, 33, 44–49, 51, 
205, 352
memory loss, 42–43
physics, impact on science of, 45, 51
printing career, 33–34
religious beliefs, 33, 41–43, 205, 366
and the Royal Institution, 34–37, 42–43
Royal Society membership, 37
and Tytler’s theory of electricity, 34
Fastow, Andrew, 280–81, 284–85
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
(FERC)
and California electricity crisis, 271–74, 
276, 278–79
Electric Reliability Organization (ERO), 
304
and end of economies of scale, 289
Energy Policy Act of 2005, 303–5
and open access transmission, 293–95, 
297–98, 305–6
Federal Power Act (FPA), 128, 140, 144–47, 
289, 293, 303, 357
Federal Power Commission (FPC), 128, 
136, 144–47, 296
federal regulation of electricity business. See 
also Federal Power Act (FPA)
and economies of scale, 147, 289, 359
emissions. See air pollution; Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA); global cli-
mate change
environmental issues, 257–61, 263. See also 
Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA)
global climate change. See global climate 
change
and Great Depression, 129, 144, 147–48
holding companies. See holding companies
interstate sales, 128, 138–41, 144–45
monopolies. See monopolies
nuclear power, 237–38, 244–45
problems with, 129, 148–49
Public Utility Act of 1935, 140–41, 
143–44. See also Public Utility 
Holding Company Act of 1935
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
and natural gas prices, 296
report on holding companies, 134–35, 
138–41
Federal Water Power Act of 1920, 144. See 
also Federal Power Act (FPA)
Feringa, Bernard L., 371
Fermi, Enrico, 217–18
Field, Cyrus, 62–64
Figures of Thought (Simpson), 46
“Five Papers That Shook the World,” 207
Flood Control Act of 1928, 156
Forbes, James, 44
Ford, Henry, 86, 104, 170
Ford Motor Company, 198
foreign oil, dependence on, 230, 290. See also 
Arab oil embargo
Fourier, Joseph, 311
Fox, Josh, 336
fracking (hydraulic fracturing), 330–31, 
336, 340, 342
Framework 
Convention 
on 
Climate 
Change, 322
Francis, Pope, 324
Frankfurter, Felix, 172
Franklin, Benjamin
and American Revolution, 4, 15, 17–19
brother of (James), 5–6
character and personality traits, 5–7, 14, 
18–19
Collinson, letters to, 7–12
courage, 4

450	
I N D E X
Franklin, Benjamin (continued)
education, 5, 7
England, diplomatic trips to, 16–17
fame, 4, 11, 15–18, 20
France, diplomatic trip to, 18–19
funeral, 20
honors and awards, 16, 40
inventions, 6, 14–15
kite experiment, 3–4, 12–14
legacy of, 19–20
and Leyden jar experiment, 10–11, 13
lightning rod invention, 14–15
Newton, influence of, 8
as prankster, 6, 14
printing career, 5–7
and Scientific Revolution, 5, 19
as scientist, 3–4, 7–15, 19–20, 352, 366
sentry-box experiment, 11–12, 14, 18
son of (William), 6, 19
as statesman and scientist, 4, 6, 15–20
theory of electricity, 9–11, 19–20, 22, 34
transmission of electricity, 59
Franklin, James, 5–6
Franklin, William, 6, 19
Franklin Institute, 59
Freeman, David, 278–79
Friedel, Robert, 71, 78, 81
Friedland, Claire, 300
Friedman, Thomas L., 323–24
Frisch, Robert, 217–18
fuel cells, 370–71
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, 
226, 242–45, 374
Gale, Leonard D., 59
Galvani, Luigi, 35
Gandhi, Mahatma, 203
Gasland (film), 336
Gates, Bill, 104, 364–65, 373–74
Gaulard, Lucien, 95
Geim, Andre K., 371
General Electric (GE)
air pollution emissions, 292
and Battle of the Currents, 97–99
and Chicago World’s Fair, 97–98
and Edison General Electric Company, 
72, 84–85, 98
Electric Bond and Share, 121, 139–41
and Insull, Samuel, 105–6, 110, 121
and Niagara Falls power project, 88, 
98–99
nuclear power plants, 232–33, 236
sodium-cooled reactor, 235
steam turbines, 110
General Motors, 195–96
general theory of relativity, 209, 221
George III, 15, 18
German Edison Company, 84
Giant Power study, 129–33
Gibbon, Edward, 73
Gibbs, John Dixon, 95
Gibson, James, 22
Gigafactory, 346–47, 351
Gisborne, Frederick, 62–63
global climate change
adaptation to versus prevention, 319, 323, 
327
American Clean Energy and Security Act 
of 2009, 320
awareness campaign, 314–15
and cap-and-trade. See cap-and-trade
and carbon tax, 364
and China, 316–17, 322, 324, 327
and Clean Air Act, 321, 325
Clean Power Plan (CPP), 311, 324–27, 
356, 375
and coal industry, 199
controversy regarding, 318
Earth Summit (Rio de Janeiro, 1992), 316
and EPA, 317, 321–23, 325–26, 356
evidence of, 313–19, 322, 326
and Gates, Bill, 373–74
and Gore, Al, 263, 309–10, 313, 317, 319
greenhouse gases, 226, 246, 310–12, 314, 
317–22, 339, 356, 370. See also car-
bon dioxide (CO2)
human influence on, 312, 316–19, 326
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC), 309–10, 316–20, 
322, 325
Keeling Curve, 313
Kyoto Protocol, 316–17
legacy of debate on, 326–27
Montreal Protocol, 315–16
and Musk, Elon, 356
and natural gas-fired power plants, 329
and new technologies, 374
and nuclear power, 226–27
official technologies, 359, 363–64. See also 
official technologies
Paris Accord, 323–24
policy, 324–27
and power plant emissions, 310, 322, 
325–27
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
451
public opinion, 321, 327
science of, 310–15
and shale gas production, 338–39
subsidies, 359, 364
UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change 
(Copenhagen 
Summit, 
2009), 322–23
Waxman-Markey bill, 310, 320–21, 356, 
374–75
global warming. See global climate change
Gompers, Samuel, 195
Gore, Al, 263, 309–10, 313, 317, 319
Gould, Jay, 74–75
Gouraud, George E., 107
government, role of, 358–59, 366–67. See 
also federal regulation of electricity 
business
Grand Coulee Dam, 128, 178–79
graphene, 371
gravitational force, 211–12
Great Depression
and big government, 138–49, 151, 355, 
358
and coal production, 190, 194–96
and federal regulation, 129, 144, 147–48
and holding companies, 106, 113, 121, 
127–28, 130, 137
and Hoover Dam, 128, 149, 151, 157, 
160–62, 165–66
and Insull’s financial difficulties, 106, 113, 
115–16, 120, 148
and New Deal for electricity, 128–29, 137, 
144, 147–48, 151, 180, 184, 355
and TVA, 128, 149, 170, 174, 180, 184, 355
and utility profits, 173–74
Green, Dwight H., 116
greenhouse gases
carbon dioxide, 185, 226, 310–14, 316–20, 
323, 325–26, 333, 338, 341, 356, 
364, 374
and fuel cells, 370
and global climate change, 310–12, 314, 
317–22, 339, 356
methane, 318, 338–39
and nuclear power plants, 226, 246
Waxman-Markey bill, 310, 320–21, 356, 
374–75
Greenstone, Michael, 333
Grossmann, Marcel, 206
Hahn, Otto, 217
Hamilton, James, 33, 37, 41
Hansen, Jim, 315
Harding, Warren G., 155, 170
Harriman, Edward H., 153–54
Hazen, Robert M., 79
Heilbron, J. L., 10, 15
Heisenberg, Werner, 218–19, 225
Henry, Joseph, 62
Hertz, 212
Hickok, Lorena, 180–81, 185
The History and Present State of Electricity 
(Priestley), 33–34
History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman 
Empire (Gibbon), 73
holding companies
FTC report on, 138–41
and Great Depression, 106, 113, 121, 
127–28, 130, 137
Insull’s use of, 106, 113, 121
Public Utility Holding Company Act 
of 1935 (PUHCA), 128, 130, 138, 
140–44, 148, 304, 357
state regulation of, 134–35
Hoover, Herbert, 130, 151, 155, 163, 165, 
170
Hoover, J. Edgar, 219
Hoover Dam
allocation of electricity, 157
allocation of water, 155–56, 165
bids for, 157–58
big government and big business coopera-
tion, 151–52, 165–66
Boulder Canyon Project proposal, 154–56
and Colorado River, 152–56
Colorado River Compact, 155
completion of, 165
dedication of, 164–66
early proposals for, 154–55
engineering and construction of, 159–63
funding for, 162–63
and Great Depression, 128, 149, 151, 157, 
160–62, 165–66
hydroelectric power production, 150–51
legacy of, 166
naming of, 163
as part of New Deal, 151–52, 164, 166
pay-for-performance incentive, 151–52, 
157–58
and Saint Francis Dam, 156, 159
Six Companies, 158, 160, 163, 165
size of, 150, 166
state legislation, 155–56
Swing-Johnson bill, 156

452	
I N D E X
Hoover Dam (continued)
TVA compared, 178–79, 181, 184–85
workers on, 159–63, 167
working conditions, 160–63, 167
Hopkins, Harry, 180
House, Royal Earl, 61
Hueston, John, 283
Hughes, David, 334
Hume, David, 44, 206
hydraulic fracturing (fracking), 330–31, 
336, 340, 342
hydroelectric power projects
federal funding of, 128
Hoover Dam. See Hoover Dam
Niagara Falls, 88, 98–99
Tennessee Valley Authority. See Tennessee 
Valley Authority (TVA)
Ickes, Harold, 163
Illinois Commerce Commission, 114, 116
Illinois Public Utility Commission, 114
incandescent light, 77–78, 349
independent system operators (ISOs), 130, 
268, 270, 274–76
Industrial Revolution
and coal industry, 188
and electric motors, 22, 365
second industrial revolution, 123
and steam engines, 21–22, 24, 27–31, 123
Infeld, Leopold, 210, 220
innovation
cost-plus regulation, effect of, 121, 363, 374
end use, focus on, 349
and patents, 26, 69
insecticides, 248, 250–52
instrument makers, 23
Insull, Samuel
and affordability of electricity, 110, 112, 
120, 122, 167, 287, 359, 361, 363
business successes, 112–14, 121
and Chicago politics, 111, 116–17
corporate raider, tactics against, 115–16, 
119–20
and cost-plus rates for electricity, 111–12, 
120–21, 200, 267, 299, 358–59, 361, 
372
criminal charges and trial, 107, 116–21, 
286–87
death, 122
defense at trial, 119–20
economies of scale, 106, 109–10, 112, 120, 
122, 129, 185, 359, 361
as Edison employee, 105, 107–8
electricity business, establishment of, 
105–6
electricity business outside of Chicago, 
112–13
electricity monopoly in Chicago, 106, 
111–12
financial difficulties, 106, 115–16
and Great Depression, 106, 113, 115–16, 
120, 148
holding companies, 106, 113, 121, 139
and industry regulation, 106, 111–12, 114, 
120–21, 265, 355
legacy, 120–21
power plants, 110
pricing for electricity, 106, 108–11, 113– 
14, 122
Roosevelt’s opinion of, 106, 134–36, 355
steam turbines, use of, 110
World War I community service, 113–14
Insull, Samuel, Jr., 117
Insull Utility Investments (IUI), 115
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), 309–10, 316–20, 322, 325
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),  
230, 236
International Energy Agency (IEA), 335
interstate commerce, 140–41, 144, 146, 
294–95
Interstate Commerce Act of 1933, 138
Iran, 228–29
Isaacson, Walter, 205–6, 208
Israel, Paul, 71, 76, 78, 81
J. F. Shea Company, 158
Jackson, Charles T., 59–60
Johnson, Edward, 107
Johnson, Hiram, 165
Johnson, Katharine, 101
Johnson, Lyndon B., 202, 312
Johnson, Robert, 101
Joskow, Paul, 268–70 
The Journey of an American Liberal (Neuse), 169
Kaiser, Henry, 158, 163
Kaiser Paving, 158
Kant, Immanuel, 12, 205
Keeling, Charles David, 312–13
Keeling Curve, 313
Keith, William, 6–7
Kemmler, William, 96–97
Kendall, Amos, 68
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
453
Kennedy, John F., 253
Kennelly, Arthur E., 96
kilowatt-hours (kWh), 30
Ki-Moon, Ban, 318
King Coal (Sinclair), 186
Kyoto Protocol, 316–17
La Follette, Philip, 173–74
La Follette, Robert, Jr., 174
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis, 48
latent heat, 22, 24, 26
Laws, Samuel, 74–75
Lay, Ken, 283–85
lessons of history, 344, 348–61, 365–67
Lewis, John L., 188, 191, 193–98, 201–2. See 
also coal industry
Lewis, Nate, 374
Lewis, Thomas, 193
Lichtenberg, G. C., 42
lightbulbs, 72, 76, 80, 82–83, 85–88, 95, 98, 
103, 349
lightning, 3–4. See also Franklin, Benjamin
Lilienthal, David. See also Tennessee Valley 
Authority (TVA)
education, 172
“Father of TVA,” 169
and government ownership of electric 
power business, 170
and impact of TVA, 178–83
law career, 172–74
legacy of, 184–85
progressive political views, 169–70, 172–73
as TVA Board member, 174–78
and utility rate setting, 173–75
liquefied natural gas (LNG), 331, 343
lithium-ion batteries, 346–48, 351, 354, 360
Lomborg, Bjorn, 319
London smog episode, 248, 254, 256–57, 
261, 263, 356
Long Island Lighting Company (LILCO), 
240–42
Long Island Power Authority (LIPA), 241
Looking Backward, 2000-1887 (Bellamy), 175
Looney, Adam, 333
Lorentz, Hendrik, 209
Louis XV, 12
Louis XVI, 18
Lowrey, Grosvenor, 78
Ludlow, Colorado, 192–93
Mach, Ernst, 209
magnetic force, 40, 212
Manhattan Project, 169, 219, 226, 245
Marcellus Shale, 332
Marconi, Guglielmo, 99–101
market-based rates for electricity, 293, 
297–98
Markey, Ed, 320
Martin, Roscoe, 170, 182–83
Massey Energy Company, 199
Maxwell, James Clerk
education, 44–45, 51
Einstein, influence on, 40, 43, 45, 51, 203–5
electromagnetic theory of light, 43, 46, 
50–51
electromagnetic wave theory, 40, 43, 46–50
equations, 33, 48–49
Faraday, influence of and respect for, 33, 
44–49, 51, 205, 352
humility, 51
Lagrangian math, use of, 48–49
legacy of, 50–51
partial derivations, 48–49
physics, impact on science of, 45, 51
potential energy and kinetic energy, 47
publications, 45–46
McClendon, Aubrey, 342–43
McDonald & Kahn, 158
McKinney, Robert, 230
Mead, Elwood, 162–63
Meitner, Lise, 217–18
Meredith, Hugh, 6
Mershon, Sherie, 340
methane, 318, 338–39
microgrid, 362–63
Middle South Utilities, 293
Middle West Utilities, 113, 115–16, 118–19, 
129–30, 139–40
Mills, Mark P., 334
Mitchell, George, 328–31, 341–43, 373
Mitchell, John, 193
Mitchell Energy and Development Corpor­
ation, 329
molecular machines, 371
monopolies
and economies of scale, 106, 112. See also 
economies of scale
Insull’s electricity monopoly in Chicago, 
106, 111–12, 355
monopoly franchises, 267, 300
natural monopolies, 106, 132, 147, 300
regulated, 120, 132, 147, 267, 289–90, 
299–300, 305
telegraph business monopoly, 68–69

454	
I N D E X
Montreal Protocol, 315–16
Morgan, A. E., 175–78, 183–84
Morgan, H. A., 175–76, 184
Morgan, J. Pierpont, 72, 81, 85, 89, 98–99, 
101
Morgan, John, 23
Morrison, Harry, 158
Morrison-Knudsen, 158
Morse, Jedidiah, 57
Morse, John, 26
Morse, Samuel
as an artist, 57–58
childhood, 56
and communication technology, 56, 64– 
66, 68, 79
education, 57
legacy of, 69–70
patents, 56–57, 59–62, 69
persistence, 55–56
in politics, 57–58
slavery, position on, 57, 69–70
telegraph, invention of. See telegraph
Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act of 
1965, 257
Mulholland, William, 156
Müller, Paul, 249
Muller, Richard, 228
Murdoch, William, 27
Murphy, Frank, 195–96
Muscle Shoals, Alabama, 136, 169–71, 177, 
179, 183
Musk, Elon
America, products manufactured in, 
345–47
and artificial intelligence, 353
and battle of the systems, 360–63
and consumer demands, 361–63
critics, 346–47, 360, 366
cross-pollination of knowledge, 351
cultivation of talent, 350
disruptive competition for established 
industries, 355
economic impact, 354
economies of scale, 351
electricity business, impact on, 346, 361–63
end use, focus on, 349, 352
factors affecting, 360
Gigafactory, 346–47, 351
and global climate change, 345, 356, 359, 
363–65
and lessons of history, 344, 348–61, 
365–67
lithium-ion batteries, 346–48, 351, 354, 
360
master plan, 348
personal power sources and storage, 346, 
349, 352, 362–63, 370
Powerwall and Powerpack electricity stor-
age devices, 346, 349, 351, 355, 358, 
362
risk, 347–48, 360
and science, 352–53
SolarCity, 345–47, 349, 352–53, 355–56, 
358, 362
SpaceX, 345–46, 348, 350–52, 355
and state regulation, 358
subsidies, 347, 356, 359
Tesla Motors, 345–49, 351–52, 354–56, 
358, 360, 366
wealth, 345
Zip2, 345
Musk, Kimbal, 345
Muskie, Edmund, 258
Musschenbroek, Pieter van, 10
The Myth of TVA (Chandler), 182
National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
(NAAQS), 259
National Climate Act, 314
National Defense Act, 170
National Energy Act, 290, 297
National Industrial Recovery Act, 172–73
National Recovery Act, 195
natural gas
and coal use, 338
deregulation, 296–97, 342, 366, 373
and electricity generation. See natural 
gas-fired power plants
imports of, 330–31
liquefied (LNG), 331, 343
regulation, 146–47, 296–98
shale gas. See shale gas
shortages, 340
take-or-pay contracts, 297
Natural Gas Act of 1938, 146, 296
Natural Gas Pipeline Company of America, 
329
Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, 297, 306
Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act of 
1989, 297–98
natural gas-fired power plants, 267, 269–70, 
278, 296, 298, 329–33, 362, 372–73. 
See also combined-cycle power plants
Neuse, Steven, 169–70, 173, 175
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
455
neutrons, 217–19, 227–28
New Deal for electricity
defined, 127–28
Federal Power Act (FPA), 128, 140, 
144–47, 289, 293, 303, 357
Federal Power Commission (FPC), 128, 
136, 144–47, 296
and FTC report on holding companies, 
138–40
legacy, 147–49
Public Utility Act of 1935, 140–41, 144
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 
1935 (PUHCA), 128, 138, 140–44, 
148, 357
Roosevelt’s Portland campaign speech, 
127–28, 134–37
Roosevelt’s report to Congress (1935), 
137–38
studies behind, 129–33
Tennessee Valley Authority. See Tennessee 
Valley Authority (TVA)
New England Power, 293
New York City smog incident, 248, 254, 257, 
263, 356
Newark Telegraph Works, 75
Newcomen, Thomas, 23–25
Newton, Isaac, 8–9, 203–4, 210–15, 220
Niagara Falls, 88, 98–99
Nicol, William, 44
Nilles, Bruce, 326
Nimitz, Chester W., 234
nitrogen oxide (NOx), 259, 269–70, 292
nitrous oxide, 318
Nixon, Richard, 248, 258
Nobel, Alfred, 219
Nobel Peace Prize, 309–10
Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 371
Nobel Prize in Physics, 100, 207, 209, 
370–71
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 249
Nollet, Jean-Antoine, 10–12, 18
Norris, George William, 170–71, 174, 
183–84
Norris-LaGuardia Act, 195
North 
American 
Electric 
Reliability 
Council (NERC), 302, 304
North American Telegraph Association, 68
Novoselov, Konstantin S., 371
nuclear power
accidents at power plants, 226, 238–45, 
374
Age of Harm, 226, 245
Atoms for Peace speech, 229–31, 363
black swan risk, 245
Chernobyl accident, 226, 241–42, 244–45
and Cold War, 226, 230–31, 233, 236, 
246, 363
and competitive reform, 289–92, 298, 305
construction costs for power plants, 
237–38
cost comparisons for generating electric-
ity, 333
and cost-plus pricing, 242
costs, 237–38, 246, 292, 372
“fall” of, 226, 236–42
575-MW project, 232
Fukushima Daiichi power plant, 226, 
242–45, 374
and generation of electricity, 204, 226
and geopolitical strategy, 230–31
and global climate change, 226–27, 246
government subsidies, 232–33, 236
legacy, 245–46
licenses for power plants, cancellation of, 
236–37
light-water reactor, 233, 235–36
market share of electricity business, 226, 
233, 236, 246, 298, 372
nuclear waste, 242, 246
and nuclear weapons, 228–29, 246
as official technology, 246, 372
private power plants, 232–33
and Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act 
(PURPA), 290
regulations, 237–38, 244–45
science of, 227–29
Shippingport nuclear reactor, 231–32, 
234
Shoreham Nuclear Power plant, 240–42, 
245
small modular reactors (SMRs), 370
submarines, 234–35
Three Mile Island, 238–42, 244–46
Traveling Wave Reactor, 374
and World War II, 225–26, 229–30
worldwide electric generation, 236
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 236–37, 
240
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, 243
nuclear weapons
and atoms, 217–19
Atoms for Peace speech, 229–31, 363
Iran, 228
and nuclear power, 228–29

456	
I N D E X
nuclear weapons (continued)
science of, 227–28
and World War II, 225–26, 229
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 169, 179–80, 234
Obama, Barack, 243, 311, 321–22, 324–25, 
338–39, 356, 375
official technologies, 238, 245–46, 359, 
363–64, 372–74
Ohm, Georg Simon, 79
ohms, 79
oil and gas industry. See also natural gas; 
shale gas
and coal industry, 190, 200–201
and foreign oil, 230, 290
and new technology, 334
On Faraday’s Lines of Force (Maxwell), 45–46
open access transmission
California, 268
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
293–95, 297–98, 305–6
Opticks (Newton), 8
O’Reilly, Henry, 61, 68
O’Reilly v. Morse, 61–62
Ørsted, Hans Christian, 36–37, 49
Pacific Bridge Company, 158
Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), 266, 270, 
278
Palucka, Tim, 340
Pantaleoni, Guido, 95
Paris Accord, 323–24
Paris International Electrical Exposition, 82
Parsons, Charles, 102
particulates, 257, 261–62
patents
alternating-current distribution system, 
95
Edison, Thomas Alva, 71, 74–75, 78, 82
Franklin’s view on, 6
and innovation, 26, 69
Marconi, 99–100
Morse, Samuel, 56–57, 59–62, 69
steam engine, 25–27, 30–31
telegraph, 56–57, 59–63, 67–69
telephone, 76
Tesla, Nikola, 92, 97, 99–100
Watt, James, 25–27, 30–31
Westinghouse, George, 92, 94–95, 97
Westinghouse, George, Sr., 92
wireless radio, 99–100
Peel, Robert, 39
Penn, William, 16
Perry, Rick, 374
persistence, 42, 55–56
personal power sources and storage, 346, 
349, 352, 362–63, 370
pesticides, 248–50, 253–54, 263
Philips, Richard, 36
Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Wisconsin, 296
photoelectric effect, 207, 370
Physics for Future Presidents (Muller), 228
Pinchot, Gifford, 131–33
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 93, 95, 104, 188, 
231, 234
PJM Interconnection, 130, 133
Planck, Max, 208
Plass, Gilbert, 312–13
plutonium, 228
Poor Richard’s Almanac (Franklin), 14
Pope, Franklin, 74–75
Posner, Richard, 301
Powers, William C., Jr., 280
Powerwall and Powerpack electricity stor-
age devices, 346, 349, 351, 355, 358, 
362
Priest, George, 301
Priestley, Joseph, 33–34
Principia (Newton), 8
Pringle, John, 15
private investment, 27, 69, 78, 86, 134, 166, 
354–56, 373
product development, stages of, 78
protons, 20, 217, 227
prudent investment method of asset valua-
tion, 173
Pruitt, Scott, 374
Public Utilities Commission v. Attleboro Company, 
145
Public Utility Act of 1935, 140–41, 144
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 
1935 (PUHCA), 128, 138, 140–44, 
148, 304, 357
Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 
1978 (PURPA), 290–92, 294, 297, 
304–5
public-private partnerships
and commercialization of electricity, 64
Hoover Dam, 166. See also Hoover Dam
nuclear power plants, 231–33
telegraph lines, 60, 63–64, 67, 69
transatlantic cable, 63–64
qualifying facilities (QFs), 290–92, 294
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
457
railroads
air brake, invention of, 88, 93–95
and coal industry, 187, 189–90, 194, 198– 
200, 261
deregulation, 261
and telegraph, 66–67
Railway Labor Act, 172
Ramsey, Mike, 283–84
Randolph, Epes, 154
Réaumur, René-Antoine Ferchault de, 12
RECLAIM, 269–70
Reed, James, 116
regional transmission organizations (RTOs),  
130, 295, 303, 306
regulation. See also federal regulation of elec-
tricity business
and big government, 140, 146–48
and economies of scale, 147, 289, 359
and Great Depression, 129, 144, 147–48
of holding companies. See holding companies
and Insull, Samuel, 106, 111–12, 114, 
120–21, 265, 355
by states. See state regulation
telegraph business, 65, 67
University of Chicago assessment of, 
299–301, 305–6
Relativity (Einstein), 220–21
renewable energy sources, 298, 325–27, 
333, 339, 341, 359, 362, 364. See also 
solar power; wind power
replacement cost method of asset valuation, 
173
research, development, demonstration, and  
commercialization (RDD&C), 358–59
resistance, 79–80
Revelle, Roger, 312–13
Ribicoff, Abraham, 254
Richberg, Donald R., 172–73
Richman, George, 13
Rickover, Hyman G., 226, 232–36, 238
Riebau, George, 33–34
Rive, Lyndon, 346
Rive, Peter, 346
Robinson, Eric, 28
Robison, John, 24–25
Rockefeller, J. D., 104
Rockwood, Charles Robinson, 152–54
Roebuck, John, 25–27
Roosevelt, Franklin D. See also New Deal for 
electricity
and government ownership of utilities, 
136, 185, 355
holding companies, view on, 128, 134–38, 
355
and Hoover, Herbert, 163, 165
Hoover Dam dedication speech, 164
and hydroelectric power projects, 136
and Insull, Samuel, 106, 134–36, 355
legacy, 148
and Lewis, John L., 196–97
and nuclear weapons, development of, 218
Portland campaign speech, 127–28, 
134–37, 185
report to Congress (1935), 137–38
report to Congress on holding companies 
(1935), 137–38
State of the Union address, 137
and TVA, 168–74, 184–85, 355. See also 
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
Roosevelt, Theodore, 151, 154
Rosenberg, Nathan, 29
Rothschild, Baron, 98
Royal Society, 8–9, 15–16, 20, 37
Rutherford, Ernest, 217
Sachs, Alexander, 218
Saint Francis Dam, 156
Salton Sink and Salton Sea, 152–54, 166
Sandeman, Robert, 41
Sauvage, Jean-Pierre, 371
Schmid, Albert, 95
Schrag, Daniel P., 338
Schurr, Sam, 189–90, 200
science
advancement of and electricity, 50–51, 
203–4, 212–13, 351–52
and cross-pollination of ideas, 27, 40, 350
technology. See technology
Scientific Revolution, 5, 8, 19, 23
Securities 
and 
Exchange 
Commission 
(SEC), 142–43
seismic mapping, 328, 331
Seuss, Hans, 312–13
shale gas
abundance of, 328–31, 334, 372
Barnett Shale, 329–30, 332
Chesapeake Energy, 342
and cost of electricity, 332–33, 341, 
372–73
and cost of natural gas, 341, 372
critics, 334
and deregulation, 342, 373
and drinking water supply, 335–38
earthquakes, 335, 339

458	
I N D E X
shale gas (continued)
environmental impact, 335–39, 341–43
Environmental Protection Agency study, 
337–38
exports, 343
and gas-fired power plants, 329–33. See 
also natural gas-fired power plants
and global climate change, 338–39, 341
golden rules, 335
government research and development, 
339–41
horizontal-drilling technology, 328, 331
hydraulic fracturing (fracking), 330–31, 
336, 340, 342
legacy of shale gas revolution, 341–43
liquefied natural gas (LNG), 331, 343
Marcellus Shale, 332
market share, 331
methane emissions, 338–39
and Mitchell, George, 328–31, 341–43
production costs, 332–34
seismic mapping, 328, 331
slick water, 330
technological advances, 328, 331, 333–34, 
341
wastewater from production of, 335–37, 
339
Shallenberger, Oliver B., 95
Shippingport nuclear reactor, 231–32, 234
Shoreham Nuclear Power plant, 240–42, 245
Siemens, 292
Silent Spring (Carson), 247–49, 252–54, 
257–58, 261, 319, 356
Silliman, Benjamin, 57
Simpson, Thomas K., 46, 48
Sinclair, Upton, 186
Singh, Dolly, 350
Skilling, Jeff, 283–85
small modular reactors (SMRs), 370
Smith, Adam, 23, 26
Smith, Francis O. J., 60, 62
Smith, Frank, 116
Soho Manufactory, 25–26, 30
solar power
China, 354
and Clean Power Plan, 325
and combined-cycle power plants, 341
cost comparisons for generating electric-
ity, 333
and goals of power generation, 167
and National Energy Act, 290
as official technology, 359, 363, 372
and personal power, 362. See also personal 
power
rooftop, 346–49, 362
and shale gas, effect of abundance and 
low price, 339
solar photovoltaics, 207, 333, 346, 352, 
358, 364, 370
solar-chemical power, 374
SolarCity, 345–47, 349, 352–53, 355–56, 
358, 362
subsidies for, 359, 364, 372
solar-chemical power, 374
SolarCity, 345–47, 349, 352–53, 355–56, 
358, 362
Southern California Edison (SCE), 270, 293
SpaceX, 345–46, 348, 350–52, 355
special theory of relativity, 204, 207–10, 
213–16, 220–21
Spinoza, Baruch, 206
spot market
electricity, 266, 268–72, 286, 295
natural gas, 297, 332
Standage, Tom, 56, 64
state regulation, 111–14, 120, 133–35, 141, 
144–45, 149, 173, 212, 357–58
steam engines
commercialization, 25–27
development of. See Watt, James
economic impact of, 28–31
and electric motors, 22, 31
and electricity generation, 102
explained, 21–22
and Industrial Revolution, 21–22, 24, 
27–31, 123
spillover effects, 29–30
and technological change, 22, 30–31
steam turbine, 21–22, 102, 110, 228, 291
Steward, Dan, 330
Stigler, George, 300–301
Stoddart, J. Fraser, 371
Submarine Thermal Reactor (STR) Mark 
I, 234
Submarine Thermal Reactor (STR) Mark 
II, 234
subsidies, 232–33, 236, 347, 356, 359, 364, 
372
sulfur dioxide (SO2), 199, 257, 259–61, 263, 
292
Super Power study, 129–33
Superstorm Sandy, 361–62
supply and demand, 270, 277–78, 300–301
Swanson, John, 116
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
459
Swing, Philip D., 154, 165
Szilárd, Léo, 218
Talmud, Max, 205
Tatum, John, 34
tax credits, 364
Taylor, Frederick, 175
technology
choice of, factors influencing, 372–73
and cross-pollination of ideas, 27, 40, 350
economic impact of new technologies, 353– 
54
fuel cells, 370–71
future technologies, investments in, 373– 
74
government, role of, 358
microgrid, 362–63
and new science, 371
official technologies, 238, 245–46, 359, 
363–64, 372–74
old technologies, improving, 370
personal power, 362
and politics, 15
solar-chemical power, 374
Traveling Wave Reactor, 374
types of, 369–71
telegraph
commercialization of, 59, 62, 64, 68–69, 
78
and communication technology, 56, 64– 
66, 68, 79
described, 55
Edison’s inventions related to, 73–75
first message, 60–61
funding for, 59–61
and government regulation, 65, 67
government role in developing, 59–61, 67
impact of, 56, 65–69, 353
legacy of, 68–69
monopoly, 68–69
patent litigation, 57, 62–63
patents, 56–57, 59–62, 69
and presidential election reporting, 61
privacy issues, 65, 67
and public-private partnerships, 60, 63– 
64, 67, 69
and railroads, 67
repeaters, 73–74
sounders, 73–74
transatlantic cable, 62–64
uses of, 64–65
as Victorian internet, 56, 64–65
Tennessee Electric Power Company, 177
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
authority and powers of, 171
board of directors, 171, 174–78, 183–84
and Cold War, 182
criticism of, 182–83
dams, 171, 177–78, 180
Electric Home and Farm Authority, 175
environmental issues, 185
funding, 171–72
geographic area covered, 178
goals of, 171, 182
government ownership, 170, 174, 182, 
184–85
Grand Coulee Dam compared, 178–79
and Great Depression, 128, 149, 170, 174, 
180, 184, 355
growth of, 169, 178–79
Hoover Dam compared, 178–79, 181, 
184–85
impact of on people in Tennessee Valley, 
178, 180–82
legacy of, 184–85
and Lilienthal. See Lilienthal, David
litigation against, 177, 184
moral purpose, 181
and New Deal, 169
and nuclear power, 169, 182, 185
origins of, 170–71
and private electric utilities, 174–78, 
184–85
and rate setting, 174–76
steam unit at Watts Bar, Tennessee, 179–80
TVA Act of 1933, 169, 171–72
workers and working conditions, 180–81
and World War I, 170
and World War II, 169–70, 179–80
TerraPower, 374
Tesla, Nikola
alternating current (AC) system, inven-
tion of, 90–92, 349
arc lighting system, 90
awards, 101–2
childhood, 89
Colorado Springs experiments, 100–101
death, 102
and Edison, 89–90, 350
education, 89
electric AC motor, 90–92
electricity business, role in development 
of, 99, 103–4
financial difficulties, 99, 101–2

460	
I N D E X
Tesla, Nikola (continued)
legacy, 103–4
patents, 92, 97, 99–100
recognition, 88–89
transformers, 91–92
and Westinghouse, 88, 92, 99, 103–4, 350
wireless experiments, 100–101
wireless radio system, 99–100
Tesla Electric Light & Manufacturing 
Company, 90
Tesla Motors, 345–49, 351–52, 354–56, 
358, 360, 366
Thayer, Ella Cheever, 65
Thiel, Peter, 347
Thompson, Robert Luther, 68
Thomson, J. J., 216
Thomson, William, 44, 63–64
Thomson-Houston companies, 85, 96, 98
Thornburgh, Richard, 240
Three Mile Island, 226, 238–42, 244–46
Tierney, J. Gregory, 167
Tierney, Patrick, 167
Tikas, Louis, 192–93
Tillerson, Rex, 374
Toynbee, Arnold, 26
Trajtenberg, Manuel, 29
Traveling Wave Reactor, 374
A Treatise of Human Nature (Hume), 206
A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism 
(Maxwell), 45–46
Trefil, James, 79
Trump, Donald, 374
Tucker, Tom, 14
Tugwell, Rexford Guy, 182
TVA: Democracy on the March (Lilienthal), 178, 
182
Twombly, Hamilton, 78
Tyndall, John, 311
Tytler, James, 33–34
Union Switch and Signal, 95, 103
United Autoworkers, 196
United Corporation Group, 139
United Mine Workers of America (UMW), 
193–98, 201–2
United States Telegraph Company, 68
University of Chicago
studies and assessment of regulation, 
299–301, 305–6, 366
study on small modular reactors (SMRs), 
370
Upton, Francis, 80
uranium, 204, 217–18, 227–28
urbanization, 30
Utah Construction, 158
Vail, Alfred, 59, 61–62
van Musschenbroek, Pieter, 10
Vanderbilt, Cornelius, 72, 89–90, 98
Vanderbilt family, 78, 85
Vernadsky, Vladimir, 312
Victorian internet, 56, 64–65
The Victorian Internet (Standage), 64
Villard, Henry, 82, 84
Volta, Alessandro, 35, 79
voltaic battery, invention of, 35
volts, 79–80
Wallace, William, 77
Walsh, Frank, 172
Wardenclyffe, 101
Warren Brothers, 158
Washington, George, 20
Watt, James
childhood, 22–23
financial backing, 25–26
and Industrial Revolution, 21–22, 24, 
27–31
as instrument maker, 23
legacy of, 30–31
and Newcomen steam engine, 23–25
partners, 25–27
patents, 25–27, 30–31
steam engine, impact of on industry, 27– 
31
steam engine, perfection of, 23–27, 31
theory of latent heat, 24
watt as unit of measurement for electric 
power, 30, 70, 79
Wattis, William, 158
watts, 30, 70, 79
Watts Bar, 179
Waxman, Henry, 320
Waxman-Markey bill, 310, 320–21, 356, 
374–75
Weart, Spencer, 314
Wedderburn, Alexander, 17
Weizmann, Chaim, 209
Wengert, Norman, 182–83
Western Union, 65, 68–69, 75, 78
Westinghouse, George, Jr.
air brake, invention of, 88, 93–95
alternating-current (AC) system, 87–88, 
96–99, 103–4, 345, 361–63
www.ebook3000.com

	
I N D E X 	
461
Battle of the Currents, 85, 87–88, 96–99, 
104, 361–63, 372
Chicago World’s Fair, lighting at, 88, 
97–99
culture of invention, 350
economies of scale, 88, 104
electricity business, role in development 
of, 88, 95–99, 103–4
end use for electricity, focus on, 349
financial difficulties, 95, 102–3
funding for electricity business, 95, 99, 
102, 355
Garrison Alley research lab, 95, 350
inventions, 88, 93–95
legacy, 103–4
patents, 92, 94–95, 97
recognition, 88–89
research laboratory, 95
rotary engine, invention of, 92
steam turbine, use of, 102
and Tesla, 88, 103–4, 350. See also Tesla, 
Nikola
wealth, 94
Westinghouse, George, Sr., 92
Westinghouse Air Brake Company, 94–95, 
103
Westinghouse Electric Company
bankruptcy and reorganization, 102–3
Chicago World’s Fair, lighting at, 88, 
97–99
formation of, 95
Niagara Falls power project, 88, 98–99
stock payment to Tesla, 92
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 232– 
36, 292
Whitehouse, Edward Orange Wildman, 63
Wiesner, Jerome, 253
Wilbur, Ray Lyman, 157
Wilkinson, John “Iron-Mad,” 26–27
Will, George F., 323
Williams, L. Pearce, 33, 36, 39, 41–42
Willkie, Wendell, 176–77, 184, 196
Wilson, Pete, 265, 278–79
wind power
and Clean Power Plan, 325
and combined-cycle power plants, 341
cost comparisons for generating electric-
ity, 333
high-altitude wind, 374
as official technology, 359, 363, 372
and Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act 
of 1978 (PURPA), 290
and shale gas, effect of abundance and 
low price, 339
subsidies for, 359, 372
and turbines, 370
Wired Love (Thayer), 65
Wiring a Continent (Thompson), 68
Wollaston, William, 36–37
World Nuclear Association, 239
World War I, 100, 113, 129–30, 143, 170, 
189–90
World War II
and coal industry, 190, 197–98, 202
and federal regulation, 148
Manhattan Project, 219
and nuclear power, 225–26, 229–30
and nuclear weapons, 225–26, 229
and power requirements, 147
Wozencraft, Oliver M., 152
Wright, Arthur, 109
Yergin, Daniel, 330–31
Yucca Mountain, 243

462
A B O U T  T H E  A U T H O R
Craig R. Roach is a nationally recognized expert 
on electricity. Over the course of his forty-year 
career, he has testifi ed as an expert in regula-
tory proceedings and courts of law across North 
America. He has served in cases involving one 
of the biggest bankruptcies ever, a fi rst-of-a-kind 
clean coal investment, a federal preemption case 
that ultimately was resolved by the U.S. Supreme 
Court, and the design and implementation of electricity auctions worth 
billions of dollars.
Craig has won a reputation for an objective, unbiased eye for the evi-
dence, and for clear and crisp writing. He brings to his work both top 
academic credentials and hard-won practical knowledge. He earned 
his undergraduate degree from John Carroll University and his PhD in 
economics from the University of Wisconsin. He founded Boston Pacifi c 
Company, Inc., a consultancy specialized in the electricity and natural gas 
businesses. He now is a senior energy advisor at Bates White Economic 
Consulting. He lives in Alexandria, Virginia. 
www.ebook3000.com

