 
The Down Home Zombie Blues
Linnea Sinclair

With heartfelt thanks  for their suggestions  and  input:  authors  Robin  D.  Owens,  Susan  Grant,  Stacey
Klemstein,  and  Anne  Aguirre,  and  my  reader/crit  partners  Nancy  Gramm,  Donna  Kuhn,  Michelle
Williamson, and Lynne “Liberry Lady” Welch.
As always,  to  Daq  and  Doozy,  fur  all your help.  And to  Jaime  Bernadino  Warren—one  of  the  first
people to “meet” Theo Petrakos—and her dad, Rob Bernadino,  who after  all these  years  still find me
amusing.
 

Acknowledgments
This author gratefully acknowledges the assistance of:
Sergeant Steve Huskisson of the Plantation (FL) Police Department; Detective Sergeant Scott Peterson
of the Collier County (FL) Sheriff’s Office; Joel Reyes, former Hialeah (FL) Police Officer; and Deputy
Sheriff  Bob  Cooley  (VA),  Valor55,  GoDirectly2Jail,  and  other  law-enforcement  personnel  on  the
Officer.com and RealPolice.net forums…who answered an author’s constant questions with such detail,
patience,  and  good  humor.  Their  assistance  has  been  invaluable.  Any  sense  of  law-enforcement
authenticity in this book is fully their doing, and for that I’m grateful beyond words. Any errors in police
procedure you may find are  no reflection of their expertise  but rather  of the author’s  stubbornness  to
have the characters and the plot go her way. God bless you all, and keep you and yours safe out there.
May guardian angels always watch your six.
 

Author's Note
Greek  phrases  used  in the manuscript  have  been  transliterated  for  readers  of  English.  Efcharisto  to
author Tori “Sofie Metropolis” Carrington for the corrections and additions!
Author's Playlist
Juno Reactor: Komit, Conga Fury, Swamp Thing, Kaguya Hime, Children of the Night
Theo Petrakos's playlist
Traveling  Ed  Teja:  Blue  Light,  Blue  Dime,  The  Down  Home  Zombie  Blues,  The  Down  Home
Divorced Guy Blues, Jorie’s Sigh—www.geocities.com/edteja
 

Every time you hear on the news about people running away  from  a  crazed  gunman,  remember
that someone’s son or daughter in a police uniform is running toward that crazed gunman.
—From What Cops Would Like You to Know, author unknown, posted on various law-enforcement sites on the Internet
 
 

1
Another dark, humid, stinking alley. Another nil-tech planet. What a surprise.
Commander Jorie Mikkalah cataloged  her surroundings as  she  absently  rubbed  her bare  arm.  Needle
pricks danced across her skin. Only her vision was unaffected by the dispersing and reassembling of her
molecules courtesy  of  the  Personnel  Matter  Transporter—her  means  of  arrival  in  the  alley  moments
before.
The ocular over her right eye eradicated the alley’s murky gloom, enhancing the moonlight so she could
clearly see the shards of broken glass and  small rusted  metal cylinders strewn  across  the hard  surface
under her and her team’s boots.
Another  dark,  humid,  stinking,  filthy alley.  Jorie  amended  her  initial  appraisal  of  her  location  as  a
breeze filtered past, sending one of the metal cylinders tumbling, clanking hollowly.
She checked her scanner even though no alarm had sounded. But it would take a few more seconds yet
for her body to adjust to the aftereffects of the PMaT and for her equilibrium to  segue  from the lighter
gravity of an intergalactic battle cruiser to the heavier gravity of a Class-F5 world. It wouldn’t do to fall
flat on her face trying to defend her team if a zombie appeared.
She swiveled toward them. “You two all right?”
Tamlynne Herryck’s sharp features relaxed under her short cap of dark-red curls. “Fine, sir.”
Low mechanical rumblings echoed behind Jorie. She shot a quick glance over her shoulder, saw nothing
threatening at the alleyway opening. Only the expected metallic land vehicles, lighted front and aft, moving
slowly past.
Herryck was scrubbing at her face when Jorie turned back. The ever-efficient lieutenant had been under
Jorie’s command for four years; she knew how to work through the PMaT experience.
Ensign Jacare Trenat, however, was as green as liaso hedges and looked more than a bit dazed from the
transit.
“Optimum,” replied Trenat when Jorie turned to him, straightening his shoulders, trying hard not to twitch.
Or fall over.
Jorie bit back  an amused  snort  of disbelief and  caught Herryck’s  eye.  A corner  of  Herryck’s  mouth
quirked up in response. They both knew this was Trenat’s third dirtside mission, perhaps his sixth PMaT
experience.
After eight years with the Guardian Force, Jorie had lost track of how much time she’d logged through
the PMaT,  having her molecules haphazardly  spewed  through some  planet’s  atmosphere.  She’d  seen
stronger  officers than the broad-shouldered  ensign leave their lunch on the ground after  a  transit.  The
itching and disorientation would drive him crazy for a few more trips.
At least it was a standard transit and not an emergency one. Even she was known to land on her rump

after one of those.
“Are we where we’re supposed to be, Lieutenant?” she asked as Herryck flipped open her scanner. The
screen blinked to life with a greenish-yellow glow.
“Confirming location now, sir.”
Jorie glanced  again at  the scanner  she’d  kept  in her left hand through the entire transport,  power  on,
shielding  at  full.  If  it  beeped,  her  laser  would  be  in  her  right  hand,  set  for  hard-terminate.  Recent
intelligence reported the chilling fact  that some  zombies had  acquired  the ability to  sense  a  Guardian’s
tech, even through shields.
That’s why she and her team were in this stinking filthy alleyway, on this backward,  nil-tech planet  the
natives had aptly named after dirt.
They were hunting zombies.
Because zombies were on the hunt again.
“Confirmed, Commander.” Herryck squinted at the screen with her unshielded eye. “Bahia Vista, Florida
state. Nation of American States United.”
A subtropical area, according to the Guardian agent on active hunt status here for three planetary months.
An agent whose reports had ceased without explanation two days ago. Jorie knew from experience what
that  could  portend.  She’d  seen  it  before  with  agents  and  trackers  who  thought  they  could  solve  a
rogue-herd situation alone. One tracker against one zombie had a chance.  An agent with basic  tracker
training might live long enough to  escape.  But if there  was  more  than one  zombie or  if the agent was
caught unawares…It was the latter she feared.
She’d  known  Danjay Wain for more  than a  dozen  years—he  was  one  of her older  brother’s  closest
friends and had flown as her gunner on her last few missions with the Interplanetary Marines during the
Tresh Border Wars. For the past three years on the Sakanah, he’d worked as Jorie’s active hunt agent
a half-dozen  times. In spite  of his teasing,  prankster  ways—he  and  her brother,  Galin, were  so  much
alike—he  was  a  conscientious  man  with  a  quick  mind  and  an  insatiable  curiosity  about  tracker
procedures.
She dreaded  now that,  during their many sessions  over  a  wedge  of  cheese  and  a  brew  in  the  crew
lounge, she’d either taught him too much about her job—or not enough.
“Think he’s alive, sir?” Herryck’s quiet question  echoed  her thoughts. No  surprise,  that.  Danjay Wain
was Herryck’s teammate, her friend as well. The jovial agent’s sudden silence bothered Herryck as much
as it bothered Jorie.
She huffed out a short breath. Even as a marine, Danjay could  be  impetuous. But she’d  never  thought
him stupid. “I hope so. Any response from his transcomm?”
Herryck squinted at her screen, tapped the query code again, then shook her head. “Still no answer.”
Damn. She so wanted the problem to be one of distance, of the ship in orbit, atmospheric interference.
Anything but what her gut told her might be true: Danjay’s impulsive hotshot streak might have finally won
out over his common sense. “How far are we from his last signal?”
“Twelve point two marks, sir.”

Twelve marks? Jorie directed a scowl upward, even though there was no way the PMaT chief on board
the Sakanah could see her. All right. I can deal with another stinking alley, she railed silently at the
chief. I know we can’t materialize anywhere we want without setting the native nil-techs on edge.
But,  damn  your  hide,  Ronna,  twelve  marks?  On  foot?  Let’s  forget  the  fact  that  this  is  a
time-critical  mission.  Let’s  forget  the  fact  that  we  have  an  agent  missing.  Do  I  look  like  I’m
dressed for sightseeing?
She was in standard hot-weather tracker gear: sleeveless shirt, shorts, knee-high duraboots, socks, and a
right-arm  technosleeve  so  she  could  multitask  her  units  if  she  had  to.  Two  G-1  laser  pistols  were
shoulder-holstered left and  right. A Hazer  micro-rifle slanted  across  her back.  In the side  of her right
boot rested a sonic-blade. Not to mention her utility belt with her MOD-tech—her Mech-Organic Data
scanner—and transcomm. Her headset with its adjustable ocular and mouth mike striped her hair like a
dark band. She’d need that to target the zombies once a warning sounded.
Hot-weather gear notwithstanding, she was definitely not dressed for a leisurely twelve-mark sightseeing
stroll.
“Sir?”
“We have to acquire transportation.” She took a  few steps  toward  the alley’s entrance,  then stopped.
Ronna  needed  to  recalibrate  her  tiny  seeker  ’droids  to  provide  landing  coordinates  better  suited  to
humanoids.
As for Trenat…“Relax,  Ensign.” In the light of the almost full moon overhead,  she  could  see  the  stiff
tension in the young man’s shoulders under his tracker shirt. He hadn’t taken his hand off his G-1 since
they arrived. “There’s not a zombie within fifty marks of this place.”
Yet. But there would be. There were close to three hundred on the planet, per  Danjay’s  last report.  It
was the largest herd the Guardians had found to date. The zombies’ controller, their C-Prime, had to be
straining its capabilities to direct all the drones.
That also meant the zombies’ sensenet was large. They’d probably already detected the energy from her
team’s PMaT and were alerted to an off-world transport. But PMaT trails faded quickly. As long as her
team’s MOD-tech stayed shielded, they should be safe.
“Transportation.” Herryck thumbed down Danjay’s data on her scanner screen. “Land vehicles powered
by combustion engines. Fossil petroleum fueled. Local term is car.”
Jorie had read the reports. No personal air transits—at least, not for internal city use. Damned nil-techs.
A four-seater gravripper would be very convenient right now. She resumed her trek  toward  the alley’s
entrance, waving her team to follow. “Let’s go find one of those cars.”
“City population  is less than three  hundred  thousand  humans,” Herryck  dutifully read  as  she  came  up
behind Jorie. “The surrounding region contains approximately one million.”
In her eight years as a Guardian, Jorie had worked cities larger and smaller. Six months ago, Kohrkin—a
medium-size  city  on  Delos-5—held  seven  hundred  thousand  humanoids.  A  herd  of  eighty  zombies
reduced the population to three hundred fifty thousand by the time the damned council heads alerted the
Sakanah.  Jorie,  Herryck,  and  two  other  commanders  went dirtside  with a  full battle  squadron.  Their
mission was successful. But the lives of those she couldn’t save still haunted her.
She thought she’d  seen  death  as  a  pilot with the Kedrian  Interplanetary  Marines  fighting in the  Tresh
Border Wars, ten years past. That was civilized warfare compared to what the Guardians faced with the

zombies.
Unless you were a pilot taken prisoner by the Tresh. Jorie’s fingers automatically rose to the long, bumpy
scar just below her collarbone as Herryck continued to  recite  the facts  Danjay had  provided.  And,  as
always, Jorie’s stomach clenched.  A memento—a  very special  one  she  couldn’t  afford  to  think about
now. She had other problems. Serious ones, if something had happened to Danjay.
The stickiness of the air and  the sharp  stench  of rotting garbage  faded.  Jorie  paused  cautiously at  the
darkened  alley entrance,  assessing  the landscape.  The  street  was  dotted  with  silent  land  vehicles,  all
pointing in the same  direction,  lights extinguished. Black  shadows  of thin trees  jutted  now and  then in
between.  The uneven rows  of low buildings were  two-story,  five-story,  a  few taller. Two  much taller
ones—twenty stories or more—glowed with a few uneven rectangles of light far down to her right.
Judging from the brief flashes of light between the buildings and tinny echoes of sound, most of the city’s
activity appeared to be a street or so in front of her. At least Ronna’s  seeker  ’droid  had  analyzed that
correctly. Materializing in the midst of a crowd of nil-techs while dressed in full tracker gear had proven
to be patently counterproductive.
A bell clanged hollowly to her left. Trenat, beside her, stiffened. She didn’t but tilted her head toward the
sound,  curious.  As  the third  gong  pealed,  she  guessed  it  wasn’t  a  warning  system  and  remembered
reading about a nil-tech method of announcing the time.
She didn’t know  local time, didn’t care.  Unlike the Tresh,  humanoids here  had  no naturally enhanced
night sight. It was only important that it was dark and would continue to be dark for a while yet. She and
her team needed that, dressed as they were, if they were going to find out what had happened to Agent
Danjay Wain.
The bell pealed eight more times, then fell silent. A fresh breeze drifted over her skin. She caught a salty
tang in the air.
“…is situated  on a  peninsula that is bordered  on one  side  by  a  large  body  of  water  known  as  Bay
Tampa.” Herryck was still reading. “On the other…”
Gulf of Mexico, Jorie knew, tuning her out. Data was Herryck’s passion.
Zombie hunting was Jorie’s.
But first she had to appropriate a car and locate Danjay Wain.
 
“Trust me, this is truly weird.” Ezequiel Martinez’s voice held an unusual note of amazement.
Homicide Detective  Sergeant  Theo  Petrakos  followed his former patrol  partner  through the cluster  of
crime-scene technicians poking, prodding, and prowling around the living room of the small bungalow a
few blocks from Crescent  Lake  Park  and  downtown  Bahia Vista.  The whir-click  of a  digital camera
sounded on his left. He recognized Liza Walters, her blond head framing the familiar piece of equipment.
Zeke stopped and pointed to a nearly shredded green plaid couch. “There.”
Theo stepped around overall-clad Sam Kasparov, who was diligently dusting a broken lamp for prints,
then came to a halt in front of a body next to the couch.

“Well?” Zeke looked at him expectantly. “Weird, right?”
Theo shoved  his hands  into the pockets  of his slacks  and  nodded  mutely in  answer.  He  wasn’t  sure
weird was sufficiently descriptive of the dead, withered body of the man sprawled faceup on the floor.
His skin looked  like  crisp  parchment  that  had  been  shrink-wrapped  over  his  bones.  His  T-shirt  lay
loosely on his frame; his sweatpants seemed overlarge. His red hair, though, was thick, full, and healthy.
Not sparse, like the mummy the dead man resembled.
Worse, his eyeballs were still moist. They bulged from his face like two large, wet, dimpleless golf balls.
Theo had never heard of a mummy with wet eyeballs. But then, this man was no mummy. Mummification
of  a  body  took  at  least  a  couple  of  months  under  normal  circumstances  in  Florida’s  warmer
temperatures.  Yet  the  landlord  had  last  seen  the  deceased—one  Dan  J.  Wayne,  according  to  the
documents Detectives Zeke Martinez and Amy Holloway had found in a kitchen drawer—alive and well
two days ago.
Theo had heard of spontaneous combustion. But spontaneous mummification?
He made a mental note to make sure Zeke checked the Centers for Disease Control database. Judging
from comments by the crime-scene techs, they were puzzled too.
They couldn’t even definitely say that this was a murder.
All they did know  was  what the landlord—an  affable,  ruddy-faced  French-Canadian  who  lived  next
door—had told Zeke and Amy: he was walking his rat terrier after the six o’clock news when he noticed
the broken front window on his rental property. He peered in. Then, voice shaking, Monsieur Lafleur had
called the police on his cell phone. The first officers to arrive on the scene found clear signs of a struggle
in the overturned, broken furniture and torn draperies.
But the struggle didn’t seem to leave any corresponding injuries to the dead man on the floor. And there
was no evidence of who—or what—he struggled with. If anything.
For all Theo could tell, the dead man had run around like a whirling dervish, demolishing his own living
room before falling to the floor in a mummified state.
That would fit with the pattern of shattered glass from the window. The window hadn’t been broken by
someone  coming  in  but  by  something—which  included  a  portion  of  a  wooden  end  table,  from  all
appearances—going out.
Theo hunkered down on his heels next to the body and snagged a pair of protective gloves from a nearby
evidence kit. Carefully, he plucked at the neck of the man’s T-shirt, then the sleeves.
“Maybe you shouldn’t get too close to Mr. Crunchy.” Zeke leaned back as if Theo’s touching the corpse
might cause  it to  burst,  sending lethal  chunks  splattering  against  the  guayabera  shirt  that  was  Zeke’s
trademark outfit. Tonight’s selection was navy blue with a wide white strip up the front. “Might be some
kind of virus. Contagious. A new SARS strain or something.”
In the fifteen years that he and Zeke had worked for the Bahia Vista Police Department, Theo had seen
the wiry man fearlessly dodge any number of flying fists, speeding cars,  and  even,  a  few times, bullets.
Diseases, however, were another issue entirely. Zeke was probably the sole reason local vitamin stores
made any profits. How he stayed married to a doctor was a source of continual speculation.
Theo continued his examination. “SARS is respiratory, not dermatological.”

“So what do we got?” Zeke asked. “Some Satanic cult that thinks the Christmas holidays are Halloween,
killing people by draining their blood?”
Zeke might think of Halloween, but Theo’s upbringing resurrected  another  image: the Kalikantzri,  evil
goblins who appeared  during the twelve days  before  Christmas,  according  to  Greek  legends.  But this
was Bahia Vista, not Athens. Theo frowned, then looked up. “Not sure. Hey, Liza, you see this?”
The stocky blond crime-scene photographer squatted down next to him with a grunt. “You mean those
marks on the side of his head?” she asked. “Yeah. Got those when Amy rolled him.”
“They line up. Almost like a large pronged vise grabbed him.”
“Like this?” She  pulled off her hair clip and  clicked  it  in  his  face.  It  was  a  plastic  half-moon  curve,
spring-loaded with rows of teeth.
He took it, turning it over in his hand. “Like this, but big enough to cover his head.”
“Saw that happen on a construction site once.” She retrieved the clip, twisted her long hair into a bun at
the back of her head, and clamped the clip over it. “Guy’s skull was crushed. Lots of blood, gray matter.
Don’t have that here.”
No, they didn’t. Not even a puncture. Just some barely discernible bruises.
“How are your holidays so far, Theo?” Liza was still squatting next to him.
“Fine,” he lied. “Yours?”
“Kids are up to their eyes in toys they don’t need, as usual. And they can’t even get to the ones under the
tree until Christmas.” She nudged him with her elbow  and  grinned. “My husband’s  cousin Bonnie is in
town. She’s a couple years younger than you, thirty-four or thirty-five, single. Real cute. Like you.” She
winked. “You’re clocking out for vacation, right?”
He nodded reluctantly. He’d wondered why she asked about his schedule  when he ran into her at  the
courthouse yesterday. Now he had a feeling he knew.
“Why don’t you come by the house tomorrow night, say hi to Mark and the kids, meet Bonnie?”
He rose. She stood with him. Liza Walters was, as his aunt Tootie liked to say, good people. But ever
since he’d divorced Camille last year, Liza had joined the ranks of friends and coworkers trying to make
sure Theo Petrakos didn’t spend his nights alone.
“Thanks. I mean that. But I’ve got some things to do.”
“How about  next week,  then? I’m sure  you’ll like her.  You could  come  with  us  to  the  New  Year’s
concert and fireworks at Pass Pointe Beach.” She raised her chin toward Zeke. “You too, Zeke. Unless
Suzanne has other plans?”
“New  Year’s  Eve is always at  her  sister’s  house.”  Zeke  splayed  his  hands  outward  in  a  gesture  of
helplessness. “Suzy doesn’t give me a choice.”
Liza briefly laid her hand on Theo’s arm. “Think about it. You need to have some fun. Forget about the
bitch.”
He smiled grimly. Forgetting about the bitch wasn’t the problem. Trusting another  woman was.  “I’ll let
you know, but I’m probably scheduled on call out.”

“That Bonnie sounds real nice,” Zeke intoned innocently as Liza went back to photographing a splintered
bookcase. “Thirty-five’s not too young for you. I mean, you’re not even fifty.”
Theo shot a narrow-eyed glance at the shorter man. “Forty-three. And don’t you start on me too.”
Zeke grinned affably. “So what are your plans for tomorrow night, old man?”
“I’m restringing my guitar.”
“Alone?”
Theo only glared at him.
Zeke shook his head. “Still singing The Down Home Divorced Guy Blues? Man, you gotta change your
tune.”
“I like my life just the way it is.”
“When’s the last time you got laid?”
“If you focus that fine investigative mind of yours on our dead friend’s problems, not mine, we just might
get out of here by midnight.”
“That long ago, eh?”
“I’m going to go see what I can find in the bedroom,” he said, ignoring Zeke’s leering grin at his choice of
destination. “You take the kitchen.”
Zeke’s good-natured snort of laughter sounded behind him as he left.
 
“Nice  work,  Trenat.”  Jorie  laid  both  hands  on  the  vehicle’s  guidance  wheel  and,  looking  over  her
shoulder,  offered  the  young  ensign  an  appreciative  smile.  He  had  done  very  nice  work  locating  a
well-concealed storage area of land vehicles and using a combination of mechanical and technical skills to
override a series of locks and security devices. All in under ten minutes. Hopefully, determining Danjay’s
status and returning him and his critical T-MOD unit to the ship would go as smoothly.
Trenat all but beamed at her from the rear seat, most of his earlier unease gone. “This power pack,” he
said, holding out a thin box slightly smaller than her hand, “will create an ignition sequence  and  activate
the engine.”
She followed his instructions as to placement and tabbed  on the power.  The vehicle vibrated  to  life, a
grumbling noise sounding from its front. “No aft propulsion?”
“No, sir.”
No antigravs either. Well, damn. But when in Vekris, one must do as the Vekrisians do. She draped the
headset around her neck and studied the control  panel with its round  numbered  gauges.  Other  gauges
had symbols like those  she’d  seen  on  signs  as  they  walked  the  short  distance  to  A-1  Rental  Cars.
Danjay’s reports noted that the local language was similar to Vekran, which Jorie spoke along with three
other  galactic  tongues.  The  two  languages  shared  a  similar—though  not  identical—alphabet,  which
explained why many of the signs she saw didn’t made sense.

As to  why the local language was  similar to  Vekran,  she  had  no  idea.  That  was  out  of  her  area  of
expertise, and Danjay’s. His report had noted it and had been forwarded to the scholars in the Galactic
Comparative-Cultures Division of the Guardian Force.
Jorie was just happy the locals didn’t speak Tresh.
Tam  Herryck,  rummaging  through  the  vehicle’s  small  storage  compartment  on  the  control  panel,
produced  a  short  paper-bound  book.  “Aw-nortz  Min-o-al,”  she  read  in  the  narrow  beam  of  her
wristbeam on her technosleeve.
Jorie leaned toward her. Tam Herryck’s  Vekran  was,  at  best,  rudimentary. “Ow-ner’s  Min-u-al,”  she
corrected. She took the book, tapped on her wristbeam, and scanned the first few pages.  It  would be
too  much  to  ask,  she  supposed,  that  the  entire  universe  be  civilized  enough—and  considerate
enough—to speak Alarsh. “Operating instructions for the vehicle’s pilot.” As the engine chugged quietly,
she found a page depicting the gauges and read in silence for a few moments. “I think I have the basics.”
She tapped off her wristbeam, then caught Trenat’s smile in the rectangular mirror over her head. “Never
met a ship I couldn’t fly, Ensign. That’s what six years in the marines will teach you.”
The vehicle’s control stick was between  the two  front seats.  She  depressed  the small button,  eased  it
until it clicked once.
The vehicle lurched backward, crashing into one parked behind it.
“Damn!” She  shoved  the stick  again and  missed a  head-on  impact  with  another  parked  vehicle  only
because she grabbed the wheel and yanked it to the left.
Herryck bounced against the door. “Sir!”
“I have it, I have it. It’s okay.” Damn, damn. Give her a nice antigrav hopper any day.
Her feet played with the two pedals, the vehicle seesawing as it jerked toward the open gate.
“I think,” Herryck  said,  bracing herself with her right hand against the front control  panel,  “those  are
some kind of throttle and braking system. Sir.”
“Thank you, Lieutenant. I know that. I’m just trying to determine their sensitivity ranges.”
“Of course, sir.” Herryck’s head jerked back and forth, but whether she was nodding or reacting to the
vehicle’s movement, Jorie didn’t know. “Good idea.”
By the time they exited onto the street, Jorie felt she had the nil-tech land vehicle under control. “Which
direction?”
“We need to take a heading of 240.8, sir.” Herryck glanced from her scanner over at the gauges in front
of Jorie, none of which functioned as guidance or directional. “Oh.” She pulled her palm off the control
panel and pointed out the window. “That way.”
They went that way,  this way,  then that way again. Jorie  noticed  that  Trenat  had  found some  kind of
safety webbing and flattened himself against the cushions of the rear seat.
“What do you think those colored lights on their structures  mean?” Herryck  asked  as  Jorie  was  again
forced  to  swerve  to  avoid  an impact with another  vehicle,  whose  driver  was  obviously  not  adept  at
proper usage of airspace.

Jorie shrugged. “A religious custom. Wain mentioned that locals hang colored lights on their residences
and even on the foliage this time of the year. Nil-techs can be very supersti—hey!” A dark land vehicle
appeared  on her right, seemingly out of nowhere.  Jorie  pushed  her foot  down  on  the  throttle,  barely
escaping being rammed broadside.  There  was  a  loud screeching  noise,  then the discordant  blare  of a
horn. A pair of oncoming vehicles added their horns to the noise as she sped by them.
“Another religious custom,” she told Herryck, who sank down in her seat and planted her boots against
the front console. “Their vehicles play music as they pass. And they’re blessing us.”
“Blessing us?”
Jorie nodded  as  she  negotiated  her vehicle between  two  others  that  seemed  to  want  to  travel  at  an
unreasonably slow rate of speed. “They put one  hand out the window,  middle finger pointing upward.
Wain’s reports stated many natives worship  a  god  they believe lives in the sky.  So  I think that  raised
finger is a gesture of blessing.”
“How kind of them. We need to go that way again, sir.”
“I’m coming up to an intersection now. How much farther?”
“We should be within walking distance in a few minutes.”
“Praise be,” Trenat croaked from the rear seat.
Jorie snickered softly. “You’d never survive in the marines, Ensign.”
 
Zeke Martinez let out a low whistle as Theo led him and Liza into the bedroom. “Damn. Looks like some
kind of computer you’d find in a sci-fi flick. It was behind that dresser?”
“The dresser’s a fake.” Theo shoved the chest-high piece  of furniture farther  away  from the wall. Liza
moved in front of him, digital camera whirring. “Drawer fronts are glued on. Inside’s hollow.”
“Looks like Mr. Wayne didn’t want just anyone to find this,” Liza said, adjusting the camera’s telephoto,
zooming in on the object on the floor. The blinking unit resembled an overlarge black metallic mouse pad
with a thin lime-green monitor.
“Maybe it’s a new kind of laptop?” Zeke asked.
“Not sure,” Theo answered honestly. “The screen’s a strange color. And the keyboard”—if that’s what
that long dark area was—“doesn’t have keys.”
“Touch-pad system?” Liza ventured.
Theo shook his head. “Maybe.” He knelt in front of the greenish-yellow screen, pointed to the symbols
splattered across it. “That’s not ASCII and it’s not HTML. But it looks somewhat like both.”
Zeke  squinted.  “Hey,  it’s  all  Greek  to  me.”  He  smacked  Theo  playfully  on  his  shoulder.  “Get  it,
Petrakos? Greek?”
“It’s not Greek. You know damned well I can speak—”
“I know, I know. I just thought it was a good line.”

“Suzanne can’t possibly love you for your personality.”
Zeke arched one eyebrow. “Actually, I’ll tell you what my little Suzy loves about me.”
“Spare  me.”  Theo  shoved  himself  to  his  feet  as  Liza  headed  back  to  the  living  room  to  ask  Sam
Kasparov to dust the unit for prints. “I put a call in to the techno squad.  One  of their geeks  should be
here in about,”  he glanced  at  his watch,  “thirty  minutes  to  pick  this  up.  Maybe  there  are  e-mails  or
documents, an Internet trail. Something that will tell us what happened to Mr. Wayne out there.” Noises
behind him made him turn toward the living room. The body snatchers had arrived with gurney and body
bag.
“Come on.” He tapped Zeke on the arm. “Let’s go see what the ME has to say.”
 
Jorie hunkered down in the thick foliage bordering the structure, with Herryck on her left and Trenat on
her right. A cool breeze now and then ruffled the leaves, tickling the sweat dripping down her neck. The
ground under her boots  smelled musty. If the blossoms  poking through the branches  had  a  scent,  she
couldn’t detect it. They were tightly closed, drooping slightly in the darkness.
Two dark-colored land vehicles sat,  power  off, at  the edge  of the street.  Two  more  green-and-white
ones—POLICE in gold letters  on their flanks—were  on a  short  graveled  stretch  of yard,  a  larger boxy
vehicle parked at an angle behind them.
Humanoids, some wearing identical green pants and white shirts that  were  obviously a  uniform, moved
between the vehicles and the structure. But none of the humanoids appeared to be Danjay Wain.
“Any sign of Agent Wain?” Jorie asked Tam Herryck in a hushed tone.
“Scanning, sir. I’m picking up our tech, but there is some distortion. It’s even jamming our PMaT signal.
I’m trying to pinpoint the source.”
That was  not good  news.  Without access  to  the PMaT  they were  essentially stranded.  And this  was
supposed to be a nil-tech world, without the expertise to jam the frequencies the Guardians used.
“It’s very localized,” Herryck  said,  as  if reading Jorie’s  concerns  about  transporting  back  to  the ship.
“But I get a  clear  signal twenty-five maxmeters from here.  This can’t  be  the reason  why Agent Wain
ceased contact.”
No, it couldn’t. Danjay, like Jorie,  had  been  trained  to  work  around  dead  zones,  natural and  artificial
ones.
Jorie studied  the structure  again.  There  were  far  too  many  nils  coming  and  going.  That—along  with
Danjay’s silence—did not portend well. Perhaps he’d been seized, removed to a security compound by
nils ever-fearful of the unknown.
That would explain his silence. It  would also  require  her to  assemble  an  assault-and-infiltration  team,
further eating into the time and resources they had to deal with the zombie problem.
Captain Pietr would not be happy.
A shaft of light cut into the night as the front door of the structure opened. Personnel in unisuits appeared,
flanking something on a wheeled gurney. Jorie felt Herryck tense beside her. Trenat’s hand moved to the

G-1 on his hip.
Data  suddenly danced  across  Herryck’s  screen.  “Sir, I’ve  a  lock  on  a  biosignature.  But  it’s…damn.
Negative state, sir.”
She knew, but she had to ask. “It’s Wain, isn’t it?”
“Yes.” Herryck’s voice was still a whisper. “Signature discharge indicates death by zombie attack.”
Hell and  damn.  She’d  hoped—prayed—there  would be  some  other  explanation  for  his  silence.  She
liked Danjay. Just before his latest mission, she and Herryck had shared a pitcher of ale with him in the
crew lounge. Danjay always had such wild stories…. She watched his body as it was trundled  into the
boxy land vehicle, her heart sinking.
Herryck  let out a  short  sigh. “I can’t  believe this happened  to  him.” There  was  a  slight tremor  in her
voice, then she ducked her head in embarrassment. “Regrets, sir. I—”
“It’s okay, Tam.” Jorie gave Herryck’s shoulder a quick squeeze. After all Jorie had been through, death
of a teammate should be easier. Or at least less painful.
But it wasn’t, and she knew that Herryck—who hadn’t been a marine, who hadn’t seen what the Tresh
could do—was feeling worse. “He was my friend too.”
Trenat peered around Jorie at Herryck’s screen. “You still reading his T-MOD?”
“Only partially. And our  PMaT  is still out of range,”  Herryck  said,  and  Jorie  could  see  that,  see  the
spikes in the T-MOD’s pattern, see the null icon for the transporter. What in hell’s wrath was happening
here?
Recovery  of the T-MOD  was  critical. It  would have  recorded  the  attacking  zombie’s  movement,  its
stats.  And—if Danjay had  been  toying with the unit to  lure the zombie, as  she  suspected  he  was—it
would also provide important data about the herd.
“Commander Mikkalah.” Trenat shifted his weight slightly. Branches rustled. “I volunteer to infiltrate the
structure and—”
“Down!” Jorie yanked on Trenat’s sleeve as she threw herself onto the dirt, feeling Tam bump her leg as
she did the same. Footsteps suddenly moved toward them, beams of lights crisscrossing the ground.
Her hand crept  along her side,  her fingers curling around  the grip of her pistol.  She  peered  over  the
leaves and twigs at the approaching figures clad in the green-and-white uniforms, recognizing utility belts
on their waists and what most likely were armaments hanging from their sides. Her heart pounded. Every
muscle in her body was taut.
No escape. She couldn’t engage an emergency PMaT transport. The signal was dead.
And if those nils took one step closer, she and her team were too.
 

2
Theo followed the body snatchers to the front door, where he caught up with Zeke. His former partner
had  spent  the  past  ten  minutes  talking  to  Monsieur  Lafleur,  while  Theo  was  briefed  by  the  ME.
“Mummification, cause unknown until the autopsy,” Theo told Zeke, summarizing in six words the ME’s
five-minute lecture. “Was the landlord able to give you anything more?”
“Not a thing.” Zeke stepped inside. “Neighbors on the east are snowbirds. Don’t show up until January.
The house  behind is vacant.  Amy and  a  couple  uniforms  woke  up  every  neighbor  across  the  street.
Nothing.” Zeke turned his wrist. “Damn. It’s after midnight. I haven’t even started the paperwork—”
The trill of Theo’s cell phone cut off Zeke’s complaint. He flipped it open. “Petrakos.” The nasal voice of
a cyber-squad technician filled Theo’s ear as he walked back into the living room, Zeke trailing behind.
Some crazy driver on Fourth Street sideswiped the guy they’d sent to the scene. No, no injuries, but his
car had two flat tires and a possible bent axle. The only other technician available lived in Tampa and was
off duty.
“We’ll wait here  until one,”  Theo  offered.  “If you can’t  reach  her by then,  someone  can  pick  up  the
laptop from evidence tomorrow.”
“One?” Zeke asked as Theo closed the phone. “Oh, man. That’s forty minutes wasted. I have to start the
report on Ol’ Crunchy here.”
Liza stepped up behind Zeke. “Thought you guys were finished.”
“I am,” Zeke said. “Sergeant Kind and Generous isn’t.”
Theo motioned toward the bedroom. “We have to wait for the cyber-squad  tech  from Tampa.  Unless
you want—”
“To take  custody  of that thing?” Liza snorted  softly. “The good  state  of  Florida  wants  their  techs  to
unscramble hard drives and such. Not us little local CSIs.”
“So we wait until the good state of Florida decides to arrive,” Zeke put in. “It could be hours, if bridge
traffic’s backed up because of holiday parties and all.”
“Both of you don’t have to wait,” Liza said. “Where’s Amy? You rode in with her, didn’t you, Zeke?”
“She went back to run ID on the deceased. I told her I’d catch a ride with Theo.”
Liza looked up at Theo. “Want me to drop Zeke back at the station so he can start the paperwork?”
“Fine by me,” Theo said.
“Liza, mi amor. You’re a lifesaver.” Zeke grabbed her hand, brought it to his lips.
She tugged it back, laughing. “You really don’t want to kiss that. You don’t know where it’s been.  Or
rather, I think you do.”
He dropped her hand, his eyes wide in an expression of horror.
She wriggled her fingers in his face.  “C’mon,  big boy.  Let’s  get you back  safe  and  sound  before  the

bogeymen come out.”
The front door closed behind them. A moment later a patrol officer pushed it open. “Sergeant Petrakos?
Detective Martinez said you’re waiting for the cyber squad. Want me to  run over  to  the 7-Eleven,  get
you a cup before I leave?”
Theo appreciated the offer and said so. He fished in his pocket for two singles and handed them to the
officer. “Black, one sugar.”
The front door creaked closed again. A few seconds  after  that,  a  car  door  slammed, followed by the
grating noise of tires over gravel. Then silence descended upon the small bungalow. Theo went back into
the bedroom, peeled off his tan cotton blazer, and tossed it over the footboard of the neatly made bed.
He stared down at the greenish-yellow screen.
Coded symbols continued to dance across it. He hadn’t found a power source or wi-fi router. His initial
tapping on what he thought to be the keypad didn’t stop the flow of symbols, so it was more than likely
not a screen-saver program. But the computer was obviously doing something.
With a start he realized he had no idea how to turn it off. He really wished the tech from the cyber squad
would get here, because if his attempt to shut down the laptop resulted in data loss, it’d be his ass—as
squad sergeant—on the line, even though Zeke was primary on the case.
He glanced at his watch.  Twelve-forty.  Technically, he was  now on vacation—seven  days  of sleeping
late, playing his guitar, and,  if he got up the energy,  trimming  the  oleander  bushes  that  threatened  to
overtake his backyard.
Zeke and Amy knew where to find him if something broke  in this case.  At the moment, there  was  no
good news: no witnesses,  nothing taken—as  far as  the landlord  could  tell. No  motive for homicide, if
that’s what this was. The landlord said Wayne had been a quiet but likable guy. Right now, they had little
to go on. It could be days, even weeks, before the ME’s lab analysis, along with information from the
usual feelers Zeke and Amy put out, would come back.
He wandered back to the living room, straining his ears for the sound of the tech’s car. The clock on the
wall said quarter to one. He shoved his hands in the front pockets of his pants, rocking back on his heels.
He hated blank time like this, with nothing to  do  but listen to  his own thoughts. He  wished he had  his
guitar. It was an old 1962 Martin OM, beat up after almost fifty years of being carted around and played
by its previous  owners,  but he loved  it, loved  its sound.  Messing  around  with  some  of  Traveling  Ed
Teja’s blues tunes would keep him occupied so he didn’t start thinking about Camille again, didn’t start
thinking about what he’d thought was a wonderful relationship that was, in reality, a sham….
He shut his eyes. It all made sense now. Her encouraging him to work overtime. Her erratic schedule at
the  restaurant.  Their  constantly  depleted  checking  account.  And  her  moods:  wild  and  intense  one
moment, deep and despairing the next.
He was a cop. He of all people should’ve known his wife was a cokehead.
But  he  hadn’t.  He  hadn’t  even  caught  on  that  she  wasn’t  really  Camille  Starlton.  Out  of  jail  after
convictions on drug charges in Alabama, she stole another woman’s identity and  lived under  that  name
until she met him. Marrying him gave her a  new last name, a  new identity. The fact  that  she  was  also
marrying a cop was evidently her idea of a private joke.
Ripping his heart out had been one hell of a punch line.

Damn it, Petrakos, stop it!
He ran one hand over his face. He should never have agreed to wait, but he thought he’d have Zeke to
talk to. Zeke with his amateur comedy routines and  leering grin. A walking encyclopedia  of herbs  and
vitamins. Madly in love with his wife, who also was madly in love with him.
Lucky bastard.
The sound of a car engine caught his attention. He opened the front door, stepped out onto  the porch,
and watched the white headlights swing his way. The green-and-white patrol car  returning. The officer,
cell phone to his ear, nodded to him through the open window, then held out a capped paper container
as Theo approached.
Theo accepted the coffee with a smile, then retreated inside.
He should have brought his guitar.
At twelve fifty-five, his cell phone trilled again. No, they hadn’t  reached  the off-duty technician. It  was
Christmas week and she must be out of town.  But, yes,  someone  would pick  it up from the evidence
room late tomorrow afternoon—three o’clock, maybe. That was the earliest they’d have a tech available.
“Just for the record, I have no idea how to shut this thing down. There’s no keyboard, no mouse.”
“You sure it’s a computer?”
“Looks like a laptop, yeah. Has a screen.”
“Hold down the power button until it shuts off.”
“There isn’t one.” Not one he could find, anyway.
“There’s always a power button. If you don’t see it next to the keyboard—”
“There’s no keyboard.”
“—check the sides.”
Theo turned the unit around and upside down. “Nope.”
“It’s running on batteries. Look for a panel on the bottom.”
“The bottom  and  the sides  are  solid.  No  panels,  no buttons.  No  keyboard,”  Theo  repeated.  “Just  a
screen and a touch pad that does nothing. It’s like the screen saver is stuck. I can’t even get a cursor.”
He envisioned the tech  raising his gaze heavenward  in exasperation.  “Fine. Close  the top.  It’ll go into
hibernate mode. Don’t worry.”
Easy for you to say, Theo thought as he tabbed the phone off. He grabbed his jacket and pulled it on.
You’re not dealing with a dead man who looks like a thousand-year-old mummy and a computer
that looks like it’s from a couple hundred years in the future.
He pushed the screen down until it was flat with the unit, then gave it one more gentle shove. He waited a
few seconds. No grinding noises like when his hard drive was unhappy. No warning beeps. Nothing.
With a shrug, Theo tucked the laptop under his arm and, juggling his half-empty cup of coffee, locked the

apartment’s door with the one of the keys the landlord had provided and headed for his car.
 
The armed nils had walked right by them, lights casting left and  right, but Jorie  couldn’t  take  a  chance
bliss luck would surface twice. She moved her team deeper into the shrubbery.
So she didn’t know someone had appropriated a key piece of Guardian equipment until Tam Herryck
poked her and pointed to the data—still annoyingly erratic—on her scanner screen.
“Hell’s wrath, he’s taking the T-MOD!” Jorie’s voice was a harsh whisper. She pushed the leafy branch
shielding her face  down  another  minmeter or  two  as  a  tall male in a  tan jacket  and  dark  pants  loped
across  the  lawn.  Now  she  could  see  him  clearly  through  the  enhanced  view  of  her  ocular.  He  had
Danjay’s unit firmly tucked in the crook of his left arm.
“But not Agent Wain’s scanner or transcomm.” The glow from Herryck’s scanner reflected eerily on her
face. “I’m still getting readings from them inside the structure.”
Double hell’s wrath! She had to recover the unit—over and above the fact that it was Guardian tech on a
nil world,  it  was  the  only  clue  they  had  about  Danjay’s  death.  But  they  needed  the  scanner  and
transcomm as well in order to be able to synthesize all the information on the herd  and  its movements.
She didn’t think they had that many more hours of darkness left.
“Could  be  worse,”  Trenat  posited  in  a  hushed  tone.  “The  armed  security  personnel  could  have
appropriated  it. This nil’s not in uniform. I don’t  see  any obvious  armaments.  We  should  be  able  to
recover the unit without a problem.”
“Good  observation,  Trenat.”  Jorie  had  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  A  civilian.  Probably  a  delivery
person, low on the hierarchy, untrained in defense or combat.
Herryck shifted her scanner in Jorie’s direction. “Sir, the T-MOD’s definitely leaking.”
Which meant a zombie would track and kill that defenseless human too, in the same way one had killed
Danjay. Jorie studied the nil with her unshielded left eye as he stepped into the wide glow of a streetlight
almost directly in front of her team’s position. Male, human, with a medium skin tone and short dark hair.
Straight nose, clean jawline. She switched to oc-view on her left, zoomed in on his face. Not young like
Trenat, but not old. Younger than her brother, Galin, definitely, though his dark eyes were bracketed by
squint wrinkles, his mouth by smile lines. He looked to be within a couple of years of her own age.
Far too young to die. Especially in the jaws of a zombie.
She made a quick decision. “We need that unit. Herryck, I’m on the nil male. You and Trenat access the
structure, get the transcomm and scanner, and bring them back to the ship. I’ll transit up when I have the
unit.”
Herryck nodded. “Understood, sir.”
“Trenat?”
“Understood, Commander.”
“Remember, no direct contact with nils unless absolutely unavoidable.” She added the reminder more for
Trenat’s sake than Herryck’s. Tam knew the difference between a tracker—a hunter of zombies—and

an agent, whose sole assignment it was to infiltrate and utilize the local cultures so that the trackers could
come dirtside  and  do  their jobs  quickly and  efficiently. But this  was  Trenat’s  first  tour.  His  technical
talents notwithstanding, he had a tendency to gawk.
Two heads nodded at her. She turned, catching the man’s form out of the corner of her eye. “I’m moving
now.”
“Sir.” Herryck’s hushed voice stopped her as she straightened, twigs and branches poking into her neck
and back. “The land vehicle, sir. Have a care. They don’t appear to navigate very safely on this world.”
“Recommendation noted, Lieutenant. You both have a care too. See you back on board.”
 
Theo plopped the laptop on the Crown Vic’s threadbare front seat, turned the key  in the ignition, then
reached  for his container  of coffee  on the dash.  The sedan’s  back  tire clipped  the curb  as  he  pulled
away, jostling his hand, and he spilled lukewarm coffee down the front of his shirt and on his right pants
leg.
Oh, hell. He gripped the wheel as he pulled up to the stop sign, aware of the damp sensation on his skin
and the sickly sweet smell of stale coffee. He wasn’t that far from his house. He could kill two birds with
one stone if he took five, ten minutes to stop there, change his clothes, and pick up the portable  sound
system that Lieutenant Stevens wanted to borrow. He could drop the laptop and the sound system off,
sleep late tomorrow.
Sounded good.
He tapped his blinker and turned left.
 
They definitely didn’t navigate very well on this world, but fortunately ground traffic was sparse as Jorie
followed the man in his vehicle. She’d worked enough surveillance to know how to keep  her quarry  in
her sights and yet stay out of his. Her scanner on the seat beside her—functioning properly now that she
was out of the dead zone around Danjay’s structure—tracked Danjay’s T-MOD and would alert her to
any sudden departures from his current heading.
At the eight-minute mark, he turned again. Two minutes after that, he slowed considerably. So did she,
dropping back under the cover of darkness, her vehicle’s running lights extinguished. This was a locale of
small structures, most likely personal residences, many adorned with small colored lights. His wasn’t, she
noted as she cruised past. The aft end of his land vehicle was just visible around the back corner of his
structure.
The narrow road curved around a small park intermittently bordered by a low wooden fence. She guided
her land vehicle onto a grassy area, disengaged the power pack, and tucked her scanner into place in her
utility belt. Her rifle was on the floor. She looped the strap  over  her head,  flipped her oc-set  in place,
and, hugging the shadows, trotted back toward his residence.
The night air tickled her bare arms and legs like a flirtatious lover, alternately warm then cool. The foliage
scraping her skin had a strong yet pleasant scent. It reminded her of Paroo, whose tropical islands were
renowned for huge blossoming trees and sweet sand beaches. She’d been there with Lorik. An error she
didn’t intend to repeat.

If Lorik had been the one in possession of the T-MOD, she might well have let the zombie get him first,
clamping its serrated jaws over Lorik’s fine-featured dark face, chewing on Lorik’s pale hair—which at
one time had reminded her of the color of starlight—as it sucked the life essence from Lorik’s  damned
brilliant mind. Then she’d retrieve the unit. The thought momentarily cheered  her.  Other  than Danjay’s
death,  things  had  been  going  well  on  this  mission  until  the  critical  Guardian  tracking  equipment  was
separated. Now they were losing precious time. The herd had to be moving, or else Danjay would still be
alive. That was his second  mistake,  after  not keeping  scrupulous  watch  on his shields. A herd  moved
because the craving set in. And the youngest, being on the outside of the hierarchy,  moved  first, taking
individual  kills,  creating  scent  trails,  drawing  the  mature  herd  drones  and  eventually  the  powerful
C-Prime—the controller of the herd—to them.
A good tracker could almost instinctually feel when the craving started to build. In her thirty-two  active
hunts, she’d never failed to spot the first signs of a craving.
Danjay may have failed, but his data would not. Jorie skirted along a  high hedge  in a  half crouch.  She
was at the residence and cover was slim. She  glanced  down  again at  the scanner  secured  to  her belt.
Shields at max. No intruders. And the T-MOD…
In the structure? No, still in the land vehicle, according to her scanner. Bliss luck! She wouldn’t have to
wait for the man to fall asleep and risk waking him as she appropriated the unit. She didn’t want to hurt a
defenseless nil. She wasn’t sure what stun setting on her G-1 would be effective with the least amount of
soft-tissue damage on this type of humanoid.
She squatted down, listening to the world’s odd night sounds—shrill chirps and resonant grumps—as she
organized the items in the small pods on her utility belt. A standard desensitizer for any security systems
the vehicle might have, then a  wide-range  sonic lockbreaker  like Trenat  had  used  to  appropriate  their
vehicle. She didn’t know if she had the young ensign’s delicate touch—she decided she would file a nice
report on him when she got back to the ship—but she’d get inside. She always did.
With one last glance at her scanner, she rose.
And froze.
Light stabbed the green expanse before her.
Biting back curses, she flattened herself on the ground. The rear door of the residence swung open. The
man stepped out in the bright glow of a small overhead illuminator. He no longer wore the jacket he had
earlier  but  was  clad  in  a  gray  short-sleeve  shirt  and  lighter  blue  pants.  A  long  black  box—not  the
T-MOD—was tucked under one arm, with two small square boxes nestled in the other. His grip on the
smaller boxes wasn’t as secure. They jiggled as he plodded toward the vehicle.
He hesitated at the pilot’s door, then, evidently changing his mind, he moved toward the vehicle’s front
end.
Damn! Damn! If he turned even the slightest bit, he might see her under the shrubbery. Her gaze glued to
his movements, she levered herself up mere minmeters on one arm and slowly plucked one of her lasers
from its holster. If he spotted her, she’d have to stun him. She had no choice.
His attention, however, seemed to be on the vehicle’s interior. She had a  sinking feeling that  she  knew
what he was looking for. Danjay’s T-MOD. The boxes he carried must be some kind of decoder.
He put the smaller boxes on the vehicle’s roof, touched something to the side of the door, then a moment
later pulled it open. The grinding, creaking noise it made sounded like a barrage of strafer cannons to her

ears. The doors on her land vehicle didn’t sound at all like that. Was this some kind of auditory security
measure?
The rear cargo door of the vehicle suddenly flew open. But no weapons turrets protruded, nothing lethal
emerged. She slowly let out the breath she hadn’t realized she was holding and watched him transfer the
small black boxes to the rear cargo area. The long box went in too. She was considering how to take him
from behind when—damn! damn!—he stepped back to the door on the navigator’s side, bent over, and
came out with the T-MOD in his grasp.
There it was. She had to take possession of it now. It shouldn’t be difficult. He was a nil, a civilian. She
was an expertly trained military commander with the element of surprise.
She rose in one smooth, swift, practiced movement.
And her scanner screeched out an intruder alert.
Zombie.
So much for keeping a low profile.
“Run!” Jorie screamed at him, her heart pounding in her throat as she tabbed the laser in her right hand
up to hard-terminate. “Run!”
She grabbed her other  laser  and  barreled  across  the lawn. “Drop  the T-MOD!  Run!” A sickly green
glow formed in the night gloom off to her left. She  laced  the spot  with both  her lasers,  aware  that  the
stupid nil was still standing there, T-MOD in his hands, staring at the expanding portal.
Just as she reached him, the green cloud erupted into hard form maybe two maxmeters away, about level
with the top  of the high hedge.  Its  diameter  was  small. Bliss luck,  she’d  done  some  damage  but  she
hadn’t stopped it. Yet. She fired off three more bursts, then swung around  to  face  the nil, bringing her
micro-rifle across  her chest  as  she  did.  “Drop  the unit, damn  you!”  Her  breath  came  in  hard  gasps.
“That’s a zombie. It’ll kill you!”
The man stared down at her. And then Jorie remembered: the entire universe did not speak Alarsh.
But that was the least of her problems. The zombie had arrived.
She swung back as it slithered like molten green liquid out of the hole in the night sky. The man behind
her uttered something guttural. She could feel his breath against her hair, could feel the hard tension of his
body against her back.
“What  in  hell  is  that?”  she  heard  him  rasp—in  passable  Vekran—as  the  zombie  snapped  into
solidification. Its serrated jaws gleamed in the moonlight and its three sunken opticals pulsed red, strafing
the darkness  in all directions.  Four  clawed  appendages,  long  and  multijointed,  clicked.  Energyworms
undulated and writhed over its tall, angular body.
“Zombie,” she said, her breath still harsh. She shoved her pistols back into the holsters and whipped her
Hazer micro-rifle forward. “Okay, big boy. Now we play rough.”
She fired as it lunged for them, the rifle’s energy almost blinding as it crashed against the void substance
of the energyworms. She squinted her left eye closed,  viewed everything through the filtered ocular  on
her right.
The zombie howled, slashing at her with its upper claws. But it stopped advancing.

Swinging the rifle down, she strafed its legs with a blast. The grass around it immediately blackened. The
zombie tottered for a moment. She aimed for its topmost eye, but missed as it jerked sideways. “Damn!”
It lashed out with its lower right arm. She caught the movement almost too late. “Down!” she screamed in
Vekran. She dropped to her knees, prayed the man behind her understood and copied her movement.
The zombie’s long arm snaked  out,  ripping through the roof  of the land vehicle, sending jagged  metal
hurtling across  the lawn. Damn, this one  had  extenders.  She  hadn’t  seen  that  mutation in a  long time.
She’d  have to  adjust  her attack,  especially as  neither Herryck  nor  Trenat  was  there  to  help  create  a
diversion or watch after the nil.
The nil. Another  worry.  The vehicle behind her was  still shuddering,  clanking from the  contact.  “You
alive, nil?” she shouted over the noise.
“Yes!”
“When I say run, you run. Understand?”
“No, wait!” He spoke quickly.
She couldn’t follow his strange version of Vekran, couldn’t catch all the words. She fired another blast at
the zombie. “I do not understand all you say. Listen to me. I say run, we run.”
“No. Gun! Give me a gun!”
“Gun?”
He slapped at the pistol on her right side. He wanted the G-1. He wanted to help.
Could he? She popped off two more blasts, quickly cradled the rifle in the crook of her arm, and yanked
her pistol out. A G-1 was easy to operate. A nil should be able to do it. She shoved it into his large hand,
closed hers around his as best she could, aimed, and pressed his thumb against the activator. A steam of
laser fire streaked down the zombie’s side. “Yes?” she asked, praying her quick lesson was sufficient and
he didn’t shoot himself in the foot.
Or her in the back.
“Yes!” His mouth curled into an oddly attractive, feral grin.
Damn, she liked that. She grinned back. “Good! Kill!” She lifted her rifle, sighted, and fired, and hoped
he mimicked her movements.
He fired in a line next to her. Good nil!
“Legs!” She told him, aiming for the same. “Opticals!” She raised her rifle and, this time, took one optical
out.
His laser fell silent. Oh, damn, it was too much for him. She was on her own again. Then all of a sudden
shots streaked out, and—pow! pang!—the remaining two opticals exploded.
She jerked her head around, stared at him in unabashed admiration. “Damn!”
“Thanks.” His face was sweaty, streaked. But he still had that delicious—there really was no other word
for it—grin.

She swung back, concentrated on the zombie’s arms. Blinded and howling, the zombie thrashed wildly,
advancing then retreating. It could still sense the leaking T-MOD but, without opticals, couldn’t hone in
on them for a kill.
It used  its extenders  instead.  Shrubbery  flew, tree  branches  crashed.  She  yanked  on  the  man’s  arm.
“This way.” She pulled him away from the vehicle, away from the T-MOD. Closer to the zombie.
“Arms!” She fired at the coiling extenders. He did the same. Good. She sprinted away from him, ignoring
whatever it was he yelled. She was almost to the zombie. She had to duck three times to avoid its claws,
but she finally sighted its white heart, just under its grinding jaws.
Almost, almost…now! She fired.
The zombie exploded, silently, in a cloud of bright green gas, then disappeared.
Jorie stood, shaking, exhausted, bliss running through her body in galactic-size doses. But only for a few
sweet seconds. Then reality hit. The leaking T-MOD. More zombies would come.
She whirled and headed for the gutted vehicle. The man sprinted, catching up with her. He grabbed her
arm, frowning. That delicious smile gone. His eyes were dark, intense. She shook him off, then at the last
moment remembered he still had her laser. “I need that.” She pointed to the pistol in his hand.
“Who are you? What was that thing?”
“I don’t have time to explain. I need that and my agent’s T-MOD. Then I have to get back to my ship.”
“You’re not making sense.”
She frowned at him, not understanding.
“You talk crazy,” he said.
No, her Vekran and his were somewhat different. “No time. No words now.” She kept it as simple as
she could. “Mine.” She pointed again to the pistol he’d yet to relinquish. “Mine.” She pointed to the unit.
He hefted the pistol in one hand, mulling his options, obviously. As if he had any. She sighed, raised her
own pistol, and this time pointed it at his head. “Mine.”
He handed her the pistol.
“Thank you.” She  tucked  both  back  into their  holsters,  then  turned  and  strode  the  few  steps  to  the
T-MOD. She bent toward it. Hard, muscled arms wrapped around her waist, lifting her up.
Damn, the nil was strong. She wrenched out of his grasp and stared in surprise at the business end of her
laser pistol. The one he’d just returned to her. His other hand was  clamped  on the T-MOD.  And that
feral grin was back.
“You’re going nowhere, lady, until you explain.”
She didn’t know how he’d managed to get it, but he could keep the G-1, though she’d face the captain’s
hell-wrath for losing it. She tried to jerk the unit out of his hand, but he wouldn’t let go.
“You. Don’t. Understand,” she said through gritted teeth. “No time!”
“Explain,” he demanded, the pistol aimed at her head. A pistol—thanks  to  her—he  knew  how to  use.

She still had her other G-1 but knew she’d be dead if she made a reach for it.
Her scanner emitted one shrill beep. Portal forming. Another zombie honing in on the unit.
She had no choice. Death by zombie, death by laser, or…
She jabbed the transcomm on the side of her utility belt with her right elbow and issued a terse order into
her mouth mike in Alarsh. “Emergency transit. Engage PMaT. Two life forms. Now!”
The nil-tech world called Earth blinked from her sight.
 

3 
The first thing Theo realized was that he itched all over. The second was that somehow—in the blink of
an eye—he’d gone from a horror movie in his backyard to the middle of a Star Trek set. He was on a
platform facing a bank of computer screens and a short console.  In front of the console  were  a  group
people  in  green-and-black  uniforms.  Two  were  clearly  not  human.  One  looked  a  bit  like  a  short,
curly-haired Wookiee. No, that was Star Wars. Wrong movie. The other  was…His  vision hazed.  His
head spun. His body tingled relentlessly. He knew with sickening certainty he was moments from passing
out.
Not good.
He locked his knees. Someone grabbed his arm, steadying him as he sucked in a deep breath. Something
slid through his fingers. The laptop.  He  turned,  then let it go,  because  now,  in the bright lights of this
science-fiction movie set, he couldn’t stop looking at the woman who took the laptop from him.
He saw  her—or  thought he saw  her—in the  uneven  glare  of  the  porch  light  over  his  back  door.  A
teenager  in  some  mismatched  slam-jam  outfit  running  toward  him,  hollering.  He  thought  she  was  in
trouble, needed help. The whole neighborhood knew he was a cop. He intended to grab her, try to calm
her down, when suddenly two beams of light burst from her hands.
That’s when he noticed the big green glowing hole in the night sky about twenty feet away.
Seconds later she was braced  against him—her lithe, muscular body  draped  in odd  equipment.  Some
kind of lens covered her right eye. He quickly discarded his initial impressions of teen and slam-jam. She
looked like a member of a futuristic SWAT team.
And then he saw  the—what  had  she  called it? The  zombie.  Cristos!  Worse  than  any  images  of  the
Kalikantzri from his childhood Christmases.
He went on autopilot after that. He hazily remembered damning himself for not putting his hip holster and
gun  back  on  immediately  after  changing  his  coffee-soaked  clothes.  He  somewhat  more  clearly
remembered taking some kind of gun from her. But mostly he focused on that towering abomination with
glowing eyes and metal skin covered with crawling, writhing worms.
Understandably,  he  wasn’t  focused  on  her,  or  what  she  looked  like.  Until  now.  She  was  sweaty,
grass-stained, dirt-streaked. And she was unequivocally gorgeous. Exotic. Medium height, five foot five
or so,  and  slender  but not skinny. Her  skin color  reminded him of honey.  She  had  muscles. She  had
curves. Nice curves. His gaze traveled  up from her cleavage  to  a  heart-shaped  face  with dark-lashed
eyes. And lips any Hollywood actress would pay big bucks to own. Lips he’d love to—
He blinked, hard. Slow down, Petrakos. Slow down.
Sounds, voices filtered back into his ears, making him aware he’d been temporarily deafened. A tremor
shook his body, subsiding as quickly as it had appeared. He was suffering from disorientation, delusions.
Too  many nights on  call  out  resulting  in  lack  of  sleep,  that’s  all  this  was.  In  a  moment  it  would  all
disappear and he’d be back in his kitchen, popping the top off a nice cold can of orange soda he’d left
standing on the counter. He intended to finish that  off before  heading back  to  the department  with the
sound system and Mr. Crunchy’s laptop.

He drew in a deep breath, then another. The itching sensation on his skin abated  to  a  mild annoyance.
But when the scene before him didn’t morph back into the familiar brown and yellow tones of his kitchen,
reality began to stealthily creep in.
And it wasn’t a reality he liked. He unstuck his tongue from the roof  of his mouth and  tried  to  speak.
“What happened?” His voice sounded rough. Not surprising, given what his body felt like.
She glanced his way. She was a few feet in front of him, talking in a strange language to a woman with
curly red  hair who was  clad  in the same  kind  of  shorts  and  odd  one-sleeved  shirt  but  minus  all  the
hardware.  A short  spate  of more  unintelligible words,  then she  handed  the laptop  to  the  woman  and
stepped back up onto the platform.
“Mine.” She reached for the gun he still held in his hand.
His cop senses kicked in. Instinctively, he stepped back, raising it.
A pale-skinned  man and  that Wookiee-looking  one  reacted,  silver weapons  appearing  in their hands.
Aimed at him. Tension laced the room. Another man and a dark-skinned, yellow-haired woman turned
from their consoles, hands on the weapons at their hips.
“Mine,” the woman in front of him repeated.
He was outnumbered. He might be able to take two, three of them out, but his stomach was still doing
somersaults. Even if he could somehow convince his legs to run, he doubted he’d make it as far as  the
door alive. Unless, of course, this was some kind of elaborate practical joke. In which case, if he reacted
with deadly force, innocent people could get hurt.
Every good cop knew there was a time to act and a time to wait, gather information. This, clearly, was
not a time to act.
Gritting his teeth, he lowered the gun. The woman plucked it from his fingers. The weapons aimed at him
disappeared into holsters. The low hum of conversation resumed.
The woman said something he couldn’t understand.
“What?”
“No concerns. You’re safe here.”
Safe?  Where  was  here?  Hell, he was  a  detective.  He  should be  able  to  find out that  simple  answer.
“Where am I?” he asked, putting some firmness in his voice this time. At least,  he thought he had.  His
head still wobbled. He shook it. Wrong move, Petrakos. That didn’t help.
“Sakanah. Ship,” she said.
He listened for a moment to the other voices around him. Hers was the only one  in the room  he could
understand. “Where?”
“Come.”
Well,  hell,  why  not?  his brain said,  as  it completed  yet another  looping circle.  It  wasn’t  like  he  had
anything else to do. Still wobbling, he followed her off the platform, scratching at the prickling sensation
on his arm.
A long gray Star Trek–looking corridor, a right turn, then another. She said nothing, guiding him with a

slight touch on his arm when his feet—still numb and clumsy—stumbled in the wrong direction. Blocks of
lettering on the walls looked like HTML code. Or ASCII. Like the lettering on the laptop screen.
For some reason he felt that was significant, though he couldn’t remember why.
She stopped before a recessed doorway, touched a small pad on the right. The door slid open, silently.
And the galaxy opened before him like a vast black sparkling maw.
This time his knees did buckle.
He grabbed for the door frame. She grabbed his elbow, guided him in. “Sit.”
A ready  room.  That’s  what it was  always called on the space  shows.  A  conference  table  ringed  by
chairs. He dropped into one at the corner of the table as sweat beaded on his brow. The wall in front of
him was all window. All black space, sprinkled with stars.
It could be a projection, a movie screen, but somehow he didn’t think so. Damn.
She came to the table with two tall clear glasses and pushed one in front of him. “Drink. It will help settle
the body after the PMaT.”
Peemat? He had no idea what she  was  talking about  but picked  up the glass,  sniffed it. Smelled like
water. He realized he was parched.
She took a long draft of hers, licked her lips. “Water.” Her voice rasped slightly.
Sweet Jesus and Mother Mary help him. She was gorgeous, totally gorgeous  in a  way that  seized  him
right in the gut and didn’t let go. Not fashion-model gorgeous—her features were too irregular, her mouth
too  wide,  her nose  too  broad,  her chin a  bit too  narrow.  And not  movie-star  gorgeous.  He’d  dated
women like that. Hell, he’d married Camille. Camille was so beautiful, men would turn in the street and
stare when she walked by.
Though he never did. He knew she was beautiful, but he never had that turn-and-stare  reaction  to  her.
He liked looking at Camille, but he always was able to stop.
Not like this.
He took a mouthful of water, swallowed. Then another. Some of the fog hovering in his brain started to
clear. Maybe it was thinking of Camille that did it. The itching quieted. And reality slammed him hard this
time.
Images  of  her  refusing  to  answer  his  questions,  threatening  him  with  her  gun,  flooded  back  to  him.
Beautiful woman be damned, he was pissed. She’d kidnapped him. She’d stolen evidence in a homicide
case and, he suspected, fully intended to withhold that evidence. She was  only interested  in getting her
damned laptop back. Not in stopping the killings by the…
…Tis Panagias ta matia! By the eyes of the Holy Virgin! What in hell was that thing in his backyard?
That overgrown Kalikantzri thing she called a zombie?
A shudder radiated through him and he braced himself in the chair. It ended as quickly as it had started.
He drew  a  deep  breath,  tried  to  marshal his thoughts. He  was  a  cop,  God  damn it. A trained  police
officer. He wasn’t going to jump to conclusions, act on incomplete information. He’d  been  in situations
like this before.

Well, maybe not quite.
Keep a lid on it, Petrakos, until you know what’s going on.
He sucked in a second slow breath. She watched him, head tilted slightly to  one  side.  He  studied  her.
Her eyes were a golden yellow, like a cat’s. Her skin had a honeyed café-au-lait hue. Her hair had to be
ten different shades of gold, orange, and brown—punk-streaked, he thought, but not as  garish. It  was
just short of shoulder length, more chin length in front, with bangs that looked like she’d hacked at them
with a knife. She wasn’t that gorgeous.
Oh, yeah, she is. And tough and capable. She’d faced down that towering monster without flinching. He
wasn’t used to being protected; he was the one usually doing that job. So when someone else did it, and
did it well, he recognized that. Appreciated it, as a cop. As much as he appreciated her face and form, as
a man. But ignore that, you can ignore that. It’s just a case of temporary insanity. You’ll get over
it. Think of Camille. She’s probably just like Camille.
She held his gaze for a long moment, as if she knew he was studying her. Then she brought her fingers to
rest in the middle of her chest. “Jorie. Mikkalah.”
It must be identification time. Good. He needed facts. “Theo. Petrakos.” He mimicked her movement.
“Peh-tra-kos.”
“Yes. Ma-cay-la?”
“Yes.”
“Where am I?” He turned one hand outward, motioned toward the room, toward the wide dark window.
“Where’s this?”
“Ship. Name is Sakanah.”
He remembered  asking her that before,  remembered  her answer.  Ship.  This  is  not  Carnival  Cruise
Lines. “What kind of ship?”
“Kind?”
“Type.”
“Ah.” She nodded. “Red-Star Class Three intergalactic combat-and-recovery vessel.”
At least, that’s what he thought she said. She touched a small wedge-shaped panel set into the top of the
table that he hadn’t noticed until now. A semitransparent,  green-glowing image sprang  to  life, hovering
over the middle of the table. He flinched back in his chair. She touched another section of the wedge and
the image rotated  slowly. It  looked  like a  cross  between  an  incarnation  of  something  from  the  latest
episodes of Battlestar Galactica and a Klingon Bird of Prey: elliptical yet winged toward the stern.
“Sakanah,” she repeated, pointing.
Ship. Combat-and-recovery vessel. A military ship. In space. In orbit around Earth, he assumed, though
he couldn’t see either Earth or the moon through the wide window. Every bit of common sense he owned
told  him  this  was  nuts.  Then  another  part  of  his  mind—one  that  had  performed  dozens  of  police
interrogations and  discounted  nothing as  impossible,  until  proven—said:  Maybe.  Maybe  not.  Listen.
Learn. Gather facts.

She moved her hand to an insignia in the center of her shirt. Three stars in a semicircle, one larger, two
smaller. “Commander. Jorie. Mikkalah.”
Commander? That would explain the weapons, her skills.
He reached in his back pocket for his wallet, flipped it open to show his Bahia Vista Police Department
ID. He laid it on the table. “Sergeant. Theo. Petrakos.”
Her eyes widened and then suddenly she laughed. Not cruelly, not like Camille, but a full, throaty, honest
laugh. And he didn’t think it was at all aimed at him but at herself.
“Bliss, bliss.” She wiped at her eyes. “I should have known. Sergeant. You’re very good.”
“Good?”
She closed her fingers into the shape  of a  gun, extended  her arm,  pressed  her thumb twice.  “Zombie.
Good aim. You know weapons.”
Of course. She’d had no way of knowing he was trained as a police officer. He thought she had and that
she’d followed him or sought him out because he had the laptop. Maybe that wasn’t it at all. Maybe she
was following the zombie.
“You speak English.” He’d heard her speak it before, but then other times she didn’t seem able to.
“Vekran. I speak Vekran. Like your…” and she said something he couldn’t catch. “Words,” she added.
“Like your words, but different. Some things don’t…” and another word he didn’t understand.
“Translate?” he guessed.
“Trans-late?”
“Have the same meaning. Have the same correlation in my language and yours.”
“Translate. Some things don’t translate.” She nodded.
He pointed to one of her holstered weapons. “Gun.”
“Pistol.”
“Okay. Pistol. We say that. But also gun.”
She shook her head. “Never this gum.”
“Gun.”
“Gun.”
He glanced around the room, spotted a wall sign with its ASCII letters. “Vekran?” he asked, pointing.
“Alarsh. My words. Words of everyone on this ship. Alarsh.”
He finally understood. Vekran—English—wasn’t her native language. He didn’t know why that surprised
him. He  was  bilingual,  fluent  in  English  and  Greek.  Tough  to  grow  up  in  Maritana  County’s  Greek
community of Mangrove Springs and not be.
“Jorie Mikkalah,” he said. “Home?”

“Home?”
He pointed to himself and then made a small circle with his hands. “Bahia Vista.  Florida.”  He  widened
the circle. “United States of America.” He put his hands together, forming a ball. “Earth.”
She paused, then: “Pahn-Taris Station.”
“Space station?”
“Like this ship. In space. No dirt.”
“I know.”
“Good.  Pahn-Taris  Station.”  She  moved  her hands  in an elongated  circle.  “K’Dri Sector  Seventeen.”
Widened again. “Chalvash System.”
“How far away from here?”
She made that slight tilt of her head that infused him with a totally illogical desire to kiss her, smudgy face
and all. “Four years’ travel.”
“You’re on this ship four years?”
“Eight.”
“Eight years? Why?”
She smiled, her gold eyes narrowing. But it wasn’t a pleasant smile. “Hunting zombies.”
 
With the language differences, Jorie still wasn’t  sure  Theo  Petrakos  fully understood  the gravity of the
situation. His demeanor  went from suspicion to  curiosity,  hovered  almost  to  camaraderie,  then  firmly
returned to suspicion again. She tried to make it very clear that the Guardians had no interest in his world
other  than  to  eradicate  the  zombies  before  the  zombies  eradicated  them.  He  seemed,  finally,  to
understand the threat the zombies posed but not the breadth or depth of it. He also  didn’t like the fact
that the Guardians had no intention of contacting his governmental authorities.
He  liked  it  less  when  she  explained  that  the  zombies  were  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Guardians.
Zombies were—and  she  admitted  shame  to  that  fact—a  mech-organic  entity  produced  by  her  own
government to monitor commercial space traffic for contaminates, and to defend and repair the Hatches:
portals that utilized the space–time curvature to  link the spacelanes.  They were  designed  to  operate  in
small herds, all under the control of the largest zombie, designated the C-Prime.
Commands issued by her people to the C-Prime were then transmitted to the herd for action. If a herd
member  was  destroyed,  the  C-Prime  could  replicate  another.  If  a  herd  member  malfunctioned,  the
C-Prime could repair it or terminate it.
Then something went radically wrong. The C-Primes stopped accepting commands from the Guardians
and began making decisions on their own.  It  was  a  flaw, the result of a  program  upgrade  intended  to
make the C-Primes more intuitive, more responsive. It ended up making them into monsters.
Her government, Jorie patiently explained, had created this problem two hundred years ago. They would
fix it, even if it took them another two hundred years.

“We made a mistake,” she said.
“That’s one goddamned big mistake!” He leaned back in his chair, away from her, as he did every time
he responded in anger.
“Agreed. Our mistake. Our solution.”
“But it’s killing my people!”
“Mine too.”
“You can fight back. We can’t.”
She knew  where  he was  going with this. Back  to  his “I have  to  warn  my  government”  diatribe.  But
getting nil-techs involved not only wasted time, it cost lives. The Guardians had learned that two hundred
years ago as well.
“Our solution,” she repeated. “No choice.”
He turned away  from her,  his hand fisted over  his mouth as  if he were  trying to  stop  his words  from
escaping.
Through all this, Tam Herryck bustled in and out, bringing more data from Danjay’s T-MOD, once again
shielded and cooperating nicely. But Jorie didn’t need more data. She needed a  chunk of quiet time in
order to compose a transmit to Galin about his friend’s untimely but heroic death. Then she needed food
and she  needed  sleep,  and  not necessarily  in that  order.  She  also  needed  a  cleanser.  Every  time  she
wiped her hand over her face, it came back with more dirt on it. Petrakos looked rumpled and tired too,
though probably  not half as  filthy as  she  did.  He  hadn’t  been  crawling  through  the  foliage  then  lying
facedown in the dirt for the better part of several time-sweeps.
He wasn’t dealing with the loss of an agent and a friend.
She sighed, rested her elbows on the tabletop and her forehead against her hands for a moment.
“You’re tired.” His voice softened.
She peeked up at him from over her hands. “Observant.”
“That’s why they pay me the big bucks.”
“Hmm?”
“Nothing. I’m tired too. But people—my people—are dying. Being killed by your zombies. It’s my job
to…It doesn’t seem right to go take a nap.”
It took a moment for her to put his sentence together. She straightened. “Zombies nap.”
“You mean they’ve stopped killing?”
“Temporarily.  Their  impetus,”  she  wasn’t  sure  he  understood  the  word,  but  he  nodded,  and  she
continued, “their impetus was heightened by the frequencies of the unshielded T-MOD. We removed that
unit to here. This ship.” She tapped the table with her finger. “We  have time before  they start  again. I
know—we know—how. We know when. We study the data, the craving. Movement of the herd.” She
was losing him. She could tell by the slanting of dark brows over even darker eyes. “We have time for
cleanser,” she scrubbed at her face, “food,” she touched her fingers to her mouth, “nap.” She closed her

eyes and tilted her head.
She heard him suck in a short breath. “Don’t do that.” His voice was low.
She opened her eyes. “What?”
“Nothing. So we have time to clean up, eat, sleep. Then what?”
“Then we go back down and we kill.”
Herryck  breezed  through  the  sliding  doorway  again.  “The  captain  says  he’s  ready  for  you  now,
Commander.”
Finally! She needed the old man’s input on this, though she knew there was a good chance she’d catch
hell’s wrath over Petrakos. With that, however, she’d already formed some answers. “On my way,” she
told Herryck. The door closed behind the lieutenant. She rose. Petrakos’s hand on her arm stopped her.
“Where are you going?”
Her conversation with Herryck had been in Alarsh. She summarized. “I must report to my captain.”
He was silent for a moment, then he lifted his chin slightly. “Send me back down.”
“Back…?”
“Home. Bahia Vista. My house. Structure,” he added.
“No.”
“I have a job. Duty.”
Don’t we all? She understood a little more about his job. It wasn’t dissimilar to hers, though on a smaller
scale. She very definitely understood duty. She was doing hers now. “No.”
“If I don’t show up at the department,” he glanced at the metal band on his wrist, “by eleven-thirty, noon,
people will be looking for me.”
“Then they won’t find you.” She shook off his hand, stepped away.
He rose quickly, but she saw him coming, because she’d spent her life training for moves like that. She
spun, bracing, pistol aimed at his chest. He stopped short, evidently not expecting that she’d see him. He
was breathing hard.
He was a big man. She had to remember that, had to stop  equating nil-tech with nil-abilities. His wide
shoulders and muscular arms strained the fabric of his collarless gray shirt. But his wasn’t stupid brawn.
He had training; he held the rank of sergeant in a dirtside security force. He’d taken out two orbitals on a
zombie the first time he ever used a G-1. That kind of ability damned near matched her own.
She respected that, but there was simply no way she could oblige him.
“My sincere regrets to you,” she told him. “But no.”
“But when we go back down—”
“I go back down. My team. Not you.”

“Why?”
She shook her head. Questions, questions. She’d already explained. “Our problem. Our solution.”
“My planet!”
She nodded knowingly. “Regrets.”
“Okay, okay.” He held up both hands, backed up a step. “Your problem, your solution. I get it now. So
put the gu—the pistol away.”
She didn’t, but she did lower it.
“After that. After you kill the zombies. Then I go home?”
Hell’s wrath. She hated this part.  It  rarely went well with nils, who illogically tied  their identities to  an
orbiting ball of dirt or, worse, to one locale on that same ball of dirt. Spacefaring cultures were so much
easier to deal with. “Regrets.”
It took a moment, then his face hardened. “Regrets? Regrets? What the fuck do you mean by ‘regrets’?”
“Fuck?”
His hand fisted against his mouth again, and he abruptly shifted away from her. He was angry, very angry.
But he was comporting himself rather well, considering the circumstances. She gave him credit  for that.
She’d dealt with far worse from nils.
He lowered his hand, turned back, and spoke with slow, controlled deliberation. “Am I to  stay  on this
ship for the rest of my life?”
“No.”
“No?” Surprise flitted over his features and, damn, there was a hopeful tone in his voice.
“Relocation.” She hoped he understood that word.  “New  residence.  New  structure.”  It  was  inevitable
that—in  the  hundreds  of  Guardian  missions  over  hundreds  of  years—certain  locals  would  become
involved, as he had. In advanced societies that had  space  travel and  an awareness  of—if not relations
with—other galactic cultures, the locals could  return to  their residences.  That was  never  the case  with
nil-techs—a label Petrakos had bristled at when she’d explained it. But nils couldn’t stay on board either.
Yet they had to live somewhere. “Nice location. Paroo. Trees smell sweet.”
Not surprisingly, the news didn’t appear to infuse him with bliss.
“Paroo.” He said the word as if it were the vilest of curses.
“Paroo.”
“No. Bahia Vista. Florida. United States of America.” His voice shook.
She sighed. There was something she hadn’t considered or had overlooked because she was so flat-line
tired. He might be spoused. Have children. Sometimes…She could  ask  the captain.  Sometimes they’d
relocate the entire family unit.
She studied him briefly again. He was in his prime as a male. Tall. Strong. And a good face. A very good
face. Someone loved him, surely. And he loved her as well.

Lucky female.
That thought startled her. Sex was bliss, but being spoused didn’t interest her. Especially after Lorik. She
must be more tired than she thought. “You’re spoused, aren’t you?”
“Spoused?”
“Male. Female. Same residence. Have children. Have love.”
Something she couldn’t identify flickered across his face. His very good face. “I’m not married, no. No
wife. No spouse. No children.”
She almost asked if all the females he knew were blind and unsexed but thought better of it.
“Why would it matter if I were marr—spoused?”
“Because…”  She  hesitated,  choosing  simple  Vekran  words.  “We  have  sincere  regrets  when  we’re
required to send nils to Paroo. We try, we very much try, Petrakos, to make what is bad into bliss. We
understand the family unit. If that was  why you’re  angry, I would ask  the captain  to  appropriate  your
family for you, send you all to  Paroo.  But family unit or  not,  that  doesn’t  change what I must do.  Or
where you must go. You hear my words, Petrakos?”
He stared at her, his expression flat. Dead. His arms were taut by his sides. She watched his eyes, ready
to raise her pistol again if she had to.
Finally he spoke, his voice bitter. “Kidnappers with a conscience. How nice. Go to hell, all of you.”
She didn’t fully understand the first part of his remark. But she clearly understood the last. She raised her
chin and met his hard stare evenly. “Been there. Twice.”
“Go report to your captain.” His voice was a low soft growl.
She backed up to the door and exited without comment, locking the door behind her. Herryck waited for
her in the corridor. “Get a security team to transfer him to secure quarters,” she told the lieutenant as she
holstered her pistol. “Stay here until they arrive.”
“Problems, sir?”
“He’s angry. And he’s security-trained and very capable of doing something about it.”
“If he tries, sir?”
She knew standard procedure as well as Herryck did.  For  all a  battle  cruiser’s  tech  and  weaponry,  it
was still a  fragile environment. No  place  for a  nil  with  a  grudge  who  had  the  skills  to  fire  a  G-I  or
micro-rifle but not the understanding of what that  could  do  to  an exterior  bulkhead  in  the  vacuum  of
space. If he managed to obtain a weapon, there’d be no choice but one. She knew that choice. And she
wasn’t required to like it. “Hard-terminate, my authorization.”
“Understood, sir.”
Good.  She  was  glad somebody  did,  because  as  she’d  issued  the command,  it weighed on her heart.
Heavily. She spun on her heels and headed for the captain’s office.
 

4 
“Good work, Commander Mikkalah. Regrettable loss of an agent, though.” Captain Pietr leaned back in
his office chair and laced his hands over his stomach. His swarthy face was lined, though his tightly curled
silver hair was still thick. He’d been in command of one Guardian ship or another since before Jorie was
born.
She had served under  him her entire career  with the Guardians.  She  respected  him tremendously.  On
occasion, she even liked him. She wasn’t yet sure if this was one of those occasions.
Petrakos  probably  thought  of  her  as  narrow,  inflexible.  Compared  to  Kort  Pietr,  she  was  wantonly
lenient. The captain would never have risked  losing the T-MOD  to  save  one  nil’s life. Zombies didn’t
damage tech. She could have waited, let the zombie snack on Petrakos, then recovered the unit before
the next zombie picked up its scent. What was  one  life when the data  she  brought  back  could  save  a
million lives?
“Thank you, sir.” She kept her shoulders back,  her hands  locked  behind her waist,  emotions tightly in
check. “Agent Wain, like all of us, knew the risks. If shielding malfunctions and cannot be repaired, the
T-MOD  must  be  destroyed.  Guardian  Force  Field  Regulations,  Section  Twelve,  Paragraph  Three,
Subsection A. Sir.”
“Yet sometimes agents  and  trackers  in the field ignore those  very important regulations,  Commander.
They become enthralled with the hunt. They want to be the one to bag a powerful C-Prime. And they see
an unshielded unit as  bait.”  He  rocked  his chair slightly, his eyes  half-hooded.  “They reinterpret  those
regulations to suit their needs. They take unnecessary risks. Sometimes it works in their favor. In Wain’s
case, it didn’t. A lesson for all of us, surely.”
Jorie wasn’t fooled for a moment, either by his posture or his words. Pietr was completely alert and by
now had read everything she and her team had logged. He knew about Petrakos and might well consider
her bringing the nil aboard  unnecessary  and  in violation of not only  field  regulations  but  half  a  dozen
Guardian Force general procedures as well. She chose, however, not to address that issue until he did.
“An unshielded unit can spur a craving,” she recited. “Actions of zombies caught in a premature craving
can be unpredictable. I would never attempt such a maneuver, sir.”
Pietr  nodded.  Silence  filled  his  large  office,  broken  only  by  the  occasional  change  in  pitch  of  the
air-ventilation system or the muted click as his deskcomp downloaded incoming messages from his staff.
He arched his clasped hands, cracking his knuckles. “We have a nil on board, Commander.”
“Yes, sir.”
Those half-hooded eyes studied her. “Tell me about him.”
She did, careful in her phrasing, careful to make it clear recovery of the T-MOD had been her priority.
“You could have terminated him.”
“His presence, tied to the T-MOD at that point, was the zombie’s focus.” That wasn’t totally truthful, but
there was no way the captain could know that. “It permitted me to engage the zombie. Had he not been
there, the zombie would have come after me and the unit might still be unrecovered.”

Pietr arched one silver eyebrow. “More likely it would simply have taken you a little longer to terminate
the zombie.” He  chuckled  softly.  “I  don’t  believe  there’s  a  zombie  out  there  that’s  a  match  for  the
intrepid Commander Jorie Mikkalah.”
That was because in the field the intrepid Commander Jorie Mikkalah often broke  more  rules than she
followed. She just made sure no one was around to record her transgressions when she did. “Thank you,
sir. That’s very kind of you. I can’t operate under those assumptions, however.”
“So now we have this Sergeant…”
“Petrakos, sir.”
“…Petrakos on board. I’m sure you can arrange for his transport to Paroo at the proper time. Tell me,
Mikkalah, are you going to attempt to connive me into sending his spouse and children with him as well?”
His mouth curved into a wry grin.
“He’s not spoused.”
“That makes it clean and easy. I like that. I’m sure he’ll find Paroo a blissful experience.”
Jorie hesitated. She could still see the bleak desolation on Petrakos’s very good face when she informed
him he’d never return to his locale, his duty, that he was powerless over his life’s path. Such impotence
took a harder toll on those used to the freedom of command. It had almost destroyed her once. Maybe
that’s why his situation disconcerted her so much. “He’s not quite accepted relocation, sir.”
“Fighting you on it, is he?” He shook his head. “Nils and their love of their planets.”
“I think it’s his career as well, sir. He holds high rank in his locale’s security forces.  He  feels a  duty to
continue to protect his people.”
“A worthy attribute. We can recommend he be placed in a similar function on Paroo.”  That closed  the
matter. She  could  hear  it in his voice.  Relocation  had  been  an effective Guardian policy for over  two
hundred years. Her job was not to question but to implement. Surely Petrakos would see that eventually.
“Now tell me about this unusual—and unexpected—herd.” Pietr motioned to a chair in front of his desk.
“And please sit down, Commander. I’ve reviewed your logs and Agent Wain’s. This is not going to be a
short conversation.”
She rather suspected that. Then the captain ordered food and ice water brought in, and Jorie logged the
meeting as one of the occasions where she liked him.
The bad news in Danjay’s data—aside from the fact that the Guardians still had no idea why the zombies
had targeted the planet—was in the size of the herd: three hundred eleven drones. The good news was
that there was still only one C-Prime and none of the drones showed signs of mutating into a second. But
the larger  the  herd  grew,  the  more  chance  one  would  mutate.  They  had  to  strike  now,  before  that
happened, while the C-Prime was still overburdened and increasingly distracted with its herd duties.
One  of  the  many  questions  Danjay’s  data  didn’t  answer,  however,  was  why  the  herd—which  he’d
dubbed  a  megaherd—had  grown  to  such  large  proportions.  The  average  zombie  herd  was  fifty  to
seventy drones  with  one  C-Prime.  Up  until  now,  the  largest  herd  that  had  been  recorded  was  one
hundred  seventy.  Usually  by  that  point,  a  second  C-Prime  mutated  and  the  herd  split,  becoming
adversaries and killing off the weaker drones, thereby reducing the herd.
Termination of a  fifty-zombie herd  was  just another  day’s  work  for a  Guardian team.  Three  hundred

would take a little bit longer.
“Before we  terminate them, we  do  need  to  know  how they managed  to  populate  so  quickly and  not
split,” Pietr said. “If this is a new mutation or resistance factor developing, it’s imperative we be able to
adjust  for that,  as  it may hold the key  to  why they’ve chosen  this locale—and  why  they  will  choose
others.”
“You think the C-Prime may have learned how to expand its capabilities?”
“I  fear  that,  Commander.  Our  advantage  has  always  been  that,  for  all  the  zombie’s  offensive  and
defensive factors,  it is innately a  stupid  creature,  unable to  learn.  The code—regulating  its mental and
physical growth—guaranteed that. A C-Prime with over three hundred drones should be  incapacitated.
This one’s not. It’s slowed down, but it’s functioning.”
“I mentioned in my report on the Port Lraknal terminations that I observed what I thought to be intuitive
behavior on the part  of several  zombies.”  But  intuitive  enough  to  consciously  choose  a  location  that
showed none of the requisite tech frequency emissions? The question puzzled her, as she knew it puzzled
Pietr.  Her  job,  however,  was  strictly  zombie  termination,  not  psychology.  She  was  a  soldier,  not  a
scientist.
Pietr was  nodding. “That’s why I’m giving you command of this mission. I believe we’re  at  a  critical
juncture here.”
He was giving her command? Jorie was one of the more experienced trackers on board, but still, Pietr’s
words surprised her. “Thank you, sir.”
“You may well damn me before this is over, Mikkalah. This is not the ideal setup. It’s a nil-tech world.
We must operate completely covertly. Our agent, who could have provided us with not only a functional
knowledge of the locale but a secure transport point for key personnel and tech, is dead. And we don’t
have another three months to waste infiltrating the populace, getting another agent in place.”
That meant more dark,  stinking, humid alleys. And,  given the conditions,  a  damned  tactical  headache.
“Understood, sir.”
Pietr leaned forward. “Let me throw this into the equation. How old are you, Commander?”
Jorie tried not to frown. It never was a good idea to frown at one  of Pietr’s  questions,  no matter  how
digressive they seemed at the moment. “Thirty-nine, sir.”
“Would you like to make the rank of captain before you turn forty?”
She sat very still. Would she like to make captain? Did a graknox like to roll in the mud? Did a fermarl
like to copulate in liaso hedges?
“Yes, sir.”
Pietr held up his index finger. “Find out how this herd  managed  to  get so  large without fracturing.” He
held up a second finger. “And then terminate it. Every one. And that captaincy will be yours.”
So. All she had to do was ascertain why zombies were  now capable  of actions  that  were  scientifically
impossible and then conduct a ground war with small, less-than-optimally  equipped  teams  in a  nil-tech
locale where the populace more than likely would consider those same Guardians their enemy. Definitely
a tactical headache if she ever saw one.

But the bliss, oh, the bliss, if she pulled it off!
 
Theo sat on the edge of the bed, his elbows on his knees, his head in his hands. Anger, frustration, and
exhaustion vied for control of his body. After twenty minutes of prying and poking into every  corner  of
the cabin and  moving what furniture wasn’t  bolted  to  the floor,  he  was  unable  to  find  any  means  of
escape. Three armed guards  and  that curly-haired  woman who seemed  to  be  Mikkalah’s  subordinate
had escorted him here, produced a tray of food from a dispenser set into the far wall, and left. He had no
doubt that at least one of those guards was still outside his door. He could take one on, probably. Two
would be difficult, but he was more than willing to make the effort, if he could just get the damned door
open!
But he couldn’t get the damned door open. And he couldn’t find any other way out of the cabin. Which
was, if he was in the mood to admit it, actually nicer than the room he’d stayed in at that new Holiday Inn
Express in the Keys last year.
He rubbed his eyes. He had a raging headache. He was hungry. There was a tray and a pitcher of water
waiting for him on the small table. He didn’t know if those yellow apple-looking things really were apples.
Or what the pale mushy stuff in the covered container was.
And he was  too  spent  to  cross  the short  distance  to  the table  to  find out.  It  was  almost three  in  the
morning, his body’s time. So he sat, damning himself for walking out of his back door without his gun.
That would have changed things. He wasn’t totally sure how or why, with his mind fuzzy and aching. He
just knew it had been a stupid bonehead mistake a seasoned cop like himself should never have made.
Ta ekanes skata. In the back of his mind, he could hear his Uncle Stavros telling him that he’d screwed
up.
His second mistake was not using Mikkalah’s own weapon on her, just before she’d sent them up to her
ship. But he hadn’t perceived her as the enemy then. He’d just wanted answers. He didn’t want to hurt
her, let alone kill her.
He wasn’t even sure he could kill her now. He’d seen a zombie. He understood, with sickening clarity,
what she had to do and why. But if the opportunity came…well, it would feel mighty good to give it a try.
That he was physically capable of overpowering  her he had  no doubt.  But he’d  have to  catch  her off
guard first, and that was no easy thing to accomplish. Her training was impressive. Maybe she had eyes
in the back of her head. Hell, she was an alien. She  probably  did.  She  was  probably  as  bad  as  those
zombies she hunted….
All women, he decided sagely as he rubbed at a knot between his brows, were zombies. Especially the
beautiful ones. Like Camille. Like this Jorie Mikkalah. They show up in your life, bite  your head,  suck
your brains out, and leave nothing behind but a  withered  corpse.  Then your friends gather  around  and
stare down at you and wonder why your eyeballs are so nice and moist.
Except his friends wouldn’t have his corpse to stare at. They’d look and look and never know what had
happened  to  him. It  had  to  be  a  horrible  feeling,  that  not  knowing.  He’d  seen  it  destroy  families  in
missing-persons cases.
Thank God his parents weren’t alive. This would kill them. And he wouldn’t even be dead with them so
he could explain he was really on Paroo, eating brains with some zombies named—

“Petrakos.”
Light shafted over his eyelids. Noise reached his ears. He blinked, realized he was flat on his back on a
soft bed.  He  didn’t recognize the matte-gray  ceiling. He  didn’t recognize the sounds  in  the  room,  an
intermittent muted clicking, a hushed rush of air. Where…?
“Petrakos.” A woman’s voice. That woman’s voice. That he recognized.
Skata. Shit. He squeezed his eyes shut for a moment, ran through more curses in Greek that would have
impressed even crusty Uncle Stavros, then levered himself up on his elbows. He must have passed out.
His gorgeous alien commander stood poised in the open doorway. He could see two of the three guards
behind her.
Her face was scrubbed clean, her hair brushed to a shine. The shorts and odd one-sleeved shirt had been
replaced with a green-and-black jumpsuit. And only one gun now, hanging from a duty belt  ringing her
hips. She stepped in, but the door stayed open. He noted  with some  small satisfaction that  she  kept  a
hand on the gun. If she didn’t fear him, she was at least cautious. Good, he decided as twinges of anger
surfaced again. Be cautious.
“You didn’t eat.” She motioned to his untouched tray.
He let his gaze move around the room, touch on the overturned chairs at the small dining table, the sofa
cushions in disarray, the storage doors hanging open. “I was busy.”
“Foolish. You will stress yourself.”
He snorted and sat up. “Being kidnapped isn’t stress?”
She picked up a slice of the apple thing, bit into it. He heard the crunch. “Good. Try?”
“No.” He glanced  at  his watch.  Five-thirty.  He’d  been  out cold  for about  two  hours.  He  felt as  if he
could sleep two hundred more, but at least the headache was gone. Sleep deprivation had always been
part of his job.
So were certain routines. He knew that around  three  in the afternoon,  someone  from the cyber  squad
would check the BVPD evidence room and find no laptop. People would start looking for him, a cop last
seen at the site of a homicide. Now missing. He knew exactly what emergency measures would be taken
to find him, and it pained him. Because unless they launched the space shuttle, they wouldn’t work.
Unless he took measures of his own.
“I brought a thing for you to see.” She took two steps toward him.
Adrenaline flashed through his body. Guards be damned, he could take her down. Right now. The hand
on the gun had moved to a pouch on her belt. She was only a few feet in front of him, pushing the last of
that apple thing into that beautiful mouth of hers.
One swift move would do it. Knock her to the floor, restrain her hands, grab her gun while the weight of
his body pinned her underneath him. She’d fight, squirm, press up against him, her hips grinding against
his…
“You want?” She tilted her head.
Panagia mou! Oh, Mother of God! Heat flooded him. His breath shuddered out. Yeah, he wanted, all

right. But they were talking about two different things.
She had  a  square  disk—about  the size of  his  Palm  Pilot—in  her  hand.  He  watched  her  squeeze  its
corners, and suddenly the flat disk became a cube. Colors, images, swirled on all four surfaces.
He should stand up, take it, but then she’d know what he wanted, and it wasn’t  whatever  the damned
cube was.
He braced one hand against his thigh, wiped his face with the other. Christ, I’m losing my mind. He had
to keep emotions out of this. He had to think like a cop.
He blanked his expression, forced himself to look at the cube. “What is it?” Better to focus on that than
on the delusional fantasies that sprang into his mind every time she came near him.
“Holographs. You know this word?”
“Photos. Images.”
She nodded. “I thought perhaps if you see, you’ll understand it isn’t…” and then a word he didn’t know.
“Isn’t what?” How could two languages be so alike and so different? One more thing to tax his sanity.
“Not without a choice for you. Not all bad.” She paused. “Believe me.”
“What’s not bad? Being a prisoner? That sucks.” He knew she probably couldn’t follow his speech. He
wasn’t sure he cared.
She turned  abruptly  and  put the cube  on the tabletop.  “Paroo.”  Her  voice carried  over  her shoulder.
“This will show you Paroo. A beautiful locale.”
Did she know how vulnerable she was with her back to him? Or was that part of the plan? Two guards
hovered near the doorway. He’d be dead before he ever  made  it halfway across  the floor.  He  shot  a
glance in their direction, sizing them up. Two males, watching him watch her. Watching him notice  how
her uniform fit her rear end only too well. It occurred to him one of them might be her lover. Hell, for all
he knew she was servicing the whole damned ship.
Camille would have.
Stop it, Petrakos!
He dropped his gaze to his hands clasped tightly between his knees. Counted to ten in Greek. When he
looked back up, she’d turned.
“Paroo,” he said. “You just don’t get it, do you?”
“I don’t acquire—”
“You don’t understand.” He stopped, feeling anger rise again. He waited until he had himself under better
control. He wasn’t usually like this. He was a cop, for God’s sake. His personnel record lauded his calm
demeanor under pressure, his ability to defuse potentially hostile situations. A hair-trigger temper wasn’t
remotely in his repertoire.
And he’d never lusted after a woman like some teenager whose hormones were raging out of control.
But he’d  never  been  kidnapped  by space  aliens before  either.  That  was  no  doubt  a  big  part  of  the

problem.
“It doesn’t matter how beautiful the prison,” he said finally. “It’s still a prison.”
When she didn’t respond, he continued: “You understand that word? Prison?”
Her mouth thinned. It took a moment before she nodded. “Yes. Involuntary confinement. But you’re still
free to—”
“I’m not free.”
“You are. Structure, friends, career. Anything you want—”
“I want my life on my terms.”
“You make a new life on Paroo.”
“Why should I?” He didn’t care that he was pushing her. Even if it accomplished nothing, it felt better to
vent his frustration.
She started to speak, stopped. He was definitely pushing her. “It’s necessary—”
“Why?”
Golden eyes blazed. “You don’t hear my words.”
“I hear your words. I just don’t like them.”
“You will like Paroo!”
“A beautiful prison is still a prison,” he repeated calmly, because he could  tell by the rising tone  of her
voice that she wasn’t calm.
She flung her hands out in a gesture of exasperation as a torrent of unintelligible words poured from her
lips. None sounded like English or Vekran. All sounded angry. One of the guards cast an alarmed look in
her direction. He realized she was probably swearing a blue streak at him in Alarsh. Then she stopped,
her mouth a tight line. She was breathing hard.
He arched one eyebrow. “Now you know how I feel.”
A chair lay on its side at her feet. With a rough movement, she reached down and righted it. She set one
knee on its seat and leaned against its back, her arms crossed.
Classic defensive posture, he noted. Something he’d  said  rankled  her.  God,  it felt good  to  analyze, to
think like a cop again.
She glared at him. “I understand  your situation, Petrakos.  Much more  than you can  know.  You don’t
understand mine.”
“Sure I do. Beam down, shoot pistol, kill zombies. End of story.”
“Nils.” She almost spat out the unflattering term. “This is the prime reason we no longer involve nils. You
have no…” and an unfamiliar word, maybe three, “planning and complexity. In a  covert  mission where
we have no dirtside base of operations to facilitate…” More garbled words. But he began to catch some
of them. It wasn’t always the word. Sometimes it was her accent, her pronunciation.

He still couldn’t figure out why it was  so  important to  her that  he accept  being sent  to  Paroo,  but he
clearly heard her frustration in dealing with the zombies. No, not just with the zombies. With his world,
low-tech by her standards. It was almost amusing, except he knew that he’d be at a similar disadvantage
in Artistotle’s day or, hell, even during the American Revolution. He  could  probably  fire a  musket,  but
riding a horse with any degree of competency was beyond him. People would peg him for a stranger, if
not a total idiot, within ten minutes of talking to him.
He knew from friends who worked undercover how important it was to be able to blend into the setting.
Officers  lived  under  false  identities  for  months—years—to  become  part  of  the  drug  culture  or  a
terrorist’s cadre.
And her people’s sole operative on his world was a shrink-wrapped corpse with wet, bulging eyes.
An idea—small but maybe workable—formed in his mind. A bargaining chip. Why hadn’t  he seen  this
before?
“Wayne, your agent.” He recalled what she told him in the ready room earlier. “He was key to stopping
this zombie herd, wasn’t he?”
She stopped mid-rant, studied him as if surprised he had the intelligence to ask the question. “I explained.
The data in his T-MOD. This is of critical importance.”
“But so was he, right? He lived in the apartment, what—three, four months? He spoke Engl—Vekran?”
“As well as he did Alarsh.”
The idea grew. If it worked, he’d be back home restringing his guitar very shortly. But he needed more
information first. “Why did he choose my city, my locale?”
“The zombies chose your locale. They like warm water, electromagnetic storm activity. Other reasons.”
She shrugged. “But those are two prime factors.”
And  the  Tampa  Bay  region  was  famous  for  its  warm  beaches  and  violent  thunderstorms.  “So  the
Guardians send Wayne, he learns the lay of the land and then provides you, the trackers, with a base of
operations.” He thought of the dead man’s bungalow, heavily ringed by shrubbery. Very private. “Your
people can beam in, work from there.”
“Necessary. We can’t utilize an air attack. Our craft aren’t like yours. Your government would—”
“I understand. I know what covert is. I’m a cop. Security,” he amended, remembering that was the term
she’d used.
“A sergeant.”
He nodded,  only half-hearing her acknowledgment.  He  had  his bargaining chip.  And,  if he played  his
cards exactly right, he’d  also  have his freedom.  A shiver of excitement raced  through him. Don’t  get
anxious.  Set  it  up  right  so  that  she  thinks  it’s  her  idea.  Then  she  goes  back  to  her  mission
commander and makes the offer. “What happens now that Wayne’s dead?”
She smiled grimly. “A big headache. For me.”
“You?”
She nodded. “My mission.”

“In charge of everything?” He made a circle with one hand. And if her answer was yes, he wasn’t sure if
that was good or bad news.
“I’m very good at my job, Petrakos.”
He took  that for a  yes.  “I know.  I saw.”  He  had  to  get her on  his  side.  More  than  that,  he  had  to
convince her he was on hers. “But you don’t have Wayne’s apartment to use. You have his data but not
his field expertise. You don’t know shit from Shinola about daily life.” He caught her frown. Good.  He
used  the  expression  deliberately  to  remind  her  she  didn’t  fully  speak  his  language.  “My  squad,  my
security force,  was  investigating Wayne’s  death.  You  don’t  even  know  what  we  may  already  know
about the Guardians.”
That frown deepened. “Thank you for adding to my headache.”
“Regrets.” He used her expression of apology, inclining his head slightly as if he meant it. “We’re in the
same business. I understand what you face now. I guess maybe life on Paroo won’t be  that  bad.  New
structure, new friends. No problems. Not like your situation.” He prayed she  didn’t have some  built-in
alien telepathic lie detector.
Relief softened the tense line between her brows. “You understand.”
“I know you have more-serious problems to deal with than whether or not I want to live on Paroo.”
“Very serious. But it’s also important to me—to us—that you know we’re not without regrets. We wish
you bliss.”
“You’re trying to save people’s lives. I’m sor—regrets for causing you trouble.” He forced his mouth into
what he hoped was a sincere smile.
“It’s normal. Change is difficult for many to accept.”
Good,  you’re  buying  it.  Hook,  line,  and  here  comes  the  sinker.  “That’s because  people  from  my
world haven’t seen what you have. We don’t have your experiences, your tech.” Now let’s start to reel
you  in,  slowly.  “You’re  very good  at  being a  tracker.  It’s  a  shame you’re  starting with  three  strikes
against you.” The frown was back. An admission, again, that he knew the language and she didn’t. “You
have a disadvantage,” he reiterated. Ah, she got that. “Of course, you could always delay the mission a
few months. Live there yourself. Then start—”
“We don’t have that kind of time. Unless you want to see more of your people dead?”
“I swore on my life to protect my people. But that’s your job now. Too bad we can’t switch places,” he
added in an offhand manner as  he concentrated  on keeping  his words  simple, understandable.  It  was
critical she followed what he had to say next. “Just imagine: you could relax in Paroo, a place you know.
I’d fight the zombies in a city that I know as well as you know this ship. It’d be very easy for me to have
people  come  and  go  in  my  house.  Big  backyard.  Thick  bushes.  Very  private.”  He  held  his  breath.
C’mon, c’mon, pretty lady. Connect the dots. Don’t make me do it for you.
She was  very still, her face  blank.  Then slowly she  eased  down  onto  the seat  of the chair.  Her  arms
relaxed. She was thinking, hard. He could see it in the movement of those golden eyes, in the pursing of
that lovely mouth.
Okay,  one  more  thing. This would seal  the deal  or  nothing would.  He  stood,  casually strode  the few
steps to the table, picked up the cube. Images of white beaches ringed by lush green mountains flowed in
his hand. It could have been Hawaii. Or Tahiti. “Looks nice.”

She shot to her feet. “Petrakos.” There was life in her face, her eyes all but dancing. “Don’t go away. I’ll
be back.”
She turned and, barking something out in Alarsh to the guards, sprinted through the doorway. It closed
behind her.
Theo sat on the edge of the bed, elbows on his knees, turning the cube over and over in his hands. He
was always a pretty good poker player. But this was the first time he’d ever gambled for his life.
 

5 
Pietr drummed his blunt fingers on his desktop.  “I have no problem  with your appropriating  this  nil’s
structure,  Commander.  However,  I  have  serious  reservations  about  having  him  participate  in  the
mission.”
“I  fully  understand.  But  his  structure  isn’t  a  transient  rental,  as  Agent  Wain’s  was.  That’s  the
disadvantage.  His  neighbors  know  him.  They’d  question  our  presence  unless  he  was  there.  On  the
positive side,  his presence  would remove  a  great  deal  of suspicion.  And he is involved with the local
security force, sir. He has access to information that could be vital to us.” Jorie hesitated, well aware she
was asking permission to do something that most likely had never been done before on a nil world. She
couldn’t begin to guess how many general-procedure regulations it violated. No, she could. Seven.
“He knows too much about us. How can we be sure he won’t  relay that  to  his superiors  in that  same
security force?”
“We can’t. But as long as the zombies are a threat, I don’t believe he will. He admits he needs  us,  sir.
We leave and hundreds, thousands more will die.”
The captain nodded slowly.
“He’s not your average nil, sir. He has security training. He faced the zombie without panicking.”
“I don’t want him facing zombies, Commander. I want his structure and his knowledge of the locale.”
“Yes, sir, I just meant—”
“I know what you meant. We don’t know what he’ll do after it’s over, and that’s  my concern.  Do  we
reward his assistance by a hard-termination? We’re not the Tresh.”
“He’s accepted relocation to Paroo.”
One silvered eyebrow arched. “Has he?”
“He indicated as much.”
“And a man’s never lied to you, Commander?”
Jorie’s cheeks heated. Hell and damn. But it wasn’t Lorik’s lies Pietr was asking about. “That’s always
a risk.”
“Yes.” Those same fingers that had drummed the desktop now tapped  against broad  lips. “But less of
one if we use a restrainer implant.”
Jorie forced her face not to show the slightest sign of revulsion as an icy chill shot through her. Restrainer
implants were used to control violent prisoners.  The Guardian version wasn’t  the same  as  the one  the
Tresh Devastator operatives had used on her, but still, unease sprinted on spiked  toes  through her gut.
Petrakos wasn’t violent. He was willing. He wanted to help. He had a good face.
And now she had to tell that same good face that they not only wanted to inhabit his structure but invade
his body as well.

 
Petrakos was seated at the table, eating the sweet-bulb slices, when she returned to his quarters. She sat
across from him and slowly began to detail her plan: the use of his structure to  facilitate equipment and
personnel transport. The use of his knowledge of his locale to fill in the gaps in Danjay’s data.
Would he be  willing to  deflect  suspicion from them if his security force  raised  questions?  He  agreed,
readily,  enthusiastically.  He’d  seen  a  zombie.  He’d  seen  Danjay’s  corpse.  Two  very  compelling
arguments.
“Captain Pietr  and  I express  deep  appreciation  for your assistance.”  She’d  poured  herself  a  glass  of
water  but  couldn’t  drink  it.  She  kept  her  hands  folded  on  the  table,  afraid  she’d  make  nervous
movements that would betray  her state  of mind. She  couldn’t  stop  thinking about  the implant. A fatal
charge that could be detonated on a whim. At max level, instant death. But the Tresh had never been so
kindly. No, the Devastator operatives had used low-level pulses on her. Wave after wave of incredible,
unending pain while the Tresh commander, Davin Prow, stood there and smiled his angel’s smile.
She shoved the memory away.
“It’s the least I could do,” he said. “You’re the ones taking all the risks.”
It took her a moment to fully translate his words. She was  sadly out of practice  with her Vekran.  The
more she spoke to him, the more she remembered. She just wished they were talking about something—
anything—else. “Part of that risk is your knowledge of us. You understand,  when this is finished, you
still must go to Paroo.”
He picked up his glass, took a sip of water. “It looks like a beautiful place.”
He would like it there. He would find bliss. Think of that, she told herself. Not what you have to do to
get him to Paroo.
“The captain…the captain requests one further effort from you, as to your intentions.” Hell’s wrath, she
shouldn’t have stumbled over her words. He put his glass down, his eyes narrowing slightly.
“He wants me to make a statement, an oath? I can do that.” He paused. “You understand the word?”
“Oath. I understand.  No,  we  have to…”  Damn, damn,  damn! It  took  all her concentration  just to  sit
there. And her mouth seemed to have forgotten how to speak.
“You have to…?” His voice was low.
She drew in a breath, let it out. “Put a security device on you.”
His frown of suspicion turned to one of puzzlement. “An electronic monitoring bracelet?” He circled his
wrist with his fingers. “Transmits a signal so you know where I am?” He shrugged. “That’s fine.”
“Yes. No. Not quite like that.”
“Oh?” Suspicion returned. “And just what is it like?”
She barely registered her fingers splaying over the area beneath her shoulder next to her collarbone. Her
thumb found the rough scar easily, even through her uniform’s fabric. “It goes here. Inside. Implant.” She
glanced down at  her fingers, then back  up at  his face.  It  showed  no expression  whatsoever,  and  that

chilled her. “You understand this word?”
He nodded slowly. “And just what does this implant do?”
“It’s a security device,” she repeated. “Yes, it locates you. But it also…if you become a threat to us—”
“It kills me.”
Oh, if only he spoke Alarsh! Or her Vekran was better. But that was the very reason they needed him.
“If you become a threat to us,” she repeated, “it permits us to take appropriate  action.”  She  waited  to
see if he questioned her words. He only stared at her. She continued: “The device has different settings.
Hard-terminate is not the only one.”
“What’s the other?” There was a sudden bitterness in his voice. “Slow, painful torture?”
She’d wondered if he understood her explanation. He did, far too well. “We won’t need to  use  it with
you. You want to help us destroy the zombies. You’re willing to relocate to Paroo. You’re not a threat.
You come back to the ship. We remove it. It’s forgotten.”
His hand clenched and unclenched on the tabletop. “If I refuse this security device?” He said the words
with obvious derision.
“The mission proceeds without you.”
“Damn it!” He slammed both hands on the table, then shoved himself out of the chair.
She shot to her feet, hand on her pistol, and questioned her decision to  leave the guards  outside,  door
closed. But he was striding away from her, not toward her. He reached the far bulkhead,  stopped,  but
didn’t turn. She watched the angry rise and fall of his shoulders in silence.
He shoved one hand through his already spiky hair and then dropped his arm to his side. Finally, he faced
her. “That’s one hell of a way to treat a friend.”
Her voice, when she found it, was not much above a whisper. “Regrets, Theo Petrakos.” She meant it.
The knowledge of what that implant could do—its searing, crippling pain—was still fresh, even after ten
years. She didn’t wish that experience on this man who was willing to help her, this man who, in his own
world, was a protector of others. This man with a  very good  face  who,  under  different circumstances,
could well be a friend.
He came back to the table, his knuckles white as he clasped his hands over the back of the chair.  She
was still standing, right hand on her pistol. He stared down at her. “Who makes the decision if I live or
die?”
“The captain. And the mission commander.”
“That’s you.”
“Yes.”
He asked another question, but the words were wrong.
“I don’t understand.”
“This decision. To kill me.” His voice was harsh, raspy. “Two people say yes and I die? Or one person
says yes and I die?”

“You’re not going to die—”
“Two or one!”
“Two. Unless I die during the mission.”
His mouth twisted into a pained smile. “Then I guess I better work real hard to keep you alive.”
 
The entire procedure took less than ten minutes, disappointing Theo considerably. He’d wanted it to hurt.
He needed the pain to remind him that just when he thought he’d figured everything out,  he hadn’t.  He
wanted  Jorie  Mikkalah  to  watch  in awe  as  he gritted  his teeth  and  took  the pain like a  man, without
flinching.
Instead, an older woman with bright orange eyes, skin the color of a rich amber beer, and two long white
braids trailing down her back held a small light over his bare shoulder for a few seconds as he sat on a
padded table in what was obviously the ship’s medical clinic. The light felt—illogically—cold, and by the
time he realized his shoulder was numb, she’d pressed a wide metal disk just below his collarbone.  He
felt a slight thump, not much more than if someone bumped against him. There was no pain.
She took  the light and  the disk  away,  smiled at  him, then  said  something  in  what  he  was  coming  to
recognize as Alarsh. He caught Jorie’s last name in the middle of it.
Commander Mikkalah was studying the data streaming over the clinic’s wall. She hadn’t even glanced his
way  during  the  entire  procedure.  Another  disappointment.  How  could  she  watch  him  in  awe  if  she
wouldn’t even face him? She turned, however, when the woman spoke. There was a tautness about her
eyes and mouth.
Queasy over medical procedures? He hoped his having that implant shoved into him bothered the hell out
of her. It more than bothered the hell out of him. But he had  no choice.  There  was  no other  way they
were going to let him return to Earth.
“It’s finished,” Jorie said. “You may place your shirt. Care with moving for a time. Soreness is expected.”
Either she didn’t want Doc White Braids to know she spoke his language better than that  or  she  really
was rattled. Or there was something about the implant she wasn’t telling him.
He pushed  himself  off  the  padded  table,  accepted  his  shirt  from  the  doc,  then  pulled  it  on.  A  little
stiffness, yeah,  as  he pushed  his right arm through the sleeve.  But he’d  played  softball off and  on for
years, been hit by enough pitches, plowed into enough third basemen. Nothing he couldn’t handle.
Except that this was  an alien device  that could  kill him. He  yanked  his T-shirt  down  to  his waist and
watched  Commander  Mikkalah  have  a  nice  little  chat  with  the  doc  as  he  tucked  it  into  his  jeans.
Instructions on how to detonate the implant? He had  to  find out more  about  that  thing in his shoulder.
Which meant, as much as it grated  on him, he had  to  keep  his line of communication open  with Jorie
Mikkalah.
“We go now.” She jerked her chin toward the door to the corridor.
He  shoved  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  followed  her  out.  The  guards  were  gone.  He  noticed  that
immediately. Of course they were. She had the magic button, the one that could kill him.

She slowed her steps until they were side by side. He slanted a glance her way, tried to see if she had a
new wristwatch  or  badge  or  something clipped  to  her belt  that  was  labeled  Kill  the  Nil.  Nothing  so
obvious, unfortunately. And her face was still grim.
“Don’t like doctors much, do you?” he asked, fighting the urge to grab her by the shoulders and back her
up against the wall. Or grab her and shake her, scream at her for shoving a lethal device into his body.
Theo Petrakos wanted to do that so badly, his throat burned. Sergeant Petrakos kept  walking, making
light conversation, knowing she had home-field advantage right now and he didn’t.
But he would, soon. Patience was a virtue.
And revenge, when it came, would be sweet.
“Med-techs,” she answered. “Vekran term is med-techs. And my opinion is that they’re useful in many
circumstances.”
No, she definitely didn’t like doctors. Good. If he got a chance, he’d introduce her to Suzanne Martinez.
Preferably in Suzanne’s clinic. With a little luck she wouldn’t know what the word veterinarian meant.
He rotated his shoulder as they waited for the elevator,  studied  his surroundings as  a  way to  keep  his
mind occupied, his emotions in check.  The corridors  here  were  busier  than the one  outside  his cabin.
They had passed ten, maybe fifteen crew on the way to sick bay, another dozen just now.  Most  could
walk unnoticed on any Bahia Vista street, the orange or gold eye colors not immediately apparent. Hair
colors, though, were brighter. He saw no soft shades. Blonds all seemed to be yellow-gold blond; black
hair was shot through with blue. Reds were all orange tones. He saw only one other person—a younger
guy—with Jorie’s hair colors of orange, blond, and brown.
Races were tougher to define. And there seemed to be no correlation between skin tone and hair color
that he could see. He’d pegged Jorie to be mixed race when he first saw her running toward him across
his backyard. Later, in the conference room, he’d tried to pigeonhole her ethnicity based on his world’s
standards. Best he could come up with would be a combo of white, black, Polynesian, and Hispanic.
Her curly-haired sidekick, with her pale skin, could be redheaded Irish.
None  of  that  applied  now,  of  course,  with  the  reality  of  where  he  was.  But  still,  except  for  the
mini-Wookiee person, any one of the crew he saw could stroll through his local Sweetbay supermarket
and no one would think twice.
Makes it more difficult to identify the enemy, Theo Petrakos thought.
They’re not the enemy right now, Sarge reminded. We need them to exterminate the zombies.
And after that?
Sarge was silent. Theo smiled inwardly.
The elevator doors opened.  Jorie  stepped  into the empty cubicle; he followed.  The doors  closed.  He
glanced at his watch. Almost eight in the morning. Bahia Vista’s morning. He still had several hours to get
home before someone raised an alarm and started looking for him.
He loved the job. But—vacation be damned—he’d never wanted to go to work so badly in his life. This
was one whopper of a commute.
And he’d need one whopper of a story to cover what had happened to the laptop he was supposed to

have logged in to evidence.
Damn. He’d been so caught up with getting back to Bahia Vista, he forgot about the laptop. He needed
that back or there’d be questions he wasn’t sure he knew how to answer. Being Baker-Acted out to a
psych unit wasn’t something he wanted to contemplate right now. He just wanted to get home, stop the
zombies, and get back to work being a cop. He’d even forgo his scheduled vacation. The past  several
hours had been travel enough.
“The herd has shifted outer zones.” She spoke suddenly, without any preliminaries. And without looking
at him. She stared at the elevator’s control pad.
“Is that good news or bad news?”
The doors opened.  His corridor.  At least,  it looked  like his corridor.  He  hadn’t  spent  enough time in
them to differentiate. And he couldn’t read the damned wall signs.
“Not sure,” she said, stepping out. “We have no T-MOD in,” an odd-sounding word, “to relay accurate
data.”
T-MOD. The laptop.
“Then we’re going home? Down,” he corrected.
“Thirty minutes. Seeker ’droids must go first.”
Thirty minutes! His heart jumped. They reached a cabin door. His, he assumed.
“Fine,” he said. He had no idea what seeker ’droids were, but they’d  just bought him thirty minutes in
which to find that laptop.
She touched his door pad. “Eat. Nap.” He stepped inside. She didn’t. “Thirty minutes.”
“Wait.” His arm shot out, stopping the door from closing.
She tensed. He tried to relax his body so she wouldn’t infer a threat. “I need…I need a favor.”
She looked up at him, one eyebrow arched in question.
“The lap—the T-MOD. My department, my security people know it exists. It was photographed at the
crime scene. I told you that we may already have information on the Guardians. If I don’t return with that
unit, there could be questions you’re not going to like. Questions that aren’t going to help you do  what
you need to do.”
She regarded him, both brows now drawn down.
He pushed. “I agreed to let you put that implant in my shoulder. I don’t want it, but I understand why you
needed to do it. I need that T-MOD unit.”
“Regrets. It’s against regulations for our information to be presented to nil-worlders.”
“It’s evidence in a homicide case. If my lieutenant can’t find it, he’s going to restrict what I can do.” He
tried to keep his explanation as simple as he could. He needed her to understand and to believe that his
participation was of critical importance. God help him if she found out he was clocked out for vacation
and no one would miss him until after Christmas. “Then I can’t help you as much as you need.”

“I cannot—”
“I went through this,” he touched his shoulder, “to help you. A favor,  Commander.  I need  you to  help
me.”
Her lashes lowered briefly, then she looked up. “It’s not that I don’t wish to. It is, I cannot.”
She turned, palming the door closed as she left.
Just on a long shot, he tried opening the door after it closed behind her. Still locked. Damn.
He ran one  hand over  his face.  Eat,  nap,  she’d  said.  Forget  that.  He  first  had  to  look  at  what  that
med-tech had done to him.
He pulled his T-shirt over his head on his way to the cabin’s narrow bathroom. The mirror over the sink
area showed a reddened bruise on his shoulder, but that was all. It occurred to him that maybe nothing
was actually implanted inside him. Maybe they just thumped him and were all having a good laugh right
now.
But maybe not. And he couldn’t take that chance.
It took him three tries to get the shower to operate, and then liquid—he wasn’t  completely sure  it was
water—shot out of a long thin slit in the wall. It had a slippery feel and was colder than he liked, but he
needed his head clear and that would help. No towels, but an air dryer set into the same wall. He felt as if
he were in a human car wash.
He pulled on his clothes, then noticed the image cube still on the bed where he’d left it. Evidence. Proof,
in case he needed it. He might not have the laptop, but at least he’d have this. He positioned his fingers
on the edges as Jorie had and squeezed. A slight vibration, then it flattened back into a square.
He pocketed it and was scratching at the stubble on his chin, trying to think of one last argument to gain
that laptop, when his cabin door opened. He rose from the chair at the small dining table.
“We have a problem,” she said, before he could ask for the laptop again.
He sat back down, his heart moving in a similar direction. “What kind of problem?”
She was clad in the same shorts—some kind of bizarre brown–orange camo pattern—she wore when he
first saw her and the same one-armed shirt, funky boots. Two pistols, a short-barreled rifle draped over
one shoulder,  and  God  only knew  what else  hanging from her  belt.  A  headset  with  microphone  and
eyepiece ringed her neck. This one-woman war machine punched at some touch pads bordering a screen
on the wall behind him. He turned in his seat, watching her.
“Your structure had visitors. The seeker ’droid relayed this image.”
Holy Mother of God. One of his neighbors must have called the police. The image on the screen showed
a patrol car, a fire engine, and a bulky vehicle that had to be a utility truck from Progress Energy.
The devastation of his car, two palm trees, and a large section of his oleander hedge was obvious. The
view was aerial, though, and he couldn’t see if the back of his house was damaged. But he had to assume
it was. Just as he had to assume—no, he knew—personnel on the scene were  looking for him. Or  his
body. Because it looked like a small hurricane had ripped through his yard.
He had to get back there before his lieutenant made that phone call to the next of kin in his personnel file:

Uncle Stavros  and  Aunt Tootie.  They’d think the worst.  No,  Uncle  Stavros  would  know  the  worst,
because he was a retired street cop. Aunt Tootie would light enough candles in church to induce a bout
of global warming.
“Okay.” He rose again, hands splayed. “This is a problem, but not insurmountable. We can—”
He looked at her. Really looked at her, his mind already miles ahead on his plan to beam back down a
few blocks away, then jog up with some excuse that he’d gone out to help anyone injured by the storm,
act devastated by what had happened to his house.
Jog up with a one-woman war machine by his side.
Not a good idea.
“You have to change.”
She did that damned  head  tilt, thick lashes  shadowing her eyes,  her lips slightly parted  as  if she  were
inviting a kiss. He fought the urge to lean into her. She was the enemy. She was an alien. She was not for
him.
“Change?” she asked.
“Your outfit. Clothes.”  He  made  a  short  motion in the  air  with  his  hand  and  tried  to  direct  his  gaze
anywhere but her cleavage or the curve of her hips. “I can handle my visitors. But not if you look  like
you’re going to attack them.”
She  glanced  down,  then  over  her  shoulder  where  the  rifle  peeked  past.  “Understand.  But  what  is
habitually worn?”
“The shorts,” he pointed, “can stay. The top…” He shook his head. It was scoop-necked and cropped
short, like those stretch sports tops women wore for exercise. And it showed off enough of her skin that
he didn’t want her wearing it. “A T-shirt would be better. This”—he motioned to her long sleeve studded
with thin cables  and  what looked  like computer  serial ports—“has  to  go.  And  the  guns.  Pistols.  The
boots.”
He could tell by the slanting of her brows she wasn’t overjoyed with his suggestion. She flipped her hand
toward the screen. “So I engage this situation in just my shorts, the rest of my body naked?”
Well, that would definitely deflect attention from the wreckage of the car and  the trees.  “Where’s  your
cabin?”
“Why?”
“Show me your closet. I’ll show you what to wear.”
 
The elevator went sideways this time, or felt as if it did. Her cabin was almost identical to his, except it
looked  lived  in  and  had  computer  equipment  on  just  about  every  horizontal  surface.  In  spite  of  his
urgency to get home, he was admittedly curious; there was a shelf along one wall that appeared to hold
personal items—another holo cube, a glittering crystal that reminded him of a geode on a  stand,  a  long
box that might be wooden, intricately carved. But apparently she was as aware  of the time as  he was.
She shoved her closet doors sideways with undisguised impatience.

Four jumpsuit uniforms—three black-and-green, one a  light gray—a  long slinky pearlized  green  dress,
two sweaterlike long tops, and a thick, deep blue robe were the choices that greeted him.
“That’s it? Nothing like this?” He plucked at his T-shirt.
“For  napping,  yes.”  From  a  drawer  set  into  the  wall  she  withdrew  a  silky  item.  Short-sleeved,
round-necked, like his T-shirt, though longer. But that’s where  the similarities ended.  And his fantasies
began. It was so sheer as to be almost see-through. Clingy, shimmering, soft. He’d love to see her with it
on. He’d love even more to take it off.
Down, boy, down!
He went back to the closet, slipped one of the long-sleeved sweaters from its hanger. It would have to
do. Something in the bottom of the closet caught his eye. A zippered duffel. He tossed the sweater on her
bed, retrieved the duffel. “Rifle, pistols, any hardware you don’t absolutely have to have in your hand, in
here.”
“Wear this?” She held up the sweater.
He nodded.
She unhooked the rifle and strap, shoved that into the duffel, then stopped, eyes narrowed. “Pistols are
fine under this.”
She was  right. The long, unstructured  sweater  covered  her double  shoulder  holster  and  weapons.  As
long as no one caught her in a bear hug, their existence would most likely go undetected.
“You have different shoes? Boots?” The combination of long sweater and nearly thigh-high boots  were
damned near erotic in tandem. All he needed was for Sophie Goldstein across the street to catch sight of
that, and the whole neighborhood would buzz with the news that their nice Sergeant Petrakos was dating
a hooker.
There wouldn’t be a candle left in the whole state of Florida  if Aunt Tootie  got wind of that.  And she
would, just the way she knew everything else that went on in his life—from her daily phone chats with her
longtime friend Mrs. Goldstein.
With a  shake  of his head,  he turned  back  to  Jorie’s  closet.  His alien seductress’s  shoe  selection  was
equally as limited as her wardrobe.  No  sneakers.  Closest  he could  find looked  like hiking boots.  She
fished out a pair of very normal-looking white socks, sat on the edge of the bed.
She had pretty feet. For an alien one-woman war machine.
Then she stood before him, hands on her hips. “Satisfactory?”
“Don’t stand like that. I can see the outline of your weapons. Pistols.”
Muttering  something  in  Alarsh  he  was  sure  was  nasty,  she  closed  the  duffel,  then  slung  it  over  her
shoulder. “Now we can go to the PMaT on Deck Fifteen, Sergeant Petrakos?”
He wanted to, badly. But he had to try, one more time. “The T-MOD.”
“The data—”
“Strip out the data. I don’t need that. I just need that unit with my evidence tag on it. If the state cyber
guys can’t make heads or tails of the rest of it, that’s not my problem.” He could tell by her frown she

wasn’t following his plea. He took a deep breath. “I just need the outside.” He sketched the shape of the
laptop with his hands. “Not the data. The outside, with the small paper on the corner.” His evidence tag.
“That will stop my security from asking questions.”
She stared at him, eyes slightly narrowed. Thinking. She shifted her weight to her other foot. Still thinking.
He touched his shoulder. A reminder.
She looked away briefly, then back again. “Just the outside?”
“Just the unit. Broken. Malfunctioning.” He thought of the wreckage in his backyard. It was conceivable
the unit could have been crushed. He knew his sound system probably had been.
She  nodded  slowly,  then  flipped  the  thin  microphone  up  to  her  mouth.  There  was  a  long  series  of
strange-sounding words, then silence. More words. She took a few steps toward the door. He followed,
apprehensive, hopeful.
“Now we go, Sergeant Petrakos,” she said, after swinging the mike down. “My lieutenant will meet us on
Deck Fifteen.”
He took that to mean he was getting the T-MOD, albeit a bit altered. “Thank you.” Now all he had to do
was figure out how to get it into what was left of his car without the uniforms on scene noticing that.
 

6 
It looked  like another  bright,  beautiful  day  in  paradise—once  Theo’s  eyes  focused  and  his  stomach
stopped doing nosedives. If he could only stop scratching at his arms, the back of his neck, his…For the
first time in several hours, he saw a small smile curve across Jorie’s mouth.
“What’s so funny?” He didn’t intend that to be the first thing he said when they materialized in a secluded
section of the park two blocks from his house. He intended to give her a briefing of what to expect from
the cops  and  emergency personnel  at  the  scene.  Keep  your  mouth  shut,  keep  a  low  profile,  and
follow my lead was the gist of it. He would get to that in a minute. If he could only stop scratching. And
she’d stop trying not to grin.
“Your stomach spins and a thousand flittercreepers dance on your skin, no?”
“Just a little itching,” he lied. He had no idea what flittercreepers were, but his body felt as if it had gone
through the spin cycle on his washing machine. More  than once.  But he was  not going to  give her the
satisfaction of knowing this nil couldn’t handle it. Not after his embarrassing performance on her ship the
first time. He  urged  her forward  toward  the short  stretch  of brick-paved  street  and  glanced  carefully
down at his watch. His head did another looping spin, then settled. Ten after nine.
“Normal. The body reacquaints itself after a brief separation.”
Neither he nor his roiling stomach  wanted  to  think any further on that  explanation.  “Does  it ever  stop
happening?”
“No. But eventually you ignore it. Don’t worry. We use shuttles to Paroo.”
He wasn’t worried. He had no intention of going through that transporter gizmo again. And he sure as hell
wasn’t going to be on any shuttle to Paroo. “Okay, this is what’s more than likely going to happen when
we walk up. We need to have our stories straight. You say  as  little as  possible,  let me do  the talking.
Understand?”
She nodded. He described the different vehicles, their purpose,  and  their personnel  as  simplistically as
possible,  though he noted  her English—or her understanding of his English—was improving. Once  he
showed his ID, he told her, the cops would know him and most likely accept his story that he was  out
checking for anyone needing help after  the  storm.  He’d  recognized  Jorie  as  a  neighbor  and  he  was
escorting her back home—careful of the tree limbs and downed power lines.
“They’re not going to ask for names, specifics. I’m one of their own. I act concerned, you act concerned,
we go inside and they leave. Easy. Simple. Understand?”
“When they ask which is my structure—”
“They won’t. You’re with me. But if they do, there’s a mid-rise condo at the other end of my street just
behind Cocoanut Grove Center. Grove Palms. Can you remember that?”
“Grove Palms,” she repeated. “And a conto is…?”
“Condo. C-o-n-d-o. Tall structure, many levels, many small apartments. Residential. Like the ship, sort
of.”

“Ah. Conglom.”
“Condo.”
“Vekran, conglom. You, condo.”
They left the park and walked down the shady  side  of the street,  sometimes on the grass,  sometimes,
when  the  foliage  grew  wildly,  on  the  street  itself.  There  were  no  sidewalks.  Late-morning  noises
surrounded them—the slamming of doors, the barking of a  dog,  a  child’s happy  shout because  it was
Christmas break and schools were closed. Street traffic was light; only one car passed. It was after nine;
most of his neighbors would already be at work.
Another minute and he could see the line of vehicles in front of his house.
For the third time during their trek, she pulled up one edge of her sweater, glanced at what looked to him
like a longer, slightly wider PDA clipped to her belt. The magic button that would drop him, writhing, to
the ground? He knew she’d stated that she and her captain would have to agree before she used it, but
he wasn’t  fully sure  he bought that.  He  doubted  that  if he were  to  suddenly grab  her and  go  for  her
weapons, she’d politely hold up one hand and say, Excuse me, I have to make a call.
No, he was pretty sure she had full authority to end his life without a conference. All the more reason he
had to appear completely cooperative until he knew exactly where that magic button was and its range.
She released the unit, pulled her sweater down.
“Messages?” he asked.
“This?” She tapped her side. “Scanner. Right now seeking energy changes that warn of a zombie.”
“All quiet?”
“All quiet.”
He nodded. Right now, she’d  said.  Right now that  thing functioned as  a  scanner.  It  might have other
functions as well. He wasn’t going to cross it off his list yet.
The low rumble of car engines at idle reached his ears, topped by the grinding sound of the fire truck’s
diesel. The green-and-white  patrol  car  sat  at  the curb  in front of his  house,  one  officer  in  a  similarly
colored uniform leaning against its trunk. Another uniform was probably around back or else behind the
fire engine. Its large red bulk blocked his view of anything farther down the street. But the firemen were
loading their gear, packing to leave. That was good. The less people who saw her, the better. He nudged
Jorie forward, quickening his pace, falling into the role of Concerned Homeowner and Can You Believe
What Happened?
Which was pretty much his opening line: “Hey, can you believe that storm?”
His shout made the uniform turn. He recognized the dark-haired woman as Carla Eddington, a patrol cop
who knew him but not well enough to question his fabricated story or Jorie’s presence. A real stroke of
luck. She was only on the job about eight months, having moved down from Massachusetts. Sometimes
it seemed everyone from up north sooner or later migrated to Florida.
Even space aliens and zombies.
“Sergeant Petrakos?” Her voice carried clearly over the engine noises. “Damn, are we glad to see you!”

She jogged toward him, inclining her head to speak into the shoulder mike clipped to her white uniform
shirt as she did, hopefully advising the others on scene that no body bags were needed. He watched her
gaze dart to Jorie in her oversize sweater, shorts, and hiking boots, then back to him again. He was glad
he’d altered Jorie’s clothing. A woman—especially  a  woman cop—would  have definitely noticed  they
were not the norm. “Where in hell have you been?”
“Out checking for injured. Helluva storm.”
“Yeah, some  kind of freak  tornado.  One  of them microbursts,  maybe.  We  thought it kidnapped  you,
Sarge. Couldn’t find a body, but your yard, your car…Hey, that’s what we have insurance for, right?”
“You sure it was a tornado?” He pasted a stricken look on his face.
Another glance at Jorie, then back to him again. “Must have been.  We’ve  got lines down  all over  the
place. Progress has two trucks here, but power’s still out on the street.”
He shook his head, walking with her toward his house. “That I know. I went to check on the neighbors.
Ran into Jorie.” He jerked his thumb to his left, where Jorie kept  pace  silently. Thank God.  “She lives
down the block. I know her from the, uh, gym.” Well, the duffel slung over her shoulder did look like a
gym bag.
“C’mon,” Eddington said to Theo as the fire truck gunned its engine loudly. “I’ll take you ’round back.”
He lightly grasped Jorie’s elbow, bringing her with him.
The scene that met his eyes was  worse  than he remembered.  The fallen palms, shredded  hedges,  and
battered  remains of his unmarked  police  sedan  did  indeed  look  as  if  a  tornado  had  touched  down.
Maritana County was prone to such freak storms. He remembered when a small tornado  tore  the roof
off one house in Treasure Island, touching nothing else on the street. He’d seen water spouts on the Gulf
hop and  skip  over  the barrier  islands, then reappear  again in the channel, heading for the  elite  Tierra
Grande island community.
If he hadn’t seen the zombie with his own eyes, he’d believe a tornado did this too. And he was not only
a cop but a detective. Damn!
“Damn!” he swore  out loud,  his hands  shoved  in his back  pockets  as  he  walked  around  the  twisted
wreckage of his vehicle, Jorie at his side. He needed Eddington to go back to her patrol car so he could
shove the stripped T-MOD into the trunk of his car. “I must have been at the neighbor’s when the twister
did this. The lieutenant’s not going to be happy. I’ll call the wrecker—”
“The boss will just be damned glad you’re alive, amigo,” said a familiar male voice behind him.
Theo  screwed  his  eyes  shut.  Shit!  Zeke  Martinez.  Not  him,  not  now,  not  with  Jorie  standing  a
hairbreadth from his side and Eddington yammering on about how this was one hell of a way to start his
vacation.
He turned just in time to have Zeke clasp one arm over his shoulder. “Thought we’d lost you for good.
I—well, hello there! Now I can see why you weren’t answering your cell phone.”
Zeke had noticed Jorie. Of course he had. Who could miss her? Though Theo obviously missed seeing
Martinez’s car. It must be  behind the fire truck.  “Jorie Mikkalah,  Zeke  Martinez.” He  stepped  out of
Zeke’s embrace, realizing what it might look like. Did her galaxy have same-sex couples? “We, uh, work
together in Homicide,” he added hastily, praying Zeke didn’t go all Latin and kiss him on the cheek.

“Jorie. A beautiful name for a beautiful lady.” Zeke held out his hand.
Panagia mou! Did they shake hands in her galaxy? Or was it a rude gesture, some kind of major insult
that would spawn an intergalactic war? He shot Jorie a tight smile, gave a quick, short nod of his head.
Take his hand, take his hand!
“Thank you,” she said, and—thank you, God—she reached out for Zeke.
He clasped her hand. “So, known this wayward bastard long?”
Theo saw her frown slightly, knew she had no idea what Zeke had asked. His mind blanked on any kind
of  amusing  rejoinder  to  divert  attention  from  her.  And  then  something  worse  happened.  Eddington
answered for her.
“Sarge knows her from working out at the gym. He was checking on his neighbors and ran across her.”
Zeke released her hand. A big grin crossed his face. “Is that so?”
Theo was in trouble  now.  Big trouble.  He  grabbed  Jorie’s  arm,  propelling her toward  his back  door.
“I—we need to make sure all the appliances are turned off.” Maybe then they’d leave and he could plant
the T-MOD in the car.
“I’ll help,” Zeke said.
Shit!
“Might want to open your windows,” Eddington called after them. “That cold front moved  through and
today’s gonna be a hot one.”
Things were hot already. He urged Jorie ahead of him, up the two steps, then stopped on the wide slab
of his back porch. He plastered on his best good-buddy grin and  faced  Zeke.  “Sorry  to  have worried
you. Appreciate your coming over here. But, really, we can handle—”
“I’m sure you can.” Zeke reached around him and opened the door. “Allow me, pretty lady.”
Theo gave her a short nod when she glanced up at him. With a shrug, she stepped inside.
“Now, that’s nice,” Zeke said under his breath, punctuating his words with a  bad  imitation of a  jungle
cat’s growl.
Oh, Christ. He was in deep shit now.
He  followed  Jorie  in.  Cooler  air  met  him  immediately.  That  wouldn’t  last  long,  not  with  the
air-conditioning and ceiling fans off. His appliances all stared blank  faces  at  him as  he pulled out plugs
and flicked off switches. Jorie positioned herself on the far side  of the kitchen table,  duffel at  her feet,
hands behind her, her back straight, her shoulders stiff. He recognized the military posture: parade  rest.
He prayed Zeke didn’t.
Then he realized her posture  also  showed—not  clearly, but it showed—the  outlines  of  her  weapons.
Zeke  was  just coming into the kitchen behind him. He’d  notice.  Zeke  hadn’t  stopped  staring at  Jorie
since he arrived.
Theo did the only thing he could. In two steps he was in front of her, one arm around her shoulder, the
other around her waist in an intimate embrace. He leaned down, his face in her hair, his mouth against her
ear, and pulled her against him. “Don’t stand like that,” he whispered. “Pistols. Relax!”

Her hands had snaked up to rest on his chest. She twisted slightly, looking up at him. Her lips parted as if
she were puzzling out his words. And then she did that damned head-tilt thing.
She was too close. She was too warm. She smelled fresh and soft and sweet, and though his arms were
very aware of her laser pistols, his chest was equally aware of her breasts brushing against him.
Theo lost it. His head lowered. A short kiss, that’s all. Something brief, intense, just to get it out of his
system. Damn her, she owed him that much, for what she’d put him through. He brushed his lips against
hers, then, caution be damned, he forced his mouth down hard. He expected her to jerk away. But her
mouth opened, and his opened more. Tongues touched, teased. Plunged.
The feel of her, the taste of her, exploded through his senses. Heat surged through his body. The groan
he was holding back threatened to strangle him. With a gasp, he released her mouth, then clutched  her
tightly against him, hand on the back  of her head  so  she  wouldn’t look  up at  him, tilt her head  again.
“Sorry,” he rasped into her ear. “Regrets.”
Behind him, Zeke applauded loudly. “I’ll start with the windows in the living room. Might help cool things
off. Though I doubt it.” He slapped Theo on the back as he walked past, snickering.
Theo waited until he heard the first screech of a casement window being forced open. He stepped back,
putting Jorie at arm’s length.
Wide-eyed, she looked genuinely startled.
He shot a glance toward the living room. “Regrets,” he said  again, quietly. “He needs  to  believe…Did
you understand words out there?” He motioned to the backyard.
“Evidently not.” She spoke slowly.
He couldn’t tell if she was angry or in shock. Maybe she’d never been kissed before. Nah. That mouth,
that tongue knew exactly what it was doing. So maybe it was that she’d never before kissed a nil. She—
Good Lord. He’d just kissed a woman from another planet. Another galaxy.
Screech, slam! went a window.
Zeke.  He  had  to  explain  about  Zeke.  “He  knows  me.  Very  well.  I  lied  to  the  officer.  The  security
woman. Gym. Gymnasium.” Her frown prompted another word. “Exercise.” He pumped his right arm as
if he were lifting a hand weight.
“Yes?”
“I said we met in an exercise place—”
“And?”
“Detective Martinez knows I don’t go to an exercise place. I have some equipment here.  At home.  At
structure. In my structure.” He stumbled over the words.
“You kissed me to apologize for lies?”
“He could see your weapons. I had to cover your body.”
She nodded. “Commendable sacrifice, Sergeant.”

Commendable  sacrifice?  The only thing he was  going to  sacrifice here  was  his sanity.  “But  now,”  he
continued, “if he asks,  he needs  to  believe we…that  is, that  you and  I are…”  He  pointed  to  her,  to
himself, then to her again.
“Lovers?” she said. “You understand this word?”
He did. So did his body. He swallowed hard. “Lovers. Yes.” Oh, sweet Jesus, Mary, and Joseph. What
was he getting himself into?
Nothing. A charade for the next ten, twenty minutes. Zeke would leave and they’d go back to being Nil
and Commander  on a  covert  operation  to  exterminate zombies.  He’d  catch  some  razzing  from  Zeke
later, but he could handle that.
He was about to ask Jorie to give him the T-MOD when Zeke stuck his head through the open kitchen
doorway. “You two cooling off yet?”
Theo stepped away from Jorie. “Very funny.”
With a snort, Zeke disappeared.
Theo’s kitchen had two windows, one over the sink and one to the left of the door to the backyard. He
leaned over the sink, pulled on the cord to raise the slatted blinds, and opened that one. Jorie was staring
at the other. He walked over and, making sure  she  was  watching, duplicated  his movements. Then he
flipped the small  latch  on  the  frame  of  the  bottom  window,  braced  his  palms  under  the  frame,  and
shoved.
Screech!
Life in air-conditioned Florida. People rarely opened windows. “Got it now?” he asked her.
“I have acquired knowledge, yes.” Jorie snagged the duffel as he headed for the living room.
“Always admired your decorating,” Zeke said. “Glad to see everything finally matches.”
Camille had taken a lot of the living-room furniture when she left, except for his television, leather recliner,
and  two  end  tables.  Theo  had  finally  bought  a  leather  two-cushion  love  seat  last  month  at  a
Rooms-to-Go clearance sale  and  dragged  the floral-print sofa  bed  Aunt Tootie  had  given him—Zeke
called it his “daisies on drugs” couch—into his spare room. Zeke had been to his house enough times that
he knew that. The comment had to be for Jorie’s sake.
“Don’t have a lot to clean that way,” Theo quipped back. Thank you, God, his brain had finally kicked
back into gear. All he had to do was act normal, talk normal, let the banter flow like it always did. This
was no big deal. So Zeke thought he had a girlfriend. There was  no way he’d  know  she  was  a  space
alien.
Jorie dropped the duffel onto his recliner, took the few steps into his dining room—also empty, thanks to
Camille—and opened her first casement window like a pro. A breeze clattered through the blinds as she
lowered them. Good girl.
“You here to help or stare?” he asked Zeke.
“Didn’t do the bedroom yet. Thought you two might want to, uh, tackle that.”
“I’ll take the spare room.” Theo headed down the short hall. The room had two large windows. He had

to angle around his weight rack and padded flat weight bench piled with gun and car magazines to get to
one window and  kneel on his small sofa  bed  to  open  the other.  When he finished, Zeke  was  leaning
against the doorjamb, arms crossed loosely over his embroidered tan guayabera.
“You sneaky son of a bitch! Going home to restring your guitar, eh? How long has this been going on?”
“You know I don’t discuss my private life.”
“Theophilus, this is Zeke you’re talking to.”
Theo hooked his thumbs in the waistband  of his jeans  and  stared  at  the floor for a  moment, his mind
working a million miles a minute. Should he—could he tell Zeke the truth about outer-space aliens here
on a mission against those things called zombies? Would Zeke even believe what Theo said? He had that
Paroo cube in his pocket. Proof. Except that someone like Zeke wouldn’t know it was  an alien object
just by looking at it.
And Jorie and her magic Kill the Nil button were in the next room. Theo didn’t know what she’d do if
she saw Zeke inspecting the cube.
It would be better to wait, play the game the way Jorie said he should,  for now.  “I didn’t want to  say
anything about her until I was sure,” he said, looking up. That sounded good and fit what Zeke knew of
him.
“And are you sure?”
“I’ve never met anyone like her in my life,” he admitted honestly.
Zeke stepped to the weight rack, picked up a twenty-five-pound weight, hefted it. “She even old enough
to drink?”
Theo pursed his lips, frowning. “Of course.” He had no idea how old Jorie was. He had no idea if space
aliens even drank  liquor. All he knew  for sure  was  they drank  water  and  had  apples  that  tasted  like
watermelons.
“Where does she work?”
“What is this, an interrogation?”
Zeke grinned, then put the weight back on the rack.
Theo used the few seconds to hammer his brain for an occupation for his one-woman war machine, with
her gizmos and gadgets and…“She’s a computer programmer for TECO.” He named the large electric
utility company on the other side of the bay. No way Zeke should know anyone there.
Jorie appeared in the doorway at that moment. Theo realized that if he’d given Zeke the alien cube, they
would have been caught red-handed. “Task completed,” she said. “Anything else required?”
He watched as Zeke turned toward her and knew Zeke heard it—that odd lilt of an accent. The oddly
formal choice of words. This was not the time to raise questions. Not until he was sure he’d be believed
and people—his people—were in a position to act.
“You’re not a local gal, are you?” Zeke was asking.
“Locale? Good one, very pretty.”

Shut up, Jorie! Theo crossed the room in two seconds, cupped his hand on her head,  and  ruffled her
funky, streaked hair in an affectionate gesture. In reality he was trying to shake some sense into her brain.
“She’s, uh, only been here a few months. Her English,” he stressed the word, “isn’t that good. Isn’t that
right, sweetheart?”
She glanced up at him, eyes narrowing for a moment. “English isn’t optimal.”
“¿Habla español?” Zeke tried.
“She’s Canadian,” Theo blurted out, his mind grabbing the images of the Canadian license plates he saw
every winter. “From Quebec.” There, that would explain how she knew English but not well.
“Ah, français!” The minute Zeke said it Theo’s stomach dropped to his feet. Shit, shit, shit! How could
he forget? Suzanne Martinez spoke French.
“My wife’s parents are from Montreal,” Zeke said. “Bring Jorie to the house. She and Suzanne will have
a great time together.”
Like hell he would. “Sure. After the holidays.” He dropped his arm to Jorie’s shoulder, hugged her hard
against him, trying to signal to her to let him do all the talking. “We’re kind of busy until then.”
“L’amour toujours!” Zeke winked.
His back door slammed. “Sarge, you in here?”
Eddington. “Yeah,” he called in reply. Keeping Jorie tightly to his side, he pushed past Zeke and headed
for  the  kitchen.  God  help  him  if  he  left  her  alone  with  his  partner.  There  was  no  telling  what  their
miscommunications might reveal. “What’s up?”
The dark-haired woman stood in the open doorway. “We’re leaving. Wrecker can’t get here until after
eleven. The guys from Progress are still out front, working on the downed power lines. Seems they got a
substation problem too.”
“Thanks for your help. Sorry to worry you.” He meant that. He knew the heartbreak that ran through a
department when one of their own was lost. It had been one of the reasons he’d had to come back.
“Thank you,” Jorie chimed in.
“One more thing,” Eddington said as Zeke sat down at the kitchen table, making himself far too much at
home.  “We  recovered  a  stolen  car  down  the  street.  A-One  Rentals  downtown  reported  it  missing.
Looks like your tornado scared off the joyriders.” She shrugged. “Well, take it easy.”
Theo waited  until the screen  door  closed  behind Eddington’s retreating  figure. One  down,  one  to  go.
“Oh, jeez. Look at the time.” He glanced at his watch. Quarter to ten. He needed to put the Paroo cube
in a secure place and then get that laptop where it belonged. “Let me straighten up a few things here, then
I’ll meet you back at the station, okay?”
“You walking there?” Zeke jerked his thumb in the direction of the backyard.
Theo didn’t have a car. His Jeep Wrangler—his personal car—was in the shop with a burned-out clutch,
and his department sedan was a twisted wreck. Jorie, she…Christ. The stolen rental. He’d never asked
her how she got from Wayne’s apartment to here. Now he could guess. He was harboring not only an
outer-space alien one-woman war machine but a car thief. What next?

As if in answer, a pinging noise sounded from underneath Jorie’s  sweater.  He  felt her flinch. Her  hand
slapped her side, brought up the palm-size scanner gizmo with its yellow-green lights flashing. Her zombie
detector.
Adrenaline slammed through Theo’s body. Oh, God. Not now.
Jorie jerked out of his grasp and bolted into the living room.
Theo was on her heels, heart in his throat, praying he could get to a weapon in time. Not now, not now!
 

7 
“Where? When?” Theo shouted at Jorie. She was bent over his recliner,  pawing frantically through the
duffel bag.  The memory  of  the  slash  of  bright  light  and  that  glowing  hole  in  the  sky  filled  his  mind.
Adrenaline spiked. He shouldered next to her, intent on grabbing one of her laser pistols.
She slapped his hands away from the top of the duffel, then yanked a metal circlet through the opening,
snapped it over her hair, and twirled the mouth mike into place. A torrent of unintelligible words flowed
from her lips.
She pushed him away again, more forcibly this time.
He took the hint and stepped back. Zeke tapped his shoulder.
“What’s the matter?”
Theo had no idea. But she wasn’t digging into the duffle for anything further. No  laser  pistols  filled her
hands. No green glow emerged through his cream-colored living-room wall. The whole problem seemed
to be whatever the conversation was. She was no doubt talking to her ship, to the captain—
Fuck. His hand rose involuntarily to the sore spot on his shoulder.
“Theo?”
He turned and wondered just how much he’d be able  to  tell Zeke  before  someone  pushed  that  magic
button and he dropped dead at his detective’s feet.
“Umm,” he said. Behind him, Jorie’s clipped staccato softened. No zombies, then. And no instant death.
He was still breathing.
“Cell phone,” he offered lamely, with a shrug. “Must be some kind of emergency at  her office. Maybe
they had a storm there too. Probably a server down. Or something.”
Zeke was frowning, looking past him. “Doesn’t sound like French.”
His mind whirled, grabbed another lie. They’d be the death of him yet, if Jorie’s magic button didn’t kill
him first. “Eskimo.” He had said she was Canadian.
“Inuktitut?”
“Huh?”
“She speaks Inuktitut?”
Oh, hell. Was that what the language was called? Trust Zeke to know.
“Yeah, sure,” Theo answered, praying the man wasn’t fluent in it as well.
“Didn’t know TECO was hiring Eskimos.” Another frown.
“Cultural-exchange program  or  something.”  Time  to  end  this  conversation.  He  grabbed  Zeke’s  arm,
nudging him back to the kitchen. Away from Jorie. He had to keep Zeke as far away from Jorie  as  he
could. The last few minutes showed him just how easily his lies could unravel.

“I  will  need  a  ride,”  he  said  as  Zeke  leaned  one  hip  against  the  kitchen  counter.  “Pick  me  up  at
eleven-thirty, after the wrecker gets here?”
“You might need some help with the mess in the yard.  And the lock  on the casement  window in your
master bath is stripped out.”
“That’s okay. I’ve  got a  week’s  vacation  to  fix things. Plus,  Jorie’s  here.”  And there  was  no way he
could sneak the laptop into the car while Zeke was around.
A  slow,  knowing  smile  played  across  Zeke’s  mouth.  “She  sure  is.”  He  cuffed  Theo  on  the  arm.
“Eleven-thirty. And the full story on the drive in. You sly bastard, you.”
“Who, me?” Theo splayed his hands and pasted a look of mock innocence on his face, keeping it there
until his back door closed behind Zeke and he heard the man’s footsteps fade. Then he sagged  against
the kitchen wall and ran one hand wearily over his face.
Sweet Mother of God. Things were happening faster than he could counter them. This might be Jorie’s
mission, but, damn it all, it was his house. His planet. Time to make some rules.
He shoved himself away from the wall and headed back to the living room.
 
Jorie heard  the back  door  slam. She  yanked  one  arm out of her sweater  and  tapped  furiously at  the
resynchronization keys on her technosleeve. Damned nil! She should never have utilized his suggestion to
strip out of her gear. Two of her team were set to transport to Petrakos’s structure. Fortunately, Herryck
had  sent  the  advisory  of  the  impending  PMaT  action  to  her  scanner  as  well,  or  else  their  covert
operation—as Petrakos liked to call it—would have become distinctly not covert.
Nils. Nils everywhere. Inside the structure. Outside the structure. Coming and going without the requisite
petition for permission. A nil kissing her…
She stopped that thought, not wanting to follow it, not wanting to  remember  the hot jolt of desire  that
flooded her when Petrakos’s lips parted her own.
It was all a ruse. He, surely, felt nothing. His only concern was to keep his nil associate, Zeekmarteenez,
from seeing her weapons. So now, when Zeekmarteenez was around, they had to play at being lovers.
Thanks to Lorik, she knew that game well.
“What in hell made  that thing go off?” Petrakos,  striding in from the structure’s  galley, pointed  to  her
scanner.
She looked up from her calibrations, aware  of the sweater  bunched  awkwardly  around  her neck,  and
met him glare for glare. “My team preparing to arrive. Which I knew nothing of because my tech”—she
jerked her chin in the direction of the open duffle—“was in that. Fortunately, Lieutenant Herryck sent a
duplicate alert to my scanner. Or you would be kissing three  trackers  so  that  Zeekmarteenez  wouldn’t
ask what we all are doing here.”
An odd expression crossed his face, his eyes widening ever so slightly, one corner of his mouth quirking,
as if something she said surprised then embarrassed him. Maybe he didn’t like being reminded that he’d
kissed her.  Or  maybe he just didn’t understand  what she’d  said.  She’d  spoken  rapidly,  not caring to
choose words she was sure he’d understand. She was angry at him and with herself. Her team arriving at

an unsecured structure could have created serious problems. And the blame would have rightly fallen on
her. She dropped her gaze back down to her technosleeve, resumed her calibrations. Her captaincy was
at stake. And Danjay’s death would go unavenged.
“Zeke. Martinez,” he said, pausing between the two words. “Zeke’s his first name.”
She caught that she’d erred in her pronunciation. A small matter. If his planet had been civilized enough
to speak Alarsh or even decent Vekran, none of this would even be a problem.
“I must have a secure structure for this mission.” She shoved her arm back through the sweater’s sleeve,
pulled the sweater down over her hips, then adjusted her headset. “Zeke Martinez and the ones out there
working from the large land vehicles. If they have unquestioned access, it will be counterproductive.”
“Zeke would be the only one. But if he thinks we’re living together…”  He  paused,  lips pursing, brows
slanting down slightly.
She didn’t understand his hesitation. Language again? “I comprehend  living together.  Like spoused  but
without contractual agreement for children.”
“Right,” he said,  but his frown stayed  in place.  Then he shook  his head.  “We  need  a  cover  story.  A
reason why you’re in my house. If Zeke believes we’re living together, that would accomplish that.”
She didn’t see a problem. “Let him believe I live here, then. We forget conglom as my structure.”
The frown lessened, but he still regarded her oddly. “Sure. Great.”
There was a flaw in the plan and he wasn’t sharing it with her. She saw  that  in his face,  heard  it in his
voice. And it wasn’t just her military experience that taught her to read those signs. Lorik had lied to her
too.  She  sighed.  “Petrakos.  You  dislike  this…cover  story.”  She  used  his  term.  “If  we  are  to  work
together, complete communication is essential. Why is this option not satisfactory?”
“It’s fine.” He  pointed  to  the duffel bag.  “I have to  get the lap—the  T-MOD  into my car  before  the
wrecker comes.”
She grabbed the stripped unit and handed it to  him, wordlessly.  She’d  had  to  pull in more  than a  few
large favors  to  get that for him—every time he reminded her of the implant in his shoulder,  her  heart
constricted. That’s why she’d gone against the captain’s orders. Guardian tech was never to be left in the
hands of a nil. This  is  only  a  shell,  she’d  convinced  herself. And  some  broken  data-mech.  It  didn’t
really violate general-procedure regulations.
She followed him to the galley but not out into the yard. It took several minutes before he pried open the
twisted rear hatch of his land vehicle and shoved the T-MOD inside. She waited by the open  window,
the breeze  warmer  now and  more  humid. Sounds  reached  her ears—land  vehicles, she  guessed.  But
there were other sounds—mechanical ones—she couldn’t place. A droning buzz nearby. A low rumble.
She watched Petrakos turn the T-MOD at various angles. His gray shirt had wet streaks down the back,
and when he bent over to adjust the unit again, she decided he had an extremely attractive posterior. For
a nil.
He strode toward the house but stopped at a small shed attached to an exterior wall and withdrew a flat
shovel. When he slammed the edge into the T-MOD, she realized two things: he was making the damage
to the unit correspond to the vehicle, and there was no chance—given that same damage—that the unit
would ever be recognized as Guardian tech.

A weight lifted slightly from her shoulders, and by the time he trudged up the back steps,  she’d  figured
out how to  work  the water  dispenser,  located  his  drinking  glasses,  and  had  a  chilled  glass  of  water
waiting when he opened the door.
He took it with a nod. “Usually not this hot this time of year,” he said before he downed the contents.
“Zombies,” she told him, and, at the slanting of his brows, sought a simple explanation without revealing
that the Guardians were still in the process  of trying to  understand  what was  happening on his planet.
“The  herd  is  uncharacteristically  large.  To  generate  their  portals,  they  utilize  fluctuations  in
electrical-magnetic currents in the atmosphere. It affects weather patterns.”
He put the empty glass in the basin, then glanced over his shoulder at her. “I think it’s time you gave me a
complete education on these—”
“Yoo-hoo!  Theophilus?” A high-pitched voice echoed  through  the  structure,  followed  by  an  insistent
rapping noise. “Yoo-hoo!”
“Shit.” Petrakos’s voice was low, harsh. “My neighbor Sophie  Goldstein,” he said,  before  Jorie  could
ask. “Stay here.”
Another unauthorized intruder, and one—if neighbor had the same meaning in Petrakos’s language as it
did in Vekran—more than familiar with the immediate locale. Her perfect plan, Jorie realized as Petrakos
strode swiftly from the galley, was gaining considerable imperfections. It must be that the zombie attack
generated  an  unusual  state  of  confusion  surrounding  his  structure.  She  could  tell  from  Petrakos’s
reactions that these visitations were not the norm.
Stop looking for problems where there are none, Galin often chided her.
The thought of her brother momentarily distracted her from the voices in the next room. She’d crafted her
transmit to him on Danjay’s death as gently as she could. She didn’t know if he’d watched it yet. But she
already knew what his pain would feel like.
With  no  little  impatience,  she  waited  for  Petrakos  to  dispense  with  this  latest—and  she  hoped
last—intruder.
 
“Don’t worry, Mrs. Goldstein. Everything’s fine,” Theo called as he crossed the living room toward the
squat image of his gray-haired neighbor. Mrs. Goldstein jiggled the handle on his screen door. It took a
certain—deliberate—combination of pressure and twisting to  open  it. One  of many little idiosyncrasies
he’d added to his house as a means to protect his privacy, in addition to the usual burglar alarm.
And of course, the Glock in his nightstand.
“Of course  I was  worried.”  Sophie  Goldstein had  the screen  door  open  and  was  three  steps  into his
living room when he came up to her. She was in a bright lime-green tracksuit that matched the polka-dot
scarf wrapped like a headband around her frizzy hair. “That’s what women do. Worry.”
So much for his privacy protection. And his privacy. What Mrs. Goldstein knew, his aunt Tootie would
know. Which meant he had to keep Jorie away from—
“I was frantic, what with the police car and fire truck and everything. Something serious happened, I told
Tootie.”

Theo winced. He should have assumed Mrs. Goldstein would be on the cell phone to his aunt, first thing.
She disseminated information faster than a police APB.
“Then I saw you and that young gal walking down the street,” she continued, craning her neck, trying to
peer  around  Theo’s  broad  form. “She’s  still here,  yes?  Just  wanted  to  make  sure  you’re  both  okay.
Terrible storm.”
Theo moved right as she sidled left. “Just some tree-limb damage. I’ll call Aunt Tootie—”
“Known that young gal long?” Mrs. Goldstein edged right, forcing Theo to take another step back as he
countered. “I described  her to  Tootie,  but she  said  you’ve never  dated  a  redhead.  Though her hair’s
really more of a gold and chestnut, isn’t it?”
They were almost to the kitchen doorway.  Theo  heard  a  soft  clank  and  thunk  behind him. His back
porch door closing. Someone else arriving or Jorie  exiting? He  prayed  it was  the latter,  because  there
was no polite way he was going to keep Mrs. Goldstein out of his kitchen—or from getting a closer look
at Jorie so she could report back to his aunt. That, he surmised, was her current mission.
When no voices hailed him from behind, he half-turned and leaned back against the doorjamb. Out of the
corner of his eye he saw movement in his yard: Jorie, head bowed over her scanner, marching around in
widening circles.
“My car was totaled,” he told Mrs. Goldstein as she squeezed by him. “Jorie’s out there  recording  the
damage now. She’s a big help.”
“Jorie?”
“She’s a computer programmer. We have to get back to work shortly.” Theo spoke to the back of Mrs.
Goldstein’s head. She’d glued her face to his kitchen window and was intently watching Jorie  pace  the
length of his oleander hedge. “One of my detectives is coming by to give me a ride in so I can pick up a
new car.”
“Jorie.”
“Known her for a couple weeks. We’re, uh, friends.”
That earned him a glance from Mrs. Goldstein, over her shoulder.
Friends, he’d  said.  Friends,  because  that would keep  Aunt Tootie  from jumping to  conclusions.  But,
damn, part of his cover  story  with Zeke  was  that  Jorie  was  living with him. Sophie  Goldstein was  far
more likely to witness any comings or goings from his house than Zeke was. Friends was  not going to
cut it with sharp-eyed Sophie.
Theo shoved his hands into his pockets and tried to re-create the sheepish look he’d bestowed earlier on
Zeke. “Actually, she’s become very important to me. But I didn’t want to get Aunt Tootie all excited….
Well, you know how it is.” He shrugged and gave her an embarrassed smile.
Mrs. Goldstein turned completely around. “So, you’ve been seeing her for a couple weeks?”
“Two, three months. We met working on a case,” he said, and the last part wasn’t a lie. “She does some
consulting work.”
“She ever been married? Any kids?”

Spoused. He could hear Jorie saying her term. He wondered if she was or ever had been. “No. But,” he
added, thinking of her teammates who would be using his house, “she comes from a large family. They’re
from Canada. Northern Canada. Lots of cousins. Very friendly family.” He smiled.
Mrs. Goldstein smiled back. “Oh, how nice.”
He could almost hear her and his aunt already planning the wedding with its large guest list. “Once we get
this all cleaned up, get settled, we’ll, uh, ask you over for coffee sometime. Next week or so. Okay?”
“Tonight—”
“My vacation starts today. We already have plans.” He ushered her out of his kitchen and back toward
the front door. “Some of Jorie’s cousins are coming by.”
Mrs. Goldstein patted his cheek as he held the screen door open for her. “Make  sure  she  knows  how
lucky she is to have you, Theophilus. Not like that Cam—”
“Yes, ma’am,” he cut in quickly. He didn’t want to talk about Camille. He shoved thoughts of his ex-wife
away, along with his unease at sharing his personal space with a  woman again. But Jorie  wasn’t  just a
woman. She was an alien one-woman war machine, and her presence was part of her job. That was all.
It wasn’t like he had to carry on conversations with her, care about what she did or where she went.
He shut the screen door and jiggled the lock  into place  as  Sophie  Goldstein hurried across  the street.
Probably couldn’t wait to tell Tootie all she’d seen and heard. The cell-phone  towers  would melt from
the heat of the two women’s rapid exchanges.
Which meant his aunt would be calling him shortly thereafter. He hoped she’d call on his cell phone. He’d
warn Jorie not to answer his house phone if it rang. And he had to remember—maybe he should really
write down—just what he was telling Zeke and Sophie about Jorie.
With a frustrated shrug, he returned to the kitchen, yanked open his porch door, then trotted  down  his
back steps to catch up with Jorie. The breeze had picked up slightly but it was getting hotter, Florida’s
humidity lying against his skin like a damp cotton cloak.
The tips of Jorie’s multicolored hair were stuck to her face. Her eyes narrowed as he approached,  but
she wasn’t looking at him. Green lines slithered across  the screen  in her hand.  He  wondered  if one  of
those represented the deadly tracking device in his shoulder.
“Mrs. Goldstein’s gone,” he said when she didn’t look up. “But we may have to deal with her—talk to
her,” he corrected, not sure if she understood the expression, “at a later date. Unfortunately, she’s friends
with my—what’s the problem?”
Red and blue lines suddenly crisscrossed the screen.
“Zombies start  to  wake.  Again.” Jorie  tapped  at  the screen  with quick,  deft  motions.  Colors  shifted,
changed. She frowned.
Shit. Monster naptime was over. “Coming here?”
“Insufficient data at  this juncture.  But this, see?”  She  pointed  to  a  pulsing red  line. “Energy surge.  An
awareness coupling floats in its wake. This,” she said, shifting her finger to a blue triangular pulse, “is their
C-Prime.  He  is  past  marginal  elevation  on  his  output.  He  should  not  even  be  able  to  output!  Yet
clearly—”

“Marginal elevation?” This wasn’t clear at all, but he guessed it was some kind of overload situation. Like
when his computer told him insufficient available memory to perform the requested operation.
Jorie looked up at  him, lips tightening, then she  murmured a  few soft  foreign words  that  sounded  like
some  kind  of  plea.  “My  Vekran  is  insufficient  for  detailed  explanations,  Petrakos.  And  there  is  no
time—”
“Okay, just tell me, how long before a zombie shows up in my backyard again?” He had a sudden visual
of a battle between the tow truck—due to arrive shortly—and the razor-clawed zombie. He wasn’t sure
who would win.
“Four to five sweeps.”
“Sweeps?”
She was shaking her head again. “Increment of time. How do you measure it?”
Theo thought of the minute hand sweeping a clock face, then remembered she had used minutes before.
“Seconds. Minutes. Hours. Sixty minutes in each hour.”
“And your standard day? Sunwake to sunset?”
Sunwake. She must mean sunrise. “Twelve hours, sunrise—sunwake—to sunset. Twelve hours,  sunset
to sunrise. Twenty-four hours total. That makes one day.”
“Hours,” she repeated, though with her accent it sounded like ow-wears. “Vekran, sweeps. Four to five
sweeps, your hours, zombies come back.”
Four  to  five  hours?  Cristos!  It  would  be  mid-afternoon.  Normally  not  a  busy  time,  but  this  was
Christmas  week.  Kids  were  home  from  school.  Families  were  running  to  the  mall,  buying  presents.
Dozens of people might not only see  those  things but get hurt. Or  killed. “Can  you get a  bigger team
here?” Theo’s mind shifted into plan-and-attack  mode  as  he envisioned some  kind of galactic SWAT
team moving into place. “We could kill the zombies when they show up.”
“This is the problem, Petrakos. It is not only time. I know the zombies will arrive, I cannot yet tell where
their location will be.”
“You mean they might not show up here in Bahia Vista?” That could be good news. Maybe they’d ooze
out of their glowing green hole in the middle of the Sahara Desert. Or on an iceberg somewhere. “They
could go to another part of this planet?”
Jorie was  shaking her head.  “Unlikely. Your  locale,  this  Florida  state.  It  has  electromagnetic  storms,
precipitation rate, humidity. I have explained this.”
There were other hot and humid tropical locations, and he said so.
“Their C-Prime established…No. That is not the word. Their C-Prime claimed—marked—this hot and
humid locale with its scent trail. So this is now their primary region. Not just Florida state. But this,” and
she swept her hand and the scanner out toward his yard. “Your city-region.”
“So they are coming back here?”
“To your residence?  Unlikely.  But  here,”  and  her  hand  moved  out  again,  “yes.  Somewhere  in  your
city-region, they will come.” She pinned him with a hard stare as her words chilled him. Unknown killers

were about to strike in his city, and no one knew where. “I have called my team,” she continued. “In one
sweep,  two,  we  will  have  more  data.  We  need  that  so  we  can  arrive  at  the  portal  site  before  the
zombies.”
We. He heard the we and knew it included himself. He was their cover, their transportation. Their only
hope of getting to the zombies without causing more terror.
Except he had no car. Zeke was due here in forty-five minutes—and he’d find a house full of outer-space
aliens girding for war. Still, Theo knew that if he tried to explain what had happened—the Guardians, the
zombies—Zeke wouldn’t take him back to the department for a replacement vehicle. He’d take Theo to
Bayfront Medical to lock him in the psych ward.
Because unless Jorie beamed down that Wookiee-looking  one,  none of the outer-space  aliens looked
outer-spacey enough to raise an alarm.
For a moment he considered  asking Jorie  to  beam  Zeke  up to  her ship. Let  the detective  experience
what Theo  had.  But  then  Zeke  Martinez  would  be  another  nil  with  too  much  knowledge  about  the
secretive Guardians. Jorie’s captain would order an implant inserted in Zeke’s shoulder. And Theo might
be the cause of Suzanne becoming a widow.
Because there was no way in hell Zeke would go to Paroo and leave his wife behind.  Suzanne was  as
much a part of Zeke as his Glock and his badge. His friend would fight to  stay  here  on Earth,  and  the
Guardians would either kidnap him or kill him.
Theo couldn’t live with that. He couldn’t risk his closest friend’s life.
Nor  could  he  risk  the  citizens  of  Bahia  Vista  having  their  brains  sucked  out  by  worm-covered
intergalactic zombies.
He was, he realized grimly, his planet’s lone soldier.
And this was turning out to be one helluva start to his long-overdue vacation.
 

8 
Theo leaned one hip on the edge of his kitchen table and tried to look nonchalant as Zeke strode up his
back  porch  steps.  It  wasn’t  easy.  He  was  far  too  aware  that  Jorie  and  three  of  her  outer-space
commandos  were  hunkered  down  in  his  spare  bedroom,  with  all  sorts  of  blinking  and  glowing
computer-type  equipment  nestled  in  between  his  weight  rack  and  sofa  bed.  He  recognized  the
curly-haired redhead from the ship. The other two—both guys he caught only a  glimpse of—he  didn’t
remember seeing. One  looked  to  be  mid-twenties,  Caucasian,  fair  hair  shaved  close.  The  other  was
older—mid-thirties—and could have been the heartthrob hero in a pirate movie, right down  to  his long
black ponytail, tanned complexion, and silver hoop earring. All that was missing was a parrot.
Fortunately,  his power  had  come  back  on ten minutes ago,  so  he’d  tuned  his kitchen CD-radio  to  a
Tampa sports-talk station to drown out the sounds of their voices. He also had the shower running in his
second  bath—something that caused  his alien  one-woman  war  machine  to  launch  into  a  half-Alarsh,
half-English tirade about wastefulness. He gave Jorie permission to turn it off once he and Zeke left.
Cover story.
“Wrecker’s not here yet?” Zeke asked, pulling open the screen door.
The devastation that had been Theo’s car still sat at the end of the driveway.
“It’s Christmas week. Nothing runs on time,” Theo answered.
“True, very true. Where’s your little friend?” Zeke’s grin had a distinctive devilish curve.
“Getting cleaned up.” Theo pushed away the brief fantasy that sprung into his mind of a wet and naked
Jorie in his shower. “I told her I’d  take  her out for a  bite  to  eat  when I come  back.”  He  knew  Zeke
wanted to see Jorie again. There was no way Theo was going to allow that.  And he didn’t want Zeke
wandering through his house and stumbling over the space commandos, even if they looked not the least
bit spacey clad in T-shirts and sweatpants plucked from his closet.
Zeke would hate being on Paroo, away from Suzanne.
Theo pulled a slender digital camera from his pants pocket and waved it in the direction of his battered
car. “I have photos of the damage for the lieutenant. But the trunk’s jammed. The laptop we found at the
scene is still in there.” As was his sound system—or what was left of it. That was really going to  put a
damper on the lieutenant’s holiday party.
“Ouch.” Zeke winced as he shot a glance over his shoulder. “So much for preserving the evidence.”
Theo shoved himself away from the table. “Yeah, I’m going to  catch  some  shit from Stevens  on that.”
The lieutenant didn’t like to hear excuses. Colton Stevens kept a miniature skateboard on his desk  that
he used as a bullshit gauge. A detective knew he was in trouble when Stevens would pick up the toy and
start  spinning the wheels—a  not-so-subtle  hint the lieutenant felt you  were  spinning  your  wheels,  and
wasting his time. “Help me with that trunk, will you? The wrecker should be here any minute.”
“Sure, boss.” Grinning, Zeke followed Theo out the door.
Theo propped the lid of the trunk up enough so that Zeke could snake his arm inside and grab the laptop.

“Not  good,”  Zeke  said,  passing the dented  unit to  Theo  as  the sound  of a  rumbling engine—the tow
truck, probably—grew louder.
“The geek squad might be able to do something with it. I’ve heard of worse cases.” But Theo doubted
any of them had originated in another galaxy.
The increasing noise was the tow truck—a  flatbed,  actually. Theo  greeted  the driver with a  wave  and
endured the man’s ribbing about the condition of his car. Fifteen minutes later his car was secured and on
its way back to the garage.
Theo jerked his chin at Zeke’s silver four-door department-issue sedan parked on the street. “Let’s get
going so I can get back here. I am supposed to be on vacation.”
Zeke dug in his pants pocket for his keys. “Your friend in the shower—what did you say her name was?”
“Jorie,” Theo supplied as they headed down his driveway.
“And Jorie’s part of your vacation plans, I take it?”
Theo only grinned and ducked into the passenger seat. The less said, the better. That way he wouldn’t
have to remember any more lies.
Though Zeke, being Zeke, wasn’t about to let the matter drop without one more try. On the ten-minute
ride to the department’s two-story brick building on Central, Theo stuck to his story, adding only the few
additional items he’d mentioned to Sophie Goldstein: he’d met Jorie about three months ago, they’d hit it
off, and things were now moving to a more serious stage. She was going to spend the next week or so
with him, see how things went.
Then  Theo  deftly  switched  to  the  topic  of  the  Tampa  Bay  Lightning’s  recent  winning  streak  and
listened—with relief—as Zeke debated the strengths and weaknesses of the team’s current goalie.
“I think last year’s knee surgery has made him too cautious. Yeah, nothing gets through his five-hole, but
if someone roofs one…”
Theo  propped  his  arm  against  the  passenger-side  window  and—letting  Zeke  ramble  on—glanced
casually at his watch. Four to five hours before the zombies returned and began sucking the brains out of
Bahia Vista’s citizens, leaving behind only bulging wet eyeballs.
It would probably take him thirty to forty minutes to secure a new ride,  another  thirty to  let Lieutenant
Stevens chew him out over the condition of the laptop, and another ten after that—traffic permitting—to
get back. It felt like time wasted, even though Jorie had assured him that there was little he could do until
they had a definite entry point for the zombies. After that…he had no idea.  He  had  a  huge information
gap as far as these zombies were concerned. Partly, he knew, it was the language differences  between
Jorie and himself. But partly he suspected there were things she simply didn’t want him to know.
One more thing to worry about.
He massaged the ache in his shoulder as Zeke turned on to Central Avenue. It would be so good to have
an ally in this. The desire to blurt out the truth was almost choking him. Besides Zeke, there was David
Gray, a former Maritana  County  deputy,  now a  top  agent with FDLE’s  Tampa  office. Damned good
man, damned fine shot. The three of them could—
No, they couldn’t. Theo rubbed his shoulder again. He didn’t want Zeke or David to  meet Doc  White
Braids.

Plus he’d  left the Paroo  cube—purposely—in  his  nightstand  drawer.  No  temptation  to  present  it  as
evidence and risk others getting sent to the nil retirement home in another galaxy.
“Sure, I’ll ask Jorie if she wants to go to the Lightning game next week,” Theo said, dropping back into
Zeke’s  monologue on ice hockey.  “But her family  has  some  kind  of  big  party  coming  up.  Not  sure
when.”
“You pull something?” Zeke pointed to Theo’s hand pressing against his shoulder.
With a slight self-conscious flinch, Theo jerked his fingers back from the small area where his live-or-die
locator was embedded. “Must have, when I tried to get the trunk open earlier.”
“There’s this great herbal goo for sprains, has emu oil and other good stuff,” Zeke said as he pulled the
car into an empty space in the department’s parking lot. “Stop at the health-food store on Ninth on your
way home, pick some up. It’ll work wonders. Then you can…”
Theo pushed open the door as Zeke’s herbal-remedy recommendations droned on. “Drop the laptop off
over at evidence, will you? I gotta go see  Stevens.  Then I have to  see  what Gretchen  has  available. I
don’t know how long the paperwork for the new wheels is going to take.”
“Sure, boss. Just make sure they don’t give you Ackerson’s old car. He has the big dog that gets carsick
all the time. I hear they still can’t get the smell out. I told them to  try that  holistic citrus-enzyme stuff. I
even got Suzy using it at the clinic. But do they listen to me? No.”
Theo glanced again at his watch as Zeke strode away. Three hours thirty-five minutes until the zombies
arrived. Stale dog puke and citrus enzymes were the least of his worries.
 
The first bright spot in an otherwise baffling, nerve-racking day, Theo thought, flipping the keys to
his replacement vehicle around in his hand.  Well, maybe two  days.  He’d  somewhat  lost track  of time
since outer-space  aliens had  kidnapped  him. No,  it was  only one  day.  It  had  been  about  one  in  the
morning when that glowing green hole erupted in his backyard. It was now almost two in the afternoon of
the same day.
Are we having fun yet? echoed sarcastically in his mind as he approached the five-year-old white Ford
Expedition parked  along the chain-link fence.  Theo’s  ears  were  still ringing from his lieutenant’s  terse
reprimand over the condition of the laptop. His day’s  bright spot  now centered  on his acquisition of a
decent vehicle. He would have been satisfied with a clean four-door sedan. But when Gretchen offered
him the option of the SUV—high mileage, dents, and all—he’d jumped on it.
For one thing, cramming three space commandos into the backseat of a Crown Vic wouldn’t be the best
idea. Second, the extra height and interior room of the SUV would work to their advantage. He hoped.
Theo wasn’t really sure what would give them an advantage  over  towering zombies that  had  arms like
razor-sharp wrecking balls. But a four-wheel-drive SUV had to be a better deal than a four-door sedan.
He turned the ignition and the engine churned, rattling the SUV with a shudder that probably approached
6.5 on the Richter scale. Great. But it, like most pool cars, was a high-mileage vehicle. He had to expect
some wear and tear.
He tapped the gas pedal, hoping a little more juice would settle the engine down, aware that what he’d
thought was his day’s bright spot was considerably dimmer. He cranked the AC  to  the highest setting.

Hot air rushed against the side of his face. The driver’s side vent was missing completely. He scanned the
dashboard. Two more vents were broken, and the passenger one was gone as well.
Oh, joy.
Everything else appeared roughly the same  as  in his now-totaled  Crown  Vic. A blue light was  tucked
behind  the  rearview  mirror.  Connections  for  a  city-issued  computer  protruded  from  an  obtrusive,
swivel-arm stand  that hovered  over  the trunk-mount  radio,  conveniently  blocking  access  to  the  most
essential piece of equipment: the dual cup holder. Theo bowed his head briefly, wondered, What next,
then flicked the strobes on, faintly catching the blue light’s reflection on the dash due to the sun’s glare. At
least that worked. He tested the PA  and  siren,  shutting the blaring high-low pitches  off once  satisfied
they functioned.
His cell phone trilled while he adjusted the rearview mirror. He quickly checked the caller ID. Right on
time.
“Yassou, Thia Tootie,” he greeted her in Greek. “How are you?” He put the SUV in reverse—praying
the back bumper wouldn’t fall off when he did so—and swung out of the space.
The AC  chose  that moment to  kick  on and—miracle  of miracles—stayed  on  even  after  he  took  the
vehicle out of reverse.
He was heading north on Eighth Street,  past  the old oak-shaded  rooming houses  mixed in with those
converted to office buildings, by the time Aunt Tootie finished grilling him about the “storm” and started
her inquisition on the subject of Jorie. The young woman was from Canada, Sophie had told her.
“Northern Canada. She’s thirty…uh, thirty-two,” he said, figuring that sounded about right. “Works for
TECO,  doing  technical  stuff.”  The  more  vague,  the  better.  Plus  his  aunt  had  more  than  a  passing
knowledge of that “technical stuff”—at seventy-three, she blogged, Web-surfed,  had  her own page  on
MyWeb, and belonged to at least  a  half-dozen  Poggle groups  where  she  and  hundreds  of her closest
cyber-friends chatted about the latest romance, sci-fi, and mystery novels.
His uncle Stavros controlled the TV remote.
It was a very happy marriage.
“And you’ll bring her over to meet us after Christmas?” his aunt was asking. “You are having Christmas
dinner with your uncle and me, aren’t you, Theophilus?”
Skata. He’d forgotten all about that. Christmas dinner had always been at Uncle Stavros’s house, even
before  his father’s  job  with Southwest  Sea  Freight kept  him away  from  home  more  and  more,  even
before his mother decided her heart belonged to Las Vegas, even before  his parents  divorced.  It  was,
plain and simple, Aunt Tootie’s cooking.  No  one  made  souflima,  that  wonderful pork  dish, like Aunt
Tootie did. Then there was always the avgolemono, a savory chicken and  lemon soup.  And plenty of
Christopsomo—sweet Greek bread—feta cheese, olives. After that would come the kourabiethes and
syrup-soaked melomakarana, and,  of course,  baklava  in all its glorious feather-light layers.  And the
coffee. Thick, sweet, pungent…
Theo’s stomach rumbled. When had he last eaten? Did that even matter?  If Jorie  and  her commandos
couldn’t stop the zombies, there’d be no one left in Maritana County to worry about a holiday dinner or
syrup-soaked melomakarana.
“I hope to be there for Christmas dinner,” he told her, running a traffic light as it flashed from yellow to

red. He had to get home, had to find out if Jorie had  any more  information on the zombies.  Plans had
begun to form in the back of his mind. “But one  of my detectives  caught a  case  last night. I might be
working.”
“Your vacation—”
“Part of the job. You went through that with Uncle Stavros.” His uncle had been a street cop his entire
career with BVPD. Theo still went to the burly old man for advice from time to time. In fact, he could—
Nah. Doc White Braids’s image surfaced again.
His aunt sighed and murmured a protective prayer in Greek.
“I’m always careful,” he told her. “If not Christmas, then New Year’s, okay?”
“S’agapo, Theophilus.”
“Love you too, Aunt Tootie.” He meant it. Tootie and Stavros had been the sole stable influence in his
life. “Hug Uncle Stavros for me. I’ll talk to you in a couple days.” He closed the cell phone with a snap
and—fingers tapping impatiently on the steering wheel—found himself stopped  behind a  line of  traffic
slowing to turn into the Sweetbay grocery store parking lot.
The questions in his mind, however, just kept on coming.
 
Jorie sat cross-legged on the carpeted floor of the small room, her gaze flicking from the data  scrolling
across her T-MOD to her team. To her left, Herryck and Trenat were dissecting the latest information on
the herd’s movement. Their voices rose and fell, halting only when Rordan—Commander  Kip  Rordan,
on her right—swung away from his T-MOD to interject something.
Immediately, Tamlynne Herryck’s  expression  would change from studious  concentration  to  unabashed
bliss. Her wide mouth would soften, and her light eyes would unfocus slightly.
Not that Tamlynne had any particular interest in Rordan. But there wasn’t a female on board who minded
looking at Kip Rordan, Jorie included. A few had  even done  more  than look  at  the tall, well-muscled
commander who kept his shoulder-length shiny black hair neatly pulled back and clipped in a tail. Jorie
didn’t think Tamlynne was in that group, but it didn’t matter. Rordan might be blessed with an extremely
good face—she thought him almost pretty in spite of his strong mouth and straight nose—but he was also
a  good  tracker,  and  he  was  even  better  at  analyzing  and  synthesizing  herd  data  from  a  T-MOD.
Handicapped by Danjay Wain’s death, Jorie  needed  a  team that  could  obtain  information quickly and
respond even faster.
So  when Captain  Pietr  had  recommended  Rordan’s  inclusion  in  her  team  at  the  last  moment,  she’d
agreed. Even though Kip Rordan was equal to her in rank and head of his own tracker team. And even
though Kip Rordan was Lorik Alclar’s close friend.
But that could  be  a  benefit. Jorie  was  determined  to  gain the captaincy  Pietr  dangled  before  her.  Let
Rordan be witness to her team’s success and report it, firsthand, to Lorik.
A success that could well start  with their first chance  to  challenge the zombies.  Data  on the herd  was
coming  in  more  quickly  now  as  the  juveniles—always  on  the  outer  edges—were  thrumming  in
anticipation of creating scent trails from their kills.

“They’re  weaker,”  Tamlynne  Herryck  said,  pointing  to  the  oscillating  lines  on  her  T-MOD  that
represented the younger zombies.
“But there are more of them,” Jorie answered just as Rordan did, her words running over his.
“Look at their numbers.”
She glanced at Rordan, nodding. “Exactly.”
“Ten,” Trenat offered.
Ten juveniles at the front of a craving. There were rarely more than six.
“Should  be  interesting,”  Jorie  quipped,  then:  “We  have  two  sweeps,  seven  minutes  before  primary
emergence.  We—”  And she  halted,  hearing a  rumbling  mechanical  noise  outside  the  structure.  Most
likely that was Petrakos returning. One of the lines of data on her T-MOD represented his location, and
last she checked, he was less than a mark from his structure.
But he could  also  be  with that shorter  man, that  Zeke  Martinez.  Petrakos  had  said  it was  normal for
Martinez to come by. Though Jorie’s pretense of being Petrakos’s lover was supposed to put a halt to
that.
Unless  their  pretense  hadn’t  been  convincing—something  Lorik  would  probably  find  amusing  if  that
information got back  to  him. From  Rordan.  He  stood  as  she  did.  She  waved  him back  down  as  she
tugged her headset through her hair and let the metal circlet drape around her neck. “If he’s with one of
his coworkers, they expect  me to  be  here.  Run one  more  deep  scan  on those  juveniles, confirm their
R-Five levels again. I’ll be right back.”
Jorie sidled through the half-closed doorway and headed for the galley. Kitchen, she corrected herself,
as a  boxy white land vehicle lumbered into view. She  could  see  Petrakos  at  the  helm.  No  one  else
seemed  to  be  with him, and  no other  vehicle followed.  A curious sense  of relief—and  validation  that
she’d judged him correctly—flooded through her as he guided the vehicle to a halt. He thrust both hands
through his short, spiky hair and, for a moment, held that position. Then with a movement that hinted at
restrained anger, he shoved open the vehicle’s door and stepped out.
She opened the kitchen’s solid door, then the mesh one leading outside—a rush of warm, moist air hitting
her instantly—and watched him approach.
He’d come back alone. Jorie hadn’t been sure…Clearly, this wasn’t  a  blissful experience  for him. But
she knew that he understood the potential of the restrainer implant: he could be located  and  terminated
without warning. More  than that,  she  knew  he  understood  the  threat  the  zombies  posed.  Had  Theo
Petrakos returned with a contingent of his own to force the Guardians to expose their existence, had he
added more weapons to the nil-tech projectile one that was clipped to his belt—or if he’d not returned at
all—she  wouldn’t  have  been  completely  surprised.  As  Captain  Pietr  was  fond  pointing  out,  nils,  so
egocentrically tied to their own small ball of dirt, believing the universe started and stopped at their front
door, were prone to do those kinds of things.
Theo Petrakos hadn’t. She couldn’t afford to discount that he might have plans in direct opposition to her
own. But for now he was cooperating.
This  was  the  first  test  she’d  put  him  through—and  he’d  passed.  His  eventual  reward  would  be
banishment from  everything  he  held  dear.  That  fact  put  a  damper  on  the  small  surge  of  bliss  she’d
experienced upon his return.

“Any news?” he asked as he mounted the wide steps. His gaze had been on her the entire trek from his
vehicle. He was still focused on her now.
Jorie raised her face as he came up to her, tried to read past the expected concern and  fading tinge of
anger there,  and  failed. “There is movement on the outer  edges  of the herd.  No  portals  yet.  But  we
expect formation in less than two sweeps.”
As  always,  she  hesitated,  waiting  for  him  to  question  the  meanings  of  her  words.  Their  language
incompatibilities—while decreasing hourly—were still an impediment. But he was nodding.
“Where?”
“Come. I’ll show you.”
Jorie heard  Trenat  and  Rordan  arguing  over  the  potential  strength  of  the  three  lead  juveniles  as  she
returned to the small room, Petrakos on her heels. She  listened for a  moment, mentally filing away  the
data as she hunkered down in front of her T-MOD and then motioned for Petrakos to do the same.
Herryck scooted sideways, making room.
“Thank you,” Petrakos said with a nod to Jorie’s lieutenant.
“You are…well go,” Herryck replied haltingly.
Petrakos frowned, then a small smile played across his mouth, erasing some of the worry Jorie had seen
on his face—his very good face—since he’d returned. “Welcome,” he said. “You’re welcome.”
“Well come,” Herryck repeated.
Petrakos nodded. “You don’t speak…”
“Vekran,” Jorie supplied as he crouched down next to her. “Herryck is learning.”
“Herryck?”
She hadn’t  introduced  him to  her team.  There’d  been  little time to  do  so;  plus, there  wasn’t  a  need.
Petrakos would be in their lives for only the few days it would take to deal with the zombies. When the
mission was finished, he’d return to the ship with them, of course. But he’d be isolated. The less he knew
about the Guardians, the better.
Or so regulations stated.
Still, that didn’t mean he couldn’t learn her team’s names. Conversing with Petrakos would give Herryck
much-needed  practice  in a  language similar to  Vekran.  Though the lieutenant didn’t need  to  learn  the
variations that turned Vekran into English. Once this mission was complete, Jorie doubted they’d visit this
nil world again.
“Tamlynne. Herryck,” Jorie said, with a small gesture at Tam. She pointed to Trenat. “Jacare. Trenat.”
“Kip  Rordan,”  the  commander  said  before  Jorie  could,  irritating  her  slightly.  She’d  never  had  any
problems with Rordan before. But she hadn’t worked with him since she’d ended  her relationship with
Lorik.
Now she had seniority over him. Or did she?

The thought struck her—had Captain Pietr offered a promotion, a captaincy, to Rordan as well? It was
no secret that she and Rordan had different command methodologies. She doubted he’d ever asked Pietr
to relocate a nil’s family. But she’d earned the right for special concessions—her success rate was one
of the highest in Guardian records. Higher than Rordan’s, in fact.
Could that too be an issue?
She shook off her disquiet and watched Petrakos nod at the introductions.
“Theo Petrakos,” he said, hand on his chest in much the same manner as when he’d  named himself on
board the Sakanah hours earlier. “Theo.”
Theo. No, the use of his first name was too personal for her. He was a nil with a restrainer implant, and
he would be sent to Paroo.
“Petrakos,” she said, and brought his attention back to her T-MOD. “We have several unusual things.”
She stabbed one finger at the cluster of small icons representing the juveniles at the herd’s  edges.  “The
juveniles”—when he nodded his comprehension of the term, she continued—“are usually at  the leading
edge of a craving. Four, six of them most often. This time, we have ten.”
“Ten?” he echoed.
“The entire herd is much larger. It is singular to our experience.”
“So many juveniles or the large herd?”
“Both.”
“The herd is—” And he continued with words she didn’t understand.
He must have caught her puzzlement, because he started over. “The herd acts as if with one thought, all
together? Or each zombie in the herd acts on its own?”
“The C-Prime  controls  all.” She  remembered  telling him much of this on the ship. But he’d  just been
through his first PMaT, and his brain, understandably, might not have been functioning at optimum. “But
the C-Prime can code instructions into one or a smaller group,  send  them on a  mission. They perform
this, they return, they reintegrate. You understand?”
“So this C-Prime sends ten juvenile zombies—”
“Yes and no.” Jorie bit back a sigh. It wasn’t only the language difficulties. The Guardians had studied the
zombies for over two hundred years. To impart that information in a few minutes was difficult, even if she
didn’t have to rethink each word she used. “It is somewhat inherency. Juveniles perform a function in a
craving that goes  back  to  the original  zombie  program  of  protecting  stations,  worlds,  from  unknown
infectious agents.  The craving—the seeking out of potential  viruses on ships  and  passengers—is  their
motivation. The C-Prime…it need not say yes or no.”
“You’re saying it’s instinct.”
“Instinct?” She wasn’t familiar with the word.
“It’s inherent—instinct for the juveniles to move at the start of a craving.”
“It is their inherency, yes. The C-Prime, it can guide. But the inherency, the need to define and eradicate
the threat, is already there.”

He was nodding. “And where is the C-Prime guiding them to?”
Jorie glanced at Herryck, received her nod, and then turned back to her T-MOD and Petrakos. “Here.”
She tapped at the screen, bringing up a regional map created by her ship’s seeker ’droids.
Petrakos sat back on his heels. “Fuck.”
She’d heard him utter that word before, didn’t know its meaning, but he was clearly never blissful when
he uttered it. “We have one and a half sweeps before  the first portal,  Petrakos.  I need  everything you
know about this place. These buildings—”
“It’s a  shopping center,”  he told  her,  and  she  could  hear  the tension in his voice.  “We  call  it  a  mall.
Everything under one roof—stores, restaurants, all inside.”
“I understand. An enclosed plaza with many establishments offering items for purchase.”
“Good. Across the street, there’s a movie theater  and  another  shopping plaza.  All together,  hundreds,
thousands of people.”
“It will be  near  sunset,”  she  told  him, because  the dismay she  heard  in  his  voice  unsettled  her.  “The
people will return to their structures to celebrate the evening meal—”
“You don’t understand.” He suddenly leaned forward, hands fisted. “This is the biggest shopping time of
the year.  Everyone  will be  there.  Not  only the store  workers  but  families,  children.  There  is  no  way
you’re  going  to  be  able  to  keep  the  zombies’  existence  or  the  Guardians’  existence  a  secret.”  He
uncurled his fingers and pointed to her screen. “Not there. You’re going to have to deal with the zombies
openly.”
Herryck, Trenat, and Rordan had all turned from their duties and were watching her. She  knew  Trenat
understood none of Petrakos’s words, but Herryck had a working knowledge  of Vekran,  and  Rordan
spoke even more. But even if they hadn’t, they couldn’t miss the anguish in Petrakos’s voice.
She translated into Alarsh a summary of what Petrakos had told her. “If this wasn’t a nil world, we could
bring down two gravrippers. For their speed, if nothing else.” A cloaking device for the craft  would be
ideal, though the Guardians had yet to perfect one.
“We’d  still have to  jam this planet’s  sensors,”  Trenat  pointed  out.  “They’re just  advanced  enough  to
track us on descent. We can’t permit that.”
No, they couldn’t. Above all else, their presence here must remain undetected.
“Then we wait,” Rordan said.
Herryck’s face jerked toward Kip Rordan. “Wait?” she asked, before Jorie could.
“Wait,” Rordan  repeated.  “These are  only juveniles. They’ll most likely cease  after  fifty, one  hundred
kills. We go to the portal site, put a full sensor sweep out on them, pull all the data we can, but don’t try
to stop them. Their scent  trails when they return to  the C-Prime  will be  strong.  That will heighten the
craving, force the C-Prime out in the open more  quickly. Then,” and  Rordan  smiled harshly, “then we
move.”
Trenat bobbed  his head  in agreement.  “I reviewed  Dr.  Alclar’s  case  studies  on  juveniles  before  this
mission. He  states  that R-Five  levels on juveniles in megaherds  are  too  weak  for us to  learn anything
overly useful from their capture.”

Trenat was reading Lorik Alclar’s research?  “The R-Five  levels aren’t  the only thing we’re  looking at
here,” Jorie put in firmly.
Petrakos  touched  her arm,  frowning. She  shook  her  head  in  response.  She  wasn’t  about  to  explain
something she knew he definitely wouldn’t want to hear.
“Killing  those  juveniles  is  a  waste  of  our  resources  and  we  risk  exposure,”  Rordan  said.  “General
Procedure Six permits—”
“I’m familiar with Gen Pro Six,” Jorie snapped. “But letting ten juveniles feed on dozens of locals—”
“Nils,” Rordan said.
“—is not acceptable.”
“Exposure of our mission here is a violation of our orders.” Rordan’s voice was hard.
“Our orders,” Jorie countered, “are to stop the zombies.”
“Our orders are also  to  determine  how this herd  managed  to  get so  large without fracturing,” Rordan
said, and Jorie clearly heard echoes of Captain Pietr in his words. “You know  Lorik’s  research  shows
that we need to let the juveniles feed to do that.”
Yes, she did, but no, they didn’t. There were other ways to obtain that data, but those were ways  that
also violated several orders and more than a handful of gen-pro regulations. She’d never discussed those
particular methods with Lorik, and, hell’s wrath, she wasn’t about to reveal them to Rordan.
She rose. “I will consider your suggestions, Commander.”
“There’s  nothing  to  consider,  Jorie.  Lorik’s  data  clearly  indicates  that  two  or  three  of  the  weaker
juveniles should die off in the first throes of the feeding, giving their scent trails to the remaining ones. This
will increase their R-Five levels, giving us a stronger lock on their C-Prime. We bag their C-Prime  and
we save this wretched planet. Plus we can analyze the mutations in the C-Prime’s  codes.  Surely that’s
worth a hundred or so dead nils?” His eyes narrowed. “Captain Pietr thinks it is.”
Captain Kort Pietr. She was no longer sure she liked him. Because he’d done more than just offer her
refreshments and  a  chance  at  a  captaincy.  She  was  sure—very  sure—he’d  made  the  same  offer  to
Rordan as well.
Rordan’s placement on her team was no chance suggestion. Now she not only had to fight the zombies
but she had to contend with Kip Rordan.
But Kip Rordan also had to contend with her.
“Work out the specifics for a scent-trail grid,” she told Trenat, ignoring the flash of alarm in Herryck’s
eyes at her stated capitulation to Rordan’s plans. “I need to  get familiar with the land vehicle Sergeant
Petrakos brought us.”
At the sound of his name, Petrakos  looked  up at  her,  suspicion playing over  his very good  face.  She
switched to Vekran. “We go outside. Now.”
“And your team?” he asked, rising.
“Yet has work to do. Come.” She turned brusquely away from him and headed for the door, her mind
already sorting through a dozen scenarios and rejecting two dozen more.

Sergeant Theo Petrakos was not going to like what she had to tell him.
But Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah—who  fully intended  to  make  captain—wasn’t  going to  give him any
choice.
She just hoped she wasn’t making a mistake in trusting him.
 

9
“We cannot go to your shopping plaza.” Jorie faced Theo Petrakos on the wide back porch just as the
mesh door clanked closed behind him.
“What do you mean?” There was a  tightness in his voice and  a  corresponding  tension in his face.  His
dark brows were drawn down, his eyes narrowed.
“I mean,” she  said,  motioning him toward  the land vehicle, wanting to  put  more  space  between  their
conversation  and  Kip  Rordan’s  eyes  and  ears,  “what  I  said.  We  cannot  risk  exposure  among  your
people. It is an edict we cannot ever violate.”
“Did it ever occur to you,” he asked, his words clipped and terse, “that my people will be paying more
attention to the zombies than to you?”
She walked the few steps to the front of the land vehicle and stopped. He was still on the porch,  arms
rigid at his side. There was so much he didn’t understand. He knew it. She knew it. But this was not the
place  or  time.  “Petrakos,”  she  said.  “Come.”  She  met  his  narrow-eyed  gaze  with  one  of  her  own.
“Please,” she added, barely under her breath.
He walked slowly down the steps, her command clearly not infusing him with bliss, even with her soft
addendum.
Jorie caught a flicker of something in one of his structure’s aft viewports. Rordan? Trenat? Rordan, she
decided. The shadow was too tall for Trenat.
“Workable size,” she said, running one hand over the vehicle’s front cowling. “Take the helm, activate the
engine so I can assess its power.”
He stopped in front of her, his body mere minmeters from hers. The line of his lips was tight; the set of his
shoulders stiff. “Don’t bail on me now, damn you. I will not have thousands of innocent people die just
because some bullshit regulation states you can’t be seen here.”
She understood his tone more than his words. She raised one hand, pushing her hair back from her face
as if she  were  irritated.  “Covert,”  she  said  quietly, when the angle of her arm blocked  her  face  from
whoever was looking out his structure’s viewport. “Vehicle. Now.”
His shoulders  relaxed  only slightly, then,  with a  shake  of his head,  he turned  and  stalked  toward  the
pilot’s door. She opened the copilot’s door and pulled herself in. Warm air, almost stuffy, enveloped her.
No  automatic enviro. In spite  of that lack,  she  liked  the  vehicle’s  added  height  and  interior  expanse
immediately.
Petrakos slammed his door shut and looked at her expectantly, brows still down.
“Activate the engine,” she told him.
He grasped  the helm and  twisted  a  knobbed  protrusion.  A  rumbling  growl  sounded  from  under  the
cowling. A puff, then a  stream  of air,  slightly cooler,  brushed  over  her face  from rough-looking holes
flanking the control panel.
She leaned one elbow on the console, angling her body  toward  him, her back  almost to  the structure.

“This vehicle has many added functions, yes? Act as if you were demonstrating them for me.”
He flicked at a lever. “Windshield wipers.”
Two thin rods moved rapidly back and  forth over  the viewport.  Petrakos  touched  something else  and
water sprayed. The rods made a squeaking sound against the glass as the water  evaporated.  Odd  that
nils would waste something so precious on a vehicle. She nodded. “Very good.”
He pushed  against the middle of the helm and  a  claxon blared.  “Horn,” he said,  watching her closely
now.
“Excellent. And these?”  A wide console  full of switches,  buttons,  and  what she  guessed  to  be  power
ports ran between the two front seats.
“Siren, lights, PA system—loudspeaker. Laptop, like your T-MOD, goes here,” he said, pointing to an
elevated stand. Then he closed his fingers into a fist. “Explain covert and the shopping mall.”
She played  with the empty swivel stand  between  them, as  if that  were  her  sole  concern  and  not  the
additional work it would take to circumvent Rordan’s presence. She damned the fact that she still needed
his expertise. “We are forbidden to disclose our presence to your people.”
“I know that.”
“So does Commander Rordan.” She fought the urge to turn and see if they were still being watched. But
that would reveal that she knew. Rordan had to believe she didn’t. “Therefore, if I order my team to your
shopping plaza, Rordan will act to prevent that.”
“But you’re the mission commander.”
“I am—unless Rordan finds reason to take that from me. Violation of the general procedures’  primary
edict would guarantee him that chance.”
“Fine.” The  anger  was  back  in  his  tone  and  his  face.  “Then  give  me  a  couple  of  your  rifles,  those
Hazards—”
“Hazers,”  she  corrected  him  as  she  pulled  out  her  scanner—holding  it  out  of  sight  below  the
console—and accessed the data from her T-MOD, still running and recording inside the structure.
“—and I’ll go myself.”
“Not required.” She tapped three key codes into her scanner,  watched  the new data  crawl  across  the
screen, then turned the unit toward him. “Because the zombies will not be at your shopping plaza when
you get there.”
“Where—”
“That large vacant region.” She  changed  the screen  to  the map image supplied  by the seeker  ’droids.
“Vegetation. No structures. Just these two open areas. You know them?”
He studied it in silence, then: “That’s a baseball field. The other is the tennis courts.”
“Structures?” His last word puzzled her. She knew what a court was but had no knowledge of a tennis
as part of a legal system.
“No. A place for outdoor games, exercise.”

She shrugged off yet another misinterpretation. “Probable population at risk?”
He was quiet for a moment, frowning again, but the tension had left his shoulders. “A lot less. There’s a
school across the street, but it’s closed for the holidays.”
“How many people might be there for outdoor games?”
“No way to know for sure, but we can assume ten, twenty. Most out walking for exercise.”
She nodded. “You’re security in your locale. You have the authority to  make  them leave.  They won’t
question. Correct?”
Petrakos started to answer her, lips parting, then he stopped. “Possibly.”
“Possibly?”
“If I could involve others  in my security force,  it would be  more  effective. But I can’t—won’t—have
them face this.” He touched his shoulder where the restrainer implant had been inserted.
The restrainer  implant wasn’t  the impediment. Involving more  nils was.  She’d  already  pushed  several
regulations to the limit with Petrakos. She wasn’t going to push even more—especially not with Rordan
on the scene.  But she  couldn’t  tell Petrakos  any more  about  Rordan  and  Guardian regs  and  Captain
Pietr’s possible machinations than she already had. She’d reached the boundary of her trust with him for
now. She had a feeling that if he sensed a weak link in the Guardians, he’d try to exploit it.
If their positions were reversed, she would.
So she nodded. “Then we must be satisfied with what you can accomplish.”
A sigh of frustration blew through Petrakos’s  lips as  he leaned  back  in the seat.  The vehicle’s engine
chose that moment to  give an odd  little shudder,  and  the cooler  air that  had  brushed  against her face
turned hot and stale-smelling. With a harsh, murmured word she didn’t understand, he twisted the knob
on the helm and disengaged the engine. “All right,” he said finally. “I’ll clear the park. But we’re going to
have to get there at least forty minutes beforehand for me to do that.”
Forty minutes before the scheduled  time she  and  her team would normally arrive to  counter  a  zombie
portal  would work  out  like  blissful  perfection.  “Understood.  Now  we  go  back  to  your  structure  so
Commander Rordan can show me how wrong my data was and that his new and better data shows that
the zombies will not be visiting your shopping plaza after all. They are going to the tennis law.”
She reached for the door lever, but his hand on her arm stopped her.
“Tennis court.”  The small, odd  smile that played  over  his lips faded.  “And  you  did  something  to  the
zombies, didn’t you?”
There was  nothing threatening about  the large fingers draped  over  her  wrist,  but  the  warmth  of  their
skin-to-skin contact unsettled her. Perhaps because there was nothing threatening. She knew he was still
angry, yet his touch was one of unexpected gentleness.
“Tampering with MOD-tech to affect a craving is not only dangerous, it’s against Guardian regulations,
Petrakos.” She met his questioning gaze levelly, pulling her thoughts back to the situation. The zombies.
Rordan. Not Sergeant Theo Petrakos with his very good face and his very real concerns.
Yes,  she’d  taken  a  risk,  a  calculated  risk,  but she  didn’t want his  questions  and  she  didn’t  want  his

gratitude.  She  was  just  doing  her  job—a  job  she  was  very  good  at.  One  that  could  lead  her  to  a
captaincy.
Moreover, Rordan and Lorik Alclar were  wrong.  Based  on research  the Interplanetary  Marines  were
doing—research  Danjay Wain had  been  aware  of—there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  low  R-5
levels limited only the information that could be gained on the C-Prime. It didn’t affect what Jorie might
be able to learn about the zombies themselves—and their increasingly disturbing abilities.
Granted, bagging a juvenile—alive—was risky. But no one on the Sakanah  had  captured  a  juvenile in
the past ten missions or more. A juvenile taken  from this rapidly mutating herd  could  be  compared  to
older captured zombies. Any changes found would be apparent and significant.
It was a risk, but it was a valid one.
So she didn’t need Petrakos’s thanks. She wasn’t doing it for him or his nils, or because his unwavering
concern  for his people  touched  something inside her,  she  assured  herself.  She  pushed  open  the  land
vehicle’s door, then stepped out. She was doing it because of her oath as a Guardian and to make sure
Danjay’s death hadn’t been in vain. She was doing it for her chance at a captaincy.
She was doing it because she knew she could.
And if it proved  Rordan—and  Lorik—were  wrong,  she’d  blissfully pour  herself an extra  glass  of  ice
water just to celebrate.
She might even be persuaded to pour one for Petrakos too.
 
Theo had  spent  the last  several  years  of  his  BVPD  career  interrogating  people  who  lied—either  by
accident or design, out of fear, greed, or stupidity. It was one of the first rules he’d learned as a rookie:
Out here, everybody lies. Yet Theo wasn’t ready to brand Jorie Mikkalah a liar. At least, not quite.
She just wasn’t telling him the complete truth. Which fit in exactly with the corollary  from Rookie  Rule
Number 1: Always know that you are never, ever being told the whole story.
He wasn’t. Not about the implant in his shoulder, not about the zombies, and not about her plans. And
especially not about whatever was going on with her team of space commandos.
He thought of that as he drove west on Twenty-second Avenue toward the mall. Jorie,  still clad  in her
oversize sweater, was perched in the front passenger seat.
It was almost three forty-five in the afternoon. The ETA for the zombies was now less than an hour.  A
surge of adrenaline shot  through him every  time he thought about  that.  He  tamped  it down.  Be calm.
Think. He’d handled a zombie before, with far less preparation.  He  could  do  it again. His Glock  was
secured on his right hip, his zip-front sweatshirt keeping it and his gun belt with extra ammo hidden from
sight. He’d also donned his black  tac  vest,  very aware  that  something that  could  so  easily trash  a  car
wouldn’t be hampered by it. But he had to wear it—and his smaller Glock in the ankle holster. For extra
protection, his assault rifle was racked in its usual place.
By comparison, the weapons the space  commandos  wore  seemed  strangely small and  light. Jorie  was
decked out in much the same manner as when he first saw her: headset with its eyepiece (swiveled down
for the moment), dual laser pistols, and various gizmos attached to a belt (all hidden by the sweater). Her
high-tech rifle rested on the floor.

Oddly, it wasn’t their weaponry  that was  foremost  in his mind at  the moment. Their camaraderie—or
lack of it—was.
He glanced at the passengers in his backseat  through the SUV’s  rearview  mirror. There  was  a  power
struggle under way. He’d been with BVPD too long not to recognize one. But this one centered on him
and the lives of everyone he knew.
A detective’s sixth sense told him he’d been off the mark in his initial appraisal of Commander Mikkalah.
She was responsible for his kidnapping and that damned thing in his shoulder, but, despite that, he began
to see that Jorie did take people’s lives into consideration. That same sixth sense told him Rordan didn’t.
And that, he suspected, was where the lines were drawn. The players had chosen their sides.
On Jorie’s was Tamlynne Herryck, now wearing his old black-and  white Tampa  Bay Lightning T-shirt
over her sleeveless  uniform top.  Tammy, he’d  dubbed  her.  But Jacare  Trenat—Jack,  wearing one  of
Theo’s Old Navy T-shirts—had sided with Kip  Rordan.  Theo  didn’t speak  a  word  of Alarsh,  but he
knew  if  he  dubbed  Rordan  Pompous  Asshole  he  wouldn’t  be  too  far  off  the  mark—though  Uncle
Stavros would probably call Rordan a malaka. Too bad he’d loaned Rordan his Bucs jersey. He hoped
like hell he’d get that back.
Jack, it seemed, was doing all he could to get his nose far up Rordan’s butt. Though to be fair, Jack was
young. Just a rookie. He had  that bright, shiny look  in his eyes  that  was  a  combination of a  desire  to
please and a belief that he could save the world.
And Rordan, with his swagger, was just the kind of malaka a rook like Jack would admire.
Of course, saving the world—Theo’s world—was Jack’s job. If it hadn’t been his own world at stake,
Theo might have found the entire situation amusing: intergalactic space commandos falling prey  to  petty
office politics. He only hoped Jorie Mikkalah was up to the task of not only the zombies but whatever
Rordan was planning as well.
He stopped for a red light. Jorie had been focused on her scanner gizmo since they’d left his house, but
she looked up at him now.
“Ten minutes,” he said, anticipating her question.
She nodded. “I need to position Rordan and Trenat first before we remove your people.”
“And Tammy?”
“Tammy?”
He inclined his head toward the Tampa Bay Lightning fan seated behind her.
“Lieutenant Herryck and I will take the opposite position. You can return to your structure. We’ll meet
you back there in about one sweep.”
“Whoa, wait a minute.” The light turned green. He stepped on the gas. The SUV stuttered, then surged
forward. “I’m part of this mission, remember? And it’s a long walk—”
“We’ll use the PMaT to transport back to the ship when the juveniles have been dealt with.”
Peemat?  Oh,  that  damned  thing  that  spins  your  guts  out  through  your  eyeballs,  then  puts  you
back together again as you go from Point A to Point B. A thought struck him. “Why do you need me

to drive you to the park if you have that transporter?” It was certainly quicker and more efficient, though
nauseating.
“Zombies  track  PMaT,”  came  Rordan’s  answer  from  behind  Theo.  Another  glance  in  the  rearview
showed a slight smirk on the man’s face.
Yeah, okay, so I’m a stupid nil. Theo returned Rordan’s reflected smirk with one of his own. “Skata
na fas, malaka,” he said under his breath. Eat shit, asshole.
“Because all PMaT transits are unshielded,” Jorie said, as if Rordan hadn’t commented. “Zombies have
what we call a  sensenet.  Through that,  they’re  aware  of surges  created  by unshielded tech.  And they
react.”
“But you said you’re going to transport back—”
“The zombies will be neutralized at that point,” she continued. “But to engage the PMaT in the proximity
of a forming portal holds danger.”
Rordan said something in Alarsh, short and quick.
Theo saw Jorie shrug. Her answer was equally short and sounded—though he had no idea of the content
of the exchange—casual, almost offhand. But her fingers were tight around her scanner.
He didn’t like not understanding their language. He  liked it even less  that  Rordan  understood  his. He
hoped  this was  just petty  office politics and  that  they were  all on the same  side  when it came  to  the
zombies.
But he couldn’t  be  sure  and  he  couldn’t  ask.  He  could  only  remember  what  she’d  told  him  earlier,
denying—lying about—tampering with her tech to change what the zombies did. He  gleaned  from their
conversations on her ship that’s what had turned Wayne, her agent, into a parchment Mr. Crunchy with
moist eyeballs.
And here she was doing the same thing because Rordan—and intergalactic office politics—prevented her
from saving lives at a crowded mall during Christmas week.
So Theo decided to do the only thing he could: tilt the balance in Jorie’s favor. He made his decision as
he dropped Rordan and Jack at the far end of the park by the tennis courts, then Jorie and Tammy at the
other, next to the baseball field. A quick trip around the perimeter announcing—via his PA system, with
blue strobe going—the possible sighting of a rabid raccoon cleared away the few remaining joggers.
Theo pushed the traffic gates shut, then set the Park Closed sign in place. Jorie had told him to go home
once the park was clear. But he was not going home until this batch of zombies was dead and that PMaT
thing was spewing Rordan’s unworthy molecules all the way back up to the ship.
He  turned  the  lumbering  vehicle  back  toward  the  ball  field,  parked  it  just  behind  the  row  of  low
bleachers,  and  got out.  Jorie  trotted  toward  him, frowning. He  leaned  on the front of his SUV,  arms
folded across his tac vest.
“I’m staying.”
She glared at him. He  glared  back.  When she  flung her arms wide in exasperation  and  let out a  now
familiar-sounding  string  of  Alarsh  curses,  he  knew  he’d  succeeded.  A  mixture  of  elation  and  relief
washed over him.

Which ended a split second later when a discordant wail erupted from the scanner in Jorie’s hand—and
echoed out of one dangling off Tammy Herryck’s hip.
Jorie favored him with one last hard glare—partially obscured by her eyepiece—as if to let Theo know
he was now edging his way to the top of her shit list. Then she thrust one of her small laser pistols into his
outstretched hand.
“Opticals, remember?” she asked, teeth gritted. She swung her rifle around. “And legs. Stay with me.”
Opticals.  Eyes.  And  legs.  And  writhing  energyworms  and  long,  flailing,  razor-sharp  extenders.  He
sprinted after her to where red-haired Tammy stood, rifle in one hand, scanner in the other, then stopped.
Both women’s heads were bent over their scanners but, damn it, no one was looking around. Someone
should be. He remembered the green glowing circle, the thing oozing out—impossibly—from its center.
He turned, squinting through his sunglasses into the late-afternoon light.
Something slammed him from behind, crushing him to the ground.  Grass,  dirt,  and  gravel were  pushed
into his face, and he heard his sunglasses crack. Then, with sickening clarity, Theo realized he could no
longer breathe.
 

10 
Theo rolled onto his back, gasping, choking, eyes streaming. Pain radiated through his face and chest, but
he kept both hands firmly on the laser pistol. Two words blared in his mind from years of training: failure
drill!
He lifted his shoulders  off the ground,  arms outstretched,  and  squeezed  off three  blasts  in  under  two
seconds: two to center mass, one to the head of the monster looming over him. The zombie shuddered
for one, two heartbeats, then lashed out with a long, tentaclelike arm, razor claws flexing.
Damn, not head. Eyes! He fired again, aiming for the thing’s eyes, aware there was no time to roll out of
the way of the claws swinging toward him. But he hit something—one eye, definitely. There was a pow!
pang! A flash of light like a huge handful of crazed  sparklers  streaked  overhead,  dissolving against the
field’s backstop. Then a hard rush of air scraped  across  his face  and  scalp,  something metallic glinting
only inches from his nose. A high whine filled his ears, and his sunglasses were ripped from his face.
From out of the corner  of his eye  he saw  the second  claw coming. No  time to  scramble  to  his  feet,
nowhere to go. He squeezed off two more shots to the thing’s head, praying he hit the other eyes, then
merged himself with the dirt beneath his back, his teeth clenching so hard his jaw ached. The sharp claw,
descending, suddenly arched up, moving to his left, moving away…
“Theo!” Jorie cried.
He watched the zombie topple backward and land on the field with a muted thud.
He took his focus off the monster just long enough to glance to his right and see her outstretched hand.
And,  behind  her,  a  small  sickly  green  oval  wavering  into  solidity  out  of  nowhere,  about  where  the
shortstop ought to be.
He grabbed her hand, pulled himself to one knee, and fired past her.
She spun as he rose, the stream of laser fire from her rifle invisible except where it laced the edge of the
glowing hole. He shot another burst at the opposite edge. The portal waved, fizzled, then faded with an
eerie whoosh of air.
Damn.
Watch  your  six.  Another  rule ran through his  mind,  and  Theo  glanced  over  his  shoulder—as  sweat
trickled down  into his eyes  and  blood  pounded  in his ears—to  assure  himself the first zombie wasn’t
moving. It  lay in a  grotesque,  twisted  heap.  He  remembered  the  one  in  his  backyard  exploding  into
nothingness. Why this one hadn’t, he didn’t know. And there was no time to ask.
Tammy was jogging toward them, shouting something. Jorie nodded, then grabbed his arm, dragging him
backward.
“Double!” she shouted. “Twins!”
Twins?
Two circles, almost a figure eight, solidifying in the air in front of the pitcher’s mound, maybe twenty-five
feet to his right.

Twins. And not the Doublemint kind either.
Shit.
Jorie and Tammy sprinted apart, blasting the figure eight in measured increments. Theo backed up, pistol
still out, watching his and their six o’clock position, searching the area for more glowing circles while at
the same time keeping part of his attention on the women working efficiently as a team. He felt more than
a little stupid and out of synch. He’d think later about how close he’d come to getting himself killed.
The figure eight collapsed with an odd fooshing noise and—this time—a small flare of sparks.
Then there was  silence, broken  only by the women’s  harsh breathing and  the sound  of his own heart
thudding in his ears.
His gaze caught Jorie’s. She was sweat-streaked, with a few twigs caught in her hair, making him wonder
if she too had been knocked to the ground. Her lips were  slightly parted,  her cheeks  flushed. Cristos,
she was gorgeous. And he knew he had to be totally insane for even thinking of that at the moment.
She’d also saved his life. He didn’t want to think on that at all.
“How many dead?” he asked. He had no idea how much ammo their weapons held or what lay ahead of
them. In the distance, he heard the first rumble of thunder. A late-afternoon storm was on its way.
“Four.” She said something to Tammy, then added, “Rordan reports two.”
That meant six down, four to go, if her estimates  were  correct.  He  shot  another  look  at  the dead  one
behind him as  thunder rumbled  again.  The  worms  had  stopped  undulating  and  now  lay  like  smudgy
ciphers on the thing’s skin. Even in death, it was butt ugly. “Including this one?”
She was nodding when he turned back. “This one we keep.”
That prompted more  unintelligible exchanges  between  Jorie  and  Tammy, uninterrupted  by any squeals
from her scanner, so Theo used the moment to inspect the dead  zombie again. It  was  smaller than the
one he’d seen in his backyard. It lay twisted, but he guessed that up straight it would be maybe four or so
inches taller than his own six foot three.
Then one of its four upper limbs twitched. Twice.
“Jorie!” He  said  her name quickly, harshly, keeping  his  laser  pistol  trained  on  the  thing’s  head.  “It’s
moving.”
She stepped over to him. “Stasis.” She pulled out her scanner and showed him a screen full of triangles
and lines that meant nothing to him.
Then, as he watched, the zombie disappeared into thin air. “Where—”
“Ship.” She jerked her chin upward, and he caught the small smile on her lips. “First one in some bit of
time, yes? Risk to transport, but—”
Two scanners screeched out a warning. Another green oval glowed faintly in the air. He raised his laser
pistol, but Jorie held up one hand, stopping him.
Beyond the oval’s haze he could see two figures sprinting quickly in his direction through the outfield: Old
Navy Jack and Rordan Pompous Asshole, wearing Theo’s Bucs jersey that—shit—now had a rip down
one sleeve.

Jorie twisted a thin tube—mouth microphone, Theo guessed—up to her face and spoke  rapidly into it.
Tammy sidled next to him as Jorie suddenly jogged off toward the two men.
“Here. Do as me.” Tammy fired at the zombie portal in several short bursts.
He did as her, the thin glow of laser fire peppering the oval barely visible in the late-afternoon light.
“Up small space more,” she said, and he moved his line of fire above hers.
But this time the portal didn’t implode. It grew, becoming more solid by the moment in spite of his and
Tammy’s barrage. He had no idea if he was doing something wrong,  because  he had  no idea  what he
was doing. Other than firing an alien laser at something that had no business being on his planet.
Rordan’s voice reached his ears, sounding excited over the low hum of their laser pistols, but Theo didn’t
know if it was a good excited or bad excited.
“Good? Bad?” he asked Tammy without taking his eyes off the portal, knowing her language skills were
limited. But Theo needed to know what was going on. He fired off a few more charges.
“Good. Bad. Yes,” Tammy answered, telling him nothing. She let loose  with a  rapid  series  of charges,
then murmured something under her breath that sounded nasty.
“Petrakos.” Jorie had returned and grabbed his elbow. “With me. Here.”
He moved sideways as Rordan came up next to  Tammy, holding a  weapon  Theo  hadn’t  seen  before:
short and double-barreled but with thin blue lines pulsing up and down the stock. Rordan fired off three
shots at the portal, which wavered, losing some of its solidity.
Then a loud screech behind Theo shot a jolt of adrenaline up his spine.
Jack’s scanner wailed in his hands, almost drowning the younger man’s short, hard words.
Rordan nodded quickly. Jorie dragged Theo even farther away.
Protecting him because he was a nil and didn’t know  what to  do.  His own gun was  still holstered,  his
assault rifle still in its rack.  All he had  was  a  weapon  he didn’t fully understand  against  an  enemy  he
understood even less. It was like being a rookie again, but a hundred times worse because this was his
city, his planet. And the one thing that Theo Petrakos did not handle well was being helpless on his own
turf.
When Jorie reached  for the pistol in his hand,  he couldn’t  stop  the bitter  anger  welling up inside him.
“Damn it, just give me a chance—”
“Feeding frenzy is building.” She  spoke  as  if he hadn’t.  “You understand?”  She  turned  his laser  pistol
over and tapped at the small indentations above the trigger.
To  his  surprise,  she  handed  the  weapon  back  to  him.  “Feeding  frenzy?  Yeah.”  He  nodded.
“Uncontrolled. Crazy.”
“Very crazy.” She pointed to his pistol. “Now the G-One is set for herd-terminate. Now we finish what
we came to do here. Yes?”
It took  a  few seconds  for her words  to  sink it. His weapon  hadn’t  been  set  to  kill.  It  had  been  set
to…He had no idea what it had been set to, only that what he’d been firing hadn’t  been  at  full power.
That would explain his ineffectiveness. He suddenly felt immeasurably better and very pissed off. Did she

think he would shoot himself in the foot or her in the back?
“You finally trust me with this?” He didn’t bother to keep the anger out of his voice.
She started to walk away, stopped, and turned back to him. “Trust?”
He strode up to her. “You set it to low power.”
She kept  walking away  from  where  Rordan,  Tammy,  and  Jack  stood.  Things  were  quiet,  but  Jorie
seemed sure a zombie feeding frenzy was about to start. Which meant it was the wrong time for him to
be asking questions. He couldn’t help it, though, so he followed her,  staying at  her heels.  “You should
have told me that up front. I can handle—”
“Killing zombies? Yes.” She glanced  up at  him just as  lightning flashed in the distance.  A split second
later, thunder cracked. “You and Rordan. Everything is kill. Understand me, Petrakos. Kill doesn’t give
us answers. For answers, it’s capture. Not kill.”
Understanding dawned, and his anger, fading, shamed him. “I thought—”
“No, you didn’t think.” She stopped and faced him, waving one hand as she spoke. “You. Rordan. Hell
and damn! I need answers. Not corpses.”
And  dead  zombies  tell  no  tales.  He  looked  at  the pistol in his hand.  The small lights  that  had  been
yellow now glowed bright blue. Full power. “And now?”
“A feeding frenzy.” She pulled her scanner away from her hip, eyes narrowing. “Count to ten, Petrakos.
You’re about to join me”—her scanner screeched out a warning as another clap of thunder echoed over
the trees—“in hell.”
Two  green  portals—no,  three—popped  into  existence.  The  portals  were  small,  but  their  color  was
stronger and their appearance more solid.
They fired in a pattern of short bursts, rising up one side of the oval first, then the other. It was the same
pattern Tammy had showed him. He peppered the middle portal, switched to the one on the right, then
back to the middle again. Jorie did the same, concentrating on the one on the left, then firing at the middle
when he didn’t.
The middle portal fizzled within moments, but the other two—stubborn bastards—resisted.
A flutter of movement to Theo’s right made  him dart  a  glance in that  direction—Tammy, Rordan,  and
Jack. Green ovals had popped out there too, like some kind of airborne measles. But far more deadly.
And  silent.  Other  than  the  sizzle  of  the  laser  fire  against  the  portals—and  the  increasing  rumble  of
thunder—their battle was waged in relative silence.
Until Jorie’s scanner gizmo squealed again. And so did she.
“Theo, down!”
He dropped, rolled, keeping his pistol firmly in his grip as a rush of air passed over his scalp. He came up
on one knee, not thinking, just reacting, sensing, and there it was, maybe ten, fifteen feet away, opticals
pulsing with a red glow. A long clawed arm shot toward him.
He targeted the eyes, fired. The zombie jerked as one eye flared out.

Theo hit the dirt again, the second claw missing him by inches.
Once more on his knee—standing up would be  not only stupid  but fatal this close—he  pulled off two
more shots. Another eye sparked, then flared out.
A keening rumble howled out of the zombie’s jaws. Theo’s skin crawled at the sound.
It staggered slightly. He was focused on the remaining eye when a flash of white under its grinding jaws
caught his attention. It looked…alive. Vulnerable.
Theo jerked his aim down slightly, pulled off three quick bursts right under the thing’s jaw.
And was rewarded with a huge ball of green gas mushrooming outward, then imploding back in on itself.
The zombie was gone.
“Bliss!” Jorie’s voice and undisguised glee sounded off to his right.
He shot  to  his feet,  turning toward  her,  his heart  pounding,  his  mouth  dry.  She  grinned  at  him.  That
started his heart pounding even harder. Another green oval, no—two. Twins. Just to Jorie’s left.
Shit.
“There!” He fired off two short bursts, hitting the larger oval’s  right side.  It  surprised  him by fooshing
into nothingness. The other one, farther away, did the same under Jorie’s barrage.
Foosh!
Foosh!
The air around him was filled with fooshes. Then a flash of lightning split the sky, followed immediately by
a double crack of thunder. The skies opened up. Rain came down in thick sheets, blinding him.
Theo spun, pistol out, searching for green ovals, but he could see nothing. Nothing but the rain and white
flashes of lightning stabbing toward the ground.
“Jorie?”
His heart constricted, but he pushed the emotion away and focused. He turned again, water stinging his
face and eyes. But there was no Jorie. No zombies either. And no Rordan, Jack, or Tammy.
“Jorie!”
Nothing. He paced off the area in the driving rain, calling her name, looking for her. She was gone. They
were gone. Through the downpour he could barely make out the outlines of his white SUV.  A flash of
lightning arced toward a palm tree, and the hair on the back of his neck tingled ominously. He bolted for
his vehicle, the loud clap of thunder drowning out his litany of curses in Greek.
 
Once her stomach stopped heaving and her brain ceased trying to flow out of her ears, Jorie shoved one
hand through her wet hair, pushing her dripping bangs out of her eyes with undisguised ire. “Which one of
you damned  fools initiated an emergency  transport?”  She  glared  at  the  occupants  of  the  Sakanah’s
PMaT transport platform.

Trenat, on her left, was kneeling on the platform, retching. She discounted him, as she did Herryck, who
looked  no less green  but was,  at  least,  standing. And would never  authorize  an  emergency  transport
without first alerting Commander Mikkalah.
Jorie turned to Rordan, on her right, and took no little satisfaction in the sallow color of his still-handsome
face or the way he leaned against the platform’s curved wall.
As if he could feel her gaze on him, he straightened, or evidently thought he did. One hand clutched his
stomach as he wavered, a little left, a little right. But his eyes, when he raised his chin, glinted. “General
procedures—”
“Don’t quote gen pro to me, Commander.” She wanted to take the four steps to put him within reach of
her fist but knew if she moved her feet right now she’d fall flat on her face. “And we left Th—Petrakos
back there.”
“The nil can take care of himself.”
Theo Petrakos—a nil—had actually hit a zombie’s white heart.  So,  yes,  he could.  But that  wasn’t  the
issue.
“Ronna,” she called to the PMaT chief. “Get a  med-tech  up here  to  help him.” She  pointed  to  Jacare
Trenat.
“Aye, sir.”
“Trenat, hang in there. It’ll be better shortly. Herryck, you okay?”
“Almost, sir.” The rain had  turned  Herryck’s  red  curls into dark  streaks,  and  water  dripped  from the
bottom of the shirt Theo had loaned her.
A second wave of disorientation hit Jorie. She’d tried to  do  too  much too  soon.  She  bent  over  at  the
waist, her palms on her thighs, and sucked in a few long breaths. The spinning in her head slowed and her
stomach crawled  back  to  its rightful place  in her body.  She  straightened  and  looked  over  at  Rordan
again.
He’d straightened as well and stopped wavering. “You and I need to talk, Commander.”
Yes,  they damned  well did.  “My office, now,” she  snapped,  and  strode  off the platform, her  soaked
sweater as uncomfortable and heavy as her heart.
 

11 
What did he expect? Thank you? Nice shooting? Glad you were there to help?
Theo charged out into the rain to shove the park’s traffic gate closed, then sloshed back to the SUV. He
pulled himself into the driver’s seat. The seat was soaked; he was soaked.
He slammed the door shut.
How about  good-bye? At least  something to  let him know  Jorie  was  going  back  to  her  ship,  so  he
wouldn’t be left standing in the rain, heart pounding, breath coming in short gasps as he wondered if she
was lying on the ground somewhere, injured. Or dead.
He threw the vehicle in gear and headed toward Twenty-second Avenue, windshield wipers barely able
to keep  up with the pummeling rain.  Drains  were  backing  up,  streets  flooding.  Cars  exiting  the  mall
slowed as they edged cautiously around larger puddles. Sheets of water sprayed out from tires in arcing
fans. Another typical Florida deluge.
For a moment he superimposed the green portals, the razor-clawed zombies, onto the parking lot on his
left. It wouldn’t yet be raining, and people—families—would be strolling leisurely, arms full of packages,
small children in tow. The portals  would have confused  them, maybe even drawing one  or  two  of the
curious dangerously close.
The zombies would have terrified them.
Innocents would have died, caught in the invisible laser crossfire, if a zombie didn’t get them first.
Because one of the things he’d learned as he worked with Jorie’s team to stop the zombies: they could
appear without warning. Guardian scanners didn’t always work. That could  be  the only answer  for his
getting nailed from behind. And for the few portals that popped into existence  while the scanners  were
silent.
Which meant that there was no way Jorie’s  team could  counter  them all—even if they were  willing to
expose themselves to the local populace.
Thank you, Petrakos. You helped save a hundred or so lives today.
You’re welcome.
His  portable  police  radio  chattered  with  the  usual  fender  benders  and  advisories  on  flooded
intersections—and nothing, thank God, about any unusual noises in the park just past the mall. It was still
raining when he pulled down his driveway and around to the back of his house. Theo’s sole thoughts now
were on stripping out of his gear, then a hot shower, a hot meal, and his recliner,  in exactly that  order.
Then bed and sleep. He didn’t even have enough energy to drag out his guitar.
Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah—he  was  sure—was  probably  already  snug and  dry  and  dining on  apple
mush that tasted like watermelons.
At least he hoped like hell she was.
Damn her.

 
Commander Jorie Mikkalah stopped in front of her desk, yanked  the wet  sweater  over  her head,  and
threw it on the small couch that ran the length of her even smaller office. The sweater landed on top  of
her Hazer micro-rifle and MOD-tech gear, leaving room for little else. It didn’t matter. She wasn’t about
to ask Kip Rordan to sit.
Rivulets of water ran down her back as she turned and faced him. He was as wet and disheveled as she
was, only—she hazarded—he probably looked one hell of a lot better. Kip Rordan at his worst was still
passably gorgeous.
Unbidden, an image of Theo Petrakos slipped into her mind. His strong, angular face, his spiky hair. Not
at all smooth like Rordan. But a female would be lucky to—
She pushed the thought away. “The feeding frenzy had ceased,” she said without any preliminaries. “Your
emergency was…?”
“Possible MOD-tech leakage.”
His reply came so quickly, it was as if he couldn’t wait one minsecond longer to  hurl the accusation  at
her.
“I heard no warning from my scanner. Or yours. Or Herryck’s or Trenat’s.”
He  stared  at  her  a  long  moment  before  answering.  “Scanners  don’t  register  leakages  on  the  zurad
frequencies.”
“Because a zurad-frequency leakage has a seventy-two percent error rate.”
“Which is why you use them.”
Jorie kept herself very still. “Are you accusing me of tampering with tech, Commander?”
He shifted position, slightly widening his stance as if he expected that fist she’d so wanted to smash into
his jaw earlier to come flying now. That thought would have amused  her but for the seriousness  of his
accusation. If Rordan could prove that, Pietr could strip her of her rank.
If Pietr found out what she’d done to Theo’s restrainer implant, he’d probably space her out the air lock.
But she knew damned well Rordan couldn’t prove she’d tampered with the MOD-tech. His suspicions,
though, could hamper her mission and play against her bid for a captaincy. The same captaincy she was
sure Rordan was after.
His eyes narrowed, then he shook his head slightly. “You’re very good at  what you do,  Commander.”
He hesitated. “Lorik didn’t deserve you.”
His added comment and the sudden softening in his tone took her by surprise. He’d already turned and
stepped for the door by the time she found her voice.
“Lorik has nothing to do—”
“Lorik’s a fermarl’s ass, Jorie,” he said, turning back to her after  he punched  the door’s  sensor  panel.
“I’m just trying to keep you alive long enough for you to realize that.”

Kip Rordan stepped swiftly into the corridor, the door closing behind him before Jorie could even think
of a reply.
 
The captured  juvenile  zombie,  however,  was  not  so  silent.  A  harsh,  keening  cry  rose  and  fell  from
between its serrated jaws as it lay immobilized on the stasis table in the ship’s xeno-mech-biology lab on
Deck 19. It was blinded, thanks to Petrako’s excellent aim. It was also separate from its herd for the first
time in its existence.
No one knew if zombies felt fear. But if they did, this one probably felt it now.
Jorie shifted her attention between the zombie and the data scrolling down several of the lab’s analytical
screens. She didn’t look at the lanky form of Dr. Lorik  Alclar, his chin-length white hair tucked  neatly
behind his ears. She didn’t look at Commander Kip Rordan in his clean, dry uniform. Quite frankly, she
didn’t want to see either of them right now.
She liked what she saw on the analytics even less.
Lorik walked to her side while she studied the data. He twisted his lightpen in his long fingers, then used it
to point at a box on the right corner of the screen. “It appears, if this youngster is not an aberration, that
their command centers have expanded.”
Their command centers. Their brains. Zombies were  increasing their capabilities to  learn.  Exactly what
Captain Pietr feared.
“Natural mutation?” She couldn’t imagine who could get close enough to a rogue C-Prime to tinker with
its mech-biotronics and live. No, she could, though she almost didn’t want to think about it.
The Tresh.
“Let’s hope it’s natural,” Lorik answered. “I don’t even want to  consider  that  we  could  be  up against
someone who found the code.”
Not just someone. More likely several someones in the Tresh’s  Devastator  ranks.  They were  the only
ones who’d have the knowledge and the cunning to use it. Like Commander Davin Prow.
The scar on her shoulder chose that moment to itch. Autosuggestion, she knew, but fought to keep  her
fingers from rising to the area under her—nice, dry—uniform.
“Either way,” Lorik said, as if reading her mind, “it’s bad news.”
“If it’s only this herd, this C-Prime, it’s solvable by their full termination.” Maybe  the intuitive behavior
she thought she’d  witnessed  by the zombies at  Port  Lraknal  was  just  an  aberration  caused  by  other
factors.
Like the Tresh.  Her  mind kept  coming back  to  that.  But if the Tresh  had  found the code  to  alter  the
zombies—these zombies on this nil world—then that brought forth an even deeper problem.
What else were the Tresh doing here? She had to be wrong.
“Their full termination is required,  regardless,”  Lorik  answered.  Stating the obvious,  Jorie  felt.  But  he
always said it with such authority that it sounded as if it were some glorious pronouncement that only the

magnificent brain of Dr. Lorik Alclar could devise.
“When will you have more-conclusive data?” she asked. Data. Not answers. Asking Lorik for answers
elicited a lecture on the structure of scientific theory.
“Twenty, thirty sweeps.” He glanced over his shoulder, then back to the screens. Jorie could almost feel
Rordan’s  gaze on her and  Lorik.  Or  maybe  she  was  just  imagining  things.  She  was  tired.  She  was
hungry.  Maybe  Rordan’s  earlier  comment  about  keeping  her  alive  was  simply  one  of  teammate  to
teammate.
It had  to  be.  She  was  misconstruing. He’d  been  Lorik’s  closest  friend for years,  the two  together  so
often that Jorie’s friends had teased that she had two lovers for the price of one….
Hell and damn.
Lorik droned  on about  the delicacy  of the work  required  and  how one  sample couldn’t  be  taken  as
conclusive and one hundred percent accurate.
“Then we’ll bring you another one.”
Rordan’s voice, damned near in her ear, almost made her jump out of her skin.
“A mature one, Kip, not another juvenile.” Lorik spoke to Rordan as if he, not Jorie, were in charge of
the mission. “Try not to damage to the opticals this time. The command processor took some overburn.”
“The nil took out the opticals,” Rordan said.
“Well, that explains it. Sloppy. Didn’t think it looked like your handiwork.”
“Or Jorie’s,” Rordan put in easily.
Jorie stepped away from the two men. She did not want to be so close to either of them, and she did not
want to be part of this conversation. And she didn’t know Rordan had followed her out into the corridor
until he called her name.
“Share last meal with me,” he said when he caught up to her.
“I’m late for a briefing with Herryck,” she lied.
“That shouldn’t take long. I’ll wait.” He gave her a small, charming smile. Herryck  would be  melting in
her boots about now.
Jorie thought of another smile—a delicious, somewhat feral grin. “Thanks, but I have to monitor the nil.”
“Let me do that while you brief Herryck.  You’ve  been  on this nonstop  for over  twenty sweeps.  You
need a break.”
“I appreciate  that,”  she  said  formally, “but I need  your expertise  on the herd  data.  The loss  of  those
juveniles will create changes. Get that thing’s R-Five levels from Lorik. I need to know what I’ll be  up
against at the next spur.”
“We,” he said. “Whatever it is we’ll be up against,  Jorie,  we’ll be  up against it together.”  He  held her
gaze for a long moment, then, with a curt nod, turned back to the labs.
Jorie headed  for the lifts. Rordan  was  right. She  was  tired.  She  was  hungry. She’d  managed  a  quick

cleanser and change of uniform before going to see Lorik, but that had altered only her outsides. Not her
insides.
But she was afraid that if she stayed on board, Kip Rordan would track her down.
She stopped at her cabin just long enough to  talk  briefly with Tam on intraship, then she  grabbed  her
scanner, weapons, and a dry sweater and headed for Deck 15.
With the MOD-tech her team had left in place in Petrakos’s structure, getting a lock and clear transport
was an almost effortless experience. The way things should be, would have been had Danjay Wain lived.
One thing she’d never taught Danjay was how to use zurad frequencies, how to artificially stimulate portal
formation. She wondered now, as the blinking equipment she’d left in Petrakos’s structure solidified into
view, if someone had. That might explain—
“That wasn’t the problem.” A female’s voice, strident, pleading, reached Jorie’s ears, along with the light
tinkling of music. She  froze,  her hand on the half-open  door.  Hell’s wrath!  Was  Petrakos’s  neighbor
visiting again?
Then a man’s voice, gruff and angry: “No, you married me readily enough.”
“Because  I loved  you!” The female again, sounding angry as  well. Angry,  it  seemed,  because  having
children meant the loss of her career on the starport….
Love? Children? Starport? Jorie didn’t recognize the voices but felt sure this wasn’t Petrakos’s elderly
neighbor. Suddenly she remembered his odd evasiveness when she’d agreed to pretend to live with him
as his lover in his structure. He’d said he wasn’t spoused. But what if he’d lied?
That would very much be Theo Petrakos, Jorie realized, ignoring an odd tightness in her chest. He would
do anything in his power to protect someone he loved.
Jorie hovered at the edge of the doorway in the small room, completely unsure of what to do. Intrude on
this highly emotional moment? Another nil would then know she and the Guardians existed.  Another  nil
would be sent to Paroo…
…and  Petrakos  would have bliss. This must be  the reason  he’d  clung so  fiercely to  his home  world.
There was a female he loved here.
She carefully dropped her rifle and her sweater to the floor, then, head high, she strode quickly toward
the sound of the music—and stopped. She expected to find Petrakos and a female standing, arguing. But
Petrakos wasn’t standing.
He was lying in a chair with an elevated  footrest,  a  blanket  draped  loosely over  his baggy gray pants.
White socks covered his feet. His eyes were closed, his bare chest rising and falling evenly.
The music faded.
“You’re being archaic,” a man’s voice said.
Jorie whipped her gaze to her left. A large screen—a vid! The female, the man, the argument were all a
vid! Relief washed over her. Petrakos didn’t love the beautiful red-haired female who now paced  what
appeared to be the bridge of a small scoutship on the screen.
A very nice scoutship. And since when did these nils have tech like that?

But her concerns were interrupted by the sound  of a  low sigh and  slight cough.  Real sounds.  Not  vid
entertainment.
Petrakos shifted in his sleep, his hands fisting, the blanket sliding off his legs to the floor.
Jorie picked it up and studied him for a moment. His short hair was still damp. He was probably chilled,
with no shirt on. She could see the slight redness on his shoulder from the implant. And the hard curve of
muscles on his arms and chest, both sprinkled with dark curling hair.
But it was his face that drew her gaze again. She couldn’t say exactly why she found it pleasing. Other
than it was an intelligent face, a hardworking face—a face that had laughed and a face that had wept.
The man and the female on the vid resumed  arguing, but she  ignored them and  leaned  over  Petrakos,
fluffing the soft blanket over his chest.
Strong hands slammed against her shoulders. Jorie flew backward, landing on her rump with a  yelp of
surprise. Her elbows hit the floor, pain shooting into her arms as  she  went flat on her back,  one  large
hand on her throat. Hard thighs locked her legs to the floor.
Then dangerously narrowed dark eyes widened and Theo Petrakos gave his head  a  small shake.  “Ah,
Cristos.  Jorie.”  He  removed  his  hand  carefully  from  her  throat  and  sat  back  on  his  haunches.
“I’m—regrets. You okay?”
She unfolded her fingers from around the G-1 on her utility belt with no memory of how her fingers had
gotten there. But then, from the look on Petrakos’s face, his reaction was the same. He hadn’t intended
to hurt her.
She could have killed him.
She relaxed her body. “Optimal,” she  said.  “But better  if I’m not on the floor.” She  levered  up as  he
grabbed her arm, pulling her toward him. Her face ended up brushing against his neck. He smelled warm
and male and slightly soapy. More than slightly blissful.
And it was insane, crazy for her to even think this way. She scooted back and was pushing herself to her
feet when he cupped her elbows, drawing her up against his so warm, so very bare chest.
She knew if she found her face in his neck again, she would be sorely tempted to take a taste of him. So
she looked up instead and found in his dark gaze an unexpected  confusion. Did he know  she  had  this
overwhelming, frightening desire to nibble her way down his half-naked body?
“Theo,” she said, wanting it to sound like a reprimand but, hell and damn, it came out sounding more like
a plea.
Noise  boomed  out from the vidscreen.  She  twisted  out of his grasp,  aware  of his gaze  following  her
before he shook his head slightly. He snatched a small rectangular box studded with buttons from the seat
of his chair. He pushed one and the voices stopped, the image going black.
He stared at the blank vidscreen for a moment, then ran one hand over his hair. He faced her. “I think it’s
time you told me what’s really going on.”
“I have told you—”
“Bits and pieces. Then you disappear back to your ship and leave me standing in the rain.”

She could tell by the sharpness in his voice that that had bothered him. “I know it makes no difference,
but that wasn’t my decision.”
“Let me guess. Rordan.”
She sucked in a slow breath. “Commander Rordan did what he thought was right.”
“Right for the mission or for himself?”
She hadn’t quite figured that out yet. “He maintains there was the danger of MOD-tech leakage.”
“So he doesn’t know what you do, or does he?”
Hell and damn, this was not where she wanted the conversation to go. She only returned to assure herself
of his well-being and to check current data on the tech running in his structure. Not to stare at his bare
chest and indulge in foolish fantasies. And not to argue about what had to be done. “I do what I think is
right for the mission and all involved, Sergeant Petrakos.”
“A minute ago I was Theo. I pissed you off, didn’t I?” He hooked his thumbs in the waistband of his gray
pants and rocked back on his heels.
She was at a loss with that last comment, but his body language spoke  to  her loud and  clear.  “I don’t
know what this ‘pissed you’ is. But if you would prefer to argue over words rather than cooperate with
me, then so be it. I still have a job to do.” She spun away from him. She’d go back to studying the data
on her MOD-tech in his small room. Nice, cooperative data that always spoke to her in a language she
understood.  Not  an  argumentative  nil  who  didn’t  know  how  to  follow  orders,  who  questioned  her
decisions in matters he knew nothing about.
And that, she knew, was one of the key problems. Petrakos was not a man to blindly follow orders. He
refused to act like a nil. He wanted full information on what was going on.
Jorie  was  a  commander  who  was  used  to  working  with  team  members  who  already  had  the
information—or had faith that Commander Mikkalah did.
Petrakos took nothing on faith.
And—even if doing so didn’t violate ten different gen-pro regs—Jorie had no time to fill in the gaps in his
knowledge.
If only he were a Guardian tracker…For a moment she  let that  fantasy blossom,  seeing him—with his
talents—as her teammate, her partner. He was a bit more conservative, where she was impetuous. But
he was also more proactive,  where  she  had  a  tendency  to  be  too  analytical. With a  start  she  realized
they’d probably work extremely well together, balancing each other’s shortcomings. And they might even
possibly—
No. Of all the things she had no time for, she had no time to be distracted by the heat generated by his
touch.
She’d settled cross-legged on the floor, keyed in her first request, and was studying the pattern when he
padded in. He folded himself down on the floor and held a tall glass out to her.
“Truce.”
She looked at the glass—water?—and then at him. In spite of her mental chastisements, her annoyance

at him faded. If he really wanted to make amends, she noted wryly, he’d put on that  shirt he’d  draped
around his neck. But she couldn’t tell him that, couldn’t risk his laughter if he figured out how increasingly
disconcerted  she  was  by  him.  Handsome  Kip  Rordan’s  smiles  left  her  cold.  But  this  nil’s  feral  grin
tempted her beyond reason.
It must be that she was tired, hungry, and thirsty. She took the glass with a nod and sipped at it. Water.
Ice cold. She knew this planet-bound  nil had  no idea  how precious  a  commodity ice water  was  on a
ship. She closed her eyes a moment in appreciation.
When she opened them, he’d pulled his knees up and rested his arms on them. “What happens next with
the zombies?”
“That  depends  on  what  Lorik—Dr.  Alclar  finds  with  the  one  we  captured.”  She  nodded  her  head
upward as if the ship was directly above  them, which, for all she  knew,  it was.  “The herd  is in a  rest
period again. The feeding frenzy—”
“That wasn’t supposed to happen.”
She looked back at the screen. “That may have been my fault.”
“Because you tampered with the tech stuff.”
“Theo.” She let out a short sigh. “It’s best that you forget I ever mentioned that.  If you were  to  say  it,
even in accident—”
“When Rordan’s around.”
“—it could have negative consequences.” She turned back to him.
“I can keep a secret.” He grinned. “So what happened?”
“I  don’t  know.”  She  flicked  her  fingers  at  the  screen.  “Nothing  indicated  a  frenzy  would  result.
I’m…better  than that.  And now everything is as  it should be.  The zombies are  in a  state  of  negative
activity. But…”
“But?”
“But if the zombies have developed the ability to think, to plan, then that would explain their unexpected
reaction. The frenzy. It might also mean that everything we’ve  known  about  them to  this point may no
longer apply.”
He was quiet for a long moment. “How would they learn to plan?”
“Only two possible ways. One, a highly unlikely but natural mutation. Or two, an unnatural tampering. A
reprogramming.”
“You think someone reprogrammed them, don’t you?”
This time she was silent, wrestling with what genpro regs said she could and could not reveal. What Pietr
would do if he knew she’d disclosed certain  aspects  of Guardian history and  procedures  to  a  nil. Yet
ignorance could kill him. “It’s not supposed to be possible. Someone would have to gain access  to  the
C-Prime without killing it or getting killed. The only way would be through the Mastermind Code.”
“And that’s not possible because…?”

She slanted him a glance. “The only person who knew the code  died  over  two  hundred  galactic years
ago.  No  one  has  been  able  to  re-create  it  since.  We’ve  tried.  Believe  me,  we’ve  tried.  Our  best
scientists, mathematicians, and no one has been able to obtain it.”
“Until now.”
She nodded slowly. “Until now.”
“And whoever has this code controls the zombies?”
“No. Whoever has this code, Theo, controls the universe.”
 

12 
Life, Theo Petrakos decided, was not cooperating with him at all. It ruined his vacation, trashed his car,
dumped unwanted houseguests into his accustomed solitude, threatened his planet, and made him start to
care—far too much—about a woman he had no business caring about.
All in about twenty-four hours.
He couldn’t wait to see what the next twenty-four hours would bring.
Invasion and subjugation by something called the Tresh, according to Jorie. Though probably not in the
next twenty-four hours. That would take a little longer, she assured him. Like a week. Just when he’d be
back on the job.
Oh, joy.
It was almost midnight. Tomorrow, he realized with surprise, was Christmas Eve. Aunt Tootie and Uncle
Stavros would be sitting at their kitchen table sharing vasilopita, the traditional Christmas cake with the
lucky florin inside. And he was sitting across his kitchen table from the woman he had no business caring
about, watching her devour her second first-ever peanut butter and jelly on white bread sandwich with an
expression so rapturous it was damned near erotic.
When she lovingly licked stray morsels of peanut butter off her fingers, Theo  shoved  himself out of his
chair and headed for the refrigerator. He needed a glass of something cold. He really needed to pour it
over his body, but drinking it would have to do. He reached for a beer but changed his mind and pulled
out a can of orange soda instead. He might not be formally on duty, but he needed his mind clear.
“These Tresh tried to take over  your government ten years  ago?”  He  thought of all the wars  that  had
erupted on Earth over the centuries. Most inevitably boiled down to you have something and we want
to control it, even if that something, like with the terrorists, was the way you thought and believed.
“The Border Wars started eighteen years ago, ending about ten years past. But we—the Interplanetary
Concord—have had issues with the Tresh  since before  I was  born.”  She  broke  off the corner  of her
sandwich and chewed thoughtfully. “You have wars on your world, yes?”
He nodded. “Lots.”
“Then you know.  It’s  never  clearly only one  issue.  It’s  always part  economics.  With us,  the concord
regulates  the  spacelanes,  regulates  trade  for  the  seven  systems  and  thirty-four  sectors  within  its
jurisdiction. Over two  hundred  fifty years  ago,  the Tresh  broke  all agreements,  pulling out.  They tried
blockades. We tried sanctions.” She shrugged. “I’m not a politician.”
“Two hundred fifty years is a long time to fight.”
“Not when the people you are fighting have no words in their language for compromise or negotiation.”
Point well taken. “So the concord invented the zombies to keep the Tresh from using your spacelanes to
trade?”
“Initially, zombies were used to monitor the Hatches and detect possible contamination from visiting ships
and crew. Infections. Viruses.”

Like the CDC.  Or  perhaps  more  like  the  way  shuttle  astronauts  were  quarantined  upon  return.  He
nodded.
“When  the  Tresh  became  a  threat,  the  functions  of  the  herds  were  augmented  to  be  proactively
defensive. But,”  she  continued,  “as  I  told  you  when  we  were  on  the  ship,  that  failed.  The  zombies
themselves became a problem. The Guardian Force then had to take over security of the Hatches  and,
with the tracker division, eliminate the zombie threat. Most of the zombies were successfully terminated
when the concord realized the malfunction. But a  few rogue  herds  escaped.  Those  are  what Guardian
trackers have been hunting ever since.”
“So when will this Lorik guy have an answer on the zombie’s brain?” He leaned against the front of the
refrigerator, regretting for a moment that he’d pulled a T-shirt on. The cold metal against his skin would
help. Jorie had dipped her spoon into the peanut butter jar and was now sucking on it with that beautiful
mouth of hers as if it were a peanut butter lollipop.
Lord, give him strength.
“Twenty sweeps, most likely.”
Twenty hours  before  Jorie  would have to  present  her captain  with two  options: Plan  A—continue  to
destroy the zombies, or Plan B—prepare for an attack and invasion.
On Christmas Eve.
“But Lorik will not accept that as final proof,” Jorie continued. The tip of her tongue traced the edge of
the spoon. Theo took a long swig of ice-cold soda from his can.
“He’s already indicated we need to bring him another zombie. Alive. Not a juvenile this time. He needs
to see how far this mutation has progressed.” She hesitated. “You understand my words?”
He nodded. He did, more and more, now that his ear had become accustomed to her accent and  now
that her English—or Vekran, or whatever it was—had improved. “So that means you’re going to have to
do funny stuff with your computer again to capture one.”
She shot him a look that clearly said he wasn’t supposed to mention her funny stuff. “Essentially, yes.”
“When and where?” He intended to be there.
She examined her empty spoon,  seemed  to  consider  dipping it in the peanut  butter  again, but after  a
moment placed it on her plate. “Thank you. That was most excellent.”
She pushed her chair back and stood.
“When and where, Jorie?”
She was heading out of the kitchen. In two strides he was right behind her.
“Jorie.”
No answer.
“When and where, Jorie?”
“I don’t know yet,” she told him when they reached the middle of his living room. She turned left into the
hall.

Evasiveness, thy name is Jorie Mikkalah.
He followed. “When will you know?”
“Not in the next few sweeps.” She stopped in front of her blinking computer equipment and rubbed one
eye with the heel of her hand. “I need a three-sweep nap, minimum. Five would be bliss.”
She’d turned away from him, and something told him she was…prevaricating. Not lying, not quite. She
was tired. Hell, he was tired. But there was another layer to whatever was going on here.
He stepped around until he could see her face. She had a smudge of peanut butter on one  cheekbone.
Probably had it on her fingers and it came off when she rubbed her eyes.  In spite  of the situation, that
made him smile.
“Hey,” he said softly. “You missed some.” He swiped at the peanut butter with his index finger and held it
out for her inspection.
“Ah, treasure!” She grasped his hand, brought his finger to her mouth, and licked.
Heat rocketed through his body. That was followed by a sudden cold draft on the back of his neck, an
icy chill, as if someone had opened a door to the North Pole. He watched Jorie’s eyes—which moments
before had fairly sparkled—narrow.
“Commander,” she said, releasing Theo’s hand.
She wasn’t talking to him, he knew that. Not just because that wasn’t his rank—she  wasn’t  looking at
him. And he had a feeling he knew who she  was  looking at.  His initials would be  P.A.  Uncle Stavros
would call him a malaka.
Theo angled around. Yep. Pompous Asshole Rordan had joined them. And, from the expression on his
face, was none too happy.
Rordan stepped toward them. Six-one, two-ten, Theo judged. Even in his stocking feet, Theo was taller,
though  not  by  much.  Pretty  ponytail  aside,  a  lot  of  Rordan  was  muscle.  Theo  judged  that  too.  He
wouldn’t look forward to going hand-to-hand with the guy. But he could  take  him down  if he had  to.
He’d taken down bigger ones.
“Jorie,” Rordan said, then a long sentence in their alien language. It  left Theo  feeling at  a  disadvantage
again, though he’d begun to catch a few familiar words. Like nil. But the rest was still unintelligible. He
didn’t like that, so he used the time to watch the man’s expressions and movements as Jorie replied with
a short series of more unknown words.
What he’d initially thought was anger on Rordan’s face shifted to something else. Disapproval? Maybe.
But why?
Because you’re a nil, Petrakos, that’s why. And she’s here talking to you.
“Problems?” Theo asked Jorie, keeping his own expression neutral.
Jorie opened her mouth to answer, then stopped. Theo realized he needed to teach her to speak Greek,
a language he hoped Rordan wouldn’t know. Fair’s fair.
“Commander Rordan was concerned because I wasn’t on board the ship,” she said after a moment.
Is he  your  keeper?  Theo  wondered,  then  gave  Rordan  an  understanding  nod.  They  were,  after  all,

supposed to be on the same side. “She’s safe here.”
Rordan ignored him and spoke to Jorie again.
“Sergeant  Petrakos  is also  part  of our  team,  Commander,”  Jorie  said  evenly. “A team that  will work
much better if we all speak the same language.”
Theo watched Rordan closely. The man did not want Theo party to what was said. So he was surprised
when, seconds later, Rordan lowered his gaze for half a heartbeat, then shrugged.
“My Vekran,” Rordan  said  slowly, “need  have practice.  But,” and  he faced  Theo,  “when things have
importance, I speak such. Since is impossible that nil speak Alarsh.”
Nice little put-down. The nil could never learn Alarsh. Wanna bet?
“So I say again,” Rordan continued. “You are over your time to work here. Nothing has critical. Five, six
sweeps, you have nap.”
“I’m not sure we have five sweeps.” Jorie crossed her arms over her chest. “The zombies have changed.
We can’t trust old data to be accurate any longer.”
“And you are not accurate with no nap. Is that not truth, Petrakos?” Rordan glanced at Theo.
So we’re buddies now? Theo wanted to argue with the man, but there was no sense in it. Jorie had to
be as exhausted as he was. “Go nap. I need some downtime—to nap too.” Sleep would definitely help.
Maybe it would clear his mind and stop his heart—and his hormones—from doing double time whenever
she came close to him.
She glanced at him with that slight tilt of her head. The words were out of his mouth before he could stop
them. “You could nap here.” With me.
“I stay here to monitor tech,” Rordan said. And Theo poured  cold  water  on his fantasy of Jorie  in his
bed—even if he played the gentleman and slept in his recliner.
“And guard the nil,” Rordan added. He held out one hand. “The G-One. The one Commander Mikkalah
provided. Return, please.”
The Guardian weapon was in his nightstand. But Theo had no intention of returning it—at least, not until
the zombie problem was solved. He didn’t discount that Rordan  would feed  him to  the creatures  if he
could. “I—”
“I have it already,  Commander.”  Jorie’s  voice rode  over  his.  “Your  diligence  is  appreciated  but  not
necessary.”
She could  be  flawless when she  wanted  to  be,  Theo  realized.  There  wasn’t  a  trace  of  deception  on
Jorie’s  face.  No  fluttering hand movements, no little side  glances,  nothing  to  give  away  that  his  alien
one-woman war machine was lying through her teeth.
Yet he’d been so sure he could tell when she was lying—well, prevaricating—before. Or  maybe she’d
been flawless then too.
But she was letting him keep the laser pistol. Was that her way of telling him she trusted him more than
she trusted Rordan? Or were she and Rordan playing a game? Why should he think that good cop–bad
cop was confined to his planet?

So he watched to see if Jorie passed her scanner—or any magic Kill the Nil button—to Rordan before
she left. Nothing changed hands. And then it was just him and Rordan as Jorie disappeared into a cold
rush of air.
Rordan turned his back on Theo and—without a word—lowered himself to the floor next to the pulsing
screen.
Was that trust, stupidity, or a dare? Theo had no valid reason to harm the man, but he could still hear his
field-training officer telling the rookie  cop  Theo  Petrakos,  Be professional  and  courteous,  but  never
forget that the next person you meet you may have to kill. Rordan, he suspected, never learned the
professional-and-courteous part. So Theo locked his bedroom door, shoved a full clip in the gun he kept
in his nightstand, and put it under his pillow. He put his service weapon on the floor under the edge of his
bed. The Guardian laser pistol he tucked into the box spring through a tear in the fabric. He worked on
the  assumption  that  if  someone  or  something  came  through  his  door,  the  floor—with  his  antique
wrought-iron bed between him and whoever—would be the safest place to be. From there, it would be
clear access to his bathroom and out the casement window with its now-unlockable lock.
Something else he should be concerned about. But that was also what the gun under his pillow was for.
He settled back on the lumpy pillow and stared at  the ceiling in the dark,  less  worried  about  intruders
outside than those making inroads from within. He’d started to trust—wanted to trust—Jorie Mikkalah.
But that, he knew now, could be a huge mistake on his part.
He was probably correct in his earlier assessment: all women were zombies. Especially the beautiful ones
like Jorie Mikkalah. They show up in your life, bite your head, suck your brains out,  and  leave you on
your lumpy pillow to die.
 
Jorie contacted Captain Pietr’s office when she woke from her nap, but his message ’bot  informed her
the captain was in conference. Just as well. She had a number of things to do before she returned to the
surface, not the least of which was indulge in a hot shower. Several issues plagued her. The shower was
her favorite place to plan.
Forty  minutes later—some  plans already  in motion—she caught up with Captain  Pietr  in  the  corridor
leading to the ready room.
“Did you get sufficient rest, Commander?” he asked her.
“About five sweeps, sir. My team is still on the scene. Lieutenant Herryck—”
Pietr’s raised hand stopped her words. “You needed  rest,  Mikkalah.  Your  tendency  to  work  yourself
into exhaustion is no secret. And, yes, I’ve seen Dr. Alclar’s preliminary report. I assume that’s why you
skipped first meal and tracked me down?”
Was there nothing this man didn’t know? It seemed impossible that Pietr could keep an eye on the over
four  hundred  fifty  on  board  the  Sakanah,  but  somehow  he  did.  More  than  one  crewmember  had
remarked how little got by the Old Man.
“Sergeant Petrakos keeps a  stocked  galley, sir.” And something so  delightful that  it should have a  far
more magnificent name than peanut butter. “I’ll have first meal there when I brief him. But I wanted to
go over the report with you first.”

The captain tapped the palm pad at the ready-room door. She followed him inside.
“Brief the nil?” he asked her as he settled into the chair at the head of the table.
“Only  about  necessities,  sir,”  she  replied  calmly,  knowing  damned  well  that  good  Guardian  agents
following regulations didn’t brief nils. “Petrakos’s presence insures that my team’s arrivals and departures
aren’t a source of speculation in his neighborhood.”
“Of course. Sit, Commander. Tell me what troubles you about Alclar’s report.”
Jorie sat, reluctantly. She’d have preferred  to  stand.  She  really wanted  to  pace,  but that  would be  an
obvious sign to Pietr that she was not in control at the moment. And she was. She had to be.
“I’ll try not to take up too much of your time, sir.” She wanted to get back to Theo’s structure. Herryck
had  relieved  Rordan  on  watch  two  sweeps  ago,  and  the  brief  conversation  Jorie  had  had  with  her
showed the zombie herd still in a negative energy state. That was good and bad. Good that there was no
immediate threat.  Bad  because  the herd  should be  showing some  movement, and  it  wasn’t.  “I  know
there’s  yet work  to  be  done.  But  I’m  concerned  that  Dr.  Alclar  is  not  pursuing  the  option  that  the
zombies’ increased learning capabilities might not be a natural mutation. I think we can’t yet rule out that
someone might have uncovered the code. Sir.”
There.  She’d  said  it.  And  Pietr  hadn’t  thrown  back  his  head,  snorting  with  laughter  at  her
pronouncement. Or busted her down to ensign for being a fool.
Yet.
His eyes did narrow, however. Then he sighed. “If someone—and I assume you have a certain group in
mind—did uncover the code and now controls the zombies, don’t you think they’d be doing more than
playing with a herd on this remote world?”
So. Captain Pietr had not only read Lorik’s preliminary report, he’d spoken to him too. That was almost
word for word how Lorik had ended their conversation not ten minutes before.
“I know Dr. Alclar believes that the Tresh would have moved  on the Hatches  immediately, yes,”  Jorie
told him. Lorik’s pronouncement was no surprise;  he echoed  the same  belief that  the Guardian Grand
Council had held for over a hundred years. “But what if they weren’t sure the code would work? Maybe
they’re testing it, testing some changes, both here and at Lraknal.”
“Then  they’d  know  we’d  found  them  and  uncovered  their  secret.”  Pietr  leaned  back  in  his  chair.
“Commander, the Tresh—and I think you know this better than most—are far more  devious  than that.
Aside from the fact that we have no evidence of the Tresh in this system,  on the highly remote  chance
they obtained the code before we did, they’d not be so ineffectual as to let us get access to any altered
zombies. And I think, in your heart of hearts, you know that. You need  to  look  beyond  your personal
issues with Lorik Alclar. He’s one of the best. He knows what he’s doing.”
Personal issues. Jorie sat very still and kept all emotion off her face. “I have the highest respect for Dr.
Alclar’s work. I have no personal issues with him, Captain.”
“I  told  him  I  was  sure  that  was  the  case.  Just  as  I  assured  him  your  previous  captivity  with  the
Tresh—and those nightmares he says you still occasionally suffer from—in no way affect your perception
of this mission.”
She would kill Lorik Alclar. First chance she got. No. Better. A quick fist to his far-too-pretty jaw, bind
his hands and feet, drag his body to the PMaT, and send him on at least a dozen emergency transports to

the surface  and  back.  When  he  was  weak,  retching,  dizzy,  and  shivering,  his  head  on  the  verge  of
exploding, she’d do it again. Make him beg, whine, scream for mercy.
Then she’d strap a leaking T-MOD to his ass and leave him for the zombies to chew on. The same ones
he believed were undergoing a natural mutation.
She stood. “Thank you for your faith in me, sir. I won’t let you down.”
“Good. Concentrate on getting Dr. Alclar the specimens he needs, then terminate the herd. Then we have
matters in the Gendarfus sector the council wants me to look into.” He sighed. “Trouble never rests, does
it, Commander Mikkalah?”
“No, sir. It doesn’t.”
She saluted smartly, tapped open the doors, then headed down the corridor, every inch of her furious.
And afraid. To ignore that the Tresh might be behind this, to ignore that someone might have uncovered
the code, was not only foolish, it could damned well be fatal.
It was time to take a chance—a big one. One she wouldn’t take if she felt there were any other options.
She saw none. She saw only what she had to do with the one person she could honestly trust.
And that revelation scared her almost as much as breaking gen-pro regs did.
It took her a sweep to dig out what she needed, which required pulling in more than a few favors. And
there would still be a lot of work to do before anything would actually be functional once she transported
it to Theo’s structure.
On top  of that,  she  had  to  do  it all before  the next craving spur  hit the zombies and  without Rordan
finding out.
Pietr was right. Trouble never rests.
 
Theo plodded out of his bathroom the same way he did most mornings: naked, his hair still damp  from
the shower, a towel draped across  his shoulders.  Except  this morning Jorie  stood  in the middle of his
bedroom, hands on her hips, one eyebrow arched.
He yelped and whipped the towel from around his neck. Fumbling and cursing, he wrapped it around his
waist.
“Don’t  you  believe  in  knocking?”  he  asked  more  harshly  than  he’d  intended  to,  but  his  heart  still
pounded. And though Sergeant Petrakos would never admit to blushing, he could feel a definite heat on
his face.
“Knocking?” She did that head-tilt kiss-me-now thing that made him want to turn around and head back
to his shower. A cold shower.
“The door.”  He  pointed.  The towel  slipped.  He  grabbed  it. “Before  you come  into someone’s  room.
Someone’s private bedroom.”
“I didn’t use the door.”

Then he noticed the square black containers stacked between his dresser  and  his guitar case.  “Okay.”
He took a breath. “Maybe I didn’t explain myself sufficiently yesterday. You can use the spare bedroom,
the hallway if you need to. But my bedroom is off-limits. Got it?” God damn it, a man had to have some
privacy, somewhere.
“I’ve  acquired  knowledge,  yes,  as  to  our  permissible  areas.  But,  regrets,”  and  she  hesitated,  an
uncertainty playing over  her features.  “Theo,  I need  your help.  This,” she  thrust one  hand toward  the
containers behind her, “is not permissible.”
He tucked in the edge of the towel tighter as he stepped toward her. It slipped again. He  gave up and
hung on to it. “What do you mean by ‘not permissible’?”
“It’s a lot—a very big lot—of…funny stuff. If Rordan finds out—if my captain  finds out—it would be
serious  in  a  most  negative  manner.”  She  raised  her  arms  slightly,  then  let  them  fall  to  her  sides  in
exasperation, words spilling from her, quick and nervous. “They think the mutation is natural. They’re not
willing  to  consider  the  Tresh  might  be  involved.  I…I  don’t  know  what  else  to  do.  This  has  never
happened before.”
“Your captain’s always agreed to every suggestion you made?” Great place to work, if true, he thought
wryly.
“Of course not. But there are other things in this situation now. Things that…” She  pursed  her lips and
shook her head. “I am so stupid.”
No, she wasn’t stupid. Theo could hear that clearly in the desperate,  almost downtrodden  tone  of her
voice. And he could  see  it clearly in the tightness of her mouth. He  regretted  his flippant comment of
moments before. She wasn’t stupid at all. She knew exactly what was going on. And she was hurt. And
afraid.
He had a sudden urge to put his arms around her, hold her, tell her things would be okay, except he had
no idea if that was true. And worse, to do that, he’d have to let go of the towel. Not good.
“Let me put some  clothes  on,” he jerked  his thumb toward  his closet,  “then you can  fill me in on the
situation.”
She nodded, then sat on the edge of his unmade bed, looking at him as if she expected him to drop his
towel then and there.
Are the Guardians nudists?
He refused  to  let his mind follow that admittedly enticing thought. He  grabbed  clean  boxers  from  his
dresser, a pair of faded jeans and his favorite black Tommy Bahama T-shirt from his closet, and headed
back into his bathroom.
Something was very wrong,  he told  himself as  he quickly pulled on his clothes.  Admittedly, he’d  only
known Jorie Mikkalah for about a day—Sweet Jesus, was that all it had been?—but he’d yet to see
her exude anything but confidence.
Okay,  so  it had  only been  a  day.  But his job  required  him to  be  able  to  size up people  quickly  and
accurately. Commander Jorie Mikkalah was no wilting wallflower. Hell, she could probably kick the shit
out of BVPD’s SWAT team.
He opened the bathroom door. She was still on the edge of the bed and turned toward him as he walked
up to her.

“Start at the beginning.” He sat on her right—an instinctual move guaranteeing he’d be between her and
anything that tried to come through his bedroom door.
She drew a deep breath, then launched into a detailed explanation of how Guardian trackers worked on
a mission. How the mission commander structured the plan, how her team followed it. How divisions on
the ship acted in support with tracking ’droids and weaponry and scientific analysis.
It was the latter where things had gone wrong.
“So Lorik—this Dr.  Alclar—he’s  a  scientist who works  with zombies? And he’s  the one  who  won’t
listen to the possibility that the Tresh are involved?”
“And convinced the captain of this, yes.”
“How?”
“Lorik…revealed  information that made  the captain  believe I  discounted  his  conclusions  for  personal
reasons. That I’m reacting emotionally and not logically.”
“Is it true?”
She slanted him a quick glance, a light sparking dangerously in her eyes. “The fact that I would willingly
feed Lorik Alclar to a herd of frenzied zombies has nothing to do with my capabilities as mission leader.”
“Whoa, whoa!” He held up his hands. That was the first surge of energy he’d seen from her in the past
fifteen minutes. It fairly sizzled. He  didn’t know  what poor  Lorik  had  done  to  deserve  her ire,  but he
wouldn’t want to leave the two of them alone in a room.
She shoved herself off the bed and paced several steps. “What happened between Lorik and myself has
nothing to do with this mission.”
Her choice  of phrase  registered.  And he didn’t think it was  a  dispute  over  who got the  desk  by  the
window. It was personal. Emotional. And judging from the defiant lift of her chin, it hadn’t been one bit
pleasant for Jorie.
Bastard. Theo didn’t even know who Lorik was, but he didn’t like him. Because whatever that personal
emotional thing was, Lorik had run tattling to the captain, making Jorie look bad in the process. He didn’t
have to be a detective to figure that out, but being a detective helped him put those pieces together that
much more quickly. And helped him frame a response  that  would pull the rest  of the information from
her—information he knew she didn’t want to admit. “So Lorik  used  you and  is now using that  against
you.”
Some of the anger bled from her, her shoulders dipping slightly. She stopped pacing and nodded.
“You were…” It took a moment for him to remember her term. “Spoused?”
“We had a concord. It’s not quite the same as being spoused. You understand?”
“You were serious about each other. Maybe get married someday, have kids.”
“Yes,  we  were  serious.  But  children  aren’t  possible  without  a  contract  and  removal  of…”  and  she
touched her side briefly and said an unfamiliar term. Built-in permanent contraception, he gathered.
So a concord was like an engagement? The term didn’t matter. The hurt he saw in her eyes did. “What
did the bastard do?”

She sat back down on the bed, folding her hands for a moment before continuing. “Over three  galactic
years now, we’ve been lovers. But four months ago, that changed.”
Three years should have been the start of a decent relationship. Jorie and Lorik had a bit more longevity
than he and Camille. “So Lorik ended the, uh, concord?”
“I ended it. He violated the concord by taking other females as lovers. I confronted him. He  professed
regrets,  but  I  couldn’t  stay  with  him.  Not  after  that.”  She  looked  away  from  him  now,  her  voice
dropping. The memory hurt her.
He understood. His memory of Camille’s infidelity hurt him too.
Funny that he and Jorie were galaxies apart, and yet they had this one deep ache in common.
She shrugged. “I don’t know if on your world it’s important to be faithful—”
“It is. At least, it is to me.”
“It is to me too.” Another shrug. “But Lorik, I don’t understand him anymore. He’s always listened to the
information I’ve  brought  him on the zombies because  he knows  I’m in  the  field,  that  I  see  things  he
cannot. Every mission is a cooperation between the tracker dirtside and the science officers on the ship.
But now…” She shook her head. “Now Lorik’s data is infallible. And my observation, my experience, is
worthless.”
“Because you left him.”
“That makes no sense! Lorik is a professional. Why can’t he act like one?”
“Because  you left him,” Theo  repeated,  and  realized  he  was  damned  glad  she  had.  “You  made  the
decision to leave. You took that control away from him.”
Jorie looked at him for a long moment, and he was aware—very aware—of the bed they sat on and the
softness of her mouth, and of a shared pain. It would be so very easy to kiss her again, to touch her, to
numb that pain—his and hers—for a little while.
But the space commandos were in his spare bedroom, and the zombies were theoretically just outside his
door.
And Jorie Mikkalah was not the type for a quickie.
Neither,  he  noted  with  a  self-effacing  mental  nod,  was  he.  Maritana  County  had  no  lack  of  badge
bunnies. Not one had made it to his bed.
“So how do we prove that Lorik’s wrong?” he asked.
“We don’t know he’s wrong. I only know that  we  cannot  afford  to  ignore the possibility of the Tresh
being here. My only option”—she drew a deep breath—“is to establish a second mission. Very covert.
One only you and I know about.”
A second mission? He was flattered, but: “I know Rordan’s a pain and Jack’s not sure who’s in charge,
but I thought Tammy was your friend.”
“She is. But I won’t risk her career on an illegal mission.”
He understood that. “What do you want me to do?”

“I have to set these up first.” She  motioned to  the crates.  “Then, Sergeant  Petrakos,  we  should go to
your security department.”
“We go where?”
“Where you are a sergeant.”
“It’s restricted.  I can’t—”  Walk  in  there  with  an  alien  one-woman  war  machine.  She  had  no  ID.
There was no way he could get her a visitor’s badge. Though if he walked in with her by his side,  she
might not need one. But Jorie  would definitely be  noticed  in her shorts  and  long sweater.  At the very
least, he had to find her something else to wear. Unless…“You want me to show you the building where
I work?” Maybe she only wanted to gauge the size of the department, in case they needed backup.
She was shaking her head. “It would help to see all incidents of zombie attacks that happened before I
arrived.  Information my ship doesn’t  know  because  we  couldn’t  recover  everything  from  our  agent’s
tech.”
As far as Theo knew, there had been no other zombie attacks. At least, not in Bahia Vista.  And since
neighboring police departments  didn’t routinely send  lists of their homicides—or  any other  crimes—to
his, the only way to get that kind of information was through a search of the data on VICAP and FCIC.
Zeke had probably already put in requests for all cases of spontaneous mummification both  locally and
statewide. But a positive hit wasn’t the same as having a case file. Answers could take days, even weeks,
especially during the holidays. Granted, Theo as a sergeant might be able to escalate  a  request.  But he
was on vacation. Poking his nose into Martinez’s and Holloway’s case was bound to raise questions.
Questions that could easily result in an implant and a trip to Paroo for Zeke or Amy. Yet by protecting
his friends, he could well be risking the lives of everyone in Bahia Vista. Everyone in Maritana County.
Theo leaned his elbows on his knees and dropped his head into his hands for a moment, wishing he could
suddenly wake up from this nightmare. Then he straightened.
Everything had changed and he hadn’t even seen it happen. What did he have to do, walk around with
his gun clipped to his belt, his damned badge on a damned chain around his neck, just to remind him to
think like a cop?
His  sole  reason  for  not  getting  someone  like  Zeke  Martinez  or  David  Gray  involved  had  just
disappeared. This was an illegal mission, Jorie had said. One  outside  the boundaries  of the Guardians’
knowledge.  Therefore,  revealing Jorie’s  presence—and  purpose—here  to  Zeke  or,  hell,  to  the  entire
BVPD wouldn’t result in a  trip to  her ship  or  ultimately  to  Paroo  for  anyone  involved.  Because  her
captain would be the one to order that, and there was no way Jorie could afford to let her captain know
about this second mission—or those participating in it.
But would Commander Mikkalah be willing to break a  regulation, an oath,  that  he suspected  she  held
inviolable?
There was only one way to find out.
 

13 
“It is the oldest of Guardian regulations. It was in force for centuries before I was even born. Petrakos,
you have no idea what you’re asking of me.” Jorie pinned him with a hard stare, then turned back to the
futuristic gizmos she was assembling in the middle of his bedroom floor.
She was calling him Petrakos again. “But—”
“No.”
“Jorie, there’s no other  way.” He  squatted  next to  her.  “Lorik and  your captain  have you backed  up
against a wall, don’t you see that? You need our help.”
“No.”
“You said it yourself: this is an unofficial mission. No one will know—”
“That I betrayed the Guardians’ existence to a nil world? That I violated the most sacred of my oaths?
Even assuming your people were capable of being trusted with that information, I would know.” She shot
him another hard glance. “I would know.”
“And this funny stuff you do with your computers,” he waved his hand at the assortment of parts in front
of her, “this violates nothing?”
“That’s not the same.”
“It is. It’s for a greater purpose, a greater good.” A phrase echoed suddenly in his mind, and he spoke
before he realized what he was saying: “The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the one.” Christ, he
was quoting Star Trek to her now, but for the life of him he couldn’t remember if it was Spock or Kirk
who said the line.
Surprise flickered across her features, her lips parting slightly. Then her eyes narrowed. “It’s the  needs
of the many outweigh the needs of the few. If you insist on citing Vekran sacred  text,  at  least  cite it
correctly.”  She  inserted  a  thin metal  card  into  a  small  box  she’d  been  working  on  for  the  past  few
minutes, then snapped the cap on.
This time he stared at her. Sacred—No. Don’t ask. You don’t want to know.
She shoved herself to her feet. “I have to speak with Lieutenant Herryck. She’s due to return to the ship
shortly. Ensign Trenat will transport down.”
Which meant, as Jorie had explained to him earlier, that she couldn’t spend so much uninterrupted time
working on her secret  project  in Theo’s  bedroom.  Tammy, a  longtime friend and  colleague,  accepted
Jorie’s occasional absences during a mission.
Jack was another matter.
Theo  watched  the  bedroom  door  close  behind  her,  then  got  to  his  feet,  retrieved  his  worn  pair  of
Top-Siders  from his closet,  and  slipped  them on.  He  stuck  his  head  in  the  spare  bedroom  just  long
enough to see her talking quietly to Tammy. It was almost ten o’clock and he hadn’t had a cup of coffee
yet. No wonder he wasn’t thinking clearly. Given the lack of caffeine in his system, he was surprised he

was still alive.
He tried not to think about how tenuous an existence he might have—coffee or no coffee—and instead
concentrated on spooning in enough grounds  for six cups.  He  poked  the switch,  and  his coffeemaker
responded with its familiar gurgle and hiss.
Now  that  he’d  found  a  way  to  circumvent  the  usual  Paroo  trip  for  any  newcomers,  he  still  had  to
convince her to let him tell Zeke what was going on. Zeke, Amy Holloway, maybe David from FDLE.
Barrington over at the sheriff’s office. Other names, faces, ran through his mind.
She’d managed to  secure  his laser  pistol without Rordan  catching on.  She’d  managed  to  beam  down
boxes of tech. Getting a few more weapons shouldn’t be a problem.
They’d need them. He’d already seen one zombie feeding frenzy, and those were  juveniles. There  was
no way, if he and Jorie had to handle an adult frenzy, they could do so  with only the two  of them. He
could still hear the foosh! foosh! foosh! of the green circles in the air. It made the hair on the back of his
neck stand up.
No, they’d need help.
He was leaning against his kitchen counter, halfway through his first cup of coffee, when she walked in.
“I don’t like the data I’m seeing,” she said. She was frowning and, even though she was speaking to him,
Theo had the feeling that the majority of her brain was focused miles away.
“The zombies are moving?”
“They should be. They’re not.” She walked past  him, stopping  at  his kitchen window.  She  rested  one
hand on the marble sill, her fingers tapping lightly in some silent refrain. “Lorik calls it bliss luck. He feels
the C-Prime’s weakening.”
“And you don’t.”
She stared out the window, her face in profile. Her fingers stopped tapping.  “I need  your land vehicle.
Something is happening. Bring that G-One I gave you. We’re going to find out just what it is.”
 
Jorie so very much missed a decent four-seater gravripper with a locator system. Left, right, left, right in
this large land vehicle was incredibly inaccurate. And a waste of time when they had  no time to  waste.
Something was wrong with the way the zombies were acting. Or not acting, in this case.
She didn’t know what bothered her more: the fact that she couldn’t pinpoint the problem or the fact that
she almost could.
It was as if the answer was just out of reach, hovering at the edges of her mind. But she couldn’t come
up with it. Even running theories  past  Tamlynne  hadn’t  helped.  And  Theo—Petrakos,  she  reminded
herself. Petrakos was like a one-note symphony: my people can help. My people can help.
He started again while they were momentarily stopped at the intersection of two streets, waiting for the
approval  of the dangling colored  lights before  they could  proceed.  “But  you  must  have  worked  with
some local police—security agencies—when you’ve tracked these things before.”

“We no longer do so on nil worlds,” she told him, studying a large expanse of green on her right while the
scanner was integrating the next data update. The green space was very much like a park, except for the
nils navigating it in small, square, open-air vehicles. Others walked, stopping only to swing long sticks in
the air. But she could see nothing there to strike. Very odd.
“Why?”
“It  caused  wars.  Cities  against  cities,  nations  against  nations.  They  want  our  tech.  Then  they  want
participation  and  representation  in  our  council.  But  they’re  not  yet  at  the  point  where  they  can
comprehend what that entails.” She glanced at her scanner, then over at Petrakos, as his vehicle glided
forward.  “Turn  left,  next  chance,  please.  Did  your  security  chief  simply  hand  you  weapons  with  no
training?”
He slowed the vehicle as they came to another set  of colored  lights over  the traffic way.  “I had  to  go
through the police  academy.  I was  trained  to  handle weapons.  It  wouldn’t take  all that  much  for  the
Guardians to train us.”
For the Guardians to train nils? Jorie doubted this entire planet was comprised of people who could
handle weapons in the way Petrakos could. But that wasn’t the core problem. “It would take a  special
edict passed by the council. Then it would take an allocation of funds and of personnel. Things that are
currently needed in other areas.”
“A temporary expenditure. Once we’re trained, we’re an asset.”
“One of limited use. It was a touch of bliss luck one of our scouts picked up zombie emissions in your
remote sector. Captain Pietr almost decided against investigating. Do you hear my words?  Your  world
has no purpose  for us other  than to  terminate the zombie herd.  Your  world  has  nothing  to  offer  the
Guardians, nothing to offer the council.”
“We have peanut butter,” he said as he made the turn.
A small smile found its way to her lips in spite of her current apprehension. “So misnamed. They should
call it glorious butter.” Jorie sighed and watched the power  grid pulse weakly—and  illogically—on her
scanner. “Continue straight on, as much as possible.  I’m not a  senior  council member.  I’m not even a
junior council member. I can’t change what has been in force for hundreds of years.”
“What if we alerted only a few of the people I know we can trust? No city leaders. Just a few more eyes
and ears out here. We tell them what to look for—”
“They’d see nothing without this.” She raised her scanner.
“But the herd—”
“Is difficult to detect until they activate a portal. I thought you acquired knowledge on that.”
“I’ve been trying hard to acquire knowledge, Jorie.” Theo pinned her with a hard stare. “But you have a
tendency to keep me in the dark.”
She didn’t completely understand.  He  was  lapsing into his locale’s  phrases  again. “There’s  insufficient
light in this vehicle?”
“What I mean is, what are we looking for, driving around?”
“Scent trails. We need to turn left again, when possible. Do you remember what I said  last night about

scent trails?”
“That zombies leave behind trails that you track on your scanner? Yeah.”
“Zombies navigate by scent trails. The data from the scent trails is like a personal letter from them to me.
You understand?”
“These scent trails tell you what they’re going to do next?”
“What they likely will do, yes. There’s always a chance of error.”
“Turn left here?”
She  checked  the  readout  again.  The  power-grid  figures  were  still  so  weak.  Hell  and  damn.  “A  bit
farther.”
Data fluctuated, flattened. A slight rise in energy, then an almost simultaneous drop.  It  made  no sense.
They should—
Hell. And. Damn!
“Right! Now. Turn right!” She barked out the order and was about to give an exact heading, but—damn,
damn!—they weren’t in a gravripper.
“I can’t now,” Petrakos shot back.
A quick glance away from the scanner’s damning data to the landscape outside showed Jorie that turn
now would put them into the center of a three-story building.
“What’s going on?” he continued, with a flick of his hand at her scanner.
What was going on was that she hoped, she prayed she was wrong. But until she  got closer,  until she
could  get  a  definite  clear  reading…Another  ghost  of  data  flickered  across  her  screen.  Her  heart
thumped—hard—in her chest.
“Theo,  it  is  essential  we  travel  to  the  right.”  She  heard  the  tension  in  her  voice  and  knew—by  his
frown—that he did too.
“I will at the next intersection, just a few more feet. What is going on?”
“Trouble. Very big trouble.” Hell’s wrath, sometimes she hated when she was right. Or about to be right.
But  she  wouldn’t  contact  the  ship  until  she  had  confirmation.  Nothing  like  Commander  Mikkalah
reporting one  of her nightmares to  Captain  Pietr  to  hasten  her  ride  into  career  oblivion—if  she  was
wrong.
Theo  slowed  the  vehicle,  a  low  clicking  sound  starting  as  it  always  did  when  the  vehicle  changed
direction. “What kind of trouble?”
“Preliminary data appears to indicate the possible presence of an additional entity with the capabilities of
altering PMaT emissions,” she said, as carefully as if she  were  sitting in Captain  Pietr’s  office. But this
wasn’t the captain  beside  her.  This was  Theo  Petrakos.  He  didn’t  know  about  her  nightmares.  She
dropped the formal edge from her tone. “This could be why nothing seems logical. It’s not the zombies
alone causing the problem. It has to be an outside source. The Tresh.”
“The—Why would they do that?”

The data on Jorie’s screen came more quickly now that  she  knew  what she  was  looking for,  and  she
made a few key adjustments to the scanner.
“Essentially,” she told him, “because we defeated them during the Border Wars. If they can control  the
zombies, they could control the—Can this vehicle not increase speed?”
“Not here. Sorry.”
She glanced at the small residential structures fronted by thick trees, then back  to  her scanner.  She  bit
back a sigh of frustration as the data scrolled down her screen and she saw energy patterns she  hadn’t
seen in ten years. Masked Tresh transport trails. Tresh fuel signatures were  unlike the Kedrian  fleet or
Guardian ships. For decades they’d perfected masking them. But flying combat in the Border Wars had
taught Jorie how to look for what wasn’t there.
Which was almost exactly what she was seeing now. Almost. She had to be sure.
“What’s in the direction we’re heading?” Water, there had to be water.
“Gulfview. A small town center. A few bars, restaurants, some little shops—”
“Water?”
“The bay, yes. Why? Jorie, why would the Tresh be in Gulfview?”
Ah. A bay. Small body of water. She risked a moment to change screens, bring up the map downloaded
from seeker ’droids’ data, and integrate that with the current data.  She  saw  the water  and  where  they
were in relation to it. Then she flipped immediately back  to  her tracker  screen.  She  couldn’t  afford  to
lose this trail, couldn’t afford to make a mistake. Not if the Tresh were here.
“The water,” she said, her voice taut but professional. She was back in combat mode. “Direct me to the
water, and I should be able to answer your question.”
She threw an extra scrambling filter over her scanner.  If the Tresh  were  dirtside,  she  didn’t want their
tech picking up hers. Though they’d have to have seen the Sakanah, she realized with chilling clarity. But
her ship would  have  seen  theirs,  and  alarms  would  have  immediately  been  sent  to  her  scanner,  her
team….
And she’d received nothing.
So were the Tresh here, or was the information scrolling down her screen some aberration—hell’s wrath,
she hated nil-tech environments—caused by Petrakos’s world?
A small trickle of apprehension slithered again up her spine. She flipped her mouth mike down, about to
open contact with the Sakanah, then stopped, fear of looking like a fool holding her back once more. If
she was wrong, the mission would end for her now.
Equally, if she was right, contacting the Sakanah could lead the Tresh directly to her and Petrakos.
Wait. Assess. Then act. It was only a little farther.
“This is as far as I can go.”
She jerked her head up. A short grassy area and a wooden walkway met her gaze. Then a small sandy
beach and, beyond that, a short expanse of dark-blue water. She could see the spiky outlines of buildings
on a distant opposite shore.

She needed to be over that water, hovering, picking up scent trails and PMaT trails captured in the rising
water vapors…but this was as far as Petrakos could go.
She saw the confusion and  frustration on his face.  Her  own frustration and  helplessness  roiled like an
angry storm inside her.  She  snatched  the Hazer  from the floor behind her seat,  then shoved  open  the
vehicle’s door.
“Jorie, wait!” Theo’s cry ended abruptly as she slammed the door behind her.
She couldn’t wait. If the Tresh were here, every second’s delay meant they were all that much closer to
death.
No, not death. A slow, painful, torturous descent into a hell she was far too familiar with. One she could
not, would not, face again.
 
God  damn  her!  Theo  bolted  after  Jorie,  hitting  the  remote  lock  on  the  key  chain  as  he  ran.  His
one-woman war machine was heading like a bat out of hell for the bayfront beach, an obvious weapon in
one hand and—if her long sweater hiked up any more—two more obvious weapons on her hip.
“Jorie!” Damn, she could run. Thank God it was Christmas Eve and only a few people were in the park.
And none close enough to see the weapon she carried or the Glock on his hip under his T-shirt. Still, if
one of the fishermen on the pier turned…
He gave an extra push and—lungs burning—came up inches behind her.  He  grabbed  the rifle’s strap.
“Jorie!” Her name came out as a harsh rasp.
She tried to wrench away from him, but he locked his hand on her arm. “Damn it, stop! You can’t…have
weapons…here.”  He  was  sucking  in  air.  She  twisted  again.  “Stop  it,”  he  hissed.  “You  want  every
police—security department here asking questions?”
She faced  him, eyes  wide,  face  flushed, mouth slightly parted  as  if both  questions  and  answers  were
finally coming to her now.
So was unwanted attention. Running after her and shouting had not been the best idea, but he’d had no
choice. Now two men in baseballs caps and dark T-shirts with faded logos watched him turn Jorie in a
slow, dancelike movement as he tried to get control of this situation—and her—and hide her weapons.
He yanked her arm and the rifle between them, and knew the only way he could  legitimize their stance
would be to be extremely stupid and kiss her again.
They had to look like lovers, perhaps lovers having a fight. He had to divert suspicion.
Their kiss was brief, intense, and far too pleasurable. Even the small taste of her made him want more.
Which  was  very  stupid.  Useless.  Downright  dangerous.  Some  kind  of  outer-space  bad  guys  had
evidently arrived, and all Theo could think about were all the other places on her body he wanted to put
his mouth. He was definitely, as Zeke was prone to say, thinking with his little head and not his big one.
He rested his face against hers, the hard length of her rifle between them. “Listen to me,” he whispered,
his fingers threading their way into the softness  of her hair. “You can’t  walk around  with pistols  here.
People over there,” and he raised his face and jerked his chin to his right, “are  watching you,  watching
us. I don’t know what’s wrong, but you have to go back to my car now or  we’re  going to  have a  lot
more trouble than just these Thresh things. Understand?”

“Tresh,” she corrected,  her voice soft against his neck,  her rapid  breathing starting to  slow.  “Regrets,
The—Petrakos. I have to—”
Theo saw the taller of the two men put down his fishing pole and stride off the pier just as—judging from
her halted explanation—Jorie did. The man headed directly for them, his intention to find out what was
going on clear from the frown on his face.
“Hell’s wrath,”  Jorie  said  harshly. Then she  kissed  him. She  kissed  him, arms going around  his neck,
pulling his  face  down  to  hers,  bodies  merging,  rifle  pressing  painfully  into  his  chest.  Jorie  had  more
padding in that area, padding he was very acutely aware of as her tongue toyed with his and her hands
stroked his shoulders.
Theo broke the kiss with undisguised reluctance and peered over the top of her head to see the fisherman
slow, then, with an amused shrug, turn. The fisherman no doubt inferred from Jorie’s actions that she was
a willing participant in kiss-and-make-up. His role as rescuer wasn’t required.
“Regrets,” Jorie said again, turning her face as Theo did to watch the man clamber back onto the fishing
pier. “But I must get to the water to take a sample. I didn’t think—I forgot the rules on your world.”
He  shoved  away  thoughts  of  how  pleasant  her  body  felt  against  his—rifle  and  all.  “Are  we  in  any
immediate danger from these Tresh things?”
A quick glance down at the gizmo in her hand. “Immediate?”
“Are they attacking us?”
“At this point, no. But until I take readings from the water vapor, I can’t tell anything more.”
Water vapor. Well, Native  Americans had  used  smoke  to  send  signals. He  guessed  the Guardians  or
maybe the Tresh could use water vapor.
He shifted her rifle between them and, holding her close  against his side,  urged  her back  to  the SUV.
“There’s an old boatyard a block or so from here. We can go out on the dock, but, for Christ’s  sake,
don’t take that rifle out where people can see it.”
Theo unlocked the doors with the remote. When he cranked the engine, the two  fishermen didn’t even
turn to watch. Good. He cut through one of the back alleys that crisscrossed the small town, then turned
down the short, rutted road that led to the ramshackle marina. The newer waterfront condos, complete
with private boat slips, had put a hurt on the small boatyard business in the area. This one had closed a
few months back, the large yellow-and-white signs nailed to the fence proclaiming its transformation into
an enclave of luxury waterfront town houses next year.
Jorie was quiet but clearly tense as he drove past the fence, her concentration on her scanner,  the seat
belt he insisted she wear pulled taut as she leaned forward. She was going to bolt  again as  soon  as  he
stopped the car.
He exited as she did, hit the remote lock, and sprinted around the front of the SUV to catch up to her.
He grabbed her arm. It was time to push for more information. “What are you looking for in the water?”
“Proof that someone is using zombie scent-trail energies to mask his PMaTs,” she said, striding forward
in spite  of  his  hold  on  her,  the  parking-lot  gravel  crunching  under  her  boots.  The  marina  might  be
abandoned, but the smells of paint, pitch, and varnish still lingered, mixing with the slight fishy tang of salt
in the air.

It took  him a  moment to  remember  that peemat  was  actually an acronym  for  her  ship’s  transporter.
“These Tresh don’t want you to know they’re here?”
“That is my estimation, yes.”
“Are they like the zombies or are they human?” Only after he asked did he wonder if Jorie was human or
even used that term. “Like you, me, Tammy, and Rordan?”
“They’re soft-fleshed, bipedal sentients,” she said, mounting the steps to the wooden dock. He released
his hold on her elbow but stayed close to her side. “In physical appearance, I could be  one  and  you’d
not know. But they’re not like us.” She glanced up at him, golden eyes narrowing. “They’re not like us at
all.”
Something in the tone  of her voice made  his  skin  crawl.  And  Sergeant  Theo  Petrakos  didn’t  spook
easily.
“What happens if you find proof they’re here?” he asked.
“It will change this whole mission,” she said, the dock creaking as she picked up her pace. “It may well
change your whole world.”
A warm breeze buffeted his skin as they neared the end of the long dock. Sunlight dappled the water in
silver-blue patches that reflected a bright blue sky and white cottony clouds. Had Theo not spent almost
two  decades  as  a  cop,  the  threat  implied  in  Jorie’s  words  could  seem  almost  out  of  place  on  this
picture-perfect Florida day. But evil was often the very definition of equal opportunity.
The cop with almost two decades’ experience felt hampered by the fact he still knew very little about the
zombies and nothing of this evil called the Tresh. “Jorie—”
She held up her free hand, halting his words. In the other hand she waved her scanner  in a  slow,  wide
arc. Water slapped softly against the dock’s piling. Her scanner was humming, pinging, beeping.
She was frowning. Then she stopped, frozen in place like a statute for two, three heartbeats before she
spun quickly toward him. “Here.” Her voice was a harsh rasp. “They’re here.”
“Who?”
She flipped the curved mouth mike up, her foreign-sounding Alarsh words  short  and  intense.  Then she
stopped, looked at her scanner, and tapped at it.
“What’s going on?” Theo  could  almost sense  her adrenaline racing. His had  started  to,  and  he didn’t
even know what in hell was going on.
She ignored him, flipped up her mike again. More words. Another pause. Then she smacked her scanner
against her thigh, her  eyes  sparking  in  anger.  “Dead  zone!  You  understand  these  words?”  She  was
marching down the dock, back toward his SUV.
He trotted hurriedly after her. “You can’t transmit, can’t receive.”
“It happened before. At the residence where Danjay was killed. I discounted it then. Stupid!  It’s  not a
dead zone.”
“Then what is it?”
“I’ll know more when I find it.” She stopped at the top of the dock stairs and  made  a  small half circle

with her scanner. “The Tresh have appropriated a structure  somewhere  near  here,  just as  I use  yours.
It’s…good. There.” She shoved the scanner back under her sweater and bounded back to the SUV.
Theo was on her heels.
“I need the Hazer,” she called out over her shoulder.
“Jorie—”
“Petrakos, now!” She’d reached the vehicle and yanked on the passenger-door handle.
He palmed the remote but didn’t unlock it. “You can’t go charging around with a rifle in plain sight. Tell
me what needs to be done. I’ll find a way to do it.”
She faced him, eyes narrowed. A gust of wind from the bay blew strands of her hair across her face. “I
need the Hazer.”
“Not until you—”
A series of chimes he’d not heard before sounded from under her sweater. She  spat  out a  short  harsh
word, shoved him aside, and took off at a dead run for the street. Again.
“Fuck.” The woman was  a  goddamned  gazelle. Theo  hit the unlock  button,  grabbed  her  Hazer,  and
pounded after her.
 

14 
Theo caught up with her in one of the unpaved narrow alleys that ran behind most houses  in Gulfview,
only too aware that a Bahia Vista cop had no jurisdiction in this town and no business running around it
with a rifle in his hand. If the local cops didn’t shoot him, the residents might. Florida was a gun-friendly
state.
Jorie slowed just as they came  to  a  ramshackle-looking  detached  garage  with some  kind of flowering
vine growing in wild abandon over one side. Theo was sucking air in great gulps but had enough energy
to grab her arm and jerk her back against him. Not for the first time, he thought of taking her down to the
ground, knee in her back, hands locked behind her, until she told him exactly what the hell was going on
here. He was getting goddamned tired of this, in more ways than one, and told her so.
“You run from me one more time like that and I’m cuffing you to the fucking car.” Which probably would
have sounded a lot more threatening had he not still been wheezing as he said it.
She shot  a  dismissive look  at  his  hand  clamped  around  her  upper  arm.  “This  way.”  Her  voice  was
hushed. She lifted her chin in the direction of a house barely visible beyond  the garage.  “Where’s  your
G-One?”
It took him a moment to remember she meant the laser pistol. “I have it.” He kept his voice low as well.
“But we just can’t go running into a house shooting—”
“Agreed.” She grabbed the Hazer from him, looped the strap over her shoulder, then pulled the scanner
out again. He watched her gaze dart back and forth from it to the thick foliage in the backyard ahead of
them. The screen appeared mostly blank to him, save for a  few squiggles. She’d  said  there  was  some
kind of dead zone.
“How do you know who’s in there if you can’t get a reading on that?” He pointed to the scanner.
“Because I can’t get a reading on that, that’s why,” she answered softly.
“You could also have an equipment malfunction.”
“I had a memory malfunction. I forgot the last time I saw something like this. But I remember now.”
She tugged him toward the side of the garage. “Quiet. Covert, yes?”
Covert, yeah. And if this turned out to be some kind of computer glitch, he swore he would throw  her
over his shoulder, take her back to his house, and handcuff her, once and for all, to his bed.
Could be fun…
Shit, Petrakos, pay attention.
He sidled along the garage with her, praying the gray clapboard house with the rusted metal awnings was
vacant of innocent civilians, which at this point included kids smoking dope or  some  drunk  sleeping off
the morning’s binge. Zombies he could handle. But she said these Tresh looked like people. They—
A loud hum flashed by his ear just as Jorie’s boot kicked his leg. His vision hazed  blue-white,  and  the
next thing he knew he was facedown in the grass and gravel, an answering hum sounding over his head.

“Theo!” Jorie’s voice was strained.
He came up on his hands. She was kneeling next to him, her Hazer  against her shoulder,  her left hand
blindly grabbing the back of his shirt.
“I’m okay,” he said as she fired the rifle again.
Small starbursts erupted at them from a broken picture window.
She was swearing, scrambling backward. Light flashed overhead.
He levered up, fired his laser pistol where he’d seen the last flash, then punched off a few more shots to
the right of that, assuming whoever, whatever, was in there was moving.
A barrage of starbursts exploded in answer, showering him and Jorie with chunks of leafy branches and
palm fronds from the trees above them.
All this was happening with nothing more than a barely audible hum and hiss. He could be sitting in the
yard next door and think nothing more was going on than a couple of birds fluttering and fighting in the
trees.
One thing he knew  for sure: whoever,  whatever,  was  in there  was  no Florida  resident  he’d  sworn  to
protect and to serve. He had a feeling he’d just met the Tresh. He also wished he’d brought his tac vest.
There was a tug on his waistband.
“This way!” Jorie rasped.
She was backing up again.
Nothing wrong with fighting in the opposite direction, he could hear Uncle Stavros say. He scurried
back, staying low, trying to watch his six and her.
They rounded the garage and came into the alley again. He squatted down next to her, his back against
the wooden  garage  door.  He  hoped  those  starburst  weapons  couldn’t  cut through the garage.  If they
could, he hoped the garage was full of enough junk to stop them. “Tresh?” he breathed.
“Tresh.” She nodded. “Three. I want to try going down this side.” She motioned behind her to her left.
“Find a doorway in. There are some small structures we could use as cover.”
He’d noticed the shed and the stack of old siding about four feet high.
“Risky. They could come up on either side of us.”
She glanced at him. “No.” She angled the barrel of her rifle up. “Sunlight. They’re deep-space adapted.
They can see in direct light for only a minute or so and can’t tolerate the sun’s rays on their skin unless
they use special apparatus and a protective suit. But after moonrise…” She nodded. “Trouble.”
Cristos. First zombies. Now  vampires.  He  was  about  to  ask  her if they sucked  blood  too,  when her
scanner chimed out in warning.
She swore,  shoving herself to  her  feet.  He  rose  at  the  same  time.  She  was  tapping  furiously  at  her
scanner, squiggles racing across the screen. Then the screen went blank.
She let out a strangled cry of frustration, spun, and kicked the garage door. It rattled, creaking.

He guessed. “They’re gone.”
“I jammed them!” She shook the scanner in his face. “Exactly what they did to my tech, I did to theirs.
But they—” And she let out a string of Alarsh curse words.
He made a mental note  to  have her teach  him some,  if and  when their lives ever  calmed down.  They
sounded as good as the ones he knew in Greek.
He motioned back toward the house. “Maybe they left something behind. We can—”
An explosion burst through the air behind them, shaking the garage and the alley under his boots.  Theo
shoved Jorie to the ground, covering her body with his. Dust and  debris  flew past  them, and  he could
hear things—big things—bouncing off the garage’s roof.
“The only things the Tresh like to leave behind,” Jorie said harshly as he pulled her to her feet, “are death
traps.”
A siren wailed in the distance. He tucked the rifle between them and, arm over her shoulders,  held her
against his side. Neighbors would be pouring out into the alley at any moment. They needed to get out of
there quickly and without raising suspicion.
“Walk, don’t run. Yet,” he told her. And when a bare-chested balding man in cutoff blue jeans  almost
bumped into them at the back of a house two doors down,  Theo  grabbed  the man’s arm,  bringing his
attention to himself, not Jorie. And not the barely visible rifle.
“Could be a gas leak, man. Get back! Keep away!”
“Shit!” The man’s eyes went wide, then he whipped around. “Serena! Don’t light that grill!”
 
Keying the remote, Theo popped the rear hatch as they reached the SUV in the marina parking lot, then
quickly took the rifle from Jorie. He stowed it in the cargo compartment beneath the floor. “In case we
get stopped and questioned,” he told her. “Pistols. G-One,” he said, remembering the term and listening
to the sirens grow closer. She handed them to him without question.
First time. Amazing. If they weren’t so obviously where they shouldn’t be, he would have kissed her, just
to say thank you for finally listening to him.
It  wasn’t  until  they  were  on  the  road,  heading  away  from  the  sirens,  that  he  asked  her  what  had
happened. How did she know the Tresh were in the house, but more important, how did the Tresh know
Jorie and Theo were there?
She held one hand up. Her headset ringed her hair again, the mike over her lips. She hadn’t said anything
but had been tapping at her scanner since, he realized now, they’d pulled out of the parking lot.
“Sakanah,”  she  said  hurriedly.  “Sakanah.”  Then  a  few  short  Alarsh  words,  her  name,  and  more
Alarsh words. Short. Tense.
When she repeated the name of her ship again, more insistently, Theo knew something was wrong. Very
wrong.
He glanced at her. “What’s the matter?”

“I cannot contact my team.” Her voice was a harsh rasp.
“Another dead zone.”
“No.” She held the scanner up. He glanced away from the line of traffic and saw lots of squiggles, which
he assumed meant it was working.
“Maybe they’re busy talking to your ship.”
“You don’t understand. I cannot contact my team or my ship. I cannot warn them about the Tresh. The
transcomm streams are all dead.” She clasped his arm. “We must get back to your residence. The Tresh
may have found my team!”
Her panic flowed into him. Her team. Who were in his house, protected from sunlight. But not from an
attack.
 
Theo went Code 3 and, with strobe flashing and siren screaming, headed  down  Twenty-second  South
Avenue,  out  of  Gulfview.  Watching  cars—and  for  anything  else  that  didn’t—move  out  of  his  way.
Listening to the chatter on his police radio for any problems occurring not from the explosion behind them
but in his neighborhood. He crossed the intersections with extra care and tried like hell not to let the panic
in Jorie’s voice affect the driving skills he’d learned years ago on patrol.
“We  have  six  normal  communication  streams  for  surface  to  ship—three  emergency  and  two  other
high-priority command private. Our transcomms, what I use to contact my team, can synchronize through
any of them,” she explained in between her continued attempts to reach her ship. “None is responding.”
“You’re sure it’s not a hardware malfunction on your end?”
“I have triple-checked that. Plus my scanner functions as a backup transcomm. It’s sensing the ship, but
it’s showing no Guardian communication traffic of any kind.”
“When’s the last time you talked to someone back at my house?”
“I  sent  the  preliminary  data  on  the  possible  Tresh  emissions  to  Tam,”  she  glanced  at  her  scanner,
“thirty-seven minutes ago. She confirmed receipt.”
That had to be while they were at the beach park and not in the firefight with the Tresh.
“I thought she was going back up to the ship.”
Jorie shook her head. “She agreed with my theory on the Tresh and opted to take Trenat’s shift.”
Because Tammy had to know Jorie trusted her more than she trusted Jack.
“So she doesn’t know what happened at that house?”
Jorie was shaking her head. “It was another  dead  zone.  The dock.  The residence.  That whole area.  I
started transmitting to her as soon as we cleared its perimeter. No response.”
“But you took readings of the Tresh in the house. You jammed their signal.”
“Readings, barely. And only because I knew how to counterprogram for a short-range scan. But scans,

readings,  aren’t  transmissions.” She  shook  her head.  “I can’t  explain our  tech  now.” She  was  clearly
frustrated. And for the first time, she sounded frightened. “You simply have to accept I know what I’m
talking about. We have a problem.”
Theo pulled out his cell phone and flipped it open. He punched in his home number. He doubted Tammy
would answer—she’d been specifically told not to. But if his answering machine picked up, that at least
meant the Tresh hadn’t beamed a dozen zombies into his living room and trashed his house. “Who else
should be at my house?”
“Kip Rordan. Trenat comes on duty in four sweeps. But only Kip would have a Hazer,” she added, as if
reading  his  mind  and  his  concerns.  “Tam  just  has  her  pistols.  Under  nil-world  regulations,  all  other
weapons must stay on the ship until we see another craving spike forming.”
The  phone  rang  in  his  ear,  then  his  answering  machine  kicked  on,  and  he  listened  to  his  own
not-home-leave-a-message. “Remember the telephone I showed you in my kitchen? The one I told you
never to touch?”
She nodded. He held the cell phone out toward her. “I’m calling, contacting, my house. My answering
machine picked up, which means there’s a good chance there’s no major damage there.”
“The Tresh will not destroy your residence without provocation. When I jammed their tech back  there,
they knew someone had found them. With the dead zone they created, I needed to force them to reveal
themselves. But at your residence,  if they can  attack  my team successfully, they will do  so  and  leave.
Quietly.”
He noticed her hand move up to touch her collar, something he’d seen before when she  mentioned the
Tresh. That made him curious, but this wasn’t the time to ask.
“But thank you for attempting contact,” she added.
He flipped his cell phone  closed  and  used  it to  point to  his radio.  “That’s my security force’s  central
communication. If there  was  any disturbance  at  my  address,  we’d  hear  about  it.”  For  a  moment  he
considered calling Sophie Goldstein but quickly opted not to. If there was some kind of problem  at  his
house, he didn’t want Sophie to go charging into the middle of it. “Any more weaponry  in all the extra
equipment in my bedroom?”
She huffed out a short sigh. “Two standard  Hazers  and  the double-stack,”  she  motioned to  the cargo
hatch, “which is my personal  rifle. But I  didn’t  tell  Tam  I  transported  the  Hazers  or  the  MOD-tech
down.”
Because Jorie wouldn’t risk her friend’s career. Unfortunately, it didn’t escape  her that  she  might have
risked her friend’s life, and she was probably berating herself about it. “The minute I suspected the Tresh
were  here,  I should have had  Tam lock  down  all the tech  in  your  structure  on  heavy  scramble.  We
automatically shield against zombie detection. But after the war we ceased to consider the Tresh a major
threat. Plus we had no reason to believe they’d be interested in a system as remote as yours.”
Scenes from movies like Independence Day and War of the Worlds filled Theo’s mind, with ovoid ships
and helmeted outer-space  aliens decimating what was  left of his oleanders  and  scaring the hell out of
Sophie Goldstein.
He crossed  U.S.  19,  siren wailing, and  headed  for the northbound  ramp  of the interstate.  He’d  seen
zombies. He was very sure that these Tresh could do a hell of a lot more than just scare  people.  “You
could have ignored the whole Tresh  angle, like your captain  and  that  other  guy  wanted  you  to.  You

didn’t. You told your theories to Tammy. You beamed down that extra  stuff. You’re  still ahead  of the
game.” He glanced at her. “Rordan’s a big boy. Tammy’s no slouch.” Then, because he knew she knew
that—even if she didn’t quite understand his expressions—he added what he knew she really wanted to
hear: “We’ll get there in time.”
She nodded, then went back to tapping commands into the screen on her scanner,  her voice tight with
tension as she repeated the ship’s name into her mouth mike. In front of him, a knot of cars  refused  to
move, ignoring his lights and siren. He  was  forced  to  pull to  the right, squeezing the SUV  past  on the
shoulder and clipping the curb more than once on his way to the ramp.
Traffic on the interstate was blessedly light. He cut the siren but kept the lights flashing. Fifteen minutes,
max, and they’d be home.
They’d just passed the baseball dome and the second downtown exit when she pulled her mouth mike
down. She closed her eyes briefly, and when she opened them, her expression was grim.
“What is it?” he asked, not liking at all what he saw on her face.
She didn’t answer for a moment, and when she did, he could hear a slight tremor in her voice. “My ship
is gone.”
“What do you mean, gone?” He stopped himself from asking if it had been destroyed. This was  a  ship
she’d said she’d spent years on. He was sure she had friends, and,  experienced  zombie hunter or  not,
contemplating the destruction of everyone she’d known for the past several  years  had  to  be  horrifying.
“Maybe it’s in a different orbit?” he added lamely.
There was a bleakness  in her eyes  when she  faced  him. “My tech  no longer picks  up evidence  of its
existence in any orbit  around  your  world.  If  they  had  to  flash  out,  I’d  have  received  an  emergency
notification, even with the transcomm inoperative. We have seeker ’droids for that purpose.  You don’t
abandon  a  team—regulations  define our  emergency procedures.”  She  held up her scanner.  “The only
thing I show now is this.” She touched a pulsing teardrop shape on her screen. “It’s a Tresh—a possible
Tresh—resonance within range of where my ship was. Until I synchronize with the MOD-tech  back  at
your structure, I won’t know more.”
Two more exits and they’d be almost home. A dozen insistent thoughts whirled through Theo’s mind as
he pushed the SUV’s speed up over eighty, not the least of which was the possibility that Jorie Mikkalah
might be spending the rest of her life on his planet. In Bahia Vista, Florida. As much as that oddly pleased
him—logistical problems of her lack of verifiable citizenship aside—it had to terrify her.
The fact that his planet might now have little in the way of defenses against not only the zombies but the
Tresh came pretty close to terrifying him.
“It’s time you told me everything, Jorie. And I mean everything.” He  shot  her a  determined  glance as,
slowing, he flicked on the SUV’s turn signal. The Thirty-eighth Avenue North ramp was up ahead. “We
have to work on the assumption your people can’t help you at this point. Not with the zombies. Not with
the Tresh.  But my people  can.  You’re  going to  have to  ditch regulations, change the structure  of this
mission, and make us all part of your team.”
Or all of us, Theo feared, reading all too well the expression on her face, are going to die.
“There is nothing your governments can do,” she said, after a long moment of silence. “If the Tresh want
to take your world, your cities, you don’t have the weaponry to stop them. Regrets.  I know  that’s  not
what you want me to say, but it’s fact. We—the Chalvash Interplanetary Concord—were barely able to

defeat them ten years ago. If they start a war against you, you will lose.”
Theo hit the siren again as they came to the end of the ramp, anger supplanting the fear he’d felt moments
before. Traffic moved out of his way as if it sensed the coming explosion. “God damn it, I refuse to give
up and do nothing!”
“The Tresh hold no belief in deities. And I’m not advocating surrender. I do, however, want you to fully
understand the situation. I’m the only one  with any direct  experience  with the Tresh.  I spent  six years
flying combat during the Border Wars. Both Kip Rordan and Tam are career Guardians. They know  a
lot about zombies, but they’ve never fought the Tresh.”
Any more bad news? Theo turned onto  his street  and  was  slightly relieved by the lack  of emergency
vehicles. He had feared another scene like the one they’d left behind in Gulfview. “But they know how to
shoot. I know how to shoot. And I can get you a lot more people who are trained, who know how to
shoot.”
“Petrakos, you do not hear my words! If Tresh ships are here and the Sakanah is gone, we cannot stop
them by shooting handfuls of their people here and there. The only way we can stop them is by thinking.
We must be smarter than they are. We must be more devious—you understand devious?”
“Completely. We have to find out their plans and use that against them.” Finding out the Tresh’s  plans
was something he believed Jorie could handle. Using everything his world had to offer to stop the Tresh
was his area of expertise. Galactic baddies or not, starburst weapons or not, they were on his turf now.
His mind played with a few scenarios: Jorie locating Tresh  hideouts  like she’d  done  in Gulfview, Theo
sending a SWAT team armed with Hazers in after them. More jamming scanners so they couldn’t beam
up and escape. Of course, Jorie would have to be the one to explain how to do that. But, hell, there had
to be some special ops geek at MacDill AFB who could duplicate her scanner gizmo.
And what a  coup  Guardian tech  would be  for  his  country!  Maybe  he  and  Jorie  would  even  get  an
invitation to the White House….
But there was a downside to his daydream. He sensed that but couldn’t quite grasp what it was, and then
they were  approaching  his house.  He  shifted  his  mind  back  to  real  time,  daydreams  and  downsides
forgotten.
He slowed. All appeared normal, but then, he honestly didn’t know what to look for: an X-wing fighter
parked on his front lawn? No starbursts appeared in his windows.
“Continue on,” Jorie told him. “We—”
“Can’t risk that the Tresh  are  inside and  see  us coming. We’ll leave the car  at  the  park  and  double
back.”
He backed  the SUV  into a  parking space  under  a  large oak  tree,  turned  off the ignition, then hit  the
remote to open the rear door. Shaded from view by the tree  and  adjacent  shrubbery,  he retrieved  her
rifle and the G-Is from the cargo hatch, handing her weapons to her.
Jorie plucked his G-1 from his hand and touched two buttons on the side. “Now it’s set back to stun,”
she said. “If the Tresh are there, we try to take them alive. We  need  to  know  what they know.  But if
there  are  serious  problems,”  she  pointed  to  the power  buttons,  “change settings to  hard-terminate  by
pressing both.”
He tapped his index finger on the buttons above the trigger and watched the power lights go from yellow

to blue. It was an easy move. “Got it.”
She held his gaze for a long moment. “You’re very good at what you do, Sergeant Theo Petrakos. There
may have been things I’ve said to make you feel I don’t value you. That I don’t respect your experience.
I want you to know that’s not the truth. I value you more than you realize. And I am honored to have you
not only on my team but,” and she hesitated slightly, “I hope, as a friend.”
Something in his chest tightened at her words and the emotion he heard underlying them. He  pulled the
rear hatch shut, then, before she could step away, reached over and cupped his hand around the side of
her face. “I’m the one who’s honored,” he said, and didn’t even try to hide the emotion in his voice. Then
something about the way they were standing facing each other—facing danger, facing death—made him
think of a line from a movie, even though this was a shady park in Bahia Vista and not the smoky interior
of a bar in Casablanca. “Of all the crime scenes in all the towns in all the world,  you had  to  walk into
mine.”
“Crime scenes?”
He sighed and patted her cheek gently. “Give me the rifle. My neighbors won’t question my carrying it.”
She hesitated for a moment, then, with a nod, handed it to him.
He locked the SUV and guided her on the grassy area along the curb and onto the brick-paved street. A
little more  than a  day  ago  they’d  walked  this same  path: he,  fresh  from  his  meeting  with  Doc  White
Braids, and she, having pulled some trickery to get him his laptop with the evidence tag.
It startled him to realize how much his life had changed in that short period of time. And how much a total
stranger—an alien one-woman war machine—had come to mean to him.
She was, for all intents and purposes, alone on his world. Even if Tammy and Rordan were alive—and
Theo had to work on the premise they might not be—Jorie could give the order to abandon the mission.
There was no ship to report to, no captain to question her decision. He suspected—because they had set
up Wayne in the rental—that they had some resources here. She could walk away and leave Theo and
his world to fend for themselves.
Yet he knew in his gut she wouldn’t. Even if she was the sole Guardian on his world,  she  would never
stop  fighting to  protect  his people.  The very essence  of Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah  was  a  sense  of
honor and duty.
When everyone else would be running away from a crazed, worm-covered, razor-armed zombie, Theo
knew Jorie would be running toward it.
Theo also knew he’d be at her side.
The brick-paved street that circled the park ended after half a block.
“We’ll cut through my neighbors’ yard, stay hidden by the bushes,” he told her as they walked at a brisk
clip. “Greg and Stacey are up north visiting relatives this week.  Then we  approach  my house  from the
west, use that big tree”—the one that the zombie shaved a fair chunk out of—“as cover. If we come
through the back door, the kitchen window is our only problem. But we can duck under that.” Plus, his
front screen door—his homemade intruder alarm—squealed like a cage full of screaming monkeys. But
then, he never thought he’d be breaking into his own house.
For a moment he thought of the broken lock on his bathroom window. But that would mean the two of
them climbing through one by one. It would restrict access to their weapons if they needed them quickly.

Not the best idea.
“Can you tell if the Tresh are already there?” he asked as  Jorie  hiked  up the edge  of her sweater  and
darted a glance at her scanner screen again. He thought for a moment about the implant in his shoulder.
He suspected her gizmo controlled that too. But he no longer viewed her or that device as a threat, and
not just because her ship was gone.
“If you hear the hum of laser fire, then they’re there,” she said grimly. “But at this distance, unless they’re
running a dead zone or some tech I can positively identify as Tresh, I can’t. That’s what I’m watching for,
what I saw earlier—something that shouldn’t be  there.  But they wouldn’t be  here  to  appropriate  your
residence. They’d kill or kidnap my team, take the data from my MOD-tech, and leave.”
It had been at least forty minutes since Jorie had last heard from Tammy. Chances were good they were
either going to walk into the middle of a firefight or a morgue. Great.
A blue Chevy minivan loaded with kids in the back and two women in the front seat breezed by. Theo
recognized the driver as  he casually put his arm around  Jorie,  shielding  their  weapons:  a  young  legal
secretary who lived with her schoolteacher husband and their twin boys a block away. He’d seen them
many times rollerblading together. Now the mom and boys were out with a friend and her kids, probably
heading for the mall to  see  Santa.  The normality of their activity made  his own seem  that  much more
bizarre.
Dear Santa, All I want for Christmas is a container of double-stack Hazer rifles so I can kill all the
zombies, and a couple of intergalactic starships to blow holes in the Tresh fleet.
It wasn’t a fleet they’d face in his house, though, but a Tresh team who looked human, according to what
Jorie  had  told  him.  And  if  her  ship  had  realized  the  Tresh  were  here,  they  might  have  sent  down
reinforcements. He hoped. “If we come into the middle of a fight, how will I know a Tresh from one of
your people?” he asked, stepping back from her again as the minivan passed. “I couldn’t see them at that
house. Do they wear specific uniforms?” Or have  fangs  like  vampires?  He  remembered  her remark
about their sensitivity to light.
“If they’re operating covertly in a nil environment, no.  They’d adopt  your mode  of dress,  as  my agent
did.”
“Dan Wayne.” He almost said Mr. Crunchy but caught himself in time. “So how will I know?”
She slanted him a glance, then pointed to her eye with her index finger. “The color of their eyes shimmers.
Iridescent? You know this word?”
“Like a rainbow,” he said, taking her arm and pulling her into Greg’s empty driveway, catching a glimpse
of the front of his house as he did so. All still appeared normal. Quiet. He hoped it wasn’t  the quiet of
death. “Blue, green, purple, yellow—”
“To me, sunbow. But Tresh eyes aren’t so bright. The colors are more muted, and they shift and change.
It’s also why they cannot see in planetary daylight.”
“And that’s it? Nothing else?”
A slight shrug. “Only their beauty.”
He  turned  the  corner  and  stopped  at  Greg’s  back  steps.  “Beauty?”  After  seeing  the  zombies,  her
comment was unexpected.

“Beauty. They’re incredibly, flawlessly beautiful.” She tilted her face and looked up at him. “Does  your
world believe in angelic beings, Theo?”
“Angels? Yeah.” He’d been shooting at angels in Gulfview?
“The Tresh are a visual heaven. But in truth, they’re the living embodiment of hell.”
He headed for the tall oleander hedge that separated Greg’s property from his. It seemed illogical that an
entire race or breed or whatever the Tresh were could be uniformly beautiful. But a lot of what Theo had
long accepted as fact—or as impossible—had been blown out of the water when he’d stepped off that
transporter platform and followed his one-woman war machine into that ready room with its view of the
star-studded galaxy.
“I know they have weapons, lasers. But are they trained  in hand-to-hand  combat?”  he asked,  handing
the double-barreled rifle back to her when they reached  the wall of shrubbery.  Maybe  they had  other
handicaps besides limited day vision.
She glanced at the Hazer’s yellow lights, then looped the strap over her head. “They’re masters in the art
of pain.”
And Jorie wanted to take them alive. Oh, Christ. For the second time in one hour, he wished he had his
tac vest. He thrust the laser pistol into the waistband of his jeans and double-checked the Glock in his hip
holster. That had only one setting, but he’d try real hard not to kill any Tresh unless he had to. Unless one
threatened Jorie. Then all bets—and promises to try to capture one alive—would be off.
 

15 
The street cop called Theo Petrakos wanted to be first through his kitchen door, gun out, clearing each
room for Jorie. But Detective Sergeant Petrakos knew Jorie had a much better chance of recognizing her
own people and assessing any potential Tresh threat than he did. So—with great reluctance—he shoved
his ego into his back pocket, kept his Glock holstered, and agreed to let her take point. He’d follow and
cover her with the laser pistol on stun.
They reached the corner of his house and stopped. She pulled her scanner out.
“Dead zone?” he whispered, not sure if a yes was good or bad news.
She  shook  her  head.  “Only  my  MOD-tech.  Nothing  from  the  ship.  No  response  from  my  team’s
transcomms.”
“And people?”
“Incomplete data.”  She  frowned,  tapping the screen,  then: “Tamlynne.” There  was  hope  in her voice.
“I’m reading Tamlynne!”
Tammy was in there but not answering. If she was singing in the shower and unaware anyone was trying
to reach her, he’d gladly help Jorie bust her lieutenant down to ensign.
“Okay,” he said. “Let’s go.”
They flanked his back door for a moment, listening. No cursing, no crashing of furniture. But that was the
way fights happened in his world, not hers. He remembered the soft, eerie hum of the laser fire as it split
the air in Gulfview. It gave a whole new meaning to the term deathly quiet.
At  her  nod  he  yanked  the  screen  door  open,  then,  as  it  bumped  against  his  shoulder,  twisted  the
doorknob and shoved. She inched in quickly, crouching, pistol out, eyes narrowed, focused.
He muffled the sound of the door closing with his foot and then was right behind her, swinging his laser
pistol opposite to hers, looking left when she looked right. His kitchen was empty,  a  half-filled glass of
water sitting on the drainboard by the sink. He saw her eyes widen as she stared at it. He didn’t know
why, but it was important. And it troubled her.
She squatted  down  quickly on the right side  of the doorway  to  his living room,  motioning  for  him  to
follow suit.
He dropped down, one shoulder against the refrigerator, adrenaline surging.
And then he realized what else was wrong. It was too quiet. Every other time the space commandos had
been in his back bedroom, he’d had to keep the kitchen radio on to mask their conversation.
There was no sound in his house. None at all. Not even the shower running.
With a sinking feeling Theo realized they had come back too late. He was about to walk in on his second
homicide crime scene in two days. But the killers would never be brought to justice.
Jorie switched her pistol to her left hand and brought the scanner up in her right. She balanced it on her
thigh and tapped furiously at it, frowning, glancing up in the direction  of his living room,  then frowning

again.
Finally she stopped and brought her hand and the pistol to her lips in a clumsy signal for silence. At least,
that’s what he hoped she was signaling.
He nodded.
She tapped the scanner one more time, then let it fall back to her side. Quickly she switched her pistol to
her right hand, raising her left, five fingers splayed. Then four, three, two…one.
A  high-pitched  squeal  reverberated  through  his  house,  damned  near—he  was  sure—cracking  his
windows. It hurt his ears like hell, but she was rising and so was he. Diversion tactics, he guessed. She
swept  into  his  living  room,  hugging  the  walls.  Theo  was  on  her  heels,  swinging  around,  pistol  out,
double-checking for anything in the shadows.  For  once,  he was  glad there  was  very little furniture for
anyone to hide behind.
She flattened herself against the wall by the entrance to his short hallway. He sidled up next to her just as
the squealing abruptly ceased. Just as something or someone moved like a blur past them into the living
room.
Without hesitation, Jorie fired. The woman—Theo saw now that it was a woman—spun, twisting, raising
a square black pistol in her hand. Theo pulled off two shots, center mass. The woman’s arm jerked up as
she fell, gun tumbling from her fingers, platinum shoulder-length curls flaring out around one of the most
incredibly beautiful faces Theo had ever seen.
This was a Tresh?
“Watch her!” Jorie’s  voice was  a  low rasp.  She  snatched  the small  black  pistol  from  the  floor,  then
hitched up her sweater and pushed it into her belt.
Theo stared at the Tresh woman lying motionless in front of his television. But breathing: he could see the
rise and  fall of her chest  under  her pink Life’s  a  Beach  T-shirt.  She  looked  like  a  Victoria’s  Secret
model lying there.  No,  she  looked  better  than any Victoria’s  Secret  model  he’d  ever  seen.  Perfectly
sculpted, classical features. Long legs encased in white jeans, slender waist, and one helluva rack.
Damn.
Then a noise in his hallway had him and Jorie flattening themselves against the wall again.
Next victim, he thought, wondering how many more cover-model types were in his bedrooms. He and
Jorie could simply stand here and pick them off one by one as they came out of the hallway.
But, of course, the Tresh had to realize that too. Then it would turn into a standoff until he and Jorie could
force them out of the rooms. A smoke bomb or tear gas would come  in real  handy then.  Or  maybe a
row of high-intensity UV lights. Unfortunately, he had none of those.
But this blonde had been stupid enough to come out. Maybe the others would too. Jorie had  said  they
couldn’t beat the Tresh by outshooting them but rather by outthinking them. If this was any indication of
Tresh thought processes, this wasn’t going to be difficult at all. All they had to do was wait.
Unless—shit  for  brains—they climbed out the windows,  like the  one  in  his  bathroom,  and  came  in
through the front or back door. Jorie had  said  they could  withstand sunlight for a  minute or  two.  And
that’s about all it would take.

Watch your six.
He spun back, heart pounding, pistol aimed at the kitchen doorway just as Jorie’s scanner emitted two
short screeches from under her sweater.
She holstered her pistol and brought her rifle up in a smooth, practiced move.
But it was too late.
The Tresh didn’t need to use the windows.
A tanned, pale-haired man shimmered into existence in the far corner of Theo’s living room, just to  the
right of his leather sofa, looking like he stepped off the cover of GQ magazine. The man jerked his short
rifle up, and a bright starburst flared from the muzzle.
Theo hit the floor, firing, as behind him a woman screamed in pain.
 
The first of Jorie’s shots missed as she dropped to the floor, partly shielded by Theo’s chair. Laser fire
slashed overhead. But the second from her specially modified double-stack Hazer punched through the
shields—L-1s,  according  to  her  rifle’s  readouts—around  the  Tresh  Devastator.  A  Devastator!  She
should  have  guessed  that  elite  squad  would  be  involved.  In  the  back  of  her  mind,  she  thought  she
recognized the male as he staggered, but it had been ten years. There wasn’t time to dig out a name or
rank. Theo was on the floor off to  her right, firing, and  somewhere  else  in the structure  a  female was
screaming.
Hell’s wrath. Tam.
Jorie thumbed the Hazer to hard-terminate as she came up on her knees next to the chair. She had one
live Tresh—the unknown female. This one could be permitted to die. The male, stunned but still standing,
swung around toward Theo. “Terminate!” she  shouted,  and  put two  blasts  at  his back,  decimating his
shield completely. Theo’s laser flared blue—and fatal—against the Tresh’s chest.
The male bucked,  writhing. Jorie  sprang  to  her feet,  but Theo  was  faster,  knocking the rifle from the
male’s grip and pointing his laser at his head.
Only as the male lay sprawled—unmoving—on the floor did his name come to her: Cordo Sem. A Tresh
Devastator she’d sworn she’d kill if she ever saw him again.
She’d just gotten her wish. But if Sem was here, that meant…
She bolted into the hallway, heart in her throat. She knew who had Tam.
The back bedroom was empty, her MOD-tech shattered in pieces. She swiveled around, searching for
clues. She didn’t know who’d destroyed the equipment: Kip and Tam, picking up the Tresh  emissions
and not wanting to lead them to the Sakanah and Jorie; or the Tresh, spiteful and angry. It didn’t matter.
The deed was done.
The Sakanah was no longer there to render aid, anyway.
So that left only Theo’s personal bedroom. They wouldn’t have transported  Tam or  Kip  back  to  their
ship. She realized something she should have already figured out, something that hit her the moment she

recognized  Cordo  Sem.  Old  scores  had  not  been  settled.  They’d  tracked  her  down.  They  wanted
revenge.
Another scream.
Hell’s fire. These monsters stopped at nothing.
Jorie stepped quickly but cautiously into the hallway just as Theo did. Sem’s rifle strap was draped over
Theo’s shoulder, his laser pistol at the ready, chest heaving. She held up one hand.
“My game.” She wasn’t sure he understood.
“Jorie—”
Stars, the worry on his face  pulled at  her heart.  “Mine,” she  repeated,  her voice shaking. “They have
Tam.” She hoped to find Kip Rordan in the room too. Hoped her scanner was  malfunctioning and  just
not picking up his readings. “They want me. This is mine to do. Watch the Tresh female. Stun her again if
necessary.” She moved toward his bedroom door, knowing full well what lay behind it.
It was time. In fact, it was ten years overdue.
“Jorie—”
“No,” she  said  firmly, pointing to  the female on the floor.  “Watch  her.  We  need  her alive.” Then she
kicked in the door to Theo’s bedroom, her double-stack raised and ready.
Devastator Senior Agent Davin Prow  filled her sights, his angelic smile beaming from where  he stood
over Tamlynne Herryck, a restrainer field pinning her to the floor. Another  shield glistened around  him.
The readout  on her Hazer’s  tiny screen  showed  it to  be  a  Level-2  Defensive,  stronger  than  the  one
around Sem. Gritting her teeth, she checked fire—he was too close to Tam, the two fields intertwining. A
familiar Devastator maneuver, where an attack on the Tresh agent kills the hostage.
“Lieutenant—no,  forgive  me,  Commander  Mikkalah.”  Davin  Prow  gave  a  slight  nod  of  his  darkly
handsome, square-jawed face. “A pleasure to see you again.”
Jorie took  her eyes  off Prow—and  the small laser  pistol in his hand—only to  glance down  for a  few
seconds. Tam was alive. Bruised but alive. There was no sign of Rordan or  Trenat.  She  couldn’t  think
about them now. She had to concentrate on getting Tam out of here without getting them both killed by
Prow.
She’d done it before.
Though where’d they go—no, don’t think about that. Don’t think about the ship. Just get Tam and
get out alive.
“What do you want?” she asked him, her finger lightly on the trigger button of her rifle. Prow was a top
agent, but she doubted he could tell by looking at her Hazer that it had been modified and could punch
holes in damned near any shielding he erected—even an L-2, though it would take several shots. But until
he moved away from Tam, she was forced to hold back. “I’d say I’m flattered  you came  all this way,
after all this time, just because of me. But I very much doubt that’s why you’re here.”
“Judging from the tech  you’ve transported  down  to  this structure,  I’d  guess  you know  very well why
we’re here. Your being here, however, is the added honeyfroth on the pudding. It makes my mission that
much sweeter.”

She watched him, assessing him while he spoke. She’d always been fast with her pistol.  So  had  he.  It
had been ten years, but she was willing to bet his reflexes hadn’t slowed any more than hers had.
So why hadn’t he fired on her when she kicked in the door? She was unshielded. Then she saw why. His
pistol—a  newer  configuration of the powerful Slayer  6-1—would  create  too  much  backwash  if  fired
through a Level-2 personal defensive shield. He’d have to drop the L-2 to fire.
So he wasn’t here as an assassin, like Cordo Sem. He hadn’t drawn her in here to kill her. Yet.
Interesting.
“What do  you want?” she  repeated,  only then realizing they’d  been  conversing entirely in  Vekran—a
language the Tresh were rarely integrated for.
That told  her something else.  Prow  and  the Tresh  had  been  on this planet  for at  least  as  long  as  the
Guardians had, if not longer.
“You’re alone on this nil world. I’m sure that fact has come to your attention.”
Did you destroy my ship? The question was on the tip of her tongue, but she held back. Prow would lie,
or,  rather,  he’d  tell  her  whatever  would  make  her  easier  to  manipulate.  Which  was,  yes,  that  the
Sakanah was gone.
“I’ve worked solo or with a small team before.”
“They’re not coming back for you, Mikkalah.”
Because they flashed out or because you destroyed them? She shrugged. “Someone will. I can wait.
I’ve waited in worse places.” Like your prison compound.
“Waiting is a  waste  of your time and  considerable  talents.  Talents  we  recognize  and  could  use.”  He
smiled at her, and killfrost spun its way up the crevices of her spine. “I have an offer.”
“I’m not interested.”
“You haven’t heard it.”
“I don’t have to.”
He stepped to his left, his L-2 undulating as he moved. Jorie could hear Tam’s harsh, strained breathing.
Hang on, Tam. All Jorie needed was for him to take two more steps. One might even do. Her modified
Hazer packed one hell’s wrath of a punch he wouldn’t expect. Hopefully it would get to him before  he
had time to respond.
She could also use Theo’s bed between them for cover and, if Prow was still standing, her Hazer could
keep  him  away  from  Tam  while  she  set  off  another  earsplitter—all  that  Tresh  beauty  came  with  a
price—from the MOD-tech  behind him. Tech  he  hadn’t  destroyed  because  he  hadn’t  had  time?  Or
because he knew what she knew about the zombies? And he needed it like she did?
“Respectfully, I disagree,” he was saying. “You do need to listen.”
Respectfully? Jorie would have laughed out loud, but that would require her closing her eyes, however
briefly. She couldn’t do that.
“Your charm overwhelms me. Release my lieutenant. That might put me in a more blissful frame of mind.”

“I fear it’s a bit too late for that. And her.”
No, don’t look down. He wants you distracted.
She saw him tap a small band on his wrist. And she heard a corresponding thin, keening wail from Tam,
followed by a harsh panting. Then a short, very soft two-tone chime.
Bile rose in her stomach. She knew that sound. A Devastator restrainer implant recycling up to the next
power level. If her hands  had  been  free,  Jorie  knew  one  would already  be  clasping the scar  near  her
neck.
“Kill her and you’ll have nothing to bargain with,” she said harshly.
“Isn’t that like negotiate? Sorry, not in my vocabulary.” Prow touched his wrist.
Tam screamed.
“Stop it, Prow!”
“The memory never fades, does it? You know exactly what she’s going through.” He moved his fingers
to his wrist again as he stepped toward her. Away from Tam. “Are you ready to listen to me now?”
It was the only chance she had. She had to let him touch the implant signal. She had to pray that, in that
microsecond, he’d be focused on the implant, and  his reflexes with his pistol would be  just that  much
slower than hers.
Head shot. The rifle would lose a little after breaking through the shielding, but a head shot was her best
chance. She watched his fingers. Forgive me, Tamlynne. But it’s going to hurt for a little longer.
“Go to hell,” she told him through gritted teeth.
Prow’s shield suddenly flared bright red  and  he staggered  back,  body  twisting at  the waist,  iridescent
eyes wide in surprise.
Out of the corner of her eye Jorie recognized Theo, his large projectile weapon clutched in both hands.
Theo moving steadily toward her out of his bathroom doorway.
Prow stumbled, one hand now clutching his shoulder. Blood gushed between his fingers as if he’d been
stabbed. No, not stabbed—shot by Theo’s nil-tech pistol. How and why that was, she  had  no time to
consider. Prow raised his weapon.
Jorie darted sideways and fired, Hazer energy boring a  yellow ringed hole in the already  disintegrating
L-2 shield. Prow ducked, twisting again. Another loud crack from her left. Another red flare.
Prow screamed something into his transcomm, and before she could get him in her sights again, he was
gone.
The restrainer field around Tamlynne Herryck evaporated with his departure.
“Tam!” Jorie  dropped  to  her knees,  pressing  her hand  against  her  lieutenant’s  pale,  damp  face.  The
woman shivered, convulsions starting. There was no time to deal with them. The Tresh could be back at
any moment. She had to secure the structure.
“Theo—”

But he was already there beside her, on his knees.
“She’s going to convulse,” she told him quickly. “Keep her stable. Don’t let her hurt herself. I have to set
shields around your structure. Then I can help.”
She sprang to her feet, lunging for the row of tech along the wall. She pushed her mouth mike into place,
and with three  words  she  segued  her  scanner  to  the  larger  tech  units  and  continued  to  work  voice
commands while her fingers keyed in overrides.
Theo’s structure wasn’t large. She could lock it down for now. The Tresh  might eventually unscramble
her shielding, but it would buy her time. Time to get help for Tam. Time to search for Rordan.
“Grid One in place. Grid Two.” She spoke out loud, hoping Tam could hear her and would know what
her commander was doing, why she wasn’t at her side. “Grid Three. Holding, locking. Grid Four. Almost
there. Locking now. Grid Five. Synchronizing. Holding. Locking.” She took one last look at the security
pattern, checking for breaches. “We’re secure.”
She sucked in a long breath and pulled her hand away from the screen. It was shaking.
She turned  around.  Theo  had  wrapped  a  blanket  around  Tamlynne and  was  holding  her  head  back,
keeping her airway clear. He glanced at her.
“The Tresh can’t beam back in?”
“Not now,” Jorie said, crouching down beside them, scanner out.  She  picked  up the resonance  of the
unit Prow  had  injected  in Tam almost immediately. “He put an implant in her,”  she  told  Theo  as  the
scanner searched through hundreds of combinations to find the right code to neutralize the implant. “Like
yours. Except—”
“Much worse.”
“Much.” A series of numbers fell into line, then vanished.  No.  Close,  but not the code.  Vomit-brained
whore spawns!
“You had an implant,” Theo said. “A Tresh one—not one like mine.”
She pulled her attention from the screen and looked at him. He must have heard  her conversation  with
Prow while he was in his bathroom. How had  he gotten  in there?  And how had  he destroyed  an L-2
shield? Questions she needed answered—later. “I was taken prisoner by the Tresh during the war. They
put an implant in me, yes.”
He just nodded, his eyes darkening with emotion.
She went back to her screen. She didn’t want his pity.
More  numbers  lined  up.  She  held  her  breath.  Could  it  be…?  Yes.  Yes.  The  implant’s  power  field
dropped  down  three  levels. Tam’s shuddering halted,  and  her cries  of anguish were  replaced  by  soft
moans. Jorie couldn’t shut down the Tresh restrainer completely. But she  could  at  least  make  the pain
somewhat bearable, until a med-tech…
“Will she be okay?” Theo touched Jorie’s arm.
“I…For  now.” There  were  no Guardian med-techs  here.  And,  depending  on what kind of signal  she
could rig from whatever tech remained, it could be months, even a  year,  before  a  Guardian ship could

find them. Damn you, Prow!
“What’s wrong?” Theo asked softly.
Damn you, Petrakos, she wanted to say. Sometimes I swear you read my mind.
“Can you put her on the bed? If she’s warm and she sleeps, it will be better.”
Theo lifted Tam gently, Jorie unwrapping the blanket as he did so. Then she tucked it around Tam again
as Theo pushed a pillow under the lieutenant’s curls. Tam whimpered, but exhaustion and pain took  its
toll. Her eyes fluttered closed.
Jorie ran through the codes two more times but found nothing better. She put her scanner on the bedside
table. Its signal would block the implant as best it could until she could rig a dedicated unit out of what
was left of the tech in the spare room.
“It’s still hurting her.” It wasn’t a question. Theo seemed to know Jorie couldn’t shut down the implant.
“That’s not the only problem.” She  ran both  hands  through her hair, her muscles suddenly taught with
anger.  “It  will  kill  her.  Two,  three  days.  If  we  don’t  disengage  it,  it  will  kill  her.  And  the  ship,  my
med-techs, aren’t here to help. Damn it!” She spun away from him, from Tam lying helpless in the wide
bed, and headed for the hall, chest tight, eyes blurring.
Theo caught up with her at the doorway, one arm circling her waist, the other around her back, gathering
her and her rifle against him, hard. For a moment she stiffened, wanting to pull away, but she didn’t. She
couldn’t. Theo’s face—that very good face—was in her hair. He whispered her name, telling her, “Hush,
it will be all right.”
It would not be all right. Her ship was gone. The Tresh were here. The zombies were in Tresh control.
She was stuck on a nil world. Her top lieutenant and close friend was dying. And she had no idea if Kip
and Jacare were even alive.
So  she  clung to  Theo,  her good  friend Theo,  just for a  moment. Clung to  his reassuring  warmth  and
hard-muscled strength and closed her eyes, tucking her face against his neck.
It would not be all right. But at least for the next few moments, she was not alone.
“Hush, Jorie.”
She raised her face. “I have more problems. And work to do.”
He brought his hands to rest on her shoulders. “We have work to do. And we’ll solve these  problems
together.  But first,” and  he grinned sheepishly, “I have to  rescue  my  laser  pistol.  It,  uh,  got  wedged
behind the toilet when I climbed through the bathroom window to try to sneak up on Prow.”
“You climbed through…?” Jorie  shook  her head  distractedly  at  his embarrassment  and  at  the  mental
picture of Theo’s large form squeezing through the small opening. “Why didn’t you use the Tresh rifle?” It
was still draped across his chest.
“I’ve never shot it.”
She’d forgotten, again, that he was a nil. “I’ll show you later,” she said, and stepped into the hallway, her
mind already sorting through plans, options. A bit of bliss luck: they’d acquired two more weapons. But
their locale was her immediate concern. Theo’s residence was small enough; she might be able to set the

shields in a randomizer pattern that would baffle the Tresh for a good long while. That would provide her
with a secure base of operations but would also limit her movements.
A lot also depended on how large a base the Tresh had here. They must have more than that house she’d
found. Obviously the Guardians had underestimated them. Interrogating the Tresh female could—
She stopped in the main room. The female wasn’t on the floor. Hell’s wrath! She flipped the Hazer back
to stun, turning quickly. “Petrakos!”
Quick footsteps from the hall behind her. “Here. What—”
Jorie glanced over her shoulder at him. “Where is she?”
“She?” He had his G-1 out now. “Fuck.”
Jorie understood the emotion behind the word if not the meaning.
Theo crossed the room and stopped at the galley doorway,  his weapon  angled against his chest.  Jorie
sprinted behind him, listening for the same thing he was: a Tresh female, waiting for them.
She heard nothing. She checked the readout on her Hazer, looking for the possible resonance of an L-1
or L-2 shield—the best she could hope for without her weapon pointed at a target. Nothing again. She
signaled her lack of information to  Theo  with a  shake  of her head  and  a  slight shrug, then flipped her
oc-set into place.
“On three.” His voice was barely above a whisper. “One. Two—”
He swept into the galley, moving right. She followed, going left. The galley was empty. They both  spun
slowly around one more time, then lowered their weapons.
“Shit,” Theo  said  through tight lips. Jorie  held back  from  pointing  out  that  while  a  spoor  trail  would
certainly be helpful in finding the female, the Tresh didn’t routinely leave behind excrement in their wakes.
She’d begun to figure out that references to deities, excrement, and certain other bodily functions, when
uttered in anger, were a sign of intense displeasure on this world.
“Let’s recheck the house.” Theo pushed past her, out of the galley. Jorie hurried after him. Five minutes
later they were in the galley again.
Theo leaned  against the  counter  next  to  the  water  dispenser  and  shook  his  head.  “My  fault.  I  take
responsibility.  She  was  out  cold.  I  even  cuffed  her.”  His  eyes  narrowed.  “Bitch  has  my  best  cuffs.
Unless…”
He was reaching for the door to go outside when Jorie grabbed his arm.
“Don’t! Your structure’s shielded.”
He shot her a puzzled look, brow furrowing slightly. She stepped in front of him and pulled at the door.
“Here.” She took his wrist and  brushed  the back  of his hand against the faint haze visible through the
ocular over her right eye.
He jerked back with a short yelp. An alarm wailed briefly from the bedroom, then silenced. “That could
be a problem if one of my neighbors comes over unexpectedly. Is there any way we could set it to only
zap the Tresh?”
“No,  but  I  can  reset  the  security  perimeter  to  within  your  structure’s  wall.  Or  only  around  specific

rooms,” Jorie told him, again damning the fact she had to operate in a nil environment and not a military
one. “But then you’ll have to be more careful.” He didn’t have an ocular and couldn’t see the shield as
she could.
Theo gingerly pushed  the door  closed.  “I can  deal  with  that  better  than  I  can  deal  with  an  innocent
neighbor getting fried. Besides, if that Tresh woman does come back in, she’s not going to be much of a
threat with her hands cuffed behind her back.”
Jorie sagged back against the galley table, perching one hip on its edge.  “I don’t  think she’s  out there.
Sem’s body is gone. The Tresh must have transported them while I was confronting Prow.” And before
she’d locked the structure down in a grid shield. Damn! Hell and damn. Eight years of hunting zombies
with the Guardians and she’d gone soft on tactics against the Tresh.
Theo had been staring out the door’s viewport. He turned to her. “Tell me about Prow and the other two
Tresh.”
“They’re Tresh Devastators. An elite force. You understand—”
“Elite. Yes. Just go on. If I don’t understand something, I’ll ask.”
Both their language skills had improved. One less thing to have to compensate for.
“I only recognized  the two  males: Cordo  Sem,  the one  we  terminated  in the main  room.  And  Prow.
Davin Prow. He’s Sem’s superior, or was. I have no reason to think that’s changed. Their presence tells
me  this  is  a  very  serious  operation.  It  also  tells  me  they’re  close  to  completion  or  the  Devastators
wouldn’t be here. They’re not an advance team. You noticed Prow spoke Vekran?”
“I heard him speak English, yeah. No offense, but he has no accent. I understood him better  than I do
you.”
“He’s integrated—the Devastators can do that.”
“Integrated?”
Yes, of course, was on the tip of her tongue, but she stopped. The way Theo moved, the way he handled
weapons, the way he almost unconsciously seemed to pick up on what needed  to  be  done  kept  lulling
her into a false sense of who and what he was. A male from a nil planet who knew nothing of the past
several hundred years in the Chalvash System,  who’d  never  heard  of the council or  the Tresh  Border
Wars.
She sought the words she needed in Vekran, then simplified them as  best  she  could.  “It’s  like another
kind of implant, but one that enhances his brain’s natural abilities. A Tresh agent qualifies for this implant
when he reaches Devastator status.”
“A built-in translator?”
“Yes. Among other functions.”
“Like?” he prompted.
She shrugged. The variations were so vast. “It depends on the parameters of the original bioprofile.”
A slight drawing down of dark brows. “You’re telling me the Tresh are biologically engineered?”
Ah!  “You  have  that  technology  here,  then?”  There’d  been  nothing  on  that  in  Danjay’s  reports.  But

perhaps Theo’s security status afforded him access to that information.
“Rudimentary. Cloning of farm animals, that kind of thing. But it’s not common. And it’s never used with
people. Humans.”
“It’s  very  common  in  most  technologically  advanced  systems.  To  the  Tresh  it’s—how  is  it  said  on
Vekris?—the highest art.”
Theo nodded slowly. “They’re all perfect. By deliberate design.”
“Devastators most of all. If there’s a lack—as in linguistic abilities—it’s augmented biomechanically.” She
watched his face. He was still nodding.
“Got it,” he said after a moment. “So  these  Devastators  came  here  already  programmed  to  speak  my
language.”
No, he hadn’t quite acquired knowledge, and she told him so.  “Programmed  to  learn your culture and
your language—which is very similar to Vekran, as you know—at a faster rate. From his fluency I’d say
he’s been here longer than Danjay was. Which now also makes me question the zombie attack that killed
him.” Something hovered at the edges of her mind again. She  tried  to  focus and  articulate  it. “It didn’t
seem right somehow. Danjay wasn’t stupid. We flew together. He was my gunner and—”
And Prow knew that as well. Prow had had the files on her entire squadron and had taken great pride in
showing them to her. And had no doubt integrated them into his memory.
“And?” Theo prompted.
“And Prow knew that if I was on the Sakanah, Danjay’s death would bring me dirtside.” She’d been so
blind, so very blind. Like everyone  else,  she  viewed the Tresh  problem  as  solved.  What  else  had  she
missed?
“You mean you specifically? Or the Guardians?”
“We’ve been here for almost four of your months. The Tresh could have called their ships in to confront
us at  any point.” And they hadn’t.  Another  puzzle. “But Danjay’s  death…”  She  shook  her head,  her
mind still sorting through everything. “I think that was aimed at me specifically.” She  looked  up at  him,
wondering how he’d perceive her when she told him why. Yes, he was in his planet’s security force. But
he’d explained that his duties were protection. She’d been an assassin. “I killed Prow’s brother.”
“Because of your war—”
“Nikah Prow wasn’t a Devastator. He was a med-tech who designed the restrainer  implants the Tresh
use. It was happenstance my team came across him during a raid on a Tresh station. We were after their
data. We had no indication he would be in the lab complex. I made the decision to take him with us. That
was my error.  It  cost  us time to  subdue  him. The Devastator  team almost caught us.  So  I  needed  a
diversion and decided he was it. I put him—bound—into an airlock and rigged a small explosive to the
outer hatch. I knew his brother would stop to rescue him. They were”—Jorie put her index fingers side
by side—“twins.”
“Go on.”
“I knew his brother would try to rescue him. I knew about how long it would take for them to open the
door we’d jammed. At six seconds to go, I blew the outer hatch and spaced him.” She watched Theo’s
face and  then,  when she  saw  little change,  remembered  where  she  was.  His people  might have more

technological experience than she’d first surmised,  but Theo  most likely had  no direct  experience  with
what happens to a live body when it’s sucked into the vacuum of deep space.
“It is,” she continued, “a very horrible way to die. A horrible thing to witness. I’m not proud  of what I
did. But it bought us time. And…” She closed  her eyes  briefly. “And I kept  thinking of all my people
who’d been tortured by the device  he’d  perfected.  I was  angry. I wanted  him to  suffer. I wanted  his
brother to suffer.”
“That saved the lives of your team, allowed you to escape.”
“We would have escaped anyway. Using Nikah Prow as a diversion gave us the time we needed. I had
no reason to space him other than”—she drew a short breath—“other than I wanted to.”
“Was this before or after his brother took you prisoner?”
“Before.”
“And he didn’t try to kill you for that?”
A faint smile twisted her lips. “Personally, Davin hates me for killing Nikah. But he’s a Tresh Devastator.
Professionally, he appreciates a job well done.”
Theo was silent for a long moment. “And now he wants you to work with him.”
“Believe nothing a Tresh says, unless it’s ‘I’m going to kill you.’” She shoved herself away from the table.
The condemnation she’d halfway expected to hear from Theo over her actions hadn’t materialized. That
made her feel marginally better, but she still wasn’t sure he fully understood what she’d done. Though he
seemed to grasp why. “I have to check on Tamlynne.”
“Jorie.” His voice stopped her in the doorway.  She  turned,  expecting a  question  about  Nikah  Prow’s
death. “Your ship’s gone. All we have is you and Tammy. If you accept  his offer,  will that  protect  my
city, my world?”
His words jolted her. She stared at him hard, part of her recognizing it was merely a question. He was a
nil. Security trained or not, he didn’t know. But another part of her wanted to lunge at him and plant her
fist in his face.
She could face his condemnation for being an assassin. She could not live with being a traitor.
She flexed her right hand. “I have to check on Tamlynne. And reset  the shields.” She  spun away  from
him and this time ignored the sound of her name—and the pain in her heart.
 

16 
The shields were easy to reset within the structure’s walls, taking less than five minutes of her time. But
the  scanner  hadn’t  been  able  to  devise  a  better  combination,  even  after  twenty  minutes  of  intense
concentration  on  Jorie’s  part.  The  implant  in  Tamlynne’s  shoulder  still  pulsed  pain—with  spikes  of
death—into her system.
Tamlynne’s eyelids fluttered briefly, then closed again, when Jorie lay her hand on Tam’s forehead. Sleep
was a good escape. But eventually even sleep would fail to provide respite.
Jorie sat on the edge  of the bed,  fighting waves  of exhaustion and  frustration.  Right now she’d  gladly
trade all her weapons for a med-tech’s JS-6-4. Then she’d have a chance of removing the unit. She was
wondering if she could somehow modify her scanner into even a basic JS-6-1, when Theo appeared in
the doorway.
“I had to ask about Prow’s offer,” he said, coming to stand beside her. “I have to explore all options.”
Jorie adjusted the blanket around Tamlynne without looking at him. She didn’t know what she’d see on
his face—suspicion?  Dismay? Or  perhaps  neither,  just  a  basic  devotion  to  duty,  something  she  was
supposed to understand. Most times she did, except when it came to Theo Petrakos. Being with him set
off a chain of unsettling emotions she did not want to—could not—deal with at the moment. “I cannot
make decisions for you or your people, Petrakos. Perhaps that best be said now. But the Tresh are not
and will never be an option for me or any Guardian.”
Tam uttered a soft moan, then shivered. Jorie’s throat tightened. She’d lost team members  before.  She
didn’t know a Guardian—or a marine—who hadn’t. But there was something different about dying in the
heat of battle, leaving this existence kicking and screaming, and succumbing slowly, helplessly, to pulses
of unending pain.
And something was even worse about losing Tam after just losing Danjay. She was still trying to process
his  death,  going  over  and  over  in  her  mind  if  she’d  done  something  wrong.  Or  if  she  hadn’t  done
something that might have kept him alive.
And then there was Kip Rordan. What limited scans she could perform gave no hints of his whereabouts
or his fate.
“What are the Tresh doing here?” Theo’s question brought her out of her dark ruminations.
“Prow didn’t share that information with me. I can only guess.”
“Then guess.” Theo’s voice was insistent. “It’s crunch time, Jorie. Do or die.”
She did look at him this time and saw the intensity in his dark eyes, the taut line of his mouth. “I need data
in order to formulate my guesses.”
She  stepped  away  from  Tam’s  still  form  on  the  bed,  then  hunkered  down  in  front  of  her  array  of
MOD-tech on the floor. She pulled up her mouth mike and spoke soft commands in Alarsh. Data rose
and merged, scenarios and probabilities appeared. Her tech continued to  pick  up energy streams  even
after the Tresh had destroyed the main units in the other room. Why Prow had left these untouched…
It may have been simply that their return interrupted his plans. Or it might be something else.

She went back  to  her  data,  peripherally  aware  of  Theo  prowling  about  his  structure—but  evidently
remembering her warning  about  the  structure’s  shielding,  because  she  heard  no  curse-filled  yelps  or
jangling alarms. Which was just as well. She didn’t want to think about Sergeant Theo Petrakos, because
when she thought about him, she felt things. And she couldn’t afford that luxury now. Her worries about
her ship, about Tam, Kip, and Jacare could overwhelm her if she let them. Her disappointment in Theo
Petrakos—If you accept his offer, will that protect my city, my world?—threatened to choke her.
For no reason! He was a nil, a damned nil. Nothing more.
Except…
A soft nudge against her arm. Th—Petrakos with a glass of ice water. “You want something to eat? It’s
almost seven. Dinnertime.”
She accepted the water and sipped at it.
Then her scanner emitted three strident tones.
She dropped  the water  glass,  aware  of its thud against the floor,  aware  of the slosh of  the  precious,
invaluable liquid against her skin. She didn’t care. The harsh tones signaled a medical emergency.
Tamlynne Herryck had stopped breathing.
Jorie shot  to  her feet,  heart  pounding,  and  was  at  Tam’s  side  in  three  long  steps.  She  grabbed  her
scanner, saw the ineffectual codes, and damned the fact she had no functional med-kit  in the structure.
Her skin chilled in spite of the anger welling up inside her as she worked frantically to reset the codes and
block the implant.
“What’s the matter?” Theo clasped her shoulder.
“Respiratory failure! And this unit won’t—”
Theo shoved  her aside  and  grasped  Tamlynne’s face,  one  hand over  her lieutenant’s nose,  his mouth
covering hers, forcing his breath….
Manual resuscitation.  It  was  such an antiquated  method  that  it took  Jorie  a  few  shocked  seconds  to
process what she was seeing. She’d seen teachtapes of the method but never used it. With med-’droids
or med-techs everywhere—even during the war—there’d been no need.
Until now.
She prayed it worked. She tore her gaze away from Theo breathing life into Tamlynne and concentrated
again  on  the  scanner.  She  had  to  weaken  the  implant,  decrease  its  output.  The  jamming  codes  the
scanner  had  produced  weren’t  sufficient. She  needed  a  damned  JS-unit.  Unless  she  could  somehow
bypass the units codes altogether and—
“Keep her alive!” she rasped at Theo, and lunged back at her tech stacked along the wall. There had to
be something in the emergency datafiles, even though this was all Guardian tech—Guardians  who were
concerned  only with destroying  the zombies.  Not  with confronting the Tresh.  If she  could  access  the
ship…
But she  couldn’t.  She  barked  search  terms  into her mouth mike, barely  waiting for the results  of one
query to appear before demanding the next. Ten, twelve years ago she’d have had this information at her
fingertips. But she was no longer in the marines, with intelligence data on the Tresh coming in daily.

If she didn’t find those Tresh overrides, Tamlynne would die.
“She’s breathing on her own.” Theo sounded hoarse but elated.
Jorie glanced at him over her shoulder, relief rising, then waning. “It won’t last. This is the first of many
attacks. It just happened sooner than I expected.”
Theo dropped down on the edge of the bed, hands against his thighs, head slightly bowed. His shoulders
sagged, then he turned and seemed to study Tam’s still form. Jorie shared his frustration. The anger—and
helplessness—inside her seethed so virulently, she felt that if a zombie were to appear in the room right
now, she was perfectly capable of tearing the thing apart with her bare hands.
But that wouldn’t help Tamlynne.
“I thought that buffered the pain,” he said, turning back and pointing to her scanner on the bedside table.
“Only temporarily. I told you—”
“Yeah. It will kill her.” He wiped one hand over his face. “So what do we do?”
“I’m trying to find override codes. The Guardians were never involved in the war with the Tresh.  They
don’t archive data on them like the Kedrian Marines do. If the ship were here, I could access its library
or link to the military libraries at Central Command. But—”
“Can we remove the implant?”
“Remove?”
“Your med-tech put one inside me. How does it come out?”
“With a JS-Six-Four,” and as she said it she knew that meant nothing to him. “It’s essentially a miniature
PMaT. I don’t have one.”
“How about surgically?” Theo made a cutting motion with his hand down his shoulder.
“The JS-Six-Four is used in surgery.”
“No. With a knife. Or your laser on low power.”
Jorie stared  at  him, grotesque  barbaric  visions of sliced flesh oozing blood  coming to  her  mind.  “We
haven’t used those methods in hundreds of years. I wouldn’t even know how—”
“I know  someone  who does.  It’s  the way things are  done  here  all the time. She’s  a  doctor.  And  an
EMT—an emergency medical technician. The wife—she’s spoused to Zeke Martinez.”
“A nil?”
“A doctor.”
“Theo, to involve a nil med-tech would reveal our presence—”
“Damn it, Jorie!” He shot to his feet, hands fisted at his sides. “If you don’t get that thing out of Tammy’s
shoulder, she’s going to die. Is that what you want?”
A soft, pained whimper came from the bed behind Theo.

Jorie closed her eyes for a moment, her training and all the platitudes  about  a  Guardian’s  duty warring
inside her, battling against what she knew she had to do.
“No.” Jorie rose and faced Theo. Captain  Pietr  and  the entire council could  strip  her of her rank  one
hundred times over for violating gen-pro regulations if they wanted to. If it came to that, she would face
them. She would accept their punishment, their censure.
She’d already lost Danjay. But she was not going to let her lieutenant die.
 
Theo punched  in Zeke  Martinez’s  cell-phone  number as  he trotted  down  the  street  toward  the  park
where he and Jorie had left his SUV. Twilight was edging into night, the air cooling but still warm for late
December in Florida. He tried to remember if Zeke and Suzanne went to her sister’s for Christmas Eve
dinner. Maybe it was New Year’s. All he did know was this was a bad time to call and ask for a favor.
He had no choice. And it wasn’t just Tammy’s condition that forced him to take action. It was that Jorie
was alone on this mission. He wasn’t going to have her lose her life too, for his world.
Not if there were options. He felt there were.
He put the cell phone to his ear and waited for Zeke to answer.
It didn’t take long—third ring. With caller ID, Zeke already knew who was calling.
“Yassou, amigo. What you got?” Zeke asked, mixing the Greek word for hello with Spanish.
“Unofficial business. You and Suzanne with family or something?”
“Business? Man, it’s Christmas Eve. You’re supposed to be on vacation.”
“Unofficial, Zeke. And it’s actually Suzanne I need.” Theo could hear voices, laughter, and the clatter of
dishes in the background. “You at her sister’s?”
“The neighbors’. You were invited, if you remember.”
He did now. Zeke had mentioned it last week. Before  Liza Walters  offered  her cousin Bonnie to  him.
Before his one-woman war machine came into his life and turned everything upside down.
“So what do you got, a sick cat? You don’t even own a cat, Theo.”
Suzanne’s voice was faint but audible: “People don’t own cats, cats own people.”
“Suzanne says—”
“Yeah, I heard  her.  Listen, when will you two  be  freed  up?  You know  I wouldn’t ask  unless  it  was
important.”
“We haven’t even had dessert yet—ow!”
Theo could envision Suzanne smacking Zeke on the arm. He’d seen her do  it enough times. Especially
when he heard, “Zeke, ask Theo what he needs.”
“I need Suzanne to meet me at her clinic as soon as she can,” Theo said, before Zeke could repeat his
wife’s instructions. And because Jorie couldn’t unequivocally discount  that  the Tresh  might track—and

respond to—the implant’s removal: “I need you to bring your Glock and rifle, and it’s probably not a bad
idea to wear your vest.”
“My—what do you got, some kind of wild dog? Sure you shouldn’t be calling animal control?”
“No wild dogs. No cats either.” Theo  searched  for the right words  to  at  least  alert  Suzanne she’d  be
dealing with a human, utilizing her EMT skills as well as her veterinary ones. “I’ve got an illegal military
operative with a time bomb in her shoulder.”
“A spook?” Zeke dropped his voice to a harsh rasp. “CIA?”
“Something like that.”  He’d  reached  his car,  blessedly  still where  they’d  left it. It  beeped  twice as  he
unlocked it with the remote. “I need to keep this totally below the radar. When can you break free?”
“Sure you’re sober?”
“Completely.” Though when this was  all over,  a  three-day  binge might be  a  great  idea.  If he had  any
vacation time left.
“Hang on.”
Theo slid in and started the engine, then backed out of the tree-shaded space.
He shifted to drive and Zeke came back on. “Forty-five minutes okay for you? Quarter to eight?”
“Quarter to eight is great. And thanks, Zeke. I really mean this. I didn’t want to get you two involved, but
our backs are against the wall here.”
“Our? Wait. This operative. Is that the gal I met? Jorie?”
Theo hesitated.  “She’s  one  of them,” he admitted  as  he pulled down  his driveway.  “But  not  the  one
who’s injured.”
“There are more?”
“I’ll explain when I see you.” He flipped the cell phone closed, climbed out of the SUV, and locked  it.
Jorie nudged open  the back  door—she  must have turned  off those  sizzle shields. When he pulled the
door shut behind him, she was busy making peanut butter and grape jelly sandwiches. She stopped just
long enough to tap at her scanner. Shields back on, he assumed,  as  he grabbed  a  can  of orange  soda
from the fridge. Jorie  had  her usual glass of water.  Helluva Christmas  Eve dinner. No  vasilopita,  no
lucky coin. But they had to eat something. He couldn’t remember the last time he had  a  real  meal. He
didn’t know when they’d get the next chance to eat one.
“We leave in fifteen minutes,” he told her, snagging half a sandwich from the plate as they stood together
at the kitchen counter near the sink. That gave them plenty of time. It would take, max, twenty minutes to
get to Suzanne’s veterinary clinic. Less if he ran Code 3.
“You remember what you thought when you were on the Sakanah? When you understood exactly who
the Guardians were, why we were here?”
He bit into the sandwich, nodded, swallowed. “Yeah, I know—”
“Revealing our  existence  never  goes  well with nils. I accept  this is necessary  to  save  Tam’s  life.  I’m
grateful. But you need to be prepared. This will not be a blissful experience, Theo.”

That, he mused, finishing off the rest of the PB&J, was probably the understatement of the century. But at
least  she  was  calling  him  Theo  again.  He  took  another  swig  of  soda,  then  reached  for  his  second
sandwich half. “Zeke and I go back a long time. He trusts me. I trust him.” He wondered for a moment
how Jorie would react when she found out Suzanne was primarily an animal doctor,  not a  people  one,
her years as an EMT notwithstanding. He shrugged it off as the least of his worries.
Right now it was more important that he and Jorie start working as a true team. “Tell me what guesses
you’ve been able to come up with about the Tresh’s presence here.”
She stared past him for a moment, and he was aware of the shadows under her eyes. And he was aware,
once again, of what Commander Jorie Mikkalah had to be feeling, facing. When that Tresh agent, Prow,
had pointed  out how alone she  was,  she’d  said—with a  chin-raised  confidence  Theo  tagged  as  pure
Jorie—that someone would be back for her.
But pure Jorie, Theo had learned, didn’t always tell the truth. And he doubted  she’d  tell a  Tresh  how
frightened she was.
He didn’t know if the Guardians  would come  back  for Jorie.  He  didn’t think Jorie  knew  that  answer
either.
She turned to him. “Once  I factored  in the Tresh  presence  here  and  factored  in what I know  they’re
capable  of,  it all became  clear.  Or  more  clear.”  She  shook  her head  slightly.  “One  never  completely
knows with the Tresh.  But my best  guess,  and  I think you can  take  that  as  almost a  certainty,  is that
they’ve been using your world as a breeding ground for an altered zombie. A more perfect one.”
“Like the Tresh themselves,” he put in. And then, because he’d been a cop too long and making light of a
serious situation was second nature to him, he added, “Are they at least going to make them prettier?”
She shot him a narrow-eyed look, mouth pursed.
He held up both hands, one of which contained his half-eaten sandwich. “Guilty as charged. Go on.”
“I originally thought they might have acquired  the code.  Now  I think they’ve programmed  around  it.
Bypassed  it  somehow.  My  tech”—she  waved  one  hand  toward  his  bedroom,  where  Tammy  lay
asleep—“picked up duplicates of everything Lorik  transmitted  while we  were  out.  It  didn’t appear  he
knew what he was  looking at  but sent  it for my input because  he recognized—finally!—that he might
have been wrong in his primary assessment. His report didn’t state the Tresh were involved. But he did
agree that someone was tampering with the zombies. He delineated some tests to run on the next zombie
we encountered. Lorik always has to be more than one hundred percent sure on everything,” she added,
almost as much to herself as to him.
Theo pushed away his unease at the fact that Lorik no longer appeared to be on Jorie’s shit list. “Why do
the Tresh need a more perfect zombie?”
“Not perfect so much as obedient only to them. And this is a guess. But it’s one I’m fairly certain of, one
I’ve told you before: to control the Hatches—our ships’ gateways through space.”
He remembered that. The zombies had been built to maintain and guard the Hatches and check incoming
ships  for  potentially  deadly  infections.  Then  something  had  gone  terribly  wrong,  turning  them  rogue,
wreaking havoc on various planets. It all had meant little to him the first time she’d explained it—was it
only yesterday? Now it was all too real. And personal. The Tresh were using his world. And they would,
if they could, kill his Jorie in order to keep on doing so.

“How do we stop them?” He  put the empty plate  in the dishwasher.  It  was  almost time to  bundle up
Tammy and put her in the SUV’s backseat, along with whatever other gizmos Jorie decided they’d need.
“We can’t stop the Tresh. Even with your friend Zeke Martinez…even with your full security force.” She
let out a short breath, then raked one hand through her hair. “Our  only choice  is to  stop  the zombies.
Destroy any chance the Tresh have of altering them for their use.”
“All of them?” Last he asked her, she said there were over three hundred. Theo didn’t know how many
more parks  he could  close  under  the guise of a  wandering rabid  raccoon  just so  they  could  turn  the
zombies into fooshing green circles.
“That’s what the Tresh would expect a Guardian to do: terminate the herd, starting with the juveniles. It’s
standard Guardian procedure. And that’s exactly why we won’t do that.”
“Then what—”
“We must locate  and  terminate  the  C-Prime—who  will  be  heavily  guarded  by  the  juveniles  and  the
mature drones.” Jorie shoved herself away from the counter. “If Lorik’s last summations are correct, we
only have one replication cycle—roughly six of your days—in order to do so. Or else  the mutation the
Tresh have programmed  will progress  to  the next generation.  Six days  after  that,  the  next.  Once  the
hatchlings are  out,  nothing short  of a  full Guardian attack  force  will be  able  to  stop  them. And  that’s
something we no longer have.”
He followed her back to his bedroom in silence, his mind working over the import of her words. Then,
while  she  gently  woke  Tammy  and  prepped  her  for  the  ride  to  the  clinic,  he  grabbed  his  tac  vest,
heavy-duty  boots,  sweatshirt,  and  his ankle-holstered  backup  gun,  and  ducked  into  his  bathroom  to
change.
 
Theo waited for something to go radically wrong—in keeping with everything else that had happened so
far—on the drive to Suzanne Martinez’s veterinary clinic, with Tammy lying on the backseat  and  Jorie
talking softly to her in her own language. But other than his aunt Tootie calling on his cell phone, sounding
forlorn that he was  working and  might not make  Christmas  dinner tomorrow,  the twenty-minute drive
was uneventful. No  Tresh  zoomed  by in X-wing fighters, firing  starburst  lasers  at  them.  No  zombies
materialized in the intersection, slashing at the overhead traffic lights.
Traffic was sparse. He didn’t have to hit his lights or siren once.
That gave him too much time to think and only made his nerves worse when he pulled around the back of
the L-shaped white stucco clinic and saw Zeke’s unmarked Crown  Vic in the parking spot  marked  D
OCTOR S. MARTINEZ. Lights shining through the low palm trees shading the clinic’s rear  windows  told
him his friends were inside and waiting.
Well, here we go.
He had no idea how Zeke would react to the news that outer-space aliens resided in Bahia Vista. No, he
did. Every cop on patrol had had more than his or her share of Signal 20s who claimed to be the galactic
emperor from Alpha Centauri or who believed that FBI agents lived in his refrigerator and Martians were
camped  out  in  his  attic—which  was  the  reason  for  lining  his  baseball  cap  and  his  underwear  with
aluminum foil.

And shooting BB pellets at the neighbors.
All Theo had were Jorie, her gizmos, and his Paroo cube. The latter of which, he realized as he put the
SUV into park, wasn’t all that much unlike one of those high-tech toys found in a Sharper Image catalog.
Or on eBay.
But helping Tammy was his main priority right now. Let Suzanne get that damned thing out of Tammy’s
shoulder—he’d talk to her later about the one in his. Let Tammy be, if not overly mobile, at least able to
work with Jorie on the zombie problem verbally.
Maybe that would take some of the pinched look out of Jorie’s golden-hued eyes. God  knew  she  had
enough to worry about.
So did he. Zeke was going to Baker-Act him for sure.
“How’s she doing?” he asked over his shoulder as he turned off the engine. Jorie had spent the entire trip
on the floor wedged between  the front and  rear  seats,  her scanner  gizmo doing whatever  her scanner
gizmo did to keep Tammy alive and as pain-free as possible.
“I be…okay.” Tammy’s voice was strained, weak.
He looked at Jorie. She was shaking her head. “No change.”
“Wait until I come around to help you with her.”
The back door of the clinic swung open when Theo’s boots hit the ground, the muffled sounds of dogs
barking  flowing  out.  The  separate  kennel  wing—rebuilt  to  hurricane-proof  specifications  two  years
ago—was off to the right but attached to the main clinic a few feet from the back door. Zeke appeared in
the doorway, silhouetted by the light behind him, rifle in one hand.
“Does Suzanne have a stretcher, a gurney?” Theo called out.
Zeke ducked back inside and reappeared moments later, pushing a gurney.
Tammy tried to sit up. Jorie moved up on the seat behind her and held her upright until Theo could slip
his arms under her legs and around her back. He placed her carefully on the gurney.
“Ay, madre mia, so young,” Zeke  said  as  he secured  the straps  around  Tammy’s body.  She  tried  to
smile, but then her eyes fluttered closed.
Theo had no idea how old Tammy was.  He  had  no idea  how old Jorie  was.  So  he only nodded  and
stepped back, letting Jorie go ahead of him inside.
The barking became louder, a cat meowed, the sounds filtering through the metal crash-barred door that
led to the kennel wing.
“Theo!” Suzanne Martinez, in powder-blue scrubs dotted with frolicking kittens and puppies, hurried to
his side and brushed a quick kiss across his cheek. She  was  a  stocky—pleasingly  plump, Aunt Tootie
often said—brunette with a heart-shaped face and upturned nose. Her long hair was pulled back into a
ponytail and tied with a gold bow—incongruous with her outfit and obviously a remnant of their aborted
evening plans. Theo again felt a pang of regret for taking them away from their party—and quite possibly
risking their lives. But not only had he not known what else to do, he truly felt this was the best thing to
do.

He heard Zeke lock the door behind them.
Suzanne was already stroking the hair out of Tammy’s face.  “Hi. I’m Suzanne Martinez.” She  looked
back up at Theo. “Zeke said she has something in her shoulder? Shrapnel?”
“A  small  device.  Like  a  microchip,  I  think.  Jorie  can—Jorie.”  He  touched  Jorie’s  arm,  taking  her
attention from Tammy. She’d  been  hovering over  her lieutenant like a  nervous  mother hen ever  since
they’d arrived. He’d probably be the same way if he was in a hospital with Zeke  on the gurney. “You
remember Zeke Martinez? This is Suzanne, his wife. Doctor Suzanne Martinez.”
Suzanne nodded. “I hope Theo told you—”
Theo  held  up  one  hand,  halting  Suzanne’s  words  and  explanation,  he  believed,  of  her  status  as  a
veterinarian. “Suzanne, this is Commander Jorie Mikkalah.”
“Commander?” That from Zeke, now standing next to his wife.
“And this young lady?” Suzanne asked, looking back down at Tammy.
“Lieutenant Tamlynne Herryck,” Jorie supplied.
“I be…okay,” Tammy said softly.
Jorie patted her hand, said something Theo couldn’t understand. Tammy closed her eyes again.
“Is she in immediate danger?” Suzanne asked.
“She had a small seizure about an hour ago, but she’s stable right now,” Theo said.
Suzanne looked troubled. “I assume there’s a valid reason you brought her here instead of to  a  regular
hospital. And requested that my kennel staff be kept out of this. After all my years  being a  cop’s  wife,
I’m used  to  not  asking.  Or  rather,  not  getting  answers  when  I  ask.  But  I  want  you  to  very  clearly
understand  the  difference  in  my  skills  here.”  She  glanced  at  Jorie.  “He  did  tell  you  that  I’m  a
veterinarian?”
“No,” Theo said, before Jorie could answer. “English isn’t her native language.”
“Inuktitut,” Zeke told his wife.
“Eskimo?” Suzanne’s eyes widened.
“No!” Theo  said  again, forcefully enough that  both  Zeke  and  Suzanne turned  abruptly  to  him. “Zeke,
I’ll…I’ll explain in a bit. But first let’s get that thing out of her, okay?”
A parrot—at least, Theo assumed it was a parrot—chose that moment to let out a raucous shriek. A cat
meowed loudly in answer.
“You have companions here?” Jorie asked.
“Companions?” Theo and Suzanne said at the same time.
Jorie spread her hands, delineating something small, then something larger. “Creatures of feather and fur
for emotional comfort and guidance. You use them to heal your patients?”
Suzanne eyed Jorie quizzically. “No—that is, yes. I’m a veterinarian. A…companion doctor.”

Jorie nodded solemnly and Theo saw relief spread over her face, her shoulders relaxing. “That’s the first
blissful news  I’ve  had  since—well, thank  you.” She  turned  to  Theo  and  laid her  fingers  on  his  hand.
“Accept my regrets for doubting you.”
“Doubting me about what?”
“When you said  this female was  a  med-tech.  I was  afraid  the  skill  level…Regrets.”  Jorie  nodded  to
Suzanne again. “I was afraid she’d  not have the skills because  of the low level of technology on your
world. But a med-tech who heals companions is the most skilled of all. Thank you.”
The blatantly puzzled expressions on Suzanne’s and Zeke’s faces would have been funny if the situation
weren’t so serious.
Suzanne was the first, however, to catch on. “On our world?”
Theo was  saved  from answering by a  soft whimper of pain  from  Tammy.  Jorie  immediately  had  her
scanner out. Suzanne stared over Jorie’s shoulder, eyes wide.
“The implant.” Jorie pointed to an image on the screen.
“Is that a…handheld MRI?”
“It does a lot of things,” Theo told her. “Jorie will explain as much as she can later. But right now can you
remove that thing?”
Suzanne reached for the scanner. “May I?”
Jorie handed it to her, and for the next few moments, the blue-walled back room of the clinic was filled
with the soft sounds of the two women’s voices, the staccato barking of a dog, and the occasional shriek
of a feathered companion.
Theo leaned against a grooming table, feeling useless.
“Theophilus.” Zeke flanked Theo’s right side. “What in hell is going on?”
“I could tell you, Ezequiel, but you won’t believe me.”
Suzanne raised one hand, catching Theo’s attention. “I’m going to take her into surgery.  We’ll call you
boys if we need anything.”
“How long?” Theo asked.
Suzanne exchanged glances with Jorie. “I want to run some tests first. That shouldn’t be more than fifteen
minutes. Then, if we don’t encounter any complications, half an hour to forty-five minutes. That…thing is
fairly close  to  the surface.  But I’ll want to  monitor her in recovery  for at  least  two  hours  after  that.  I
suggest you two find the coffeemaker in the staff room and get it brewing.”
With that she turned and, with Jorie on one side, wheeled Tammy down the short hall.
Theo watched them go. He could feel Zeke staring at him the entire time.
“You won’t believe me,” he said before Zeke could repeat the question.
Zeke rocked back on his heels. “Try me.”

“Make some coffee. I refuse to be Baker-Acted without sufficient caffeine in my veins.”
 

17 
It took Theo over half an hour to explain—or try to explain—about Jorie and the zombies and the Tresh.
Then he sat in silence, sipping a cup of Zeke’s wonderful black-as-mud coffee, as his friend and former
partner examined the Guardian laser pistol, Hazer micro-rifle, and, lastly, the cube showing holographs of
Paroo.
“Looks like Tahiti,” Zeke said.
Theo leaned  forward  and  pressed  an icon on the side  of the top  screen.  He’d  figured  out  the  zoom
feature yesterday after returning from the confrontation with the zombies in the park.
“Tahiti with the cast from Star Wars,” Zeke amended. “Means nothing.” He  handed  the cube  back  to
Theo, who pressed two sides to flatten it, then shoved it back in his pocket.
“I know. But that and the weapons are all I have right now.”
“If it was anyone but you—”
“I know.”
Zeke picked up the rifle again, hefting it. Theo glanced at his watch. Almost nine o’clock. And this wasn’t
a residential neighborhood. “Okay,” he said, knowing what Zeke wanted and might finally take as proof.
“One shot. Outside in the parking lot. But I’m going to turn on my strobe so we don’t get any funny calls
from any passersby or Suzanne’s kennel staff reporting a strange blue flash.”
“I’ll call Nina on the kennel intercom and  tell her not to  worry  about  the strobe.”  Zeke  was  grinning,
clearly excited about seeing the rifle in action.
The air outside  was  still warm,  muggy. Zeke  propped  open  the clinic’s rear  door  with a  folding chair
while Theo unlocked the SUV and hit the switch for the blue strobe behind his rearview.
“Two settings,” he said, angling the Hazer so that Zeke could see the small buttons. “Stun.” A yellow light
pulsed down  the side  of the rifle. “And dead.”  The light  turned  blue.  “You  got  something  you  don’t
need?”
“Suzanne remodeled the nurses’ station last week. There are two old metal desks behind the Dumpster.
They’re heavy bastards. I’ll give you a hand.”
Theo looped the rifle’s strap over his shoulder, then pushed while Zeke pulled. Theo turned the desk so
the file drawers faced Zeke and were in line with the Dumpster. If the charge kept going, the Dumpster
should stop it.
Then he trotted to the far end of the parking lot, Zeke by his side. “Ready?”
“Fire at will.”
“Poor  Will.” Theo  shouldered  the rifle and  took  aim. “He’s  always getting  shot  at.”  He  punched  the
trigger button.
Blue light bored  through one  side  of the desk  with nothing more  than a  low hum, then flared  brightly
against the front of the Dumpster.

“Damn!” Zeke broke into a trot, heavy-duty flashlight in one hand, and stopped to kneel in front of the
smoldering three-inch hole in the desk. “It went completely through both file pedestals. Hot damn.”
Theo shut off the strobe, then walked over to the blistered, buckled section of the Dumpster. “If Suzanne
catches any shit about this, let me know. I’ll kick in some bucks for a new one.” He looked at Zeke.
His friend sighed and shut off the flashlight. “Okay, so you’ve got some really sweet weapons there. But
we’ve got lasers. That doesn’t prove she’s an outer-space alien.”
“I told you.” Theo grabbed the edge of the battered desk and pulled it toward the Dumpster. “I’ve been
on their ship.”
“Beamed up, yeah.” Zeke pushed, grunting. “You’ve seen The Wizard of Oz. Little girl gets smacked by
a tornado and dreams all kinds of things. You say you were out in the yard when the tornado hit—”
“Zombie,” Theo corrected.
“Tornado. Microburst,” Zeke countered. Together they shoved the desk back up against the Dumpster.
“The whole thing is just a hallucination.”
“Jorie’s real. This rifle’s real.”
“She could be some kind of terrorist. Or superspy.”
“Who just happened to be in my backyard at the exact moment this supposed microburst clocked me?”
Theo kicked at a stone and sent it skittering across  the asphalt  as  he walked  back  toward  the clinic’s
open door. “And who then set up an elaborate video display of fifteen-foot-tall monsters, not only in my
backyard but in the park by the mall? And, oh, the ones in my house where people beam in and out like
a scene from Star Trek? Why, Zeke, why?” They’d reached the doorway. Theo crossed his arms over
his chest. “If these are high-tech terrorists from some third-world country—who couldn’t afford this kind
of technology to begin with—why me? Why a Homicide cop in a small Florida city? Why not a  police
chief in Miami? Or an FDLE lieutenant who would have access to far-more-sensitive information than I
do? Why go to all this trouble for me?”
“Did you run NCIC on her?”
“I didn’t think NCIC included starship pilots’ licenses.”
Zeke stepped inside. “Fingerprints.”
Theo followed and closed the door. “You’re not going to find Jorie or Tammy in our databases.”
“Outer-space aliens don’t have names like Tammy.”
“Tamlynne,” Jorie’s voice said behind him. “Her name’s Tamlynne.”
Theo turned, quickly reading her face.  No  tears.  No  sadness.  Hope  rose  that  Jorie  would at  least  be
spared this heartache.
“She’s in recovery.” Suzanne was walking toward  them, surgical mask  loose  around  her neck.  “She’s
doing very well.”
Theo reached for Jorie. “You got it out? She’s okay?”
She took his hand. “Yes and yes. And it’s fully disabled. The Tresh have no way of tracking it.” Finally, a

small smile. “Dr. Suzanne is excellently skilled. Companion med-techs always are.”
He stood staring at her, aware  of the warmth of her hand in his, aware  that  Zeke  had  come  to  stand
beside him. He didn’t care. He gave her hand a small squeeze.
“Contact lenses,” Zeke said.
“Zeke, what are you babbling about?” Suzanne sounded annoyed.
“Her.” Zeke gestured at Jorie. “She has Theo believing she’s from some other planet. The hair, the gold
eyes. Has to be contacts.”
Jorie glanced at Theo. “Nils,” she said quietly, pulling her hand out of his. “I warned you.”
“Zeke,” Suzanne said, but Zeke had flicked on his flashlight and aimed it at Jorie’s face.
“But you can always see the lenses in an oblique light.”
“Zeke.” Suzanne, again.
Jorie blinked.
“Look that way.” Zeke pointed to the wall.
Jorie shrugged and turned in profile to him.
“Zeke!”  Suzanne  had  lost  patience.  Theo  heard  that  clearly.  He  wondered  what  had  happened  in
surgery, what Jorie had told or shown her. Something, obviously. Because Suzanne didn’t seem the least
bit disturbed by Zeke’s mention of “another planet.”
Suzanne—in a  very familiar move—smacked  Zeke  on the arm.  He  stopped  squinting at  Jorie’s  eyes.
“Suzy—”
“I believe Jorie is who she says she is.”
“What?” Zeke straightened.
“So is Tamlynne,” Suzanne continued. “Though whether they’re actually from this Chalv, Cal…”
“Chalvash,” Jorie said.
“Thank you. Chalvash System—that,  I don’t  know.  But I do  know  that  small  scanner  of  hers  is  far
beyond any kind of medical equipment we have. Nothing I’ve seen even comes close.”
Zeke looked at his wife. “You can’t really think that—”
“I do. I watched Jorie sonically seal my incision. I do know what I’m talking about, Zeke.  Nothing we
have here—nothing—can do that.”
Zeke switched a look from his wife to Jorie and back to his wife again. “So she’s not wearing contacts?”
Suzanne angled her face  around  toward  Jorie’s.  “Nope.  Interesting  eye  color,  almost  feline.  Do  you
know if it’s a dominant or recessive gene?” she asked Jorie.
“It’s what my parents chose,” Jorie said.

It took a moment for Theo to realize what she said, and then it startled him. Evidently the Tresh weren’t
the only ones who played with biological engineering.
Zeke shoved the flashlight back in his duty belt, disbelief playing across his features. “This is crazy.”
“I so know that feeling,” Theo intoned wryly. He clapped  Zeke  on the back.  “Now  that  we  have that
settled, let me give you the bad news: Jorie and her people aren’t the only outer-space aliens here. And
the zombies aren’t the only issue. We’ve got problems, big problems, amigo. Go fire up that coffeepot.
We need to tell you about the Tresh.”
 
Zeke was skeptical. No, more than skeptical. He could not, did not want to believe Jorie was a Guardian
who’d come to Florida via a spaceship right out of Star Trek. Theo could see it in the way the detective
leaned back in the chair in the staff room, arms across his chest, eyes narrowed.
“C’mon, Theo,” Zeke said, when Jorie paused in her recounting of the Tresh Devastators showing up in
Theo’s house. “Don’t you think NASA or NO-RAD or one of those agencies would notice a bunch of
space cruisers hanging out up there?” He waved his hand in a circle over his head.
Theo rested his elbows on his knees and scrubbed his hands over his face. It was almost eleven o’clock.
The end—or what should be the end—of another grueling, confusing day.
Another hour and it was Christmas.
Christ.
“We take considerable efforts not to be noticed by nil-techs,” Jorie said. She too had her arms crossed
over her chest and leaned back in her chair across the small staff room from Zeke.
This was not going well.
“I know it’s hard to believe,” Theo said finally. “I’m still having a difficult time processing what I’ve seen.
But I can’t change the facts: these zombie things are here, the Tresh are here, and Jorie’s ship and crew
are gone. We need help. But if you don’t want to get involved, I understand.  Suzanne’s  removing that
implant from Tammy is above and beyond the call. We really have no right to ask for anything more.” His
own implant could  wait.  He  shoved  himself to  his feet.  “If Suzanne says  it’s okay,  we’ll take  Tammy
back home now.”
Zeke grimaced, his mouth twisting slightly. “You really believe all this shit, don’t you?”
“I wish I didn’t,” Theo answered honestly.
“Let me print her,” Zeke said. “Her and her friend. I want name, DOB,  everything. Run them through
NCIC.”
“You’re not going to find anything.”
“Then what are you worried about?” Zeke replied smoothly.
Shit. Standard interrogation setup, and he’d walked right into it. He would have laughed out loud, but he
was too tired. “You got a kit in your car? Go get it.”
Zeke strolled out and Theo explained the procedure to a frowning Jorie.

“Why would there be a record of my biological signature in your criminal files?” she asked.
“There won’t be. That’s why I’m saying it’s no big deal. Not important,” he amended. “But he’s a friend.
And friends double-check each other sometimes.”
“He thinks I’m deceiving you.”
“He thinks it’s a possibility, because he hasn’t seen what I have. So he has to gather his own information,
to be sure.”
“Nils,” Jorie said softly as Zeke returned, but a corner of her mouth quirked up in a grin and she let Zeke
take her prints. She had no idea what a Social Security number was. Her response to his request for date
of birth was equally perplexing.
“Esare three nine seven Tal one Nifarris,” she told him, and even obliged by writing it down.
“Which makes you how old?” Zeke asked.
“My age on my world? Thirty-nine.”
He’d thought she was younger, but then, he didn’t know if his years were the same as Chalvash System
years, or wherever in hell she was from. She could be thirty-nine or nineteen or seventy-nine. He had no
way to know.
“And you have no driver’s license, no identification?” Zeke was asking.
Jorie pulled her scanner out from under her long sweater and flicked through several screens. “This.”
Theo stepped forward, craning his neck, and saw a small head-shot image of a  very serious  Jorie  with
shorter hair, and then lines of squiggly or angular characters to the left of the image. Characters like the
ones that had scrolled down the screen of Mr. Crunchy’s laptop and had graced the corridor walls of her
ship.
“Can you translate that to Vekran?” he asked.
“Trans…ah!” She tapped the screen a few times. The angular letters shifted until Theo saw a somewhat
recognizable alphabet.
Not totally English. But, damn, he could almost read it.
COMMANDER JORIE MIKKALAH, GUARDIAN FORCE HUNTER STATUS C7-1.
He saw the word Sakanah and recognized it as the name of her ship. Then there were lots of numbers
that meant nothing and a couple of symbols that meant even less.
Zeke made some more notations on his pad, then left to find out if Suzanne was  ready  to  give Tammy
medical clearance.
“You see why we don’t work with nil-techs?” Jorie asked as Zeke’s footsteps faded.
“You worked with me.”
“You’re…” And she closed her eyes briefly. “Different. Special.”
He almost asked  her to  define special  but didn’t want to  get his hopes  up that  she  meant  something

personal. It was safer to respond as a cop. “And that’s why you came looking for me?”
She sighed. “Unlike what Zeke Martinez believes, I did not come looking for you. I wanted my agent’s
T-MOD, which you had. Had you relinquished it when you should have, we would not now be  having
this conversation.”
Okay, score one  for Jorie  Mikkalah.  Yes,  he had  hoped  to  catch  her off guard  and  get her to  admit
she’d targeted him. Listening to  Zeke  had  opened  that  small, worrisome  doubt.  Illogical because  he’d
seen the zombies, the Tresh, her ship.
But he also saw himself starting to care very much about  what happened  to  her,  and  not just because
heat roared  through his body  when she  did that  head-tilt  thing. It  had  moved  beyond  that—he  didn’t
know quite when and where, because the past two days were now becoming a serious blur.
Like all cops, he was trained to never become emotionally involved with an investigation—especially not
with the subject of an investigation.
With Jorie  Mikkalah,  he’d  broken  that rule, big-time. And that  scared  him  almost  as  much  as  being
Baker-Acted to the psych ward.
It would be so much easier if Zeke was right and Jorie Mikkalah was some kind of foreign superspy with
James Bond–like toys. He could arrest her, turn her over to FDLE, which would in turn send her off to
the FBI. He could forget her. And they could deport her back to…the Chalvash System.
Except that not the FBI, the CIA, hell, not even NASA would know how to send her there.
Which was just as well. He didn’t want her to leave. He wanted her here, with him.
And that scared the hell out of Theo Petrakos even more.
 
Tamlynne should, would be fine. Jorie let that one worry drift away from her as Theo guided the white
land  vehicle—the  Essuvee,  she  corrected  herself—back  to  his  structure.  Her  fears  for  her  ship,  for
Captain Pietr, for Rordan, Trenat, Lorik, and everyone else plagued her. Maybe she should have asked
Prow if the Sakanah had been destroyed. Not that she believed he’d have told her the truth, but perhaps
she could have inferred something from his tone, the shift of his eyes. Then, at least, she’d know.
Not knowing was eating her up inside.
Once Tamlynne regained full consciousness—Jorie checked on her lieutenant with another  glance over
her shoulder at the rear seat—she might have some answers to a few of those questions. But up to this
point, with the pain from the implant lacing through her body,  Lieutenant Tamlynne Herryck  had  been
able to provide little coherent information about the Tresh attack in Theo’s structure.
Jorie didn’t discount that the Tresh  might have interfered  with Tamlynne’s memory of their arrival and
subsequent actions. She doubted Dr. Suzanne Martinez—as skilled as she was—would have any way of
restoring that. Her tech, like most everything else on this ball of dirt, was rudimentary.
Peculiar world, this planet named for dirt. So many large gaps in technology. Yet some of the nils—the
inhabitants—she’d met were so…special. Extraordinary.
She turned back to find Theo watching her, though in the vehicle’s dark  interior she  felt his gaze more

than saw it. The vehicle was stopped, idling, because of the colored-light edict. Foolish and unnecessary,
as there were no other vehicles in the immediate vicinity. She shifted in her seat, but Theo didn’t move his
gaze. She  couldn’t  read  his expression,  but,  oddly,  what she  felt  more  than  saw  pulled  at  her.  Heat
blossomed on her cheeks, and she was suddenly very aware of his presence mere minmeters from her.
His strength. His warmth.
“Theo?” she asked softly, not wanting to wake Tamlynne. Suzanne Martinez had given her a medication
to encourage a healing rest.
He said nothing for a moment, then shook his head and turned away. The vehicle moved forward again.
She shook off the sensation. She was stressed and tired. That was all.
When Theo pulled behind his structure, she already had her scanner out, verifying shield integrity before
she temporarily disengaged it. No breaches. Whether any had been attempted she wouldn’t know  until
she went inside and checked her tech.
“I’ll take her,” Theo  said,  after  Jorie  had  hopped  out of her seat  and  was  opening the rear  door.  He
pushed that metal ring he always carried into her hand, then picked out a  short  object  from the bunch.
“To open the kitchen door.
“It’s a key,” he said, when she held it up in his back porch light to examine it.
“Ah.” She nodded.
“Key to my heart.” His tone was light, but his voice was soft.
Heart? She knew he referred to his structure as a house. She shot him a puzzled glance and was about
to ask for an explanation when he shrugged.
“Never mind. It’s…it’s just a joke.” He gathered Tamlynne’s limp form into his arms.
They’d reached Theo’s bedroom door when a possible problem occurred to Jorie. “I’ll need to work in
there. And she needs someplace quiet to rest. Best I move my tech—”
“It would be better to open the sofa bed in the spare room. Let her stay there. That way I don’t have to
bother her to access my stuff.”
“Sofa bed?”
Theo set Tamlynne down on his bed. “I’ll leave her here for now. Come with me.”
The sofa bed turned out to be a colorful couch with a bed folded within. Not unlike the recessed bunks
on Kedrian troop ships but much nicer. Jorie ran her hand over the mattress, then helped Theo secure the
sheets and blanket he’d pulled from a corridor closet.
She moved the broken remnants of the Guardian MOD-tech to the corner behind his exercise machine.
Theo brought Tamlynne in.
“Nice, so nice,” her lieutenant murmured in Alarsh as she snuggled against the blanket.  Jorie  pulled off
Tamlynne’s boots and loosened the top of her uniform. They would need  clothes,  clean clothes,  soon.
There was nowhere to get supplies. The ship…
She pushed it away.

“So nice,” Tamlynne whispered again.
Jorie sat  on  the  edge  of  the  mattress  and  brushed  the  curls  off  Tamlynne’s  forehead.  “Nap,  Tam.”
Whatever medicine Suzanne gave Tamlynne must be working. Her skin was less clammy.
Tamlynne sighed, her eyes slitting open for a moment. “Theo is…so nice.”
Theo? Yes, Theo. Even Tamlynne wasn’t immune to his very good face or his delicious grin, it seemed.
Though it had been a while since Jorie’d seen the latter. “Yes, he is, Tam. Now nap. I’ll be in the next
room, working.”
“You work too much. Sir.” Tamlynne smiled dreamily. “Theo likes you.”
“And you’re hallucinating.” Jorie smiled back.
“Do you…like him?”
Did she like Theo Petrakos? Her body heated in answer. “Of course.”
“A lot?”
“Yes, a lot,” she admitted, surprised by her own truthfulness. But less surprised at the reasons why she
felt that way. Images of Theo  handling her weapons  with ease,  firing on the zombies,  escorting  her all
over his city without question,  breathing  life  into  a  failing  Tamlynne  filled  her  mind.  Yes,  he  had  the
Guardian implant in his shoulder, but she knew that wasn’t what motivated him. It wasn’t why he brought
her glasses of precious water or showed her how to make peanut butter and bread meals. It wasn’t why
he pushed himself as hard as she did.
There was an uncommon courage and dedication in him. It made her feel stronger just being with him.
“Good,” Tamlynne whispered. “I think you two—”
“Close  your  eyes  and  your  mouth.”  She  tapped  Tamlynne  teasingly  on  the  nose.  “That’s  an  order,
Lieutenant.”
“Sir. Yes…sir.” The last word was muffled as Tamlynne turned her face into the pillow.
Jorie smoothed the blanket around Tam, then got slowly to her feet. Tamlynne would be more herself by
sunwake. And if the Tresh hadn’t tampered with her memories, she’d be able to provide answers as to
Rordan and the Sakanah. She’d be functional, coherent, not babbling silliness about—
Theo. Standing just behind her, leaning against the edge of the doorway. He’d removed his security vest.
His tight-fitting black  shirt clung only too  well to  his broad  shoulders  and  defined,  only  too  well,  the
outlines of the muscles on his chest and arms.
Her breath caught, embarrassingly so. He was looking at her. She could see an intensity in his eyes that
she’d only felt before in the darkened vehicle.
Had he heard…? But no, she and Tam had spoken only in Alarsh.
Hadn’t they?
“Everything okay?” His voice was a deep rumble.
“A good nap will help,” she said, moving away  from the sofa  bed.  “I need  to…”  and  she  waved  one

hand in the direction of his structure where her tech still gathered data. But she couldn’t think of what he
called that room or even how to describe what she needed to do. Because the way he was looking at her
incinerated every sensible thought in her head.
Theo curled his fingers around her wrist and pulled her toward him. She went without resistance, as if she
were a ship caught in a tow field. He stepped back into the corridor and she followed, his gentle pressure
on her arm guiding her closer. Then he reached behind her and shut the door.
“Jorie.” His arm slid around her waist.  The fingers holding her wrist raised  her hand to  his mouth. He
brushed a lingering kiss across her palm. The incinerator in her brain unleashed a flash of heat that rushed
down her body and flared between her thighs.
Trembling, she  uncurled her fingers. She  traced  the  rough  line  of  his  jaw,  then  her  thumb  found  the
softness of his lower lip.
He pulled her more tightly against him. He lowered his face but she was already raising hers, her mouth
seeking his, not with the hard, desperate intensity of their earlier feigned kisses but more gently. Carefully.
Something was happening, changing between them. It made no rational sense. She knew with the same,
unerring clairvoyance  that had  kept  her alive all these  years  that  what she  was  doing was  dangerous.
Theo Petrakos was dangerous.
She didn’t care. But she would be careful.
His  mouth  brushed  hers,  the  warmth  of  his  breath  flowing  across  her  face.  She  answered  with  the
smallest of kisses, the slightest meeting of tongues. She dropped her hand from his face and splayed her
fingers against his chest. She could feel his heart beating rapidly.
It matched her own.
He rubbed his face against hers, his mouth touching her cheekbone, her jaw, and, as she angled her head,
trailing down her neck. A soft heat, gentle and searing at the same time.
He took another step back, bringing her with him as he leaned against the wall. She  went willingly. His
hand at her waist pressed her to him, clothes and weapons—bulky—merging.
His light kisses were sheer torture, but she didn’t push, didn’t ask for more, because his restraint was as
much of an aphrodisiac as his touch. A powerful man controlling his power.
A passionate man willing to take his time.
Her own desire teetered on the edge of exploding. It would be so  easy  to  tear  Theo’s  clothes  off and
blank her mind, lose her worries in a hard, driving sexual encounter with this man whose body trembled
under her fingers.
But that wasn’t what he was asking for. And it wasn’t what she wanted.
She was very aware that what he wanted and what she wanted might never come to pass. There  were
the Tresh and the zombies. There was a city about to be under siege. There was the very real problem of
survival.
And if—when—the Sakanah  returned,  she  would leave.  It  was  her duty.  Just  as  it  was  his  duty  to
protect his city.
A low chuckle rumbled in his chest as he ran his hands up the length of her back, as if he too suddenly

realized this was  a  desperate  foolishness. His voice was  a  husky whisper  in her  ear.  “You  make  me
crazy, agapi mou.”
Jorie  understood  crazy—especially  as  it  related  to  Theo  Petrakos—only  too  well,  though  his  other
phrase was lost on her. She turned her face, brushing his mouth with hers, then moved away. His arms
loosened around her, but he didn’t let go.
She sighed with more forcefulness than she wanted to and, when she looked at him, saw a sadness in his
smile that echoed her own.
She touched his mouth with her fingers one more time. “We have work to do,” she told him.
He nodded, then draped one arm over her shoulders. She wrapped her arm around his waist and headed
for his bedroom, where her blinking array of MOD-tech was now their only lifeline, their only hope.
 

18 
Agapi mou. My darling. My love. Theo knew the phrase because he’d been raised speaking Greek, but
he’d never before said it to any woman out loud. Not through his high-school years, not through college
or the police academy. He’d never said it to Camille.
To speak those words in the language he’d heard from infancy was too intimate. It exposed his heart.
Yet he didn’t give a damn that it had been only two days. He’d touched Jorie, kissed Jorie, argued with
Jorie, and fought by her side. There was no doubt. Agapi mou.
It was just another bit of damned irony that this was the worst possible time for him to feel that way.
He sat on the edge of his bed and watched her tap requests into the yellow-green screen, listened to her
utter soft commands  in Alarsh.  It  was  almost one-thirty  in  the  morning,  officially  Christmas.  Children
everywhere were snug in their beds, dreaming of Santa Claus and sugarplums or however the old poem
went. Yet zombies and the Tresh were more likely to land on their roofs than eight tiny reindeer.
Helluva Christmas present.
Jorie stopped tapping at the screen and rubbed tiredly at her face.
“Anything I can help with?” he asked, because he felt so useless and because he wanted her to know she
didn’t have to carry the burden alone.
She looked over her shoulder. “No, but thank you.” She went back to her computer with a soft sigh.
He stood, restless energy unsettling him. He wanted to stay awake in case she needed something, but to
just sit there and listen to his mind think—and his heart break—was driving him crazy. Hurry up and wait
had never been his strong point, which was why he liked detective work. He could always find something
to do.
But  here,  too  much  had  happened,  and  so  much  of  it  had  been  out  of  his  control.  He  needed  to
refocus…yes.  He  grabbed  his  guitar  case.  Duty  belt  and  weapons  were  carefully  placed  on  his
nightstand. Boots came off. He propped his pillow against the wrought-iron headboard and brought  his
guitar into his lap. The well-worn Brazilian rosewood was smooth and cool under his fingers—and very
familiar. He dug out his slide, then picked aimlessly at a few strings until a blues refrain he’d been toying
with came to mind. Zeke had been busting his butt for over a year now about his reclusive ways since his
divorce. You still singing The Down Home Divorced Guy Blues? was Zeke’s constant taunt.
So Theo actually started writing the song. He closed his eyes and let himself sink into the sassy notes of
the music, keeping time with one foot against the blanket.  He  hummed the melody softly—he was  still
working on the lyrics.
The tension leached  from his neck  and  shoulders.  He  went through  the  refrain  twice,  then  something
made him open his eyes. He realized the room had grown quiet. He no longer heard Jorie’s voice or her
tapping on the screen  just on the edge  of his hearing. That’s  because  she’d  turned,  her eyes  wide  in
question.
Skata. He should have asked if playing his guitar would bother her.

“Sorry. I’ll stop.” He shifted forward to put the guitar back in its case.
“No. That’s blissful.” A small smile played across her lips.
“I don’t want to disturb what you’re doing.”
“I’ve done all I can for now,” she said, and rubbed her hand over her face again. “Until the zombies take
a new action, I can only watch and wait.”
“And the Tresh?”
“I’m no threat to them until the zombies wake again,” she continued. “And since they know more than I
do about the Sakanah, they may not consider me a threat at all.”
Theo could hear the strain in her voice at the mention of her ship. He wished he had answers for her, but
that too was out of his control.
She motioned to his guitar. “Please. It sounds so nice. And I need  something else  to  think about  for a
little while.”
Was that why she let him kiss her? Was that part of the playacting they’d started—he’d started—earlier?
And he had started it, he admitted ruefully.
But somehow, no, he didn’t think she was toying with him. And he hoped  it wasn’t  only his male ego
making that claim.
He  glanced  at  his  watch:  two-ten.  He  pulled  another  pillow  against  the  headboard,  then  patted  the
mattress. “Come, sit with me.”
It  would  be  temptation,  Jorie  next  to  him  on  his  bed.  But  playing  his  guitar  would  keep  his  hands
occupied. Because after what had happened in the hallway, he knew if he touched her again, he wouldn’t
be able to stop.
She pulled off her boots,  then climbed across  his bed  on all fours,  looking almost childlike, an impish
smile on her face. She settled next to him and drew her knees up, wrapping her arms around them.
He found himself playing Traveling Ed Teja’s “Blue Light,” because it was  soft  but upbeat  at  the same
time. Somewhere  in the middle of the song,  Jorie’s  head  came  to  rest  on his shoulder.  He  smiled  to
himself and kept playing, going through the song a second time, then segued into Teja’s “Blue Dime.”
He plucked the last few notes softly. She’d curled up against him, her knees resting against his thigh.
He put his guitar and  case  carefully on the floor,  tucked  the G-1  under  his pillow, then turned  off his
bedside lamp and drew her into his arms. She murmured something unintelligible. He smoothed her hair
back from her face and she settled into slumber again.
Theo listened to  her breathing,  the muted clicking of her computer,  and  the rustle of the night  breeze
through the fronds of the palm trees outside.
It was Christmas, and somewhere, sweet voices were singing, Silent night, holy night…
While all of unholy hell waited just beyond his door.
 

Jorie woke  to  a  dim, shadowed  room  and  a  man’s  arm  draped  over  her  waist.  She  recognized  the
intermittent click-whir of her tech  and  saw  the green  glow of a  nil-tech timekeeper  on the wrist lying
across her forearm.
Theo. His breath ruffled her hair. Everything he was tugged at her heart.
She glanced at his wrist again—she knew how to interpret the symbols to  this locale—and  then at  the
pale light filtering through the covered  viewports.  It  was  just  before  sunwake.  She—they—had  been
asleep for a little more than four sweeps. Hours, she corrected.
With no emergencies, no Tresh transporting in, no zombies crashing past—bliss, that.
She slipped out from under his arm.
“Jorie?” His voice was thick with sleep.
She thought of the last few times she’d  slipped  out of a  man’s embrace  in bed.  She  hadn’t  heard  her
name whispered, but another female’s. She touched  her finger to  his lips. “I’ll look  in on Tam and  be
back.”
She would. She desperately needed rest, and if the zombies were in an inactive phase—she checked her
readouts as she padded by, and they were—then she wouldn’t look a gift fermarl in the ears. She needed
all her strength for when the next spur hit.
Her scanner showed Tamlynne to be resting comfortably, her shoulder healing with only a little swelling.
But some of the clamminess had returned to her skin. Jorie  remembered  that  well. The nightmares she
knew so intimately weren’t over for her lieutenant yet. The implant’s removal only halted further damage.
Suzanne Martinez had no way to correct what had already been done.
The med-techs on the Sakanah could help, she thought, as she slipped back into Theo’s bedroom. But
her ship wasn’t here.
She sat slowly down on the edge of the bed,  not wanting to  wake  him. She  was  fully capable,  as  her
brother often reminded her, of worrying enough for the both of them.
Galin. How long before a Guardian officer delivered the news of the destruction of the Sakanah and the
death of his sister? Just after he’d learned of the loss of his longtime friend? It wasn’t that  Galin wasn’t
strong—he was. It pained her that she would be the cause of such suffering….
“Hey.”
Theo’s arms went around her and  Theo’s  warmth encompassed  her as  he sat  behind her on the bed.
And only then did Jorie realize she was shivering, her breath coming out in small hiccuping gasps. Hell’s
wrath.  Would  the damage  the implant caused  never  grant her peace?  Or  had  seeing  Prow  and  Sem
reawakened old horrors?
“Hey,” he said again, his voice a low rumble. He drew her back against him. “Come here.”
She turned in his embrace and let him lower her to the bed, fitting herself tightly against him. She couldn’t
stop shaking.
“Is Tammy okay?”
She nodded under his chin. “Fine.”

“What is it, agapi mou?”
“Nothing.” She buried her face into his shirt and bit her lip to try to refocus her body’s reaction. It didn’t
work. “It’ll pass.”
Strong hands massaged their way up her spine and down again.
“You’ve had a very stressful few days,” he said.
“Yes.” But she’d had worse. She should be able to handle this. That too made her weary.
He worked the muscles on the back of her shoulders with a gentle pressure. She sucked  in a  series  of
long breaths, tried to focus on the sound of Theo’s  heartbeat.  Focus  on the fact  that  Cordo  Sem was
dead. Davin Prow, she thought, might have been wounded. There was  something about  that  encounter
she felt she was missing, but she couldn’t bring it to mind now. The last thing she  wanted  to  see  in her
head was Prow.
Slowly, the knife-edged insanity that wore a Tresh Devastator’s face slipped back into the depths of her
mind where it belonged. Thankfully she’d  only gotten  the shakes  and  not awakened  screaming from a
nightmare. She felt limp, a little boneless. Theo’s fingers slowed.
“Better?”
“Thank you.” She pulled her face off his chest with a sigh, then rolled away from him, onto her back.
He leaned over her, his lips touching hers with a light kiss, then pulled back. “You’re welcome.”
He propped himself up on one elbow and watched her. “You want to tell me now what happened?” he
asked after a long moment of silence, during which she was far too aware of the heat of him next to her.
She laid her fingers on the edge of her sweater near her collarbone. “Bad memories.”
“The implant the Tresh put in you.”
“Yes. Ten years past.”
He folded his hand over hers. “How long before it was removed?”
“Forty-four of your days.”
He uttered an unfamiliar series of harsh words. “But you still remember the pain.”
“It has nothing to do with remembering. The Tresh device is insidious,” she continued. “You know  that
word?”
“It causes collateral damage.”
“Even Tamlynne, with the few sweeps it was in her body, will have resultant issues. It’s good, then,” and
Jorie  realized  it  was,  “that  I’m  here.  She  may  have  small  episodes,  and  I  can  help  her  work  them
through.”
He was  nodding but frowning slightly. She  thought  she  knew  why.  “Guardian  restrainer  implants  are
noninvasive. Not like the Tresh one. There’s no neural interface.”
One corner of his mouth lifted. “So mine just gives me a zap if I piss you off.”

She owed him the truth. “Yours does nothing. I neutralized it.”
His eyes widened. “When?”
“When I did my funny stuff.” She gave him a small smile. She liked that phrase he used. It was so very
much Theo. “Before we went to capture the juvenile zombie at your park.  Kip  Rordan…”  She  forced
from her mind the question of whether he was dead  or  alive. “I was  worried  he had  some  issues with
you.”
“You mean an intense mutual dislike?”
“He had the command codes when I wasn’t here. And his understanding of the mission, his goals, were
different than mine.” She sighed, her mind coming back to the one fact she couldn’t push away. “If they’d
only listened—”
“Hey.” He kissed her lightly. “You can’t change the past. Let it go, Jorie. All you can do is what’s here
and now.”
“But—”
“I know.  Believe me, I know.  When you beamed  me up to  your ship,  I  thought  I’d  lost  everything,
everyone. I reacted stupidly, getting angry, going over all the mistakes  I’d  made  that  brought  me there
instead of thinking and looking at what I had where I was. What I could work with. What I could do.”
She remembered his bursts of temper and his subsequent, not always successful, attempts at self-control.
“And last year when Camille and I split up—”
“Camille?”
His mouth pursed wryly. “I was married. Spoused.”
“Oh.” There was a female he loved. Jorie’s heart wilted.
“Was,” he repeated. “I fell into the same stupid trap. Remember you told me about the guy who cheated
on you? Loren?”
“Lorik.”
“I went through the same thing.”
“She had you and chose someone else?”
“That was only one of the wonderful things she did, yeah.”
“Vomit-brained slut bucket.”
Theo barked out a laugh. “What?”
“It’s an expression. Sadly, it doesn’t render well in Vekran.”
Still chuckling, he dotted her jaw with kisses.
She turned her face and found his mouth. His mirth abated and he sighed against her lips.
“We should get some sleep,” he said.

“Yes.”
But he didn’t move and she didn’t move.
His mouth brushed hers again. “You should have kept that zapper implant in me working,” he said,  his
voice rough. “Keep me under control. Make me leave you alone.”
“I don’t want you to leave me alone.”
His breath fanned her cheek. “Last chance. Say, ‘Go away, Petrakos.’”
She ran her hand up the side of his face, then through his short hair. “No.”
He closed  his eyes,  leaning into her touch,  his capitulation sending a  wave  of desire  through her.  She
knew he was aware of how dangerous this was. It could only cause them both heartache.
But she might not live so long. All she had was now. Wasn’t that what he said? Here and now. And right
here and now, she wanted Theo Petrakos very, very much.
She wrapped her arms around his neck and brought his face  back  down  to  hers,  letting him lead  with
kisses and answering with caresses of her own. His body was taut muscle that yielded to her fingers. She
arched up into him and he groaned.
“You’re making me crazy, babe.”
“I think that’s good.”
“Do you?” He watched her through hooded eyes dark with passion.
“Yes.” Her fingers found the waistband at the back of his pants and pulled his shirt away. She needed the
heat of his skin under her hands.
“Oh, babe.” He kissed her hard, then pulled back. “You’d better be very sure what you want—”
“I want,” she told him, more than a little breathless because her fingers weren’t the only ones now doing
the exploring. His hand had slipped under her sweater and sleeveless tracker shirt to cup her breast and
tease her nipple. “Theo, I want you.”
She felt his body throb in response even as he said her name, his kiss deep and desperate. He tugged at
her sweater, and she pulled away from him just long enough to sit up and yank it and then her shirt over
her head.  Bliss, when she  rolled back  to  him, his own chest  was  bare  and  they were  heated  skin  to
heated skin.
Her shorts came off next, his pants,  their socks,  clothes  flying into the dim corners  of the room.  Then
hands  were  replaced  by  mouths,  kissing  and  nibbling  and  leaving  hot,  wet  trails.  His  touch  left  her
panting, damned near delirious with pleasure. She murmured to him in Alarsh because her brain couldn’t
find any Vekran words.
He moved up her body to claim her mouth again. “Tell me what you’re saying is good,” he rasped against
her lips, the touch of his hands and the feel of his body throbbing against hers intoxicating.
“Very good. Oh—”
He thrust inside her, hot and hard.

“—yes!” she gasped, heat and tingles of ecstasy spiraling through her as she moved in rhythm with him.
His kisses deepened as he took her over the edge with him. Sparks of pleasure raced again through her
veins as he groaned her name, shuddering into her. Then, even spent,  his fingers threaded  into her hair
and he nibbled on her ear, her neck, and back up to her mouth.
Their bodies were hot, sweat-slickened. He turned on his side, gathering her up against him, curving his
body around hers as he drew the sheet and blanket over them. He murmured something exotic-sounding
in her ear. It wasn’t Vekran or his English.
“Hmm?” she asked, his warmth lulling her into sleep.
He kissed her shoulder. “I’ll tell you in a few hours. Sleep.”
“Is it good?”
Laughter rumbled in his chest. “It’s good, agapi mou.”
“What does that—”
“I’ll explain that too. Hush now. Naptime.”
Jorie didn’t remember falling asleep. But waking up again was  a  blissful experience,  with Theo  trailing
kisses down her neck. She didn’t know the time, but the room was brighter. “I should look in on Tam.”
“Just did.” A strong hand slid slowly down  her hip, pleasure  radiating in its wake.  “Brought her some
water.” He nipped her ear. “She’s a little weak, but I think she’ll be okay.”
Decadent. Wanton. Jorie dutifully chastised herself as Theo shifted his body on top of hers, his hands and
his mouth working magic. She surrendered willingly, let herself stay in the here  and  now just for a  little
while. She’d have the rest of the day to ruminate about her problems.
And there might not be a tomorrow.
She returned  his magic with some  of her own,  mesmerized by the heat  in  his  dark  eyes  and  by  that
delicious, feral grin that had captured her from the moment she first saw it. He was a man who loved life.
He was a man who was not afraid of duty—or death. She felt as if she’d known him forever. And knew
that no matter how long she would know him, it would never be long enough.
She explored him more boldly as the morning’s soft light intensified, inexplicably pleased by the way her
touch made his breath hitch. But when his teeth  nipped  the soft  flesh of her inner thigh and  his tongue
traced every intimate corner of her body, she  was  the one  twisting the bedsheets  between  her fingers,
coherency once again fleeing.
“We’re good together,” he whispered huskily, when heartbeats finally slowed and she was cradled in his
arms.
Yes, they were.
Later,  while Theo  was  in the—wasteful!—freshwater  shower,  Jorie  borrowed  his soft  blue robe  and,
scanner in hand, slipped into Tam’s room to take  the next set  of medical readings.  Her  lieutenant was
sitting up, but her gaze and her concentration wandered if the conversation went on for more than three
or four sentences.
And the only answer Tam could provide about the ship or the crew’s whereabouts was that Commander

Rordan was in Theo’s galley, getting a glass of water. Wasn’t he?
It was as if time had stopped for Tamlynne Herryck.
Suppressing a shiver, Jorie remembered seeing the half-empty glass on the galley counter when she and
Theo had returned.
When she walked back into the bedroom, Theo was dressed in faded blue pants and a dark-green shirt.
Being decadent and wanton, she indulged in a  wasteful freshwater  shower—the  water  felt so  blissfully
better than the ship’s recycled synthetic liquid—and once again sorted out problems and priorities in her
mind.
It all came back to one thing: she had to terminate the C-Prime. It wouldn’t stop the Tresh. But it would
stop the Tresh from using the zombies to  destroy  this world’s  inhabitants and—ultimately—control the
Hatches.
She didn’t discount that the Tresh could move their entire experiment to another remote nil-tech world.
But at least this one—with Theo Petrakos on it—would survive.
 
19 
Theo was standing in his living room, taking the first few sips of coffee and flipping through channels to
find the news, when he saw the bright purple  horror  heading at  a  determined  clip straight for his front
door.
“Shit!” He hurriedly put the remote and his cup on the end table, sloshing hot coffee over his hand, then
bolted  into the bedroom.  He  prayed  Jorie  was  out of the shower.  He  had  no idea  how to  work  her
scanner gizmo, and frying Sophie Goldstein would not win him any brownie points with Aunt Tootie.
Jorie was standing naked near the end of his bed, small drops of water still beading on her tawny skin.
She turned, head tilted, and eyed him quizzically.
In spite of impending doom,  Theo  stopped  dead  in his tracks,  his breath  hitching as  his body  heated.
Sweet Jesus and Mother Mary. She was…incredible. And unless he’d missed something important in the
past few hours, she was his.
Sweet Jesus. And Merry Christmas.
“We have company. My neighbor,” he stammered out. “The house shields?”
She leaned over to retrieve her scanner from the nightstand.
Nice ass.
God, he was hopeless.
“Disengaged,” she told him.
“Thanks.” He stared at  her a  few more  long, worthy seconds.  “You might want to  get dressed.  Mrs.

Goldstein’s”—his doorbell rang—“here.”
When he opened the front door,  Sophie  was  already  shoving a  plastic  food  container  past  the screen
door  that  was  propped  against  her  shoulder.  She  had  on  a  purple  tunic-type  blouse  with  silver
embroidery on the round neckline, purple pants, and—Theo noticed with a quick glance down—purple
flip-flop sandals.
“Working during the holidays! Tootie  is upset.  I told  her I’d  bring you some  butter  cookies  and  fried
honey puffs. I’ve been making them since Hanukkah. It was no trouble to do up another batch.”
He  leaned  against  the  doorjamb,  blocking  any  attempts  by  the  purple  horror  to  enter  his  home.
“Thanks—”
“So you got some kind of big case? You want some latkes or brisket? I can make that too. You can’t
fight crime on an empty stomach.”
It wasn’t quite ten in the morning yet, but Theo’s mouth watered at the mention of Sophie’s brisket. The
honey puffs, little bits of fried dough drenched in honey and flavored with orange and cinnamon, were a
nice  treat  too.  And  potato  latkes—no.  He  had  to  keep  Mrs.  Goldstein—he  had  to  keep
everybody—away from his house.
“I really appreciate  this. But, yeah,  I’m working,  and  I have no idea  if I’ll be  home later  or  not.  But
thanks. I mean that.” He nodded and smiled down at her.
She nodded and smiled up at him. And made no move to leave his front porch.
“Thanks,” he said again. “Uh, happy holidays.”
“You should really at least try to see Tootie and Stavros. Not that I’m trying to tell you how to run your
life, Theophilus. But your uncle always managed to spend some part of Christmas with you and Tootie,
even if he had to sit in his patrol  car  in the driveway.” She  pinned him with a  hard  stare.  “They were
always there for you, especially after your meshuga mother decided her life’s calling was to be a craps
dealer in Vegas.”
Well,  yes.  The  four  months  he’d  spent  living  in  Sin  City  were  certainly  memorable  ones  for  a
twelve-year-old boy. Then his father and Uncle Stavros showed up with a court order. And the jingling
sounds  of slot machines and  “Place  your bets!  Ante  up!”  were  replaced  by  the  familiar  cries  of  the
seagulls down at the sponge docks and Aunt Tootie singing Greek hymns very off-key  in church every
Sunday.
Life was—if not as interesting—better.
“I’ll try to cut some time out and see them,” he told Sophie. So what if the fate of his planet teetered on
the brink? The zombies were in nap phase again, according to Jorie.
But the truth was, he didn’t want to leave Jorie alone. Not that she wasn’t capable of kicking serious ass.
The last time they left the house, however, the Tresh showed up and Rordan went missing. Two events
that Theo wasn’t sure weren’t somehow connected.
And then there was Tammy. Not rowing with both oars in the water yet. Which only made him wonder
even more what Jorie had gone through as a prisoner of war with the Tresh. And made him admire even
more her sheer determination to survive.
“I’ll call Tootie and tell her to expect you.” Sophie Goldstein reached up and patted him on the cheek.

“Merry Christmas.”
There was a little spring in her step as she returned to her house. Sophie Goldstein, Problem Solver and
Amateur Ann Landers, had made everything right again.
If only everything else was so easy.
Theo  locked  the  front  door,  then,  container  of  sweets  under  one  arm,  stuck  his  head  through  his
bedroom doorway. No Jorie. He found her dressed in her sleeveless top and funky shorts, sitting on the
bed with Tammy, scanner beeping softly as colors swirled over the screen. He pried open the container’s
lid and plucked out a sticky honey puff. They were still warm. “Take a bite. You’ll like this.”
She did. He waited. A rapturous expression crossed her face. He grinned and  handed  one  to  Tammy,
whose coloring was still too pale. She chewed, then leaned back against her pillows with an appreciative
sigh.
Both women were licking their fingers when Theo’s cell phone trilled. He handed the container to  Jorie
and dug the phone out of his pocket.
Zeke. He flipped it open. “Amigo. What’s up?”
“You home?”
“Yeah. Why?”
“I’m five minutes out. Don’t go anywhere. I have to talk to you. Now.”
 
Theo watched Zeke  roll up around  back,  nosing his sedan  just behind the white SUV.  House  shields
were off. When Theo saw Zeke tuck a manila case folder under one arm as he shut the car door, Theo’s
personal shields went up.
Zeke had found something in FCIC or  NCIC  on Jorie.  Even though he knew,  logically, there  was  no
way that was possible, that’s the first thing that  jumped  into his mind. Jorie  was  not who she  said  she
was. Their growing closeness, their growing intimacy, was a sham. It was Camille all over again.
He was cursed, just like his old man.
Stop it, Petrakos!
Zeke climbed the short steps to the porch, his short-sleeved button-down shirt tucked into dark slacks,
his detective’s shield and gun clearly visible on his belt. This was no social call. Theo shoved the kitchen
door open before Zeke could reach for it.
“Jorie here?” Zeke  asked.  No  greeting. No  perfunctory  off-color  joke.  Not  even “Merry  Christmas,”
and, Christ, it was.
Fuck. “Yeah.”
“Go get her.”
Theo stepped back, then something warred within him. He had to know the truth before  he faced  her.
“Tell me why.”

Zeke tossed the folder on the kitchen table and flipped it open.
Hands clenched at his side, Theo stared at the photographs on the table. Relief and fear tumbled through
him. Three  parchment-wrapped,  wet-eyeball  mummies stared  back.  He  grabbed  the  photos.  “I’ll  get
her.”
 
Jorie stood at the galley table, Theo’s hand lightly on her shoulder, Zeke Martinez’s flat photographs at
her fingertips. She would have preferred holographs, where she could examine the bodies in more detail.
But this nil world made that impossible.
This nil world also affected her MOD-tech. Zombies had fed and she hadn’t known about it. When Theo
brought the photos into the bedroom, she’d immediately run a scan and a backup data grab. There was
no trace of any craving spur in her data, which still assured  her the zombies were  in a  negative phase.
Napping.
Obviously they weren’t.
“Tell me again why you think zombies did this.” Martinez leaned both hands on the back of a chair.
He still wasn’t convinced that what she and Theo had told him at Suzanne’s med facility was  true.  She
could hear that in his voice, see it clearly in his stance. But he had come here asking for her input. That
seemed to matter to Theo.
She outlined as simply as she could how the zombies used the portals, how, in their now-perverted quest
for viral infections, they were drawn to the warm, humid environment, the high rate of electromagnetism,
and, under the right stimuli, the life force of soft-fleshed sentients. How his world, his city, provided them
the perfect haven, enhanced by the fact that it was so far off the usual spacelanes  that  no civilized fleet
would think to come here. Except the Tresh.
But whether or not they were civilized was debatable.
Martinez puffed out his lips and blew a  sigh of exasperation.  Frustration.  Disbelief. Then he shook  his
head and raked one hand through his dark curly hair.
“The lieutenant’s going to Baker-Act us both,” he said to Theo.
A cryptic comment. She’d ask Theo later what the act of making bread had to do with the zombies. She
also wanted to ask him what he’d said in those odd, softly lyrical phrases when they were in the heat of
passion. But that definitely would have to wait.
She went back to the photographs. “This happened yesterday. You’re sure?” she asked Martinez.
“The bodies were discovered yesterday by the SO—the Sheriff’s Office. Two down at the east beach
on Fort Hernando. One by the Gandy Bridge.”
The locales meant nothing to her. “All by water?”
Martinez nodded. “We won’t know time or date of death until we get the ME’s report.”
“Medical examiner,” Theo added when she looked over her shoulder at him. “Med-tech who investigates
dead bodies.”

Then it could have occurred the day before, when she’d captured  the juvenile in the park.  Or  it could
have been…anytime. It was one of a tracker’s worst nightmares: insufficient data due to tech failure.
“Let me run the data one more time.” She headed for the bedroom, Theo and Martinez on her heels. She
folded herself down on the floor and slipped her headset over her hair. “Voice system activate, confirm
ident,” she  said,  and  then stopped,  realizing she’d  spoken  in  Vekran.  She  repeated  the  command  in
Alarsh and ignored the impulse to smack herself.
But there was nothing in the data.  She  even recalibrated  search  parameters  to  double  their usual grab
rate. Nothing. It had to be the lack of input from the ship’s seeker ’droids that was hampering her. When
the Sakanah disappeared, so did the ’droids. It was like working with one eye blinded.
Maybe that’s why Prow didn’t destroy these units. He knew they were ineffective. He—
Prow. Prow had been in here with Tamlynne. And she didn’t know for how long and doing what. A chill
clamped around her heart like a graknox’s jaws on its luckless prey’s head.
Theo hunkered down by her side. “What did you find?”
“It’s what I didn’t find. And what I,  stupidly, didn’t even  consider.  Prow  was  in  this  room  with  my
T-MOD.” She initiated a diagnostic but was fully aware that Prow might have assumed she’d do so and
taken countermeasures. She would have.
“Ass-faced demon’s spawn!” She shoved herself to her feet. Theo moved up with her but stepped back
as if he knew she had an overwhelming urge to hit something, hard.
She  spun  away  from  him  and  Martinez  and  strode  into  the  spare  room,  which  now  functioned  as
Tamlynne’s bedroom. Her lieutenant was sitting in the middle of the foldout bed, rocking back and forth.
“You work too hard, sir.” Her voice was dreamy.
Jorie’s anger spiked, then dissipated. Oh, Tamlynne. “Merely the usual problems, Lieutenant. It will be
okay,” she told her in Alarsh.
“Theo likes you.”
“I know, Tam.” Sometimes a flower  grows  in  hell.  It  was  an old,  overused  Kedrian  saying, but the
truth of it hit Jorie as it came into her mind. In this hell, she’d found Theo. The only positive thing in the
midst of all this. Even Tam, as disordered as she was by the effects of the Tresh implant, recognized that.
With a sigh, Jorie squatted down and sorted through the broken remains of the MOD-tech. It was time
to get creative.
She brought what she deemed salvageable back to Theo’s bedroom. Theo and Martinez’s voices filtered
in from the structure’s main room.
“I agree with you, Zeke, but I don’t think we have the luxury of time here,” Theo was saying. “The brass
will want to set up committees, research teams. They’re not going to just take Jorie’s word for this. I still
don’t think you believe her.”
Jorie tuned them out as she stripped out the components from the secondary T-MOD and  inserted  the
salvaged ones. All house shields were disengaged, except for the roof. PMaT transports were primarily
vertical. If the Tresh transported into the backyard and came through the door, rifles flaring, she’d have a
battle on her hands.

But her two  MOD  units couldn’t  maintain the shields, continue to  scan,  send  out a  scrambled  seeker
signal,  and  continue  to  interpolate  data  while  she  swapped  out  components.  It  was  as  if  she  were
working  under  battlefield  conditions  again.  Except  this  was  Guardian  MOD-tech,  not  Interplanetary
Marines. And, yes, that meant there were crucial differences, including the lack of necessary redundancy
and a reliance on a correlative data source—the ship, now unavailable.
She  resealed  the  units  and  restarted  the  tech  programs,  holding  her  breath  for  the  ubiquitous
program-failure warning screen. The blue screen from hell. When none appeared after five minutes, she
relaxed somewhat. First hurdle cleared.
But it would be  another  ten  minutes  for  the  units  to  completely  synchronize  and  another  ten  for  the
diagnostic to initialize and complete.
She pushed herself to her feet. She was thirsty. And perhaps a spoonful or more of that glorious peanut
butter. And a honey puff if Theo and Martinez hadn’t eaten them all.
She clipped her scanner to her utility belt. It erupted with a screech, sending her pulse racing. She jerked
it up, noted coordinates, then spun and grabbed her Hazer from the bed,  damning herself for dropping
the shields.
 
Theo heard the familiar screech, dropped the plastic container of honey puffs on the kitchen counter, then
pulled his gun out of the hip holster  under  his shirt. Only as  he lurched toward  the living room  did he
realize it was his Glock. Not the laser pistol. Too late. Something was  already  oozing out of the green
glow on his living-room wall.
“What the fuck?” Zeke rasped from behind him.
Theo knew Jorie had to be on the way in here,  but he couldn’t  take  a  chance.  He  fired rapidly three
times, center mass.
The zombie screamed,  its cry grating on his ears.  A  juvenile,  he  realized.  Razor-clawed  appendages
thrashed, neck twisted—damn! His new leather couch!
He saw the pinpoint of white and fired once more.
The head jerked back.  Four  arms flailed outward.  The creature  slammed against the wall and,  with a
violent shudder, crumpled to the floor.
A stream of Alarsh curses reached his ears. He shot a glance to his left. Jorie, double-stack rifle in her
hands.
“Is it…?” he asked her.
She angled the rifle down, then whipped up her scanner. She nodded. “Dead.” She turned to him, eyes
widening. She stared at the Glock in his hand. “You terminated it with…that?”
He looked down at his gun. “Yeah. But it didn’t disappear.”
She trotted over to where the zombie lay, serrated jaws agape, some kind of yellow liquid spilling onto
the floor. The worms writhing on its surface were slowing, spasming. She squatted down, ran the scanner
over the hideous length of the thing, then rose.

“Hell’s wrath,” she whispered,  and  raised  her gaze as  he stepped  next to  her.  “We  just might have a
chance.”
A gagging sound behind Theo made him turn. Zeke, hand over his mouth, looking decidedly green. The
detective’s  eyes  were  wide  as  he  bolted  for  the  kitchen  doorway  and  then—judging  from  the
sound—proceeded to lose his honey puffs in the sink.
 
Theo had never liked the yellow curtains in his spare bedroom, anyway.  Camille had  picked  them out.
He yanked them down and handed them to Tammy, who carried them without comment or question to
the living room. Jorie was explaining the different functions of the zombie’s appendages to  a  thoroughly
embarrassed Zeke  Martinez as  they awaited  Suzanne’s  arrival. If they had  to  move the zombie—and
Theo suspected Suzanne might want to take it back to her clinic—the curtains would come in handy. If
they didn’t move it, they would still come in handy. Just because he didn’t puke his guts out like Zeke did
when he first saw one didn’t mean he enjoyed looking at that thing on his living-room floor.
“Why didn’t the shields stop it?” he asked. Tammy was on his leather couch next to the pile of curtains.
She gave him a smile as he walked toward Jorie.
“I disengaged the shields when Martinez arrived,” Jorie said, and Theo nodded, remembering now. “All
but the overhead. I couldn’t reactivate them and repair my tech, so they stayed off. But I forgot that I’d
reduced their dimensions to fit within this structure’s walls. Because of her.” She pointed toward the front
window and, ultimately, Mrs. Goldstein’s house. “That left a gap. A slight one, but enough that a vertical
insertion could occur.”
“You’re saying the Tresh sent the zombie?”
“The Guardians have worked with the fact that the zombies’ appearances were at random locales even
when spurred by a craving. That no longer appears  to  be  true.  The Tresh  now can  control  them. It’s
almost as if they’ve returned to their original programming.”
“You sound pleased about that.”
“I am. Anything that can be programmed can be reprogrammed. Our problem has been that the zombies
defied programming for all these years. But there’s something that pleases me even more.” She glanced
up at him, head tilted, mouth slightly parted.
Oh, hell, yeah. He knew what pleased her more. Same thing that pleased him, and they’d done it twice
since early this morning. But he had a feeling that wasn’t at all what she was talking about.
Down, boy. Heel.
“Don’t keep me in suspense.”
“The Tresh sent this zombie in shielded. Another reason I know the Tresh now control them. I told you
about the shields the Devastators used here, the L-One and L-Twos.”
He nodded, grateful for all those years watching Deep Space Nine and Next Generation. He wouldn’t
even begin to guess what she was talking about if he hadn’t.
“This,” she pulled at the rifle strap slung over her shoulder,  “is the only thing I have that  can  penetrate
those shields. Devastator shield technology utilizes extremely complex phase patterns.”

“But you modified that Hazer, right? We don’t have any more of those.”
“We don’t need them. We have that.” And she pointed to his hip and his gun’s holster peeking out from
under the edge of his T-shirt.
He pulled out his gun and held it in his palm. “This?”
“Very basically, the shields are high-level energy fields used to counter high-level energy weapons. Not a
nil-tech projectile weapon that no one has seen, let alone used, in hundreds of years.”
He slid the gun back into his holster. “But the house shields reacted to my hand.”
“Because  they’re  patterned  to  counter  denser,  physical  intrusions.  A  body.  An  asteroid.  They  also
require a larger generator and a much larger energy source. Ships and  structures  can  maintain them. A
single individual’s personal portable shield generator cannot. It would be”—Jorie lifted her scanner—“at
least five times this size. It takes both my MOD-tech units in your bedroom  to  generate  a  basic  shield
around this structure, and that’s working them at capacity.”
Theo stared at her, trying to grasp all she said. It sounded like good news, though he wasn’t totally sure
why.
“How does this help us defeat  the Tresh?”  he asked  as  he heard  the sound  of a  car  pulling down  his
driveway. The edge of a red roof moving past his side window told him it was Suzanne’s Jeep Cherokee.
“It doesn’t, not exactly,” Jorie said. “What it does tell me is that I can get to the C-Prime  with far less
problems than I anticipated. The drones and juveniles guarding it will all be L-One  or  L-Two  shielded.
With only one  modified Hazer,  there  was  no way I could  defend  myself on all sides.  Even the Hazer
takes several concentrated shots to dissolve a shield. But if we have help,” Jorie glanced at Zeke sitting
on the arm of the recliner, listening, “and sufficient projectile weapons, we have a damned good chance.”
That sounded encouraging. “But why is its body still here?”
“First  guess,  without  studying  data?  Same  thing.  Your  projectile  weapon  simply  punctures,  thereby
ceasing the zombie’s functions. But it doesn’t  utilize energy as  an implosion catalyst  the way a  G-One
would.”
His porch door clanked  closed  and  then there  were  quick  steps  across  his tile kitchen floor.  Suzanne
arrived in blue jeans and a red T-shirt bearing the image of a  scowling orange  tabby  cat  wearing fake
fuzzy antlers on its head. Paw-Humbug! was in white lettering across the top.
“What do we have—” Suzanne stopped and stared down at the dead zombie lying against the wall. Then
she put her hands on her hips and, with a shake of her head, turned to Theo. “That’s the most butt-ugly
thing I’ve ever seen in my life.”
 
As Suzanne Martinez examined the zombie, Jorie checked on both MOD-tech units and,  satisfied they
were functioning, reinstated the house shields. Then she keyed in another diagnostic, looking for anything
Prow might have left behind. The program would run slowly due to the power drain from maintaining the
shields. But now that she had a possible solution close at hand, she was willing to wait for the results.
She returned to the main room and touched Theo on the arm. “House shields are activated.” She looked
at Martinez, then at his spouse. “You understand? Don’t exit, don’t open a window,  without telling me

first.”
“No more zombies, no Tresh?” Theo asked.
“In this room, no.”
“How’d they know we were here?” Martinez asked.
“They’re not sensing us.” Jorie gestured to Martinez, then to Tamlynne. “They’re sensing the resonance
of Guardian equipment. They may have been monitoring the shields, looking for changes.  Or  they may
have simply been taking a routine sweep of the area, knowing we’ve been here in the past. Either way,
when I changed shield patterns, they knew.”
That was why repairing tech in the field was  so  risky.  She’d  thought she’d  secured  the locale—it was
secured by Guardian standards. But not by marine field-combat standards. She had to work that way in
the future or it could cost lives.
Damning herself, she walked over to Tam on the couch and repeated her instructions about the shields in
Alarsh. Tam nodded. “Understand, sir.”
“I’ll keep  an eye  on her,”  Martinez  offered,  evidently  figuring  out  what  she’d  said  to  Tamlynne.  He
looked a little less pale, but Jorie noticed he was keeping his distance from the zombie. “How is she?”
“There’s some memory loss, some disorientation,” Jorie  told  him, moved  by his concern.  “I’ve seen  it
before. If we weren’t in this situation, it wouldn’t be an issue.”
“You really are from outer space.”
Jorie grinned wryly, in spite of her consternation. Martinez’s earnest  amazement was  almost endearing.
“It’s not outer space to me. The Chalvash System,  the worlds  of the Interplanetary  Concord,  and  the
spacelanes that connect them. That’s home to me. To us.” She nodded at Tamlynne.
“What are you going to do if you can’t get back?”
Jorie opened her mouth, then hesitated. It was the one thing never out of her mind, and yet she had  no
answer. Then she felt Theo’s hand brush her shoulder and come to rest against the back of her neck.
“She’ll be fine,” Theo said.
“Sorry.” Martinez splayed one hand outward in apology. “I shouldn’t have asked that.”
“The Guardians never abandon a team member,” she said finally. But they couldn’t rescue her and Tam if
they didn’t know they were alive.
Yet if they did, that would mean she’d never see Theo again. She wouldn’t let them send him to Paroo.
She’d tell whatever lie she had to in order to prevent that. His life was here: his friends, his neighbor, his
duty, his aunt and uncle he spoke so fondly of. She could never ask him to make that sacrifice. No, the
pain would be hers alone.
She pulled away from the warmth of Theo’s fingers—and the growing ache in her heart—and knelt down
next  to  Suzanne.  “There  are  some  components  I  need  extracted  from  its  chest.  It  will  have  to  be
invasive.” Next nil world she visited, she would make sure a JS-6-4 was standard equipment in all field
packs. “There may be fail-safes, autodestructs. The Tresh are famous for that. Can you do an extraction
here, or should we take this to your clinic?”

“The clinic. I have access to all my equipment there. Nina’s on duty again, but she won’t come in from
the kennel wing unless I ask her to, and I won’t. Plus, I don’t think it’s a good idea to leave this in Theo’s
living room. The neighbors might object when putrefaction sets in and it begins to smell.”
“God, Suzy, please!” Martinez looked pained.
“Ezequiel, my love, I’m still baffled how you ended up in Homicide.”
Martinez waved dismissively at Theo. “His fault.”
“I’ll drop  the rear  structure  shields,” Jorie  said  as  Theo,  behind her,  tried  unsuccessfully not to  laugh.
“Which vehicle?”
“Mine’s larger,” Theo said. “I’ll fold down the backseats. Zeke can ride with me—”
“I’ll ride with Suzy, thank you,” Martinez said quickly.
That feral grin Jorie loved so much played over Theo’s lips. “Okay, Jorie rides with me and the zombie.
What about Tammy?”
“She can come with us,” Suzanne offered. “You won’t have room.”
That was  probably  for the best.  Until Jorie  was  very sure  of  shield  integrity,  she  wasn’t  comfortable
leaving  Tamlynne  alone  in  Theo’s  structure,  even  though  physically  she  functioned  well.  She  hadn’t
panicked when the zombie appeared, and she’d assisted Theo with removing the viewport draperies with
no problems. In those ways, the lieutenant seemed to be healing.
Her conversations, however, were still disjointed. And there were no answers on the Tresh’s appearance
or Rordan’s disappearance.
“Let’s wrap this thing up.” Theo nudged the dead zombie’s shoulder with the toe of his boot. There was
a gurgling sound, and another gush of yellow liquid ran through its jaws. “Zeke, give me a hand?”
But Martinez’s hand was over his mouth. And he was moving as fast as he could out of the room.
 

20 
“I told you before. We don’t have that kind of time.” Theo paced the back hallway of Suzanne’s clinic.
Zeke had hoisted himself up onto a metal grooming table and sat, palms planted against the top, keeping
out of Theo’s way in the narrow corridor.
Smart move. Theo’d had a feeling this conversation was coming and, on the drive over, had done a lot of
thinking. His amusement over Zeke’s reaction to the zombie had faded in light of the very real problems
the creature portended. So he’d run through a  few scenarios  again, just as  he had  when he and  Jorie
returned to his house after the confrontation with the Tresh in Gulfview.
But this time, he caught the one big mistake. The downside to his answer to all their problems.  He  just
hoped it wasn’t too late to fix it.
He’d also made some very big decisions. And now that he had, he wanted to act on them. Stalling was
driving him crazy. There was too much at risk.
“Seeing that zombie thing will speed up the process, I think,” Zeke said.
“Negative. The chief will want FDLE called in, and FDLE will want the feds. Then there’ll be the usual
fight  over  who  heads  the  Zombie  Task  Force  and  who  gets  to  staff  it.  Us?  County?  The  National
Guard?” He understood Jorie’s objections so much more clearly now. “And where’s the funding coming
from? By that time the Tresh will have the whole herd in the ‘new and improved’ aisles and we’ll be  in
really deep shit.”
“We’re already in deep shit, amigo. She said  there  could  be  three  hundred  of these  things. There  are
only three of us. Those are not good odds.”
“Yeah, I know.” Theo stopped pacing and ran one hand through his hair. Okay, so he hadn’t worked out
all the kinks in his plan yet. “Plus, Tammy’s not much help.”
“Even if she could be, four is not good odds. We need to request at least a couple SWAT  teams.  For
starters.”
Theo shot a glance at Zeke. Yeah, he remembered thinking that was the answer. “I’m not dragging Jorie
into the chief’s office the day after Christmas.”
“I don’t think this can wait until tomorrow.  You said  yourself it’ll take  a  couple  days  to  set  things up.
Sooner  the  better.  Besides,  Brantley  knows  how  to  play  the  game.  If  anyone  can  cut  through  the
bureaucratic bullshit the feds can generate, the chief can.”
“That’s not the point.”
“Then what is? Face  facts.  We’ve  got a  potentially catastrophic  situation about  to  erupt  here.  Okay,
there’s going to be red tape, there’s going to be politics. But do  you really think they’re  going to  drag
their feet if hundreds of people could die? If nothing else, they’d be crucified by the news media. It’d be
the Hurricane Katrina fiasco all over again.”
“And what do you think,” Theo asked quietly as his friend voiced the one downside he’d overlooked and
now feared, “the news media will do to Jorie?”

Zeke’s mouth opened, then closed quickly.
“A freak  show,  Ezequiel. It’d  be  a  fucking freak  show.”  Everyone  would  want  a  piece  of  Guardian
Commander Jorie Mikkalah. The National Enquirer. The Jerry Springer Show. And worse. Bile rose
in Theo’s throat. How could he have been so stupid as not to realize what would happen? All this time
he’d seen the Guardians’ reluctance to reveal their presence as a selfish act. And he’d ignored what Jorie
told them the Guardians learned from experience: nil-tech worlds  routinely acted  illogically—sometimes
even violently—when faced with someone from another galaxy. “I’m not putting her through that.”
“The feds will never let that happen. They’ll put her under lock and key.”
Another scenario he’d come up with and feared. “I’m not letting that happen either.”
“Theophilus. I don’t think you have a choice.”
“Like hell I don’t.” Theo spun away from him and resumed pacing.
“What are you going to do, risk hundreds of people’s lives because you don’t want a bunch of scientists
in some  basement  room  of  the  Pentagon  asking  Jorie  questions?  I  think  she  can  handle  that.  She’s
probably been trained to handle that.”
Theo could see the tight, pained expression on Jorie’s face as she told him about her captivity with the
Tresh.  He  could  feel her shivering against him. He  could  see  her fingers  trace  the  rough  scar  on  her
shoulder.
He could see her getting into a black government sedan with darkened windows, knowing he’d never see
her again.
His breath shuddered out. This was the only scenario he’d agree to. And it too had flaws. “I’ll give them
the zombie, the weapons.” They had both Guardian and Tresh now. “I’m not giving them Jorie.”
“You can’t hide her in your spare room the rest of her life. She has no Social Security  number, no ID.
She can’t even get a job.” Zeke raised his arms in an exasperated motion. “Talk about an illegal alien!”
“I’ll get her an ID. A whole identity.”
Zeke stared at him. “Be serious.”
“I am.”
“You know what that costs, a good fake identity?”
“I can take equity out of my house to pay for it.”
Zeke barked out a harsh laugh. “Brilliant, Einstein. Traceable funds. There goes your career.”
“I’m not going to write a fucking personal check.” Theo glared at him. “I’m not that stupid.”
“Then listen to yourself, damn it! You’re talking felony jail time. Your life down the shitter. You do know
what they do to cops in the Graybar Hotel, don’t you?”
“You’re assuming I’d get caught.”
“No, she’d get caught, suddenly surfacing in all the databases.” Zeke ticked the items off on his fingers.
“She’d have to get a job, buy a car, rent an apartment—”

“Not if she’s living with me, she won’t.”
“Living with—what’re you going to do, Theophilus? Marry her?”
Theo raised his chin and met Zeke’s question with a hard stare. This was one of the decisions he’d made
driving through the bright Florida sunshine in the middle of Christmas Day with Jorie by his side. And a
dead zombie behind them. “Yes.”
“You’re—Ay, Jesucristo.” Zeke dropped his head in his hands, then lifted his face slightly and peered up
at Theo. “You got a thing for women with fake identities?”
The not-so-veiled reference to his disastrous marriage hit him like a  sucker  punch.  Theo  looked  away,
keeping his temper in check. But he couldn’t keep the anger out of his voice when he turned back. “I’m
sorely tempted to kick the shit out of you for saying that.”
Zeke straightened slowly, eyes wide then narrowing. “You want to take it outside, Theo? We can take it
outside.”
Theo needed to hit something. He really did. But Zeke Martinez wasn’t whom he needed to hit. It was
Rordan  and  Lorik  and  Jorie’s  captain  and  all the Guardians  who,  by their reluctance  to  consider  the
threat  of the Tresh,  got him and  Jorie  to  the point where  they were  now,  backs  against the wall  and
nowhere to go. And it was the Tresh and this guy Prow. Oh, how he needed to hit Prow. Get him in a
choke hold and watch the life drain from his iridescent eyes.
But Zeke wasn’t Prow or Rordan or the Guardians. Zeke was his partner. His best detective. He ran his
hand over his face.
“You got your fancy clothes on, amigo.” He looked at Zeke out of the corner of his eye. “Suzanne will
kill me if you get them dirty.”
Zeke studied him for a few heartbeats, then snorted. “You ’fraid of my old lady?”
“Hell, yeah.”
“Me too.”  Zeke  brushed  invisible dirt off his thighs. “I probably  should have changed  after  Mass  this
morning, but when Barrington—we were talking in the parking lot after church—when he told me about
these weird mummy bodies one of his deputies had found, all I could think of was getting to the SO  to
see what they had.”
On Christmas. The bad guys never take a holiday, Uncle Stavros always said. Theo nodded. “Thanks.
And, hey, I’m sorry. I shouldn’t—”
“She’s got you all wrapped up in knots, doesn’t she?”
Actually, his feelings for Jorie were one of the few things he had no problems with. “This situation has me
wrapped up in knots. It’s not only Jorie. There’s Tammy. Jorie’s more worried about her than she says,
and I know she feels responsible for what happened. Both of them are suffering in their own ways.” He
shook his head. “I keep thinking I’m going to wake up and it’s all a bad dream.”  Except  for Jorie.  He
wanted to wake up and find her beside him.
“There’s only  one  way  to  end  the  bad  dream,  and  you  know  it.  We  contact  the  lieutenant  and  he
contacts the chief. Bring ’em here to see Big Butt-Ugly—”
“Baby Butt-Ugly,” Theo corrected.

“—and we go in loaded for bear.”
Theo’s brain knew Zeke was right. But Theo’s heart was afraid he’d lose Jorie in the process.
 
It was a damning discovery. One made possible, Jorie told Theo and Zeke as they stood in the doorway
of the brightly lit examining room, only because Lorik’s final report had pinpointed what she  needed  to
do to find proof of the mutations. Doing that had taken Jorie and Suzanne almost two hours.
Theo listened intently as she went down the list: a zombie with an embedded personal shield. A zombie
with an accelerated growth rate, a maturity beyond its stated numerical age. A zombie that not only took
data and guidance from the C-Prime but was now able to regenerate a portion of what it used and send it
back.
Making the C-Prime stronger. Making the C-Prime able to control a megaherd.
No longer a parasitic relationship, with the herd draining the C-Prime until the herd was forced to  split,
but almost trophobiosis: a feeding, a mutual protection.
Jorie put her scanner down on a nearby metal table. “Questions?”
From down  the corridor,  Theo  could  hear  Suzanne’s  soft  voice and  a  low squeal  of excitement from
Tammy. Suzanne had said she wanted to try something to help Tam focus, and judging from the glimpse
of fluff a few moments ago, she’d brought a kitten out of the kennel and placed the creature in Tammy’s
arms.
Just as well. Tammy didn’t need to hear about these new and improved zombies, anyway.
“How many are there, total?” Zeke was asking.
“Last count was three hundred eleven,” Jorie told him, “but we terminated a few. If they’ve regenerated
those, they’re still in the egg stage.”
Egg? Theo did not want to see what zombie eggs looked like.
Zeke nodded. “How long from egg to zombie?”
“In your planetary terms?” Jorie closed her eyes for a moment. “Two weeks, your time, egg to hatchling.
They  grow  quickly  after  that.  Three  weeks  to  primary  juvenile.  Another  four  to  six,  depending  on
availability of foodstuffs, to full juvenile.”
“But that’s  the old zombies,” Theo  said,  remembering information she’d  given him  over  the  past  few
days. “Not the new and improved.”
“I have no idea of the time line now, other than it would be faster. And I don’t know if it accelerates all
stages  or  just  one.  Egg  to  hatchling,  maybe.  Or  juvenile  to  drone.  I’d  need  time  to  determine  that
answer.”
And time, Theo knew, they didn’t have.
Zeke caught that as well. “In another two, three months there could be a hundred more of these things.”
“At minimum. There are no sexes. All zombies can replicate and can do so every six days when needed

to expand the herd or to populate out a new one.” Jorie motioned toward an adjoining room, where the
corpse of the zombie lay. “I can show you—”
“No thanks.” Zeke closed his eyes and waved his hands in front of his face. “Pass.”
Theo pushed away from the wall. There was something they were all missing here. Another factor. “The
Tresh know we know this. They have to know we have the zombie.”
“They also  know  I have no ship here,  minimal weapons.  They  must  know  what  I  figured  out—your
projectile weapons can easily pierce their shields. This isn’t a flaw they’ll fix by tomorrow. But three, four
days to design a correction?” She shrugged. “Another three or four to recalibrate their tech? I wouldn’t
discount it.”
She’d been elated when she’d realized a Tresh shield couldn’t stop a bullet. He had too, still thinking of
some kind of small, private army. Nothing official. Nothing that would put Jorie’s face in the news. Just
cops he could trust. With the full understanding that if something went wrong—if the brass or the media
found out about his band of zombie vigilantes—he would take the fall. No question. He accepted that.
But putting together  his vigilantes would take  time, with people  being on different shifts and  away  for
vacation. Two, three weeks, he could pull something together.
“So we have a small window in which to act, both on the zombies reproducing the mutation and on the
Tresh shoring up their defenses,” Theo said. “Do we have two weeks, at least? One?” New Year’s Eve?
Could he pull this off by New Year’s Eve?
“The more we delay, the more we give the Tresh the chance to reconfigure for projectiles,”  Jorie  said.
“Two weeks from now there will be more zombies, and two weeks from now Tresh defenses will have
improved. More people may die. My team and I have worked situations like that before, where we were
brought in much later than we should have been. But it was only the zombies we fought, not the Tresh.
And we fought them with full squadrons of gravrippers.
“Remind me someday,” she told him with a nod as he paced to the other side of the room, “to tell you
about  Delos-Five.  Three  hundred  fifty  thousand  people  died  before  the  Delos  pritus  agreed  to  let
Guardian squadrons into their airspace.”
He had no idea what a pritus was—some kind of head honcho or group,  he assumed—but  he clearly
heard the pain in her voice at what she must have perceived as failing in her duty. A duty he knew he was
asking her to delay.
“We have a chance to avoid that stupidity, the senseless waste of life here,” she said as he paced back.
“Without a squadron of those gravrippers?” Zeke asked.
Jorie picked up her scanner and slid it into its holder under her sweater. “I don’t intend to chase  down
the C-Prime. I’m going to trigger a craving and bring it to me.”
Bring the C-Prime to her? Panic jolted Theo. He gripped the edge of the table. “That’s suicide.”
“I’ve done it before—”
“A C-Prime? Alone?”
“No, but—”

Theo leaned closer. “With insufficient tech and no emergency transport?”
“You never transit in close proximity to a zombie. It’s too risky. Five maxmeters is the initial safe zone.”
“I saw that feeding frenzy, Jorie.  I got tagged  by one,  for Christ’s  sake.  When you’re  surrounded  by
zombies, there is no safe zone.”
“I just need one shot at the C-Prime.”
“One shot? At the heart, right? And if you miss?”
She met his gaze squarely. “I’m not going to kill it. I’m going to reprogram it.”
A vision of her climbing up the damned  thing and  shoving  a  DVD  in  its  jaws  jumped  into  his  mind.
Insanity. “Reprogram it?”
“I’m going to use the accelerated exchange rate at which the zombies now interact to spread  a  kind of
virus among them. If I start with the C-Prime, then everyone—every one,” she stressed, “will be infected.
The C-Prime will give it to the juveniles, who’ll give it to the drones, who’ll bring it back—multiplied in
strength,  unless  Lorik’s  calculations  are  in  error—to  the  C-Prime.”  She  paused.  “They’ll  terminate
themselves.”
“The Tresh can’t counteract that?” Zeke asked.
“They’ll try. If they hadn’t created a  megaherd  and  instead  worked  in smaller herds  with a  number of
C-Primes, they could isolate several of the herds and correct the problem, maybe only losing one or two
herds in the process. But here, everything is tied to one zombie. Once the C-Prime’s functions begin to
fail, the herd will lose cohesiveness. It can’t split for safety, because there’s no strong, healthy secondary
C-Prime rising in the ranks  to  give that order,  no uninfected secondary  C-Prime  to  keep  things under
control. Once the C-Prime terminates, the infected herd will feed on itself.”
The sound of Suzanne’s laughter filtered in. Theo glanced out the door as Zeke did, then he turned back
to Jorie. “Couldn’t you kill the C-Prime and have the same result?”
“That  would  disorient  the  herd,  yes.  But  it  wouldn’t  guarantee  that  a  secondary  C-Prime  wouldn’t
develop, especially with the Tresh involved. We need them all sick and dying, the stronger feeding on the
weaker,  ingesting  their  virus,  weakening  and  becoming  prey  themselves.  That’s  the  only  way  I  can
guarantee the Tresh will have nothing to work with.”
Theo massaged the growing ache between his eyebrows  with two  fingers. “I cannot  let you take  on a
C-Prime by yourself—”
“You do not hear my words.” Jorie was shaking her head, as if she were chastising him for forgetting to
pick his socks up off the floor, not discussing a suicidal attempt at bagging a giant zombie. “I never said I
was doing this alone. I said I would be the one responsible for targeting the C-Prime. Anyone else who
cares to help will have more than enough to keep themselves busy.”
Anyone  else  who  cares  to  help.  Meaning  more  than  just  Zeke.  Theo  stared  at  her.  “And  your
regulations that forbid contact with my people?”
“The regulations you kept demanding I break?” She raised her arms, then let them fall to her sides. “I see
no  other  possible  way  to  solve  this.  And  I  have  to.  I’m  a  Guardian  Force  commander.  It’s  my
responsibility to protect all worlds from the problem we created. The fact  that  I’m the only functioning
Guardian on this planet doesn’t change that. I have to violate the no-contact rule. But I will not break the

one demanding I follow my duty.”
“No. Wait.” Theo held up one hand.
“What do you mean, wait?” She put her hands on her hips. “You’ve been a one-note symphony since I
arrived on your world, telling me we must get your people involved.”
“And you gave me war  stories  of all the problems  that  happen  when Guardians  reveal  themselves  to
nil-techs,” he shot back.
“Yes. They want our ships, our jumpdrives, our tech, our weapons. Well, there’s no ship for your people
to have unless the Tresh  offer theirs,  and  I doubt  they will. I couldn’t  build a  jumpdrive if you held a
Hazer to my head. As for tech, I’m going to have to reconfigure much of what I have in your residence
just to adapt my Hazer and create the reprogramming dart with the virus. I have my scanner, of course.
And Tam’s, though I may need to use that for parts as well.” She shrugged. “I have the G-Ones and the
two  Tresh  weapons.  But  there’s  nothing  I  can  give  your  people  that  will  bring  them  up  to  the
technological level of the Guardians or help them get off this ball of dirt any faster.  I can  only tell them
that, yes, other civilizations are out there and, yes, interstellar travel is possible. If they even believe me.”
But they would believe her. Seeing the zombies and dissecting the dead ones  would convince even the
staunchest of skeptics. Which meant only two things: the zombies and Jorie would be all over the news
channels, or they wouldn’t—they’d be in the deepest basement of the Pentagon.
Theo couldn’t live with either outcome. He had to develop a third choice. A way to stop the zombies and
the Tresh. A way to keep Jorie safe.
In less than a week.
He saw  Zeke  flip open  his cell phone.  Theo  shot  him a  warning  glance.  “What  do  you  think  you’re
doing?”
“Just going to wish Lieutenant Stevens a Merry Christmas. And see if he wants to meet a zombie.”
Theo closed his hand around the phone. “Give me a few hours.”
“Theophilus—”
“A few hours.”
“The clerk’s office is closed. You can’t apply for a marriage license until tomorrow.”
He was aware of Jorie watching them and listening. He glanced over his shoulder at her while he hung on
to Zeke’s phone. “How long will it take you to make this reprogramming dart?”
“If the ship were here? Two sweeps. Now?” She blew an exasperated  sigh through her lips. “Earliest,
two days. Moonrise, day after tomorrow. Or sunwake of the next.”
Well, it beat the hell out of two hours.
“Two days.” He plucked Zeke’s cell phone from his fingers, snapped it closed, then handed  it back  to
him. “Two days.”
“Providing we’re not attacked by any more zombies,” Jorie added.
“You know, the fun just never stops.” Theo grabbed her hand and  pulled her around  the table  toward

him. “Go find Tammy. It’s time to go home.”
 
Jorie went in search  of Tamlynne, very aware  she  had  no idea  of what was  going on in Theo’s  head
anymore. She thought he’d be  bliss-infused to  learn she  was  willing to  work  with his people.  He  was
furious. She thought he’d want to attack the problem right away. He was hesitating.
Following the sound of Suzanne’s voice, she found Tam in the clinic’s small mess hall. It smelled of that
coffee Theo so loved. Tam and  Suzanne were  sitting at  a  square  table.  Between  them, a  dancing and
pouncing kitten—she was very sure that was the Vekran word—with bluish-gray fur attacked small balls
of paper that Tam, laughing, flicked across the tabletop.
Suzanne looked up when Jorie entered. “This has helped,” she said softly, motioning to the kitten.
“Look, sir! Isn’t he wonderful?” Tam ran her hand over the small back.
A sentence. A full sentence in Alarsh. No hesitation. No singsong inflection. Jorie shot a quick glance at
Suzanne, then back to Tam again. “He’s very handsome,” she answered, also in Alarsh.
“Suzanne say,” Tam switched to Vekran, “cute. The cat is cute.” She hesitated between each word, but
it wasn’t  the hesitation Jorie  had  heard  before  but rather  the normal one  of  someone  learning  a  new
language. Vekran. English.
“Yes?” Tam continued, looking at Suzanne. “Correct?”
“That’s correct.” Suzanne nodded. “The cat is cute.”
Tam patted the table. “Table. Chair. Maga. Zine.” She touched or pointed to the different items, naming
them. “Ceelink. Vindow.”
“I’ve been  doing basic  right-brain–left-brain  exercises  with her,”  Suzanne told  Jorie.  “You understand
what I mean by that?”
Jorie nodded,  her throat  tight.  Suzanne’s  compassion  for  Tam,  a  stranger,  was  a  rare  blessing.  “So
there’s hope?” she managed after a moment.
“Her mind and her body need time to heal. Your doctors have machines to speed that up. We don’t. All
I can do is keep her exercising her brain, her senses. And hope whatever memories were repressed will
surface.”
Tam cradled the kitten and placed a soft kiss on its head.
Jorie pulled out a  chair and  sat.  “Lieutenant,”  she  said  in  Alarsh.  “Guardian  Force  Field  Regulation,
Section Twelve, Paragraph Three, Subsection A.”
Tam blinked. “If…if shielding malfunctions and cannot be repaired, the T…the T…” She frowned. “The
T-MOD, yes! The T-MOD must be destroyed. Sir.” She looked at Jorie and smiled.
Jorie smiled back, a small weight lifting from her heart.
“What was that?” Suzanne asked, one eyebrow lifting.
Jorie switched back to Vekran. “Something every green-as-liaso-hedges ensign would know. One of the

most-quoted Guardian regulations. I gave her the cite. She replied with the regulation. She stumbled a bit,
but she repeated it.”
“Are you and Theo going to take her back to his house?” Suzanne asked as Jorie heard  the sounds  of
footsteps approaching.
“He asked that I retrieve her.”
Suzanne laid her hand on Jorie’s arm. “A suggestion. Let her stay with Zeke and me for a day or two.”
“Who’s staying with us?” Zeke Martinez came up behind Suzanne.
The dark-haired woman turned. “I’d like Tamlynne to spend a few days at our house, Ezequiel. Hear me
out.” She raised one hand. “I am a doctor.  Tam’s been  through a  traumatic experience,  one  her brain
associates with a certain location. I think the fact that she’s improved since she came here—aside from
the hour or  so  I’ve  worked  with her—is  because  she’s  no longer having flashbacks  or  reacting to  an
implanted autosuggestion triggered by being in Theo’s house. I want to keep her out of the environment
she associates with the attack.”
“But—”
“We have the room. The guest room your mother uses when she visits.”
“—it’s Christmas,” Martinez finished.
“Yes. And where’s your generosity of spirit?”
“It could be dangerous, Suzy.” Theo  perched  on the edge  of the table.  Jorie  felt his hand rest  on her
shoulder. “The Tresh could come gunning for her.”
“Then why haven’t they?” Suzanne asked. “They haven’t come to this clinic.”
Theo looked down at Jorie, one eyebrow slightly arched.
“They follow tech and PMaT trails,” Jorie said. “The Tresh knew about your residence  because  of the
Guardian tech there. The same way I found the structure they were using.”
“I know Zeke asked you this before, but are you sure there’s no way they knew you were in my house
when they sent  the zombie?” Theo  motioned to  the corridor  where  the dead  zombie’s body  now  lay
secured in a cold-storage unit.
“I can’t tell you what they know,” Jorie said. “But I can tell you that if I were working a  nil world  and
saw Guardian shields over a structure and Guardian tech trails emanating from that  same  structure,  I’d
feel fairly sure a Guardian was in that vicinity.”
Which was how they found Danjay Wain. She had no doubt of that now.
“And since I have Tamlynne’s scanner and the Tresh implant has been removed,” Jorie continued, “they
have no way of tracking her specifically. If anything, they’d return to the implant’s last signal, and that’s
Theo’s residence. Not here and not your residence,” she said with a nod to Martinez.
“It’s not rocket  science,  Theo.”  Martinez punched  Theo  lightly on the  arm.  “Get  it?  Rocket  science.
Outer-space aliens.”
Jorie frowned. “Starship propulsion has nothing—”

Theo ruffled her hair. “Don’t encourage him. Please.”
“So it’s settled?”  Suzanne asked,  glancing from Jorie  to  Zeke.  “Tam comes  home  with  us  for  a  few
days?”
“I think it’s wise.” Jorie reached over and stroked the kitten’s soft head. “I’ll tell her she has to help you
care for the companion. The kitten. Her family had many when she was a child. It’s a high honor on her
world.”
She  translated  everything  to  Alarsh  and  watched  a  light  of  happiness  glow  in  Tam’s  eyes  as  she
enthusiastically accepted her new “assignment.”
Theo pulled Jorie to her feet. “Zeke, keep in touch with me.”
“Yes, boss.”
Jorie reached for Suzanne’s hand and clasped it, trying to convey through touch what words could not.
Then  it  was  just  her  and  Theo  in  the  white  land  vehicle,  pulling  away  from  Suzanne’s  clinic.  And
Tamlynne Herryck. The only other Guardian—the only other person—on this world who spoke Alarsh
and who knew what it was like to travel between the stars.
Jorie had never felt so alone.
 

21 
“Hungry?” Theo’s voice broke into Jorie’s troubled thoughts as the Essuvee rumbled away from Suzanne
Martinez’s companion facility.
She  took  her  gaze  away  from  her  scanner,  where  she’d  outlined  the  initial  parameters  for  her
reprogramming virus, and—after  a  short  conversation  with her stomach—nodded.  “I need  to  get  this
transferred to my T-MOD. We have more peanut butter, yes?”
“Is three hours going to make a huge difference?”
She interpreted  that to  mean he wasn’t  intending to  head  back  to  his residence—and  her tech—right
now. “Overall, no.” Everything was so uncertain without the tech  and  a  team to  compile needed  facts.
“But I can’t afford any more mistakes here.”
“You haven’t—”
“I have.” She  recited  the list of sins  that  were  now  emblazoned  in  her  mind.  “I  should  have  alerted
Tamlynne and  the ship when I picked  up that  dead  zone.  I don’t  know  if  Captain  Pietr  would  have
listened to me. Probably not, and, yes, I could have risked his questioning my competence. But Tamlynne
would have listened. Acted. She would have been ready for Prow. And Rordan—”
His hand squeezing hers  stopped  her words.  “You don’t  know  for sure.  Second-guessing  yourself  is
going to create more mistakes, because you’re not going to trust your instincts when you need them.”
“My instincts say I need to get this program started.”
With a sigh, Theo turned the vehicle around. “Okay, get it started. But my instincts say you need a break.
You’ve immersed yourself in this for too long. We have an old saying about  not being able  to  see  the
forest for the trees. You understand that?”
She did. “But—”
“We’ll stop home. You get your computers working on this thing. Then I want to get you out of the forest
for a  while. Plus,” he paused  and  glanced  at  her  quickly,  then  back  to  the  traffic  ahead,  “I’ve  been
thinking about how the Tresh hone in on your tech. The more we’re there, the greater risk we have of a
confrontation with them.”
He had a point. Still…“You’d rather return to find a zombie has sliced up your main room?”
“Than confront it? Yes. Every confrontation distracts us—distracts you—from what needs  to  be  done.
Every confrontation risks lives. Something happens to you, Jorie, and we have no hope of stopping these
things. You’re the only one who understands how they function.” He slowed the vehicle as the dangling
lights changed to red. “If we could all go live at Zeke and Suzanne’s for the next week until the zombies
are stopped, I’d be a lot happier.”
“The shields are secure,” she argued.
“The shields tell the Tresh where you are,” he countered.
But the shields were necessary to protect the tech, and the tech was necessary to stop the zombies. She

understood  his concerns  but saw  no options.  She  went back  to  her  calculations  on  her  scanner,  not
raising her head until Theo guided the land vehicle behind his structure.
Armed, they both exited the vehicle and—as she temporarily dropped the back sector shields—entered
his residence. But nothing challenged them. She gave him an “I told you so” nod as  she  headed  for his
bedroom. Once on the floor, she segued her small scanner to the larger of the two MOD-tech units.
She was  peripherally aware  of Theo  moving about  his  residence.  At  one  point  he  changed  his  shirt,
buttoning up a new one, then brought her a glass of water.
“Done yet?”
“Almost.”  She  wondered  how  long  she  could  keep  saying  “almost.”  Once  the  programming  began
running, it didn’t need  her input.  But  working  with  the  familiar  MOD-tech,  speaking  Alarsh  into  her
oc-set’s mike, was comforting.
Then Theo was kneeling behind her, hands on her shoulders. “Now, Jorie.”
It wasn’t a question. She sighed and stood. She had a feeling she knew where he wanted to go, and she
fully understood. But it made her nervous—and not only because she’d be away from her tech.  “Two,
three sweeps,” she told him as they entered  his kitchen.  “Then I must get back  here.”  The back  door
clanked shut behind her. She sealed his residence’s shields and followed him down the porch steps.
“I want to see my aunt and  uncle. It’s  Christmas.  You understand  what that  means?” he asked  as  he
backed the vehicle out of his residence’s narrow paved accessway.
“Only that it’s a  day  of observation  for you.  An important one.”  She  glanced  at  him.  Moonrise  was
approaching, the world’s natural light dimming. It was an experience that still struck her as odd. Shiplight
was so much better. More consistent.
Plus, moonlight meant night, a  time the Tresh  preferred  to  move.  She  shook  off her unease  and  went
back to his question about his Christmas. “You’re also thinking you might not see them again.”
He looked over quickly. “You reading minds now?”
She’d  known  that’s  where  he  wanted  to  go  because  it’s  what  she  always  did  before  she  left  on  a
dangerous mission: see the people most important to her. “I’ve spent most of my adult life either targeting
a sentient or being a target. Every time I see Galin, I always treat it as if it’s the last one.”
“Galin?” Theo’s voice had a strained note. “Don’t tell me. Another concord?”
She frowned at him. “Not with my brother!”
“I didn’t know you had a brother.”
Sadness trickled past her heart. “Yes.” It had been three galactic years since she’d seen him.
“Is he a Guardian too?”
She shook her head. “He designs starship jumpdrives. The thing that makes—”
“I understand  jumpdrives.  Hyperspace.”  He  lowered  the  pitch  of  his  voice.  “Warp  Factor  Ten,  Mr.
Data.” He pointed one finger. “Engage.”
Warp factor? How did he know the term? “Warp Factor Ten is fiction and, besides, denotes an infinite

velocity and therefore is impossible.”
They were stopped due to the edict of multicolored lights. Theo stared at her. She stared back. She felt
that for some reason her comment had startled him. The vehicle moved forward again.
“What size do you wear?” he asked.
His question made so little sense in the current conversation about her brother  and  jumpdrives that  she
tried translating it in a few other galactic tongues. It still made no sense. She gave up. “Size?”
He plucked at his shirt. “Clothing size.”
“What does that have to do with jumpdrives?”
“Nothing. But it has everything to do with Aunt Tootie and Uncle Stavros.” He slowed the vehicle again,
then turned left into a large paved area. “God bless Walgreens. They never close.”
“Never clothes?”
Theo disengaged the vehicle’s engine and twisted in his seat. “The shorts,  sweater,  boots”—he  tapped
her arm, then her leg—“won’t pass muster with Tootie on Christmas. But I stopped here last week to get
a soda. It amazed me what these places sell now.”
“Soda?” Jorie was very lost.
That feral smile played over his lips. “You’ll see.”
What Jorie saw, as she followed Theo into the establishment, was a commissary. A decent-size one with
a wide selection  of  items,  most  in  brightly  colored  boxes.  He  threaded  his  fingers  through  hers  and
brought her to an aisle that contained…clothes. Not many. Most appeared to be shirts of the type Theo
favored—short-sleeved  and  round-necked.  But  these  were  lettered:  Life’s  a  Beach.  And  What
Happens in Bahia Vista Beach Stays in Bahia Vista Beach.
“Just some touristy stuff,” Theo said. “But this might work.”
It was a slender sleeveless dress, ankle length, deep green in color splashed with large white flowers. The
material was very lightweight but soft. It looked like something worn in Paroo, and she said so.
“Hawaiian,” he said.
Another nonsensical word.
“Flip-flops,” he said, dropping a pair of white sandals dotted with lots of tiny gold beads on the floor next
to her feet. “Women wear them everywhere these days.”
Dress and shoes were chosen in the proper  size. A colorful satchel  with a  shoulder  strap  was  added,
along with a soft, long-sleeved light-blue shirt—sweatshirt, Theo termed it—with Bahia  Vista,  Florida
on the front and  a  matching pair  of  shorts.  Jorie  followed  Theo  to  the  front  of  the  commissary  and
watched him hand greenish pieces of paper to a pale-skinned female with purple streaks in her short dark
hair and a line of gold hoop earrings draped over the outside curve of her left ear.
“Wow, who does your hair?” the female asked her.
“She’s not from around here.” Theo draped one arm over Jorie’s shoulder. “Somewhere she can change
into this dress?”

“You guys going to a beach party? Customer restrooms are in the back. Go down the vitamin aisle and
you’ll see the door.”
“Thanks.” Theo nudged Jorie forward. “Merry Christmas.”
Jorie  felt  silly  changing  her  clothes,  but  she  understood.  In  many  civilizations,  mode  of  dress  was
indicative of stature. Theo was taking her to see cherished elder family. When in Vekris…
She put her tracker clothes, socks, and boots into the plastic bag provided by the commissary and  her
scanner inside the satchel. She took a moment to scrub freshwater—so delightfully plentiful here—over
her face and run wet fingers through her hair. Then she pulled the dress over her head. It was rather nice,
narrow at the waist and flaring slightly over her hips. Slit up both sides. Good. If she had to run or kick
out in battle, she could do so. She slipped her feet into the sandals—definitely not battleworthy.
Then she marched out of the small room.
Theo was leaning against the wall. His eyes widened. For reasons she couldn’t quite explain, she blushed.
Theo stared at her as if she were the last morsel of peanut  butter  in the universe and  he was  starving.
“Hot damn.”
Hot? She did feel a little warm.
He slipped his hand into hers. “C’mon. Aunt Tootie can’t wait to meet you.”
 
“So nice to see you got dressed up, Theophilus,” Aunt Tootie said in mock sternness as Theo opened the
back door and stepped into her kitchen. Savory, mouthwatering aromas  of meat juices and  the yeasty
tang of baking assaulted him immediately.
This was the house that he’d always thought of as home—a rambling pale-yellow  stucco  Florida  ranch
with the ubiquitous barrel-tile roof, on a corner lot filled with scrub  palm, orange,  and  grapefruit trees.
The house was within a few blocks of the bayou—a  site of much boyhood  mischief—but it was  Aunt
Tootie’s kitchen that held the most memories.
He swept the small, silver-haired woman into his arms, chuckling. Tootie was laughing too. She’d been a
cop’s wife since she was twenty years old and was well used to her husband appearing in all manner of
dress when he was working, and she believed Theo—in jeans and a black silk camp shirt that covered
his gun on his hip—was working today.
Jorie’s outfit, however, was another matter. The shorts and long sweater would have been an immediate
negative in Tootie’s eyes.
He kissed her cheek. “Kala Christouyenna,” he told her, wishing her a Merry Christmas.
Tootie stood on tiptoes to frame his face with her hands and kissed him soundly on both cheeks. “Kala
Christouyenna! S’agapo.”
Theo watched dark-brown eyes twinkle. “Love you too.  Now…”  And he turned  her slightly. Here  it
comes. Tootie had hated Camille on sight. “Titania Petrakos, this is Jorie Mikkalah.”
“Jorie.” Tootie extended her hand, her face and tone completely unreadable. She would have made  an

excellent detective. “How nice to meet you. Welcome to our home.”
Jorie took her hand. “Thank you. Theo said”—she glanced up at him, and he saw an unexpected sadness
in her eyes—“this is a family time for you. I’m honored that you permit me to share it.”
The first flicker of emotion crossed  Tootie’s  round  face.  A softening? Theo  wasn’t  sure.  “It  must  be
difficult for you to be away from your family. Theo said you’re from—”
“Up north,” Theo put in with a wave of one hand, delineating some distant place. Real distant. “Way up
north.”
Tootie patted Jorie’s hand. “You’ll get to experience your first Greek Christmas, then.”
Thank God it was a Greek Christmas. Had it been one with a turkey and green beans on the table, there
would have been a lot more explaining to do when Jorie didn’t know what those dishes were.
But hungry people eat instead of talk. Theo and Jorie ate, and ate well. Jorie’s fondness for peanut butter
quickly extended to his aunt’s cooking, and the obvious delight on her face  as  she  tasted  each  offered
dish and treasured each morsel gave a whole new meaning to the word savoring.
Still, Theo could tell she was nervous. The small macramé tote bag with her scanner and G-1 was never
out of her reach, and several times he saw her touch it, as if for reassurance. And he suspected her trips
to the bathroom were more to check her scanner than to powder her nose.
At the end of the meal, Theo helped Tootie and Jorie clear the table and put back the traditional wooden
bowl of water with the basil-wrapped cross—a Greek tradition to keep the evil Kalikantzri at bay. He
hadn’t seen a zombie since this morning. Must be working.
Then he left the two women discussing Sophie Goldstein’s honey puffs and headed for the living room.
He  was  a  bit  concerned  leaving  Jorie  with  his  aunt,  but  not  overmuch.  Jorie’s  mastery  of  English
was—except for her accent, which was something of a cross between French and British—damned near
perfect now.
Besides, if she  blew it, it didn’t matter.  He  hadn’t  been  so  insistent on seeing his aunt and  uncle only
because it was Christmas. He was going to tell Stavros the truth.
In case he was killed. He hadn’t ruled out the possibility, because he knew Jorie was bound to try some
wild scheme. And he knew he’d be there, right beside her.
Theo settled on the blue-and-yellow tropical-print couch  in front of the television—a nice wide-screen
plasma.  Couple  years  old  but  still  had  a  good  picture.  A  basketball  game  was  on.  He  watched
disinterestedly for a few minutes while Uncle Stavros  brought  back  his second  plate  of syrup-covered
melomakarana.
Stavros Petrakos—a bear of a man with a full head of thick gray-streaked  dark  hair and  eyebrows  to
match—sat down with a grunt. “Want one?”
“No room.” Theo waved one hand. “Well, okay. One more.”
Stavros snorted. “Cops and doughnuts.”
“Pot calling the kettle…”
“How’s things on the job?”

“Job’s good.”  It  was.  Theo  couldn’t  think of anything he wanted  to  do  more  than being a  cop.  “Got
some budgetary wranglings coming up, but they’ve already approved the new MDTs.”
“How did we ever do the job without computers in the cars? Ha!” Stavros licked his fingers. “Pretty gal
you got there. How old is she?”
Theo knew the answer to that one now. “Thirty-nine.”
“Doesn’t look a day over thirty—Skata! You see that foul?” His uncle pointed to the television. “Illegal
elbow if I ever saw one.” He paused. “She divorced?”
Theo was ready with the recitation. “Never been  married,  though she  was  engaged  once.  Broke  it off
because the guy cheated on her. No kids. Has a lot of responsibility in her job—she’s fairly high up the
food chain. Well liked, well respected. Real team leader, you know? And, oh, she was in the marines.”
A melomakarana stopped in midair. “Marines?”
“Flew combat.”
“For Canada?”
“Multinational force, actually.”
“You’re pulling your old uncle’s leg, right?”
“Nope.” And it’s going to get worse. “Remember that UFO sighting out over  the Gulf when I was  a
kid? I was out with you and Dad night-fishing on the Tsavaris’s boat?”
Stavros shot him a narrow-eyed glance, but nodded.
“You told me later you’d seen others but said the stories would have to wait until I was older. Well, I’m
older.” Like thirty years older. He wondered now—given his longtime dedication to sci-fi and things Star
Trek–ish—why he’d never asked his uncle for the rest of the stories before.
Stavros was silent for a moment, chewing his melomakarana and darting glances between Theo and the
game on television. Then: “This is because your gal’s a pilot, right? They see those things all the time. She
saw one of those UFOs and no one believed her.”
“No.” Theo waited until Stavros swallowed the piece of cookie. “She is one of those UFOs.”
“Theophilus, you’re talking nonsense.”
Theo rubbed one hand through his hair. “This is not going to make sense. But I want you to know what’s
going on, because I want you to understand if something…happens.”
“Something—look, the job’s stressful. No one knows that more than me. I did thirty years on the streets.
But they have people who can help you.” Stavros laid his hand on Theo’s arm. “Counselors and such.”
Theo ignored him. “Jorie’s part of a group called the Guardian Force. They wouldn’t have bothered with
our planet except that these monster guard-dog things they created—they call them zombies—ended up
here.  Looks  like  another  nasty  outer-space  group,  the  Tresh,  are  messing  with  these  zombies’
programming. But, unfortunately, these  Tresh  attacked  Jorie’s  ship, and  now it’s just her and  me and
Zeke and maybe a few others to stop the bad guys.”
He glanced at Stavros. His uncle was wiping one hand over his broad face. “I’ll get you all the help you

need,” his uncle said. “If it takes every dime I have. It doesn’t matter. You know Tootie and I love you.”
“I love you too,” Theo said, leaning forward and pulling his cell phone from his back pocket. He flipped it
open and hit a number on speed dial. “Yassou, amigo. Listen, Uncle Stavros is about to Baker-Act me.
Will you talk to him? Thanks.” He handed the cell phone to Stavros. “It’s Zeke.”
His  uncle  took  the  cell  phone  gingerly,  as  if  it  might  bite  him.  “Zeke?  What  kind  of  skata  is  my
boy…Okay.” Silence. Longer silence. “What?” he bellowed. “Mou espasas ta arheedia!”
Theo knew from experience that when he heard  Stavros  accuse  someone  of busting his balls, Stavros
was not quite convinced but getting close.
Evidently, so did Tootie. “Stavros! Watch your language, please!” came from the kitchen.
Finally Stavros nodded, wished Zeke and Suzanne a Merry Christmas, and handed  the phone  back  to
Theo. “Tis Panagias ta matia!”
Now it was the Virgin Mary’s eyes being invoked. “Yeah, I know,” Theo said.
“If you’re playing a game on the old man—”
“I’m not. We’re not.” He filled his uncle in on the rest of the details, including the problem  with Jorie’s
lieutenant and the unknown status of the rest of her team and her ship. He  could  tell some  of it simply
didn’t register with the old man. He’d seen  too  many Signal 20s  in his day.  But there  had  been  those
UFO sightings he’d been tight-lipped about for decades. Theo asked about them again now.
Stavros shook his head. “The one with your father and you wasn’t the first, not by any means.  But I’d
stopped talking to anyone about them by that point. No one believes you, and you get a  reputation—I
had Tootie to think about. And you.”
“You ever get taken on board, like I was?”
“Skata, it was enough just seeing these things zipping around  the sky  at  night. If one  grabbed  me, I’d
probably start shooting.”
“That was my initial reaction too. But then you start thinking about where you are and who could get hurt,
all the while telling yourself this is not really happening.”
“But it did.”  His uncle studied  him. He  wasn’t  one  hundred  percent  convinced.  But Theo  was  family.
“What do you need me to do?” Stavros asked.
Stavros Petrakos had been one damned  fine shot  in his day,  but he was  seventy-eight  now.  A robust
seventy-eight who mowed  his  own  lawn  and  trimmed  his  own  fruit  trees,  but  seventy-eight.  “We’re
putting a task force together. But this is strictly under  the radar.  If anything should…happen,  what the
news media gets and what actually went down might be two different things. I just wanted you to know
the truth.”
Stavros’s gaze didn’t waver. “I still hope this is some kind of a joke.”
“Wish it was too.”
“When?”
“By New Year’s, I’m thinking.”

Stavros nodded. “The chief knows?”
“I’m trying to keep the brass and the news reporters out of it right now. I don’t think they’ll be able to
move quickly enough. And I don’t want to make a media spectacle out of Jorie.”
“Poor kid. She’s basically all alone in this.”
Theo patted his uncle on the shoulder, then stood. “She’s not alone. She has me.”
He wandered back into the kitchen, which was empty, then, hearing a  familiar tinkling sound,  followed
that to the spare  bedroom  in the back  of the house,  where  his aunt kept  her music-box  collection.  A
thoroughly enthralled Jorie was holding a miniature palm tree in her hand as it played a tinny rendition of
the Beach Boys’ tune “Kokomo.”
Yeah, that’s what he needed to do. Run away with her to the Keys and a little place called Kokomo.
“Bliss!” she said when he stepped into the room.
He smiled. “Time to go.”
“So soon?” Tootie plucked a music box in the shape of two intertwined cats from one of the shelves that
ringed the small room. “Jorie’s never seen these before. I guess there’s not a lot of use for them in those
Eskimo villages.” She shook her head.
Theo took the palm tree from Jorie and put it back on the shelf where it belonged. He knew where each
one belonged. He’d helped his uncle build the shelves as his aunt’s collection grew over the years. “You
know I’m working, Thia.”
“I know, I know. But if I didn’t make  a  fuss, I wouldn’t be  a  good  aunt.” She  shooed  him and  Jorie
toward the living room, where Stavros was waiting. “Maybe around New Year’s  or  after,  you’ll come
for dinner, yes?”
His uncle’s face didn’t betray a thing. Man was a damned good cop.
“Sure.” He hugged his uncle, then his aunt.
“She’s a nice girl,” Tootie whispered in his ear.
He bussed her cheek. “Told you so.”
Stavros was holding Jorie’s hand and patting it. Tootie pulled her away and gave her a hug, then put a
bag of leftovers in Jorie’s hand as they went through the kitchen. “Something to nibble on later,” Tootie
said.
Nothing like homemade Greek cooking to fuel a fight against zombies.
 
The bright moonlight and the glow of the porch light bathed Theo’s back steps in a white glow. But Jorie
let Theo handle the physical inspection of a structure he was more familiar with than she was. She studied
her  scanner.  Residence  shields  were  intact,  with  no  attempted  instrusions.  Still,  both  she  and  Theo
entered the back door with weapons out—and she kicked off her sandals as she came across the kitchen
threshold. There was no way she could run in those things.

Only after they cleared the residence did Theo go back out into the warm night air to  retrieve  the bag
with her clothes  and  Tootie’s  offerings  from  the  vehicle’s  rear  seat.  Theo  had  a  lovely  family,  Jorie
realized as  she  leaned  against the kitchen counter  and  slipped  her sandals  back  on.  It  made  her miss
Galin all the more.
“Somebody left this on the back porch steps.” Theo came though the kitchen door,  bags  and  Tootie’s
containers bundled in his arms. And something else.
Jorie automatically reinstated the residence’s rear shields as  she  stepped  toward  him. He  put the food
containers on the small table, the clothing bag on a chair, and turned as she  approached,  a  squat  silver
cylinder in his hand.
Jorie froze, her throat closing, a tremor shaking her body so severely she almost dropped her scanner.
“This was tucked to the side, I almost missed—Jorie?”
“Where did you get that?” Her voice was a hard rasp.
“This?” He angled the metal cuplike object away from him. “It was on the steps.”
Jorie sucked in a harsh breath and inched back.
“Babe, what’s the matter? It’s just some kind of capped soup mug with a built-in spoon thing—”
“A  feeder.  It’s  a  feeder.”  She  could  make  out  the  markings  engraved  on  its  side  now:  Detention
Compound  3  Ovzil.  Her  heart  pounded  and  she  felt light-headed.  She  let the scanner  slide from her
hand to the tabletop, then gripped the back of the closest chair.
“A feeder?”
Vekran, English words fled. She had to close her eyes for a moment and focus, seeking the explanation
in Alarsh, then in Vekran.
Theo’s fingers curled around her arm. “Honey?”
The…thing was inches from her body, still in his hand. With a strangled cry she struck out at it, hard. It
flew from his grasp and clattered to the floor, rolling back and forth a few times before it wobbled to a
halt.
She watched in sick fascination. How many times had she thrown hers against the cell wall?
“Jorie!” Both hands were on her shoulders, and Theo’s breath was warm on her cheek.
“A feeder.” Her voice was rough. She raised her face to his. “It holds a liquid-and-powder protein mix.
You slide the spoon  down  to  stir,” she  pushed  her thumb against nothing, yet she  could  feel the cold
metal feeder in her hand, “then take a scoop and swivel it to eat. It’s the only thing you get to eat when
you’re a prisoner of the Tresh.” Foul-tasting. Even now, she wanted to gag.
“Fuck.” Theo’s face blanked, then hardened. “Shields are up?”
She knew they were. But she grabbed the scanner off the table, because her whole world suddenly tilted
to one side. She nodded.
“You’re sure that’s what it is?”

Her gaze found the feeder  on the floor.  “Don’t you see…?”  But Theo  couldn’t  read  Supi,  the  Tresh
language. “Those letters. Detention Compound 3 Ovzil.” Ovzil Rok Por. A prison compound run by the
Devastators at the base of the Ovzil Neha mountain range. The wind never stopped there. She could still
hear its shrill moan through the ventilation system of her cell.
She shook her head, pushing away the memory. Theo released  her shoulders  and  dug his weapon  out
from under his shirt.
Her own hand shook as she studied the scanner again. “No sign of any shield breach. They—someone
left it here, knowing I’d find it.” That someone had to be Prow. And he knew what finding it would do to
her.
“Was Compound Three where you were?”
She swallowed. “Yes.”
“With Prow?”
“Yes.”
“They’re playing mind games  with  you,  Jorie.  Psychological  warfare.  Because  they  can’t  get  to  you
directly.” He moved back to her, one large hand on her shoulder once again. Warm, reassuring, steady.
“Don’t let them win.”
Jorie slid the scanner back into the small bag and palmed her G-1, forcing down the bile that threatened
to surge up her throat.  Forcing  the memories away.  Forcing  herself to  remember  she  was  a  Guardian
Force commander.
By the time they’d checked every closet, every corner of the small residence, she was calmer. And Theo
had spoken to Zeke Martinez. Nothing unusual there. Tamlynne was fine, the kitten sleeping in her lap.
But they were alerted.
Jorie sagged down into a kitchen chair and rested her forehead against her fingertips.
There was the scrape of wood against tile, and Theo sat down next to her. “Why would Prow keep that
feeder after all these years?”
“I doubt it’s mine.” The thing was still on the floor. Hers or not, she  wouldn’t pick  it up.  Could  barely
look at it. “There’s likely a matter replicator on board his ship. Or ship’s supply has  some  feeders  and
engraved it with the prison compound’s name.”
He pulled her hands away from her face and held them in his. “We can take it out in the backyard and fry
it with your Hazer, if that will make you feel better.”
Star’s end, but he had a very good face and an even better heart. “No. You’re right. The vomit-brained
bastard is playing games. He can’t win unless I let him. I’m not going to let him.” She drew a long breath.
“He wants me to remember. I will remember. And I’ll make him pay because I will not forget.”
Jorie pulled her hands out of Theo’s, strode to where the feeder lay on its side, and snatched it off the tile
floor. Her stomach spasmed as her fingers touched the cool, slick metal, but she didn’t drop it. Instead,
she marched to Theo’s bedroom and placed the feeder on the corner of his wooden dresser.
She would not forget.

Then cross-legged and teeth clenched, she went back to analyzing the reprogramming dart.
 
22 
At some point during the late-evening hours, Theo dropped one of his light-green long-sleeved pullover
shirts in her lap along with a pair of gray drawstring shorts, with the admonishment to “get comfortable.”
And at some point even later that evening, Theo tugged her away from her screen and her worries  and
back into his arms—and his bed.
“Last night,” she told him hesitantly as his hands slipped under  the green  shirt and  massaged  the aches
along her spine, “we probably shouldn’t have—”
His breath was soft in her ear.  “Last night was  wonderful. Perfect.  Don’t  change that.  Not  everything
happens according to plan.”
“My only plan is reprogramming the C-Prime. Beyond that, I cannot even begin to speculate.”
“Then don’t speculate,” he said, his voice husky with emotion. “I told you. Take what’s here and now.”
Jorie turned in his embrace and saw the undisguised heat in his gaze. She couldn’t remember Lorik ever
looking at her like that. It thrilled her—and frightened her. There was so much at risk, so much at stake.
So many unknowns.
And then there  was  Theo.  Infuriating, obstinate,  intelligent, compassionate,  loyal, brave  Theo.  So  she
sought the heat of his skin as she had the night before,  focusing everything on this one  man right now,
knowing full well this one man would haunt her dreams forever.
 
The  next  spate  of  bad  news  hit  at  about  nine-fifteen  local  time  the  next  morning.  Significantly  after
sunwake and significantly after a morning meal of coffee—which Jorie  was  slowly acquiring a  taste  for
when it was heavily sweetened—and peanut butter on toasted bread.
The scanner riding her hip under Theo’s borrowed shirt screeched out a terrifying high–low warning that
sent her careening out of the kitchen and into his bedroom. Structure shield failure. Her MOD-tech was
gasping its last breath but still trying to run the calculations on the zombie reprogramming dart  and  still
attempting to send signals to any Guardian ship that might be sweeping the sector.
She now understood Theo’s panic at nakedness.
They  were  naked,  exposed,  vulnerable.  If  the  Tresh  saw  the  structure’s  energy  pattern  suddenly
flattening, they were dead—and the terror the feeder cup symbolized would become real.
She  grabbed  her  Hazers  from  under  Theo’s  bed  and  tossed  him  the  spare.  “Hard-terminate!”  She
couldn’t take any chances. A team of Devastators or a dozen zombies could appear at any moment.
“What happened?” Theo slung the strap over his shoulder, his projectile weapon already in hand.

“Shields are gone,” she told him in English, then switched to Alarsh, forcing her MOD-tech units through
a series of resets and reinstallations through commands given tersely into her mouth mike.
“Tresh?”
“My fault.” She kept  watch  on her scanner.  Anything could  happen.  In a  way,  she  almost wished for
another attack by the Tresh. She wanted this damned thing settled! “Overloaded the system.”
He started for the door.
“Stay here. They’ll zero in on the tech. I can’t program and watch for them.”
“I got your six, babe. Do your work.”
She did, but there was no way she could resurrect full residence shields. Bliss luck it was  daylight, the
Tresh less likely to move easily then. But less likely hadn’t helped Tam, Kip, or Jacare. Of course,  she
was the instigator, tracking down the Tresh first that day.
The zombies appeared in daylight or dark.
She worked feverishly to get the shield program to resurrect, aware of Theo pacing behind her, aware of
every other noise in the residence, every land vehicle passing on the street, waiting for that cold draft that
preceded a PMaT transit—or the green glow of a zombie portal forming.
None of her patches held. The unit was overtaxed. She was asking too much of it: shield the residence,
design the zombie dart, parse the skies with a Guardian distress signal. Something had to go.
She gritted her teeth and deleted the distress signal, her heart sinking as she did so. The one chance, the
only chance she’d have of being found, of going home again, lay in that signal. Even a seeker ’droid on
mapping duties would have seen and reported it.
Now there was nothing.
With the deletion of that program, tech resources restructured, energy usage leveled. She had something
to work with. She might not get home, but she could protect where she was.
She resurrected the roof shield first. “Overhead in place,” she told Theo. Out of the corner of her eye she
saw him glance up, and if she hadn’t been  so  scared,  aggravated,  and  under  pressure,  she  might have
grinned. So typical.
But the next datastream gave her nothing to smile about. There  was  insufficient power  to  re-create  the
wall shields. A core  processor  must  have  burned  out  in  the  shutdown.  Capacity  was  under  seventy
percent of what she’d had last night. And she couldn’t reduce functions any more. She couldn’t stop the
dart-program computations.
“Ass-faced demon’s whore!” She hated no-choice situations.
Only when she  caught Theo’s  raised  eyebrow  did she  realize  she’d  sworm  out  loud  and  in  Vekran.
Alarsh  epithets  never  translated  well.  “I  can’t  shield  your  entire  structure  anymore.  My  tech  took
damage. I don’t have time to chase down the problem, and even if I did, I’ve nothing to  repair  it with.
So…” She keyed in changes to the shield program, shaking her head in frustration.
“What can you shield?”
“One room. This room, including your bathroom. That’s all.” She locked the shields in place, then flipped

her oc-set over her right eye and glanced quickly around. Everything looked good. She pulled the band
back  down  around  her neck.  “Perimeter  secure.  But anytime you go through that  door,  especially  at
night, you have to assume something you’re not going to want to meet might be out there.”
“You’re sure the Tresh didn’t cause this?”
“I checked  once  and  am running a  secondary  check  now.”  Best  she  could,  with  her  tech’s  reduced
capacity. “But I don’t think so. It’s just a basic overload on a unit that was never meant to do as much as
it’s been doing.”
“I thought it was maintaining the shields and designing the zombie dart. Your scanners track the zombies
and the Tresh, right?”
She’d never told him about the wide-beam distress signal. She’d convinced herself it was because there
hadn’t been time to discuss such things, but she knew it was really because of what she felt and what had
happened  the  past  two  nights.  Hesitantly,  she  told  him  now  and  saw  the  fleeting  expression  of
disappointment on his face. Then it was gone, his features relaxing. She remembered his ability to subvert
his emotions when they were in the cabin assigned to him on the Sakanah.
“We should be able to make a move on that C-Prime in a couple of days. Once that’s done, you can put
all your tech into contacting another Guardian ship.” He reached down and tugged on a lock of her hair.
“I know you want to go home, Jorie.”
She also saw the darkening of his eyes every time he realized that.
“It’s my duty to report what I’ve found out about the Tresh.”
He hunkered down next to her, shoving his gun in his holster  as  he did so.  “We  had  this conversation
three days ago. Only I was telling you about my duty to be here. Do you remember what you told me?
That you try to take what’s bad and make it into bliss. Well, I’ve been trying to do that for you. Trying to
let you know you’re welcome here. More than welcome here. With me.” He chucked her gently under
the chin with two fingers. “It’s not that I don’t understand, babe. I do. I just don’t know how to  make
things perfect for you.”
He rose, then strode to the large viewport and stared out it without further comment.
“Nothing’s ever perfect, Theo,” she said after a while. Such were the problems of living in the here and
now, she wanted to add but didn’t. They were both adults. They both knew that.
He turned, shaking his head.  “Ain’t that the damned  truth.” He  motioned to  the door.  “I need  coffee.
Drop the sizzle shields so I can go to the kitchen.”
“I’ll leave that door unshielded when you’re here. Any PMaT transits in the area,  or  portal  formations,
will set off the alarms on my scanner. But at night or when I’m alone, we should keep all shields up.” She
keyed in the change and nodded at him.
Then she went back to her programs, very aware of the silver feeder cup off to her left. The threat  still
existed; there was still a lot of work to do. She brought up the log on the zombie dart and a cry strangled
her throat. Her tech’s failure had done more than crash the shield program. It had corrupted all her work
to date on the dart. Almost twelve sweeps’ worth, useless.
Heavy footsteps hurried her way. “Jorie?”
She waved one hand at her blinking screen with an abrupt motion, not bothering to hide her frustration.

“Gone. All gone. I have to start all over again on the dart.”
“Christ. Well.” He huffed out a short sigh. “Just start over. It’s the only thing we can do.”
She thrust her hands through her hair and leaned forward for a moment, wondering if that was true. She
straightened.  “We  need  another  plan.  We’re  losing  too  much  ground,  Theo.  I’m  a  tracker.  I  know
survival programming and a bit more because I’ve made it my business to learn it. But I’m not part of a
tech team. And this,” she motioned to her T-MOD and  its auxiliary units, “may not hold together  long
enough, even if I figure out exactly what to do. We may have to just try to terminate the C-Prime without
the  dart  and  hope  the  herd  collapses  in  on  itself  from  there.  And  that  the  Tresh  don’t  take
countermeasures.”
The more she thought about it, the more she was convinced the feeder cup was a private message from
Prow. The Devastator team might well be unaware he sent it. It didn’t fit their normal method of attack.
So  that meant the Devastators  had  yet to  make  another  move against her.  She  was  sure  they  would
before the next zombie germination cycle completed.
“Right now all we have is you, me, and Zeke.”  Theo  didn’t sound  blissful. “A couple  guys I talked  to
earlier this morning aren’t interested or available to go on a private hunting expedition. I’m still waiting on
callbacks from a few others.”
A couple more people? With herself as the only experienced tracker, even ten people would be a tough
fight. “What if I met with your security chief, your regional leaders?”  She  tried  to  remember  the terms
from Danjay’s reports: major…mayor? And then some political figure over the larger populace. Meeting
with a nil world’s heads of state was forbidden by gen-pro regs. She no longer cared about genpro regs.
“It would have to go up through the chain of command, which could  take  weeks.  And after  that?” He
shrugged. “You told  me the horror  stories,  the governments fighting over  access  to  the  Guardians.  It
would all happen here. And you’d be at the center of it.”
“We may not have a choice.”
Theo’s eyes narrowed. “I’m not opting for that as long as we still have some options.” He pulled his cell
phone—she’d finally learned the terminology for that thing—out of his pocket. “Let me try David Gray
again.” He wandered back to the main room.
Jorie returned to her programming, rebuilding the dart,  very aware  how outnumbered  and  ill-prepared
they were. And even more aware there was nothing that could be done about it.
A few minutes later  Theo  returned,  hunkering down  again with a  glimpse of that  feral grin on his lips.
“David’s interested. I’ll need to get him to Suzanne’s to let him see the zombie. He knows—not what’s
going on, not yet, but FDLE has  reports  on mummified bodies—zombie  attacks—that  my department
wasn’t told about. The data wasn’t considered relevant to  our  queries  because  the attacks  weren’t  on
people but on a whole herd of cows, up in Pasco County. Fifty or so.”
“Cows.” She ran the word though her mind. “Ah. Cattle?” When he nodded, she continued. “Juveniles in
a feeding frenzy will often attack anything warm-blooded. And this Pasco  is a  location?” Another  nod.
“How far?”
“Twenty, thirty miles north—Wait, I’ll show you.” He left then returned with a fat paperbound book that
had printed maps in the front.
“Where exactly in the region?”

“I don’t know. I’ll get the complete story from David when I meet with him at about three o’clock.”
“He’ll accept what you tell him is true?”
“He’ll consider the facts and come to the only conclusion he can. He’s a logical kind of guy—he worked
SWAT at my department. Special Weapons and Tactics,” he explained.
“Sniper?” She thought she understood the acronym.
“Damned good one. Like I said, very logical, very calm.”
Sniper training was good. How Theo’s friend would react when confronted with a problem from another
star system remained to be seen.
And she was still the only experienced tracker.
“I want to see Tamlynne before we meet up with him,” she told Theo. She needed to hear a sentence in
Alarsh. And she needed not to feel so alone.
 
Theo never thought he’d see the day he’d willingly say, Hey, babe, let’s go shopping for clothes. But
Jorie had to have something to wear besides her Guardian shorts and a Hawaiian print beach dress, and
his T-shirts didn’t cut it. They may yet have to face his lieutenant or Chief Brantley. They may yet have to
do any number of other things to solve this zombie problem, which would require her fitting in visually in
Bahia Vista, and she didn’t.
Even the Tresh woman had worn white jeans and a touristy T-shirt.
Jorie, he knew, would look terrific in a pair of white jeans.
Plus, he sensed a growing unhappiness in her and had no trouble listing the reasons. Top of the list had to
be the fact she was stuck on his world. He was acutely aware he could have exercised more control and
not slept with her so soon. Okay, they were both adults. But in spite of her training and all that Guardian
crap she did, she was a woman and she’d been abandoned. He’d played on that, shamelessly, because
he couldn’t stop wanting to touch her.
It had been a long time since he’d seduced a woman—Camille had been a practiced tease. No seduction
necessary. But with Jorie, for all that he’d rushed it once he sensed  there  might be  a  mutual attraction,
he’d taken  his time with small caresses,  light kisses.  He  wore  her down  in inches. And added  to  her
problems.
So, hey, babe. Let’s go clothes shopping, pick up something for Tammy, then we’ll meet up  with
David  Gray  and  talk  about  zombies  covered  by  energyworms  and  Tresh  Devastators  with
iridescent eyes.
Just your average couple out for an afternoon. And all women loved to shop for clothes, didn’t they? Of
course, going to T. J. Maxx the day after Christmas probably wasn’t the brightest idea.
They managed to get her two pairs of jeans, a pair of black khakis, and some sweater and shirt combos
that looked  casual  and  covered  her G-1.  Tammy’s size was  more  of  a  guess,  so  they  went  with  an
unstructured tracksuit, workout pants, and a sweatshirt.

“I didn’t realize,” she said, back in the SUV  and  buckling her seat  belt,  “that acquiring clothing was  a
body-contact sport here.”
“We were amateurs up against professionals,” he told her, and backed out of the space.
Her scanner was  out.  Anytime she  was  sure  it wouldn’t be  seen,  she  had  it out.  Looking for another
Tresh safe house. There had to be more than the one in Gulfview. But she’d found none.
He didn’t know if that was good or bad news. He only knew it worried her.
Suzanne was home—her veterinary clinic operating  on holiday hours  this week—but  Zeke  was  at  the
department. Theo would be too, in a couple of days. That worried  him. If the zombie problem  wasn’t
solved, he didn’t discount that Jorie  might go out on her own,  find an abandoned  house,  work  out of
there. Not put him at risk.
All the more reason they had to solve the problem now. Meeting with David was one more positive step.
He left Jorie and Tammy alone in Suzanne’s guest bedroom and found Zeke’s wife in her home office at
the other end of the house.
“Telecommuting,” she said when he wandered in.
He immediately felt bad. “I’m keeping you from what you should be doing.”
“Not at all. Robin handled the routine cases this morning.” Robin was  a  bright, young veterinary intern
that Suzanne hoped  to  groom as  her partner.  “No  emergencies.  No  cats  eating  tinsel.  Robin  has  off
tomorrow and I’m handling the morning. We close at two all week.”
Which was why he’d told David to meet him there at three.
“How’s Tammy?”
“Tammy is quite a remarkable young woman.  I have to  pinch myself over  the fact  she’s  from another
galaxy. She’s regained a lot of spunk in the past twenty-four hours. But there’s  still amnesia over  what
happened at your house. Although Jorie says it could be artificially induced.”
“Any nightmares last night?”
“Not that Zeke or I heard. But I have caught her just staring sometimes, and  then she  shivers.  When I
touch her, she snaps out of it.”
He’d seen Jorie do that too and told Suzanne.
“Can you stop these people, Theo?” Suzanne’s eyes darkened. “I mean, here I am carrying on with my
cats, dogs, parrots, and ducks as if nothing’s changed in the world. But everything has. If you can’t stop
these Tresh and the zombies, what can we do?”
He squeezed her shoulder. “We’ll stop them.” But could they? With every  passing hour,  things looked
bleaker; Jorie, less confident. And with every passing hour, he was more and more  reminded—as  with
his talk with Suzanne—of all the reasons, the people he had to fight for.
He collected Jorie, accepted a surprise hug from Tammy, and, with Suzanne’s spare keys in his pocket,
headed off to meet the man whom he hoped would be his planet’s newest recruit in the war.

 
“Shee-it.” The former BVPD SWAT sniper and FDLE agent was from Texas and could draw that word
out the way only a  proper  Texan could.  Of medium height with dark-blond  hair  and  blue-gray  eyes,
David Gray also looked like everyone’s idea of the nice guy next door.
Theo had seen him in action during a few SWAT missions. Nice, unassuming David Gray was not a guy
you’d want to piss off.
David pointed  to  the dead  zombie in Suzanne’s  cold-storage  locker.  “You sure  George  Lucas  didn’t
build that thing?”
“Yep. It was in my living room,” Theo told him. “Alive. It’s no special-effects puppet.”
David’s gaze moved to Jorie. “It’s a baby zombie,” she told him. “The adult drones can get,” she closed
her eyes briefly, “fifteen of your feet tall.”
“Fifteen.” David nodded, looked down at the zombie, and rocked back on his heels.
Theo tried to read his friend and failed.
“And you say these are from another galaxy?”
“Technically, no,” Jorie put in before Theo could answer. “This was probably bred here. But the original
zombie, yes, that’s from the Chalvash System.”
David wiped one hand over his face and turned to Theo. “If it was anyone but you, bud.”
How often had  he heard  that in the past  few days?  “I wish it was  anyone but me. This is not how I
anticipated spending my vacation.”
“And you shouldn’t be. This is a bigger problem than a few of us can handle. You know that.”
“How well is anyone going to handle it when the news  trucks  and  the crew  from The  Oprah  Winfrey
Show arrive? And then the subsequent wild rumors? Stock market will crash, people will start shooting
their neighbors and looting the grocery stores. Perfect opportunity for some of those nutcase terrorists to
make a move. We can prevent all that with a small but effective operation here.”
“What’s to prevent these things from breeding more?”
“They’d need a C-Prime, a controller zombie,” Jorie said. “If I can take that out with a reprogramming
dart, the herd dies.”
“I repeat. What’s to prevent someone from bringing another C-Prime here?”
Theo looked at Jorie. He’d assumed  their problems  would be  over  with the death  of this C-Prime.  It
never occurred to him that someone—the Tresh—might import others and that this was not a  one-time
thing.
Jorie knotted her fingers together. “It would take at least a year by your calendar, given the location of
the closest herd off-planet.”
“A year.” David didn’t look happy. “And how do we stop them a year from now?”

Jorie sucked in a deep breath. “If the Sakanah wasn’t destroyed, or if she managed to send a  distress
report, it’s possible the Guardians already have another ship on the way.”
“And if they don’t?”
“Then there’s nothing you can do to stop the Tresh or the zombies except what I’m doing now: lure the
C-Prime and terminate it.”
“And who besides you knows how to do this?” David asked Jorie.
Theo knew where he was going with this. He knew, moreover, how valid it was. He  just didn’t like it.
Damn David for being so damned logical!
“At the moment, only me,” Jorie said. “The problem isn’t that I can’t teach you what a  tracker  does;  I
can. The problem is the MOD-tech that’s a necessary part of my job in tracking the zombies, in warning
us about  the Tresh,  communicates only in Alarsh.  My language. I  can  convert  some  to  accept  voice
commands and basic displays in Vekran—English. But much of it I can’t.”
David looked at Theo. “You try to do this alone, it’s a suicide mission.”
“It  is  either  way,”  Theo  countered.  “There’s  no  way  the  state  or  the  feds  could  move  on  this  in
four—max, six—days.  You know  that.  We  have  to  do  something  now.  That  means  me,  Jorie,  and
Martinez. If you feel you can’t, I understand. But that’s not going to stop the three of us from trying.”
David paced  over  to  the cold-storage  locker  and  stared  down  at  the zombie  again.  “Four,”  he  said,
turning around. “Four of us. I don’t like it, Theo, but count me in.”
 

23 
It took Jorie two and a half more days to finish constructing the zombie-reprogramming-dart virus. Or at
least, as she viewed it, to do all she knew how to do. Her abilities in that area were mostly self-taught, as
she told Theo more than once. They had to work with the possibility that the dart would do nothing. Then
hard-termination of the C-Prime would be their only option. That meant it would take longer for the herd
to fall apart. And that meant—during that time—more zombies could be born.
It also gave the Tresh more time to counter their move. Which was why, when she wasn’t working on the
virus dart or nestled in Theo’s arms, she put Theo through tracker training sessions. Gen-pro regs were
history, as far as she was concerned. She told him—and trained him for—everything she could think of
relative to the zombies and the Tresh.
They’d heard nothing from the Tresh or Prow since the feeder cup appeared on Theo’s back porch. The
lack of interruptions was good, certainly, but it only made her more nervous.
“Like waiting for the other shoe to drop,” Theo had said over dinner earlier that evening.
Jorie had never heard the expression before, but it was appropriate.
With the virus as complete as it was going to be, her next project was to  modify one  of the Hazers  to
carry the dart. “It’s not a physical object,” she explained to Theo when he sat beside her on the floor a
few hours later, the spare Hazer’s stock open to expose its core databoard. “We call it a dart because
it’s an encapsulated, self-executing program within the Hazer’s data energy stream.”
“You’ve done this before?” he asked, as she worked on lining up her scanner’s infrared with the larger
MOD-tech’s.
“Not exactly.”
“You’ve watched someone do it?”
“Only in a sim.” Damn, damn! She couldn’t get the scanner to synch with the main tech.  She  swore  in
Alarsh.
“I’m bothering you.”
“No,  I’m—”  She  wiped  one  hand  over  her  face.  Theo’s  presence  was  actually  calming.  She  truly
seemed to worry less when he was around. “I’m tired. I should be doing this in the morning, when my
eyes can focus.”
“Good idea.” Theo brushed her bangs back from her face. “It’s after midnight.”
“You  talked  to  Martinez?  Tamlynne?”  She  knew  he  did  at  least  twice  a  day,  but  she  needed  the
reassurance.
“Tammy’s teaching the kitten to  fetch balls of paper.  Martinez has  found two  more  incidents of what
appear to be zombie attacks. No idea of when they occurred until we hear back from the ME’s office.”
If they were recent, her scanners had picked up neither of them.
“We’ll get up early,” Theo said. “We still have a couple days yet.”

She knew they did. But she wanted to leave some time in case things went wrong. No, not in case. For
when things went wrong.
She put the disassembled spare Hazer carefully on the low table Theo had brought in for her to work on
and rechecked the residence shields. “I’m shielding the door. If you need anything from your kitchen, get
it now.”
“The only thing I need right now is you.” Theo’s voice was soft, his eyes smoky.
She sighed, set the shields fully around the bedroom, and turned back to him. A few hours’ bliss. She lost
herself and her troubles in him nightly now. Lost it all in his gentle yet expert touch, his fingers kneading,
stroking. Mouths and tongues searching, touching. A few hours.  And then another  day  of hard  reality.
And another day closer to hell.
 
The screech of an intruder alarm jolted Jorie out of a blissfully deep sleep. Theo’s arms were tangled with
hers at her waist, and there was some accidental bumping and shoving as she grasped for her Hazer and
he—she assumed—for whatever weapon he kept tucked under his pillow.
Only as her skin rapidly chilled did she realize she was  naked.  She  snatched  her sweatshirt  and  shorts
from the floor. Then, heart pounding and still naked, she knelt in front of her tech to check shield integrity.
Theo had  already  pulled on  a  pair  of  sweatpants  and  stood  at  the  doorway,  flashlight  in  one  hand,
weapon in the other.
No breach. But someone or something had tried to. She yanked the sweatshirt over her head as she gave
him the news.
“If that’s one of my neighbors,” he said when she looked at him, “we’re going to have some explaining to
do.”
She rose quickly and stepped into her shorts. “At four-thirty in the morning?”
“Good point. They’ll have some explaining to do too. What’s out there?”
With half her tech in disarray? “A live entity. Not a zombie. That’s all I know.”
“One?”
“One.”
“Armed?”
“We have to assume, yes.” She knotted her shorts. “Ready?”
“On a count of three. You drop the door shield. I’ll open the door, go out first. You follow, cover me.”
“On three. One, two—” She keyed in the change from the scanner, now dangling from her hip belt. Theo
yanked open the door, then, weapon out, moved  quickly and  quietly into the corridor.  Jorie  followed,
Hazer primed and ready.
They  swept  into  the  main  room,  the  glow  from  his  flashlight  moving  left  and  right,  then  stopping  at
something—someone—sprawled awkwardly on the floor near Theo’s couch.

She started to reach for her scanner but stopped. She didn’t need it. Her heart skittered. She recognized
him. “Kip!”
“Kip?” Theo asked.
“Kip. Commander Rordan.” She knelt next to the still form, angling her rifle away as she felt for a pulse in
his neck. Hope and fear clashed. “Alive, but I think my shield knocked him unconscious.”
“Kip Rordan?” Theo’s voice held a note of amazement.
She  fully  understood.  How  and  why  and  from  where  Rordan  had  returned,  she  had  no  idea.  She
checked her scanner, keying in for the Sakanah’s resonance. Hoping, praying—nothing showed on her
screen.
But Kip was here. And he was alive. Why? The surge of bliss she’d felt at finding him waned.  Distrust
raised its ugly head. The last thing left on her doorstep—so to speak—was the Tresh feeder cup. Now
Kip. It was possible the two events weren’t remotely connected. It was equally possible they were.
“Help me with him,” she said to Theo.
“Jorie, wait.” Theo  hunkered  down  next to  her.  “Are you sure  he’s  Rordan?  Are  you  sure  he’s  not
working with the Tresh? Or the Tresh didn’t send him?”
“I’m not sure of anything other than, yes, he’s Kip Rordan. My scanner confirms his identity through his
bioresonance and his palm print.”
Rordan let out a low moan.
“We need to get him back behind the shields in the bedroom,” she told Theo. “Help me lift him.”
Theo was clearly not happy with her command, but whether it was because he’d disliked Rordan  from
the beginning or  because  he didn’t trust  which side  Rordan  was  on now,  Jorie  didn’t know.  But  she
wasn’t going to try for answers in an unshielded part of the residence. She might not know if she trusted
Kip Rordan, but she knew for sure she didn’t trust the Tresh.
Together they dragged Rordan back to Theo’s bedroom and closed the door. Theo turned on a bedside
lamp. She brought up the shields and checked her scanner one more time. “Nothing else; no one else is
out there.”
Rordan’s eyelids fluttered open when she turned. “Jorie.” His voice was raspy.
Theo was sitting on the edge of the bed and had his G-1 out, set for stun, Jorie noticed. Rordan was less
than a maxmeter away, on the floor in front of the closet doors.
She pushed aside the fact she’d known him for years and grabbed for her professional personality. It was
safer until she knew what in hell’s fire was going on.
“Commander Rordan, what happened?” she asked, then, realizing she spoke in English, repeated herself
in Alarsh. “What are you doing here?”
She  studied  him  as  she  waited  for  him  to  answer.  He  was  in  the  green-and-black  Guardian
uniform—much as when she’d last seen him, several days ago. His dark hair was still pulled back but he
was unshaven, his skin reddened  and  rough-looking.  His uniform, she  realized,  looked  rather  worn  as
well.

Definitely not the usual impeccable Kip Rordan.
He was frowning, switching a glance from her to Theo and back to her again.
“Commander Rordan. Report.”
Rordan levered himself up on his elbows. Theo stood quickly, pistol out. “Don’t move.”
“Tell that danker-brained nil to put the pistol away,” Rordan snarled in Alarsh.
Well, that was definitely the Rordan Jorie knew and remembered. “Not until you answer my question,”
she  replied.  “The  Tresh  almost  killed  Tamlynne  Herryck.  You  disappeared.  Now  you’re  back.  I’m
waiting to hear how and why.”
“Not just the Tresh, Jorie. Devastators. There’s a full contingent of Devastators here,” Rordan said.
“Go on.” She curled her fingers around the Hazer but didn’t raise it. “What happened after Theo and  I
left in his land vehicle?”
The narrowing of Rordan’s eyes told her he didn’t miss the movement. “Herryck  and  I were  receiving
data from the ship. I told her to go back to the Sakanah. She insisted on staying a few sweeps longer.
Some project.”  He  shrugged slightly, as  much as  his near-prone  position would allow. “I went to  the
galley to get a glass of water when I heard the alarms go off. By the time I got to  the main room,  the
Tresh were everywhere. I fired on two but did little damage. They have some kind of shielding—”
“I know about that,” Jorie said.
“So I backed up into the galley and transmitted a distress call to the ship, alerting them to the situation. I
initiated an emergency PMaT  for  Herryck  and  myself,  the  ship  acknowledged,  then  something  went
wrong.”
“What’s he saying?” Theo asked, when Rordan paused.
Theo couldn’t understand Alarsh. And making Rordan use Vekran would slow them down and open too
many chances  for misinterpretation.  “In a  moment,” she  told  Theo  in English. “Continue,” she  said  to
Rordan.
“I felt the PMaT lock on, but I didn’t end up on the ship. I ended up…” He shook  his head.  “I’m not
sure where, exactly. But it’s taken me about four planetary days to walk back here.”
Walk? Jorie’s gaze raked  over  Rordan  again. Hell’s fire. It  did look  as  if he’d  been  walking for four
days.
“I haven’t been  able  to  contact  the ship on my scanner,”  he continued.  “I haven’t been  able  to  get a
reading on you until about  two  sweeps  ago.  I saw  the resonance  of Guardian shields. But  I  couldn’t
make voice contact with you through the scanner. I thought it might have been damaged in the aborted
PMaT.”
“The ship’s gone,” Jorie said.
“Gone?” Rordan looked genuinely startled.
Jorie nodded. “Relay ’droids, seeker ’droids, all gone. Plus this planet’s full of dead zones.” Any one of
those reasons would hamper scanner-to-scanner voice contact. But if Rordan was behind the destruction
of the ship, he’d know that.

“Flashed out?”
“I don’t know.”
“And Herryck?”
“Alive, but they put an implant in her. I had to use a local med-tech  to  remove  it. There’s  still residual
damage.”
“Ass-faced motherless whores!” Rordan sagged back, his eyes closing briefly.
Jorie agreed with his description of the Tresh.
He sat up again, this time completely but slowly, due to Theo’s pistol following his movement. “Tell the
dirt-sucker to—”
“Rordan.” Jorie didn’t keep the anger out of her voice.
He pulled his knees up and turned his beautiful unshaven face toward her.
“I’m going to get you a glass of water,” Jorie said. “Then I’m going to brief Sergeant Petrakos on what
you’ve told me. Understand we have no proof that what you’ve said is true—”
“Herryck can—”
“Herryck remembers nothing. So what would you do  in my place,  Commander?  Gen-pro  regs,  now,”
she prodded, but her tone was anything but light. “Teammate returns from unauthorized absence after last
being seen with enemy agents.” She fixed him with a narrow-eyed gaze.
He nodded. “Teammate is to be treated with all courtesy but assumed to be working with the enemy until
facts show otherwise.”
“Then we understand each other.”
“Completely.”
“Then understand this as well: the people of this planet are not now or ever again to be referred to as nils,
dirt-suckers, or any other creative disparaging epithet. They have ranks, they have names. You will refer
to them with those ranks and names. Or you will find my courtesy toward you to be seriously lacking.”
Jorie strode into the bathroom to retrieve a glass of water, wondering how much of Rordan’s story was
true. Wondering how she was going to prove it was—or wasn’t. Any error  in judgment here  could  be
fatal.
 
“Oh, I could definitely tell you if he’s lying. That’s part of what I do as a Homicide detective,” Theo said,
half listening to the thrumming of the shower behind him. It was now almost six o’clock in the morning.
He and Jorie had agreed letting Rordan get cleaned up didn’t pose any immediate threat.  If he tried  to
escape through the bathroom window, he’d get zapped again.
“But I’d need to speak Alarsh, and I don’t,” Theo continued. “So all I can do if you ask him about that
Tresh feeder cup is watch his body language. But I suspect he’s had training just like I have.  It’s  not a
foolproof method.”

Jorie, with a pillow propped up behind her, was leaning back against her side—as Theo already thought
of that half of his bed—of the wrought-iron headboard. He sat at her feet, the small G-1 pistol still in his
hand, still set for stun.
As was Jorie’s rifle. He noticed that too.
“All Guardians get interrogation training,” Jorie confirmed. “We’ll wait on that, then.”
“Does he have an implant?” Theo  asked,  wondering what else  might affect Rordan’s  responses  if and
when he decided to confront him, for Jorie’s sake.
“None  my scanner  could  find—and,  yes,  I checked,  right after  I took  his palm print.  But  as  Rordan
noted, much of our tech is keyed to relay or booster through either our ship or the ’droids we put in your
atmosphere for that purpose. With both of those gone, our range and capabilities are reduced.”
It would be like having a cell phone with no cell-phone towers. That had happened to him on vacation in
the Virgin Islands. He understood her frustration.
“So you’re saying he could have an implant and you wouldn’t pick it up.”
“I can’t rule that out.”
“How did he walk right into the house shields if he has a scanner?”
“That’s easier.  The scanner  verifies that the shields exist but not their perimeters.  I use  my oc-set  for
that.” She flipped the band up from around her neck and pushed the eyepiece down.
He’d noticed her doing that, never knew why. “Rordan doesn’t have an oc-set?”
“He owns one, all trackers do.” She pushed the band back down around her neck. “I haven’t seen him
wear one since this mission started, no. But he’s also stayed in standard ship uniform, not tracker gear.”
He’d noticed that too. He also knew cops on patrol wore a lot more gear than detectives did. Evidently
there were similarities with the Guardians.
“Have you ever heard of a beam-up go wrong and send someone elsewhere on the planet, like he said
happened to him?”
She pursed her lips and blew out a small sigh. “Rare,  but yes.  If Ronna—our  PMaT  chief—knew the
ship was under attack and knew Rordan and Tamlynne were in danger, she could have simply tried for
an emergency relocate.  If we  have several  field teams  operating  on a  world,  an  emergency  transport
could take an agent from his location back to field base, rather than up to the ship. But there’s no other
base here that Ronna could have locked on to. To blindly send him somewhere—it’s horribly risky.”
“Because you don’t know what’s in the spot you’re sending him to,” Theo guessed, hearing Montgomery
Scott’s  accented  voice from various Star  Trek  episodes  giving the warning  about  materializing  inside
solid rock.
She nodded.
“So—assuming that’s what happened—why didn’t this Ronna send Tammy?” Theo asked.
“She may have tried—assuming that’s what happened. But if Prow already  had  a  security field around
Tamlynne, Ronna wouldn’t have been able to get a lock on her bioresonance.”

The sound of water ceased, the shower door slammed.
“What’s your gut-level feeling?” he asked her, his voice low.
She sighed again. “He still hates you. If he was a Tresh operative trying to ingratiate his way in, that’s not
the way to do it. He’d try to befriend you, find out what we were planning.”
“Or he’s been a Tresh operative  and  part  of this zombie-breeding  program  all along and  this is just a
continuation of his usual, delightful personality.”
“That would be hugely coincidental. We had no plans to come to your world. But, yes, it’s something I
will consider. The sad thing is, if none of this is true,  we’re  hampering ourselves.  Rordan’s  experience
with reprogramming darts far exceeds mine. He’s also an excellent tracker. I could use his help with this,
desperately.”
Theo knew that. He also knew he had to look past his personal dislike of the man and try—for Jorie’s
sake, for all their sakes—to figure out if Rordan was telling the truth.
He also knew one more thing: his private time with Jorie was over. Until they knew whose side Rordan
was on, one of them would have to be awake and keeping an eye on the man at all times.
The bathroom door opened and Rordan padded out in a pair of Theo’s gray sweatpants and a plain gray
T-shirt. His long hair was unbound, hanging wet past his shoulders. He was scrubbing the towel over his
face but stopped. Theo saw his eyes shift from Jorie with her rifle to himself with the G-1, sitting rather
closely on the bed. Sooner or later—probably sooner—the man was going to figure it out, Theo knew.
The only room in the house that was shielded was his bedroom. And there was only one bed in the room.
Rordan said something in Alarsh.
“Vekran,” Jorie told him. “Become used to it. It’s the language of the world where you live.”
“As I learn for four days,” Rordan said gruffly. He wiped  the towel  over  his face  one  more  time, then
draped it over one shoulder. “So. I am not yet worthy of trust?”
“There’s a lot at risk here,” Jorie said.
“A long time you know me, Jorie Mikkalah.”
“Yes.”
Rordan said something in Alarsh that sounded unpleasant, then turned away. Jorie’s gaze didn’t waver.
Theo could  almost sense  her anger  and  disappointment  with one  more  problem  she  didn’t  need  right
now. He had to remind himself this was her teammate. He had to let her handle Rordan her way.
“You need food,” Jorie said to Rordan, then looked at Theo. “Coffee?”
Theo nodded. “Drop the shield and I’ll start a pot.”
“We’ll all go to the kitchen.” Jorie tapped her scanner. “We all need food. And we need to talk.”
“I do not work with Tresh,” Rordan said as Jorie stood, adjusting her rifle.
Theo watched the man’s eyes, watched his expressions, tried to read him as a detective should. Rordan
was reacting as most innocent people would when accused. But Theo was also very aware Rordan was
not “most people.” He had military training. He was a Guardian. And he was from another galaxy.

But if there was a way to break him down and get at the truth, Theo would find it. He knew they were
almost out of time to deal with the zombies. They couldn’t afford any more mistakes now.
 

24 
After a full day—and night—of trying to work around Kip Rordan and watch him at the same time, Jorie
knew she had no choice. As much as  it made  her nervous  to  do  so,  she  had  to  trust  him. She  pulled
herself off Theo’s bedroom floor, away from her blinking and humming and uncooperative tech, slipped
her feet into the sandals  Theo  had  bought for her,  and  headed  back  for the kitchen,  where  Theo  and
Rordan  were  finishing off midmeal—lunch, Theo  called it. Probably  giving each  other  a  good  case  of
indigestion.
Their mutual dislike was obvious. Worse after Rordan watched her get the into Theo’s bed last night.
She’d “turned grounder.” A derisive term for an agent or tracker—or any spacer, really—who’d chosen
to be  planet-bound.  Dirt-locked.  Forgotten  what  they  were  and  adopted  the  ways  and  culture  of  a
nil-tech world. Or worse, taken a grounder lover.
She hadn’t forgotten she was a spacer. She never could—not even clad in the shorts and sweatshirt so
indigenous to this locale. But she had taken a grounder lover. And now she was about to turn their only
weapon against the zombies and the Tresh over to a man who might be a Tresh agent.
Life just became more blissful from one moment to the next.
She pulled out a chair across from Theo and sat. “I’ve come up against another technical problem,” she
said to Theo without any preliminaries. “One I can’t solve alone.”
He’d been leaning back in his chair, sipping that orange fizzy drink he so loved from a metal can. He let
the front legs of the chair hit the floor with a thump. That was the only noise in the room. Neither he nor
Rordan had bothered exchanging any mealtime pleasantries that she could hear.
“The dart?” Theo asked.
She nodded and noticed Rordan looking at her now. He knew about the dart. She’d brought him up to
date over firstmeal—breakfast—but without too many specifics. And without letting him look at her tech.
Rordan’s gaze was neutral, as if he sensed she’d come to a decision but didn’t want to let any emotions
play on his face.
She knew how that went. She’d worn the same expression herself many times with Captain Pietr.
She raised her chin slightly as she spoke to Rordan. “I am going to check everything you do. But I need
your help. Or we’re going to lose an effective time frame in which to confront the C-Prime.”
“We’d be closer to a resolution if you’d let me work on it since yesterday,” he told her in Alarsh. Rordan
waved one hand before she could berate him for using their language and glanced at  Theo: “I tell Jorie
she wasted much time to come late to this decision.”
“You’d be just as cautious if the situation were reversed,” she shot back. They both knew damned well
he was the one always spouting gen-pro regulations at every turn.
Rordan arched one eyebrow. “But also I would place traps,” he said in Vekran. “So have you. Good.”
He stood. “I only hope, once you believe again that I’m with you, we still have enough time to stop the
C-Prime.”

So did Jorie, desperately.
 
She hunkered down in front of her main unit, with Rordan on her right, and showed him what she’d done.
He nodded, asking very Rordan-like questions, then scrolled back through her work,  making notations
on his scanner. She watched him and listened to Theo pacing in his main room, talking on his cell phone
to either Martinez or Gray. She wasn’t sure which.
“Ah,” Rordan said softly. “Here’s your first problem. We’re using a Hazer, yes?”
She nodded.
He pointed to a line of data. “This range parameter is too low.”
“No, that’s correct.”
“No, it’s not.” He glanced at her, mouth pursed. “Where are you, Jorie?”
Hell  and  damn.  She  was  on  a  planet  aptly  named  after  dirt.  And  she  was  working  with  regional
atmospheric and environmental settings for Port Lraknal.
That corrected, he kept scrolling, now and then muttering, “Good, good.” And on two occasions a short
laugh and, “Excellent!”
After a while it ceased to register in her mind that neither she nor Rordan was in uniform, that  the tech
they worked on was cobbled together and  limping at  best,  and  that  he’d  been  missing after  last being
seen confronting Tresh agents. It was as if this was just another Guardian field mission. She  fell into an
easy patter of exchanges with Rordan and so was surprised when Theo knelt down by her side.
“Will it work?” he asked in Vekran.
Vekran. She’d been speaking in Alarsh, and the words jarred her momentarily.
Not Vekran. English.
“Yes,” she  told  him, feeling more  confident than she  had  hours  before.  “If we  get a  clear  shot  at  the
C-Prime, yes.”
He nodded and she saw his gaze flick toward Rordan, then back to her again, his expression unreadable.
“David Gray has the reports on what might be zombie attacks in Pasco County, but I’d need to go to his
office to view them.” He hesitated. “He’s in Tampa. That’s at least thirty, forty minutes travel time each
way.”
He’d  mentioned  that  information  yesterday,  showed  her  this  Pasco  County,  north  of  their  current
location. Any expansion of zombie activity concerned her.
“I need that data,” she told him.
“It would be risky to get you into his office. It’s a secure facility and you don’t have workable ID.”
Yes, there was that. Jorie understood security requirements.
“And I definitely couldn’t get you both in,” Theo continued.

Jorie thought she saw what he was really asking: could he leave her alone with Rordan?
It was now late afternoon. If Rordan was allied with the Tresh, they’d had more than enough time to take
some kind of action. Things at Theo’s residence had been blissfully quiet.
“I need Gray’s information,” she repeated. “Commander Rordan still has work to  do  here.  Bring back
copies of whatever you can.”
She could sense his indecision, his discomfort.  He  didn’t want to  leave her alone.  Finally, he nodded.
“I’m turning the answering machine off,” he said,  motioning to  the small square  object  on his bedside
table. “Phone rings, you answer. Every time. Got that?”
“I  have  acquired  knowledge,”  she  replied  with  a  small  smile.  She  couldn’t  remember  the  last  time
anyone—other than her brother—had worried about her. Jorie Mikkalah, ex-marine and Guardian Force
commander, was well known for being able to take care of herself.
Yet Theo tried to take care of her, anyway. That amused her but warmed her at the same time.
“You don’t answer, there’s going to be a shitload of trouble on your doorstep, quickly,” he said, but he
was looking at Rordan. “I can do that, no matter where I am.”
“I have same interest in staying alive as you do,” Rordan said with a quick glance away from his scanner.
“It’s not your life I’m worried about.”
“And same interest,” Rordan continued as if Theo hadn’t spoken, “in Jorie’s life.”
Theo pushed himself to his feet, grabbing Jorie’s arm as he did so. She rose with him.
“Answer the phone every time,” he said, his dark eyes serious. Then, taking her by surprise, he pulled her
against him, his mouth on hers, one hand threading up into the back of her hair.
Her “Oof!” turned into a hard but quick kiss of passion  and  desperation  that  set  her heart  hammering.
Theo pulled back slightly with a whispered, “No regrets,” as he brushed his mouth over her ear. Then, in
his normal tone: “I should be back no later than six-thirty or seven.”
She waited until Theo disappeared into the main room before turning to look down at Rordan, expecting
disapproval, and finding on his face what she expected. She knew  she  should be  annoyed  at  Theo  for
staking  his  claim,  as  her  brother  would  call  it.  Part  of  her  recognized  the  childishness—or  the  very
maleness—of his actions.  But she  also  knew  he cared,  very much. And the kiss  was  not  so  much  a
message to Rordan as it was a message shared between themselves.
For if something were to happen, she knew that, yes, she would regret not having kissed him again.
She settled back down on the floor, aware of Rordan’s gaze on her. She turned and awaited one of his
usual remarks.
“Why?” was all he said, and that surprised her. Bothered her. She didn’t understand and so gave him a
perfunctory answer.
“What’s between Theo Petrakos and myself is my personal business.”
Rordan stared at his scanner. She could see his mouth thinning, she could  see  the tension in his fingers
wrapping  around  the  scanner’s  edge.  Finally,  he  looked  back  at  her.  “You  question  my  allegiance
because I’ve been gone for four days. Now I’m wondering, should I question yours? This is not the Jorie

Mikkalah I’ve  worked  with on  the  Sakanah.  If  Lorik  were  here,  I’d  understand.  A  revenge  game.
Stupid, but it might work. But he’s not.” Rordan shook his head, closing his eyes for a moment.
“This has nothing to do with Lorik.”
“Then what does it have to do with?” His voice rose. “We call you the Ice Princess on board, you know
that, don’t you? We had bets years ago, when Lorik wanted you, how long it would take—”
Jorie shot to her feet and spun away from him, knowing if she didn’t she’d smash her fist into his pretty
face.
She was aware of the nickname a few of the men had bestowed on her. She’d heard the whispers, the
snickers. She hadn’t cared—it was almost a badge of honor on the Sakanah.  Shipboard  affairs fueled
the long times between missions and filled the need for excitement.
When she  was  bored,  she’d  grab  her Hazer  and  pull up a  zombie-attack  sim in the ship’s  weapon’s
range. She’d never bed-hopped.
And then there was Lorik.
She didn’t care to know if he’d won or lost the bet on how quickly he’d bed her.
“Jorie.” The hard tone was gone from Rordan’s voice. “Regrets. I spoke without thinking. It’s just that I
value you—”
“You value me?” She  spun back  to  him.  “So  much  that  when  Lorik  was  cheating  on  me,  you  said
nothing? You even helped him in his duplicity! Tell me again how much you value me, Kip Rordan.”
“Jorie—”
“Pietr offered you a captaincy too, didn’t he?”
He studied her before answering. “I was  aware  of the offer,  but that’s  not the only reason  I took  the
assignment.”
She  bristled  at  his  admission,  but  part  of  her  anger,  she  knew,  should  be  directed  at  Pietr.  He’d
deliberately  made  a  difficult  mission  more  difficult  by  pitting  two  teammates  against  each  other—a
method he’d been known to use before. And now look where they were.
She almost said as much, but it was useless. Pietr was gone, and the offered captaincy was a moot point.
“The assignment has changed,” she said tersely. “I doubt it’s one you would have signed up for originally.
But it’s what we  have to  do  now: finish the dart,  infect the C-Prime,  and  keep  this world  from being
overrun by the Tresh.”
“And Petrakos?”
She  almost  asked,  “What  about  him?”  but  didn’t  want  to  let  the  conversation  get  personal  again.
“Gen-pro regs no longer apply. It would be different if the Tresh weren’t involved, if the zombies were
dormant. We could stay covert, wait and see if a ship comes looking for us in a year. But that’s not the
case here. We need the locals’ help if we’re to have any chance of success.”
“That’s not what—”
The phone rang, interrupting Rordan’s remark. She grabbed the handset and hit the button as Theo had

showed her. Only as she opened her mouth did she remember to switch from Alarsh to English. “This is
Jorie.”
“Everything okay, babe?”
Theo’s deep voice was like balm to her frayed soul. “As usual,” she said, a small sigh accompanying her
words.
“Rordan behaving?”
“That is as usual too.”
“Being a pompous asshole, is he? If you zap him with your stunner, I won’t complain.”
She could almost see his feral, delicious grin. “Sadly, there’s too much work to do yet.”
“Well, keep it in mind. I’ll check in with you later.”
“Got it,” she said, using his phrase.
“Very good!” He chuckled. “Later, babe.”  A click in her ear  signaled the disconnect.  She  tapped  the
button again and replaced the handset in the holder.
Rordan had turned back to his calculations on the main unit. Jorie stared out the bedroom window for a
moment, at the street bathed in late-afternoon sunlight, at the tall, thin trees with their long fronds, at the
stouter trees with thick foliage draped in dangling gray mosses, and  at  the residences,  neatly kept,  that
lined the street.
Two  laughing  children  glided  by  on  their  wheeled  shoes—Rollerblades.  They  spied  Mrs.  Goldstein
arranging flowers in pots on her front porch and they waved. She waved back, calling out something that
Jorie couldn’t hear.
The children answered and continued on.  A small blue land vehicle came  into view from the opposite
direction, moving slowly, aware of the children, no doubt. It went out of sight.
Mrs. Goldstein’s front door slammed and her porch was empty.
But they were there, they were all there. In every street surrounding Theo’s  residence,  the same  scene
was being enacted in a  variety of ways.  Bahia Vista.  Florida.  Earth.  People  living their lives. None  of
them knowing what lurked only a breath away.
Yet all depended on Jorie to stop it.
She stepped away from the window and  resumed  her place,  cross-legged,  in front of the MOD-tech.
She concentrated on Rordan’s work and tried very hard to keep all her worries at bay.
 
Theo telephoned three more times before Jorie was surprised by a rumbling sound outside the residence.
Trotting quickly into the main room, her flip-flops slapping against her feet, she caught a glimpse of him in
his large land vehicle moving past the window, heading around to the back.
Unexpectedly, her heart fluttered, and she felt silly and stupid and girlish but couldn’t keep the smile off
her face. He was back early. Or else—knowing Theo  as  she  was  coming to  know  him—he’d always

intended to return at this time but didn’t want Rordan to know that.
And Rordan  wouldn’t know.  Exhaustion after  his four-day  trek—or  perhaps  just  from  staring  at  the
configurations on the screens since his return—had caught up with him. He was lying on the small couch
in Theo’s spare room, one arm slung over his eyes.
Still, taking no chances, Jorie had managed to adjust the security fields just enough that if Rordan left the
room, she’d know. It wouldn’t stop him, but he couldn’t sneak up on her or out of the residence.
She waited for Theo in the kitchen, then stepped into the circle of his embrace as he held one arm out to
her.
“Everything okay, babe?”
It was now. She nodded against his chest, then raised her face. “Program is complete. And it’s a good
one, I think. What did you find?”
“Something that will probably mean more to you than to me. Where’s our friend Rordan?”
“Sleeping.”
“Do we still need to keep him under guard?” He drew her away from his chest and nudged her toward
the table, tossing a large tan envelope on its top. She pulled out a chair and sat, as he did.
“Only time will truly answer that question. I managed to set a motion-sensor field around the spare room,
but my basic instinct is he told the truth. The emergency PMaT dumped him somewhere out of danger,
either by accident or design. There have been any number of chances for him to contact the Tresh or for
the Tresh to make a move on this residence after you left. Neither happened.”
“Yet.”
“Yet,” she agreed. “You’re back early.”
He grinned. “I’m back right on time.”
Ah! She’d been correct in her estimation of him. “And this?” She tapped the envelope.
He opened  it and  pushed  a  stack  of papers  her way.  “All reports  David and  I could  find that  fit  the
zombie-attack profile. You need to go through them. Ask me anything you don’t understand.”
She thumbed quickly through the pages, nodding.
“You might want to turn off the field around Rordan,” he told her. “We need to eat. I’ll see what I can
scare up for dinner for the three of us.”
She frowned at him. “You need to frighten food?”
He stood and, reaching over, ruffled her hair. “More funny English.”
“I prefer my food complacent, not frightened.”
“How about complacent pizza?”
“Pizza?”
“You’ll love it.” He  headed  for the  kitchen’s  cold-storage  unit,  then  pulled  out  a  can  of  his  favorite

beverage.  She  neutralized  the  sensor  field  around  the  spare  room,  turned  back  to  the  papers  he’d
brought, and began reading.
She was aware he left the kitchen after that, aware he was talking on his cell phone again. Aware even of
Rordan’s voice in the background, though only briefly.
The papers he brought her had her full attention. When he returned, she asked for explanations of some
terms and odd acronyms. That solved, she went back to the papers  again, her heart  sinking with each
page she turned.
A chime sounded, startling her. She grabbed her scanner, but it wasn’t that. Theo was at his front door,
talking to someone. The door closed with a  thump. Then Theo  came  in with two  large flat boxes  that
emitted a wonderful aroma, and for a moment her stomach overruled her troubled mind.
“Go tell Rordan dinner’s ready,” he said.
She stood but held up a handful of the papers. “This isn’t good news.”
“Eat first,” he told her. “Bad news always goes better on a full stomach.”
Yes, it did. Especially as it might be the last meal they’d have.
 

25 
Pizza was wonderful—not as blissful as  peanut  butter,  but definitely an experience  Jorie  would like to
repeat.
The news Theo brought was much less so. Yet it was exactly what she needed, what her tech—without
its interface with her ship—could no longer provide.
The northern  area  that Theo  referred  to  as  Pasco  County  wasn’t  the  only  site  of  expanded  zombie
activity.  The  zombies  had  struck  south,  in  a  region  he  called  Manatee  County.  The  expansion  was
worrisome but, as even Rordan agreed, predictable given the size of the herd.
“Big mission,” Rordan noted in his halting Vekran as he perused the data. Theo’s  papers  had  replaced
the  pizza  boxes  and  the  delicious  spicy  food  they’d  contained.  Jorie  had  arranged  the  papers
chronologically. Theo was now aligning them to a crudely drawn map of the area.
Big mission, indeed. Not only what they had to do, but what the Tresh were evidently planning: a rapid
zombie-breeding program that could provide them with the means to take control over a large number of
the spacelane Hatches in a short period of time. What it had taken the Interplanetary Concord decades
to put in place, the Tresh could accomplish in mere months.
“The key area,” Jorie said, pointing to a small peninsula on the map, “is here.”
Rordan agreed, nodding, confirming the location on his scanner.
“Fort Hernando Park,” Theo said.
The name meant nothing to Jorie, but she vaguely remembered hearing it before and said so.
“Two bodies were found there a few days ago. Those were the pictures Martinez brought here.”
She  remembered  fearing  when  she  first  saw  them  that  one  might  have  been  Kip  Rordan.  She
remembered also that Fort Hernando was a remote beach area, a T-shaped finger of land with very few
residences and not accessible at night.
“That’s the Skyway Bridge,” Theo was saying, dragging his finger across a long line. “Fort Hernando is
just west of that, jutting out into Tampa Bay. It’s a county park and recreation area.”
It was also—judging from the reports of attacks and unknown disturbances in the area, integrated with
what Jorie could pull from her scanner—a hotbed of zombies.
“When do we do this?” Theo asked.
“We have to  incorporate  the virus program  into  the  Hazer’s  datastream,”  Jorie  said.  “That  will  take
several sweeps—”
“Tomorrow, most early time,” Rordan put in, and Jorie knew he was correct. Recalibrating the rifle was
delicate work under the best of conditions and not something to be rushed. They didn’t have the best of
conditions—only some basic tech components on the floor of Theo’s bedroom.
“Probably tomorrow,” she agreed. “Which is still workable. We have a few days yet.”

But what they didn’t have was a sim. On missions like this, they’d always practice first in a sim on board.
Work out all possible angles of attack.
That meant going into a mission blind with two operatives—Martinez  and  Gray—who’d  never  faced  a
zombie before and one—Theo—who had but had limited experience. The juvenile feeding frenzy Theo
had encountered was mild compared to what a C-Prime could do. In spite of the training Jorie had put
him through, things could go horribly wrong.
At the very least, they needed to draw up plans and contingency plans, she told Theo.
He understood. “That means we need a day where you, me, Rordan, Zeke, and David can all sit down
and go over everything.”
It wouldn’t be a sim. She had serious doubts if it would even be enough. But it would have to do.
 
Bedtime, when it eventually happened, was as awkward as the night before. Jorie worked on the Hazer
with  Rordan  until  her  eyes  blurred,  then—because  she  still  wouldn’t  chance  Rordan  working
alone—ordered  him to  rest  on the mattress  Theo  had  taken  from the foldout in the spare  room.  The
mattress, along with a pillow and blanket, was shoved against the bedroom wall near the bathroom.
“I’ll sleep on the couch in the other room,” Rordan said.
“I can’t shield the entire house.”
“You and Petrakos don’t want your privacy?” Rordan’s voice held a petulant tone.
“I have one thread of patience left,” Jorie snapped, “and you’re fraying it. Sleep here or sleep standing in
the shower, for all I care. But you’re not leaving this room.”
She kicked  off her sandals  and—still wearing the soft  shorts  and  sweatshirt—climbed  onto  the larger
bed, plumping a pillow to put under her head. Rordan eventually sat on his mattress, then, a few minutes
later, laid back, his arm thrown over his eyes.
Jorie tucked her scanner and G-1 against her side and dozed lightly until Theo came in. The bed jostled
as he crawled over next to her, his presence a welcome warmth in spite of the fact that Rordan was in the
room. She watched through lowered lashes as Theo tapped on her scanner and sealed the bedroom, just
as she’d taught him.
If Rordan tried to leave the room, he’d be zapped, as Theo  was  so  fond of saying. If he tried  for her
scanner, he’d have to pull it from between Theo and herself.
Rordan tried neither, because when she woke, sunlight filtering through the windows, he was still on the
floor—snoring lightly—and her scanner and G-1 were undisturbed.
Theo’s hand brushed hers, sending flutters around her heart. She turned her face, lifting her chin so their
lips met briefly.
“Coffee, agapi mou?” he asked.
“Blissful idea.” She grabbed a pair of pants Theo called jeans and a short-sleeved green T-shirt  on her
way to the shower.

Things became less blissful as the morning progressed. The Hazer—evidently in as  grouchy a  mood  as
Rordan—refused to accept the virus-dart programming, in spite  of all the tricks  and  tweaks  Jorie  and
Rordan tried.
Frustrated and swearing in Alarsh, Rordan went to the kitchen for a glass of ice water. It was almost time
for midmeal. Perhaps that would help. Jorie wandered into the spare  room,  where  Theo—in jeans  the
same light blue as  her own—had  set  up his own small computer.  It  was  very rudimentary tech,  but it
accessed  his world’s  databases—something  Jorie’s  could  not.  She  plopped  down  next to  him on the
small flowered couch.
“Are you sure it’s not his programming that’s screwing up?” Theo asked quietly.
“I’m double-checking everything he does,” she told him. Which was also slowing down  the process.  It
was hard to solve problems and watch for problems at the same time.
“But you can’t rule it out.”
“No,” she admitted, a weariness enfolding her. She closed her eyes and let her head drop back against
the couch. She was trying to do too much in too short a time, with too little resources.
Give up, a small voice prodded. There’s no shame in acknowledging your limitations. They’re not
even your limitations. If Pietr hadn’t played games, if Lorik had listened, you wouldn’t even be in
this situation.
It’s no  longer  a  Guardian  problem.  There  aren’t  enough  Guardians  here  to  make  a  difference.
Eventually, the security forces on this planet will recognize the zombies’ existence and be  forced
to handle it their own way.
But there would be so many deaths before they did.
There already have been more deaths. You couldn’t stop those. You didn’t even know about them.
Your tech is ineffectual now. The ship is gone, It’s no longer a Guardian problem.
You can  protect  Theo.  You  can  protect  his  family.  You  can  protect  your  team.  That’s  all  you
should be expected to do in this situation.
True. It was all true. Why couldn’t she accept that?
Because you have to solve everything. You’re the big important zombie tracker. Pietr even said it:
there’s not a zombie around that’s a match for the intrepid Commander Jorie Mikkalah.
Lorik even said it: you’re not a woman, you’re a zombie-killing machine. It’s all you care about.
It’s more important than anything else. Your kill record. A captaincy.
Ice Princess. Living in a castle of ice-cold corpses…
“Jorie? Jorie!”
Theo’s voice in her ear, Theo’s arms around her, holding her against him, against his warmth.
Jorie opened her eyes, shivering uncontrollably.
“Jorie?”
She stared into his dark eyes and tried to speak, but her mouth only made little gasping sounds. Where

was she? What was happening?
“It’s okay, babe. I’m here. I’ve got you.”
“Theo?” she finally managed to croak. She wanted to reach up and touch his face, but her arms wouldn’t
obey. She clutched her spasming hands against her stomach.
“What—Jorie?” Rordan sat quickly on the other side of her. His fingers curled around her arm. “What’s
the matter?”
Alarsh. She recognized the language Rordan spoke. Alarsh. The language of her people,  her ship. The
ship where the intrepid Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah  tallied her kills with notches  in the wall of her ice
castle. The ship where her bed was cold and vacant because Lorik had left to find a  woman who was
warm.
Not the Ice Princess. Killer of zombies.
She closed her eyes. A low, desperate moan filled her throat.
“I’m losing her.”
Theo’s  voice.  He’d  leave too.  No  Ice  Princess  belonged  with a  man with a  very  good  face.  A  nice
family. He should be spoused. Loved. Surely all the females on his world weren’t blind and unsexed. He
would find love. But not with the Ice Princess.
“She…Lorik tells me of this. She dreams, cries. Cannot wake.”
Vekran. Someone speaking very bad Vekran—ah. Kip Rordan, friend of Lorik’s. Kip Rordan, beautiful
man who knew she was cold, unloving. Lorik tells him this….
Ice Princess.
“She’s come out of it before. Jorie. Babe.”
Large hands, warm, against her face. She leaned into the warmth, but the keening cry started  again. A
thin wail. Pain. So much pain. And so cold. Shivering, shivering.
“C’mon,  babe,  c’mon.”  Hands  moved  rapidly  up  and  down  her  arms.  Another  set  massaged  her
shoulders, her back, through her thin T-shirt. “You’re safe. I’m here. Nothing’s going to hurt you.”
More warmth. She was being pulled against someone, away from the hands at  her back.  Arms circled
her, held her, rocked her. A low rumbling in her ear. A man’s voice, singing softly.
She knew the voice. She knew the melody. Not Alarsh. Not the ship. Nothing cold, but warmth. A deep
voice that sang to her before. Such bliss…
“Theo?” her voice cracked, her throat dry. But her face and Theo’s neck were wet.
“It’s me, babe. Easy. Take a deep breath.”
She did as she was told, aching. But the shivering had stopped.
She was in Theo’s lap, her face buried against his neck, her hands fisted into his chest. She could feel the
tight bands of his arms around her legs and back. She took another deep breath. He was still rocking her,
humming softly.

She tried to raise her face. He nudged  her head  back  down.  “Relax, agapi  mou.  It’s  over.  I’m here.
You’re safe.”
“Theo.” She wrapped her arms around his neck, pulling herself more tightly against him, and fell into his
warmth with a quiet sigh.
 
“She just needs to rest,” Theo said, shifting Jorie slightly so his arms held her more securely. Rordan had
reached for her two, three times during her nightmare or seizure or whatever it was. There was no way
he was  going to  let  the  bastard  touch  her.  He  didn’t  discount  that  Rordan  might  have  caused  what
happened.
He stood, intending to take her to the bedroom.
“I will—”
“No.” He put the same force behind that single word as he had when he was on the streets in uniform.
Rordan said nothing more. Theo angled around him, Jorie held tightly against his chest,  and  headed  for
the bedroom.
She murmured softly, her eyes fluttering open when he laid her on the bed. “Theo?”
“Naptime, agapi mou. Short nap.”
“Mmm, yes.” Her mouth curved in a small smile.
He kissed it lightly. “I’ll be right here.” He squeezed her hand. “Right nearby.”
He  straightened,  then  opened  a  drawer  in  his  dresser  and  grabbed  the  Tresh  feeder  cup  before
confronting Rordan in the hallway, where he knew the man would be waiting.
“Kitchen,” he told Rordan, holding the cup out of sight behind him. “Now.”
When Rordan sat, Theo pulled back the chair catty-corner to Rordan’s, sat down, and placed  the cup
with the unfamiliar inscription on the table. He watched Rordan’s eyes and mouth and tried to keep the
man’s hands in sight as well. Some things didn’t need a common language.
He’d done this before, placing a murder weapon or a bloodied scrap of clothing between himself and a
suspect. Just put it there, watched and waited.
Rordan looked at him expectantly.
Theo sat, hands loosely on his thighs, as if Rordan’s reaction mattered not at all.
Finally Rordan picked up the cup. When he turned it to the inscription, Theo saw him start slightly. Saw
the minute widening of his eyes.
“Tresh,” Rordan said. “You get this where?”
“You tell me.”
“I…have no information.”
“You know it’s Tresh.”

“These.” Rordan ran his index fingers over the inscription. “Tresh words. Not my language.” He put the
cup back on the table.
“But you know they’re Tresh words.”
“Of  course.  Guardians  know  many  things.”  Rordan’s  frown  deepened  and  he  looked  away  for  a
moment,  muttering  a  long  list  of  something  nasty  in  Alarsh.  His  cursing,  Theo  noted,  was  more
monotonous  than  Jorie’s.  Hers  was  melodious,  even  melodramatic.  Rordan  was  obviously  a  rank
amateur when it came to ass-faced vomit-brained demon’s whores.
“You’ve known about the Tresh for a long time,” Theo commented.
“Not like you want me to say, no. I learn of Tresh through study. We all learn through study. On my ship,
on Sakanah, only few like Jorie learn Tresh through war.”
Theo remembered her saying she was the only one on this team with direct combat experience.
“The war was over years ago. Yet the Tresh are here. So are you.”
“I do not work with Tresh!”
Theo pushed the cup closer to Rordan. “Someone left this on my steps,” he motioned toward the porch
door. “Then you showed up.”
Rordan shook his head. “No, no.” He met Theo’s hard stare without wavering.
“The Tresh  are  powerful,” Theo  continued,  trying  now  to  keep  it  simple  enough  that  Rordan  would
understand. “They have this shielding. Better than the Guardians. I could understand someone wanting to
be part of that. Part of their power. They even control zombies. Very powerful, the Tresh.”
“Yes. Powerful. Dangerous—that is word? Dangerous.”
Theo poked the cup again. “Why is this here?”
“Why? I don’t have answer.”
“You have power, Commander Rordan. You can be dangerous.”
Rordan slammed one fist on the table. “I do not work with Tresh!”
Theo  watched  him,  desperately  wanting  to  see  signs  that  the  man  was  lying.  But  all  words  aside,
Rordan’s body language and continued denials only proclaimed his innocence.
If he was reading Rordan correctly. There was no guarantee he was.
Rordan flexed his fingers, then clenched them again, his gaze hard and angry. He spat out a few Alarsh
words, glanced past Theo toward the living room, then back to Theo again.
“Hear my words,  nil.” He  pointed  one  finger at  Theo,  his voice lower  now.  “I  tell  you  once  so  you
understand and stop this stupid game. I do  not work  with Tresh.  Not  because  I am Guardian.  Forget
Guardian. I do not ever hurt Jorie. You hear me? I do not ever hurt Jorie.”
Rordan  sat  back,  color  rising on his face,  and  Theo  saw  clearly that  the animosity  he’d  sensed  from
Rordan  had  nothing to  do  with Theo  being a  nil but with Theo  being a  male.  And  a  male  Jorie  was
interested in.

“I would never hurt her either,” Theo told him.
Rordan crossed his arms over his chest. “You understand nothing of her. I understand. I live same life as
Jorie. Same dreams. She is not for you.”
Theo forced his anger down before answering. “I think that’s Jorie’s decision, not yours.”
“Jorie has dream to be captain. You can give her this?”
“Your ship’s gone.”
“If—when—ship comes again, Jorie will be captain. And you say, no, Jorie? Stay and be nil with me?
You love her, Petrakos?”
“I—”
“You love her and take away her dream?” Rordan shoved his chair back and stood. “I do not ever hurt
Jorie.”
And he strode from the kitchen, leaving Theo alone with the Tresh feeder cup and an overwhelming urge
to smash that cup against the wall.
He forced himself to go to the refrigerator instead. It was past lunchtime. A can of soda  would suffice.
He’d lost his appetite.
Rordan’s  words  hit home.  As  much as  he didn’t want to  admit  it,  it  was  something  he  had  to  face.
Everything  Jorie  was,  everything  she’d  lived,  was  something  he’d  never  experienced.  They’d  found
themselves thrust together because of emergency circumstances. But when normalcy returned—any kind
of normalcy—they might find their lives didn’t fit well together at all.
He knew that. He just didn’t want to face that, because she’d made him feel alive again. She’d made him
love again. She’d made him trust again.
That  Rordan  understood  Jorie  better  than  he  did,  he  had  no  doubt.  They  had  years  of  shared
experiences.
Familiarity also breeds contempt.
He could only hope.
His cell phone trilled a familiar tune. He dug it out of his pocket and checked caller ID: Martinez.
“Yassou, amigo.”
“Theo, listen. Don’t be mad at me. We got trouble. I’m doing all I can to help.”
Theo’s gut clenched. He did not like the sound of Zeke’s voice. “What kind of trouble?”
“You and Jorie home?”
“Yeah.” He was walking through his living room and could see her sitting up in bed, talking to  Rordan.
He didn’t like that either. Though she did appear to have some animation back in her face. “What—”
“We’ll be there in about thirty minutes.”
“We?”

“Trust me on this.”
“Who’s we?”
Zeke hesitated. “Chief Brantley.”
“Brantley?” Theo stopped in his tracks.
“Just don’t go anywhere, okay? I’m only trying to help. See you in thirty.”
Theo flipped the cell phone closed. Panagia mou! The chief of the Bahia Vista Police Department was
coming here  to  find out just what Detective  Sergeant  Theo  Petrakos  was  doing  harboring  two  illegal
outer-space aliens in his city.
He could see the news-media trucks rolling in right behind him.
And then The Jerry Springer Show.
And then the feds’ dark sedans with blackened windows.
Fuck.
 

26 
Gerard  Brantley  was  proof  that  brains  were  as  important  as  brawn  to  a  cop.  That  the  slender,
spectacled,  pale-haired  man  was  a  scholar—with  master’s  degrees  in  public  administration  and
criminology—was  well  known.  Even  more  well  known  was  his  impressive  record  as  a  detective  in
Special  Investigations. Officers he worked  with considered  him  persistent  and  thorough.  Suspects  he
caught considered him relentless.
He was also often fair. At the moment, Theo was praying for fair.
“Sir,” he said, stepping back to let the chief enter the front hallway. “Sir,” he said a second time, to the
taller,  burly  man  behind  Brantley  whose  tightly  curled  dark  hair  was  sprinkled  with  silver.  Jamont
Sanders,  head  of  BVPD’s  Forensic  Services  Unit.  Like  Brantley,  he  was  in  khaki  pants  and  a
short-sleeved  white  knit  shirt  with  a  green  embroidered  BVPD  emblem.  The  department’s  casual
uniform.
Behind Sanders, in jeans but the same knit shirt, was an uneasy-looking Zeke Martinez.
“Ezequiel,” Theo said, with a nod.
Zeke had the good graces not to say anything. Theo wasn’t sure what Zeke could say that he’d want to
hear.
The only positive note was that Internal Affairs wasn’t  also  part  of the entourage.  So  he wasn’t  being
stripped of rank—yet.
The  four  of  them  ended  up  in  Theo’s  kitchen,  because  Sanders  needed  a  table.  When  the
broad-shouldered man pulled Jorie’s battered T-MOD from his large briefcase,  Theo  knew  he was  in
trouble.
“The lab tells me this is made of an unknown alloy,” Sanders said without preamble, his deep voice laced
with a Southern drawl. “Martinez tells me you can explain how we came into possession of it.”
For  a  moment, Theo  was  shocked  into silence. It  never  occurred  to  him that  the  laptoplike  T-MOD
would be  analyzed for anything other  than  its  data.  He’d  almost  forgotten  about  the  unit,  what  with
zombies climbing out of green glowing portals and Tresh Devastators popping in and out surrounded by
magic shields. Had Jorie’s cover been blown by the firefight with the juvenile zombies in the park or after
the encounter with the Tresh safe house in Gulfview, that would have made sense.
But the T-MOD…
“I can explain, sir,” he told Sanders. “But I can’t guarantee you’ll believe everything I tell you.”
“We might,” Brantley said, pulling off his wire-rimmed glasses and buffing one lens with a cloth he pulled
from his pants pocket. “We just came from Suzanne Martinez’s veterinary clinic.”
“Suzanne was busy with an emergency,” Zeke said. “I had to get Baby out of cold storage myself.”
No wonder Zeke looked a little green around the gills. Theo almost felt sorry for the man, but he still was
disturbed by what he saw as a defection. Why did Zeke bring Sanders and Brantley into this? He knew
how much Theo was opposed to any outside resources being brought in at this point—until he was sure

Jorie was safe.
He no longer had a chance to do that, he realized grimly. While Brantley’s involvement could result in a
more  effective  attack  on  the  C-Prime,  it  almost  certainly  guaranteed  that  Jorie—and  Tam  and
Rordan—would become property of the media and the feds shortly thereafter.
“How much did Detective Martinez tell you about the zombie?” Theo asked Brantley.
It was Sanders who answered. “We limited his recounting to what he had experienced himself. He told
us about Baby’s appearance here.”  Sanders  motioned to  the wall behind him that  separated  the living
room and kitchen. “But I understand you’ve had other encounters, not only with these creatures but with
people who claim they’re hunting them.”
So Zeke had told them everything. His last small hope that he could keep Jorie out of this shivered and
died.
“The biggest part of their proof—their ship—is gone,” Theo told him. “It’s a lot of hearsay at this point, a
lot that will have to be taken on faith.”
Chief Brantley leaned his hands on the back of the kitchen chair, his shoulders hunching as if he was tired
or annoyed. “Sergeant Petrakos, understand very clearly that the only reason we don’t have FDLE here
right now—not to mention Homeland Security—is because Detective Martinez insisted we have faith in
you. I personally think what we have here is something far beyond our department’s abilities. Far beyond
even FDLE’s. But Martinez refused to tell us anything more unless we first promised to  give you a  fair
hearing.” Brantley straightened and glanced at his watch.  “You have forty-five minutes, Sergeant.  Start
talking. Or I’m getting on the phone to the governor’s office and the Homeland Security task force.”
 
Jamont Sanders  had  big hands  for  a  cop  who  was  also  a  forensic  scientist,  with  fingers  like  brown
sausages. But he was well known for his deft, sure handling of even the smallest bioswab or entomology
needle probe. Sanders poked the air in front of him with that same controlled delicacy. “Force field, eh?
Shit!” He  jumped  back  as  the invisible shield sizzled and  a  corresponding  alarm erupted  from  Jorie’s
MOD-tech on the bedroom floor. “Feels like a damned Taser!”
“It could feel worse,” Theo told him. “That’s the low setting.”
Brantley was silent, watching.
Next came the G-1 and the Hazer, both demonstrated in the backyard by an obviously condescending
Rordan, who clearly didn’t care that Brantley was chief of police in Bahia Vista. Theo could almost see
NIL tattooed on all their foreheads.
Then the scanner, which of the three alien items was the least convincing. Any twelve-year-old whiz kid
could probably rig something like that, at least visually.
Sanders picked up the Hazer again, examining the touch  pads  on the stock  closely.  Rordan  sauntered
over and—with exaggerated motions, as if showing a child—went through the weapon’s settings.
Theo knew  language was  a  problem  with  Rordan,  but  not  that  big  of  one.  He’d  certainly  made  his
intentions about Jorie clear enough.
He glanced at her standing on the bottom step of his back porch, hands locked loosely behind her back.

They’d had little time to speak since Zeke’s phone call and no time at all for anything private, other than a
squeeze of her hand along with her reassurance that she’d recovered from her brief nightmare. He didn’t
tell her he  was  still  worried—he  wondered  if  the  Guardians  had  something  like  posttraumatic  stress
syndrome.
Her gaze darted to him as if she felt his eyes  on her.  A corner  of her mouth quirked  briefly in a  small
smile, then faded. She was nervous, but whether it was because she was still drained from her nightmare
or was picking up on his unease, Theo couldn’t tell.
And couldn’t ask. Not with Brantley next to him. Not with Rordan within earshot.
Minutes later they filed back into his kitchen. Sanders grabbed a chair and motioned Rordan, Jorie, and
Theo to sit. The chief declined  the offered  chair and  leaned  against the counter,  watching again. Zeke
Martinez stood by the refrigerator, arms folded, looking decidedly anxious.
Theo  was  no  longer  immensely  pissed  at  Zeke.  He  had  somewhat  figured  out  the  scenario  in  his
mind—the lab bringing their odd findings to Sanders, who then cornered Zeke as primary on the Wayne
case. And Zeke had no answers other than the truth, as bizarre as it was.
All he had was Baby, back in Suzanne’s clinic. Any twelve-year-old might be able to fabricate an “alien
scanner” and maybe even come up with some kind of Taser-like force field. But no twelve-year-old whiz
kid could concoct Baby.
“So these  zombies,” Sanders  was  asking Jorie,  “progressed  beyond  their  original  programming?  And
spread?”
She nodded. “They were designed to be defensive but obedient. When the Mastermind Code was lost,
we could  no  longer  control  them  or  prevent  the  adaptations  from  occurring.  All  we  can  do  now  is
terminate them as we find them.”
“Killer bees,” Sanders said softly.
Theo saw Jorie frown, not understanding the analogy: a hybrid honeybee that was accidentally released in
the late 1950s and became known for its vicious and defensive behavior. It was never bred for that—the
bees  were  bred  for  better  honey  production.  But  once  in  the  wild,  they  became  a  force—and  a
legend—all their own.
“Why do they mummify the people or animals they kill?” Sanders asked.
“Again, a perversion of their original function. They were constructed to take bodily fluid samples  from
sentients they detained  for analysis as  protection  against the spread  of disease.  They’d then secrete  a
chemical to seal the area where the sample was taken—putting the probed area in isolation. Stasis.” She
looked at Sanders for confirmation that he understood her explanation.
He nodded. “Now they suck the entire body dry and then seal it.”
Gave a whole new meaning to overkill, Theo noted silently.
“It wasn’t always so,” Jorie said. “The first attacks, a sentient might lose an arm, a leg. But now,” and she
shook  her  head,  “it  becomes  worse  as  time  passes.  Worse  with  each  new  generation.  The  original
program  that  initiated  their  testing  function  now  goes  out  of  control  when  stimulated  by  certain
frequencies  and  the  presence  of  a  sentient.  It’s  no  longer  sample  and  seal.  It’s  drain,  absorb,  and
kill—and crave more in a frenzied function to eradicate anything the zombie sees as capable of carrying
an infection. Which is any warm-blooded living creature. That’s why we call that their craving.”

“Up until now you’ve stopped them.” Brantley finally spoke.
“The zombies respond to frequencies emitted by tech,” Jorie said. “That means they seek out—up until
now—a  ship, world,  or  station  sufficiently  advanced  that  we,  that  the  Guardians,  have  no  problems
integrating with them. Or a low-tech world where the Guardians have established a small research colony
or defensive outpost so that there are already resources in place we can use.
“Your world is different.” Jorie waved one hand toward the porch door. “You don’t house a  Guardian
outpost. And your tech is not yet at the level where the zombies would be drawn here—which is why we
ignored you, for the most part. But the Tresh didn’t. I think the Tresh  brought  them here  because  they
believed they could  use  your world  and  be  undetected.  It  was  happenstance  that  we  found  you.  But
because you are what you are—a  low-tech  world  not capable  of star  travel,  with no experience  with
other star systems—we’re handicapped in solving the problem.
“Now, with my ship no longer here,  we  are  handicapped  even more.  But, yes,  up until now we  have
stopped the zombies. And, yes,” Jorie said, raising her chin and meeting Brantley’s skeptical gaze clearly,
“even now I will try.”
And that, Theo knew with a sinking heart, was why he cared so very deeply about her. It was something
he’d seen in her from the very beginning: a sense of honor. Not blind duty. But a sense of honor because
the lives she saved meant something to her.
It was a sense of honor—considering the odds—that could also get her killed.
Chief Brantley pushed himself away from the counter. “Sanders?”
“Sir?”
“I need to speak privately with you.”
“Sir.” Sanders stood, glancing around. “Sergeant, may we use your back porch?”
Theo doubted  they were  interested  in his landscaping by zombie.  “Please.”  He  motioned  toward  the
porch door. “We’ll stay here.” And sweat in the air-conditioning.
Sanders followed Brantley out. Zeke hesitated for a moment, then came and took Sanders’s seat at the
head of the table, opposite Theo, with Jorie and Rordan flanking him. Rordan was poking at his scanner,
ignoring the conversation.
“You still want to kick my ass, amigo?” Zeke asked quietly.
“Not as much as before. I can see where they had you—”
“By the cojones?” Zeke blew out an exasperated breath. “Like you wouldn’t believe.”
“I’m wondering if Brantley believes.”
“You should have seen his face when I showed him Baby.”
“I take it he’s been tight-lipped about what he wants to do.”
Zeke nodded. “You know Brantley.”
“I do not,” Jorie put in, fisting one hand on the tabletop. “Will he be a hindrance or a help?”

That brought a comment in Alarsh from Rordan, which received a quick, narrow-eyed look from Jorie.
He  decided  Rordan  wanted  an  argument.  And  Theo  had  no  intention  of  giving  Rordan  anything  he
wanted.
“Chief  Brantley  could  isolate  the  beach  area,  give  us  additional  shooters,  and  pretty  much  insure
innocents don’t get hurt. That would be a help,” Theo admitted. “But that help might come  at  a  price.”
One that Theo didn’t want to pay but one he couldn’t refuse—unless he was willing to walk away from
the job. An inconceivable thought two weeks ago. At the moment, this hour, with Jorie across from him
and the memory of holding her while she shivered and cried in his arms still very real,  it was  no longer
quite as inconceivable.
And that shocked him. Not Officer Theo Petrakos who became Detective Theo Petrakos who was now
Sergeant Theo Petrakos. Nephew of Stavros Petrakos, a thirty-year vet of the same job.
It was the only thing he’d ever wanted to do: be a  cop.  And he swore  he’d  never  let a  woman come
between him and his career. Yet here he was with that possibility raising its ugly head.
And here  he was—with  Rordan’s  challenges echoing in his mind—capable  of asking  Jorie  to  do  the
same thing. What would he do if a Guardian ship returned?
An earsplitting sound halted his answer and doubled his heart rate.
Jorie was on her feet, lunging for the Hazer on the table. “Zombie!”
Rordan answered with a series of short commands in Alarsh that Theo ignored as he shoved away from
the table. He grabbed his gun from under  his shirt and  was  on Jorie’s  heels as  she  bolted  through the
porch door.
Theo was immediately aware of two  things: Sanders  and  the chief rearing back  and  reaching for guns
secured on their hip holsters as he and Jorie charged onto the porch, and—slightly to the left of the two
men and about twenty feet behind them—a pale green glow starting to solidify into a circular shape.
Panagia mou!
“Behind you!” he shouted, praying both men trusted him enough to  turn around  and  not perceive  Jorie
and himself—both armed—as the enemy.
Rordan bumped past Theo, laser pistol out, as Sanders glanced over his shoulder. “What in hell?”
The high whine of the Hazer punctuated Sanders’s question. Jorie fired, the head and upper arms of the
zombie already  in full view. This was  no juvenile. It  slithered through the portal,  twisting  as  laser  fire
sizzled against the energyworms writhing frantically over its body.
Jorie’s shouted exclamation drew Theo’s attention. The zombie’s lower arms slashed out in a wide arc.
Jorie dropped to the ground as Theo flew down the porch steps toward her.
Eyes, he remembered. Opticals. Then go for the heart. He squared off, fired. Missed. Fuck.
The arms swung back. Theo dropped, rolled, came up again, and  saw  Rordan  sprinting off to  his left,
trying to get behind the zombie. “Crossfire!” he called out. “Watch crossfire!” He didn’t know if Rordan
understood.
But there  was  no time. Razor-clawed  arms were  moving, reaching, grabbing,  coming far too  close  to
Jorie, who was—Theo realized with a surge of fear and anger—too close to this zombie.

Damn her!
The head dipped as he tried for the eyes again. Then one of Rordan’s laser shots caught the zombie in
the neck, and for a split second it reared back. Theo took aim with his Glock. Fired.
Pow-pang! An eye exploded with a hard crack, the impact from his bullet sending a  chunk of zombie
cheek flying in its wake.
The creature’s  head  dipped,  and  when  it  raised  it,  Theo  was  ready.  Pow-pang!  Another  eye.  One
more—
The zombie lunged as Jorie darted forward, Hazer raised, her concentration on the white heart and  not
on the clawed arm coming swiftly toward her. Theo damned the fact that he was in love with a woman
who was constantly intent on bucking the odds.
“Jorie!” He jogged toward her, firing on a joint in the arm in an attempt to sever it. More zombie chunks
flew, but the arm kept coming. “Jorie! Down!”
A stream of energy burst from her Hazer  just as  Theo  reached  her.  There  was  a  blinding green-white
flash. He grabbed the waistband of her jeans, yanking her to the ground. She landed on her butt with a
yelp and a sharp exclamation, cursing him, for all he knew. He didn’t care. He threw himself on top  of
her as a rush of wind across his arms told him just how close they’d come to getting shredded  like the
roof of his car.
“Theo,” she  said  into his neck  as  he was  breathing in big gulps  of  grass  and  Jorie-scented  air.  “The
zombie’s gone.”
He rolled off her, raising his gun as he did so. Everything was eerily quiet. And empty. Except for Rordan
trotting toward them at a rapid clip, looking none too pleased at Theo’s arms around Jorie. And Sanders,
Brantley, and Martinez standing stiffly on his back porch.
The zombie was gone. Jorie must have hit its heart.
Theo shoved his gun back in his holster. Then he drew her to her feet and didn’t let go of her hand, even
though Rordan was a few steps to their left and Brantley and Sanders were now bearing down on them
from their right.
“I thought I felt its arm swinging—”
“You felt the portal collapsing.” She cocked her head at him, and it was all he could do not to plant a kiss
on her smudgy, grass-streaked face. “Next time, retreat a few maxmeters from a portal  before  pushing
me to the ground. Yes?”
“I’d like there to be no more next times,” he murmured, because  Rordan  was  approaching,  spouting a
stream of unintelligible Alarsh. “What now?” Theo added. He was tired of being left in the dark  where
Rordan was concerned. This was, damn it all, his planet. His chief was on the scene. Rordan needed to
learn to speak English or—
“How many of those creatures did you say are here?” That was from Chief Brantley, his mouth set in a
grim, determined line. Sanders, striding behind him, looked equally disturbed.
“About three  hundred,”  he told  Brantley,  already  seeing  National  Guard  trucks  rolling  down  Central
Avenue. Followed by the media, of course. “But they’re not all that  big. Many are  smaller, like Baby.
And we really only need to deal with the main one, the C-Prime.”

“Three hundred.” Brantley gestured to where the zombie no longer stood. “Of those.”
Now  it was  the black  sedans  with  their  darkened  windows  Theo  could  see  in  his  mind.  FBI.  CIA.
NASA. Some alphabet-soup agency that would take Jorie away from him.
As if sensing his fears, she pulled her hand from his and turned to Rordan.
Jorie said something low and short in Alarsh. Rordan was silent a moment, then answered.
Feeling lost in more ways than one, Theo  turned  back  to  the chief. “I don’t  think this has  to  be  a  big
operation,  sir.  I  already  have  some  volunteers.  A  smaller  group  would  keep  any  wild  rumors  from
causing problems.”
“That’s not your decision  to  make,  Petrakos.”  The chief pulled out his cell phone  and  glanced  up  at
Sanders. “I’m contacting Secretary Warren at the Homeland Security Task Force. And unless she has a
better idea, the next call I’m making is to the governor.”
Theo’s gut clenched at Brantley’s words. He didn’t dare argue with the chief. But he had to. “Sir—”
“I hear you on the rumors, Sergeant. I know the problems we could face if the television stations got hold
of this. But DHS is very experienced in dealing with exactly those kinds of situations. Let’s let the experts
do their jobs.
“In the meantime, I expect you and Commander Mikkalah to make yourselves available to anyone from
DHS the minute they ask.” He pinned Theo  with a  hard  stare  through his wire-rimmed glasses.  “Your
vacation is officially over.” And with that, Brantley turned away and, cell phone to one ear, headed down
Theo’s driveway, Sanders in tow.
Theo waited until they’d rounded the corner of his house before letting his shoulders sag.
Zeke stepped back, his hands splayed in silent apology. “Theo—”
Theo waved away whatever his friend had to say. Words couldn’t  change things at  this juncture.  Only
action could, and he wasn’t sure what action to—
A blur of movement on his left and  the sharp  sound  of a  fist against flesh. Theo  spun to  see  Rordan
stumble backward, eyes wide, and land on his ass on the ground with a grunt. Jorie stood over him, eyes
narrowed, rubbing her knuckles.
“What’s going on?” Theo asked quickly, his right hand resting on his gun’s grip as Zeke shouldered  up
next to him.
“Get up, Commander,” Jorie ordered tersely. “In the residence. Now.”
“What did he do?” Theo watched Rordan rise stiffly, a reddened patch on his jaw.  When Jorie’s  hand
shot  out  again,  Theo  thought  she  was  moving  in  for  a  second  punch,  but,  no,  she  was  pointing  to
Rordan’s scanner.
The man held on to it for a moment, then, with a brusque movement, yanked it from its holder on his belt
and shoved it into Jorie’s waiting hand.
She said something short and hard in Alarsh. Rordan answered, equally short. Then he strode off toward
the rear door.
“What did he—” Theo repeated, but Jorie waggled the scanner in front of his face.

“That zombie,” she said, “was not sent by the Tresh.”
“Rordan did something to the scanner so the zombie would attack? But why?”
“How?” Zeke put in.
“That,” Jorie answered as Theo fell into step with her, Zeke trailing behind, “is what we are now going to
find out.”
 

27 
“What do you mean you did it for me?” Jorie hated questioning Rordan in Alarsh. She was all too aware
of Theo’s strained look as he sat at the head of the small galley table, arms folded and unable to follow
the conversation. She was all too aware of Martinez’s nervous, narrow-eyed stare from where he leaned
against  the  refrigeration  unit.  But  she  couldn’t  afford  any  miscommunication  right  now  between  Kip
Rordan and herself. His life, quite honestly, hung on what he said.
“We’re  surrounded  by nils,” Rordan  replied  easily. Her  punch to  his  jaw  didn’t  seem  to  hamper  his
speech,  but then,  for all his annoying  qualities,  Rordan  had  never  been  one  to  whine  about  physical
discomfort.  “Inexperienced,  dirt-sucking  nils  who  have  no  comprehension  of  the  seriousness  of  the
situation that faces them. I decided to show them.”
“You decided.” Jorie cut the rest of her sentence short, reining in her temper because she knew she was
tired and she knew she was stressed. She also knew—in a way she didn’t want to  face—Rordan  was
partially right.
But his method was so very wrong. “That zombie could have killed Theo’s superior officer.”
“With both you and me on the scene? The nil and his associate were also armed. I assume they’ve had
the same training Petrakos has. And we’ve learned their projectile weapons can be somewhat effective.
Given those factors, it was an acceptable risk.”
“A risk you took without consulting me.”
“I didn’t foresee your cooperation.” Rordan touched his jaw gingerly. Then, to her surprise,  a  wry grin
played over his mouth. “You pack a good one for a lightweight.”
“This isn’t the time for levity, Commander.”
A trilling noise came  from  Martinez’s  direction.  Jorie  angled  around  and  saw  him  pull  out  the  small
communication cell phone, then place it against his ear. “Sir,” Jorie heard him say. “Yes, I…yes, sir.”
With a nod toward Theo, Martinez sidled out of the kitchen and  into the main room,  his conversation
muffled.
Theo rose  halfway, then settled  back  down.  Jorie  had  a  strong  suspicion he didn’t want to  leave her
alone with Rordan.
“Jorie.” Rordan turned his hand toward  her,  palm open.  “I’m trying to  remind you I’m not the enemy
here.”
“Pulling that stunt—”
“We need to establish our dominance. I can see you allying with the nils. You’re forgetting that  we  are
the Guardians. This is our mission. If terrorizing the nils a little gains their cooperation, then it’s worth it.
They need to remember who and what we are.” Rordan paused, then the hard edge  dropped  from his
voice. “You need to remember who we are.”
Jorie waited for him to say it—you’ve turned  grounder—but he didn’t.  Perhaps  he had  no desire  to
experience  another  lightweight  punch.  Or  perhaps,  and  more  likely,  he  knew  she  already  heard  his

condemnation.
“We,” she told him, “are out of our  element and  outnumbered.  Utilization of available resources  is not
only a recommended but a sane course of action.”
Rordan leaned back in his chair. “Have you ever seen a nil society react to a Guardian—or to any what
they call ‘extraterrestrial presence’ before?”
She  knew  what  he  was  getting  at.  Rordan  had  been  part  of  the  rescue  unit  assigned  to  recover  a
Guardian research team from the nil-tech settlement on Borangari. She’d viewed the official reports and
more than once listened to Rordan’s stories over a pitcher of ale.
“No one’s lashing us to boulders and pushing us off a cliff as a sacrifice to their god,” she said.
“Goddess,”  he  corrected.  “No,  they’ll  do  things  a  bit  differently  here.  But  our  presence  will  cause
problems, and we will not be easily accepted.”
“So you suggest what? Sit by and let the Tresh take over this world? Let  them breed  zombies so  they
can control the Hatches?”
“We risk that if you let Petrakos’s people control this mission. They might decide—and  they will—that
we are as much of an unknown as the zombies. I’ve been going over Wain’s notes. Plus, Petrakos has a
number of printed periodicals in his residence. You know I read Vekran better than I speak it. Everything
points to a culture that is highly xenophobic. They classify as fiction the fact that sentients populate other
star systems. We are the very things their nightmares are made of.”
Jorie knew  that.  She’d  read  Wain’s  notes  too.  And  she  was  trained  in  nil-tech  contact  procedures,
almost all of which she’d violated in the past several days. Even since Sergeant Petrakos has ceased to
be a nil and become Theo—colleague, friend, and lover—to her.
“So you add to their nightmares by dropping a live zombie in their midst.” She shook her head. “And you
add to mine by making me question your motives, your allegiance.”
“I intended to warn you. It just appeared more quickly than I anticipated. I don’t quite have your touch
when it comes to that kind of thing.” He hesitated, his eyes darkening. “You can’t possibly still think I’m
working with the Tresh?”
“I can think of a lot of different scenarios, Kip.” She hefted his scanner.  “For  now,  this stays  with me.
Your G-One too.”
She saw the flash of anger in his eyes. So did Theo, apparently, because he shifted position, watching but
very obviously coiled for action.
Not for the first time, Jorie felt torn between her upbringing, her training, and what experience was now
teaching her. By all elements, Theo Petrakos was a nil. But he’d  meshed  so  completely with her style,
picked up so intuitively how Guardians operate, and she felt so comfortable with him.
But he was a nil.
Then why was she so much more attuned to him than to Rordan?
Because she loved him? Her silent admission shocked her, but even as she considered the truth behind
the words, she knew what she and Theo  had  went far beyond  the boundaries  of the bedroom.  She’d
never felt so secure. And so afraid. And with so many larger problems looming over her.

Like Rordan’s misguided loyalty—and ego. “The G-One,” she repeated to Rordan, hand out. “Because,
yes, I am a Guardian. And you know you’d do the same thing if the situation were reversed.”
He slid the weapon across the table toward her, clearly not happy, but the tension that had  surfaced  in
him was gone. Theo evidently sensed it too, relaxing somewhat. But not completely.
That was something else she’d noticed about Theo Petrakos. He never really relaxed. Even when she’d
found him sleeping in his reclining chair, he’d lunged out of it, pinning her within seconds.
“But I will give you an assignment,” she  continued,  pushing away  the memory of Theo’s  body  against
hers. “We will be dealing with the local security force. And I fully believe their xenophobia will come into
play. Finish that research. Build out from Wain’s notes. I have no intention of sacrificing you, Tamlynne,
or myself to their fears.”
It took a moment before  Rordan  nodded.  Then he arched  one  eyebrow.  “And I’m supposed  to  stop
them when you take my weapon away?”
“We’re  going to  deal  with them with an even more  powerful weapon.  You can  terminate ten,  twenty
sentients with this.” Jorie raised the laser pistol. “But with knowledge,  you can  control  thousands.  And
that, Commander Rordan, is what we have to use if we have any chance of survival.”
She waited until Rordan left the kitchen and was several steps into the main room before she eased her
forehead down on her arms, folded on the tabletop. Hell’s wrath. She physically ached, though she knew
part of that was the result of another nightmare episode she remembered only snatches of.
Snatches of feeling so safe with Theo’s arms around her…the same arms that—after  a  short  scrape  of
chair legs against the floor—encircled her now.
Jorie leaned against him for a moment, then let him pull her to her feet. She rested her face on his chest
and listened to the sound of his heartbeat. Martinez’s voice flowed into the room every few moments, a
low exchange of sounds.
“So what’s happening?” Theo asked quietly.
Too much, too fast, she thought. She pulled back slightly but kept her hands resting on his chest.  She
needed  his warmth. “Rordan  does  not play subordinate  well.  He  triggered  the  zombie’s  appearance,
believing to do  so  would insure your chief’s cooperation  with us.  With the Guardians,”  she  amended.
Theo was not “us.”
“That was incredibly stupid.” Theo’s voice went hard.
“Not to Rordan’s way of thinking.”
“You’re sure he didn’t do it to help the Tresh?”
“One hundred percent? No,” she admitted. “Ninety-nine percent? Yes.”
“You took his gun away from him. And his scanner.”
“Because I don’t want him trying to play hero again. And he will. It’s in his nature and—”
“He wants you.”
Jorie raised her chin and blinked hard, not sure Theo had said what she thought he did.

“Rordan wants you. Wants in your pants. You understand the expression?” Theo asked, eyes narrowing
for a moment as if he contemplated something unpleasant.
She nodded. She did understand.
“He’s never told you?”
“He—not exactly, no.” Their conversation in her office had  held those  overtones.  But she’d  tried  hard
since then to convince herself she was wrong. “He’s Lorik’s best friend.”
“Goes after his buddy’s girl, does he? Wonderful guy.” Theo brushed her hair away from her face.
“But he was my friend too. For many years. I think you’re misreading—”
“He warned me away from you. I’m not misreading anything, Jorie.” He paused. “He knows I’m in love
with you.”
She stared at Theo, at that now-familiar face. Heat flared, blossomed. Fear spiked. Theo loved her. She
wanted desperately to kiss him. She wanted desperately to push him away, so she could run and never
have to face the consequences of loving him too.
“Theo—”
He covered her mouth with his, turning his name into a kiss that was heartbreaking in its gentleness.
“I know, agapi mou,” he said after he pulled back slightly. His breath fanned her face. “My timing sucks.
But I had to tell you in case something happens. I love you, Jorie. I don’t care what planet you’re from. I
don’t care who created the zombies or why. I don’t care that I’ve never seen a gravripper and you didn’t
know peanut butter existed. I love you. I believe in you. And if need be, I will follow you into the jaws of
hell, without question.”
“Theo.” Her voice wavered. She almost said it, almost told him she loved him. But fear kept the words
from crossing her lips. Instead, she kissed him fiercely, far too aware that following her into the jaws of
hell might be exactly what she’d have to ask him to do. Far too aware that loving Theo was also a hell of
its own for her.
A noise made her suddenly pull back.
Martinez, clearing his throat. She sensed his disapproval and realized in some ways he wasn’t unlike Kip
Rordan. He was here to remind Theo who he was and what he was required to do.
“Sanders  has  scheduled  a  preliminary  meeting  for  oh-eight-hundred  tomorrow,”  Martinez  said.
“Information sharing, he calls it. Informal, but I take it DHS will be there.”
Jorie tried to place the acronym and failed. But she guessed it was another government entity.
“I didn’t tell anyone about Tammy,” Martinez continued quickly, with a slight nod to Jorie. “I thought you
should know that. Suzanne and I discussed  it. Tammy’s vulnerable. Can’t  defend  herself verbally. We
thought…”  Martinez  shrugged  and  glanced  at  the  floor  for  a  moment.  “You  and  Theo  can  protect
yourselves. Commander Rordan’s tough. But Tammy’s not.
“If I’m wrong, boss, tell me,” Martinez added, looking at Theo. “But we thought if Jorie  knew  Tammy
was safe, it would be one less thing for her to worry about.”
An unaccustomed tightness formed in Jorie’s chest. Nils—Rordan’s xenophobic nils—weren’t supposed

to act like this.
Theo seemed equally touched. “And if the brass finds out?”
Martinez shrugged,  though  a  corner  of  his  mouth  quirked  slightly.  “Then  we’ll  both  be  singing  ‘The
Down-Home Unemployed-Cop Blues.’”
 
After Martinez left, Jorie returned to the floor of Theo’s  bedroom  and  the reassembled  Hazer  that  still
fought accepting the dart program. If they couldn’t get the dart to infect the C-Prime, then the only choice
they’d have would be to initiate a full-scale hunt. But how, on this world,  with herself and  Kip  Rordan
being the only trained Guardians?
Granted,  Theo’s  projectile  weapons  were  efficient  for  termination.  Granted,  it  seemed  as  if  Theo’s
government  might  be  a  workable  problem—there  would  be  questions,  distrust,  but  there  would  be
cooperation. Eventually.
But  people  would  die  while  they  tried  to  put  all  this  together.  And,  worse,  the  Tresh  would  grow
stronger,  armed  now  with  zombies  capable  of  closing  the  Hatches.  Those  living  in  the  outer
colonies—like her brother—would be the first to be cut off. Trapped. Stranded.
Some colonies could survive off the planet’s natural resources.  But others  could  not.  And the stations,
like the one she was raised on, would be forced to evacuate to the nearest habitable world. If there was
one.
Or worse—they’d be forced to bargain with the Tresh for their lives.
She went back to working on the Hazer with renewed determination.
“Jorie.”
She started, turning at the sound of Theo’s voice. Her back complained in wrenching spasms.  She  had
no idea now long she’d been bent over the rifle. She stretched her legs out slowly, carefully. Painfully.
Theo folded himself down on the floor beside her and ran his hand down her leg. “It’s past  dinnertime.
Cramp?” he asked, massaging a knot in her calf.
His  ministrations  hurt  so  much  they  actually  felt  wonderful.  She  locked  her  arms  and  leaned  back,
nodding.
“I brought David up to date,” Theo said, dragging her other leg onto his lap and continuing his delicious
massage. “Had a small talk with Uncle Stavros too. Both asked a lot of good questions, many of which I
can’t answer as well as you can.”
She didn’t want to  answer  any questions  right  now.  She  wanted  to  let  Theo’s  fingers  continue  their
exquisite  torture  and  then  reward  him  in  kind.  She  sighed.  Duty  first,  then  pleasure.  “What  kind  of
questions?”
“Zombie breeding cycles, most vulnerable areas. Things like that. I told David about their heart and also
the importance of hitting the eyes. But some of the details he wants I don’t know. Like their life span.”
“If David will be at tomorrow’s meeting, I can answer everything then.”

Theo shook his head. “At this point, no.”
“Then why involve him now?”
“Because  a  good  cop  always  appreciates  backup.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  whether  I  think  Chief
Brantley is capable of handling this. He is. It’s just that—”
Her scanner emitted three short, sharp trilling sounds that were duplicated by the T-MOD in front of her.
Her heart  stopped,  then pounded  a  frenzied beat  in  her  chest—a  sound  as  loud  as  the  thumping  of
Rordan’s boots in the corridor.
She pulled her legs from Theo’s  lap and  swung  forward,  her  fingers  flying  to  the  T-MOD’s  screen.
Rordan burst into the room.
Theo’s “What? What is it?” was almost drowned  out by Rordan’s  demands  for coordinates  and  herd
size.
She didn’t answer either until she was absolutely sure.
“The C-Prime,” she said, surprised at the calmness in her voice. “The C-Prime has scented a craving, a
feeding frenzy.”
“Where?” Theo asked.
She dragged over a paper map he’d used earlier and pointed to a T-shaped finger of land jutting out into
the bay. The words—in Vekran or English—read Fort Hernando. “There. And we have less than one
sweep, one hour, in which to get in position before it arrives.”
Rordan pointed to the Hazer. “Working?”
She shook her head, anger and frustration suddenly roiling inside her. “I finally have the program loaded.
But the Hazer is only recognizing half the command string—”
“It loaded?” Relief was obvious in Rordan’s voice. “I think I can fix problem.”
Theo was already standing. Jorie accepted his hand and  let him pull her to  her feet.  “We’ll handle the
hardware,” he said. “I want every weapon checked. We’re not going to get a second chance.”
No,  they  weren’t.  This  was  a  mission  riddled  with  errors,  plagued  with  missteps.  This  one
thing—infecting the C-Prime—had to unfold flawlessly. Because there was no option for an emergency
transport if things went wrong.
 
This was it. Jorie raised her gaze from the line of weaponry  on Theo’s  galley table  that  had  been  their
sole focus for the past  ten minutes, aware  of time pushing them inexorably toward  the most powerful
zombie in the herd.
Do or die.
“Theo.” She swallowed her fear and wrapped her fingers around his wrist.
He looked up from the projectile weapon he was working on, a slight frown on his very good face. He
was so focused on the mission now. So was she. But there was something else she had to do first, and it

frightened her almost as much as the C-Prime.
“Theo,” she said again, because the frown had turned into a questioning arched eyebrow. “You need to
know. Before this happens tonight.” She was fumbling, her Vekran failing her.
“Babe, what’s the matter?”
She sucked in a breath. “Theo, I love you.”
Both eyebrows arched. Then he released his hold on his weapon and dragged her into his arms.
Bliss.
 

28 
“David? It’s  a  go.  Forty-five  minutes. You in?” Theo  sat  on the  edge  of  his  bed  and  kicked  off  his
Top-Siders,  pinning the cell phone  between  his  shoulder  and  his  ear.  He  pulled  on  his  socks  as  he
listened to David Gray’s exclamation of excitement. His own heart pounded, but it wasn’t solely due to
the zombies.
“Shit, yeah. This is the big one?”
“The big one.” He snagged his left boot  and  shoved  his foot  inside. “Meet  us at  the 7-Eleven?”  Theo
didn’t have to say which one. There was only one on the chain of finger islands leading to the state park
beach area. It was a notorious cop-stop-for-coffee hangout.
“I’ll be there in thirty.”
Theo went over weapons and gear with David one more time, feeling slightly foolish considering David’s
expertise but not wanting his friend to forget this was an unusual, high-risk circumstance.
Very high-risk. He hadn’t contacted Chief Brantley. He didn’t intend to.
He hoped  he wasn’t  making the biggest mistake  of his life. Because  the best  thing in his life had  just
happened five minutes before.
Jorie loved him. So he’d told her what agapi mou meant and  answered  her in Greek  with s’agapo.  I
love you.
The love of his life walked in when he was sealing his tactical vest over his T-shirt. She wore  the same
funky shorts and half-sleeved outfit she had the first time he saw her. He knew what all the gizmos were
now, even knew  how she  could  power  her  weapons  through  the  small  ports  in  what  she  called  her
technosleeve. And how those same ports could transmit data to her ship.
If her ship was there. It wasn’t, but he suspected she used the devices now to segue with Rordan.
Theo checked his Glock. “You give Rordan back his pistol?”
“He said to tell you thank you for your trust.”
Theo doubted that. He glanced toward the corridor and lowered his voice. “You have a plan if he turns
out not to be on our side?”
He saw the brief flash of pain in her eyes. It was never a pleasant course to contemplate—having to take
down a partner, a colleague. A longtime friend. She’d admitted Rordan was one.  That still made  Theo
pause and still made Theo hear Rordan’s insistent challenge: Jorie has dream to be captain.  You  can
give her this?
No, but he could love her. And she could love him.
She’d  been  tinkering with something on her  technosleeve.  She  looked  up.  “If  he’s  working  with  the
Tresh, we should know that very quickly.”
“They’ll react to the C-Prime?”

“They will probably note the onset of the craving. It seems to be a regular feed cycle, if somewhat early.
But it wouldn’t normally be something the Devastators would be concerned about, except they know I’m
here.”
That worried him. “Any chance they’re using this C-Prime to draw you out?”
She shook her head. “I thought about that. If they didn’t know where I was, yes. But they know. Prow
was here.”
Theo didn’t miss the thinning of her mouth when she said the Devastator’s name. He wondered if the man
was dead or alive.
Evidently so did Jorie. “And if he still lives,” she continued, “I cannot see him relinquishing to  a  zombie
the chance to kill me. He likes, how do you say it here, the personal touch?”
She glanced at him again, head titled, eyes narrowed, looking defiant and confident and determined and
saucy, all in one.
He knew that look well and brushed that saucy mouth with a kiss because he could. She was his. And he
would do everything he could to keep that fact a fact.
He was rewarded with a small smile.
He draped one arm across her shoulders and pulled her tightly against him. “Let’s go kick some zombie
ass.”
 
Rordan waited for Theo and  Jorie  in the kitchen,  wearing borrowed  jeans  and  sweatshirt  but with his
Guardian  weapons  affixed  to  his  belt.  Theo  noticed  he  didn’t  have  the  technosleeve  that  Jorie  did.
Tammy did—but  Tammy was  safe  with Suzanne.  Zeke  would  meet  Theo,  Jorie,  and  Rordan  at  the
7-Eleven, just like David Gray.
Theo called Zeke on the cell phone when he pulled out of his driveway. “I’m ten–fifty-one,” he told him.
En route.
“Ditto,” Zeke said. “Fifteen minutes.”
The chatter  in his SUV  was  a  mix of English,  Vekran,  and  Alarsh,  with  Jorie  doing  double  duty  on
translations. He was amazed at the calm tone of her voice but didn’t miss her white-knuckled grip on her
scanner.
He loosened his own tight grasp on the steering wheel and focused his mind into what he thought of as
Code 3 mode: lights, sirens, and unknown trouble.
There were no lights flashing or sirens blaring on his vehicle. But there was unknown trouble. And known
trouble. He’d faced a zombie before. He could extrapolate that experience to what it would mean to face
a C-Prime.
Jorie checked the altered Hazer again, frowning. Rordan believed he’d corrected the problem, but Theo
knew that the weapon  and  the program  were  untested.  Things might have to  be  done  the  hard  way,
killing off the zombies as they appeared.  Theo  had  no illusions they were  going to  eradicate  the entire
herd tonight.

That meant Brantley would be involved eventually. Like tomorrow.  Theo  ran through a  list of possible
excuses  in his mind as  to  why he hadn’t  alerted  the chief: he and  Jorie  were  at  Fort  Hernando  for  a
moonlight stroll. With Rordan. And an SUV full of weapons. Surprise! David Gray was there. Surprise!
Zeke Martinez was there. Surprise! The zombies showed up.
Maybe  a  picnic.  A  sunset  picnic.  A  few  friends  along.  David.  Zeke  without  Suzanne.  The  zombies
showed up….
He thought of ten more  scenarios,  but they all ended  the same  way: Brantley was  pissed.  And  Theo
would be lucky not to lose his job.
But he did not want the media here at this point. And he could see no way to keep the newshounds  at
bay if BVPD and DHS joined forces. It would leak, just as it always did. And Theo would lose Jorie.
As he crested  the bridge  leading to  Tierra  Grande,  off to  his right were  the  lighted  caged  pools  and
palm-tree-laced landscaping of the high-priced homes the island was known for. It was past seven-thirty;
the sun had  set  more  than an hour ago.  The  backs  of  the  homes  were  dotted  with  squares  of  light:
windows, sliding glass doors, and skylights. Other lights flickered from the small commercial buildings at
the base of the bridge. The 7-Eleven sign was lit. He spotted  David’s  red  pickup  on the southernmost
corner of the parking lot.
His cell phone rang.
“Yassou, amigo,” Zeke said. “I got your six.”
Theo glanced in his rearview mirror and saw headlights flash. Zeke in his black Ford Mustang.
Right on time.
The battle for Earth was about to begin.
 
Theo pulled his SUV next to David’s pickup and motioned for Jorie and Rordan to stay put. Even though
David had found a darkened corner of the lot away from the glare of the convenience store’s lights, they
were all obviously armed. That could bring unwanted attention. At least Theo’s vest said POLICE in large
white letters across the back.
So did Zeke’s. Theo leaned against David’s door and unfolded the map with Jorie’s notations on it. Zeke
and David studied it in the light from the pickup’s interior while Theo went over, again, what they needed
to know about zombies: the heart, the eyes, and for God’s sake watch those razor-edged arms!
“Leave the C-Prime to Jorie and Rordan,” Theo said. “We need it alive to  contaminate the rest  of the
herd. Our job is to take out any zombies protecting the C-Prime. Jorie needs a clear shot.”
A loud bang and  a  staccato  series  of pops  sounded  behind him. Theo  spun,  reaching  for  his  Glock.
David jerked around in his seat.
Then out of the corner of his eye Theo saw the colors—red and blue—sparkling, streaking, falling….
Fireworks. His heart slowed to a normal rhythm, then he shook his head. It was New Year’s Eve.
“Concert on the beach in Pass  Pointe,”  Zeke  said.  “There’ve  been  big ads  for it in the newspaper  all

week.”
Pass Pointe—a Gulf-front finger of land two blocks wide and  thirty-one  blocks  long—was  just across
the  channel  from  Tierra  Grande  and  Fort  Hernando.  Theo  briefly  wondered  if  the  noise  from  the
fireworks and concert would affect the zombies but then hit on the real benefit: a big party in the Pointe
was bound to draw locals and tourists away from Fort Hernando’s beaches tonight.
Satisfied everyone was on the same page, he climbed into the front seat  of his SUV.  Jorie  was  staring
intently at her scanner.
“Visitors?” he asked, anxious to get his own party started yet very aware and more than a little nervous
about what could happen.
She shook her head. “Not yet. But we won’t have to wait long.”
He cranked the engine. “Tresh?”
“No indication. But I discount nothing.”
“So we go in loaded for bear.”
She frowned. “Full, but with no clothes?”
It took Theo a moment—while pulling out of the parking lot and keeping an eye on Zeke’s Mustang—to
unscramble her misinterpretation.  Bear.  Bare.  He  grinned  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  his  adrenaline  was
threatening to race again.
Zombies loomed. A C-Prime. The Tresh. His career. And the foremost thought in his mind—even with
Rordan no doubt glaring daggers at the back of his head—was Jorie naked.
Hopeless. He was sincerely, unequivocally hopeless.
“A bear,”  he said,  then spelled  the word,  “is a  large,  fierce animal. It  means we  go in  ready  to  fight
anything.”
Jorie hefted the Hazer. “If this doesn’t work, anything is a good possibility.”
Rordan’s voice was a bearlike growl from the backseat. “It will work.”
Theo had no means to judge that. He only sensed that Jorie was worried. And that worried him.
The road from Tierra Grande to Fort Hernando narrowed from four lanes to two, the palm-tree-dotted
center median giving way to a plain tarmac road with rutted, sandy shoulders. Traffic disappeared  as  if
someone  had  beamed  the cars  away.  The state  park  didn’t have any residences,  and  the gates  to  its
overnight campground were locked at nine P.M. That meant another hour where people could yet come
and go into the park.
Theo hoped they all went over to the Pointe for the concert. The fewer innocent civilians around to  get
munched on by a zombie, the better.
Headlights approached. Two boxy campers, a pickup towing a camper, and an old VW convertible with
three teens inside bounced by as Theo headed over the small bridge and  into the park.  A few minutes
later, the solitary road dead-ended at park headquarters. The old fort, fishing pier, and the popular north
beach were to the right; the east beach to the left. No headlights twinkled from either direction. Theo had
been out here dozens of times, but he was never more aware of its isolation than now.

And he had another cop, an FDLE sniper, and two Guardians with him.
“Which way?” he asked Jorie, mentally tallying the pros and cons of the smaller east beach area against
the north beach and its picnic tables, shelters, restrooms, and playground. There was more cover on the
north beach and it faced directly out into the Gulf of Mexico. The east beach faced the towering Skyway
Bridge. He kept telling himself that both were too remote for there to be a concern about being seen, but
the north beach had more advantages.
“That way,” Jorie said, pointing out the window.
Theo’s heart sank. East beach. Little cover once they passed the small picnic area. The majority of the
beach faced the bridge and the channel. If there  was  night boat  traffic—people  fishing, partying, doing
what people did on the water under cover of darkness—it might be an issue.
He headed east—the lights on the Skyway Bridge glowing in the distance—and filed the location away
as one more thing he could do nothing about.
They parked almost at the end of the beach road, the three vehicles in a half circle. Theo leaned against
the front fender, smelling the tang of salt in the air and listening to the wind whistle through the dune grass,
while Jorie and Rordan had their heads together over her scanner.
Zeke and David—standing by David’s pickup—were checking their weapons,  including the Tresh  rifle
Jorie had given David. Theo let himself fixate on Jorie, on the tilt of her head, the curve of her shoulders,
the soft short curtain of hair brushing her cheek.  He  saw  her in patches  of light and  shadow  from the
vehicles’ headlights and the full moon now rising overhead.
Some urge he couldn’t  identify forced  him to  memorize what he could  see  of  her  in  this  chiaroscuro
landscape. It was as if he wanted to capture a prebattle picture so, when it was over, he could recall her
satisfaction, her joy.
But something else said that wasn’t it at all.
He couldn’t let himself think about that. You go home the end of each shift. It was something all rookies
learned, a motto that was supposed to keep you alive through whatever came your way on the streets.
Don’t focus on what can go wrong. Focus on getting home.
They would. End of this mission, he and Jorie would go home.
“Theo!” Jorie straightened abruptly,  swinging the scanner  toward  him. The screen  swirled with colors,
with data. Then it screeched.
His heart jolted accordingly and his gaze locked on movement behind her.
A faint greenish glow swirled twenty-five feet down the beach from where they stood. He drew his G-1
pistol as it became less translucent. It was easily three times as large as any he’d seen before.
“C-Prime,” Jorie announced. “Hold fire.”
“Holy shit,” said David as four more green portals, smaller but solidifying quickly, suddenly popped into
the air. Theo targeted the closest one and traced its edges with laser fire.
Then all hell broke loose.
Two of the smaller portals  erupted,  zombies slithering through them like  oiled  snakes  going  downhill.

Laser  fire spit from  Rordan’s  weapon,  slashing  at  the  remaining  expanding  portal.  David  leveled  his
assault rifle and hit an emerging zombie with three quick, clean shots to the eyes.
But that only blinded it. It didn’t stop it.
Zeke fired as a razor-edged arm raked too close to David’s head.
“Get its heart,  under  the chin!” Theo  dropped  to  one  knee  for a  better  angle and  punched  out  three
bursts. But the zombie—damn, the thing had to be more than fifteen feet tall!—took that moment to lunge
sideways toward Rordan.
Theo fired again at  the  creature’s  jawline.  You  owe  me  one,  he  silently  told  Rordan  as  the  zombie
dissolved into a roiling cloud of green gas.
Rordan darted a narrow-eyed glance at Theo, as if he’d heard.
There was  no time for a  quick  comeback  or  kudos.  Two  other  zombies moved  into the glare  of  the
vehicles’  headlights,  lunging  toward  Theo  yet  staying  close  to  the  C-Prime.  The  C-Prime  was  fully
through  the  portal,  huge,  almost  bloated-looking,  the  wormlike  creatures  on  its  surface  writhing  so
frantically that they flung themselves off in spinning clumps.
Theo saw Jorie nimbly sidestep  a  squirming clump and—Cristos!—suddenly realized how close,  how
too goddamned close, she was to the C-Prime.
Even though he knew  better  than  to  distract  her,  he  couldn’t  help  himself.  Fear  and  possessiveness
warred with practicality. He shouted her name but she didn’t turn, didn’t even glance his way.  Rordan
did, but only for a second.  Then the Guardian commander  was  keeping  pace  with Jorie,  covering her
back per prearranged plan. Both moved too dangerously close to the biggest zombie he’d even seen.
The sharp,  rapid  crack  of David’s  assault  rifle  brought  Theo  back  to  his  own  problems.  Four  large
zombies—the one  he’d  killed had  been  replaced  while he was  watching  Jorie—advanced  across  the
sand toward Zeke. An upper arm lashed out, lengthening as if by magic before Theo’s eyes. He fired at
an arm joint as Zeke hit the sand, rolling to safety by a margin of inches.
“Extenders!” he called out to David and Zeke as  he jogged  toward  them, his boots  sinking in the soft
sand. “The arms grow. Watch it!”
Another slash by a different zombie sent the tops of several medium-size palm trees flying. Theo ducked
as fronds  sailed past  him, then straightened  again, firing. He  took  out the zombie’s topmost  eye.  The
zombie reared back with a keening roar. Theo fired again. The laser’s energy smashed into the creature’s
white heart, and in an almost blinding green flash it disappeared.
A larger one stepped up immediately in its place, its extenders filling the gap made by its missing partner.
Behind it, Theo saw two more portals form. He swore harshly in Greek. He had to function for Jorie as
Tamlynne had—destroying the portals before they could become zombies. David and  Zeke  would just
have to handle the ones that got through.
He bounded for the pavement, trying to keep clear of the zombies as he headed for the forming portals.
He heard David shout out a warning, followed immediately by the harsh sound of gunfire. He dropped to
his knees behind a palm tree, cursing at the pain as stones cut through his jeans. A whining sound told him
a razored claw had passed inches from his head.
“Clear!” Zeke called out. Theo sprang to his feet and ran. Three portals now glowed a sickly green, and,
claws or not, he had to take out at least two of them, or Jorie wouldn’t be able to get a clear shot to fire

the dart.
These zombies were not like the juveniles he’d fought in the park.  These  were  full-grown, nasty-assed
pieces of shit. And they were deadly as hell.
He sited the largest portal and ringed it with laser fire from his G-1, barely waiting to see what happened
before moving to the next one. That odd fooshing noise a suddenly collapsing portal made was the only
way he knew if he’d succeeded—or not.
One down… But the next two—God  damn  it!—weren’t  so  cooperative.  For  every  one  he fooshed,
another appeared. He felt as if he were inside a giant pinball machine with the damned things popping up
left and right.
Fire! Jog left. Fire! Jog right. Duck, drop, roll, because a zombie noticed him again. Sweat ran down his
face in spite of the cooling night air and the breeze off the bay.
He darted another glance at Jorie. Rordan was doing a good job of keeping the zombies away from her
and hitting the few portals that formed nearby,  but Jorie  hadn’t  been  able  to  get into position.  Several
times he saw her drop to one knee and prepare to fire, only to have to bolt out of the way of a clawed
arm or worm-covered leg.
Seven zombies now guarded the C-Prime, with three directly in front of it. Jorie and Rordan hit them with
a barrage. Zeke and David took on the other  four, with David now using the Tresh  laser  rifle to  very
neatly drop two with nice shots under their chins. Theo laced two growing portals, going back and forth
from one to the other, but he failed to see the third off to his left until a zombie was already halfway out of
it.
He spun, fired, and missed. When he turned back, claws were reaching through the two portals in front
of him.
One closed with a hard foosh! A glance to his left showed Zeke taking on that zombie, yellow goo flying
as bullets plowed into its face. Zeke wasn’t going to eat for a week after this.
Theo peppered the remaining portal with laser fire, slicing across a zombie’s extended arm. It fell to the
sand, spasming as the portal snapped closed.
A harsh shout in Rordan’s voice made him turn quickly. The spate of Alarsh words  meant nothing, but
they didn’t have to. David’s excellent marksmanship had eradicated all but two zombies—and one was
reeling from Zeke’s fire. Jorie surged between them, heading straight for the C-Prime.
Theo’s heart stopped, but his brain and  feet  didn’t.  He  bolted  toward  her,  watching her focus on the
towering monster as it seemed to focus on her, upper extenders uncoiling with an almost sinuous grace.
She was too close. In the dark, cut by swaths of light from the cars’ headlights, there was no way she’d
see those upper arms bearing down on her.
The only reason he didn’t shout her name was it would have required an expenditure of energy. And he
needed every ounce if he was to reach her in time.
Rordan was too far away. She must have slipped past him as she had through Theo’s grasp days ago.
She dropped to her knees a few yards from the C-Prime’s  feet,  then shouldered  her rifle. Theo  heard
Rordan’s angry shouts to his left. He slowed, Glock out now, G-1 in his other hand, his gaze locked on
that descending arm.

He had to let her fire first. If he fired and  the zombie jerked  away,  her shot  would go wild. And they
didn’t have a second dart.
“I got your six, babe!” He shoved the G-1 into his waistband. The Glock was firmly in his right hand. “Hit
’im!”
Somewhere in the distance there was a high whine underscored by gunfire—David’s laser  rifle. Zeke’s
Glock.  Rordan’s  G-1  flashing through it all. But Theo  couldn’t  let his attention  waver.  There  was  the
C-Prime. There was Jorie. The first threatened his world. The second was his whole world.
Nothing else mattered.
The Hazer  jerked,  a  barely  visible white-hot  trail spitting upward—not  at  the  C-Prime’s  heart  but  at
another vulnerable spot under its jaw. A miss of inches would hit the white heart, killing it and the chance
to infect the herd.
Teeth clenched, Theo waited for the flare of the laser  against the zombie’s charged  skin. He  fired the
Glock at  the arm,  so  close  now  he  could  see  the  worms  twisting  and  turning.  Three  shots  in  rapid
succession.
“Down!” he screamed at Jorie. “Get down!”
He lunged toward her, firing one last time as yellow goo exploded, splattering around him like pus-filled
rain. He tackled her, covering her body with his as something slammed hard  into his back.  He  tensed,
waiting for the searing pain of claws ripping through his flesh, but whatever  it was  bounced  off, leaving
him gasping and groaning and very aware that he hurt like hell. But Jorie was alive.
Swearing a blue streak at him in Alarsh, but she was alive.
He glanced up. The C-Prime towered over them, seeming stunned, one arm missing, the others splaying
outward slowly.
He didn’t know what that meant. He didn’t care. He pulled himself to his feet and her with him. “Go!” He
took his gaze off the zombie just long enough to catch a wicked grin playing over Jorie’s lips. It was the
image he’d waited for. “Did you—”
Then  someone  shouted,  “Move,  now!”  Theo  grabbed  Jorie’s  arm.  They  barreled  back  toward  the
vehicles, where Zeke and Rordan fought with the last zombie.
A piercing roar sounded behind them.
“It’s working,” Jorie huffed out as they ran. “The virus burns. The C-Prime feels it. It  will return to  the
herd. Seek healing. Kill them—”
Theo saw it as she did, her voice halting abruptly. His boots dug into the sand. She raised her G-1 at the
translucent milky square jutting out of the night darkness and shouted something in Alarsh.
Her words needed no translation.
The Tresh had arrived.
 

29 
Theo dragged Jorie behind David’s pickup, then shoved another clip into his gun. The sound of Rordan’s
laser filled the air. Theo edged around the front of the pickup, sighted one of the humanoid forms visible
through the shimmering translucence, and fired.
No screams, no sounds of a body hitting the sand. Nothing.
Skata.
“Ass-faced demon’s whores!” Jorie, beside him, poked frantically at her scanner.
“Their shielding,” Theo guessed.
“Enhanced to counter projectile weapons.” She said something in Alarsh as  Rordan  scrambled  to  their
side of the truck. From the look on Rordan’s face, Theo guessed Jorie had just delivered the bad news.
Nil weapons don’t work.
David—just off to Theo’s left and using Zeke’s Mustang for cover—let loose with three shots from his
assault rifle.
“No good,” Theo called out to him. “Shields!”
“And that big one?” David shouted back.
The C-Prime  hadn’t  created  a  portal  and  returned  to  the herd,  as  Jorie  said  it would.  It  stood  in the
moonlight swaying, serrated jaws grinding. Something was wrong.
“Are the Tresh controlling the C-Prime?” Theo asked her.
She was working her scanner and talking in soft but urgent tones to Rordan. “They’re trying,” she said,
after a long moment during which Theo’s nerves continued to fray down  to  the last strand.  He  did not
want things to go wrong like this. He did not want to have to call for backup from Chief Brantley, who’d
arrive with the media—and probably the end of Theo’s career.
“They know we did something to the C-Prime but not what—yet,” she said. “They can’t risk it returning
to the herd until they know. But they also can’t terminate it—a herd that size would be insane without its
C-Prime.”
Suddenly Jorie barked out a short, mirthless laugh.
“They have an additional problem. They constructed their shields strong enough to prevent any incoming
fire. But they also prevent outgoing. This is a blissful recurring problem with them.”
Theo leaned around the edge of the pickup  and  eyed  the three  Tresh  encased  in the translucent haze.
Definitely not happy. Like Jorie, they had handheld gizmos that two of them were furiously tapping. The
third, armed with a rifle…
He ducked back. “Is that Prow?”
Jorie’s gaze met his. “Yes. And I’m sure he knows I’m here.”

Rordan said something, his voice low and urgent.
“My problem,” Jorie answered him. “I will handle it.”
Theo knew she meant Prow, and her answer  didn’t please  him any more  than it pleased  Rordan.  For
once, he and Pompous Asshole were in agreement.
Movement near  Zeke’s  Mustang caught Theo’s  attention.  David and  Zeke,  motioning  that  they  were
coming over to the pickup. The two vehicles were almost dovetailed at the front, but there was a gap—a
potentially dangerous gap—of a few open feet. “We’ll cover you,” Theo called out.
The rush of bodies made Prow jerk his head in their direction, but nothing more. Zeke hunkered next to
Theo,  his  brows  down,  his  mouth  tight.  Theo’s  cop  senses  went  on  overtime.  Something  was
wrong—more than the obvious swaying of the C-Prime and the trio of Tresh.
Zeke shot a glance at Jorie, then back to Theo again. He patted the cell-phone case on his belt. “Suzanne
text-messaged me. I…” He glanced at Jorie again. “Shit. Okay. Tammy’s missing.”
Theo saw the color drain from Jorie’s face as he felt his own heart drop. “Tammy? When?” He draped
his fingers over Jorie’s wrist, trying to reassure her through his touch. I’m here for you.
“She leaves your residence?” Jorie’s voice was strained.
“Yes—I mean, I don’t know. About a half hour ago. They were folding laundry in the den. Suzanne went
to the bathroom to put the towels away. When she came back, Tammy was gone. It was only seconds,
she said. Not even half a minute. The doors were all locked. But she’s not in the house, she’s not in the
yard, she’s nowhere to be seen in the neighborhood. I’m…I’m sorry,” Zeke stuttered, and Zeke  never
stuttered. “She’s just…gone.”
“The doors were locked,” Theo repeated.
“Locked from the inside. There’s no way she could leave and lock them behind her.”
Theo knew that. That’s why he asked. That meant there was only one other way out of Zeke’s house.
“Tresh,” Rordan said, spitting out the word. “The Tresh now take Tamlynne.”
Jorie turned abruptly and glared at Prow. If looks could kill, Prow  would be  flattened,  pulverized, and
incinerated. Theo would gladly help, but he didn’t think the takedown moves he’d learned in the police
academy would be sufficient.
He was, he realized with a sinking feeling, out of his league. Killing zombies was one thing. Dealing with
intergalactic politics and the kidnapping of a Guardian officer was far and away another. He didn’t even
know if Brantley and DHS could—
“Something’s happening.” David’s voice held an urgent note.
Jorie was  already  rising, Rordan  behind her.  Theo  glanced  at  her  scanner,  even  though  the  swirls  of
colors and ASCII-like letters meant nothing to him. Then he looked at the C-Prime, because Jorie was.
A green glow encircled the monster’s head, spilling over its shoulders and damaged upper-arm socket.
“It’s returning to the herd?” Finally, something going right. He hoped.
“Trying,” Jorie said, as Rordan carried on a monologue in Alarsh. “Perhaps I can help it.” Her voice held

a harsh note.
“We,” Theo said, but she was already ignoring him, tapping at her scanner. She brought her G-1 up to
the unit. By the cascade  of lights down  the  weapon’s  side,  Theo  guessed  something  had  transferred
between the two.
She flipped her eyepiece down and her mike up. “Cover me,” she told Theo over her shoulder.
“Wait a minute, young lady,” David drawled, inching forward.
“Jorie.” Theo clamped his hand on her shoulder firmly enough to let her know he meant business. Just in
case she missed the warning tone in David’s voice.
She jerked  her face  toward  him, brows  down,  golden eyes  narrowed,  and  the intensity he saw  there
fairly sizzled the air between them. “Petrakos,” she said. “They have Tamlynne. Now it’s my turn.”
“We work as a team—”
“My problem. My solution.”
He’d heard that before. Didn’t like it then, liked it even less now.
She shook off his hand. Then someone bumped him, moving past.
Rordan.
Jorie staggered. She regained her footing quickly. Rordan’s name was the only thing Theo understood as
she shouted  after  the man who’d  already  cleared  the half circle of vehicles. Then  she  bolted.  Theo’s
desperate grasp for her rewarded him with nothing but air.
Fuck!
The Tresh had Tamlynne. The only chance Jorie had of getting her back would be to force the Tresh to
drop their shielding and try to kidnap Prow. A fact Rordan must have figured out seconds before Theo
did.
Rordan, who wanted to play hero.
Damn him.
Theo tore after Jorie and Rordan, who were skirting the edge of the low dunes that lined the beach road.
And who were arguing volubly if not understandably.
The Tresh  turned,  watching in their shielded  space.  Prow  raised  his weapon.  He’d  have  to  drop  the
shielding to fire, but that wasn’t the only thing the Tresh could do.
Three greenish circles suddenly hovered over the sand. Theo  had  a  feeling he would run out of ammo
long before the Tresh ran out of zombies to send.
Jorie laced the closest zombie portal with her laser, then shouted at Rordan. He’d stopped, dropped to
one knee, scanner out. Theo was only a few feet from Jorie when the C-Prime let out an eerie screech. It
lurched toward Rordan, arms lengthening as it moved.
Jorie screamed Rordan’s name, but Rordan was already racing to  meet the zombie, scanner  raised.  A
clawed arm shot out, clacking as it zeroed in on Rordan’s head. The C-Prime’s mouth opened, and, in a

flash, Theo knew what had happened to Jorie’s agent whose mummified head bore the indentations of a
zombie’s  jaw:  Guardian  tech  set  to  spur  a  reaction,  and  a  Guardian  agent  who  couldn’t  move  fast
enough.
So did Jorie, who put on a burst of speed just as Theo almost reached her.
“No!” he shouted, but she wasn’t stopping and the arm was coming down. He heard gunfire. He didn’t
know if it was David or Zeke. It didn’t matter. The zombie’s claw struck Rordan’s shoulder, sending him
sprawling in the sand, the scanner spinning a few feet to his left. But a  second  claw was  there,  coming
from the opposite direction.
If Theo stopped to aim and fire, he’d never reach Jorie. And she was already at Rordan’s feet.
Theo’s  heart  stuttered  as  Jorie  reached  up for the claw,  his own cry of horror  almost  strangling  him.
Lungs burning, he lunged for her, intent on hanging on to her, no matter what. If he couldn’t pull her away
and the C-Prime took them both, so be it.
Cristos!
He tripped over Rordan’s boots and grabbed her waist. She jerked up, the zombie lifting her. Her arms
moved  frantically,  and  only  then  did  Theo  realize  the  C-Prime  didn’t  have  her.  She  held  on  to  the
C-Prime.
“Theo! Loop this—”
The scanner’s strap. She fumbled with the strap around one of the long bolts dotting the claw. With one
arm still around her waist and his boots barely touching the sand, Theo reached  past  her and  wrapped
the strap once, twice around the bolt.
“Let go!” he bellowed at her.
“No. One more!” She hung on to  the edge  of the metallic arm and  flipped the entire scanner  over  an
adjoining bolt. “Now! Jump!”
She fell against him as they dropped to the sand. He dragged her to her feet. There was a third arm.
“Move!” He shoved her away.
“Rordan!” She spun, reaching for the man lying motionless behind them.
“I’ve got him. Now go!” He grabbed Rordan’s wrists. As soon as he was clear of the C-Prime’s arms,
he’d throw the man over his shoulder, fireman style. But right now speed was critical.
He caught a fleeting glimpse of a grin on Jorie’s lips. “Good work, agapi mou!”
Her  Greek  accent  was  lousy,  but  his  heart  swelled.  “Move!”  he  said  again.  He  didn’t  know  why
attaching the scanner to the C-Prime was important, but they’d done it. They were going to make it.
She darted past him as he dragged Rordan away from the zombie. Theo was aware  of David shouting
something. And Zeke—
“Down! Get down!” Zeke’s command was clearer.
Another spate of gunfire. Then the high-pitched whine of a laser rifle. Theo jerked toward the sound. The
Tresh shielding was gone. Prow raised his rifle and fired.

“Jorie, down!” Theo screamed as he released  Rordan’s  wrists.  He  yanked  his Glock  from the holster
and fired three shots at Prow, center mass. He pulled off two more as the Devastator lurched backward
from the impact of the bullets, laser rifle sliding from his fingers.
Both Tresh on Prow’s right fell too, but Theo didn’t know if it was David or Zeke who took them out,
because someone else was falling.
Jorie.
Jorie, twisting sideways, her G-1 slipping from her grasp, her eyes wide, her knees folding.
Theo bellowed out an anguished cry and raced toward her. She lay on the sand  when he reached  her,
four neat holes puncturing her right shoulder, two more on her right side charring her skin, the edge of her
uniform, and the top of her technosleeve. Her eyes  were  still wide,  her breath  coming in hard,  rasping
gasps.
“Th-Theo?”
Cristos.  Cristos!  “Babe.”  His own voice was  as  breathy  as  hers.  “Don’t  move.  Stay  still.  We’ll  get
help.” He  reached  instinctively for his police  radio,  but it wasn’t  on his hip, and  for a  long,  agonizing
moment, confusion flooded him. Then he remembered: he wasn’t  a  cop  now.  He  was  Theo  Petrakos,
who’d acted without Chief Brantley’s approval or help. Without the Bahia Vista PD as backup.
“Zeke!” Heart thudding painfully in his chest, he fumbled for the cell phone on his belt. The 911 dispatch
would get an EMT unit here. There was a small fire station on the island, not far from the 7-Eleven. Three
minutes, maybe five.
Jorie’s eyelids fluttered, her gaze unfocused as Zeke and David knelt beside him in the sand.
“Agapi mou.” He took her cold fingers in his left hand, flipped open the cell phone with his right. “Stay
with me, agapi mou.”
“David’s got dispatch,” Zeke said, closing his hand over Theo’s phone. “We—”
Voices shouted something behind him. But not in English. Something…
“…Mikkalah! Mister Zeke!”
Theo looked quickly over his shoulder. Tamlynne Herryck and a team of Guardians sprinted toward him
across the sand.
Tammy?
“Tammy!” Zeke thrust himself to his feet.
“Mister Zeke,” she answered, then it was all Alarsh and hands shoving Theo away, scanners beeping and
pinging and something that looked like a short Wookiee placing silvery pads on Jorie’s wounds.
“Time is critical,” a familiar voice said behind him.
Rordan,  blood  dripping  down  the  side  of  his  face  and  staining  one  arm  of  his  uniform  where  the
C-Prime’s claw had ripped through. He leaned heavily on a shorter man’s shoulder. Another Guardian in
green and black. “Serious injury, she has,” Rordan added.
The  shorter  Guardian  said  something.  Rordan  shrugged,  then  winced.  “I  go  med-tech.  Jorie  go

med-tech.”
Med-tech.  Theo’s  brain  finally  kicked  into  gear,  overriding  the  panic  that  had  encompassed  him.
Med-tech. “Your ship’s here?”
“New ship,” Rordan said. “Find Tamlynne. Search us. See Tresh.  We  go now.” He  hesitated.  “Thank
you, Theo Petrakos.”
Something in the man’s tone chilled Theo. “You go to the ship?” But he asked the question of thin, cold
air.  Rordan  and  his  escort  faded  before  his  eyes.  “No!  Jorie!”  Theo  whipped  around.  Jorie,  the
Wookiee, and the medical team were gone. Only Tammy remained, hand on the transcomm unit on her
belt.
Jorie. His Jorie was gone. Desperately, he motioned toward the night sky. “Beam me up there, Tammy.”
“Regrets, Sergeant Petrakos.” Tammy’s voice was soft, her words uttered slowly. “Mission is over. It is
good. The C-Prime is with herd.”
Theo shot a glance to his right, only then realizing the towering zombie was gone.
“Virus spreads now,” Tammy continued. “Tresh lose this herd.”
“And Jorie?”
Tammy  hesitated,  drawing  a  breath.  Then:  “She,  my  commander,  is  strong.  She  hurts  much,  much
serious. You…” and she stopped again, glancing first at Zeke, then at  David.  “You have deity?  Faith?
Yes? You pray. I pray very much now. For my commander.”
Cristos, Cristos. Yes, he could pray. But he didn’t believe anymore that his prayers would be answered.
Tammy splayed one hand outward. “Mister Zeke, tell Miss Suzanne much thanks.  You are  very bright
stars in my sky of memory. You understand?”
“I’ll tell her, Tamlynne,” Zeke said quietly. “We’ll miss you. And we’ll pray for Jorie.”
A  tremulous  smile  played  across  Tammy’s  lips.  She  tapped  her  transcomm.  Theo  watched—his
shoulders so stiff they hurt almost as much as his heart—as she faded into the darkness.
Jorie. A bright star in the sky of my memory.
A breeze kicked up, peppering his face with fine grains of sand.  The air tasted  of fish and  salt.  Lights
twinkled on the Skyway Bridge across the water, which made a soft, shushing sound as it lapped invisibly
against the sand.
In the distance, a siren wailed.
“Theo.” David said his name.
Theo shook his head. He couldn’t speak, because to speak he’d have to unclench his jaw, and if he did
that, he wouldn’t be able to contain the pained, anguished cry he knew would come out.
“Theo, the EMTs will be here shortly.”
He’d never see her again. He’d never know if she lived or died.

“Guess we can give them those Tresh guys,” Zeke intoned. “And the zombie arm. The ME might enjoy
that. What do you think, amigo?”
The siren grew louder. Theo looked away from the lights on the bridge and toward the southern horizon,
where the dark water met the dark sky. Flashes of light caught the corner of his eye. Fireworks off to the
west, like shooting stars. He’d never be able to see them again without thinking of her.
“She’s safe, Theo.” Zeke’s voice softened. “They have technology we don’t. She’ll be fine. She’s back
with her own people now.”
Back with Rordan. Jorie has dream to be captain. You can give her this?
He had,  he realized.  If she  lived,  he  had  given  her  the  chance  for  her  captaincy.  The  C-Prime  was
infected, the herd would die soon. The Tresh were out of business. All because of one Commander Jorie
Mikkalah.
Captain Jorie Mikkalah.
He held on to that thought, his prayer for her.
It was all he had.
 

30 
“Captain Mikkalah, glad you’re back with us. You’ve had us worried.”
Jorie slowly opened her eyes at the sound of the unfamiliar female voice. The high-pitched tone with the
clipped Gendari accent wasn’t Marai, the med-tech on the Sakanah. The Sakanah was…She  blinked
from the room’s bright lights. This wasn’t the Sakanah, but she was in a sick bay. She’d been here for
several days being poked and prodded and hooked up to tech because…because…
It came back to  her in a  rush: the C-Prime,  Rordan’s  use  of her program  to  lure it and  stimulate the
formation of a portal to send it back once it had been dealt with—a complicated little maneuver that had
taken her years to create—and Rordan’s failure to attach the altered tech to the zombie’s arm.
She’d done it so many times to a normal zombie. Never before to a C-Prime.
Neither had Rordan. Thieving ass-faced demon’s spawn. Try for her captaincy, would he?
Captaincy. Captain. Captain Mikkalah?
She blinked again. The  unfamiliar  female  voice  belonged  to  a  familiar  female  face.  She’d  never  met
Admiral Nerzanya, but she recognized  the thin, pale-eyed  Gendari  woman with the bright yellow hair.
Who in the Guardian ranks  wouldn’t?  And there  was  thieving ass-faced  demon’s  spawn  Kip  Rordan
behind her.
“Admiral, sir,” she said, her voice sounding distinctly rusty. Her body felt correspondingly disused.
Of course. The C-Prime. The Tresh. And Theo—
Theo.  The man with the very good  face.  The man who—She  glanced  quickly  around  the  room.  No
Theo. The Tresh…no. She remembered him firing at Prow. Just after Prow fired at her. So Theo had to
be alive. Where was he?
Her heart sank. Rordan. Thieving bastard. Rordan knew about the restrainer implant. Rordan knew Theo
knew about the Guardians.  Theo  might already  be  on Paroo.  Or  worse.  Admiral Nerzanya  hated  nils
even more than Captain Pietr did.
Pietr. “The Sakanah?”
“The ship was rescued by a battle squadron that we diverted to this sector, based on new intelligence the
Vekrans provided. They tracked one of their missionary ships missing for over half a century now…”
Missionary ship? Theo’s misquote sounded in Jorie’s mind: The needs of the many outweigh the needs
of the one. Is that how he, his people, knew Vekran sacred text? And starship warp factors?
“…to this system, and they alerted us to Tresh energy trails,” the admiral was saying. “My flagship was
part of that squadron. The Sakanah took damage, but casualties were light. And my cruisers destroyed
the Tresh ship that attacked her. So rest easy, Captain.”
Captain.  Nerzanya  said  it  again.  “My  rank  is  commander,”  Jorie  chanced,  knowing  that  correcting
Nerzanya wasn’t something one did if one wanted to stay a Guardian.
The woman smiled. “I’m aware of Pietr’s offer. You have more than earned the promotion.”

Jorie held herself very still, while every  fiber in her body  wanted  to  dance  with blissful glee. Captain.
Captain Jorie Mikkalah! She did it! She—
Theo.
“We’re establishing an outpost in this sector,” Nerzanya was saying. “This nil world is a  useless  ball of
dirt, but the Tresh want it. We need to find out if it’s for more than to breed zombies. Plus, as we expand
the Hatches,  it might become  useful. This sector,  if you accept  the commission, would be  under  your
command, Mikkalah.”
This sector. Earth, the planet aptly named after dirt. The planet that was Theo’s home.
Theo. She couldn’t ask yet.
“Earth’s planetary governments are aware of this?”
“I don’t think the nils are yet ready for us, though that is something that will be considered at a later date.
We’ve deleted all traces of our visit by reclaiming Agent Wain’s body and the zombie corpses.”
Jorie hesitated, not sure she wanted to know the answer. “And Th—Sergeant Petrakos and his people?”
“Unfortunate casualties  but not unexpected,  knowing the Tresh,”  the admiral said  with a  slight nod  to
Rordan. “Full details are in the commander’s report. Fortunately, he neutralized the nil sergeant’s implant,
so there will be no record of it if the bodies are autopsied.”
The bodies… Theo. Theo, Zeke and David Gray.
Theo. Her breath caught painfully. Please, please, no…
She stared at Rordan, her body rigid. He stared back at her.
The admiral—who’d made her a captain, who had little respect for nils—waited.
“Thank you, Commander Rordan,” Jorie said evenly.
Nerzanya  smiled. “Congratulations on your promotion,  Captain.”  With a  nod,  she  turned  and  left  the
small room.
Rordan stayed, with only the sound of voices in the main sick bay and then the muted thump of the large
doors closing behind the admiral filling the silence between them.
“I neutralized Theo’s restrainer,” Jorie said finally.
“I know. You have a knack for those kinds of things. I’m still learning.” He pulled his scanner  from his
belt and held it out toward her. “Here’s the report. What do you think?”
She almost couldn’t look at it. Zeke Martinez. David Gray. Theo…
She changed screens, looked at  the coding behind the images, looked  at  time-date  stamps,  looked  at
everything, even though her heart was breaking and the tears filling her eyes sometimes made it damned
near impossible to see.
And then Tamlynne’s report on Suzanne’s death…
Tamlynne…

Tamlynne wasn’t nearly as skilled as Rordan in forgeries. But she was good enough to  put this one  by
Nerzanya’s scrutiny.
“You slut-bucket bastard,” Jorie whispered, but she was smiling.
Rordan smiled too.
“The admiral’s shuttle departs within the sweep,” he said.  “I told  her you weren’t  one  for any kind of
captain’s ceremony. You’d want to get right to work. She’s  leaving us this ship—a  rather  decent  Red
Star Class Seven. Not as big as the Sakanah, but it has an upgraded PMaT. Much less disconcerting. I
thought—once Nerzanya was gone—you’d want to test it. Until then, as your first officer, I suggest you
take a relaxing cleanser and find something to eat. Captain.” He inclined his head in a gesture of respect.
“I’ll be on the bridge if you need me.”
Jorie watched him leave, tears of gratitude and amazement spilling down her cheeks.
 
“I’ve always loved a man in uniform.”
Theo closed the door of his marked patrol car and turned at the sound of Sophie Goldstein’s voice. She
strode up his driveway, a veritable rainbow of colors, from her red shoes to her blue-and-red polka-dot
pants to her yellow-and-blue shirt with a green-and-blue polka-dot vest. She held some kind of covered
dish in her arms.  Again. He  couldn’t  imagine what it was  this afternoon.  So  far this  week  he’d  been
treated to brisket, cheese blintzes, noodle kugel, potato pancakes, and more honey puffs.
“Kasha varnishkes.” She shoved the dish at him. “It’s got rice, noodles, and  mushrooms. It’s  good  for
you. Have you heard from your lady friend?”
His “lady friend” had returned to northern Canada to be with her family for some kind of emergency. It
was somewhat the truth. And it kept Sophie from poking further into his obvious blue mood.
A mood that had little to do with his return to uniform.
That early-morning meeting almost a week ago with Chief Brantley and DHS hadn’t gone so  well. The
zombie corpses—including Baby—had disappeared, giving DHS little to put into their top-secret file on
the matter other than the Paroo cube, his G-1, and his, Brantley’s, and his team’s accounts. And sworn
statements by all involved to reveal nothing without explicit permission from the feds. But at least Internal
Affairs hadn’t been there, and Theo hadn’t lost his job. Nor his rank. He was still a sergeant. He was just
a sergeant in uniform working street patrol.
It was a way to keep his mind off Jorie. And to do his penance to Saint Brantley.
He was damned lucky to still have a job.
He transferred  his duty duffel  bag  to  his  left  hand  and  took  the  covered  dish.  “You’re  spoiling  me,
Sophie.” The dish was still warm, and the aroma, as  always,  was  tantalizing. But in truth he’d  found it
hard to enjoy much of anything since New Year’s Eve.
“So what’s the news from Jorie?”
“Still tied up with family.” He tried to smile and failed.

Sophie Goldstein made the tsk-tsk noise that some women had down to a fine art. She patted his arm.
“Things will work out.”
Juggling the dish and his duffel, Theo unlocked his back door, then dropped the duffel on the floor.  He
slid the dish onto the counter. A cold orange soda waited for him in the fridge.
He took a swig, then plodded through his living room, stripping off his uniform shirt as he went.  A wry
grin played over his mouth at Sophie’s comment about a “man in uniform.” There was nothing remotely
sexy about a white polyester shirt and green polyester pants. And a bulky tac vest. Though Aunt Tootie
might not agree. She always said Uncle Stavros—
“Theo?”
He stopped dead in his tracks in his bedroom doorway, shirt halfway down one arm, and stared at the
woman in the green-and-black jumpsuit rising from the edge of his bed. His heart thumped so loudly in
his chest that it momentarily trapped the name he was trying to say.
She looked like…
“Jorie?” His voice rasped with emotion. He unglued his feet from the floor and sent the command to his
legs to move, now! “Jorie!”
Then she was against his chest and in his arms, and warm and real, and, Cristos, Cristos, she was alive.
She was alive and he was holding her, touching her, kissing her. He tasted the salt of the tears on her face
as they mixed with his own.
Jorie.
He yanked the shirt off his arm, then thrust his hands in her hair, giving her mouth no escape from his. But
she  leaned  into  him,  her  arms  locked  around  his  neck.  He  had  no  escape  either.  And  this  was  a
wonderful, beautiful prison.
Only when his hands roamed down her body and up again did he remember the ugly charred wounds on
her skin. “Are you okay?” He ran his fingers lightly over her shoulder.
“Now, yes.” She tilted her head slightly, her eyes half-closed, her smile incredibly enticing.
“What happened? Can you—” A hundred  questions  raced  through his mind, but as  desperately  as  he
wanted answers, he had to kiss her again.
“Please tell me you’re not here to say good-bye,” he murmured as he released her mouth.
Keeping her hands linked around his neck, she leaned back and looked up at him. “Actually, I’m here to
offer you a job.”
A job? With the Guardians? Relief flooded him—and a surge of excitement. There’d be problems if he
left, but somehow, some way, he’d handle them. “Do I have time to see Tootie and Stavros?”
She grinned broadly. “No good-byes, Theo Petrakos. We’re staying here.” Her expression turned more
serious, in direct contrast to the seductive way her fingers were playing with his hair at  the nape  of his
neck. “The C-Prime and the herd are dead. But we believe the Tresh have the code and will be  back.
Your world—especially your Florida—is too perfect for what they want to do with the zombies. We also
suspect they’re here for other reasons and may still have operatives on your world.  We  need  to  know
where they are. And stop whatever else they try to do.”

She nodded upward. “My ship will guard your world. But the Tresh appear to be able to manipulate the
zombie portals in ways we cannot. Yet. So we need someone on the surface, someone who knows this
locale and  knows  zombies.  Someone”—and  her voice turned  throaty  and  soft—“I  can  work  closely
with. As head of the mission. As captain of the ship.”
Captain. Her dreams had come true. And his prayers had been answered.
He pulled her closer, weapons—his and hers—and bodies—soft and  hard—merging. “That calls for a
special celebration. Your place or mine?”
She touched her lips to his. “Yours,” she  whispered,  her fingers already  working to  undo  his tac  vest.
“You have glorious peanut butter.”
 
About the Author
A former news reporter and retired private detective, Linnea Sinclair writes  award-winning,  fast-paced
science-fiction  romance  for  Bantam  Spectra,  including  Finders  Keepers,  Gabriel’s  Ghost,  An
Accidental  Goddess,  Games  of  Command,  and  The  Down  Home  Zombie  Blues. Her  books  have
won or been finalists for the RITA, Sapphire, Pearl, and Prism and  in various regional RWA  contests.
Sinclair is also a John W Campbell Award nominee. When not on duty with some intergalactic fleet—or
playing human slave to her two spoiled felines—she can be visited at www.linneasinclair.com.
 
If you enjoyed
The Down Home Zombie Blues
be sure not to miss
SHADES OF DARK
the next exciting novel from
Linnea Sinclair
—and the long-awaited sequel to her RITA Award-winning novel
Gabriel’s Ghost
Court-martialed captain Chasidah Bergren, once the pride of the Sixth Fleet, races against time to  stop
the powerful Hayden Burke from inciting a civil war in the empire, and placing blame for the atrocities on
the man Chaz loves: Gabriel Sullivan—poet,  mercenary,  and  hated  shape-shifting telepath.  But Chaz’s
world collapses around her when corruption surfaces among her crew, her friends, and even her family,
pushing Chaz and  Sully to  their limits. Everyone  has  a  price.  Everyone  can  make  a  choice.  But when
Sully makes his, Chaz must choose between what Sully has become—and what her heart demands she

must do.
Coming in summer 2008, from Bantam Books
 
ALSO BY LINNEA SINCLAIR
Finders Keepers
Gabriel’s Ghost
An Accidental Goddess
Games of Command
 
THE DOWN HOME ZOMBIE BLUES
A Bantam Book / December 2007
Published by Bantam Dell
A Division of Random House, Inc.
New York, New York
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s
imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales
is entirely coincidental.
All rights reserved
Copyright © 2007 by Linnea Sinclair Bernadino
Bantam Books and the rooster colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
eISBN: 978-0-553-90437-6

www.bantamdell.com
v1.0
Why mess up a kitchen for just one man
I’ll be eating right again when I’m over these divorced guy blues
Wanting a life that will be for two
But I’m still gun-shy
Got these divorced guy blues
Taking my time getting out again
I still like the women but I don’t know when
I’ll be over these down home divorced guy blues
© Ed Teja & Uncle Steve, 2003
 
1 
Another dark, humid, stinking alley. Another nil-tech planet. What a surprise.
Commander Jorie Mikkalah cataloged  her surroundings as  she  absently  rubbed  her bare  arm.  Needle
pricks danced across her skin. Only her vision was unaffected by the dispersing and reassembling of her
molecules courtesy  of  the  Personnel  Matter  Transporter—her  means  of  arrival  in  the  alley  moments
before.
The ocular over her right eye eradicated the alley’s murky gloom, enhancing the moonlight so she could
clearly see the shards of broken glass and  small rusted  metal cylinders strewn  across  the hard  surface
under her and her team’s boots.
Another  dark,  humid,  stinking,  filthy alley.  Jorie  amended  her  initial  appraisal  of  her  location  as  a
breeze filtered past, sending one of the metal cylinders tumbling, clanking hollowly.
She checked her scanner even though no alarm had sounded. But it would take a few more seconds yet
for her body to adjust to the aftereffects of the PMaT and for her equilibrium to  segue  from the lighter
gravity of an intergalactic battle cruiser to the heavier gravity of a Class-F5 world. It wouldn’t do to fall
flat on her face trying to defend her team if a zombie appeared.
She swiveled toward them. “You two all right?”

Tamlynne Herryck’s sharp features relaxed under her short cap of dark-red curls. “Fine, sir.”
Low mechanical rumblings echoed behind Jorie. She shot a quick glance over her shoulder, saw nothing
threatening at the alleyway opening. Only the expected metallic land vehicles, lighted front and aft, moving
slowly past.
Herryck was scrubbing at her face when Jorie turned back. The ever-efficient lieutenant had been under
Jorie’s command for four years; she knew how to work through the PMaT experience.
Ensign Jacare Trenat, however, was as green as liaso hedges and looked more than a bit dazed from the
transit.
“Optimum,” replied Trenat when Jorie turned to him, straightening his shoulders, trying hard not to twitch.
Or fall over.
Jorie bit back  an amused  snort  of disbelief and  caught Herryck’s  eye.  A corner  of  Herryck’s  mouth
quirked up in response. They both knew this was Trenat’s third dirtside mission, perhaps his sixth PMaT
experience. 
 
Every time you hear  on the news  about  people  running away  from  a  crazed  gunman,  remember  that
someone’s son or daughter in a police uniform is running toward that crazed gunman.
—From What Cops Would Like You to Know, author  unknown, posted  on various law-enforcement
sites on the Internet
 
DOWN HOME ZOMBIE BLUES
Lyrics by Linnea Sinclair & Ed Teja
Music by Ed Teja (ASCAP)
Say, baby, baby, hear what I say?
You see a zombie pass by today?
She ain’t talking; hell, she ain’t even breathing
She’s got the down home zombie blues
Now I’m way past Jupiter, in the middle of the stars
Cruising past asteroids, just me and my guitar

We’re hunting down a nightmare, tracking fast and sure
Ain’t got no time to waste, got them down home zombie blues
Got a ship that’s fast, gets me on my way
Got a laser pistol in case those zombies wanta play
We’re hunting down a nightmare, tracking fast and sure
Ain’t got no time to waste, got them down home zombie blues
My gal’s a sharpshooter, and she kisses mighty fine.
Not much we can’t handle hunting zombies side by side
We’re hunting down a nightmare, tracking fast and sure
Ain’t got no time to waste, got them down home zombie blues
Say, baby, baby, hear what I say?
You see a zombie pass by today?
She ain’t talking; hell, she ain’t even breathing
She’s got the down home zombie blues
©2003–2007 by Ed Teja & Linnea Sinclair
 
DOWN HOME DIVORCED GUY BLUES
words by Ed Teja & Uncle Steve
music by Ed Teja
Taking my time getting out again
I still like the women but I don’t know when

I’ll be over these down home divorced guy blues
Eating my dinner right out of the canem" align="left"> Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
About the Author
If you enjoyed The Down Home Zombie Blues
Also by Linnea Sinclair
Copyright
 
With heartfelt thanks  for their suggestions  and  input:  authors  Robin  D.  Owens,  Susan  Grant,  Stacey
Klemstein,  and  Anne  Aguirre,  and  my  reader/crit  partners  Nancy  Gramm,  Donna  Kuhn,  Michelle
Williamson, and Lynne “Liberry Lady” Welch.
As always,  to  Daq  and  Doozy,  fur  all your help.  And to  Jaime  Bernadino  Warren—one  of  the  first
people to “meet” Theo Petrakos—and her dad, Rob Bernadino,  who after  all these  years  still find me
amusing.
 
Acknowledgments
This author gratefully acknowledges the assistance of:
Sergeant Steve Huskisson of the Plantation (FL) Police Department; Detective Sergeant Scott Peterson
of the Collier County (FL) Sheriff’s Office; Joel Reyes, former Hialeah (FL) Police Officer; and Deputy
Sheriff  Bob  Cooley  (VA),  Valor55,  GoDirectly2Jail,  and  other  law-enforcement  personnel  on  the
Officer.com and RealPolice.net forums…who answered an author’s constant questions with such detail,
patience,  and  good  humor.  Their  assistance  has  been  invaluable.  Any  sense  of  law-enforcement
authenticity in this book is fully their doing, and for that I’m grateful beyond words. Any errors in police
procedure you may find are  no reflection of their expertise  but rather  of the author’s  stubbornness  to
have the characters and the plot go her way. God bless you all, and keep you and yours safe out there.
May guardian angels always watch your six.

 
Author’s Note
Greek  phrases  used  in the manuscript  have  been  transliterated  for  readers  of  English.  Efcharisto  to
author Tori “Sofie Metropolis” Carrington for the corrections and additions!
Author’s Playlist
Juno Reactor: Komit, Conga Fury, Swamp Thing, Kaguya Hime, Children of the Night
Theo Petrakos’s Playlist
Traveling  Ed  Teja:  Blue  Light,  Blue  Dime,  The  Down  Home  Zombie  Blues,  The  Down  Home
Divorced Guy Blues, Jorie’s Sigh—www.geocities.com/edteja
 
 
 
 
Contents
Cover Page
Title Page
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Author’s Note
Author’s Playlist
Theo Petrakos’s Playlist
Epigraph
Down Home Zombie Blues
Down Home Divorced Guy Blues
Chapter 1

Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30

About the Author
If you enjoyed The Down Home Zombie Blues
Also by Linnea Sinclair
Copyright
 
With heartfelt thanks  for their suggestions  and  input:  authors  Robin  D.  Owens,  Susan  Grant,  Stacey
Klemstein,  and  Anne  Aguirre,  and  my  reader/crit  partners  Nancy  Gramm,  Donna  Kuhn,  Michelle
Williamson, and Lynne “Liberry Lady” Welch.
As always,  to  Daq  and  Doozy,  fur  all your help.  And to  Jaime  Bernadino  Warren—one  of  the  first
people to “meet” Theo Petrakos—and her dad, Rob Bernadino,  who after  all these  years  still find me
amusing.
 
Acknowledgments
This author gratefully acknowledges the assistance of:
Sergeant Steve Huskisson of the Plantation (FL) Police Department; Detective Sergeant Scott Peterson
of the Collier County (FL) Sheriff’s Office; Joel Reyes, former Hialeah (FL) Police Officer; and Deputy
Sheriff  Bob  Cooley  (VA),  Valor55,  GoDirectly2Jail,  and  other  law-enforcement  personnel  on  the
Officer.com and RealPolice.net forums…who answered an author’s constant questions with such detail,
patience,  and  good  humor.  Their  assistance  has  been  invaluable.  Any  sense  of  law-enforcement
authenticity in this book is fully their doing, and for that I’m grateful beyond words. Any errors in police
procedure you may find are  no reflection of their expertise  but rather  of the author’s  stubbornness  to
have the characters and the plot go her way. God bless you all, and keep you and yours safe out there.
May guardian angels always watch your six.
 
Author’s Note
Greek  phrases  used  in the manuscript  have  been  transliterated  for  readers  of  English.  Efcharisto  to
author Tori “Sofie Metropolis” Carrington for the corrections and additions!
Author’s Playlist
Juno Reactor: Komit, Conga Fury, Swamp Thing, Kaguya Hime, Children of the Night
Theo Petrakos’s Playlist
Traveling  Ed  Teja:  Blue  Light,  Blue  Dime,  The  Down  Home  Zombie  Blues,  The  Down  Home

Divorced Guy Blues, Jorie’s Sigh—www.geocities.com/edteja
 
Every time you hear  on the news  about  people  running away  from  a  crazed  gunman,  remember  that
someone’s son or daughter in a police uniform is running toward that crazed gunman.
—From What Cops Would Like You to Know, author  unknown, posted  on various law-enforcement
sites on the Internet
 
DOWN HOME ZOMBIE BLUES
Lyrics by Linnea Sinclair & Ed Teja
Music by Ed Teja (ASCAP)
Say, baby, baby, hear what I say?
You see a zombie pass by today?
She ain’t talking; hell, she ain’t even breathing
She’s got the down home zombie blues
Now I’m way past Jupiter, in the middle of the stars
Cruising past asteroids, just me and my guitar
We’re hunting down a nightmare, tracking fast and sure
Ain’t got no time to waste, got them down home zombie blues
Got a ship that’s fast, gets me on my way
Got a laser pistol in case those zombies wanta play
We’re hunting down a nightmare, tracking fast and sure
Ain’t got no time to waste, got them down home zombie blues
My gal’s a sharpshooter, and she kisses mighty fine.

Not much we can’t handle hunting zombies side by side
We’re hunting down a nightmare, tracking fast and sure
Ain’t got no time to waste, got them down home zombie blues
Say, baby, baby, hear what I say?
You see a zombie pass by today?
She ain’t talking; hell, she ain’t even breathing
She’s got the down home zombie blues
©2003–2007 by Ed Teja & Linnea Sinclair
 
DOWN HOME DIVORCED GUY BLUES
words by Ed Teja & Uncle Steve
music by Ed Teja
Taking my time getting out again
I still like the women but I don’t know when
I’ll be over these down home divorced guy blues
Eating my dinner right out of the can
Why mess up a kitchen for just one man
I’ll be eating right again when I’m over these divorced guy blues
Wanting a life that will be for two
But I’m still gun-shy
Got these divorced guy blues

Taking my time getting out again
I still like the women but I don’t know when
I’ll be over these down home divorced guy blues
© Ed Teja & Uncle Steve, 2003
 
1 
Another dark, humid, stinking alley. Another nil-tech planet. What a surprise.
Commander Jorie Mikkalah cataloged  her surroundings as  she  absently  rubbed  her bare  arm.  Needle
pricks danced across her skin. Only her vision was unaffected by the dispersing and reassembling of her
molecules courtesy  of  the  Personnel  Matter  Transporter—her  means  of  arrival  in  the  alley  moments
before.
The ocular over her right eye eradicated the alley’s murky gloom, enhancing the moonlight so she could
clearly see the shards of broken glass and  small rusted  metal cylinders strewn  across  the hard  surface
under her and her team’s boots.
Another  dark,  humid,  stinking,  filthy alley.  Jorie  amended  her  initial  appraisal  of  her  location  as  a
breeze filtered past, sending one of the metal cylinders tumbling, clanking hollowly.
She checked her scanner even though no alarm had sounded. But it would take a few more seconds yet
for her body to adjust to the aftereffects of the PMaT and for her equilibrium to  segue  from the lighter
gravity of an intergalactic battle cruiser to the heavier gravity of a Class-F5 world. It wouldn’t do to fall
flat on her face trying to defend her team if a zombie appeared.
She swiveled toward them. “You two all right?”
Tamlynne Herryck’s sharp features relaxed under her short cap of dark-red curls. “Fine, sir.”
Low mechanical rumblings echoed behind Jorie. She shot a quick glance over her shoulder, saw nothing
threatening at the alleyway opening. Only the expected metallic land vehicles, lighted front and aft, moving
slowly past.
Herryck was scrubbing at her face when Jorie turned back. The ever-efficient lieutenant had been under
Jorie’s command for four years; she knew how to work through the PMaT experience.
Ensign Jacare Trenat, however, was as green as liaso hedges and looked more than a bit dazed from the
transit.
“Optimum,” replied Trenat when Jorie turned to him, straightening his shoulders, trying hard not to twitch.
Or fall over.
Jorie bit back  an amused  snort  of disbelief and  caught Herryck’s  eye.  A corner  of  Herryck’s  mouth
quirked up in response. They both knew this was Trenat’s third dirtside mission, perhaps his sixth PMaT

experience.
After eight years with the Guardian Force, Jorie had lost track of how much time she’d logged through
the PMaT,  having her molecules haphazardly  spewed  through some  planet’s  atmosphere.  She’d  seen
stronger  officers than the broad-shouldered  ensign leave their lunch on the ground after  a  transit.  The
itching and disorientation would drive him crazy for a few more trips.
At least it was a standard transit and not an emergency one. Even she was known to land on her rump
after one of those.
“Are we where we’re supposed to be, Lieutenant?” she asked as Herryck flipped open her scanner. The
screen blinked to life with a greenish-yellow glow.
“Confirming location now, sir.”
Jorie glanced  again at  the scanner  she’d  kept  in her left hand through the entire transport,  power  on,
shielding  at  full.  If  it  beeped,  her  laser  would  be  in  her  right  hand,  set  for  hard-terminate.  Recent
intelligence reported the chilling fact  that some  zombies had  acquired  the ability to  sense  a  Guardian’s
tech, even through shields.
That’s why she and her team were in this stinking filthy alleyway, on this backward,  nil-tech planet  the
natives had aptly named after dirt.
They were hunting zombies.
Because zombies were on the hunt again.
“Confirmed, Commander.” Herryck squinted at the screen with her unshielded eye. “Bahia Vista, Florida
state. Nation of American States United.”
A subtropical area, according to the Guardian agent on active hunt status here for three planetary months.
An agent whose reports had ceased without explanation two days ago. Jorie knew from experience what
that  could  portend.  She’d  seen  it  before  with  agents  and  trackers  who  thought  they  could  solve  a
rogue-herd situation alone. One tracker against one zombie had a chance.  An agent with basic  tracker
training might live long enough to  escape.  But if there  was  more  than one  zombie or  if the agent was
caught unawares…It was the latter she feared.
She’d  known  Danjay Wain for more  than a  dozen  years—he  was  one  of her older  brother’s  closest
friends and had flown as her gunner on her last few missions with the Interplanetary Marines during the
Tresh Border Wars. For the past three years on the Sakanah, he’d worked as Jorie’s active hunt agent
a half-dozen  times. In spite  of his teasing,  prankster  ways—he  and  her brother,  Galin, were  so  much
alike—he  was  a  conscientious  man  with  a  quick  mind  and  an  insatiable  curiosity  about  tracker
procedures.
She dreaded  now that,  during their many sessions  over  a  wedge  of  cheese  and  a  brew  in  the  crew
lounge, she’d either taught him too much about her job—or not enough.
“Think he’s alive, sir?” Herryck’s quiet question  echoed  her thoughts. No  surprise,  that.  Danjay Wain
was Herryck’s teammate, her friend as well. The jovial agent’s sudden silence bothered Herryck as much
as it bothered Jorie.
She huffed out a short breath. Even as a marine, Danjay could  be  impetuous. But she’d  never  thought
him stupid. “I hope so. Any response from his transcomm?”

Herryck squinted at her screen, tapped the query code again, then shook her head. “Still no answer.”
Damn. She so wanted the problem to be one of distance, of the ship in orbit, atmospheric interference.
Anything but what her gut told her might be true: Danjay’s impulsive hotshot streak might have finally won
out over his common sense. “How far are we from his last signal?”
“Twelve point two marks, sir.”
Twelve marks? Jorie directed a scowl upward, even though there was no way the PMaT chief on board
the Sakanah could see her. All right. I can deal with another stinking alley, she railed silently at the
chief. I know we can’t materialize anywhere we want without setting the native nil-techs on edge.
But,  damn  your  hide,  Ronna,  twelve  marks?  On  foot?  Let’s  forget  the  fact  that  this  is  a
time-critical  mission.  Let’s  forget  the  fact  that  we  have  an  agent  missing.  Do  I  look  like  I’m
dressed for sightseeing?
She was in standard hot-weather tracker gear: sleeveless shirt, shorts, knee-high duraboots, socks, and a
right-arm  technosleeve  so  she  could  multitask  her  units  if  she  had  to.  Two  G-1  laser  pistols  were
shoulder-holstered left and  right. A Hazer  micro-rifle slanted  across  her back.  In the side  of her right
boot rested a sonic-blade. Not to mention her utility belt with her MOD-tech—her Mech-Organic Data
scanner—and transcomm. Her headset with its adjustable ocular and mouth mike striped her hair like a
dark band. She’d need that to target the zombies once a warning sounded.
Hot-weather gear notwithstanding, she was definitely not dressed for a leisurely twelve-mark sightseeing
stroll.
“Sir?”
“We have to acquire transportation.” She took a  few steps  toward  the alley’s entrance,  then stopped.
Ronna  needed  to  recalibrate  her  tiny  seeker  ’droids  to  provide  landing  coordinates  better  suited  to
humanoids.
As for Trenat…“Relax,  Ensign.” In the light of the almost full moon overhead,  she  could  see  the  stiff
tension in the young man’s shoulders under his tracker shirt. He hadn’t taken his hand off his G-1 since
they arrived. “There’s not a zombie within fifty marks of this place.”
Yet. But there would be. There were close to three hundred on the planet, per  Danjay’s  last report.  It
was the largest herd the Guardians had found to date. The zombies’ controller, their C-Prime, had to be
straining its capabilities to direct all the drones.
That also meant the zombies’ sensenet was large. They’d probably already detected the energy from her
team’s PMaT and were alerted to an off-world transport. But PMaT trails faded quickly. As long as her
team’s MOD-tech stayed shielded, they should be safe.
“Transportation.” Herryck thumbed down Danjay’s data on her scanner screen. “Land vehicles powered
by combustion engines. Fossil petroleum fueled. Local term is car.”
Jorie had read the reports. No personal air transits—at least, not for internal city use. Damned nil-techs.
A four-seater gravripper would be very convenient right now. She resumed her trek  toward  the alley’s
entrance, waving her team to follow. “Let’s go find one of those cars.”
“City population  is less than three  hundred  thousand  humans,” Herryck  dutifully read  as  she  came  up
behind Jorie. “The surrounding region contains approximately one million.”
In her eight years as a Guardian, Jorie had worked cities larger and smaller. Six months ago, Kohrkin—a

medium-size  city  on  Delos-5—held  seven  hundred  thousand  humanoids.  A  herd  of  eighty  zombies
reduced the population to three hundred fifty thousand by the time the damned council heads alerted the
Sakanah.  Jorie,  Herryck,  and  two  other  commanders  went dirtside  with a  full battle  squadron.  Their
mission was successful. But the lives of those she couldn’t save still haunted her.
She thought she’d  seen  death  as  a  pilot with the Kedrian  Interplanetary  Marines  fighting in the  Tresh
Border Wars, ten years past. That was civilized warfare compared to what the Guardians faced with the
zombies.
Unless you were a pilot taken prisoner by the Tresh. Jorie’s fingers automatically rose to the long, bumpy
scar just below her collarbone as Herryck continued to  recite  the facts  Danjay had  provided.  And,  as
always, Jorie’s stomach clenched.  A memento—a  very special  one  she  couldn’t  afford  to  think about
now. She had other problems. Serious ones, if something had happened to Danjay.
The stickiness of the air and  the sharp  stench  of rotting garbage  faded.  Jorie  paused  cautiously at  the
darkened  alley entrance,  assessing  the landscape.  The  street  was  dotted  with  silent  land  vehicles,  all
pointing in the same  direction,  lights extinguished. Black  shadows  of thin trees  jutted  now and  then in
between.  The uneven rows  of low buildings were  two-story,  five-story,  a  few taller. Two  much taller
ones—twenty stories or more—glowed with a few uneven rectangles of light far down to her right.
Judging from the brief flashes of light between the buildings and tinny echoes of sound, most of the city’s
activity appeared to be a street or so in front of her. At least Ronna’s  seeker  ’droid  had  analyzed that
correctly. Materializing in the midst of a crowd of nil-techs while dressed in full tracker gear had proven
to be patently counterproductive.
A bell clanged hollowly to her left. Trenat, beside her, stiffened. She didn’t but tilted her head toward the
sound,  curious.  As  the third  gong  pealed,  she  guessed  it  wasn’t  a  warning  system  and  remembered
reading about a nil-tech method of announcing the time.
She didn’t know  local time, didn’t care.  Unlike the Tresh,  humanoids here  had  no naturally enhanced
night sight. It was only important that it was dark and would continue to be dark for a while yet. She and
her team needed that, dressed as they were, if they were going to find out what had happened to Agent
Danjay Wain.
The bell pealed eight more times, then fell silent. A fresh breeze drifted over her skin. She caught a salty
tang in the air.
“…is situated  on a  peninsula that is bordered  on one  side  by  a  large  body  of  water  known  as  Bay
Tampa.” Herryck was still reading. “On the other…”
Gulf of Mexico, Jorie knew, tuning her out. Data was Herryck’s passion.
Zombie hunting was Jorie’s.
But first she had to appropriate a car and locate Danjay Wain.
 
“Trust me, this is truly weird.” Ezequiel Martinez’s voice held an unusual note of amazement.
Homicide Detective  Sergeant  Theo  Petrakos  followed his former patrol  partner  through the cluster  of
crime-scene technicians poking, prodding, and prowling around the living room of the small bungalow a
few blocks from Crescent  Lake  Park  and  downtown  Bahia Vista.  The whir-click  of a  digital camera

sounded on his left. He recognized Liza Walters, her blond head framing the familiar piece of equipment.
Zeke stopped and pointed to a nearly shredded green plaid couch. “There.”
Theo stepped around overall-clad Sam Kasparov, who was diligently dusting a broken lamp for prints,
then came to a halt in front of a body next to the couch.
“Well?” Zeke looked at him expectantly. “Weird, right?”
Theo shoved  his hands  into the pockets  of his slacks  and  nodded  mutely in  answer.  He  wasn’t  sure
weird was sufficiently descriptive of the dead, withered body of the man sprawled faceup on the floor.
His skin looked  like  crisp  parchment  that  had  been  shrink-wrapped  over  his  bones.  His  T-shirt  lay
loosely on his frame; his sweatpants seemed overlarge. His red hair, though, was thick, full, and healthy.
Not sparse, like the mummy the dead man resembled.
Worse, his eyeballs were still moist. They bulged from his face like two large, wet, dimpleless golf balls.
Theo had never heard of a mummy with wet eyeballs. But then, this man was no mummy. Mummification
of  a  body  took  at  least  a  couple  of  months  under  normal  circumstances  in  Florida’s  warmer
temperatures.  Yet  the  landlord  had  last  seen  the  deceased—one  Dan  J.  Wayne,  according  to  the
documents Detectives Zeke Martinez and Amy Holloway had found in a kitchen drawer—alive and well
two days ago.
Theo had heard of spontaneous combustion. But spontaneous mummification?
He made a mental note to make sure Zeke checked the Centers for Disease Control database. Judging
from comments by the crime-scene techs, they were puzzled too.
They couldn’t even definitely say that this was a murder.
All they did know  was  what the landlord—an  affable,  ruddy-faced  French-Canadian  who  lived  next
door—had told Zeke and Amy: he was walking his rat terrier after the six o’clock news when he noticed
the broken front window on his rental property. He peered in. Then, voice shaking, Monsieur Lafleur had
called the police on his cell phone. The first officers to arrive on the scene found clear signs of a struggle
in the overturned, broken furniture and torn draperies.
But the struggle didn’t seem to leave any corresponding injuries to the dead man on the floor. And there
was no evidence of who—or what—he struggled with. If anything.
For all Theo could tell, the dead man had run around like a whirling dervish, demolishing his own living
room before falling to the floor in a mummified state.
That would fit with the pattern of shattered glass from the window. The window hadn’t been broken by
someone  coming  in  but  by  something—which  included  a  portion  of  a  wooden  end  table,  from  all
appearances—going out.
Theo hunkered down on his heels next to the body and snagged a pair of protective gloves from a nearby
evidence kit. Carefully, he plucked at the neck of the man’s T-shirt, then the sleeves.
“Maybe you shouldn’t get too close to Mr. Crunchy.” Zeke leaned back as if Theo’s touching the corpse
might cause  it to  burst,  sending lethal  chunks  splattering  against  the  guayabera  shirt  that  was  Zeke’s
trademark outfit. Tonight’s selection was navy blue with a wide white strip up the front. “Might be some
kind of virus. Contagious. A new SARS strain or something.”

In the fifteen years that he and Zeke had worked for the Bahia Vista Police Department, Theo had seen
the wiry man fearlessly dodge any number of flying fists, speeding cars,  and  even,  a  few times, bullets.
Diseases, however, were another issue entirely. Zeke was probably the sole reason local vitamin stores
made any profits. How he stayed married to a doctor was a source of continual speculation.
Theo continued his examination. “SARS is respiratory, not dermatological.”
“So what do we got?” Zeke asked. “Some Satanic cult that thinks the Christmas holidays are Halloween,
killing people by draining their blood?”
Zeke might think of Halloween, but Theo’s upbringing resurrected  another  image: the Kalikantzri,  evil
goblins who appeared  during the twelve days  before  Christmas,  according  to  Greek  legends.  But this
was Bahia Vista, not Athens. Theo frowned, then looked up. “Not sure. Hey, Liza, you see this?”
The stocky blond crime-scene photographer squatted down next to him with a grunt. “You mean those
marks on the side of his head?” she asked. “Yeah. Got those when Amy rolled him.”
“They line up. Almost like a large pronged vise grabbed him.”
“Like this?” She  pulled off her hair clip and  clicked  it  in  his  face.  It  was  a  plastic  half-moon  curve,
spring-loaded with rows of teeth.
He took it, turning it over in his hand. “Like this, but big enough to cover his head.”
“Saw that happen on a construction site once.” She retrieved the clip, twisted her long hair into a bun at
the back of her head, and clamped the clip over it. “Guy’s skull was crushed. Lots of blood, gray matter.
Don’t have that here.”
No, they didn’t. Not even a puncture. Just some barely discernible bruises.
“How are your holidays so far, Theo?” Liza was still squatting next to him.
“Fine,” he lied. “Yours?”
“Kids are up to their eyes in toys they don’t need, as usual. And they can’t even get to the ones under the
tree until Christmas.” She nudged him with her elbow  and  grinned. “My husband’s  cousin Bonnie is in
town. She’s a couple years younger than you, thirty-four or thirty-five, single. Real cute. Like you.” She
winked. “You’re clocking out for vacation, right?”
He nodded reluctantly. He’d wondered why she asked about his schedule  when he ran into her at  the
courthouse yesterday. Now he had a feeling he knew.
“Why don’t you come by the house tomorrow night, say hi to Mark and the kids, meet Bonnie?”
He rose. She stood with him. Liza Walters was, as his aunt Tootie liked to say, good people. But ever
since he’d divorced Camille last year, Liza had joined the ranks of friends and coworkers trying to make
sure Theo Petrakos didn’t spend his nights alone.
“Thanks. I mean that. But I’ve got some things to do.”
“How about  next week,  then? I’m sure  you’ll like her.  You could  come  with  us  to  the  New  Year’s
concert and fireworks at Pass Pointe Beach.” She raised her chin toward Zeke. “You too, Zeke. Unless
Suzanne has other plans?”
“New  Year’s  Eve is always at  her  sister’s  house.”  Zeke  splayed  his  hands  outward  in  a  gesture  of

helplessness. “Suzy doesn’t give me a choice.”
Liza briefly laid her hand on Theo’s arm. “Think about it. You need to have some fun. Forget about the
bitch.”
He smiled grimly. Forgetting about the bitch wasn’t the problem. Trusting another  woman was.  “I’ll let
you know, but I’m probably scheduled on call out.”
“That Bonnie sounds real nice,” Zeke intoned innocently as Liza went back to photographing a splintered
bookcase. “Thirty-five’s not too young for you. I mean, you’re not even fifty.”
Theo shot a narrow-eyed glance at the shorter man. “Forty-three. And don’t you start on me too.”
Zeke grinned affably. “So what are your plans for tomorrow night, old man?”
“I’m restringing my guitar.”
“Alone?”
Theo only glared at him.
Zeke shook his head. “Still singing The Down Home Divorced Guy Blues? Man, you gotta change your
tune.”
“I like my life just the way it is.”
“When’s the last time you got laid?”
“If you focus that fine investigative mind of yours on our dead friend’s problems, not mine, we just might
get out of here by midnight.”
“That long ago, eh?”
“I’m going to go see what I can find in the bedroom,” he said, ignoring Zeke’s leering grin at his choice of
destination. “You take the kitchen.”
Zeke’s good-natured snort of laughter sounded behind him as he left.
 
“Nice  work,  Trenat.”  Jorie  laid  both  hands  on  the  vehicle’s  guidance  wheel  and,  looking  over  her
shoulder,  offered  the  young  ensign  an  appreciative  smile.  He  had  done  very  nice  work  locating  a
well-concealed storage area of land vehicles and using a combination of mechanical and technical skills to
override a series of locks and security devices. All in under ten minutes. Hopefully, determining Danjay’s
status and returning him and his critical T-MOD unit to the ship would go as smoothly.
Trenat all but beamed at her from the rear seat, most of his earlier unease gone. “This power pack,” he
said, holding out a thin box slightly smaller than her hand, “will create an ignition sequence  and  activate
the engine.”
She followed his instructions as to placement and tabbed  on the power.  The vehicle vibrated  to  life, a
grumbling noise sounding from its front. “No aft propulsion?”
“No, sir.”

No antigravs either. Well, damn. But when in Vekris, one must do as the Vekrisians do. She draped the
headset around her neck and studied the control  panel with its round  numbered  gauges.  Other  gauges
had symbols like those  she’d  seen  on  signs  as  they  walked  the  short  distance  to  A-1  Rental  Cars.
Danjay’s reports noted that the local language was similar to Vekran, which Jorie spoke along with three
other  galactic  tongues.  The  two  languages  shared  a  similar—though  not  identical—alphabet,  which
explained why many of the signs she saw didn’t made sense.
As to  why the local language was  similar to  Vekran,  she  had  no  idea.  That  was  out  of  her  area  of
expertise, and Danjay’s. His report had noted it and had been forwarded to the scholars in the Galactic
Comparative-Cultures Division of the Guardian Force.
Jorie was just happy the locals didn’t speak Tresh.
Tam  Herryck,  rummaging  through  the  vehicle’s  small  storage  compartment  on  the  control  panel,
produced  a  short  paper-bound  book.  “Aw-nortz  Min-o-al,”  she  read  in  the  narrow  beam  of  her
wristbeam on her technosleeve.
Jorie leaned toward her. Tam Herryck’s  Vekran  was,  at  best,  rudimentary. “Ow-ner’s  Min-u-al,”  she
corrected. She took the book, tapped on her wristbeam, and scanned the first few pages.  It  would be
too  much  to  ask,  she  supposed,  that  the  entire  universe  be  civilized  enough—and  considerate
enough—to speak Alarsh. “Operating instructions for the vehicle’s pilot.” As the engine chugged quietly,
she found a page depicting the gauges and read in silence for a few moments. “I think I have the basics.”
She tapped off her wristbeam, then caught Trenat’s smile in the rectangular mirror over her head. “Never
met a ship I couldn’t fly, Ensign. That’s what six years in the marines will teach you.”
The vehicle’s control stick was between  the two  front seats.  She  depressed  the small button,  eased  it
until it clicked once.
The vehicle lurched backward, crashing into one parked behind it.
“Damn!” She  shoved  the stick  again and  missed a  head-on  impact  with  another  parked  vehicle  only
because she grabbed the wheel and yanked it to the left.
Herryck bounced against the door. “Sir!”
“I have it, I have it. It’s okay.” Damn, damn. Give her a nice antigrav hopper any day.
Her feet played with the two pedals, the vehicle seesawing as it jerked toward the open gate.
“I think,” Herryck  said,  bracing herself with her right hand against the front control  panel,  “those  are
some kind of throttle and braking system. Sir.”
“Thank you, Lieutenant. I know that. I’m just trying to determine their sensitivity ranges.”
“Of course, sir.” Herryck’s head jerked back and forth, but whether she was nodding or reacting to the
vehicle’s movement, Jorie didn’t know. “Good idea.”
By the time they exited onto the street, Jorie felt she had the nil-tech land vehicle under control. “Which
direction?”
“We need to take a heading of 240.8, sir.” Herryck glanced from her scanner over at the gauges in front
of Jorie, none of which functioned as guidance or directional. “Oh.” She pulled her palm off the control
panel and pointed out the window. “That way.”

They went that way,  this way,  then that way again. Jorie  noticed  that  Trenat  had  found some  kind of
safety webbing and flattened himself against the cushions of the rear seat.
“What do you think those colored lights on their structures  mean?” Herryck  asked  as  Jorie  was  again
forced  to  swerve  to  avoid  an impact with another  vehicle,  whose  driver  was  obviously  not  adept  at
proper usage of airspace.
Jorie shrugged. “A religious custom. Wain mentioned that locals hang colored lights on their residences
and even on the foliage this time of the year. Nil-techs can be very supersti—hey!” A dark land vehicle
appeared  on her right, seemingly out of nowhere.  Jorie  pushed  her foot  down  on  the  throttle,  barely
escaping being rammed broadside.  There  was  a  loud screeching  noise,  then the discordant  blare  of a
horn. A pair of oncoming vehicles added their horns to the noise as she sped by them.
“Another religious custom,” she told Herryck, who sank down in her seat and planted her boots against
the front console. “Their vehicles play music as they pass. And they’re blessing us.”
“Blessing us?”
Jorie nodded  as  she  negotiated  her vehicle between  two  others  that  seemed  to  want  to  travel  at  an
unreasonably slow rate of speed. “They put one  hand out the window,  middle finger pointing upward.
Wain’s reports stated many natives worship  a  god  they believe lives in the sky.  So  I think that  raised
finger is a gesture of blessing.”
“How kind of them. We need to go that way again, sir.”
“I’m coming up to an intersection now. How much farther?”
“We should be within walking distance in a few minutes.”
“Praise be,” Trenat croaked from the rear seat.
Jorie snickered softly. “You’d never survive in the marines, Ensign.”
 
Zeke Martinez let out a low whistle as Theo led him and Liza into the bedroom. “Damn. Looks like some
kind of computer you’d find in a sci-fi flick. It was behind that dresser?”
“The dresser’s a fake.” Theo shoved the chest-high piece  of furniture farther  away  from the wall. Liza
moved in front of him, digital camera whirring. “Drawer fronts are glued on. Inside’s hollow.”
“Looks like Mr. Wayne didn’t want just anyone to find this,” Liza said, adjusting the camera’s telephoto,
zooming in on the object on the floor. The blinking unit resembled an overlarge black metallic mouse pad
with a thin lime-green monitor.
“Maybe it’s a new kind of laptop?” Zeke asked.
“Not sure,” Theo answered honestly. “The screen’s a strange color. And the keyboard”—if that’s what
that long dark area was—“doesn’t have keys.”
“Touch-pad system?” Liza ventured.
Theo shook his head. “Maybe.” He knelt in front of the greenish-yellow screen, pointed to the symbols
splattered across it. “That’s not ASCII and it’s not HTML. But it looks somewhat like both.”

Zeke  squinted.  “Hey,  it’s  all  Greek  to  me.”  He  smacked  Theo  playfully  on  his  shoulder.  “Get  it,
Petrakos? Greek?”
“It’s not Greek. You know damned well I can speak—”
“I know, I know. I just thought it was a good line.”
“Suzanne can’t possibly love you for your personality.”
Zeke arched one eyebrow. “Actually, I’ll tell you what my little Suzy loves about me.”
“Spare  me.”  Theo  shoved  himself  to  his  feet  as  Liza  headed  back  to  the  living  room  to  ask  Sam
Kasparov to dust the unit for prints. “I put a call in to the techno squad.  One  of their geeks  should be
here in about,”  he glanced  at  his watch,  “thirty  minutes  to  pick  this  up.  Maybe  there  are  e-mails  or
documents, an Internet trail. Something that will tell us what happened to Mr. Wayne out there.” Noises
behind him made him turn toward the living room. The body snatchers had arrived with gurney and body
bag.
“Come on.” He tapped Zeke on the arm. “Let’s go see what the ME has to say.”
 
Jorie hunkered down in the thick foliage bordering the structure, with Herryck on her left and Trenat on
her right. A cool breeze now and then ruffled the leaves, tickling the sweat dripping down her neck. The
ground under her boots  smelled musty. If the blossoms  poking through the branches  had  a  scent,  she
couldn’t detect it. They were tightly closed, drooping slightly in the darkness.
Two dark-colored land vehicles sat,  power  off, at  the edge  of the street.  Two  more  green-and-white
ones—POLICE in gold letters  on their flanks—were  on a  short  graveled  stretch  of yard,  a  larger boxy
vehicle parked at an angle behind them.
Humanoids, some wearing identical green pants and white shirts that  were  obviously a  uniform, moved
between the vehicles and the structure. But none of the humanoids appeared to be Danjay Wain.
“Any sign of Agent Wain?” Jorie asked Tam Herryck in a hushed tone.
“Scanning, sir. I’m picking up our tech, but there is some distortion. It’s even jamming our PMaT signal.
I’m trying to pinpoint the source.”
That was  not good  news.  Without access  to  the PMaT  they were  essentially stranded.  And this  was
supposed to be a nil-tech world, without the expertise to jam the frequencies the Guardians used.
“It’s very localized,” Herryck  said,  as  if reading Jorie’s  concerns  about  transporting  back  to  the ship.
“But I get a  clear  signal twenty-five maxmeters from here.  This can’t  be  the reason  why Agent Wain
ceased contact.”
No, it couldn’t. Danjay, like Jorie,  had  been  trained  to  work  around  dead  zones,  natural and  artificial
ones.
Jorie studied  the structure  again.  There  were  far  too  many  nils  coming  and  going.  That—along  with
Danjay’s silence—did not portend well. Perhaps he’d been seized, removed to a security compound by
nils ever-fearful of the unknown.

That would explain his silence. It  would also  require  her to  assemble  an  assault-and-infiltration  team,
further eating into the time and resources they had to deal with the zombie problem.
Captain Pietr would not be happy.
A shaft of light cut into the night as the front door of the structure opened. Personnel in unisuits appeared,
flanking something on a wheeled gurney. Jorie felt Herryck tense beside her. Trenat’s hand moved to the
G-1 on his hip.
Data  suddenly danced  across  Herryck’s  screen.  “Sir, I’ve  a  lock  on  a  biosignature.  But  it’s…damn.
Negative state, sir.”
She knew, but she had to ask. “It’s Wain, isn’t it?”
“Yes.” Herryck’s voice was still a whisper. “Signature discharge indicates death by zombie attack.”
Hell and  damn.  She’d  hoped—prayed—there  would be  some  other  explanation  for  his  silence.  She
liked Danjay. Just before his latest mission, she and Herryck had shared a pitcher of ale with him in the
crew lounge. Danjay always had such wild stories…. She watched his body as it was trundled  into the
boxy land vehicle, her heart sinking.
Herryck  let out a  short  sigh. “I can’t  believe this happened  to  him.” There  was  a  slight tremor  in her
voice, then she ducked her head in embarrassment. “Regrets, sir. I—”
“It’s okay, Tam.” Jorie gave Herryck’s shoulder a quick squeeze. After all Jorie had been through, death
of a teammate should be easier. Or at least less painful.
But it wasn’t, and she knew that Herryck—who hadn’t been a marine, who hadn’t seen what the Tresh
could do—was feeling worse. “He was my friend too.”
Trenat peered around Jorie at Herryck’s screen. “You still reading his T-MOD?”
“Only partially. And our  PMaT  is still out of range,”  Herryck  said,  and  Jorie  could  see  that,  see  the
spikes in the T-MOD’s pattern, see the null icon for the transporter. What in hell’s wrath was happening
here?
Recovery  of the T-MOD  was  critical. It  would have  recorded  the  attacking  zombie’s  movement,  its
stats.  And—if Danjay had  been  toying with the unit to  lure the zombie, as  she  suspected  he  was—it
would also provide important data about the herd.
“Commander Mikkalah.” Trenat shifted his weight slightly. Branches rustled. “I volunteer to infiltrate the
structure and—”
“Down!” Jorie yanked on Trenat’s sleeve as she threw herself onto the dirt, feeling Tam bump her leg as
she did the same. Footsteps suddenly moved toward them, beams of lights crisscrossing the ground.
Her hand crept  along her side,  her fingers curling around  the grip of her pistol.  She  peered  over  the
leaves and twigs at the approaching figures clad in the green-and-white uniforms, recognizing utility belts
on their waists and what most likely were armaments hanging from their sides. Her heart pounded. Every
muscle in her body was taut.
No escape. She couldn’t engage an emergency PMaT transport. The signal was dead.
And if those nils took one step closer, she and her team were too.

 
2 
Theo followed the body snatchers to the front door, where he caught up with Zeke. His former partner
had  spent  the  past  ten  minutes  talking  to  Monsieur  Lafleur,  while  Theo  was  briefed  by  the  ME.
“Mummification, cause unknown until the autopsy,” Theo told Zeke, summarizing in six words the ME’s
five-minute lecture. “Was the landlord able to give you anything more?”
“Not a thing.” Zeke stepped inside. “Neighbors on the east are snowbirds. Don’t show up until January.
The house  behind is vacant.  Amy and  a  couple  uniforms  woke  up  every  neighbor  across  the  street.
Nothing.” Zeke turned his wrist. “Damn. It’s after midnight. I haven’t even started the paperwork—”
The trill of Theo’s cell phone cut off Zeke’s complaint. He flipped it open. “Petrakos.” The nasal voice of
a cyber-squad technician filled Theo’s ear as he walked back into the living room, Zeke trailing behind.
Some crazy driver on Fourth Street sideswiped the guy they’d sent to the scene. No, no injuries, but his
car had two flat tires and a possible bent axle. The only other technician available lived in Tampa and was
off duty.
“We’ll wait here  until one,”  Theo  offered.  “If you can’t  reach  her by then,  someone  can  pick  up  the
laptop from evidence tomorrow.”
“One?” Zeke asked as Theo closed the phone. “Oh, man. That’s forty minutes wasted. I have to start the
report on Ol’ Crunchy here.”
Liza stepped up behind Zeke. “Thought you guys were finished.”
“I am,” Zeke said. “Sergeant Kind and Generous isn’t.”
Theo motioned toward the bedroom. “We have to wait for the cyber-squad  tech  from Tampa.  Unless
you want—”
“To take  custody  of that thing?” Liza snorted  softly. “The good  state  of  Florida  wants  their  techs  to
unscramble hard drives and such. Not us little local CSIs.”
“So we wait until the good state of Florida decides to arrive,” Zeke put in. “It could be hours, if bridge
traffic’s backed up because of holiday parties and all.”
“Both of you don’t have to wait,” Liza said. “Where’s Amy? You rode in with her, didn’t you, Zeke?”
“She went back to run ID on the deceased. I told her I’d catch a ride with Theo.”
Liza looked up at Theo. “Want me to drop Zeke back at the station so he can start the paperwork?”
“Fine by me,” Theo said.
“Liza, mi amor. You’re a lifesaver.” Zeke grabbed her hand, brought it to his lips.
She tugged it back, laughing. “You really don’t want to kiss that. You don’t know where it’s been.  Or
rather, I think you do.”
He dropped her hand, his eyes wide in an expression of horror.
She wriggled her fingers in his face.  “C’mon,  big boy.  Let’s  get you back  safe  and  sound  before  the

bogeymen come out.”
The front door closed behind them. A moment later a patrol officer pushed it open. “Sergeant Petrakos?
Detective Martinez said you’re waiting for the cyber squad. Want me to  run over  to  the 7-Eleven,  get
you a cup before I leave?”
Theo appreciated the offer and said so. He fished in his pocket for two singles and handed them to the
officer. “Black, one sugar.”
The front door creaked closed again. A few seconds  after  that,  a  car  door  slammed, followed by the
grating noise of tires over gravel. Then silence descended upon the small bungalow. Theo went back into
the bedroom, peeled off his tan cotton blazer, and tossed it over the footboard of the neatly made bed.
He stared down at the greenish-yellow screen.
Coded symbols continued to dance across it. He hadn’t found a power source or wi-fi router. His initial
tapping on what he thought to be the keypad didn’t stop the flow of symbols, so it was more than likely
not a screen-saver program. But the computer was obviously doing something.
With a start he realized he had no idea how to turn it off. He really wished the tech from the cyber squad
would get here, because if his attempt to shut down the laptop resulted in data loss, it’d be his ass—as
squad sergeant—on the line, even though Zeke was primary on the case.
He glanced at his watch.  Twelve-forty.  Technically, he was  now on vacation—seven  days  of sleeping
late, playing his guitar, and,  if he got up the energy,  trimming  the  oleander  bushes  that  threatened  to
overtake his backyard.
Zeke and Amy knew where to find him if something broke  in this case.  At the moment, there  was  no
good news: no witnesses,  nothing taken—as  far as  the landlord  could  tell. No  motive for homicide, if
that’s what this was. The landlord said Wayne had been a quiet but likable guy. Right now, they had little
to go on. It could be days, even weeks, before the ME’s lab analysis, along with information from the
usual feelers Zeke and Amy put out, would come back.
He wandered back to the living room, straining his ears for the sound of the tech’s car. The clock on the
wall said quarter to one. He shoved his hands in the front pockets of his pants, rocking back on his heels.
He hated blank time like this, with nothing to  do  but listen to  his own thoughts. He  wished he had  his
guitar. It was an old 1962 Martin OM, beat up after almost fifty years of being carted around and played
by its previous  owners,  but he loved  it, loved  its sound.  Messing  around  with  some  of  Traveling  Ed
Teja’s blues tunes would keep him occupied so he didn’t start thinking about Camille again, didn’t start
thinking about what he’d thought was a wonderful relationship that was, in reality, a sham….
He shut his eyes. It all made sense now. Her encouraging him to work overtime. Her erratic schedule at
the  restaurant.  Their  constantly  depleted  checking  account.  And  her  moods:  wild  and  intense  one
moment, deep and despairing the next.
He was a cop. He of all people should’ve known his wife was a cokehead.
But  he  hadn’t.  He  hadn’t  even  caught  on  that  she  wasn’t  really  Camille  Starlton.  Out  of  jail  after
convictions on drug charges in Alabama, she stole another woman’s identity and  lived under  that  name
until she met him. Marrying him gave her a  new last name, a  new identity. The fact  that  she  was  also
marrying a cop was evidently her idea of a private joke.
Ripping his heart out had been one hell of a punch line.

Damn it, Petrakos, stop it!
He ran one hand over his face. He should never have agreed to wait, but he thought he’d have Zeke to
talk to. Zeke with his amateur comedy routines and  leering grin. A walking encyclopedia  of herbs  and
vitamins. Madly in love with his wife, who also was madly in love with him.
Lucky bastard.
The sound of a car engine caught his attention. He opened the front door, stepped out onto  the porch,
and watched the white headlights swing his way. The green-and-white patrol car  returning. The officer,
cell phone to his ear, nodded to him through the open window, then held out a capped paper container
as Theo approached.
Theo accepted the coffee with a smile, then retreated inside.
He should have brought his guitar.
At twelve fifty-five, his cell phone trilled again. No, they hadn’t  reached  the off-duty technician. It  was
Christmas week and she must be out of town.  But, yes,  someone  would pick  it up from the evidence
room late tomorrow afternoon—three o’clock, maybe. That was the earliest they’d have a tech available.
“Just for the record, I have no idea how to shut this thing down. There’s no keyboard, no mouse.”
“You sure it’s a computer?”
“Looks like a laptop, yeah. Has a screen.”
“Hold down the power button until it shuts off.”
“There isn’t one.” Not one he could find, anyway.
“There’s always a power button. If you don’t see it next to the keyboard—”
“There’s no keyboard.”
“—check the sides.”
Theo turned the unit around and upside down. “Nope.”
“It’s running on batteries. Look for a panel on the bottom.”
“The bottom  and  the sides  are  solid.  No  panels,  no buttons.  No  keyboard,”  Theo  repeated.  “Just  a
screen and a touch pad that does nothing. It’s like the screen saver is stuck. I can’t even get a cursor.”
He envisioned the tech  raising his gaze heavenward  in exasperation.  “Fine. Close  the top.  It’ll go into
hibernate mode. Don’t worry.”
Easy for you to say, Theo thought as he tabbed the phone off. He grabbed his jacket and pulled it on.
You’re not dealing with a dead man who looks like a thousand-year-old mummy and a computer
that looks like it’s from a couple hundred years in the future.
He pushed the screen down until it was flat with the unit, then gave it one more gentle shove. He waited a
few seconds. No grinding noises like when his hard drive was unhappy. No warning beeps. Nothing.
With a shrug, Theo tucked the laptop under his arm and, juggling his half-empty cup of coffee, locked the

apartment’s door with the one of the keys the landlord had provided and headed for his car.
 
The armed nils had walked right by them, lights casting left and  right, but Jorie  couldn’t  take  a  chance
bliss luck would surface twice. She moved her team deeper into the shrubbery.
So she didn’t know someone had appropriated a key piece of Guardian equipment until Tam Herryck
poked her and pointed to the data—still annoyingly erratic—on her scanner screen.
“Hell’s wrath, he’s taking the T-MOD!” Jorie’s voice was a harsh whisper. She pushed the leafy branch
shielding her face  down  another  minmeter or  two  as  a  tall male in a  tan jacket  and  dark  pants  loped
across  the  lawn.  Now  she  could  see  him  clearly  through  the  enhanced  view  of  her  ocular.  He  had
Danjay’s unit firmly tucked in the crook of his left arm.
“But not Agent Wain’s scanner or transcomm.” The glow from Herryck’s scanner reflected eerily on her
face. “I’m still getting readings from them inside the structure.”
Double hell’s wrath! She had to recover the unit—over and above the fact that it was Guardian tech on a
nil world,  it  was  the  only  clue  they  had  about  Danjay’s  death.  But  they  needed  the  scanner  and
transcomm as well in order to be able to synthesize all the information on the herd  and  its movements.
She didn’t think they had that many more hours of darkness left.
“Could  be  worse,”  Trenat  posited  in  a  hushed  tone.  “The  armed  security  personnel  could  have
appropriated  it. This nil’s not in uniform. I don’t  see  any obvious  armaments.  We  should  be  able  to
recover the unit without a problem.”
“Good  observation,  Trenat.”  Jorie  had  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  A  civilian.  Probably  a  delivery
person, low on the hierarchy, untrained in defense or combat.
Herryck shifted her scanner in Jorie’s direction. “Sir, the T-MOD’s definitely leaking.”
Which meant a zombie would track and kill that defenseless human too, in the same way one had killed
Danjay. Jorie studied the nil with her unshielded left eye as he stepped into the wide glow of a streetlight
almost directly in front of her team’s position. Male, human, with a medium skin tone and short dark hair.
Straight nose, clean jawline. She switched to oc-view on her left, zoomed in on his face. Not young like
Trenat, but not old. Younger than her brother, Galin, definitely, though his dark eyes were bracketed by
squint wrinkles, his mouth by smile lines. He looked to be within a couple of years of her own age.
Far too young to die. Especially in the jaws of a zombie.
She made a quick decision. “We need that unit. Herryck, I’m on the nil male. You and Trenat access the
structure, get the transcomm and scanner, and bring them back to the ship. I’ll transit up when I have the
unit.”
Herryck nodded. “Understood, sir.”
“Trenat?”
“Understood, Commander.”
“Remember, no direct contact with nils unless absolutely unavoidable.” She added the reminder more for
Trenat’s sake than Herryck’s. Tam knew the difference between a tracker—a hunter of zombies—and

an agent, whose sole assignment it was to infiltrate and utilize the local cultures so that the trackers could
come dirtside  and  do  their jobs  quickly and  efficiently. But this  was  Trenat’s  first  tour.  His  technical
talents notwithstanding, he had a tendency to gawk.
Two heads nodded at her. She turned, catching the man’s form out of the corner of her eye. “I’m moving
now.”
“Sir.” Herryck’s hushed voice stopped her as she straightened, twigs and branches poking into her neck
and back. “The land vehicle, sir. Have a care. They don’t appear to navigate very safely on this world.”
“Recommendation noted, Lieutenant. You both have a care too. See you back on board.”
 
Theo plopped the laptop on the Crown Vic’s threadbare front seat, turned the key  in the ignition, then
reached  for his container  of coffee  on the dash.  The sedan’s  back  tire clipped  the curb  as  he  pulled
away, jostling his hand, and he spilled lukewarm coffee down the front of his shirt and on his right pants
leg.
Oh, hell. He gripped the wheel as he pulled up to the stop sign, aware of the damp sensation on his skin
and the sickly sweet smell of stale coffee. He wasn’t that far from his house. He could kill two birds with
one stone if he took five, ten minutes to stop there, change his clothes, and pick up the portable  sound
system that Lieutenant Stevens wanted to borrow. He could drop the laptop and the sound system off,
sleep late tomorrow.
Sounded good.
He tapped his blinker and turned left.
 
They definitely didn’t navigate very well on this world, but fortunately ground traffic was sparse as Jorie
followed the man in his vehicle. She’d worked enough surveillance to know how to keep  her quarry  in
her sights and yet stay out of his. Her scanner on the seat beside her—functioning properly now that she
was out of the dead zone around Danjay’s structure—tracked Danjay’s T-MOD and would alert her to
any sudden departures from his current heading.
At the eight-minute mark, he turned again. Two minutes after that, he slowed considerably. So did she,
dropping back under the cover of darkness, her vehicle’s running lights extinguished. This was a locale of
small structures, most likely personal residences, many adorned with small colored lights. His wasn’t, she
noted as she cruised past. The aft end of his land vehicle was just visible around the back corner of his
structure.
The narrow road curved around a small park intermittently bordered by a low wooden fence. She guided
her land vehicle onto a grassy area, disengaged the power pack, and tucked her scanner into place in her
utility belt. Her rifle was on the floor. She looped the strap  over  her head,  flipped her oc-set  in place,
and, hugging the shadows, trotted back toward his residence.
The night air tickled her bare arms and legs like a flirtatious lover, alternately warm then cool. The foliage
scraping her skin had a strong yet pleasant scent. It reminded her of Paroo, whose tropical islands were
renowned for huge blossoming trees and sweet sand beaches. She’d been there with Lorik. An error she
didn’t intend to repeat.

If Lorik had been the one in possession of the T-MOD, she might well have let the zombie get him first,
clamping its serrated jaws over Lorik’s fine-featured dark face, chewing on Lorik’s pale hair—which at
one time had reminded her of the color of starlight—as it sucked the life essence from Lorik’s  damned
brilliant mind. Then she’d retrieve the unit. The thought momentarily cheered  her.  Other  than Danjay’s
death,  things  had  been  going  well  on  this  mission  until  the  critical  Guardian  tracking  equipment  was
separated. Now they were losing precious time. The herd had to be moving, or else Danjay would still be
alive. That was his second  mistake,  after  not keeping  scrupulous  watch  on his shields. A herd  moved
because the craving set in. And the youngest, being on the outside of the hierarchy,  moved  first, taking
individual  kills,  creating  scent  trails,  drawing  the  mature  herd  drones  and  eventually  the  powerful
C-Prime—the controller of the herd—to them.
A good tracker could almost instinctually feel when the craving started to build. In her thirty-two  active
hunts, she’d never failed to spot the first signs of a craving.
Danjay may have failed, but his data would not. Jorie skirted along a  high hedge  in a  half crouch.  She
was at the residence and cover was slim. She  glanced  down  again at  the scanner  secured  to  her belt.
Shields at max. No intruders. And the T-MOD…
In the structure? No, still in the land vehicle, according to her scanner. Bliss luck! She wouldn’t have to
wait for the man to fall asleep and risk waking him as she appropriated the unit. She didn’t want to hurt a
defenseless nil. She wasn’t sure what stun setting on her G-1 would be effective with the least amount of
soft-tissue damage on this type of humanoid.
She squatted down, listening to the world’s odd night sounds—shrill chirps and resonant grumps—as she
organized the items in the small pods on her utility belt. A standard desensitizer for any security systems
the vehicle might have, then a  wide-range  sonic lockbreaker  like Trenat  had  used  to  appropriate  their
vehicle. She didn’t know if she had the young ensign’s delicate touch—she decided she would file a nice
report on him when she got back to the ship—but she’d get inside. She always did.
With one last glance at her scanner, she rose.
And froze.
Light stabbed the green expanse before her.
Biting back curses, she flattened herself on the ground. The rear door of the residence swung open. The
man stepped out in the bright glow of a small overhead illuminator. He no longer wore the jacket he had
earlier  but  was  clad  in  a  gray  short-sleeve  shirt  and  lighter  blue  pants.  A  long  black  box—not  the
T-MOD—was tucked under one arm, with two small square boxes nestled in the other. His grip on the
smaller boxes wasn’t as secure. They jiggled as he plodded toward the vehicle.
He hesitated at the pilot’s door, then, evidently changing his mind, he moved toward the vehicle’s front
end.
Damn! Damn! If he turned even the slightest bit, he might see her under the shrubbery. Her gaze glued to
his movements, she levered herself up mere minmeters on one arm and slowly plucked one of her lasers
from its holster. If he spotted her, she’d have to stun him. She had no choice.
His attention, however, seemed to be on the vehicle’s interior. She had a  sinking feeling that  she  knew
what he was looking for. Danjay’s T-MOD. The boxes he carried must be some kind of decoder.
He put the smaller boxes on the vehicle’s roof, touched something to the side of the door, then a moment
later pulled it open. The grinding, creaking noise it made sounded like a barrage of strafer cannons to her

ears. The doors on her land vehicle didn’t sound at all like that. Was this some kind of auditory security
measure?
The rear cargo door of the vehicle suddenly flew open. But no weapons turrets protruded, nothing lethal
emerged. She slowly let out the breath she hadn’t realized she was holding and watched him transfer the
small black boxes to the rear cargo area. The long box went in too. She was considering how to take him
from behind when—damn! damn!—he stepped back to the door on the navigator’s side, bent over, and
came out with the T-MOD in his grasp.
There it was. She had to take possession of it now. It shouldn’t be difficult. He was a nil, a civilian. She
was an expertly trained military commander with the element of surprise.
She rose in one smooth, swift, practiced movement.
And her scanner screeched out an intruder alert.
Zombie.
So much for keeping a low profile.
“Run!” Jorie screamed at him, her heart pounding in her throat as she tabbed the laser in her right hand
up to hard-terminate. “Run!”
She grabbed her other  laser  and  barreled  across  the lawn. “Drop  the T-MOD!  Run!” A sickly green
glow formed in the night gloom off to her left. She  laced  the spot  with both  her lasers,  aware  that  the
stupid nil was still standing there, T-MOD in his hands, staring at the expanding portal.
Just as she reached him, the green cloud erupted into hard form maybe two maxmeters away, about level
with the top  of the high hedge.  Its  diameter  was  small. Bliss luck,  she’d  done  some  damage  but  she
hadn’t stopped it. Yet. She fired off three more bursts, then swung around  to  face  the nil, bringing her
micro-rifle across  her chest  as  she  did.  “Drop  the unit, damn  you!”  Her  breath  came  in  hard  gasps.
“That’s a zombie. It’ll kill you!”
The man stared down at her. And then Jorie remembered: the entire universe did not speak Alarsh.
But that was the least of her problems. The zombie had arrived.
She swung back as it slithered like molten green liquid out of the hole in the night sky. The man behind
her uttered something guttural. She could feel his breath against her hair, could feel the hard tension of his
body against her back.
“What  in  hell  is  that?”  she  heard  him  rasp—in  passable  Vekran—as  the  zombie  snapped  into
solidification. Its serrated jaws gleamed in the moonlight and its three sunken opticals pulsed red, strafing
the darkness  in all directions.  Four  clawed  appendages,  long  and  multijointed,  clicked.  Energyworms
undulated and writhed over its tall, angular body.
“Zombie,” she said, her breath still harsh. She shoved her pistols back into the holsters and whipped her
Hazer micro-rifle forward. “Okay, big boy. Now we play rough.”
She fired as it lunged for them, the rifle’s energy almost blinding as it crashed against the void substance
of the energyworms. She squinted her left eye closed,  viewed everything through the filtered ocular  on
her right.
The zombie howled, slashing at her with its upper claws. But it stopped advancing.

Swinging the rifle down, she strafed its legs with a blast. The grass around it immediately blackened. The
zombie tottered for a moment. She aimed for its topmost eye, but missed as it jerked sideways. “Damn!”
It lashed out with its lower right arm. She caught the movement almost too late. “Down!” she screamed in
Vekran. She dropped to her knees, prayed the man behind her understood and copied her movement.
The zombie’s long arm snaked  out,  ripping through the roof  of the land vehicle, sending jagged  metal
hurtling across  the lawn. Damn, this one  had  extenders.  She  hadn’t  seen  that  mutation in a  long time.
She’d  have to  adjust  her attack,  especially as  neither Herryck  nor  Trenat  was  there  to  help  create  a
diversion or watch after the nil.
The nil. Another  worry.  The vehicle behind her was  still shuddering,  clanking from the  contact.  “You
alive, nil?” she shouted over the noise.
“Yes!”
“When I say run, you run. Understand?”
“No, wait!” He spoke quickly.
She couldn’t follow his strange version of Vekran, couldn’t catch all the words. She fired another blast at
the zombie. “I do not understand all you say. Listen to me. I say run, we run.”
“No. Gun! Give me a gun!”
“Gun?”
He slapped at the pistol on her right side. He wanted the G-1. He wanted to help.
Could he? She popped off two more blasts, quickly cradled the rifle in the crook of her arm, and yanked
her pistol out. A G-1 was easy to operate. A nil should be able to do it. She shoved it into his large hand,
closed hers around his as best she could, aimed, and pressed his thumb against the activator. A steam of
laser fire streaked down the zombie’s side. “Yes?” she asked, praying her quick lesson was sufficient and
he didn’t shoot himself in the foot.
Or her in the back.
“Yes!” His mouth curled into an oddly attractive, feral grin.
Damn, she liked that. She grinned back. “Good! Kill!” She lifted her rifle, sighted, and fired, and hoped
he mimicked her movements.
He fired in a line next to her. Good nil!
“Legs!” She told him, aiming for the same. “Opticals!” She raised her rifle and, this time, took one optical
out.
His laser fell silent. Oh, damn, it was too much for him. She was on her own again. Then all of a sudden
shots streaked out, and—pow! pang!—the remaining two opticals exploded.
She jerked her head around, stared at him in unabashed admiration. “Damn!”
“Thanks.” His face was sweaty, streaked. But he still had that delicious—there really was no other word
for it—grin.

She swung back, concentrated on the zombie’s arms. Blinded and howling, the zombie thrashed wildly,
advancing then retreating. It could still sense the leaking T-MOD but, without opticals, couldn’t hone in
on them for a kill.
It used  its extenders  instead.  Shrubbery  flew, tree  branches  crashed.  She  yanked  on  the  man’s  arm.
“This way.” She pulled him away from the vehicle, away from the T-MOD. Closer to the zombie.
“Arms!” She fired at the coiling extenders. He did the same. Good. She sprinted away from him, ignoring
whatever it was he yelled. She was almost to the zombie. She had to duck three times to avoid its claws,
but she finally sighted its white heart, just under its grinding jaws.
Almost, almost…now! She fired.
The zombie exploded, silently, in a cloud of bright green gas, then disappeared.
Jorie stood, shaking, exhausted, bliss running through her body in galactic-size doses. But only for a few
sweet seconds. Then reality hit. The leaking T-MOD. More zombies would come.
She whirled and headed for the gutted vehicle. The man sprinted, catching up with her. He grabbed her
arm, frowning. That delicious smile gone. His eyes were dark, intense. She shook him off, then at the last
moment remembered he still had her laser. “I need that.” She pointed to the pistol in his hand.
“Who are you? What was that thing?”
“I don’t have time to explain. I need that and my agent’s T-MOD. Then I have to get back to my ship.”
“You’re not making sense.”
She frowned at him, not understanding.
“You talk crazy,” he said.
No, her Vekran and his were somewhat different. “No time. No words now.” She kept it as simple as
she could. “Mine.” She pointed again to the pistol he’d yet to relinquish. “Mine.” She pointed to the unit.
He hefted the pistol in one hand, mulling his options, obviously. As if he had any. She sighed, raised her
own pistol, and this time pointed it at his head. “Mine.”
He handed her the pistol.
“Thank you.” She  tucked  both  back  into their  holsters,  then  turned  and  strode  the  few  steps  to  the
T-MOD. She bent toward it. Hard, muscled arms wrapped around her waist, lifting her up.
Damn, the nil was strong. She wrenched out of his grasp and stared in surprise at the business end of her
laser pistol. The one he’d just returned to her. His other hand was  clamped  on the T-MOD.  And that
feral grin was back.
“You’re going nowhere, lady, until you explain.”
She didn’t know how he’d managed to get it, but he could keep the G-1, though she’d face the captain’s
hell-wrath for losing it. She tried to jerk the unit out of his hand, but he wouldn’t let go.
“You. Don’t. Understand,” she said through gritted teeth. “No time!”
“Explain,” he demanded, the pistol aimed at her head. A pistol—thanks  to  her—he  knew  how to  use.

She still had her other G-1 but knew she’d be dead if she made a reach for it.
Her scanner emitted one shrill beep. Portal forming. Another zombie honing in on the unit.
She had no choice. Death by zombie, death by laser, or…
She jabbed the transcomm on the side of her utility belt with her right elbow and issued a terse order into
her mouth mike in Alarsh. “Emergency transit. Engage PMaT. Two life forms. Now!”
The nil-tech world called Earth blinked from her sight.
 
3 
The first thing Theo realized was that he itched all over. The second was that somehow—in the blink of
an eye—he’d gone from a horror movie in his backyard to the middle of a Star Trek set. He was on a
platform facing a bank of computer screens and a short console.  In front of the console  were  a  group
people  in  green-and-black  uniforms.  Two  were  clearly  not  human.  One  looked  a  bit  like  a  short,
curly-haired Wookiee. No, that was Star Wars. Wrong movie. The other  was…His  vision hazed.  His
head spun. His body tingled relentlessly. He knew with sickening certainty he was moments from passing
out.
Not good.
He locked his knees. Someone grabbed his arm, steadying him as he sucked in a deep breath. Something
slid through his fingers. The laptop.  He  turned,  then let it go,  because  now,  in the bright lights of this
science-fiction movie set, he couldn’t stop looking at the woman who took the laptop from him.
He saw  her—or  thought he saw  her—in the  uneven  glare  of  the  porch  light  over  his  back  door.  A
teenager  in  some  mismatched  slam-jam  outfit  running  toward  him,  hollering.  He  thought  she  was  in
trouble, needed help. The whole neighborhood knew he was a cop. He intended to grab her, try to calm
her down, when suddenly two beams of light burst from her hands.
That’s when he noticed the big green glowing hole in the night sky about twenty feet away.
Seconds later she was braced  against him—her lithe, muscular body  draped  in odd  equipment.  Some
kind of lens covered her right eye. He quickly discarded his initial impressions of teen and slam-jam. She
looked like a member of a futuristic SWAT team.
And then he saw  the—what  had  she  called it? The  zombie.  Cristos!  Worse  than  any  images  of  the
Kalikantzri from his childhood Christmases.
He went on autopilot after that. He hazily remembered damning himself for not putting his hip holster and
gun  back  on  immediately  after  changing  his  coffee-soaked  clothes.  He  somewhat  more  clearly
remembered taking some kind of gun from her. But mostly he focused on that towering abomination with
glowing eyes and metal skin covered with crawling, writhing worms.
Understandably,  he  wasn’t  focused  on  her,  or  what  she  looked  like.  Until  now.  She  was  sweaty,
grass-stained, dirt-streaked. And she was unequivocally gorgeous. Exotic. Medium height, five foot five
or so,  and  slender  but not skinny. Her  skin color  reminded him of honey.  She  had  muscles. She  had
curves. Nice curves. His gaze traveled  up from her cleavage  to  a  heart-shaped  face  with dark-lashed
eyes. And lips any Hollywood actress would pay big bucks to own. Lips he’d love to—

He blinked, hard. Slow down, Petrakos. Slow down.
Sounds, voices filtered back into his ears, making him aware he’d been temporarily deafened. A tremor
shook his body, subsiding as quickly as it had appeared. He was suffering from disorientation, delusions.
Too  many nights on  call  out  resulting  in  lack  of  sleep,  that’s  all  this  was.  In  a  moment  it  would  all
disappear and he’d be back in his kitchen, popping the top off a nice cold can of orange soda he’d left
standing on the counter. He intended to finish that  off before  heading back  to  the department  with the
sound system and Mr. Crunchy’s laptop.
He drew in a deep breath, then another. The itching sensation on his skin abated  to  a  mild annoyance.
But when the scene before him didn’t morph back into the familiar brown and yellow tones of his kitchen,
reality began to stealthily creep in.
And it wasn’t a reality he liked. He unstuck his tongue from the roof  of his mouth and  tried  to  speak.
“What happened?” His voice sounded rough. Not surprising, given what his body felt like.
She glanced his way. She was a few feet in front of him, talking in a strange language to a woman with
curly red  hair who was  clad  in the same  kind  of  shorts  and  odd  one-sleeved  shirt  but  minus  all  the
hardware.  A short  spate  of more  unintelligible words,  then she  handed  the laptop  to  the  woman  and
stepped back up onto the platform.
“Mine.” She reached for the gun he still held in his hand.
His cop senses kicked in. Instinctively, he stepped back, raising it.
A pale-skinned  man and  that Wookiee-looking  one  reacted,  silver weapons  appearing  in their hands.
Aimed at him. Tension laced the room. Another man and a dark-skinned, yellow-haired woman turned
from their consoles, hands on the weapons at their hips.
“Mine,” the woman in front of him repeated.
He was outnumbered. He might be able to take two, three of them out, but his stomach was still doing
somersaults. Even if he could somehow convince his legs to run, he doubted he’d make it as far as  the
door alive. Unless, of course, this was some kind of elaborate practical joke. In which case, if he reacted
with deadly force, innocent people could get hurt.
Every good cop knew there was a time to act and a time to wait, gather information. This, clearly, was
not a time to act.
Gritting his teeth, he lowered the gun. The woman plucked it from his fingers. The weapons aimed at him
disappeared into holsters. The low hum of conversation resumed.
The woman said something he couldn’t understand.
“What?”
“No concerns. You’re safe here.”
Safe?  Where  was  here?  Hell, he was  a  detective.  He  should be  able  to  find out that  simple  answer.
“Where am I?” he asked, putting some firmness in his voice this time. At least,  he thought he had.  His
head still wobbled. He shook it. Wrong move, Petrakos. That didn’t help.
“Sakanah. Ship,” she said.

He listened for a moment to the other voices around him. Hers was the only one  in the room  he could
understand. “Where?”
“Come.”
Well,  hell,  why  not?  his brain said,  as  it completed  yet another  looping circle.  It  wasn’t  like  he  had
anything else to do. Still wobbling, he followed her off the platform, scratching at the prickling sensation
on his arm.
A long gray Star Trek–looking corridor, a right turn, then another. She said nothing, guiding him with a
slight touch on his arm when his feet—still numb and clumsy—stumbled in the wrong direction. Blocks of
lettering on the walls looked like HTML code. Or ASCII. Like the lettering on the laptop screen.
For some reason he felt that was significant, though he couldn’t remember why.
She stopped before a recessed doorway, touched a small pad on the right. The door slid open, silently.
And the galaxy opened before him like a vast black sparkling maw.
This time his knees did buckle.
He grabbed for the door frame. She grabbed his elbow, guided him in. “Sit.”
A ready  room.  That’s  what it was  always called on the space  shows.  A  conference  table  ringed  by
chairs. He dropped into one at the corner of the table as sweat beaded on his brow. The wall in front of
him was all window. All black space, sprinkled with stars.
It could be a projection, a movie screen, but somehow he didn’t think so. Damn.
She came to the table with two tall clear glasses and pushed one in front of him. “Drink. It will help settle
the body after the PMaT.”
Peemat? He had no idea what she  was  talking about  but picked  up the glass,  sniffed it. Smelled like
water. He realized he was parched.
She took a long draft of hers, licked her lips. “Water.” Her voice rasped slightly.
Sweet Jesus and Mother Mary help him. She was gorgeous, totally gorgeous  in a  way that  seized  him
right in the gut and didn’t let go. Not fashion-model gorgeous—her features were too irregular, her mouth
too  wide,  her nose  too  broad,  her chin a  bit too  narrow.  And not  movie-star  gorgeous.  He’d  dated
women like that. Hell, he’d married Camille. Camille was so beautiful, men would turn in the street and
stare when she walked by.
Though he never did. He knew she was beautiful, but he never had that turn-and-stare  reaction  to  her.
He liked looking at Camille, but he always was able to stop.
Not like this.
He took a mouthful of water, swallowed. Then another. Some of the fog hovering in his brain started to
clear. Maybe it was thinking of Camille that did it. The itching quieted. And reality slammed him hard this
time.
Images  of  her  refusing  to  answer  his  questions,  threatening  him  with  her  gun,  flooded  back  to  him.
Beautiful woman be damned, he was pissed. She’d kidnapped him. She’d stolen evidence in a homicide
case and, he suspected, fully intended to withhold that evidence. She was  only interested  in getting her

damned laptop back. Not in stopping the killings by the…
…Tis Panagias ta matia! By the eyes of the Holy Virgin! What in hell was that thing in his backyard?
That overgrown Kalikantzri thing she called a zombie?
A shudder radiated through him and he braced himself in the chair. It ended as quickly as it had started.
He drew  a  deep  breath,  tried  to  marshal his thoughts. He  was  a  cop,  God  damn it. A trained  police
officer. He wasn’t going to jump to conclusions, act on incomplete information. He’d  been  in situations
like this before.
Well, maybe not quite.
Keep a lid on it, Petrakos, until you know what’s going on.
He sucked in a second slow breath. She watched him, head tilted slightly to  one  side.  He  studied  her.
Her eyes were a golden yellow, like a cat’s. Her skin had a honeyed café-au-lait hue. Her hair had to be
ten different shades of gold, orange, and brown—punk-streaked, he thought, but not as  garish. It  was
just short of shoulder length, more chin length in front, with bangs that looked like she’d hacked at them
with a knife. She wasn’t that gorgeous.
Oh, yeah, she is. And tough and capable. She’d faced down that towering monster without flinching. He
wasn’t used to being protected; he was the one usually doing that job. So when someone else did it, and
did it well, he recognized that. Appreciated it, as a cop. As much as he appreciated her face and form, as
a man. But ignore that, you can ignore that. It’s just a case of temporary insanity. You’ll get over
it. Think of Camille. She’s probably just like Camille.
She held his gaze for a long moment, as if she knew he was studying her. Then she brought her fingers to
rest in the middle of her chest. “Jorie. Mikkalah.”
It must be identification time. Good. He needed facts. “Theo. Petrakos.” He mimicked her movement.
“Peh-tra-kos.”
“Yes. Ma-cay-la?”
“Yes.”
“Where am I?” He turned one hand outward, motioned toward the room, toward the wide dark window.
“Where’s this?”
“Ship. Name is Sakanah.”
He remembered  asking her that before,  remembered  her answer.  Ship.  This  is  not  Carnival  Cruise
Lines. “What kind of ship?”
“Kind?”
“Type.”
“Ah.” She nodded. “Red-Star Class Three intergalactic combat-and-recovery vessel.”
At least, that’s what he thought she said. She touched a small wedge-shaped panel set into the top of the
table that he hadn’t noticed until now. A semitransparent,  green-glowing image sprang  to  life, hovering
over the middle of the table. He flinched back in his chair. She touched another section of the wedge and
the image rotated  slowly. It  looked  like a  cross  between  an  incarnation  of  something  from  the  latest

episodes of Battlestar Galactica and a Klingon Bird of Prey: elliptical yet winged toward the stern.
“Sakanah,” she repeated, pointing.
Ship. Combat-and-recovery vessel. A military ship. In space. In orbit around Earth, he assumed, though
he couldn’t see either Earth or the moon through the wide window. Every bit of common sense he owned
told  him  this  was  nuts.  Then  another  part  of  his  mind—one  that  had  performed  dozens  of  police
interrogations and  discounted  nothing as  impossible,  until  proven—said:  Maybe.  Maybe  not.  Listen.
Learn. Gather facts.
She moved her hand to an insignia in the center of her shirt. Three stars in a semicircle, one larger, two
smaller. “Commander. Jorie. Mikkalah.”
Commander? That would explain the weapons, her skills.
He reached in his back pocket for his wallet, flipped it open to show his Bahia Vista Police Department
ID. He laid it on the table. “Sergeant. Theo. Petrakos.”
Her eyes widened and then suddenly she laughed. Not cruelly, not like Camille, but a full, throaty, honest
laugh. And he didn’t think it was at all aimed at him but at herself.
“Bliss, bliss.” She wiped at her eyes. “I should have known. Sergeant. You’re very good.”
“Good?”
She closed her fingers into the shape  of a  gun, extended  her arm,  pressed  her thumb twice.  “Zombie.
Good aim. You know weapons.”
Of course. She’d had no way of knowing he was trained as a police officer. He thought she had and that
she’d followed him or sought him out because he had the laptop. Maybe that wasn’t it at all. Maybe she
was following the zombie.
“You speak English.” He’d heard her speak it before, but then other times she didn’t seem able to.
“Vekran. I speak Vekran. Like your…” and she said something he couldn’t catch. “Words,” she added.
“Like your words, but different. Some things don’t…” and another word he didn’t understand.
“Translate?” he guessed.
“Trans-late?”
“Have the same meaning. Have the same correlation in my language and yours.”
“Translate. Some things don’t translate.” She nodded.
He pointed to one of her holstered weapons. “Gun.”
“Pistol.”
“Okay. Pistol. We say that. But also gun.”
She shook her head. “Never this gum.”
“Gun.”
“Gun.”

He glanced around the room, spotted a wall sign with its ASCII letters. “Vekran?” he asked, pointing.
“Alarsh. My words. Words of everyone on this ship. Alarsh.”
He finally understood. Vekran—English—wasn’t her native language. He didn’t know why that surprised
him. He  was  bilingual,  fluent  in  English  and  Greek.  Tough  to  grow  up  in  Maritana  County’s  Greek
community of Mangrove Springs and not be.
“Jorie Mikkalah,” he said. “Home?”
“Home?”
He pointed to himself and then made a small circle with his hands. “Bahia Vista.  Florida.”  He  widened
the circle. “United States of America.” He put his hands together, forming a ball. “Earth.”
She paused, then: “Pahn-Taris Station.”
“Space station?”
“Like this ship. In space. No dirt.”
“I know.”
“Good.  Pahn-Taris  Station.”  She  moved  her hands  in an elongated  circle.  “K’Dri Sector  Seventeen.”
Widened again. “Chalvash System.”
“How far away from here?”
She made that slight tilt of her head that infused him with a totally illogical desire to kiss her, smudgy face
and all. “Four years’ travel.”
“You’re on this ship four years?”
“Eight.”
“Eight years? Why?”
She smiled, her gold eyes narrowing. But it wasn’t a pleasant smile. “Hunting zombies.”
 
With the language differences, Jorie still wasn’t  sure  Theo  Petrakos  fully understood  the gravity of the
situation. His demeanor  went from suspicion to  curiosity,  hovered  almost  to  camaraderie,  then  firmly
returned to suspicion again. She tried to make it very clear that the Guardians had no interest in his world
other  than  to  eradicate  the  zombies  before  the  zombies  eradicated  them.  He  seemed,  finally,  to
understand the threat the zombies posed but not the breadth or depth of it. He also  didn’t like the fact
that the Guardians had no intention of contacting his governmental authorities.
He  liked  it  less  when  she  explained  that  the  zombies  were  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Guardians.
Zombies were—and  she  admitted  shame  to  that  fact—a  mech-organic  entity  produced  by  her  own
government to monitor commercial space traffic for contaminates, and to defend and repair the Hatches:
portals that utilized the space–time curvature to  link the spacelanes.  They were  designed  to  operate  in
small herds, all under the control of the largest zombie, designated the C-Prime.

Commands issued by her people to the C-Prime were then transmitted to the herd for action. If a herd
member  was  destroyed,  the  C-Prime  could  replicate  another.  If  a  herd  member  malfunctioned,  the
C-Prime could repair it or terminate it.
Then something went radically wrong. The C-Primes stopped accepting commands from the Guardians
and began making decisions on their own.  It  was  a  flaw, the result of a  program  upgrade  intended  to
make the C-Primes more intuitive, more responsive. It ended up making them into monsters.
Her government, Jorie patiently explained, had created this problem two hundred years ago. They would
fix it, even if it took them another two hundred years.
“We made a mistake,” she said.
“That’s one goddamned big mistake!” He leaned back in his chair, away from her, as he did every time
he responded in anger.
“Agreed. Our mistake. Our solution.”
“But it’s killing my people!”
“Mine too.”
“You can fight back. We can’t.”
She knew  where  he was  going with this. Back  to  his “I have  to  warn  my  government”  diatribe.  But
getting nil-techs involved not only wasted time, it cost lives. The Guardians had learned that two hundred
years ago as well.
“Our solution,” she repeated. “No choice.”
He turned away  from her,  his hand fisted over  his mouth as  if he were  trying to  stop  his words  from
escaping.
Through all this, Tam Herryck bustled in and out, bringing more data from Danjay’s T-MOD, once again
shielded and cooperating nicely. But Jorie didn’t need more data. She needed a  chunk of quiet time in
order to compose a transmit to Galin about his friend’s untimely but heroic death. Then she needed food
and she  needed  sleep,  and  not necessarily  in that  order.  She  also  needed  a  cleanser.  Every  time  she
wiped her hand over her face, it came back with more dirt on it. Petrakos looked rumpled and tired too,
though probably  not half as  filthy as  she  did.  He  hadn’t  been  crawling  through  the  foliage  then  lying
facedown in the dirt for the better part of several time-sweeps.
He wasn’t dealing with the loss of an agent and a friend.
She sighed, rested her elbows on the tabletop and her forehead against her hands for a moment.
“You’re tired.” His voice softened.
She peeked up at him from over her hands. “Observant.”
“That’s why they pay me the big bucks.”
“Hmm?”
“Nothing. I’m tired too. But people—my people—are dying. Being killed by your zombies. It’s my job
to…It doesn’t seem right to go take a nap.”

It took a moment for her to put his sentence together. She straightened. “Zombies nap.”
“You mean they’ve stopped killing?”
“Temporarily.  Their  impetus,”  she  wasn’t  sure  he  understood  the  word,  but  he  nodded,  and  she
continued, “their impetus was heightened by the frequencies of the unshielded T-MOD. We removed that
unit to here. This ship.” She tapped the table with her finger. “We  have time before  they start  again. I
know—we know—how. We know when. We study the data, the craving. Movement of the herd.” She
was losing him. She could tell by the slanting of dark brows over even darker eyes. “We have time for
cleanser,” she scrubbed at her face, “food,” she touched her fingers to her mouth, “nap.” She closed her
eyes and tilted her head.
She heard him suck in a short breath. “Don’t do that.” His voice was low.
She opened her eyes. “What?”
“Nothing. So we have time to clean up, eat, sleep. Then what?”
“Then we go back down and we kill.”
Herryck  breezed  through  the  sliding  doorway  again.  “The  captain  says  he’s  ready  for  you  now,
Commander.”
Finally! She needed the old man’s input on this, though she knew there was a good chance she’d catch
hell’s wrath over Petrakos. With that, however, she’d already formed some answers. “On my way,” she
told Herryck. The door closed behind the lieutenant. She rose. Petrakos’s hand on her arm stopped her.
“Where are you going?”
Her conversation with Herryck had been in Alarsh. She summarized. “I must report to my captain.”
He was silent for a moment, then he lifted his chin slightly. “Send me back down.”
“Back…?”
“Home. Bahia Vista. My house. Structure,” he added.
“No.”
“I have a job. Duty.”
Don’t we all? She understood a little more about his job. It wasn’t dissimilar to hers, though on a smaller
scale. She very definitely understood duty. She was doing hers now. “No.”
“If I don’t show up at the department,” he glanced at the metal band on his wrist, “by eleven-thirty, noon,
people will be looking for me.”
“Then they won’t find you.” She shook off his hand, stepped away.
He rose quickly, but she saw him coming, because she’d spent her life training for moves like that. She
spun, bracing, pistol aimed at his chest. He stopped short, evidently not expecting that she’d see him. He
was breathing hard.
He was a big man. She had to remember that, had to stop  equating nil-tech with nil-abilities. His wide
shoulders and muscular arms strained the fabric of his collarless gray shirt. But his wasn’t stupid brawn.

He had training; he held the rank of sergeant in a dirtside security force. He’d taken out two orbitals on a
zombie the first time he ever used a G-1. That kind of ability damned near matched her own.
She respected that, but there was simply no way she could oblige him.
“My sincere regrets to you,” she told him. “But no.”
“But when we go back down—”
“I go back down. My team. Not you.”
“Why?”
She shook her head. Questions, questions. She’d already explained. “Our problem. Our solution.”
“My planet!”
She nodded knowingly. “Regrets.”
“Okay, okay.” He held up both hands, backed up a step. “Your problem, your solution. I get it now. So
put the gu—the pistol away.”
She didn’t, but she did lower it.
“After that. After you kill the zombies. Then I go home?”
Hell’s wrath. She hated this part.  It  rarely went well with nils, who illogically tied  their identities to  an
orbiting ball of dirt or, worse, to one locale on that same ball of dirt. Spacefaring cultures were so much
easier to deal with. “Regrets.”
It took a moment, then his face hardened. “Regrets? Regrets? What the fuck do you mean by ‘regrets’?”
“Fuck?”
His hand fisted against his mouth again, and he abruptly shifted away from her. He was angry, very angry.
But he was comporting himself rather well, considering the circumstances. She gave him credit  for that.
She’d dealt with far worse from nils.
He lowered his hand, turned back, and spoke with slow, controlled deliberation. “Am I to  stay  on this
ship for the rest of my life?”
“No.”
“No?” Surprise flitted over his features and, damn, there was a hopeful tone in his voice.
“Relocation.” She hoped he understood that word.  “New  residence.  New  structure.”  It  was  inevitable
that—in  the  hundreds  of  Guardian  missions  over  hundreds  of  years—certain  locals  would  become
involved, as he had. In advanced societies that had  space  travel and  an awareness  of—if not relations
with—other galactic cultures, the locals could  return to  their residences.  That was  never  the case  with
nil-techs—a label Petrakos had bristled at when she’d explained it. But nils couldn’t stay on board either.
Yet they had to live somewhere. “Nice location. Paroo. Trees smell sweet.”
Not surprisingly, the news didn’t appear to infuse him with bliss.
“Paroo.” He said the word as if it were the vilest of curses.

“Paroo.”
“No. Bahia Vista. Florida. United States of America.” His voice shook.
She sighed. There was something she hadn’t considered or had overlooked because she was so flat-line
tired. He might be spoused. Have children. Sometimes…She could  ask  the captain.  Sometimes they’d
relocate the entire family unit.
She studied him briefly again. He was in his prime as a male. Tall. Strong. And a good face. A very good
face. Someone loved him, surely. And he loved her as well.
Lucky female.
That thought startled her. Sex was bliss, but being spoused didn’t interest her. Especially after Lorik. She
must be more tired than she thought. “You’re spoused, aren’t you?”
“Spoused?”
“Male. Female. Same residence. Have children. Have love.”
Something she couldn’t identify flickered across his face. His very good face. “I’m not married, no. No
wife. No spouse. No children.”
She almost asked if all the females he knew were blind and unsexed but thought better of it.
“Why would it matter if I were marr—spoused?”
“Because…”  She  hesitated,  choosing  simple  Vekran  words.  “We  have  sincere  regrets  when  we’re
required to send nils to Paroo. We try, we very much try, Petrakos, to make what is bad into bliss. We
understand the family unit. If that was  why you’re  angry, I would ask  the captain  to  appropriate  your
family for you, send you all to  Paroo.  But family unit or  not,  that  doesn’t  change what I must do.  Or
where you must go. You hear my words, Petrakos?”
He stared at her, his expression flat. Dead. His arms were taut by his sides. She watched his eyes, ready
to raise her pistol again if she had to.
Finally he spoke, his voice bitter. “Kidnappers with a conscience. How nice. Go to hell, all of you.”
She didn’t fully understand the first part of his remark. But she clearly understood the last. She raised her
chin and met his hard stare evenly. “Been there. Twice.”
“Go report to your captain.” His voice was a low soft growl.
She backed up to the door and exited without comment, locking the door behind her. Herryck waited for
her in the corridor. “Get a security team to transfer him to secure quarters,” she told the lieutenant as she
holstered her pistol. “Stay here until they arrive.”
“Problems, sir?”
“He’s angry. And he’s security-trained and very capable of doing something about it.”
“If he tries, sir?”
She knew standard procedure as well as Herryck did.  For  all a  battle  cruiser’s  tech  and  weaponry,  it
was still a  fragile environment. No  place  for a  nil  with  a  grudge  who  had  the  skills  to  fire  a  G-I  or

micro-rifle but not the understanding of what that  could  do  to  an exterior  bulkhead  in  the  vacuum  of
space. If he managed to obtain a weapon, there’d be no choice but one. She knew that choice. And she
wasn’t required to like it. “Hard-terminate, my authorization.”
“Understood, sir.”
Good.  She  was  glad somebody  did,  because  as  she’d  issued  the command,  it weighed on her heart.
Heavily. She spun on her heels and headed for the captain’s office.
 
4 
“Good work, Commander Mikkalah. Regrettable loss of an agent, though.” Captain Pietr leaned back in
his office chair and laced his hands over his stomach. His swarthy face was lined, though his tightly curled
silver hair was still thick. He’d been in command of one Guardian ship or another since before Jorie was
born.
She had served under  him her entire career  with the Guardians.  She  respected  him tremendously.  On
occasion, she even liked him. She wasn’t yet sure if this was one of those occasions.
Petrakos  probably  thought  of  her  as  narrow,  inflexible.  Compared  to  Kort  Pietr,  she  was  wantonly
lenient. The captain would never have risked  losing the T-MOD  to  save  one  nil’s life. Zombies didn’t
damage tech. She could have waited, let the zombie snack on Petrakos, then recovered the unit before
the next zombie picked up its scent. What was  one  life when the data  she  brought  back  could  save  a
million lives?
“Thank you, sir.” She kept her shoulders back,  her hands  locked  behind her waist,  emotions tightly in
check. “Agent Wain, like all of us, knew the risks. If shielding malfunctions and cannot be repaired, the
T-MOD  must  be  destroyed.  Guardian  Force  Field  Regulations,  Section  Twelve,  Paragraph  Three,
Subsection A. Sir.”
“Yet sometimes agents  and  trackers  in the field ignore those  very important regulations,  Commander.
They become enthralled with the hunt. They want to be the one to bag a powerful C-Prime. And they see
an unshielded unit as  bait.”  He  rocked  his chair slightly, his eyes  half-hooded.  “They reinterpret  those
regulations to suit their needs. They take unnecessary risks. Sometimes it works in their favor. In Wain’s
case, it didn’t. A lesson for all of us, surely.”
Jorie wasn’t fooled for a moment, either by his posture or his words. Pietr was completely alert and by
now had read everything she and her team had logged. He knew about Petrakos and might well consider
her bringing the nil aboard  unnecessary  and  in violation of not only  field  regulations  but  half  a  dozen
Guardian Force general procedures as well. She chose, however, not to address that issue until he did.
“An unshielded unit can spur a craving,” she recited. “Actions of zombies caught in a premature craving
can be unpredictable. I would never attempt such a maneuver, sir.”
Pietr  nodded.  Silence  filled  his  large  office,  broken  only  by  the  occasional  change  in  pitch  of  the
air-ventilation system or the muted click as his deskcomp downloaded incoming messages from his staff.
He arched his clasped hands, cracking his knuckles. “We have a nil on board, Commander.”
“Yes, sir.”

Those half-hooded eyes studied her. “Tell me about him.”
She did, careful in her phrasing, careful to make it clear recovery of the T-MOD had been her priority.
“You could have terminated him.”
“His presence, tied to the T-MOD at that point, was the zombie’s focus.” That wasn’t totally truthful, but
there was no way the captain could know that. “It permitted me to engage the zombie. Had he not been
there, the zombie would have come after me and the unit might still be unrecovered.”
Pietr arched one silver eyebrow. “More likely it would simply have taken you a little longer to terminate
the zombie.” He  chuckled  softly.  “I  don’t  believe  there’s  a  zombie  out  there  that’s  a  match  for  the
intrepid Commander Jorie Mikkalah.”
That was because in the field the intrepid Commander Jorie Mikkalah often broke  more  rules than she
followed. She just made sure no one was around to record her transgressions when she did. “Thank you,
sir. That’s very kind of you. I can’t operate under those assumptions, however.”
“So now we have this Sergeant…”
“Petrakos, sir.”
“…Petrakos on board. I’m sure you can arrange for his transport to Paroo at the proper time. Tell me,
Mikkalah, are you going to attempt to connive me into sending his spouse and children with him as well?”
His mouth curved into a wry grin.
“He’s not spoused.”
“That makes it clean and easy. I like that. I’m sure he’ll find Paroo a blissful experience.”
Jorie hesitated. She could still see the bleak desolation on Petrakos’s very good face when she informed
him he’d never return to his locale, his duty, that he was powerless over his life’s path. Such impotence
took a harder toll on those used to the freedom of command. It had almost destroyed her once. Maybe
that’s why his situation disconcerted her so much. “He’s not quite accepted relocation, sir.”
“Fighting you on it, is he?” He shook his head. “Nils and their love of their planets.”
“I think it’s his career as well, sir. He holds high rank in his locale’s security forces.  He  feels a  duty to
continue to protect his people.”
“A worthy attribute. We can recommend he be placed in a similar function on Paroo.”  That closed  the
matter. She  could  hear  it in his voice.  Relocation  had  been  an effective Guardian policy for over  two
hundred years. Her job was not to question but to implement. Surely Petrakos would see that eventually.
“Now tell me about this unusual—and unexpected—herd.” Pietr motioned to a chair in front of his desk.
“And please sit down, Commander. I’ve reviewed your logs and Agent Wain’s. This is not going to be a
short conversation.”
She rather suspected that. Then the captain ordered food and ice water brought in, and Jorie logged the
meeting as one of the occasions where she liked him.
The bad news in Danjay’s data—aside from the fact that the Guardians still had no idea why the zombies
had targeted the planet—was in the size of the herd: three hundred eleven drones. The good news was
that there was still only one C-Prime and none of the drones showed signs of mutating into a second. But

the larger  the  herd  grew,  the  more  chance  one  would  mutate.  They  had  to  strike  now,  before  that
happened, while the C-Prime was still overburdened and increasingly distracted with its herd duties.
One  of  the  many  questions  Danjay’s  data  didn’t  answer,  however,  was  why  the  herd—which  he’d
dubbed  a  megaherd—had  grown  to  such  large  proportions.  The  average  zombie  herd  was  fifty  to
seventy drones  with  one  C-Prime.  Up  until  now,  the  largest  herd  that  had  been  recorded  was  one
hundred  seventy.  Usually  by  that  point,  a  second  C-Prime  mutated  and  the  herd  split,  becoming
adversaries and killing off the weaker drones, thereby reducing the herd.
Termination of a  fifty-zombie herd  was  just another  day’s  work  for a  Guardian team.  Three  hundred
would take a little bit longer.
“Before we  terminate them, we  do  need  to  know  how they managed  to  populate  so  quickly and  not
split,” Pietr said. “If this is a new mutation or resistance factor developing, it’s imperative we be able to
adjust  for that,  as  it may hold the key  to  why they’ve chosen  this locale—and  why  they  will  choose
others.”
“You think the C-Prime may have learned how to expand its capabilities?”
“I  fear  that,  Commander.  Our  advantage  has  always  been  that,  for  all  the  zombie’s  offensive  and
defensive factors,  it is innately a  stupid  creature,  unable to  learn.  The code—regulating  its mental and
physical growth—guaranteed that. A C-Prime with over three hundred drones should be  incapacitated.
This one’s not. It’s slowed down, but it’s functioning.”
“I mentioned in my report on the Port Lraknal terminations that I observed what I thought to be intuitive
behavior on the part  of several  zombies.”  But  intuitive  enough  to  consciously  choose  a  location  that
showed none of the requisite tech frequency emissions? The question puzzled her, as she knew it puzzled
Pietr.  Her  job,  however,  was  strictly  zombie  termination,  not  psychology.  She  was  a  soldier,  not  a
scientist.
Pietr was  nodding. “That’s why I’m giving you command of this mission. I believe we’re  at  a  critical
juncture here.”
He was giving her command? Jorie was one of the more experienced trackers on board, but still, Pietr’s
words surprised her. “Thank you, sir.”
“You may well damn me before this is over, Mikkalah. This is not the ideal setup. It’s a nil-tech world.
We must operate completely covertly. Our agent, who could have provided us with not only a functional
knowledge of the locale but a secure transport point for key personnel and tech, is dead. And we don’t
have another three months to waste infiltrating the populace, getting another agent in place.”
That meant more dark,  stinking, humid alleys. And,  given the conditions,  a  damned  tactical  headache.
“Understood, sir.”
Pietr leaned forward. “Let me throw this into the equation. How old are you, Commander?”
Jorie tried not to frown. It never was a good idea to frown at one  of Pietr’s  questions,  no matter  how
digressive they seemed at the moment. “Thirty-nine, sir.”
“Would you like to make the rank of captain before you turn forty?”
She sat very still. Would she like to make captain? Did a graknox like to roll in the mud? Did a fermarl
like to copulate in liaso hedges?

“Yes, sir.”
Pietr held up his index finger. “Find out how this herd  managed  to  get so  large without fracturing.” He
held up a second finger. “And then terminate it. Every one. And that captaincy will be yours.”
So. All she had to do was ascertain why zombies were  now capable  of actions  that  were  scientifically
impossible and then conduct a ground war with small, less-than-optimally  equipped  teams  in a  nil-tech
locale where the populace more than likely would consider those same Guardians their enemy. Definitely
a tactical headache if she ever saw one.
But the bliss, oh, the bliss, if she pulled it off!
 
Theo sat on the edge of the bed, his elbows on his knees, his head in his hands. Anger, frustration, and
exhaustion vied for control of his body. After twenty minutes of prying and poking into every  corner  of
the cabin and  moving what furniture wasn’t  bolted  to  the floor,  he  was  unable  to  find  any  means  of
escape. Three armed guards  and  that curly-haired  woman who seemed  to  be  Mikkalah’s  subordinate
had escorted him here, produced a tray of food from a dispenser set into the far wall, and left. He had no
doubt that at least one of those guards was still outside his door. He could take one on, probably. Two
would be difficult, but he was more than willing to make the effort, if he could just get the damned door
open!
But he couldn’t get the damned door open. And he couldn’t find any other way out of the cabin. Which
was, if he was in the mood to admit it, actually nicer than the room he’d stayed in at that new Holiday Inn
Express in the Keys last year.
He rubbed his eyes. He had a raging headache. He was hungry. There was a tray and a pitcher of water
waiting for him on the small table. He didn’t know if those yellow apple-looking things really were apples.
Or what the pale mushy stuff in the covered container was.
And he was  too  spent  to  cross  the short  distance  to  the table  to  find out.  It  was  almost three  in  the
morning, his body’s time. So he sat, damning himself for walking out of his back door without his gun.
That would have changed things. He wasn’t totally sure how or why, with his mind fuzzy and aching. He
just knew it had been a stupid bonehead mistake a seasoned cop like himself should never have made.
Ta ekanes skata. In the back of his mind, he could hear his Uncle Stavros telling him that he’d screwed
up.
His second mistake was not using Mikkalah’s own weapon on her, just before she’d sent them up to her
ship. But he hadn’t perceived her as the enemy then. He’d just wanted answers. He didn’t want to hurt
her, let alone kill her.
He wasn’t even sure he could kill her now. He’d seen a zombie. He understood, with sickening clarity,
what she had to do and why. But if the opportunity came…well, it would feel mighty good to give it a try.
That he was physically capable of overpowering  her he had  no doubt.  But he’d  have to  catch  her off
guard first, and that was no easy thing to accomplish. Her training was impressive. Maybe she had eyes
in the back of her head. Hell, she was an alien. She  probably  did.  She  was  probably  as  bad  as  those
zombies she hunted….
All women, he decided sagely as he rubbed at a knot between his brows, were zombies. Especially the

beautiful ones. Like Camille. Like this Jorie Mikkalah. They show up in your life, bite  your head,  suck
your brains out, and leave nothing behind but a  withered  corpse.  Then your friends gather  around  and
stare down at you and wonder why your eyeballs are so nice and moist.
Except his friends wouldn’t have his corpse to stare at. They’d look and look and never know what had
happened  to  him. It  had  to  be  a  horrible  feeling,  that  not  knowing.  He’d  seen  it  destroy  families  in
missing-persons cases.
Thank God his parents weren’t alive. This would kill them. And he wouldn’t even be dead with them so
he could explain he was really on Paroo, eating brains with some zombies named—
“Petrakos.”
Light shafted over his eyelids. Noise reached his ears. He blinked, realized he was flat on his back on a
soft bed.  He  didn’t recognize the matte-gray  ceiling. He  didn’t recognize the sounds  in  the  room,  an
intermittent muted clicking, a hushed rush of air. Where…?
“Petrakos.” A woman’s voice. That woman’s voice. That he recognized.
Skata. Shit. He squeezed his eyes shut for a moment, ran through more curses in Greek that would have
impressed even crusty Uncle Stavros, then levered himself up on his elbows. He must have passed out.
His gorgeous alien commander stood poised in the open doorway. He could see two of the three guards
behind her.
Her face was scrubbed clean, her hair brushed to a shine. The shorts and odd one-sleeved shirt had been
replaced with a green-and-black jumpsuit. And only one gun now, hanging from a duty belt  ringing her
hips. She stepped in, but the door stayed open. He noted  with some  small satisfaction that  she  kept  a
hand on the gun. If she didn’t fear him, she was at least cautious. Good, he decided as twinges of anger
surfaced again. Be cautious.
“You didn’t eat.” She motioned to his untouched tray.
He let his gaze move around the room, touch on the overturned chairs at the small dining table, the sofa
cushions in disarray, the storage doors hanging open. “I was busy.”
“Foolish. You will stress yourself.”
He snorted and sat up. “Being kidnapped isn’t stress?”
She picked up a slice of the apple thing, bit into it. He heard the crunch. “Good. Try?”
“No.” He glanced  at  his watch.  Five-thirty.  He’d  been  out cold  for about  two  hours.  He  felt as  if he
could sleep two hundred more, but at least the headache was gone. Sleep deprivation had always been
part of his job.
So were certain routines. He knew that around  three  in the afternoon,  someone  from the cyber  squad
would check the BVPD evidence room and find no laptop. People would start looking for him, a cop last
seen at the site of a homicide. Now missing. He knew exactly what emergency measures would be taken
to find him, and it pained him. Because unless they launched the space shuttle, they wouldn’t work.
Unless he took measures of his own.
“I brought a thing for you to see.” She took two steps toward him.

Adrenaline flashed through his body. Guards be damned, he could take her down. Right now. The hand
on the gun had moved to a pouch on her belt. She was only a few feet in front of him, pushing the last of
that apple thing into that beautiful mouth of hers.
One swift move would do it. Knock her to the floor, restrain her hands, grab her gun while the weight of
his body pinned her underneath him. She’d fight, squirm, press up against him, her hips grinding against
his…
“You want?” She tilted her head.
Panagia mou! Oh, Mother of God! Heat flooded him. His breath shuddered out. Yeah, he wanted, all
right. But they were talking about two different things.
She had  a  square  disk—about  the size of  his  Palm  Pilot—in  her  hand.  He  watched  her  squeeze  its
corners, and suddenly the flat disk became a cube. Colors, images, swirled on all four surfaces.
He should stand up, take it, but then she’d know what he wanted, and it wasn’t  whatever  the damned
cube was.
He braced one hand against his thigh, wiped his face with the other. Christ, I’m losing my mind. He had
to keep emotions out of this. He had to think like a cop.
He blanked his expression, forced himself to look at the cube. “What is it?” Better to focus on that than
on the delusional fantasies that sprang into his mind every time she came near him.
“Holographs. You know this word?”
“Photos. Images.”
She nodded. “I thought perhaps if you see, you’ll understand it isn’t…” and then a word he didn’t know.
“Isn’t what?” How could two languages be so alike and so different? One more thing to tax his sanity.
“Not without a choice for you. Not all bad.” She paused. “Believe me.”
“What’s not bad? Being a prisoner? That sucks.” He knew she probably couldn’t follow his speech. He
wasn’t sure he cared.
She turned  abruptly  and  put the cube  on the tabletop.  “Paroo.”  Her  voice carried  over  her shoulder.
“This will show you Paroo. A beautiful locale.”
Did she know how vulnerable she was with her back to him? Or was that part of the plan? Two guards
hovered near the doorway. He’d be dead before he ever  made  it halfway across  the floor.  He  shot  a
glance in their direction, sizing them up. Two males, watching him watch her. Watching him notice  how
her uniform fit her rear end only too well. It occurred to him one of them might be her lover. Hell, for all
he knew she was servicing the whole damned ship.
Camille would have.
Stop it, Petrakos!
He dropped his gaze to his hands clasped tightly between his knees. Counted to ten in Greek. When he
looked back up, she’d turned.
“Paroo,” he said. “You just don’t get it, do you?”

“I don’t acquire—”
“You don’t understand.” He stopped, feeling anger rise again. He waited until he had himself under better
control. He wasn’t usually like this. He was a cop, for God’s sake. His personnel record lauded his calm
demeanor under pressure, his ability to defuse potentially hostile situations. A hair-trigger temper wasn’t
remotely in his repertoire.
And he’d never lusted after a woman like some teenager whose hormones were raging out of control.
But he’d  never  been  kidnapped  by space  aliens before  either.  That  was  no  doubt  a  big  part  of  the
problem.
“It doesn’t matter how beautiful the prison,” he said finally. “It’s still a prison.”
When she didn’t respond, he continued: “You understand that word? Prison?”
Her mouth thinned. It took a moment before she nodded. “Yes. Involuntary confinement. But you’re still
free to—”
“I’m not free.”
“You are. Structure, friends, career. Anything you want—”
“I want my life on my terms.”
“You make a new life on Paroo.”
“Why should I?” He didn’t care that he was pushing her. Even if it accomplished nothing, it felt better to
vent his frustration.
She started to speak, stopped. He was definitely pushing her. “It’s necessary—”
“Why?”
Golden eyes blazed. “You don’t hear my words.”
“I hear your words. I just don’t like them.”
“You will like Paroo!”
“A beautiful prison is still a prison,” he repeated calmly, because he could  tell by the rising tone  of her
voice that she wasn’t calm.
She flung her hands out in a gesture of exasperation as a torrent of unintelligible words poured from her
lips. None sounded like English or Vekran. All sounded angry. One of the guards cast an alarmed look in
her direction. He realized she was probably swearing a blue streak at him in Alarsh. Then she stopped,
her mouth a tight line. She was breathing hard.
He arched one eyebrow. “Now you know how I feel.”
A chair lay on its side at her feet. With a rough movement, she reached down and righted it. She set one
knee on its seat and leaned against its back, her arms crossed.
Classic defensive posture, he noted. Something he’d  said  rankled  her.  God,  it felt good  to  analyze, to
think like a cop again.

She glared at him. “I understand  your situation, Petrakos.  Much more  than you can  know.  You don’t
understand mine.”
“Sure I do. Beam down, shoot pistol, kill zombies. End of story.”
“Nils.” She almost spat out the unflattering term. “This is the prime reason we no longer involve nils. You
have no…” and an unfamiliar word, maybe three, “planning and complexity. In a  covert  mission where
we have no dirtside base of operations to facilitate…” More garbled words. But he began to catch some
of them. It wasn’t always the word. Sometimes it was her accent, her pronunciation.
He still couldn’t figure out why it was  so  important to  her that  he accept  being sent  to  Paroo,  but he
clearly heard her frustration in dealing with the zombies. No, not just with the zombies. With his world,
low-tech by her standards. It was almost amusing, except he knew that he’d be at a similar disadvantage
in Artistotle’s day or, hell, even during the American Revolution. He  could  probably  fire a  musket,  but
riding a horse with any degree of competency was beyond him. People would peg him for a stranger, if
not a total idiot, within ten minutes of talking to him.
He knew from friends who worked undercover how important it was to be able to blend into the setting.
Officers  lived  under  false  identities  for  months—years—to  become  part  of  the  drug  culture  or  a
terrorist’s cadre.
And her people’s sole operative on his world was a shrink-wrapped corpse with wet, bulging eyes.
An idea—small but maybe workable—formed in his mind. A bargaining chip. Why hadn’t  he seen  this
before?
“Wayne, your agent.” He recalled what she told him in the ready room earlier. “He was key to stopping
this zombie herd, wasn’t he?”
She stopped mid-rant, studied him as if surprised he had the intelligence to ask the question. “I explained.
The data in his T-MOD. This is of critical importance.”
“But so was he, right? He lived in the apartment, what—three, four months? He spoke Engl—Vekran?”
“As well as he did Alarsh.”
The idea grew. If it worked, he’d be back home restringing his guitar very shortly. But he needed more
information first. “Why did he choose my city, my locale?”
“The zombies chose your locale. They like warm water, electromagnetic storm activity. Other reasons.”
She shrugged. “But those are two prime factors.”
And  the  Tampa  Bay  region  was  famous  for  its  warm  beaches  and  violent  thunderstorms.  “So  the
Guardians send Wayne, he learns the lay of the land and then provides you, the trackers, with a base of
operations.” He thought of the dead man’s bungalow, heavily ringed by shrubbery. Very private. “Your
people can beam in, work from there.”
“Necessary. We can’t utilize an air attack. Our craft aren’t like yours. Your government would—”
“I understand. I know what covert is. I’m a cop. Security,” he amended, remembering that was the term
she’d used.
“A sergeant.”

He nodded,  only half-hearing her acknowledgment.  He  had  his bargaining chip.  And,  if he played  his
cards exactly right, he’d  also  have his freedom.  A shiver of excitement raced  through him. Don’t  get
anxious.  Set  it  up  right  so  that  she  thinks  it’s  her  idea.  Then  she  goes  back  to  her  mission
commander and makes the offer. “What happens now that Wayne’s dead?”
She smiled grimly. “A big headache. For me.”
“You?”
She nodded. “My mission.”
“In charge of everything?” He made a circle with one hand. And if her answer was yes, he wasn’t sure if
that was good or bad news.
“I’m very good at my job, Petrakos.”
He took  that for a  yes.  “I know.  I saw.”  He  had  to  get her on  his  side.  More  than  that,  he  had  to
convince her he was on hers. “But you don’t have Wayne’s apartment to use. You have his data but not
his field expertise. You don’t know shit from Shinola about daily life.” He caught her frown. Good.  He
used  the  expression  deliberately  to  remind  her  she  didn’t  fully  speak  his  language.  “My  squad,  my
security force,  was  investigating Wayne’s  death.  You  don’t  even  know  what  we  may  already  know
about the Guardians.”
That frown deepened. “Thank you for adding to my headache.”
“Regrets.” He used her expression of apology, inclining his head slightly as if he meant it. “We’re in the
same business. I understand what you face now. I guess maybe life on Paroo won’t be  that  bad.  New
structure, new friends. No problems. Not like your situation.” He prayed she  didn’t have some  built-in
alien telepathic lie detector.
Relief softened the tense line between her brows. “You understand.”
“I know you have more-serious problems to deal with than whether or not I want to live on Paroo.”
“Very serious. But it’s also important to me—to us—that you know we’re not without regrets. We wish
you bliss.”
“You’re trying to save people’s lives. I’m sor—regrets for causing you trouble.” He forced his mouth into
what he hoped was a sincere smile.
“It’s normal. Change is difficult for many to accept.”
Good,  you’re  buying  it.  Hook,  line,  and  here  comes  the  sinker.  “That’s because  people  from  my
world haven’t seen what you have. We don’t have your experiences, your tech.” Now let’s start to reel
you  in,  slowly.  “You’re  very good  at  being a  tracker.  It’s  a  shame you’re  starting with  three  strikes
against you.” The frown was back. An admission, again, that he knew the language and she didn’t. “You
have a disadvantage,” he reiterated. Ah, she got that. “Of course, you could always delay the mission a
few months. Live there yourself. Then start—”
“We don’t have that kind of time. Unless you want to see more of your people dead?”
“I swore on my life to protect my people. But that’s your job now. Too bad we can’t switch places,” he
added in an offhand manner as  he concentrated  on keeping  his words  simple, understandable.  It  was
critical she followed what he had to say next. “Just imagine: you could relax in Paroo, a place you know.

I’d fight the zombies in a city that I know as well as you know this ship. It’d be very easy for me to have
people  come  and  go  in  my  house.  Big  backyard.  Thick  bushes.  Very  private.”  He  held  his  breath.
C’mon, c’mon, pretty lady. Connect the dots. Don’t make me do it for you.
She was  very still, her face  blank.  Then slowly she  eased  down  onto  the seat  of the chair.  Her  arms
relaxed. She was thinking, hard. He could see it in the movement of those golden eyes, in the pursing of
that lovely mouth.
Okay,  one  more  thing. This would seal  the deal  or  nothing would.  He  stood,  casually strode  the few
steps to the table, picked up the cube. Images of white beaches ringed by lush green mountains flowed in
his hand. It could have been Hawaii. Or Tahiti. “Looks nice.”
She shot to her feet. “Petrakos.” There was life in her face, her eyes all but dancing. “Don’t go away. I’ll
be back.”
She turned and, barking something out in Alarsh to the guards, sprinted through the doorway. It closed
behind her.
Theo sat on the edge of the bed, elbows on his knees, turning the cube over and over in his hands. He
was always a pretty good poker player. But this was the first time he’d ever gambled for his life.
 
5 
Pietr drummed his blunt fingers on his desktop.  “I have no problem  with your appropriating  this  nil’s
structure,  Commander.  However,  I  have  serious  reservations  about  having  him  participate  in  the
mission.”
“I  fully  understand.  But  his  structure  isn’t  a  transient  rental,  as  Agent  Wain’s  was.  That’s  the
disadvantage.  His  neighbors  know  him.  They’d  question  our  presence  unless  he  was  there.  On  the
positive side,  his presence  would remove  a  great  deal  of suspicion.  And he is involved with the local
security force, sir. He has access to information that could be vital to us.” Jorie hesitated, well aware she
was asking permission to do something that most likely had never been done before on a nil world. She
couldn’t begin to guess how many general-procedure regulations it violated. No, she could. Seven.
“He knows too much about us. How can we be sure he won’t  relay that  to  his superiors  in that  same
security force?”
“We can’t. But as long as the zombies are a threat, I don’t believe he will. He admits he needs  us,  sir.
We leave and hundreds, thousands more will die.”
The captain nodded slowly.
“He’s not your average nil, sir. He has security training. He faced the zombie without panicking.”
“I don’t want him facing zombies, Commander. I want his structure and his knowledge of the locale.”
“Yes, sir, I just meant—”
“I know what you meant. We don’t know what he’ll do after it’s over, and that’s  my concern.  Do  we
reward his assistance by a hard-termination? We’re not the Tresh.”

“He’s accepted relocation to Paroo.”
One silvered eyebrow arched. “Has he?”
“He indicated as much.”
“And a man’s never lied to you, Commander?”
Jorie’s cheeks heated. Hell and damn. But it wasn’t Lorik’s lies Pietr was asking about. “That’s always
a risk.”
“Yes.” Those same fingers that had drummed the desktop now tapped  against broad  lips. “But less of
one if we use a restrainer implant.”
Jorie forced her face not to show the slightest sign of revulsion as an icy chill shot through her. Restrainer
implants were used to control violent prisoners.  The Guardian version wasn’t  the same  as  the one  the
Tresh Devastator operatives had used on her, but still, unease sprinted on spiked  toes  through her gut.
Petrakos wasn’t violent. He was willing. He wanted to help. He had a good face.
And now she had to tell that same good face that they not only wanted to inhabit his structure but invade
his body as well.
 
Petrakos was seated at the table, eating the sweet-bulb slices, when she returned to his quarters. She sat
across from him and slowly began to detail her plan: the use of his structure to  facilitate equipment and
personnel transport. The use of his knowledge of his locale to fill in the gaps in Danjay’s data.
Would he be  willing to  deflect  suspicion from them if his security force  raised  questions?  He  agreed,
readily,  enthusiastically.  He’d  seen  a  zombie.  He’d  seen  Danjay’s  corpse.  Two  very  compelling
arguments.
“Captain Pietr  and  I express  deep  appreciation  for your assistance.”  She’d  poured  herself  a  glass  of
water  but  couldn’t  drink  it.  She  kept  her  hands  folded  on  the  table,  afraid  she’d  make  nervous
movements that would betray  her state  of mind. She  couldn’t  stop  thinking about  the implant. A fatal
charge that could be detonated on a whim. At max level, instant death. But the Tresh had never been so
kindly. No, the Devastator operatives had used low-level pulses on her. Wave after wave of incredible,
unending pain while the Tresh commander, Davin Prow, stood there and smiled his angel’s smile.
She shoved the memory away.
“It’s the least I could do,” he said. “You’re the ones taking all the risks.”
It took her a moment to fully translate his words. She was  sadly out of practice  with her Vekran.  The
more she spoke to him, the more she remembered. She just wished they were talking about something—
anything—else. “Part of that risk is your knowledge of us. You understand,  when this is finished, you
still must go to Paroo.”
He picked up his glass, took a sip of water. “It looks like a beautiful place.”
He would like it there. He would find bliss. Think of that, she told herself. Not what you have to do to
get him to Paroo.

“The captain…the captain requests one further effort from you, as to your intentions.” Hell’s wrath, she
shouldn’t have stumbled over her words. He put his glass down, his eyes narrowing slightly.
“He wants me to make a statement, an oath? I can do that.” He paused. “You understand the word?”
“Oath. I understand.  No,  we  have to…”  Damn, damn,  damn! It  took  all her concentration  just to  sit
there. And her mouth seemed to have forgotten how to speak.
“You have to…?” His voice was low.
She drew in a breath, let it out. “Put a security device on you.”
His frown of suspicion turned to one of puzzlement. “An electronic monitoring bracelet?” He circled his
wrist with his fingers. “Transmits a signal so you know where I am?” He shrugged. “That’s fine.”
“Yes. No. Not quite like that.”
“Oh?” Suspicion returned. “And just what is it like?”
She barely registered her fingers splaying over the area beneath her shoulder next to her collarbone. Her
thumb found the rough scar easily, even through her uniform’s fabric. “It goes here. Inside. Implant.” She
glanced down at  her fingers, then back  up at  his face.  It  showed  no expression  whatsoever,  and  that
chilled her. “You understand this word?”
He nodded slowly. “And just what does this implant do?”
“It’s a security device,” she repeated. “Yes, it locates you. But it also…if you become a threat to us—”
“It kills me.”
Oh, if only he spoke Alarsh! Or her Vekran was better. But that was the very reason they needed him.
“If you become a threat to us,” she repeated, “it permits us to take appropriate  action.”  She  waited  to
see if he questioned her words. He only stared at her. She continued: “The device has different settings.
Hard-terminate is not the only one.”
“What’s the other?” There was a sudden bitterness in his voice. “Slow, painful torture?”
She’d wondered if he understood her explanation. He did, far too well. “We won’t need to  use  it with
you. You want to help us destroy the zombies. You’re willing to relocate to Paroo. You’re not a threat.
You come back to the ship. We remove it. It’s forgotten.”
His hand clenched and unclenched on the tabletop. “If I refuse this security device?” He said the words
with obvious derision.
“The mission proceeds without you.”
“Damn it!” He slammed both hands on the table, then shoved himself out of the chair.
She shot to her feet, hand on her pistol, and questioned her decision to  leave the guards  outside,  door
closed. But he was striding away from her, not toward her. He reached the far bulkhead,  stopped,  but
didn’t turn. She watched the angry rise and fall of his shoulders in silence.
He shoved one hand through his already spiky hair and then dropped his arm to his side. Finally, he faced
her. “That’s one hell of a way to treat a friend.”

Her voice, when she found it, was not much above a whisper. “Regrets, Theo Petrakos.” She meant it.
The knowledge of what that implant could do—its searing, crippling pain—was still fresh, even after ten
years. She didn’t wish that experience on this man who was willing to help her, this man who, in his own
world, was a protector of others. This man with a  very good  face  who,  under  different circumstances,
could well be a friend.
He came back to the table, his knuckles white as he clasped his hands over the back of the chair.  She
was still standing, right hand on her pistol. He stared down at her. “Who makes the decision if I live or
die?”
“The captain. And the mission commander.”
“That’s you.”
“Yes.”
He asked another question, but the words were wrong.
“I don’t understand.”
“This decision. To kill me.” His voice was harsh, raspy. “Two people say yes and I die? Or one person
says yes and I die?”
“You’re not going to die—”
“Two or one!”
“Two. Unless I die during the mission.”
His mouth twisted into a pained smile. “Then I guess I better work real hard to keep you alive.”
 
The entire procedure took less than ten minutes, disappointing Theo considerably. He’d wanted it to hurt.
He needed the pain to remind him that just when he thought he’d figured everything out,  he hadn’t.  He
wanted  Jorie  Mikkalah  to  watch  in awe  as  he gritted  his teeth  and  took  the pain like a  man, without
flinching.
Instead, an older woman with bright orange eyes, skin the color of a rich amber beer, and two long white
braids trailing down her back held a small light over his bare shoulder for a few seconds as he sat on a
padded table in what was obviously the ship’s medical clinic. The light felt—illogically—cold, and by the
time he realized his shoulder was numb, she’d pressed a wide metal disk just below his collarbone.  He
felt a slight thump, not much more than if someone bumped against him. There was no pain.
She took  the light and  the disk  away,  smiled at  him, then  said  something  in  what  he  was  coming  to
recognize as Alarsh. He caught Jorie’s last name in the middle of it.
Commander Mikkalah was studying the data streaming over the clinic’s wall. She hadn’t even glanced his
way  during  the  entire  procedure.  Another  disappointment.  How  could  she  watch  him  in  awe  if  she
wouldn’t even face him? She turned, however, when the woman spoke. There was a tautness about her
eyes and mouth.
Queasy over medical procedures? He hoped his having that implant shoved into him bothered the hell out

of her. It more than bothered the hell out of him. But he had  no choice.  There  was  no other  way they
were going to let him return to Earth.
“It’s finished,” Jorie said. “You may place your shirt. Care with moving for a time. Soreness is expected.”
Either she didn’t want Doc White Braids to know she spoke his language better than that  or  she  really
was rattled. Or there was something about the implant she wasn’t telling him.
He pushed  himself  off  the  padded  table,  accepted  his  shirt  from  the  doc,  then  pulled  it  on.  A  little
stiffness, yeah,  as  he pushed  his right arm through the sleeve.  But he’d  played  softball off and  on for
years, been hit by enough pitches, plowed into enough third basemen. Nothing he couldn’t handle.
Except that this was  an alien device  that could  kill him. He  yanked  his T-shirt  down  to  his waist and
watched  Commander  Mikkalah  have  a  nice  little  chat  with  the  doc  as  he  tucked  it  into  his  jeans.
Instructions on how to detonate the implant? He had  to  find out more  about  that  thing in his shoulder.
Which meant, as much as it grated  on him, he had  to  keep  his line of communication open  with Jorie
Mikkalah.
“We go now.” She jerked her chin toward the door to the corridor.
He  shoved  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  followed  her  out.  The  guards  were  gone.  He  noticed  that
immediately. Of course they were. She had the magic button, the one that could kill him.
She slowed her steps until they were side by side. He slanted a glance her way, tried to see if she had a
new wristwatch  or  badge  or  something clipped  to  her belt  that  was  labeled  Kill  the  Nil.  Nothing  so
obvious, unfortunately. And her face was still grim.
“Don’t like doctors much, do you?” he asked, fighting the urge to grab her by the shoulders and back her
up against the wall. Or grab her and shake her, scream at her for shoving a lethal device into his body.
Theo Petrakos wanted to do that so badly, his throat burned. Sergeant Petrakos kept  walking, making
light conversation, knowing she had home-field advantage right now and he didn’t.
But he would, soon. Patience was a virtue.
And revenge, when it came, would be sweet.
“Med-techs,” she answered. “Vekran term is med-techs. And my opinion is that they’re useful in many
circumstances.”
No, she definitely didn’t like doctors. Good. If he got a chance, he’d introduce her to Suzanne Martinez.
Preferably in Suzanne’s clinic. With a little luck she wouldn’t know what the word veterinarian meant.
He rotated his shoulder as they waited for the elevator,  studied  his surroundings as  a  way to  keep  his
mind occupied, his emotions in check.  The corridors  here  were  busier  than the one  outside  his cabin.
They had passed ten, maybe fifteen crew on the way to sick bay, another dozen just now.  Most  could
walk unnoticed on any Bahia Vista street, the orange or gold eye colors not immediately apparent. Hair
colors, though, were brighter. He saw no soft shades. Blonds all seemed to be yellow-gold blond; black
hair was shot through with blue. Reds were all orange tones. He saw only one other person—a younger
guy—with Jorie’s hair colors of orange, blond, and brown.
Races were tougher to define. And there seemed to be no correlation between skin tone and hair color
that he could see. He’d pegged Jorie to be mixed race when he first saw her running toward him across
his backyard. Later, in the conference room, he’d tried to pigeonhole her ethnicity based on his world’s
standards. Best he could come up with would be a combo of white, black, Polynesian, and Hispanic.

Her curly-haired sidekick, with her pale skin, could be redheaded Irish.
None  of  that  applied  now,  of  course,  with  the  reality  of  where  he  was.  But  still,  except  for  the
mini-Wookiee person, any one of the crew he saw could stroll through his local Sweetbay supermarket
and no one would think twice.
Makes it more difficult to identify the enemy, Theo Petrakos thought.
They’re not the enemy right now, Sarge reminded. We need them to exterminate the zombies.
And after that?
Sarge was silent. Theo smiled inwardly.
The elevator doors opened.  Jorie  stepped  into the empty cubicle; he followed.  The doors  closed.  He
glanced at his watch. Almost eight in the morning. Bahia Vista’s morning. He still had several hours to get
home before someone raised an alarm and started looking for him.
He loved the job. But—vacation be damned—he’d never wanted to go to work so badly in his life. This
was one whopper of a commute.
And he’d need one whopper of a story to cover what had happened to the laptop he was supposed to
have logged in to evidence.
Damn. He’d been so caught up with getting back to Bahia Vista, he forgot about the laptop. He needed
that back or there’d be questions he wasn’t sure he knew how to answer. Being Baker-Acted out to a
psych unit wasn’t something he wanted to contemplate right now. He just wanted to get home, stop the
zombies, and get back to work being a cop. He’d even forgo his scheduled vacation. The past  several
hours had been travel enough.
“The herd has shifted outer zones.” She spoke suddenly, without any preliminaries. And without looking
at him. She stared at the elevator’s control pad.
“Is that good news or bad news?”
The doors opened.  His corridor.  At least,  it looked  like his corridor.  He  hadn’t  spent  enough time in
them to differentiate. And he couldn’t read the damned wall signs.
“Not sure,” she said, stepping out. “We have no T-MOD in,” an odd-sounding word, “to relay accurate
data.”
T-MOD. The laptop.
“Then we’re going home? Down,” he corrected.
“Thirty minutes. Seeker ’droids must go first.”
Thirty minutes! His heart jumped. They reached a cabin door. His, he assumed.
“Fine,” he said. He had no idea what seeker ’droids were, but they’d  just bought him thirty minutes in
which to find that laptop.
She touched his door pad. “Eat. Nap.” He stepped inside. She didn’t. “Thirty minutes.”
“Wait.” His arm shot out, stopping the door from closing.

She tensed. He tried to relax his body so she wouldn’t infer a threat. “I need…I need a favor.”
She looked up at him, one eyebrow arched in question.
“The lap—the T-MOD. My department, my security people know it exists. It was photographed at the
crime scene. I told you that we may already have information on the Guardians. If I don’t return with that
unit, there could be questions you’re not going to like. Questions that aren’t going to help you do  what
you need to do.”
She regarded him, both brows now drawn down.
He pushed. “I agreed to let you put that implant in my shoulder. I don’t want it, but I understand why you
needed to do it. I need that T-MOD unit.”
“Regrets. It’s against regulations for our information to be presented to nil-worlders.”
“It’s evidence in a homicide case. If my lieutenant can’t find it, he’s going to restrict what I can do.” He
tried to keep his explanation as simple as he could. He needed her to understand and to believe that his
participation was of critical importance. God help him if she found out he was clocked out for vacation
and no one would miss him until after Christmas. “Then I can’t help you as much as you need.”
“I cannot—”
“I went through this,” he touched his shoulder, “to help you. A favor,  Commander.  I need  you to  help
me.”
Her lashes lowered briefly, then she looked up. “It’s not that I don’t wish to. It is, I cannot.”
She turned, palming the door closed as she left.
Just on a long shot, he tried opening the door after it closed behind her. Still locked. Damn.
He ran one  hand over  his face.  Eat,  nap,  she’d  said.  Forget  that.  He  first  had  to  look  at  what  that
med-tech had done to him.
He pulled his T-shirt over his head on his way to the cabin’s narrow bathroom. The mirror over the sink
area showed a reddened bruise on his shoulder, but that was all. It occurred to him that maybe nothing
was actually implanted inside him. Maybe they just thumped him and were all having a good laugh right
now.
But maybe not. And he couldn’t take that chance.
It took him three tries to get the shower to operate, and then liquid—he wasn’t  completely sure  it was
water—shot out of a long thin slit in the wall. It had a slippery feel and was colder than he liked, but he
needed his head clear and that would help. No towels, but an air dryer set into the same wall. He felt as if
he were in a human car wash.
He pulled on his clothes, then noticed the image cube still on the bed where he’d left it. Evidence. Proof,
in case he needed it. He might not have the laptop, but at least he’d have this. He positioned his fingers
on the edges as Jorie had and squeezed. A slight vibration, then it flattened back into a square.
He pocketed it and was scratching at the stubble on his chin, trying to think of one last argument to gain
that laptop, when his cabin door opened. He rose from the chair at the small dining table.
“We have a problem,” she said, before he could ask for the laptop again.

He sat back down, his heart moving in a similar direction. “What kind of problem?”
She was clad in the same shorts—some kind of bizarre brown–orange camo pattern—she wore when he
first saw her and the same one-armed shirt, funky boots. Two pistols, a short-barreled rifle draped over
one shoulder,  and  God  only knew  what else  hanging from her  belt.  A  headset  with  microphone  and
eyepiece ringed her neck. This one-woman war machine punched at some touch pads bordering a screen
on the wall behind him. He turned in his seat, watching her.
“Your structure had visitors. The seeker ’droid relayed this image.”
Holy Mother of God. One of his neighbors must have called the police. The image on the screen showed
a patrol car, a fire engine, and a bulky vehicle that had to be a utility truck from Progress Energy.
The devastation of his car, two palm trees, and a large section of his oleander hedge was obvious. The
view was aerial, though, and he couldn’t see if the back of his house was damaged. But he had to assume
it was. Just as he had to assume—no, he knew—personnel on the scene were  looking for him. Or  his
body. Because it looked like a small hurricane had ripped through his yard.
He had to get back there before his lieutenant made that phone call to the next of kin in his personnel file:
Uncle Stavros  and  Aunt Tootie.  They’d think the worst.  No,  Uncle  Stavros  would  know  the  worst,
because he was a retired street cop. Aunt Tootie would light enough candles in church to induce a bout
of global warming.
“Okay.” He rose again, hands splayed. “This is a problem, but not insurmountable. We can—”
He looked at her. Really looked at her, his mind already miles ahead on his plan to beam back down a
few blocks away, then jog up with some excuse that he’d gone out to help anyone injured by the storm,
act devastated by what had happened to his house.
Jog up with a one-woman war machine by his side.
Not a good idea.
“You have to change.”
She did that damned  head  tilt, thick lashes  shadowing her eyes,  her lips slightly parted  as  if she  were
inviting a kiss. He fought the urge to lean into her. She was the enemy. She was an alien. She was not for
him.
“Change?” she asked.
“Your outfit. Clothes.”  He  made  a  short  motion in the  air  with  his  hand  and  tried  to  direct  his  gaze
anywhere but her cleavage or the curve of her hips. “I can handle my visitors. But not if you look  like
you’re going to attack them.”
She  glanced  down,  then  over  her  shoulder  where  the  rifle  peeked  past.  “Understand.  But  what  is
habitually worn?”
“The shorts,” he pointed, “can stay. The top…” He shook his head. It was scoop-necked and cropped
short, like those stretch sports tops women wore for exercise. And it showed off enough of her skin that
he didn’t want her wearing it. “A T-shirt would be better. This”—he motioned to her long sleeve studded
with thin cables  and  what looked  like computer  serial ports—“has  to  go.  And  the  guns.  Pistols.  The
boots.”

He could tell by the slanting of her brows she wasn’t overjoyed with his suggestion. She flipped her hand
toward the screen. “So I engage this situation in just my shorts, the rest of my body naked?”
Well, that would definitely deflect attention from the wreckage of the car and  the trees.  “Where’s  your
cabin?”
“Why?”
“Show me your closet. I’ll show you what to wear.”
 
The elevator went sideways this time, or felt as if it did. Her cabin was almost identical to his, except it
looked  lived  in  and  had  computer  equipment  on  just  about  every  horizontal  surface.  In  spite  of  his
urgency to get home, he was admittedly curious; there was a shelf along one wall that appeared to hold
personal items—another holo cube, a glittering crystal that reminded him of a geode on a  stand,  a  long
box that might be wooden, intricately carved. But apparently she was as aware  of the time as  he was.
She shoved her closet doors sideways with undisguised impatience.
Four jumpsuit uniforms—three black-and-green, one a  light gray—a  long slinky pearlized  green  dress,
two sweaterlike long tops, and a thick, deep blue robe were the choices that greeted him.
“That’s it? Nothing like this?” He plucked at his T-shirt.
“For  napping,  yes.”  From  a  drawer  set  into  the  wall  she  withdrew  a  silky  item.  Short-sleeved,
round-necked, like his T-shirt, though longer. But that’s where  the similarities ended.  And his fantasies
began. It was so sheer as to be almost see-through. Clingy, shimmering, soft. He’d love to see her with it
on. He’d love even more to take it off.
Down, boy, down!
He went back to the closet, slipped one of the long-sleeved sweaters from its hanger. It would have to
do. Something in the bottom of the closet caught his eye. A zippered duffel. He tossed the sweater on her
bed, retrieved the duffel. “Rifle, pistols, any hardware you don’t absolutely have to have in your hand, in
here.”
“Wear this?” She held up the sweater.
He nodded.
She unhooked the rifle and strap, shoved that into the duffel, then stopped, eyes narrowed. “Pistols are
fine under this.”
She was  right. The long, unstructured  sweater  covered  her double  shoulder  holster  and  weapons.  As
long as no one caught her in a bear hug, their existence would most likely go undetected.
“You have different shoes? Boots?” The combination of long sweater and nearly thigh-high boots  were
damned near erotic in tandem. All he needed was for Sophie Goldstein across the street to catch sight of
that, and the whole neighborhood would buzz with the news that their nice Sergeant Petrakos was dating
a hooker.
There wouldn’t be a candle left in the whole state of Florida  if Aunt Tootie  got wind of that.  And she
would, just the way she knew everything else that went on in his life—from her daily phone chats with her

longtime friend Mrs. Goldstein.
With a  shake  of his head,  he turned  back  to  Jorie’s  closet.  His alien seductress’s  shoe  selection  was
equally as limited as her wardrobe.  No  sneakers.  Closest  he could  find looked  like hiking boots.  She
fished out a pair of very normal-looking white socks, sat on the edge of the bed.
She had pretty feet. For an alien one-woman war machine.
Then she stood before him, hands on her hips. “Satisfactory?”
“Don’t stand like that. I can see the outline of your weapons. Pistols.”
Muttering  something  in  Alarsh  he  was  sure  was  nasty,  she  closed  the  duffel,  then  slung  it  over  her
shoulder. “Now we can go to the PMaT on Deck Fifteen, Sergeant Petrakos?”
He wanted to, badly. But he had to try, one more time. “The T-MOD.”
“The data—”
“Strip out the data. I don’t need that. I just need that unit with my evidence tag on it. If the state cyber
guys can’t make heads or tails of the rest of it, that’s not my problem.” He could tell by her frown she
wasn’t following his plea. He took a deep breath. “I just need the outside.” He sketched the shape of the
laptop with his hands. “Not the data. The outside, with the small paper on the corner.” His evidence tag.
“That will stop my security from asking questions.”
She stared at him, eyes slightly narrowed. Thinking. She shifted her weight to her other foot. Still thinking.
He touched his shoulder. A reminder.
She looked away briefly, then back again. “Just the outside?”
“Just the unit. Broken. Malfunctioning.” He thought of the wreckage in his backyard. It was conceivable
the unit could have been crushed. He knew his sound system probably had been.
She  nodded  slowly,  then  flipped  the  thin  microphone  up  to  her  mouth.  There  was  a  long  series  of
strange-sounding words, then silence. More words. She took a few steps toward the door. He followed,
apprehensive, hopeful.
“Now we go, Sergeant Petrakos,” she said, after swinging the mike down. “My lieutenant will meet us on
Deck Fifteen.”
He took that to mean he was getting the T-MOD, albeit a bit altered. “Thank you.” Now all he had to do
was figure out how to get it into what was left of his car without the uniforms on scene noticing that.
 
6 
It looked  like another  bright,  beautiful  day  in  paradise—once  Theo’s  eyes  focused  and  his  stomach
stopped doing nosedives. If he could only stop scratching at his arms, the back of his neck, his…For the
first time in several hours, he saw a small smile curve across Jorie’s mouth.
“What’s so funny?” He didn’t intend that to be the first thing he said when they materialized in a secluded
section of the park two blocks from his house. He intended to give her a briefing of what to expect from

the cops  and  emergency personnel  at  the  scene.  Keep  your  mouth  shut,  keep  a  low  profile,  and
follow my lead was the gist of it. He would get to that in a minute. If he could only stop scratching. And
she’d stop trying not to grin.
“Your stomach spins and a thousand flittercreepers dance on your skin, no?”
“Just a little itching,” he lied. He had no idea what flittercreepers were, but his body felt as if it had gone
through the spin cycle on his washing machine. More  than once.  But he was  not going to  give her the
satisfaction of knowing this nil couldn’t handle it. Not after his embarrassing performance on her ship the
first time. He  urged  her forward  toward  the short  stretch  of brick-paved  street  and  glanced  carefully
down at his watch. His head did another looping spin, then settled. Ten after nine.
“Normal. The body reacquaints itself after a brief separation.”
Neither he nor his roiling stomach  wanted  to  think any further on that  explanation.  “Does  it ever  stop
happening?”
“No. But eventually you ignore it. Don’t worry. We use shuttles to Paroo.”
He wasn’t worried. He had no intention of going through that transporter gizmo again. And he sure as hell
wasn’t going to be on any shuttle to Paroo. “Okay, this is what’s more than likely going to happen when
we walk up. We need to have our stories straight. You say  as  little as  possible,  let me do  the talking.
Understand?”
She nodded. He described the different vehicles, their purpose,  and  their personnel  as  simplistically as
possible,  though he noted  her English—or her understanding of his English—was improving. Once  he
showed his ID, he told her, the cops would know him and most likely accept his story that he was  out
checking for anyone needing help after  the  storm.  He’d  recognized  Jorie  as  a  neighbor  and  he  was
escorting her back home—careful of the tree limbs and downed power lines.
“They’re not going to ask for names, specifics. I’m one of their own. I act concerned, you act concerned,
we go inside and they leave. Easy. Simple. Understand?”
“When they ask which is my structure—”
“They won’t. You’re with me. But if they do, there’s a mid-rise condo at the other end of my street just
behind Cocoanut Grove Center. Grove Palms. Can you remember that?”
“Grove Palms,” she repeated. “And a conto is…?”
“Condo. C-o-n-d-o. Tall structure, many levels, many small apartments. Residential. Like the ship, sort
of.”
“Ah. Conglom.”
“Condo.”
“Vekran, conglom. You, condo.”
They left the park and walked down the shady  side  of the street,  sometimes on the grass,  sometimes,
when  the  foliage  grew  wildly,  on  the  street  itself.  There  were  no  sidewalks.  Late-morning  noises
surrounded them—the slamming of doors, the barking of a  dog,  a  child’s happy  shout because  it was
Christmas break and schools were closed. Street traffic was light; only one car passed. It was after nine;
most of his neighbors would already be at work.

Another minute and he could see the line of vehicles in front of his house.
For the third time during their trek, she pulled up one edge of her sweater, glanced at what looked to him
like a longer, slightly wider PDA clipped to her belt. The magic button that would drop him, writhing, to
the ground? He knew she’d stated that she and her captain would have to agree before she used it, but
he wasn’t  fully sure  he bought that.  He  doubted  that  if he were  to  suddenly grab  her and  go  for  her
weapons, she’d politely hold up one hand and say, Excuse me, I have to make a call.
No, he was pretty sure she had full authority to end his life without a conference. All the more reason he
had to appear completely cooperative until he knew exactly where that magic button was and its range.
She released the unit, pulled her sweater down.
“Messages?” he asked.
“This?” She tapped her side. “Scanner. Right now seeking energy changes that warn of a zombie.”
“All quiet?”
“All quiet.”
He nodded. Right now, she’d  said.  Right now that  thing functioned as  a  scanner.  It  might have other
functions as well. He wasn’t going to cross it off his list yet.
The low rumble of car engines at idle reached his ears, topped by the grinding sound of the fire truck’s
diesel. The green-and-white  patrol  car  sat  at  the curb  in front of his  house,  one  officer  in  a  similarly
colored uniform leaning against its trunk. Another uniform was probably around back or else behind the
fire engine. Its large red bulk blocked his view of anything farther down the street. But the firemen were
loading their gear, packing to leave. That was good. The less people who saw her, the better. He nudged
Jorie forward, quickening his pace, falling into the role of Concerned Homeowner and Can You Believe
What Happened?
Which was pretty much his opening line: “Hey, can you believe that storm?”
His shout made the uniform turn. He recognized the dark-haired woman as Carla Eddington, a patrol cop
who knew him but not well enough to question his fabricated story or Jorie’s presence. A real stroke of
luck. She was only on the job about eight months, having moved down from Massachusetts. Sometimes
it seemed everyone from up north sooner or later migrated to Florida.
Even space aliens and zombies.
“Sergeant Petrakos?” Her voice carried clearly over the engine noises. “Damn, are we glad to see you!”
She jogged toward him, inclining her head to speak into the shoulder mike clipped to her white uniform
shirt as she did, hopefully advising the others on scene that no body bags were needed. He watched her
gaze dart to Jorie in her oversize sweater, shorts, and hiking boots, then back to him again. He was glad
he’d altered Jorie’s clothing. A woman—especially  a  woman cop—would  have definitely noticed  they
were not the norm. “Where in hell have you been?”
“Out checking for injured. Helluva storm.”
“Yeah, some  kind of freak  tornado.  One  of them microbursts,  maybe.  We  thought it kidnapped  you,
Sarge. Couldn’t find a body, but your yard, your car…Hey, that’s what we have insurance for, right?”
“You sure it was a tornado?” He pasted a stricken look on his face.

Another glance at Jorie, then back to him again. “Must have been.  We’ve  got lines down  all over  the
place. Progress has two trucks here, but power’s still out on the street.”
He shook his head, walking with her toward his house. “That I know. I went to check on the neighbors.
Ran into Jorie.” He jerked his thumb to his left, where Jorie kept  pace  silently. Thank God.  “She lives
down the block. I know her from the, uh, gym.” Well, the duffel slung over her shoulder did look like a
gym bag.
“C’mon,” Eddington said to Theo as the fire truck gunned its engine loudly. “I’ll take you ’round back.”
He lightly grasped Jorie’s elbow, bringing her with him.
The scene that met his eyes was  worse  than he remembered.  The fallen palms, shredded  hedges,  and
battered  remains of his unmarked  police  sedan  did  indeed  look  as  if  a  tornado  had  touched  down.
Maritana County was prone to such freak storms. He remembered when a small tornado  tore  the roof
off one house in Treasure Island, touching nothing else on the street. He’d seen water spouts on the Gulf
hop and  skip  over  the barrier  islands, then reappear  again in the channel, heading for the  elite  Tierra
Grande island community.
If he hadn’t seen the zombie with his own eyes, he’d believe a tornado did this too. And he was not only
a cop but a detective. Damn!
“Damn!” he swore  out loud,  his hands  shoved  in his back  pockets  as  he  walked  around  the  twisted
wreckage of his vehicle, Jorie at his side. He needed Eddington to go back to her patrol car so he could
shove the stripped T-MOD into the trunk of his car. “I must have been at the neighbor’s when the twister
did this. The lieutenant’s not going to be happy. I’ll call the wrecker—”
“The boss will just be damned glad you’re alive, amigo,” said a familiar male voice behind him.
Theo  screwed  his  eyes  shut.  Shit!  Zeke  Martinez.  Not  him,  not  now,  not  with  Jorie  standing  a
hairbreadth from his side and Eddington yammering on about how this was one hell of a way to start his
vacation.
He turned just in time to have Zeke clasp one arm over his shoulder. “Thought we’d lost you for good.
I—well, hello there! Now I can see why you weren’t answering your cell phone.”
Zeke had noticed Jorie. Of course he had. Who could miss her? Though Theo obviously missed seeing
Martinez’s car. It must be  behind the fire truck.  “Jorie Mikkalah,  Zeke  Martinez.” He  stepped  out of
Zeke’s embrace, realizing what it might look like. Did her galaxy have same-sex couples? “We, uh, work
together in Homicide,” he added hastily, praying Zeke didn’t go all Latin and kiss him on the cheek.
“Jorie. A beautiful name for a beautiful lady.” Zeke held out his hand.
Panagia mou! Did they shake hands in her galaxy? Or was it a rude gesture, some kind of major insult
that would spawn an intergalactic war? He shot Jorie a tight smile, gave a quick, short nod of his head.
Take his hand, take his hand!
“Thank you,” she said, and—thank you, God—she reached out for Zeke.
He clasped her hand. “So, known this wayward bastard long?”
Theo saw her frown slightly, knew she had no idea what Zeke had asked. His mind blanked on any kind
of  amusing  rejoinder  to  divert  attention  from  her.  And  then  something  worse  happened.  Eddington
answered for her.

“Sarge knows her from working out at the gym. He was checking on his neighbors and ran across her.”
Zeke released her hand. A big grin crossed his face. “Is that so?”
Theo was in trouble  now.  Big trouble.  He  grabbed  Jorie’s  arm,  propelling her toward  his back  door.
“I—we need to make sure all the appliances are turned off.” Maybe then they’d leave and he could plant
the T-MOD in the car.
“I’ll help,” Zeke said.
Shit!
“Might want to open your windows,” Eddington called after them. “That cold front moved  through and
today’s gonna be a hot one.”
Things were hot already. He urged Jorie ahead of him, up the two steps, then stopped on the wide slab
of his back porch. He plastered on his best good-buddy grin and  faced  Zeke.  “Sorry  to  have worried
you. Appreciate your coming over here. But, really, we can handle—”
“I’m sure you can.” Zeke reached around him and opened the door. “Allow me, pretty lady.”
Theo gave her a short nod when she glanced up at him. With a shrug, she stepped inside.
“Now, that’s nice,” Zeke said under his breath, punctuating his words with a  bad  imitation of a  jungle
cat’s growl.
Oh, Christ. He was in deep shit now.
He  followed  Jorie  in.  Cooler  air  met  him  immediately.  That  wouldn’t  last  long,  not  with  the
air-conditioning and ceiling fans off. His appliances all stared blank  faces  at  him as  he pulled out plugs
and flicked off switches. Jorie positioned herself on the far side  of the kitchen table,  duffel at  her feet,
hands behind her, her back straight, her shoulders stiff. He recognized the military posture: parade  rest.
He prayed Zeke didn’t.
Then he realized her posture  also  showed—not  clearly, but it showed—the  outlines  of  her  weapons.
Zeke  was  just coming into the kitchen behind him. He’d  notice.  Zeke  hadn’t  stopped  staring at  Jorie
since he arrived.
Theo did the only thing he could. In two steps he was in front of her, one arm around her shoulder, the
other around her waist in an intimate embrace. He leaned down, his face in her hair, his mouth against her
ear, and pulled her against him. “Don’t stand like that,” he whispered. “Pistols. Relax!”
Her hands had snaked up to rest on his chest. She twisted slightly, looking up at him. Her lips parted as if
she were puzzling out his words. And then she did that damned head-tilt thing.
She was too close. She was too warm. She smelled fresh and soft and sweet, and though his arms were
very aware of her laser pistols, his chest was equally aware of her breasts brushing against him.
Theo lost it. His head lowered. A short kiss, that’s all. Something brief, intense, just to get it out of his
system. Damn her, she owed him that much, for what she’d put him through. He brushed his lips against
hers, then, caution be damned, he forced his mouth down hard. He expected her to jerk away. But her
mouth opened, and his opened more. Tongues touched, teased. Plunged.
The feel of her, the taste of her, exploded through his senses. Heat surged through his body. The groan

he was holding back threatened to strangle him. With a gasp, he released her mouth, then clutched  her
tightly against him, hand on the back  of her head  so  she  wouldn’t look  up at  him, tilt her head  again.
“Sorry,” he rasped into her ear. “Regrets.”
Behind him, Zeke applauded loudly. “I’ll start with the windows in the living room. Might help cool things
off. Though I doubt it.” He slapped Theo on the back as he walked past, snickering.
Theo waited until he heard the first screech of a casement window being forced open. He stepped back,
putting Jorie at arm’s length.
Wide-eyed, she looked genuinely startled.
He shot a glance toward the living room. “Regrets,” he said  again, quietly. “He needs  to  believe…Did
you understand words out there?” He motioned to the backyard.
“Evidently not.” She spoke slowly.
He couldn’t tell if she was angry or in shock. Maybe she’d never been kissed before. Nah. That mouth,
that tongue knew exactly what it was doing. So maybe it was that she’d never before kissed a nil. She—
Good Lord. He’d just kissed a woman from another planet. Another galaxy.
Screech, slam! went a window.
Zeke.  He  had  to  explain  about  Zeke.  “He  knows  me.  Very  well.  I  lied  to  the  officer.  The  security
woman. Gym. Gymnasium.” Her frown prompted another word. “Exercise.” He pumped his right arm as
if he were lifting a hand weight.
“Yes?”
“I said we met in an exercise place—”
“And?”
“Detective Martinez knows I don’t go to an exercise place. I have some equipment here.  At home.  At
structure. In my structure.” He stumbled over the words.
“You kissed me to apologize for lies?”
“He could see your weapons. I had to cover your body.”
She nodded. “Commendable sacrifice, Sergeant.”
Commendable  sacrifice?  The only thing he was  going to  sacrifice here  was  his sanity.  “But  now,”  he
continued, “if he asks,  he needs  to  believe we…that  is, that  you and  I are…”  He  pointed  to  her,  to
himself, then to her again.
“Lovers?” she said. “You understand this word?”
He did. So did his body. He swallowed hard. “Lovers. Yes.” Oh, sweet Jesus, Mary, and Joseph. What
was he getting himself into?
Nothing. A charade for the next ten, twenty minutes. Zeke would leave and they’d go back to being Nil
and Commander  on a  covert  operation  to  exterminate zombies.  He’d  catch  some  razzing  from  Zeke
later, but he could handle that.

He was about to ask Jorie to give him the T-MOD when Zeke stuck his head through the open kitchen
doorway. “You two cooling off yet?”
Theo stepped away from Jorie. “Very funny.”
With a snort, Zeke disappeared.
Theo’s kitchen had two windows, one over the sink and one to the left of the door to the backyard. He
leaned over the sink, pulled on the cord to raise the slatted blinds, and opened that one. Jorie was staring
at the other. He walked over and, making sure  she  was  watching, duplicated  his movements. Then he
flipped the small  latch  on  the  frame  of  the  bottom  window,  braced  his  palms  under  the  frame,  and
shoved.
Screech!
Life in air-conditioned Florida. People rarely opened windows. “Got it now?” he asked her.
“I have acquired knowledge, yes.” Jorie snagged the duffel as he headed for the living room.
“Always admired your decorating,” Zeke said. “Glad to see everything finally matches.”
Camille had taken a lot of the living-room furniture when she left, except for his television, leather recliner,
and  two  end  tables.  Theo  had  finally  bought  a  leather  two-cushion  love  seat  last  month  at  a
Rooms-to-Go clearance sale  and  dragged  the floral-print sofa  bed  Aunt Tootie  had  given him—Zeke
called it his “daisies on drugs” couch—into his spare room. Zeke had been to his house enough times that
he knew that. The comment had to be for Jorie’s sake.
“Don’t have a lot to clean that way,” Theo quipped back. Thank you, God, his brain had finally kicked
back into gear. All he had to do was act normal, talk normal, let the banter flow like it always did. This
was no big deal. So Zeke thought he had a girlfriend. There was  no way he’d  know  she  was  a  space
alien.
Jorie dropped the duffel onto his recliner, took the few steps into his dining room—also empty, thanks to
Camille—and opened her first casement window like a pro. A breeze clattered through the blinds as she
lowered them. Good girl.
“You here to help or stare?” he asked Zeke.
“Didn’t do the bedroom yet. Thought you two might want to, uh, tackle that.”
“I’ll take the spare room.” Theo headed down the short hall. The room had two large windows. He had
to angle around his weight rack and padded flat weight bench piled with gun and car magazines to get to
one window and  kneel on his small sofa  bed  to  open  the other.  When he finished, Zeke  was  leaning
against the doorjamb, arms crossed loosely over his embroidered tan guayabera.
“You sneaky son of a bitch! Going home to restring your guitar, eh? How long has this been going on?”
“You know I don’t discuss my private life.”
“Theophilus, this is Zeke you’re talking to.”
Theo hooked his thumbs in the waistband  of his jeans  and  stared  at  the floor for a  moment, his mind
working a million miles a minute. Should he—could he tell Zeke the truth about outer-space aliens here
on a mission against those things called zombies? Would Zeke even believe what Theo said? He had that

Paroo cube in his pocket. Proof. Except that someone like Zeke wouldn’t know it was  an alien object
just by looking at it.
And Jorie and her magic Kill the Nil button were in the next room. Theo didn’t know what she’d do if
she saw Zeke inspecting the cube.
It would be better to wait, play the game the way Jorie said he should,  for now.  “I didn’t want to  say
anything about her until I was sure,” he said, looking up. That sounded good and fit what Zeke knew of
him.
“And are you sure?”
“I’ve never met anyone like her in my life,” he admitted honestly.
Zeke stepped to the weight rack, picked up a twenty-five-pound weight, hefted it. “She even old enough
to drink?”
Theo pursed his lips, frowning. “Of course.” He had no idea how old Jorie was. He had no idea if space
aliens even drank  liquor. All he knew  for sure  was  they drank  water  and  had  apples  that  tasted  like
watermelons.
“Where does she work?”
“What is this, an interrogation?”
Zeke grinned, then put the weight back on the rack.
Theo used the few seconds to hammer his brain for an occupation for his one-woman war machine, with
her gizmos and gadgets and…“She’s a computer programmer for TECO.” He named the large electric
utility company on the other side of the bay. No way Zeke should know anyone there.
Jorie appeared in the doorway at that moment. Theo realized that if he’d given Zeke the alien cube, they
would have been caught red-handed. “Task completed,” she said. “Anything else required?”
He watched as Zeke turned toward her and knew Zeke heard it—that odd lilt of an accent. The oddly
formal choice of words. This was not the time to raise questions. Not until he was sure he’d be believed
and people—his people—were in a position to act.
“You’re not a local gal, are you?” Zeke was asking.
“Locale? Good one, very pretty.”
Shut up, Jorie! Theo crossed the room in two seconds, cupped his hand on her head,  and  ruffled her
funky, streaked hair in an affectionate gesture. In reality he was trying to shake some sense into her brain.
“She’s, uh, only been here a few months. Her English,” he stressed the word, “isn’t that good. Isn’t that
right, sweetheart?”
She glanced up at him, eyes narrowing for a moment. “English isn’t optimal.”
“¿Habla español?” Zeke tried.
“She’s Canadian,” Theo blurted out, his mind grabbing the images of the Canadian license plates he saw
every winter. “From Quebec.” There, that would explain how she knew English but not well.
“Ah, français!” The minute Zeke said it Theo’s stomach dropped to his feet. Shit, shit, shit! How could

he forget? Suzanne Martinez spoke French.
“My wife’s parents are from Montreal,” Zeke said. “Bring Jorie to the house. She and Suzanne will have
a great time together.”
Like hell he would. “Sure. After the holidays.” He dropped his arm to Jorie’s shoulder, hugged her hard
against him, trying to signal to her to let him do all the talking. “We’re kind of busy until then.”
“L’amour toujours!” Zeke winked.
His back door slammed. “Sarge, you in here?”
Eddington. “Yeah,” he called in reply. Keeping Jorie tightly to his side, he pushed past Zeke and headed
for  the  kitchen.  God  help  him  if  he  left  her  alone  with  his  partner.  There  was  no  telling  what  their
miscommunications might reveal. “What’s up?”
The dark-haired woman stood in the open doorway. “We’re leaving. Wrecker can’t get here until after
eleven. The guys from Progress are still out front, working on the downed power lines. Seems they got a
substation problem too.”
“Thanks for your help. Sorry to worry you.” He meant that. He knew the heartbreak that ran through a
department when one of their own was lost. It had been one of the reasons he’d had to come back.
“Thank you,” Jorie chimed in.
“One more thing,” Eddington said as Zeke sat down at the kitchen table, making himself far too much at
home.  “We  recovered  a  stolen  car  down  the  street.  A-One  Rentals  downtown  reported  it  missing.
Looks like your tornado scared off the joyriders.” She shrugged. “Well, take it easy.”
Theo waited  until the screen  door  closed  behind Eddington’s retreating  figure. One  down,  one  to  go.
“Oh, jeez. Look at the time.” He glanced at his watch. Quarter to ten. He needed to put the Paroo cube
in a secure place and then get that laptop where it belonged. “Let me straighten up a few things here, then
I’ll meet you back at the station, okay?”
“You walking there?” Zeke jerked his thumb in the direction of the backyard.
Theo didn’t have a car. His Jeep Wrangler—his personal car—was in the shop with a burned-out clutch,
and his department sedan was a twisted wreck. Jorie, she…Christ. The stolen rental. He’d never asked
her how she got from Wayne’s apartment to here. Now he could guess. He was harboring not only an
outer-space alien one-woman war machine but a car thief. What next?
As if in answer, a pinging noise sounded from underneath Jorie’s  sweater.  He  felt her flinch. Her  hand
slapped her side, brought up the palm-size scanner gizmo with its yellow-green lights flashing. Her zombie
detector.
Adrenaline slammed through Theo’s body. Oh, God. Not now.
Jorie jerked out of his grasp and bolted into the living room.
Theo was on her heels, heart in his throat, praying he could get to a weapon in time. Not now, not now!
 
7 

“Where? When?” Theo shouted at Jorie. She was bent over his recliner,  pawing frantically through the
duffel bag.  The memory  of  the  slash  of  bright  light  and  that  glowing  hole  in  the  sky  filled  his  mind.
Adrenaline spiked. He shouldered next to her, intent on grabbing one of her laser pistols.
She slapped his hands away from the top of the duffel, then yanked a metal circlet through the opening,
snapped it over her hair, and twirled the mouth mike into place. A torrent of unintelligible words flowed
from her lips.
She pushed him away again, more forcibly this time.
He took the hint and stepped back. Zeke tapped his shoulder.
“What’s the matter?”
Theo had no idea. But she wasn’t digging into the duffle for anything further. No  laser  pistols  filled her
hands. No green glow emerged through his cream-colored living-room wall. The whole problem seemed
to be whatever the conversation was. She was no doubt talking to her ship, to the captain—
Fuck. His hand rose involuntarily to the sore spot on his shoulder.
“Theo?”
He turned and wondered just how much he’d be able  to  tell Zeke  before  someone  pushed  that  magic
button and he dropped dead at his detective’s feet.
“Umm,” he said. Behind him, Jorie’s clipped staccato softened. No zombies, then. And no instant death.
He was still breathing.
“Cell phone,” he offered lamely, with a shrug. “Must be some kind of emergency at  her office. Maybe
they had a storm there too. Probably a server down. Or something.”
Zeke was frowning, looking past him. “Doesn’t sound like French.”
His mind whirled, grabbed another lie. They’d be the death of him yet, if Jorie’s magic button didn’t kill
him first. “Eskimo.” He had said she was Canadian.
“Inuktitut?”
“Huh?”
“She speaks Inuktitut?”
Oh, hell. Was that what the language was called? Trust Zeke to know.
“Yeah, sure,” Theo answered, praying the man wasn’t fluent in it as well.
“Didn’t know TECO was hiring Eskimos.” Another frown.
“Cultural-exchange program  or  something.”  Time  to  end  this  conversation.  He  grabbed  Zeke’s  arm,
nudging him back to the kitchen. Away from Jorie. He had to keep Zeke as far away from Jorie  as  he
could. The last few minutes showed him just how easily his lies could unravel.
“I  will  need  a  ride,”  he  said  as  Zeke  leaned  one  hip  against  the  kitchen  counter.  “Pick  me  up  at
eleven-thirty, after the wrecker gets here?”

“You might need some help with the mess in the yard.  And the lock  on the casement  window in your
master bath is stripped out.”
“That’s okay. I’ve  got a  week’s  vacation  to  fix things. Plus,  Jorie’s  here.”  And there  was  no way he
could sneak the laptop into the car while Zeke was around.
A  slow,  knowing  smile  played  across  Zeke’s  mouth.  “She  sure  is.”  He  cuffed  Theo  on  the  arm.
“Eleven-thirty. And the full story on the drive in. You sly bastard, you.”
“Who, me?” Theo splayed his hands and pasted a look of mock innocence on his face, keeping it there
until his back door closed behind Zeke and he heard the man’s footsteps fade. Then he sagged  against
the kitchen wall and ran one hand wearily over his face.
Sweet Mother of God. Things were happening faster than he could counter them. This might be Jorie’s
mission, but, damn it all, it was his house. His planet. Time to make some rules.
He shoved himself away from the wall and headed back to the living room.
 
Jorie heard  the back  door  slam. She  yanked  one  arm out of her sweater  and  tapped  furiously at  the
resynchronization keys on her technosleeve. Damned nil! She should never have utilized his suggestion to
strip out of her gear. Two of her team were set to transport to Petrakos’s structure. Fortunately, Herryck
had  sent  the  advisory  of  the  impending  PMaT  action  to  her  scanner  as  well,  or  else  their  covert
operation—as Petrakos liked to call it—would have become distinctly not covert.
Nils. Nils everywhere. Inside the structure. Outside the structure. Coming and going without the requisite
petition for permission. A nil kissing her…
She stopped that thought, not wanting to follow it, not wanting to  remember  the hot jolt of desire  that
flooded her when Petrakos’s lips parted her own.
It was all a ruse. He, surely, felt nothing. His only concern was to keep his nil associate, Zeekmarteenez,
from seeing her weapons. So now, when Zeekmarteenez was around, they had to play at being lovers.
Thanks to Lorik, she knew that game well.
“What in hell made  that thing go off?” Petrakos,  striding in from the structure’s  galley, pointed  to  her
scanner.
She looked up from her calibrations, aware  of the sweater  bunched  awkwardly  around  her neck,  and
met him glare for glare. “My team preparing to arrive. Which I knew nothing of because my tech”—she
jerked her chin in the direction of the open duffle—“was in that. Fortunately, Lieutenant Herryck sent a
duplicate alert to my scanner. Or you would be kissing three  trackers  so  that  Zeekmarteenez  wouldn’t
ask what we all are doing here.”
An odd expression crossed his face, his eyes widening ever so slightly, one corner of his mouth quirking,
as if something she said surprised then embarrassed him. Maybe he didn’t like being reminded that he’d
kissed her.  Or  maybe he just didn’t understand  what she’d  said.  She’d  spoken  rapidly,  not caring to
choose words she was sure he’d understand. She was angry at him and with herself. Her team arriving at
an unsecured structure could have created serious problems. And the blame would have rightly fallen on
her. She dropped her gaze back down to her technosleeve, resumed her calibrations. Her captaincy was
at stake. And Danjay’s death would go unavenged.

“Zeke. Martinez,” he said, pausing between the two words. “Zeke’s his first name.”
She caught that she’d erred in her pronunciation. A small matter. If his planet had been civilized enough
to speak Alarsh or even decent Vekran, none of this would even be a problem.
“I must have a secure structure for this mission.” She shoved her arm back through the sweater’s sleeve,
pulled the sweater down over her hips, then adjusted her headset. “Zeke Martinez and the ones out there
working from the large land vehicles. If they have unquestioned access, it will be counterproductive.”
“Zeke would be the only one. But if he thinks we’re living together…”  He  paused,  lips pursing, brows
slanting down slightly.
She didn’t understand his hesitation. Language again? “I comprehend  living together.  Like spoused  but
without contractual agreement for children.”
“Right,” he said,  but his frown stayed  in place.  Then he shook  his head.  “We  need  a  cover  story.  A
reason why you’re in my house. If Zeke believes we’re living together, that would accomplish that.”
She didn’t see a problem. “Let him believe I live here, then. We forget conglom as my structure.”
The frown lessened, but he still regarded her oddly. “Sure. Great.”
There was a flaw in the plan and he wasn’t sharing it with her. She saw  that  in his face,  heard  it in his
voice. And it wasn’t just her military experience that taught her to read those signs. Lorik had lied to her
too.  She  sighed.  “Petrakos.  You  dislike  this…cover  story.”  She  used  his  term.  “If  we  are  to  work
together, complete communication is essential. Why is this option not satisfactory?”
“It’s fine.” He  pointed  to  the duffel bag.  “I have to  get the lap—the  T-MOD  into my car  before  the
wrecker comes.”
She grabbed the stripped unit and handed it to  him, wordlessly.  She’d  had  to  pull in more  than a  few
large favors  to  get that for him—every time he reminded her of the implant in his shoulder,  her  heart
constricted. That’s why she’d gone against the captain’s orders. Guardian tech was never to be left in the
hands of a nil. This  is  only  a  shell,  she’d  convinced  herself. And  some  broken  data-mech.  It  didn’t
really violate general-procedure regulations.
She followed him to the galley but not out into the yard. It took several minutes before he pried open the
twisted rear hatch of his land vehicle and shoved the T-MOD inside. She waited by the open  window,
the breeze  warmer  now and  more  humid. Sounds  reached  her ears—land  vehicles, she  guessed.  But
there were other sounds—mechanical ones—she couldn’t place. A droning buzz nearby. A low rumble.
She watched Petrakos turn the T-MOD at various angles. His gray shirt had wet streaks down the back,
and when he bent over to adjust the unit again, she decided he had an extremely attractive posterior. For
a nil.
He strode toward the house but stopped at a small shed attached to an exterior wall and withdrew a flat
shovel. When he slammed the edge into the T-MOD, she realized two things: he was making the damage
to the unit correspond to the vehicle, and there was no chance—given that same damage—that the unit
would ever be recognized as Guardian tech.
A weight lifted slightly from her shoulders, and by the time he trudged up the back steps,  she’d  figured
out how to  work  the water  dispenser,  located  his  drinking  glasses,  and  had  a  chilled  glass  of  water
waiting when he opened the door.

He took it with a nod. “Usually not this hot this time of year,” he said before he downed the contents.
“Zombies,” she told him, and, at the slanting of his brows, sought a simple explanation without revealing
that the Guardians were still in the process  of trying to  understand  what was  happening on his planet.
“The  herd  is  uncharacteristically  large.  To  generate  their  portals,  they  utilize  fluctuations  in
electrical-magnetic currents in the atmosphere. It affects weather patterns.”
He put the empty glass in the basin, then glanced over his shoulder at her. “I think it’s time you gave me a
complete education on these—”
“Yoo-hoo!  Theophilus?” A high-pitched voice echoed  through  the  structure,  followed  by  an  insistent
rapping noise. “Yoo-hoo!”
“Shit.” Petrakos’s voice was low, harsh. “My neighbor Sophie  Goldstein,” he said,  before  Jorie  could
ask. “Stay here.”
Another unauthorized intruder, and one—if neighbor had the same meaning in Petrakos’s language as it
did in Vekran—more than familiar with the immediate locale. Her perfect plan, Jorie realized as Petrakos
strode swiftly from the galley, was gaining considerable imperfections. It must be that the zombie attack
generated  an  unusual  state  of  confusion  surrounding  his  structure.  She  could  tell  from  Petrakos’s
reactions that these visitations were not the norm.
Stop looking for problems where there are none, Galin often chided her.
The thought of her brother momentarily distracted her from the voices in the next room. She’d crafted her
transmit to him on Danjay’s death as gently as she could. She didn’t know if he’d watched it yet. But she
already knew what his pain would feel like.
With  no  little  impatience,  she  waited  for  Petrakos  to  dispense  with  this  latest—and  she  hoped
last—intruder.
 
“Don’t worry, Mrs. Goldstein. Everything’s fine,” Theo called as he crossed the living room toward the
squat image of his gray-haired neighbor. Mrs. Goldstein jiggled the handle on his screen door. It took a
certain—deliberate—combination of pressure and twisting to  open  it. One  of many little idiosyncrasies
he’d added to his house as a means to protect his privacy, in addition to the usual burglar alarm.
And of course, the Glock in his nightstand.
“Of course  I was  worried.”  Sophie  Goldstein had  the screen  door  open  and  was  three  steps  into his
living room when he came up to her. She was in a bright lime-green tracksuit that matched the polka-dot
scarf wrapped like a headband around her frizzy hair. “That’s what women do. Worry.”
So much for his privacy protection. And his privacy. What Mrs. Goldstein knew, his aunt Tootie would
know. Which meant he had to keep Jorie away from—
“I was frantic, what with the police car and fire truck and everything. Something serious happened, I told
Tootie.”
Theo winced. He should have assumed Mrs. Goldstein would be on the cell phone to his aunt, first thing.
She disseminated information faster than a police APB.

“Then I saw you and that young gal walking down the street,” she continued, craning her neck, trying to
peer  around  Theo’s  broad  form. “She’s  still here,  yes?  Just  wanted  to  make  sure  you’re  both  okay.
Terrible storm.”
Theo moved right as she sidled left. “Just some tree-limb damage. I’ll call Aunt Tootie—”
“Known that young gal long?” Mrs. Goldstein edged right, forcing Theo to take another step back as he
countered. “I described  her to  Tootie,  but she  said  you’ve never  dated  a  redhead.  Though her hair’s
really more of a gold and chestnut, isn’t it?”
They were almost to the kitchen doorway.  Theo  heard  a  soft  clank  and  thunk  behind him. His back
porch door closing. Someone else arriving or Jorie  exiting? He  prayed  it was  the latter,  because  there
was no polite way he was going to keep Mrs. Goldstein out of his kitchen—or from getting a closer look
at Jorie so she could report back to his aunt. That, he surmised, was her current mission.
When no voices hailed him from behind, he half-turned and leaned back against the doorjamb. Out of the
corner of his eye he saw movement in his yard: Jorie, head bowed over her scanner, marching around in
widening circles.
“My car was totaled,” he told Mrs. Goldstein as she squeezed by him. “Jorie’s out there  recording  the
damage now. She’s a big help.”
“Jorie?”
“She’s a computer programmer. We have to get back to work shortly.” Theo spoke to the back of Mrs.
Goldstein’s head. She’d glued her face to his kitchen window and was intently watching Jorie  pace  the
length of his oleander hedge. “One of my detectives is coming by to give me a ride in so I can pick up a
new car.”
“Jorie.”
“Known her for a couple weeks. We’re, uh, friends.”
That earned him a glance from Mrs. Goldstein, over her shoulder.
Friends, he’d  said.  Friends,  because  that would keep  Aunt Tootie  from jumping to  conclusions.  But,
damn, part of his cover  story  with Zeke  was  that  Jorie  was  living with him. Sophie  Goldstein was  far
more likely to witness any comings or goings from his house than Zeke was. Friends was  not going to
cut it with sharp-eyed Sophie.
Theo shoved his hands into his pockets and tried to re-create the sheepish look he’d bestowed earlier on
Zeke. “Actually, she’s become very important to me. But I didn’t want to get Aunt Tootie all excited….
Well, you know how it is.” He shrugged and gave her an embarrassed smile.
Mrs. Goldstein turned completely around. “So, you’ve been seeing her for a couple weeks?”
“Two, three months. We met working on a case,” he said, and the last part wasn’t a lie. “She does some
consulting work.”
“She ever been married? Any kids?”
Spoused. He could hear Jorie saying her term. He wondered if she was or ever had been. “No. But,” he
added, thinking of her teammates who would be using his house, “she comes from a large family. They’re
from Canada. Northern Canada. Lots of cousins. Very friendly family.” He smiled.

Mrs. Goldstein smiled back. “Oh, how nice.”
He could almost hear her and his aunt already planning the wedding with its large guest list. “Once we get
this all cleaned up, get settled, we’ll, uh, ask you over for coffee sometime. Next week or so. Okay?”
“Tonight—”
“My vacation starts today. We already have plans.” He ushered her out of his kitchen and back toward
the front door. “Some of Jorie’s cousins are coming by.”
Mrs. Goldstein patted his cheek as he held the screen door open for her. “Make  sure  she  knows  how
lucky she is to have you, Theophilus. Not like that Cam—”
“Yes, ma’am,” he cut in quickly. He didn’t want to talk about Camille. He shoved thoughts of his ex-wife
away, along with his unease at sharing his personal space with a  woman again. But Jorie  wasn’t  just a
woman. She was an alien one-woman war machine, and her presence was part of her job. That was all.
It wasn’t like he had to carry on conversations with her, care about what she did or where she went.
He shut the screen door and jiggled the lock  into place  as  Sophie  Goldstein hurried across  the street.
Probably couldn’t wait to tell Tootie all she’d seen and heard. The cell-phone  towers  would melt from
the heat of the two women’s rapid exchanges.
Which meant his aunt would be calling him shortly thereafter. He hoped she’d call on his cell phone. He’d
warn Jorie not to answer his house phone if it rang. And he had to remember—maybe he should really
write down—just what he was telling Zeke and Sophie about Jorie.
With a frustrated shrug, he returned to the kitchen, yanked open his porch door, then trotted  down  his
back steps to catch up with Jorie. The breeze had picked up slightly but it was getting hotter, Florida’s
humidity lying against his skin like a damp cotton cloak.
The tips of Jorie’s multicolored hair were stuck to her face. Her eyes narrowed as he approached,  but
she wasn’t looking at him. Green lines slithered across  the screen  in her hand.  He  wondered  if one  of
those represented the deadly tracking device in his shoulder.
“Mrs. Goldstein’s gone,” he said when she didn’t look up. “But we may have to deal with her—talk to
her,” he corrected, not sure if she understood the expression, “at a later date. Unfortunately, she’s friends
with my—what’s the problem?”
Red and blue lines suddenly crisscrossed the screen.
“Zombies start  to  wake.  Again.” Jorie  tapped  at  the screen  with quick,  deft  motions.  Colors  shifted,
changed. She frowned.
Shit. Monster naptime was over. “Coming here?”
“Insufficient data at  this juncture.  But this, see?”  She  pointed  to  a  pulsing red  line. “Energy surge.  An
awareness coupling floats in its wake. This,” she said, shifting her finger to a blue triangular pulse, “is their
C-Prime.  He  is  past  marginal  elevation  on  his  output.  He  should  not  even  be  able  to  output!  Yet
clearly—”
“Marginal elevation?” This wasn’t clear at all, but he guessed it was some kind of overload situation. Like
when his computer told him insufficient available memory to perform the requested operation.
Jorie looked up at  him, lips tightening, then she  murmured a  few soft  foreign words  that  sounded  like

some  kind  of  plea.  “My  Vekran  is  insufficient  for  detailed  explanations,  Petrakos.  And  there  is  no
time—”
“Okay, just tell me, how long before a zombie shows up in my backyard again?” He had a sudden visual
of a battle between the tow truck—due to arrive shortly—and the razor-clawed zombie. He wasn’t sure
who would win.
“Four to five sweeps.”
“Sweeps?”
She was shaking her head again. “Increment of time. How do you measure it?”
Theo thought of the minute hand sweeping a clock face, then remembered she had used minutes before.
“Seconds. Minutes. Hours. Sixty minutes in each hour.”
“And your standard day? Sunwake to sunset?”
Sunwake. She must mean sunrise. “Twelve hours, sunrise—sunwake—to sunset. Twelve hours,  sunset
to sunrise. Twenty-four hours total. That makes one day.”
“Hours,” she repeated, though with her accent it sounded like ow-wears. “Vekran, sweeps. Four to five
sweeps, your hours, zombies come back.”
Four  to  five  hours?  Cristos!  It  would  be  mid-afternoon.  Normally  not  a  busy  time,  but  this  was
Christmas  week.  Kids  were  home  from  school.  Families  were  running  to  the  mall,  buying  presents.
Dozens of people might not only see  those  things but get hurt. Or  killed. “Can  you get a  bigger team
here?” Theo’s mind shifted into plan-and-attack  mode  as  he envisioned some  kind of galactic SWAT
team moving into place. “We could kill the zombies when they show up.”
“This is the problem, Petrakos. It is not only time. I know the zombies will arrive, I cannot yet tell where
their location will be.”
“You mean they might not show up here in Bahia Vista?” That could be good news. Maybe they’d ooze
out of their glowing green hole in the middle of the Sahara Desert. Or on an iceberg somewhere. “They
could go to another part of this planet?”
Jorie was  shaking her head.  “Unlikely. Your  locale,  this  Florida  state.  It  has  electromagnetic  storms,
precipitation rate, humidity. I have explained this.”
There were other hot and humid tropical locations, and he said so.
“Their C-Prime established…No. That is not the word. Their C-Prime claimed—marked—this hot and
humid locale with its scent trail. So this is now their primary region. Not just Florida state. But this,” and
she swept her hand and the scanner out toward his yard. “Your city-region.”
“So they are coming back here?”
“To your residence?  Unlikely.  But  here,”  and  her  hand  moved  out  again,  “yes.  Somewhere  in  your
city-region, they will come.” She pinned him with a hard stare as her words chilled him. Unknown killers
were about to strike in his city, and no one knew where. “I have called my team,” she continued. “In one
sweep,  two,  we  will  have  more  data.  We  need  that  so  we  can  arrive  at  the  portal  site  before  the
zombies.”

We. He heard the we and knew it included himself. He was their cover, their transportation. Their only
hope of getting to the zombies without causing more terror.
Except he had no car. Zeke was due here in forty-five minutes—and he’d find a house full of outer-space
aliens girding for war. Still, Theo knew that if he tried to explain what had happened—the Guardians, the
zombies—Zeke wouldn’t take him back to the department for a replacement vehicle. He’d take Theo to
Bayfront Medical to lock him in the psych ward.
Because unless Jorie beamed down that Wookiee-looking  one,  none of the outer-space  aliens looked
outer-spacey enough to raise an alarm.
For a moment he considered  asking Jorie  to  beam  Zeke  up to  her ship. Let  the detective  experience
what Theo  had.  But  then  Zeke  Martinez  would  be  another  nil  with  too  much  knowledge  about  the
secretive Guardians. Jorie’s captain would order an implant inserted in Zeke’s shoulder. And Theo might
be the cause of Suzanne becoming a widow.
Because there was no way in hell Zeke would go to Paroo and leave his wife behind.  Suzanne was  as
much a part of Zeke as his Glock and his badge. His friend would fight to  stay  here  on Earth,  and  the
Guardians would either kidnap him or kill him.
Theo couldn’t live with that. He couldn’t risk his closest friend’s life.
Nor  could  he  risk  the  citizens  of  Bahia  Vista  having  their  brains  sucked  out  by  worm-covered
intergalactic zombies.
He was, he realized grimly, his planet’s lone soldier.
And this was turning out to be one helluva start to his long-overdue vacation.
 
8 
Theo leaned one hip on the edge of his kitchen table and tried to look nonchalant as Zeke strode up his
back  porch  steps.  It  wasn’t  easy.  He  was  far  too  aware  that  Jorie  and  three  of  her  outer-space
commandos  were  hunkered  down  in  his  spare  bedroom,  with  all  sorts  of  blinking  and  glowing
computer-type  equipment  nestled  in  between  his  weight  rack  and  sofa  bed.  He  recognized  the
curly-haired redhead from the ship. The other two—both guys he caught only a  glimpse of—he  didn’t
remember seeing. One  looked  to  be  mid-twenties,  Caucasian,  fair  hair  shaved  close.  The  other  was
older—mid-thirties—and could have been the heartthrob hero in a pirate movie, right down  to  his long
black ponytail, tanned complexion, and silver hoop earring. All that was missing was a parrot.
Fortunately,  his power  had  come  back  on ten minutes ago,  so  he’d  tuned  his kitchen CD-radio  to  a
Tampa sports-talk station to drown out the sounds of their voices. He also had the shower running in his
second  bath—something that caused  his alien  one-woman  war  machine  to  launch  into  a  half-Alarsh,
half-English tirade about wastefulness. He gave Jorie permission to turn it off once he and Zeke left.
Cover story.
“Wrecker’s not here yet?” Zeke asked, pulling open the screen door.
The devastation that had been Theo’s car still sat at the end of the driveway.

“It’s Christmas week. Nothing runs on time,” Theo answered.
“True, very true. Where’s your little friend?” Zeke’s grin had a distinctive devilish curve.
“Getting cleaned up.” Theo pushed away the brief fantasy that sprung into his mind of a wet and naked
Jorie in his shower. “I told her I’d  take  her out for a  bite  to  eat  when I come  back.”  He  knew  Zeke
wanted to see Jorie again. There was no way Theo was going to allow that.  And he didn’t want Zeke
wandering through his house and stumbling over the space commandos, even if they looked not the least
bit spacey clad in T-shirts and sweatpants plucked from his closet.
Zeke would hate being on Paroo, away from Suzanne.
Theo pulled a slender digital camera from his pants pocket and waved it in the direction of his battered
car. “I have photos of the damage for the lieutenant. But the trunk’s jammed. The laptop we found at the
scene is still in there.” As was his sound system—or what was left of it. That was really going to  put a
damper on the lieutenant’s holiday party.
“Ouch.” Zeke winced as he shot a glance over his shoulder. “So much for preserving the evidence.”
Theo shoved himself away from the table. “Yeah, I’m going to  catch  some  shit from Stevens  on that.”
The lieutenant didn’t like to hear excuses. Colton Stevens kept a miniature skateboard on his desk  that
he used as a bullshit gauge. A detective knew he was in trouble when Stevens would pick up the toy and
start  spinning the wheels—a  not-so-subtle  hint the lieutenant felt you  were  spinning  your  wheels,  and
wasting his time. “Help me with that trunk, will you? The wrecker should be here any minute.”
“Sure, boss.” Grinning, Zeke followed Theo out the door.
Theo propped the lid of the trunk up enough so that Zeke could snake his arm inside and grab the laptop.
“Not  good,”  Zeke  said,  passing the dented  unit to  Theo  as  the sound  of a  rumbling engine—the tow
truck, probably—grew louder.
“The geek squad might be able to do something with it. I’ve heard of worse cases.” But Theo doubted
any of them had originated in another galaxy.
The increasing noise was the tow truck—a  flatbed,  actually. Theo  greeted  the driver with a  wave  and
endured the man’s ribbing about the condition of his car. Fifteen minutes later his car was secured and on
its way back to the garage.
Theo jerked his chin at Zeke’s silver four-door department-issue sedan parked on the street. “Let’s get
going so I can get back here. I am supposed to be on vacation.”
Zeke dug in his pants pocket for his keys. “Your friend in the shower—what did you say her name was?”
“Jorie,” Theo supplied as they headed down his driveway.
“And Jorie’s part of your vacation plans, I take it?”
Theo only grinned and ducked into the passenger seat. The less said, the better. That way he wouldn’t
have to remember any more lies.
Though Zeke, being Zeke, wasn’t about to let the matter drop without one more try. On the ten-minute
ride to the department’s two-story brick building on Central, Theo stuck to his story, adding only the few
additional items he’d mentioned to Sophie Goldstein: he’d met Jorie about three months ago, they’d hit it

off, and things were now moving to a more serious stage. She was going to spend the next week or so
with him, see how things went.
Then  Theo  deftly  switched  to  the  topic  of  the  Tampa  Bay  Lightning’s  recent  winning  streak  and
listened—with relief—as Zeke debated the strengths and weaknesses of the team’s current goalie.
“I think last year’s knee surgery has made him too cautious. Yeah, nothing gets through his five-hole, but
if someone roofs one…”
Theo  propped  his  arm  against  the  passenger-side  window  and—letting  Zeke  ramble  on—glanced
casually at his watch. Four to five hours before the zombies returned and began sucking the brains out of
Bahia Vista’s citizens, leaving behind only bulging wet eyeballs.
It would probably take him thirty to forty minutes to secure a new ride,  another  thirty to  let Lieutenant
Stevens chew him out over the condition of the laptop, and another ten after that—traffic permitting—to
get back. It felt like time wasted, even though Jorie had assured him that there was little he could do until
they had a definite entry point for the zombies. After that…he had no idea.  He  had  a  huge information
gap as far as these zombies were concerned. Partly, he knew, it was the language differences  between
Jorie and himself. But partly he suspected there were things she simply didn’t want him to know.
One more thing to worry about.
He massaged the ache in his shoulder as Zeke turned on to Central Avenue. It would be so good to have
an ally in this. The desire to blurt out the truth was almost choking him. Besides Zeke, there was David
Gray, a former Maritana  County  deputy,  now a  top  agent with FDLE’s  Tampa  office. Damned good
man, damned fine shot. The three of them could—
No, they couldn’t. Theo rubbed his shoulder again. He didn’t want Zeke or David to  meet Doc  White
Braids.
Plus he’d  left the Paroo  cube—purposely—in  his  nightstand  drawer.  No  temptation  to  present  it  as
evidence and risk others getting sent to the nil retirement home in another galaxy.
“Sure, I’ll ask Jorie if she wants to go to the Lightning game next week,” Theo said, dropping back into
Zeke’s  monologue on ice hockey.  “But her family  has  some  kind  of  big  party  coming  up.  Not  sure
when.”
“You pull something?” Zeke pointed to Theo’s hand pressing against his shoulder.
With a slight self-conscious flinch, Theo jerked his fingers back from the small area where his live-or-die
locator was embedded. “Must have, when I tried to get the trunk open earlier.”
“There’s this great herbal goo for sprains, has emu oil and other good stuff,” Zeke said as he pulled the
car into an empty space in the department’s parking lot. “Stop at the health-food store on Ninth on your
way home, pick some up. It’ll work wonders. Then you can…”
Theo pushed open the door as Zeke’s herbal-remedy recommendations droned on. “Drop the laptop off
over at evidence, will you? I gotta go see  Stevens.  Then I have to  see  what Gretchen  has  available. I
don’t know how long the paperwork for the new wheels is going to take.”
“Sure, boss. Just make sure they don’t give you Ackerson’s old car. He has the big dog that gets carsick
all the time. I hear they still can’t get the smell out. I told them to  try that  holistic citrus-enzyme stuff. I
even got Suzy using it at the clinic. But do they listen to me? No.”

Theo glanced again at his watch as Zeke strode away. Three hours thirty-five minutes until the zombies
arrived. Stale dog puke and citrus enzymes were the least of his worries.
 
The first bright spot in an otherwise baffling, nerve-racking day, Theo thought, flipping the keys to
his replacement vehicle around in his hand.  Well, maybe two  days.  He’d  somewhat  lost track  of time
since outer-space  aliens had  kidnapped  him. No,  it was  only one  day.  It  had  been  about  one  in  the
morning when that glowing green hole erupted in his backyard. It was now almost two in the afternoon of
the same day.
Are we having fun yet? echoed sarcastically in his mind as he approached the five-year-old white Ford
Expedition parked  along the chain-link fence.  Theo’s  ears  were  still ringing from his lieutenant’s  terse
reprimand over the condition of the laptop. His day’s  bright spot  now centered  on his acquisition of a
decent vehicle. He would have been satisfied with a clean four-door sedan. But when Gretchen offered
him the option of the SUV—high mileage, dents, and all—he’d jumped on it.
For one thing, cramming three space commandos into the backseat of a Crown Vic wouldn’t be the best
idea. Second, the extra height and interior room of the SUV would work to their advantage. He hoped.
Theo wasn’t really sure what would give them an advantage  over  towering zombies that  had  arms like
razor-sharp wrecking balls. But a four-wheel-drive SUV had to be a better deal than a four-door sedan.
He turned the ignition and the engine churned, rattling the SUV with a shudder that probably approached
6.5 on the Richter scale. Great. But it, like most pool cars, was a high-mileage vehicle. He had to expect
some wear and tear.
He tapped the gas pedal, hoping a little more juice would settle the engine down, aware that what he’d
thought was his day’s bright spot was considerably dimmer. He cranked the AC  to  the highest setting.
Hot air rushed against the side of his face. The driver’s side vent was missing completely. He scanned the
dashboard. Two more vents were broken, and the passenger one was gone as well.
Oh, joy.
Everything else appeared roughly the same  as  in his now-totaled  Crown  Vic. A blue light was  tucked
behind  the  rearview  mirror.  Connections  for  a  city-issued  computer  protruded  from  an  obtrusive,
swivel-arm stand  that hovered  over  the trunk-mount  radio,  conveniently  blocking  access  to  the  most
essential piece of equipment: the dual cup holder. Theo bowed his head briefly, wondered, What next,
then flicked the strobes on, faintly catching the blue light’s reflection on the dash due to the sun’s glare. At
least that worked. He tested the PA  and  siren,  shutting the blaring high-low pitches  off once  satisfied
they functioned.
His cell phone trilled while he adjusted the rearview mirror. He quickly checked the caller ID. Right on
time.
“Yassou, Thia Tootie,” he greeted her in Greek. “How are you?” He put the SUV in reverse—praying
the back bumper wouldn’t fall off when he did so—and swung out of the space.
The AC  chose  that moment to  kick  on and—miracle  of miracles—stayed  on  even  after  he  took  the
vehicle out of reverse.
He was heading north on Eighth Street,  past  the old oak-shaded  rooming houses  mixed in with those

converted to office buildings, by the time Aunt Tootie finished grilling him about the “storm” and started
her inquisition on the subject of Jorie. The young woman was from Canada, Sophie had told her.
“Northern Canada. She’s thirty…uh, thirty-two,” he said, figuring that sounded about right. “Works for
TECO,  doing  technical  stuff.”  The  more  vague,  the  better.  Plus  his  aunt  had  more  than  a  passing
knowledge of that “technical stuff”—at seventy-three, she blogged, Web-surfed,  had  her own page  on
MyWeb, and belonged to at least  a  half-dozen  Poggle groups  where  she  and  hundreds  of her closest
cyber-friends chatted about the latest romance, sci-fi, and mystery novels.
His uncle Stavros controlled the TV remote.
It was a very happy marriage.
“And you’ll bring her over to meet us after Christmas?” his aunt was asking. “You are having Christmas
dinner with your uncle and me, aren’t you, Theophilus?”
Skata. He’d forgotten all about that. Christmas dinner had always been at Uncle Stavros’s house, even
before  his father’s  job  with Southwest  Sea  Freight kept  him away  from  home  more  and  more,  even
before his mother decided her heart belonged to Las Vegas, even before  his parents  divorced.  It  was,
plain and simple, Aunt Tootie’s cooking.  No  one  made  souflima,  that  wonderful pork  dish, like Aunt
Tootie did. Then there was always the avgolemono, a savory chicken and  lemon soup.  And plenty of
Christopsomo—sweet Greek bread—feta cheese, olives. After that would come the kourabiethes and
syrup-soaked melomakarana, and,  of course,  baklava  in all its glorious feather-light layers.  And the
coffee. Thick, sweet, pungent…
Theo’s stomach rumbled. When had he last eaten? Did that even matter?  If Jorie  and  her commandos
couldn’t stop the zombies, there’d be no one left in Maritana County to worry about a holiday dinner or
syrup-soaked melomakarana.
“I hope to be there for Christmas dinner,” he told her, running a traffic light as it flashed from yellow to
red. He had to get home, had to find out if Jorie had  any more  information on the zombies.  Plans had
begun to form in the back of his mind. “But one  of my detectives  caught a  case  last night. I might be
working.”
“Your vacation—”
“Part of the job. You went through that with Uncle Stavros.” His uncle had been a street cop his entire
career with BVPD. Theo still went to the burly old man for advice from time to time. In fact, he could—
Nah. Doc White Braids’s image surfaced again.
His aunt sighed and murmured a protective prayer in Greek.
“I’m always careful,” he told her. “If not Christmas, then New Year’s, okay?”
“S’agapo, Theophilus.”
“Love you too, Aunt Tootie.” He meant it. Tootie and Stavros had been the sole stable influence in his
life. “Hug Uncle Stavros for me. I’ll talk to you in a couple days.” He closed the cell phone with a snap
and—fingers tapping impatiently on the steering wheel—found himself stopped  behind a  line of  traffic
slowing to turn into the Sweetbay grocery store parking lot.
The questions in his mind, however, just kept on coming.

 
Jorie sat cross-legged on the carpeted floor of the small room, her gaze flicking from the data  scrolling
across her T-MOD to her team. To her left, Herryck and Trenat were dissecting the latest information on
the herd’s movement. Their voices rose and fell, halting only when Rordan—Commander  Kip  Rordan,
on her right—swung away from his T-MOD to interject something.
Immediately, Tamlynne Herryck’s  expression  would change from studious  concentration  to  unabashed
bliss. Her wide mouth would soften, and her light eyes would unfocus slightly.
Not that Tamlynne had any particular interest in Rordan. But there wasn’t a female on board who minded
looking at Kip Rordan, Jorie included. A few had  even done  more  than look  at  the tall, well-muscled
commander who kept his shoulder-length shiny black hair neatly pulled back and clipped in a tail. Jorie
didn’t think Tamlynne was in that group, but it didn’t matter. Rordan might be blessed with an extremely
good face—she thought him almost pretty in spite of his strong mouth and straight nose—but he was also
a  good  tracker,  and  he  was  even  better  at  analyzing  and  synthesizing  herd  data  from  a  T-MOD.
Handicapped by Danjay Wain’s death, Jorie  needed  a  team that  could  obtain  information quickly and
respond even faster.
So  when Captain  Pietr  had  recommended  Rordan’s  inclusion  in  her  team  at  the  last  moment,  she’d
agreed. Even though Kip Rordan was equal to her in rank and head of his own tracker team. And even
though Kip Rordan was Lorik Alclar’s close friend.
But that could  be  a  benefit. Jorie  was  determined  to  gain the captaincy  Pietr  dangled  before  her.  Let
Rordan be witness to her team’s success and report it, firsthand, to Lorik.
A success that could well start  with their first chance  to  challenge the zombies.  Data  on the herd  was
coming  in  more  quickly  now  as  the  juveniles—always  on  the  outer  edges—were  thrumming  in
anticipation of creating scent trails from their kills.
“They’re  weaker,”  Tamlynne  Herryck  said,  pointing  to  the  oscillating  lines  on  her  T-MOD  that
represented the younger zombies.
“But there are more of them,” Jorie answered just as Rordan did, her words running over his.
“Look at their numbers.”
She glanced at Rordan, nodding. “Exactly.”
“Ten,” Trenat offered.
Ten juveniles at the front of a craving. There were rarely more than six.
“Should  be  interesting,”  Jorie  quipped,  then:  “We  have  two  sweeps,  seven  minutes  before  primary
emergence.  We—”  And she  halted,  hearing a  rumbling  mechanical  noise  outside  the  structure.  Most
likely that was Petrakos returning. One of the lines of data on her T-MOD represented his location, and
last she checked, he was less than a mark from his structure.
But he could  also  be  with that shorter  man, that  Zeke  Martinez.  Petrakos  had  said  it was  normal for
Martinez to come by. Though Jorie’s pretense of being Petrakos’s lover was supposed to put a halt to
that.
Unless  their  pretense  hadn’t  been  convincing—something  Lorik  would  probably  find  amusing  if  that

information got back  to  him. From  Rordan.  He  stood  as  she  did.  She  waved  him back  down  as  she
tugged her headset through her hair and let the metal circlet drape around her neck. “If he’s with one of
his coworkers, they expect  me to  be  here.  Run one  more  deep  scan  on those  juveniles, confirm their
R-Five levels again. I’ll be right back.”
Jorie sidled through the half-closed doorway and headed for the galley. Kitchen, she corrected herself,
as a  boxy white land vehicle lumbered into view. She  could  see  Petrakos  at  the  helm.  No  one  else
seemed  to  be  with him, and  no other  vehicle followed.  A curious sense  of relief—and  validation  that
she’d judged him correctly—flooded through her as he guided the vehicle to a halt. He thrust both hands
through his short, spiky hair and, for a moment, held that position. Then with a movement that hinted at
restrained anger, he shoved open the vehicle’s door and stepped out.
She opened the kitchen’s solid door, then the mesh one leading outside—a rush of warm, moist air hitting
her instantly—and watched him approach.
He’d come back alone. Jorie hadn’t been sure…Clearly, this wasn’t  a  blissful experience  for him. But
she knew that he understood the potential of the restrainer implant: he could be located  and  terminated
without warning. More  than that,  she  knew  he  understood  the  threat  the  zombies  posed.  Had  Theo
Petrakos returned with a contingent of his own to force the Guardians to expose their existence, had he
added more weapons to the nil-tech projectile one that was clipped to his belt—or if he’d not returned at
all—she  wouldn’t  have  been  completely  surprised.  As  Captain  Pietr  was  fond  pointing  out,  nils,  so
egocentrically tied to their own small ball of dirt, believing the universe started and stopped at their front
door, were prone to do those kinds of things.
Theo Petrakos hadn’t. She couldn’t afford to discount that he might have plans in direct opposition to her
own. But for now he was cooperating.
This  was  the  first  test  she’d  put  him  through—and  he’d  passed.  His  eventual  reward  would  be
banishment from  everything  he  held  dear.  That  fact  put  a  damper  on  the  small  surge  of  bliss  she’d
experienced upon his return.
“Any news?” he asked as he mounted the wide steps. His gaze had been on her the entire trek from his
vehicle. He was still focused on her now.
Jorie raised her face as he came up to her, tried to read past the expected concern and  fading tinge of
anger there,  and  failed. “There is movement on the outer  edges  of the herd.  No  portals  yet.  But  we
expect formation in less than two sweeps.”
As  always,  she  hesitated,  waiting  for  him  to  question  the  meanings  of  her  words.  Their  language
incompatibilities—while decreasing hourly—were still an impediment. But he was nodding.
“Where?”
“Come. I’ll show you.”
Jorie heard  Trenat  and  Rordan  arguing  over  the  potential  strength  of  the  three  lead  juveniles  as  she
returned to the small room, Petrakos on her heels. She  listened for a  moment, mentally filing away  the
data as she hunkered down in front of her T-MOD and then motioned for Petrakos to do the same.
Herryck scooted sideways, making room.
“Thank you,” Petrakos said with a nod to Jorie’s lieutenant.
“You are…well go,” Herryck replied haltingly.

Petrakos frowned, then a small smile played across his mouth, erasing some of the worry Jorie had seen
on his face—his very good face—since he’d returned. “Welcome,” he said. “You’re welcome.”
“Well come,” Herryck repeated.
Petrakos nodded. “You don’t speak…”
“Vekran,” Jorie supplied as he crouched down next to her. “Herryck is learning.”
“Herryck?”
She hadn’t  introduced  him to  her team.  There’d  been  little time to  do  so;  plus, there  wasn’t  a  need.
Petrakos would be in their lives for only the few days it would take to deal with the zombies. When the
mission was finished, he’d return to the ship with them, of course. But he’d be isolated. The less he knew
about the Guardians, the better.
Or so regulations stated.
Still, that didn’t mean he couldn’t learn her team’s names. Conversing with Petrakos would give Herryck
much-needed  practice  in a  language similar to  Vekran.  Though the lieutenant didn’t need  to  learn  the
variations that turned Vekran into English. Once this mission was complete, Jorie doubted they’d visit this
nil world again.
“Tamlynne. Herryck,” Jorie said, with a small gesture at Tam. She pointed to Trenat. “Jacare. Trenat.”
“Kip  Rordan,”  the  commander  said  before  Jorie  could,  irritating  her  slightly.  She’d  never  had  any
problems with Rordan before. But she hadn’t worked with him since she’d ended  her relationship with
Lorik.
Now she had seniority over him. Or did she?
The thought struck her—had Captain Pietr offered a promotion, a captaincy, to Rordan as well? It was
no secret that she and Rordan had different command methodologies. She doubted he’d ever asked Pietr
to relocate a nil’s family. But she’d earned the right for special concessions—her success rate was one
of the highest in Guardian records. Higher than Rordan’s, in fact.
Could that too be an issue?
She shook off her disquiet and watched Petrakos nod at the introductions.
“Theo Petrakos,” he said, hand on his chest in much the same manner as when he’d  named himself on
board the Sakanah hours earlier. “Theo.”
Theo. No, the use of his first name was too personal for her. He was a nil with a restrainer implant, and
he would be sent to Paroo.
“Petrakos,” she said, and brought his attention back to her T-MOD. “We have several unusual things.”
She stabbed one finger at the cluster of small icons representing the juveniles at the herd’s  edges.  “The
juveniles”—when he nodded his comprehension of the term, she continued—“are usually at  the leading
edge of a craving. Four, six of them most often. This time, we have ten.”
“Ten?” he echoed.
“The entire herd is much larger. It is singular to our experience.”

“So many juveniles or the large herd?”
“Both.”
“The herd is—” And he continued with words she didn’t understand.
He must have caught her puzzlement, because he started over. “The herd acts as if with one thought, all
together? Or each zombie in the herd acts on its own?”
“The C-Prime  controls  all.” She  remembered  telling him much of this on the ship. But he’d  just been
through his first PMaT, and his brain, understandably, might not have been functioning at optimum. “But
the C-Prime can code instructions into one or a smaller group,  send  them on a  mission. They perform
this, they return, they reintegrate. You understand?”
“So this C-Prime sends ten juvenile zombies—”
“Yes and no.” Jorie bit back a sigh. It wasn’t only the language difficulties. The Guardians had studied the
zombies for over two hundred years. To impart that information in a few minutes was difficult, even if she
didn’t have to rethink each word she used. “It is somewhat inherency. Juveniles perform a function in a
craving that goes  back  to  the original  zombie  program  of  protecting  stations,  worlds,  from  unknown
infectious agents.  The craving—the seeking out of potential  viruses on ships  and  passengers—is  their
motivation. The C-Prime…it need not say yes or no.”
“You’re saying it’s instinct.”
“Instinct?” She wasn’t familiar with the word.
“It’s inherent—instinct for the juveniles to move at the start of a craving.”
“It is their inherency, yes. The C-Prime, it can guide. But the inherency, the need to define and eradicate
the threat, is already there.”
He was nodding. “And where is the C-Prime guiding them to?”
Jorie glanced at Herryck, received her nod, and then turned back to her T-MOD and Petrakos. “Here.”
She tapped at the screen, bringing up a regional map created by her ship’s seeker ’droids.
Petrakos sat back on his heels. “Fuck.”
She’d heard him utter that word before, didn’t know its meaning, but he was clearly never blissful when
he uttered it. “We have one and a half sweeps before  the first portal,  Petrakos.  I need  everything you
know about this place. These buildings—”
“It’s a  shopping center,”  he told  her,  and  she  could  hear  the tension in his voice.  “We  call  it  a  mall.
Everything under one roof—stores, restaurants, all inside.”
“I understand. An enclosed plaza with many establishments offering items for purchase.”
“Good. Across the street, there’s a movie theater  and  another  shopping plaza.  All together,  hundreds,
thousands of people.”
“It will be  near  sunset,”  she  told  him, because  the dismay she  heard  in  his  voice  unsettled  her.  “The
people will return to their structures to celebrate the evening meal—”
“You don’t understand.” He suddenly leaned forward, hands fisted. “This is the biggest shopping time of

the year.  Everyone  will be  there.  Not  only the store  workers  but  families,  children.  There  is  no  way
you’re  going  to  be  able  to  keep  the  zombies’  existence  or  the  Guardians’  existence  a  secret.”  He
uncurled his fingers and pointed to her screen. “Not there. You’re going to have to deal with the zombies
openly.”
Herryck, Trenat, and Rordan had all turned from their duties and were watching her. She  knew  Trenat
understood none of Petrakos’s words, but Herryck had a working knowledge  of Vekran,  and  Rordan
spoke even more. But even if they hadn’t, they couldn’t miss the anguish in Petrakos’s voice.
She translated into Alarsh a summary of what Petrakos had told her. “If this wasn’t a nil world, we could
bring down two gravrippers. For their speed, if nothing else.” A cloaking device for the craft  would be
ideal, though the Guardians had yet to perfect one.
“We’d  still have to  jam this planet’s  sensors,”  Trenat  pointed  out.  “They’re just  advanced  enough  to
track us on descent. We can’t permit that.”
No, they couldn’t. Above all else, their presence here must remain undetected.
“Then we wait,” Rordan said.
Herryck’s face jerked toward Kip Rordan. “Wait?” she asked, before Jorie could.
“Wait,” Rordan  repeated.  “These are  only juveniles. They’ll most likely cease  after  fifty, one  hundred
kills. We go to the portal site, put a full sensor sweep out on them, pull all the data we can, but don’t try
to stop them. Their scent  trails when they return to  the C-Prime  will be  strong.  That will heighten the
craving, force the C-Prime out in the open more  quickly. Then,” and  Rordan  smiled harshly, “then we
move.”
Trenat bobbed  his head  in agreement.  “I reviewed  Dr.  Alclar’s  case  studies  on  juveniles  before  this
mission. He  states  that R-Five  levels on juveniles in megaherds  are  too  weak  for us to  learn anything
overly useful from their capture.”
Trenat was reading Lorik Alclar’s research?  “The R-Five  levels aren’t  the only thing we’re  looking at
here,” Jorie put in firmly.
Petrakos  touched  her arm,  frowning. She  shook  her  head  in  response.  She  wasn’t  about  to  explain
something she knew he definitely wouldn’t want to hear.
“Killing  those  juveniles  is  a  waste  of  our  resources  and  we  risk  exposure,”  Rordan  said.  “General
Procedure Six permits—”
“I’m familiar with Gen Pro Six,” Jorie snapped. “But letting ten juveniles feed on dozens of locals—”
“Nils,” Rordan said.
“—is not acceptable.”
“Exposure of our mission here is a violation of our orders.” Rordan’s voice was hard.
“Our orders,” Jorie countered, “are to stop the zombies.”
“Our orders are also  to  determine  how this herd  managed  to  get so  large without fracturing,” Rordan
said, and Jorie clearly heard echoes of Captain Pietr in his words. “You know  Lorik’s  research  shows
that we need to let the juveniles feed to do that.”

Yes, she did, but no, they didn’t. There were other ways to obtain that data, but those were ways  that
also violated several orders and more than a handful of gen-pro regulations. She’d never discussed those
particular methods with Lorik, and, hell’s wrath, she wasn’t about to reveal them to Rordan.
She rose. “I will consider your suggestions, Commander.”
“There’s  nothing  to  consider,  Jorie.  Lorik’s  data  clearly  indicates  that  two  or  three  of  the  weaker
juveniles should die off in the first throes of the feeding, giving their scent trails to the remaining ones. This
will increase their R-Five levels, giving us a stronger lock on their C-Prime. We bag their C-Prime  and
we save this wretched planet. Plus we can analyze the mutations in the C-Prime’s  codes.  Surely that’s
worth a hundred or so dead nils?” His eyes narrowed. “Captain Pietr thinks it is.”
Captain Kort Pietr. She was no longer sure she liked him. Because he’d done more than just offer her
refreshments and  a  chance  at  a  captaincy.  She  was  sure—very  sure—he’d  made  the  same  offer  to
Rordan as well.
Rordan’s placement on her team was no chance suggestion. Now she not only had to fight the zombies
but she had to contend with Kip Rordan.
But Kip Rordan also had to contend with her.
“Work out the specifics for a scent-trail grid,” she told Trenat, ignoring the flash of alarm in Herryck’s
eyes at her stated capitulation to Rordan’s plans. “I need to  get familiar with the land vehicle Sergeant
Petrakos brought us.”
At the sound of his name, Petrakos  looked  up at  her,  suspicion playing over  his very good  face.  She
switched to Vekran. “We go outside. Now.”
“And your team?” he asked, rising.
“Yet has work to do. Come.” She turned brusquely away from him and headed for the door, her mind
already sorting through a dozen scenarios and rejecting two dozen more.
Sergeant Theo Petrakos was not going to like what she had to tell him.
But Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah—who  fully intended  to  make  captain—wasn’t  going to  give him any
choice.
She just hoped she wasn’t making a mistake in trusting him.
 
9 
“We cannot go to your shopping plaza.” Jorie faced Theo Petrakos on the wide back porch just as the
mesh door clanked closed behind him.
“What do you mean?” There was a  tightness in his voice and  a  corresponding  tension in his face.  His
dark brows were drawn down, his eyes narrowed.
“I mean,” she  said,  motioning him toward  the land vehicle, wanting to  put  more  space  between  their
conversation  and  Kip  Rordan’s  eyes  and  ears,  “what  I  said.  We  cannot  risk  exposure  among  your
people. It is an edict we cannot ever violate.”

“Did it ever occur to you,” he asked, his words clipped and terse, “that my people will be paying more
attention to the zombies than to you?”
She walked the few steps to the front of the land vehicle and stopped. He was still on the porch,  arms
rigid at his side. There was so much he didn’t understand. He knew it. She knew it. But this was not the
place  or  time.  “Petrakos,”  she  said.  “Come.”  She  met  his  narrow-eyed  gaze  with  one  of  her  own.
“Please,” she added, barely under her breath.
He walked slowly down the steps, her command clearly not infusing him with bliss, even with her soft
addendum.
Jorie caught a flicker of something in one of his structure’s aft viewports. Rordan? Trenat? Rordan, she
decided. The shadow was too tall for Trenat.
“Workable size,” she said, running one hand over the vehicle’s front cowling. “Take the helm, activate the
engine so I can assess its power.”
He stopped in front of her, his body mere minmeters from hers. The line of his lips was tight; the set of his
shoulders stiff. “Don’t bail on me now, damn you. I will not have thousands of innocent people die just
because some bullshit regulation states you can’t be seen here.”
She understood his tone more than his words. She raised one hand, pushing her hair back from her face
as if she  were  irritated.  “Covert,”  she  said  quietly, when the angle of her arm blocked  her  face  from
whoever was looking out his structure’s viewport. “Vehicle. Now.”
His shoulders  relaxed  only slightly, then,  with a  shake  of his head,  he turned  and  stalked  toward  the
pilot’s door. She opened the copilot’s door and pulled herself in. Warm air, almost stuffy, enveloped her.
No  automatic enviro. In spite  of that lack,  she  liked  the  vehicle’s  added  height  and  interior  expanse
immediately.
Petrakos slammed his door shut and looked at her expectantly, brows still down.
“Activate the engine,” she told him.
He grasped  the helm and  twisted  a  knobbed  protrusion.  A  rumbling  growl  sounded  from  under  the
cowling. A puff, then a  stream  of air,  slightly cooler,  brushed  over  her face  from rough-looking holes
flanking the control panel.
She leaned one elbow on the console, angling her body  toward  him, her back  almost to  the structure.
“This vehicle has many added functions, yes? Act as if you were demonstrating them for me.”
He flicked at a lever. “Windshield wipers.”
Two thin rods moved rapidly back and  forth over  the viewport.  Petrakos  touched  something else  and
water sprayed. The rods made a squeaking sound against the glass as the water  evaporated.  Odd  that
nils would waste something so precious on a vehicle. She nodded. “Very good.”
He pushed  against the middle of the helm and  a  claxon blared.  “Horn,” he said,  watching her closely
now.
“Excellent. And these?”  A wide console  full of switches,  buttons,  and  what she  guessed  to  be  power
ports ran between the two front seats.
“Siren, lights, PA system—loudspeaker. Laptop, like your T-MOD, goes here,” he said, pointing to an

elevated stand. Then he closed his fingers into a fist. “Explain covert and the shopping mall.”
She played  with the empty swivel stand  between  them, as  if that  were  her  sole  concern  and  not  the
additional work it would take to circumvent Rordan’s presence. She damned the fact that she still needed
his expertise. “We are forbidden to disclose our presence to your people.”
“I know that.”
“So does Commander Rordan.” She fought the urge to turn and see if they were still being watched. But
that would reveal that she knew. Rordan had to believe she didn’t. “Therefore, if I order my team to your
shopping plaza, Rordan will act to prevent that.”
“But you’re the mission commander.”
“I am—unless Rordan finds reason to take that from me. Violation of the general procedures’  primary
edict would guarantee him that chance.”
“Fine.” The  anger  was  back  in  his  tone  and  his  face.  “Then  give  me  a  couple  of  your  rifles,  those
Hazards—”
“Hazers,”  she  corrected  him  as  she  pulled  out  her  scanner—holding  it  out  of  sight  below  the
console—and accessed the data from her T-MOD, still running and recording inside the structure.
“—and I’ll go myself.”
“Not required.” She tapped three key codes into her scanner,  watched  the new data  crawl  across  the
screen, then turned the unit toward him. “Because the zombies will not be at your shopping plaza when
you get there.”
“Where—”
“That large vacant region.” She  changed  the screen  to  the map image supplied  by the seeker  ’droids.
“Vegetation. No structures. Just these two open areas. You know them?”
He studied it in silence, then: “That’s a baseball field. The other is the tennis courts.”
“Structures?” His last word puzzled her. She knew what a court was but had no knowledge of a tennis
as part of a legal system.
“No. A place for outdoor games, exercise.”
She shrugged off yet another misinterpretation. “Probable population at risk?”
He was quiet for a moment, frowning again, but the tension had left his shoulders. “A lot less. There’s a
school across the street, but it’s closed for the holidays.”
“How many people might be there for outdoor games?”
“No way to know for sure, but we can assume ten, twenty. Most out walking for exercise.”
She nodded. “You’re security in your locale. You have the authority to  make  them leave.  They won’t
question. Correct?”
Petrakos started to answer her, lips parting, then he stopped. “Possibly.”

“Possibly?”
“If I could involve others  in my security force,  it would be  more  effective. But I can’t—won’t—have
them face this.” He touched his shoulder where the restrainer implant had been inserted.
The restrainer  implant wasn’t  the impediment. Involving more  nils was.  She’d  already  pushed  several
regulations to the limit with Petrakos. She wasn’t going to push even more—especially not with Rordan
on the scene.  But she  couldn’t  tell Petrakos  any more  about  Rordan  and  Guardian regs  and  Captain
Pietr’s possible machinations than she already had. She’d reached the boundary of her trust with him for
now. She had a feeling that if he sensed a weak link in the Guardians, he’d try to exploit it.
If their positions were reversed, she would.
So she nodded. “Then we must be satisfied with what you can accomplish.”
A sigh of frustration blew through Petrakos’s  lips as  he leaned  back  in the seat.  The vehicle’s engine
chose that moment to  give an odd  little shudder,  and  the cooler  air that  had  brushed  against her face
turned hot and stale-smelling. With a harsh, murmured word she didn’t understand, he twisted the knob
on the helm and disengaged the engine. “All right,” he said finally. “I’ll clear the park. But we’re going to
have to get there at least forty minutes beforehand for me to do that.”
Forty minutes before the scheduled  time she  and  her team would normally arrive to  counter  a  zombie
portal  would work  out  like  blissful  perfection.  “Understood.  Now  we  go  back  to  your  structure  so
Commander Rordan can show me how wrong my data was and that his new and better data shows that
the zombies will not be visiting your shopping plaza after all. They are going to the tennis law.”
She reached for the door lever, but his hand on her arm stopped her.
“Tennis court.”  The small, odd  smile that played  over  his lips faded.  “And  you  did  something  to  the
zombies, didn’t you?”
There was  nothing threatening about  the large fingers draped  over  her  wrist,  but  the  warmth  of  their
skin-to-skin contact unsettled her. Perhaps because there was nothing threatening. She knew he was still
angry, yet his touch was one of unexpected gentleness.
“Tampering with MOD-tech to affect a craving is not only dangerous, it’s against Guardian regulations,
Petrakos.” She met his questioning gaze levelly, pulling her thoughts back to the situation. The zombies.
Rordan. Not Sergeant Theo Petrakos with his very good face and his very real concerns.
Yes,  she’d  taken  a  risk,  a  calculated  risk,  but she  didn’t want his  questions  and  she  didn’t  want  his
gratitude.  She  was  just  doing  her  job—a  job  she  was  very  good  at.  One  that  could  lead  her  to  a
captaincy.
Moreover, Rordan and Lorik Alclar were  wrong.  Based  on research  the Interplanetary  Marines  were
doing—research  Danjay Wain had  been  aware  of—there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  low  R-5
levels limited only the information that could be gained on the C-Prime. It didn’t affect what Jorie might
be able to learn about the zombies themselves—and their increasingly disturbing abilities.
Granted, bagging a juvenile—alive—was risky. But no one on the Sakanah  had  captured  a  juvenile in
the past ten missions or more. A juvenile taken  from this rapidly mutating herd  could  be  compared  to
older captured zombies. Any changes found would be apparent and significant.
It was a risk, but it was a valid one.

So she didn’t need Petrakos’s thanks. She wasn’t doing it for him or his nils, or because his unwavering
concern  for his people  touched  something inside her,  she  assured  herself.  She  pushed  open  the  land
vehicle’s door, then stepped out. She was doing it because of her oath as a Guardian and to make sure
Danjay’s death hadn’t been in vain. She was doing it for her chance at a captaincy.
She was doing it because she knew she could.
And if it proved  Rordan—and  Lorik—were  wrong,  she’d  blissfully pour  herself an extra  glass  of  ice
water just to celebrate.
She might even be persuaded to pour one for Petrakos too.
 
Theo had  spent  the last  several  years  of  his  BVPD  career  interrogating  people  who  lied—either  by
accident or design, out of fear, greed, or stupidity. It was one of the first rules he’d learned as a rookie:
Out here, everybody lies. Yet Theo wasn’t ready to brand Jorie Mikkalah a liar. At least, not quite.
She just wasn’t telling him the complete truth. Which fit in exactly with the corollary  from Rookie  Rule
Number 1: Always know that you are never, ever being told the whole story.
He wasn’t. Not about the implant in his shoulder, not about the zombies, and not about her plans. And
especially not about whatever was going on with her team of space commandos.
He thought of that as he drove west on Twenty-second Avenue toward the mall. Jorie,  still clad  in her
oversize sweater, was perched in the front passenger seat.
It was almost three forty-five in the afternoon. The ETA for the zombies was now less than an hour.  A
surge of adrenaline shot  through him every  time he thought about  that.  He  tamped  it down.  Be calm.
Think. He’d handled a zombie before, with far less preparation.  He  could  do  it again. His Glock  was
secured on his right hip, his zip-front sweatshirt keeping it and his gun belt with extra ammo hidden from
sight. He’d also donned his black  tac  vest,  very aware  that  something that  could  so  easily trash  a  car
wouldn’t be hampered by it. But he had to wear it—and his smaller Glock in the ankle holster. For extra
protection, his assault rifle was racked in its usual place.
By comparison, the weapons the space  commandos  wore  seemed  strangely small and  light. Jorie  was
decked out in much the same manner as when he first saw her: headset with its eyepiece (swiveled down
for the moment), dual laser pistols, and various gizmos attached to a belt (all hidden by the sweater). Her
high-tech rifle rested on the floor.
Oddly, it wasn’t their weaponry  that was  foremost  in his mind at  the moment. Their camaraderie—or
lack of it—was.
He glanced at the passengers in his backseat  through the SUV’s  rearview  mirror. There  was  a  power
struggle under way. He’d been with BVPD too long not to recognize one. But this one centered on him
and the lives of everyone he knew.
A detective’s sixth sense told him he’d been off the mark in his initial appraisal of Commander Mikkalah.
She was responsible for his kidnapping and that damned thing in his shoulder, but, despite that, he began
to see that Jorie did take people’s lives into consideration. That same sixth sense told him Rordan didn’t.
And that, he suspected, was where the lines were drawn. The players had chosen their sides.

On Jorie’s was Tamlynne Herryck, now wearing his old black-and  white Tampa  Bay Lightning T-shirt
over her sleeveless  uniform top.  Tammy, he’d  dubbed  her.  But Jacare  Trenat—Jack,  wearing one  of
Theo’s Old Navy T-shirts—had sided with Kip  Rordan.  Theo  didn’t speak  a  word  of Alarsh,  but he
knew  if  he  dubbed  Rordan  Pompous  Asshole  he  wouldn’t  be  too  far  off  the  mark—though  Uncle
Stavros would probably call Rordan a malaka. Too bad he’d loaned Rordan his Bucs jersey. He hoped
like hell he’d get that back.
Jack, it seemed, was doing all he could to get his nose far up Rordan’s butt. Though to be fair, Jack was
young. Just a rookie. He had  that bright, shiny look  in his eyes  that  was  a  combination of a  desire  to
please and a belief that he could save the world.
And Rordan, with his swagger, was just the kind of malaka a rook like Jack would admire.
Of course, saving the world—Theo’s world—was Jack’s job. If it hadn’t been his own world at stake,
Theo might have found the entire situation amusing: intergalactic space commandos falling prey  to  petty
office politics. He only hoped Jorie Mikkalah was up to the task of not only the zombies but whatever
Rordan was planning as well.
He stopped for a red light. Jorie had been focused on her scanner gizmo since they’d left his house, but
she looked up at him now.
“Ten minutes,” he said, anticipating her question.
She nodded. “I need to position Rordan and Trenat first before we remove your people.”
“And Tammy?”
“Tammy?”
He inclined his head toward the Tampa Bay Lightning fan seated behind her.
“Lieutenant Herryck and I will take the opposite position. You can return to your structure. We’ll meet
you back there in about one sweep.”
“Whoa, wait a minute.” The light turned green. He stepped on the gas. The SUV stuttered, then surged
forward. “I’m part of this mission, remember? And it’s a long walk—”
“We’ll use the PMaT to transport back to the ship when the juveniles have been dealt with.”
Peemat?  Oh,  that  damned  thing  that  spins  your  guts  out  through  your  eyeballs,  then  puts  you
back together again as you go from Point A to Point B. A thought struck him. “Why do you need me
to drive you to the park if you have that transporter?” It was certainly quicker and more efficient, though
nauseating.
“Zombies  track  PMaT,”  came  Rordan’s  answer  from  behind  Theo.  Another  glance  in  the  rearview
showed a slight smirk on the man’s face.
Yeah, okay, so I’m a stupid nil. Theo returned Rordan’s reflected smirk with one of his own. “Skata
na fas, malaka,” he said under his breath. Eat shit, asshole.
“Because all PMaT transits are unshielded,” Jorie said, as if Rordan hadn’t commented. “Zombies have
what we call a  sensenet.  Through that,  they’re  aware  of surges  created  by unshielded tech.  And they
react.”

“But you said you’re going to transport back—”
“The zombies will be neutralized at that point,” she continued. “But to engage the PMaT in the proximity
of a forming portal holds danger.”
Rordan said something in Alarsh, short and quick.
Theo saw Jorie shrug. Her answer was equally short and sounded—though he had no idea of the content
of the exchange—casual, almost offhand. But her fingers were tight around her scanner.
He didn’t like not understanding their language. He  liked it even less  that  Rordan  understood  his. He
hoped  this was  just petty  office politics and  that  they were  all on the same  side  when it came  to  the
zombies.
But he couldn’t  be  sure  and  he  couldn’t  ask.  He  could  only  remember  what  she’d  told  him  earlier,
denying—lying about—tampering with her tech to change what the zombies did. He  gleaned  from their
conversations on her ship that’s what had turned Wayne, her agent, into a parchment Mr. Crunchy with
moist eyeballs.
And here she was doing the same thing because Rordan—and intergalactic office politics—prevented her
from saving lives at a crowded mall during Christmas week.
So Theo decided to do the only thing he could: tilt the balance in Jorie’s favor. He made his decision as
he dropped Rordan and Jack at the far end of the park by the tennis courts, then Jorie and Tammy at the
other, next to the baseball field. A quick trip around the perimeter announcing—via his PA system, with
blue strobe going—the possible sighting of a rabid raccoon cleared away the few remaining joggers.
Theo pushed the traffic gates shut, then set the Park Closed sign in place. Jorie had told him to go home
once the park was clear. But he was not going home until this batch of zombies was dead and that PMaT
thing was spewing Rordan’s unworthy molecules all the way back up to the ship.
He  turned  the  lumbering  vehicle  back  toward  the  ball  field,  parked  it  just  behind  the  row  of  low
bleachers,  and  got out.  Jorie  trotted  toward  him, frowning. He  leaned  on the front of his SUV,  arms
folded across his tac vest.
“I’m staying.”
She glared at him. He  glared  back.  When she  flung her arms wide in exasperation  and  let out a  now
familiar-sounding  string  of  Alarsh  curses,  he  knew  he’d  succeeded.  A  mixture  of  elation  and  relief
washed over him.
Which ended a split second later when a discordant wail erupted from the scanner in Jorie’s hand—and
echoed out of one dangling off Tammy Herryck’s hip.
Jorie favored him with one last hard glare—partially obscured by her eyepiece—as if to let Theo know
he was now edging his way to the top of her shit list. Then she thrust one of her small laser pistols into his
outstretched hand.
“Opticals, remember?” she asked, teeth gritted. She swung her rifle around. “And legs. Stay with me.”
Opticals.  Eyes.  And  legs.  And  writhing  energyworms  and  long,  flailing,  razor-sharp  extenders.  He
sprinted after her to where red-haired Tammy stood, rifle in one hand, scanner in the other, then stopped.
Both women’s heads were bent over their scanners but, damn it, no one was looking around. Someone
should be. He remembered the green glowing circle, the thing oozing out—impossibly—from its center.

He turned, squinting through his sunglasses into the late-afternoon light.
Something slammed him from behind, crushing him to the ground.  Grass,  dirt,  and  gravel were  pushed
into his face, and he heard his sunglasses crack. Then, with sickening clarity, Theo realized he could no
longer breathe.
 
10 
Theo rolled onto his back, gasping, choking, eyes streaming. Pain radiated through his face and chest, but
he kept both hands firmly on the laser pistol. Two words blared in his mind from years of training: failure
drill!
He lifted his shoulders  off the ground,  arms outstretched,  and  squeezed  off three  blasts  in  under  two
seconds: two to center mass, one to the head of the monster looming over him. The zombie shuddered
for one, two heartbeats, then lashed out with a long, tentaclelike arm, razor claws flexing.
Damn, not head. Eyes! He fired again, aiming for the thing’s eyes, aware there was no time to roll out of
the way of the claws swinging toward him. But he hit something—one eye, definitely. There was a pow!
pang! A flash of light like a huge handful of crazed  sparklers  streaked  overhead,  dissolving against the
field’s backstop. Then a hard rush of air scraped  across  his face  and  scalp,  something metallic glinting
only inches from his nose. A high whine filled his ears, and his sunglasses were ripped from his face.
From out of the corner  of his eye  he saw  the second  claw coming. No  time to  scramble  to  his  feet,
nowhere to go. He squeezed off two more shots to the thing’s head, praying he hit the other eyes, then
merged himself with the dirt beneath his back, his teeth clenching so hard his jaw ached. The sharp claw,
descending, suddenly arched up, moving to his left, moving away…
“Theo!” Jorie cried.
He watched the zombie topple backward and land on the field with a muted thud.
He took his focus off the monster just long enough to glance to his right and see her outstretched hand.
And,  behind  her,  a  small  sickly  green  oval  wavering  into  solidity  out  of  nowhere,  about  where  the
shortstop ought to be.
He grabbed her hand, pulled himself to one knee, and fired past her.
She spun as he rose, the stream of laser fire from her rifle invisible except where it laced the edge of the
glowing hole. He shot another burst at the opposite edge. The portal waved, fizzled, then faded with an
eerie whoosh of air.
Damn.
Watch  your  six.  Another  rule ran through his  mind,  and  Theo  glanced  over  his  shoulder—as  sweat
trickled down  into his eyes  and  blood  pounded  in his ears—to  assure  himself the first zombie wasn’t
moving. It  lay in a  grotesque,  twisted  heap.  He  remembered  the  one  in  his  backyard  exploding  into
nothingness. Why this one hadn’t, he didn’t know. And there was no time to ask.
Tammy was jogging toward them, shouting something. Jorie nodded, then grabbed his arm, dragging him
backward.

“Double!” she shouted. “Twins!”
Twins?
Two circles, almost a figure eight, solidifying in the air in front of the pitcher’s mound, maybe twenty-five
feet to his right.
Twins. And not the Doublemint kind either.
Shit.
Jorie and Tammy sprinted apart, blasting the figure eight in measured increments. Theo backed up, pistol
still out, watching his and their six o’clock position, searching the area for more glowing circles while at
the same time keeping part of his attention on the women working efficiently as a team. He felt more than
a little stupid and out of synch. He’d think later about how close he’d come to getting himself killed.
The figure eight collapsed with an odd fooshing noise and—this time—a small flare of sparks.
Then there was  silence, broken  only by the women’s  harsh breathing and  the sound  of his own heart
thudding in his ears.
His gaze caught Jorie’s. She was sweat-streaked, with a few twigs caught in her hair, making him wonder
if she too had been knocked to the ground. Her lips were  slightly parted,  her cheeks  flushed. Cristos,
she was gorgeous. And he knew he had to be totally insane for even thinking of that at the moment.
She’d also saved his life. He didn’t want to think on that at all.
“How many dead?” he asked. He had no idea how much ammo their weapons held or what lay ahead of
them. In the distance, he heard the first rumble of thunder. A late-afternoon storm was on its way.
“Four.” She said something to Tammy, then added, “Rordan reports two.”
That meant six down, four to go, if her estimates  were  correct.  He  shot  another  look  at  the dead  one
behind him as  thunder rumbled  again.  The  worms  had  stopped  undulating  and  now  lay  like  smudgy
ciphers on the thing’s skin. Even in death, it was butt ugly. “Including this one?”
She was nodding when he turned back. “This one we keep.”
That prompted more  unintelligible exchanges  between  Jorie  and  Tammy, uninterrupted  by any squeals
from her scanner, so Theo used the moment to inspect the dead  zombie again. It  was  smaller than the
one he’d seen in his backyard. It lay twisted, but he guessed that up straight it would be maybe four or so
inches taller than his own six foot three.
Then one of its four upper limbs twitched. Twice.
“Jorie!” He  said  her name quickly, harshly, keeping  his  laser  pistol  trained  on  the  thing’s  head.  “It’s
moving.”
She stepped over to him. “Stasis.” She pulled out her scanner and showed him a screen full of triangles
and lines that meant nothing to him.
Then, as he watched, the zombie disappeared into thin air. “Where—”
“Ship.” She jerked her chin upward, and he caught the small smile on her lips. “First one in some bit of
time, yes? Risk to transport, but—”

Two scanners screeched out a warning. Another green oval glowed faintly in the air. He raised his laser
pistol, but Jorie held up one hand, stopping him.
Beyond the oval’s haze he could see two figures sprinting quickly in his direction through the outfield: Old
Navy Jack and Rordan Pompous Asshole, wearing Theo’s Bucs jersey that—shit—now had a rip down
one sleeve.
Jorie twisted a thin tube—mouth microphone, Theo guessed—up to her face and spoke  rapidly into it.
Tammy sidled next to him as Jorie suddenly jogged off toward the two men.
“Here. Do as me.” Tammy fired at the zombie portal in several short bursts.
He did as her, the thin glow of laser fire peppering the oval barely visible in the late-afternoon light.
“Up small space more,” she said, and he moved his line of fire above hers.
But this time the portal didn’t implode. It grew, becoming more solid by the moment in spite of his and
Tammy’s barrage. He had no idea if he was doing something wrong,  because  he had  no idea  what he
was doing. Other than firing an alien laser at something that had no business being on his planet.
Rordan’s voice reached his ears, sounding excited over the low hum of their laser pistols, but Theo didn’t
know if it was a good excited or bad excited.
“Good? Bad?” he asked Tammy without taking his eyes off the portal, knowing her language skills were
limited. But Theo needed to know what was going on. He fired off a few more charges.
“Good. Bad. Yes,” Tammy answered, telling him nothing. She let loose  with a  rapid  series  of charges,
then murmured something under her breath that sounded nasty.
“Petrakos.” Jorie had returned and grabbed his elbow. “With me. Here.”
He moved sideways as Rordan came up next to  Tammy, holding a  weapon  Theo  hadn’t  seen  before:
short and double-barreled but with thin blue lines pulsing up and down the stock. Rordan fired off three
shots at the portal, which wavered, losing some of its solidity.
Then a loud screech behind Theo shot a jolt of adrenaline up his spine.
Jack’s scanner wailed in his hands, almost drowning the younger man’s short, hard words.
Rordan nodded quickly. Jorie dragged Theo even farther away.
Protecting him because he was a nil and didn’t know  what to  do.  His own gun was  still holstered,  his
assault rifle still in its rack.  All he had  was  a  weapon  he didn’t fully understand  against  an  enemy  he
understood even less. It was like being a rookie again, but a hundred times worse because this was his
city, his planet. And the one thing that Theo Petrakos did not handle well was being helpless on his own
turf.
When Jorie reached  for the pistol in his hand,  he couldn’t  stop  the bitter  anger  welling up inside him.
“Damn it, just give me a chance—”
“Feeding frenzy is building.” She  spoke  as  if he hadn’t.  “You understand?”  She  turned  his laser  pistol
over and tapped at the small indentations above the trigger.
To  his  surprise,  she  handed  the  weapon  back  to  him.  “Feeding  frenzy?  Yeah.”  He  nodded.
“Uncontrolled. Crazy.”

“Very crazy.” She pointed to his pistol. “Now the G-One is set for herd-terminate. Now we finish what
we came to do here. Yes?”
It took  a  few seconds  for her words  to  sink it. His weapon  hadn’t  been  set  to  kill.  It  had  been  set
to…He had no idea what it had been set to, only that what he’d been firing hadn’t  been  at  full power.
That would explain his ineffectiveness. He suddenly felt immeasurably better and very pissed off. Did she
think he would shoot himself in the foot or her in the back?
“You finally trust me with this?” He didn’t bother to keep the anger out of his voice.
She started to walk away, stopped, and turned back to him. “Trust?”
He strode up to her. “You set it to low power.”
She kept  walking away  from  where  Rordan,  Tammy,  and  Jack  stood.  Things  were  quiet,  but  Jorie
seemed sure a zombie feeding frenzy was about to start. Which meant it was the wrong time for him to
be asking questions. He couldn’t help it, though, so he followed her,  staying at  her heels.  “You should
have told me that up front. I can handle—”
“Killing zombies? Yes.” She glanced  up at  him just as  lightning flashed in the distance.  A split second
later, thunder cracked. “You and Rordan. Everything is kill. Understand me, Petrakos. Kill doesn’t give
us answers. For answers, it’s capture. Not kill.”
Understanding dawned, and his anger, fading, shamed him. “I thought—”
“No, you didn’t think.” She stopped and faced him, waving one hand as she spoke. “You. Rordan. Hell
and damn! I need answers. Not corpses.”
And  dead  zombies  tell  no  tales.  He  looked  at  the pistol in his hand.  The small lights  that  had  been
yellow now glowed bright blue. Full power. “And now?”
“A feeding frenzy.” She pulled her scanner away from her hip, eyes narrowing. “Count to ten, Petrakos.
You’re about to join me”—her scanner screeched out a warning as another clap of thunder echoed over
the trees—“in hell.”
Two  green  portals—no,  three—popped  into  existence.  The  portals  were  small,  but  their  color  was
stronger and their appearance more solid.
They fired in a pattern of short bursts, rising up one side of the oval first, then the other. It was the same
pattern Tammy had showed him. He peppered the middle portal, switched to the one on the right, then
back to the middle again. Jorie did the same, concentrating on the one on the left, then firing at the middle
when he didn’t.
The middle portal fizzled within moments, but the other two—stubborn bastards—resisted.
A flutter of movement to Theo’s right made  him dart  a  glance in that  direction—Tammy, Rordan,  and
Jack. Green ovals had popped out there too, like some kind of airborne measles. But far more deadly.
And  silent.  Other  than  the  sizzle  of  the  laser  fire  against  the  portals—and  the  increasing  rumble  of
thunder—their battle was waged in relative silence.
Until Jorie’s scanner gizmo squealed again. And so did she.
“Theo, down!”

He dropped, rolled, keeping his pistol firmly in his grip as a rush of air passed over his scalp. He came up
on one knee, not thinking, just reacting, sensing, and there it was, maybe ten, fifteen feet away, opticals
pulsing with a red glow. A long clawed arm shot toward him.
He targeted the eyes, fired. The zombie jerked as one eye flared out.
Theo hit the dirt again, the second claw missing him by inches.
Once more on his knee—standing up would be  not only stupid  but fatal this close—he  pulled off two
more shots. Another eye sparked, then flared out.
A keening rumble howled out of the zombie’s jaws. Theo’s skin crawled at the sound.
It staggered slightly. He was focused on the remaining eye when a flash of white under its grinding jaws
caught his attention. It looked…alive. Vulnerable.
Theo jerked his aim down slightly, pulled off three quick bursts right under the thing’s jaw.
And was rewarded with a huge ball of green gas mushrooming outward, then imploding back in on itself.
The zombie was gone.
“Bliss!” Jorie’s voice and undisguised glee sounded off to his right.
He shot  to  his feet,  turning toward  her,  his heart  pounding,  his  mouth  dry.  She  grinned  at  him.  That
started his heart pounding even harder. Another green oval, no—two. Twins. Just to Jorie’s left.
Shit.
“There!” He fired off two short bursts, hitting the larger oval’s  right side.  It  surprised  him by fooshing
into nothingness. The other one, farther away, did the same under Jorie’s barrage.
Foosh!
Foosh!
The air around him was filled with fooshes. Then a flash of lightning split the sky, followed immediately by
a double crack of thunder. The skies opened up. Rain came down in thick sheets, blinding him.
Theo spun, pistol out, searching for green ovals, but he could see nothing. Nothing but the rain and white
flashes of lightning stabbing toward the ground.
“Jorie?”
His heart constricted, but he pushed the emotion away and focused. He turned again, water stinging his
face and eyes. But there was no Jorie. No zombies either. And no Rordan, Jack, or Tammy.
“Jorie!”
Nothing. He paced off the area in the driving rain, calling her name, looking for her. She was gone. They
were gone. Through the downpour he could barely make out the outlines of his white SUV.  A flash of
lightning arced toward a palm tree, and the hair on the back of his neck tingled ominously. He bolted for
his vehicle, the loud clap of thunder drowning out his litany of curses in Greek.
 

Once her stomach stopped heaving and her brain ceased trying to flow out of her ears, Jorie shoved one
hand through her wet hair, pushing her dripping bangs out of her eyes with undisguised ire. “Which one of
you damned  fools initiated an emergency  transport?”  She  glared  at  the  occupants  of  the  Sakanah’s
PMaT transport platform.
Trenat, on her left, was kneeling on the platform, retching. She discounted him, as she did Herryck, who
looked  no less green  but was,  at  least,  standing. And would never  authorize  an  emergency  transport
without first alerting Commander Mikkalah.
Jorie turned to Rordan, on her right, and took no little satisfaction in the sallow color of his still-handsome
face or the way he leaned against the platform’s curved wall.
As if he could feel her gaze on him, he straightened, or evidently thought he did. One hand clutched his
stomach as he wavered, a little left, a little right. But his eyes, when he raised his chin, glinted. “General
procedures—”
“Don’t quote gen pro to me, Commander.” She wanted to take the four steps to put him within reach of
her fist but knew if she moved her feet right now she’d fall flat on her face. “And we left Th—Petrakos
back there.”
“The nil can take care of himself.”
Theo Petrakos—a nil—had actually hit a zombie’s white heart.  So,  yes,  he could.  But that  wasn’t  the
issue.
“Ronna,” she called to the PMaT chief. “Get a  med-tech  up here  to  help him.” She  pointed  to  Jacare
Trenat.
“Aye, sir.”
“Trenat, hang in there. It’ll be better shortly. Herryck, you okay?”
“Almost, sir.” The rain had  turned  Herryck’s  red  curls into dark  streaks,  and  water  dripped  from the
bottom of the shirt Theo had loaned her.
A second wave of disorientation hit Jorie. She’d tried to  do  too  much too  soon.  She  bent  over  at  the
waist, her palms on her thighs, and sucked in a few long breaths. The spinning in her head slowed and her
stomach crawled  back  to  its rightful place  in her body.  She  straightened  and  looked  over  at  Rordan
again.
He’d straightened as well and stopped wavering. “You and I need to talk, Commander.”
Yes,  they damned  well did.  “My office, now,” she  snapped,  and  strode  off the platform, her  soaked
sweater as uncomfortable and heavy as her heart.
 
11 
What did he expect? Thank you? Nice shooting? Glad you were there to help?
Theo charged out into the rain to shove the park’s traffic gate closed, then sloshed back to the SUV. He
pulled himself into the driver’s seat. The seat was soaked; he was soaked.

He slammed the door shut.
How about  good-bye? At least  something to  let him know  Jorie  was  going  back  to  her  ship,  so  he
wouldn’t be left standing in the rain, heart pounding, breath coming in short gasps as he wondered if she
was lying on the ground somewhere, injured. Or dead.
He threw the vehicle in gear and headed toward Twenty-second Avenue, windshield wipers barely able
to keep  up with the pummeling rain.  Drains  were  backing  up,  streets  flooding.  Cars  exiting  the  mall
slowed as they edged cautiously around larger puddles. Sheets of water sprayed out from tires in arcing
fans. Another typical Florida deluge.
For a moment he superimposed the green portals, the razor-clawed zombies, onto the parking lot on his
left. It wouldn’t yet be raining, and people—families—would be strolling leisurely, arms full of packages,
small children in tow. The portals  would have confused  them, maybe even drawing one  or  two  of the
curious dangerously close.
The zombies would have terrified them.
Innocents would have died, caught in the invisible laser crossfire, if a zombie didn’t get them first.
Because one of the things he’d learned as he worked with Jorie’s team to stop the zombies: they could
appear without warning. Guardian scanners didn’t always work. That could  be  the only answer  for his
getting nailed from behind. And for the few portals that popped into existence  while the scanners  were
silent.
Which meant that there was no way Jorie’s  team could  counter  them all—even if they were  willing to
expose themselves to the local populace.
Thank you, Petrakos. You helped save a hundred or so lives today.
You’re welcome.
His  portable  police  radio  chattered  with  the  usual  fender  benders  and  advisories  on  flooded
intersections—and nothing, thank God, about any unusual noises in the park just past the mall. It was still
raining when he pulled down his driveway and around to the back of his house. Theo’s sole thoughts now
were on stripping out of his gear, then a hot shower, a hot meal, and his recliner,  in exactly that  order.
Then bed and sleep. He didn’t even have enough energy to drag out his guitar.
Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah—he  was  sure—was  probably  already  snug and  dry  and  dining on  apple
mush that tasted like watermelons.
At least he hoped like hell she was.
Damn her.
 
Commander Jorie Mikkalah stopped in front of her desk, yanked  the wet  sweater  over  her head,  and
threw it on the small couch that ran the length of her even smaller office. The sweater landed on top  of
her Hazer micro-rifle and MOD-tech gear, leaving room for little else. It didn’t matter. She wasn’t about
to ask Kip Rordan to sit.
Rivulets of water ran down her back as she turned and faced him. He was as wet and disheveled as she

was, only—she hazarded—he probably looked one hell of a lot better. Kip Rordan at his worst was still
passably gorgeous.
Unbidden, an image of Theo Petrakos slipped into her mind. His strong, angular face, his spiky hair. Not
at all smooth like Rordan. But a female would be lucky to—
She pushed the thought away. “The feeding frenzy had ceased,” she said without any preliminaries. “Your
emergency was…?”
“Possible MOD-tech leakage.”
His reply came so quickly, it was as if he couldn’t wait one minsecond longer to  hurl the accusation  at
her.
“I heard no warning from my scanner. Or yours. Or Herryck’s or Trenat’s.”
He  stared  at  her  a  long  moment  before  answering.  “Scanners  don’t  register  leakages  on  the  zurad
frequencies.”
“Because a zurad-frequency leakage has a seventy-two percent error rate.”
“Which is why you use them.”
Jorie kept herself very still. “Are you accusing me of tampering with tech, Commander?”
He shifted position, slightly widening his stance as if he expected that fist she’d so wanted to smash into
his jaw earlier to come flying now. That thought would have amused  her but for the seriousness  of his
accusation. If Rordan could prove that, Pietr could strip her of her rank.
If Pietr found out what she’d done to Theo’s restrainer implant, he’d probably space her out the air lock.
But she knew damned well Rordan couldn’t prove she’d tampered with the MOD-tech. His suspicions,
though, could hamper her mission and play against her bid for a captaincy. The same captaincy she was
sure Rordan was after.
His eyes narrowed, then he shook his head slightly. “You’re very good at  what you do,  Commander.”
He hesitated. “Lorik didn’t deserve you.”
His added comment and the sudden softening in his tone took her by surprise. He’d already turned and
stepped for the door by the time she found her voice.
“Lorik has nothing to do—”
“Lorik’s a fermarl’s ass, Jorie,” he said, turning back to her after  he punched  the door’s  sensor  panel.
“I’m just trying to keep you alive long enough for you to realize that.”
Kip Rordan stepped swiftly into the corridor, the door closing behind him before Jorie could even think
of a reply.
 
The captured  juvenile  zombie,  however,  was  not  so  silent.  A  harsh,  keening  cry  rose  and  fell  from
between its serrated jaws as it lay immobilized on the stasis table in the ship’s xeno-mech-biology lab on
Deck 19. It was blinded, thanks to Petrako’s excellent aim. It was also separate from its herd for the first

time in its existence.
No one knew if zombies felt fear. But if they did, this one probably felt it now.
Jorie shifted her attention between the zombie and the data scrolling down several of the lab’s analytical
screens. She didn’t look at the lanky form of Dr. Lorik  Alclar, his chin-length white hair tucked  neatly
behind his ears. She didn’t look at Commander Kip Rordan in his clean, dry uniform. Quite frankly, she
didn’t want to see either of them right now.
She liked what she saw on the analytics even less.
Lorik walked to her side while she studied the data. He twisted his lightpen in his long fingers, then used it
to point at a box on the right corner of the screen. “It appears, if this youngster is not an aberration, that
their command centers have expanded.”
Their command centers. Their brains. Zombies were  increasing their capabilities to  learn.  Exactly what
Captain Pietr feared.
“Natural mutation?” She couldn’t imagine who could get close enough to a rogue C-Prime to tinker with
its mech-biotronics and live. No, she could, though she almost didn’t want to think about it.
The Tresh.
“Let’s hope it’s natural,” Lorik answered. “I don’t even want to  consider  that  we  could  be  up against
someone who found the code.”
Not just someone. More likely several someones in the Tresh’s  Devastator  ranks.  They were  the only
ones who’d have the knowledge and the cunning to use it. Like Commander Davin Prow.
The scar on her shoulder chose that moment to itch. Autosuggestion, she knew, but fought to keep  her
fingers from rising to the area under her—nice, dry—uniform.
“Either way,” Lorik said, as if reading her mind, “it’s bad news.”
“If it’s only this herd, this C-Prime, it’s solvable by their full termination.” Maybe  the intuitive behavior
she thought she’d  witnessed  by the zombies at  Port  Lraknal  was  just  an  aberration  caused  by  other
factors.
Like the Tresh.  Her  mind kept  coming back  to  that.  But if the Tresh  had  found the code  to  alter  the
zombies—these zombies on this nil world—then that brought forth an even deeper problem.
What else were the Tresh doing here? She had to be wrong.
“Their full termination is required,  regardless,”  Lorik  answered.  Stating the obvious,  Jorie  felt.  But  he
always said it with such authority that it sounded as if it were some glorious pronouncement that only the
magnificent brain of Dr. Lorik Alclar could devise.
“When will you have more-conclusive data?” she asked. Data. Not answers. Asking Lorik for answers
elicited a lecture on the structure of scientific theory.
“Twenty, thirty sweeps.” He glanced over his shoulder, then back to the screens. Jorie could almost feel
Rordan’s  gaze on her and  Lorik.  Or  maybe  she  was  just  imagining  things.  She  was  tired.  She  was
hungry.  Maybe  Rordan’s  earlier  comment  about  keeping  her  alive  was  simply  one  of  teammate  to
teammate.

It had  to  be.  She  was  misconstruing. He’d  been  Lorik’s  closest  friend for years,  the two  together  so
often that Jorie’s friends had teased that she had two lovers for the price of one….
Hell and damn.
Lorik droned  on about  the delicacy  of the work  required  and  how one  sample couldn’t  be  taken  as
conclusive and one hundred percent accurate.
“Then we’ll bring you another one.”
Rordan’s voice, damned near in her ear, almost made her jump out of her skin.
“A mature one, Kip, not another juvenile.” Lorik spoke to Rordan as if he, not Jorie, were in charge of
the mission. “Try not to damage to the opticals this time. The command processor took some overburn.”
“The nil took out the opticals,” Rordan said.
“Well, that explains it. Sloppy. Didn’t think it looked like your handiwork.”
“Or Jorie’s,” Rordan put in easily.
Jorie stepped away from the two men. She did not want to be so close to either of them, and she did not
want to be part of this conversation. And she didn’t know Rordan had followed her out into the corridor
until he called her name.
“Share last meal with me,” he said when he caught up to her.
“I’m late for a briefing with Herryck,” she lied.
“That shouldn’t take long. I’ll wait.” He gave her a small, charming smile. Herryck  would be  melting in
her boots about now.
Jorie thought of another smile—a delicious, somewhat feral grin. “Thanks, but I have to monitor the nil.”
“Let me do that while you brief Herryck.  You’ve  been  on this nonstop  for over  twenty sweeps.  You
need a break.”
“I appreciate  that,”  she  said  formally, “but I need  your expertise  on the herd  data.  The loss  of  those
juveniles will create changes. Get that thing’s R-Five levels from Lorik. I need to know what I’ll be  up
against at the next spur.”
“We,” he said. “Whatever it is we’ll be up against,  Jorie,  we’ll be  up against it together.”  He  held her
gaze for a long moment, then, with a curt nod, turned back to the labs.
Jorie headed  for the lifts. Rordan  was  right. She  was  tired.  She  was  hungry. She’d  managed  a  quick
cleanser and change of uniform before going to see Lorik, but that had altered only her outsides. Not her
insides.
But she was afraid that if she stayed on board, Kip Rordan would track her down.
She stopped at her cabin just long enough to  talk  briefly with Tam on intraship, then she  grabbed  her
scanner, weapons, and a dry sweater and headed for Deck 15.
With the MOD-tech her team had left in place in Petrakos’s structure, getting a lock and clear transport
was an almost effortless experience. The way things should be, would have been had Danjay Wain lived.

One thing she’d never taught Danjay was how to use zurad frequencies, how to artificially stimulate portal
formation. She wondered now, as the blinking equipment she’d left in Petrakos’s structure solidified into
view, if someone had. That might explain—
“That wasn’t the problem.” A female’s voice, strident, pleading, reached Jorie’s ears, along with the light
tinkling of music. She  froze,  her hand on the half-open  door.  Hell’s wrath!  Was  Petrakos’s  neighbor
visiting again?
Then a man’s voice, gruff and angry: “No, you married me readily enough.”
“Because  I loved  you!” The female again, sounding angry as  well. Angry,  it  seemed,  because  having
children meant the loss of her career on the starport….
Love? Children? Starport? Jorie didn’t recognize the voices but felt sure this wasn’t Petrakos’s elderly
neighbor. Suddenly she remembered his odd evasiveness when she’d agreed to pretend to live with him
as his lover in his structure. He’d said he wasn’t spoused. But what if he’d lied?
That would very much be Theo Petrakos, Jorie realized, ignoring an odd tightness in her chest. He would
do anything in his power to protect someone he loved.
Jorie hovered at the edge of the doorway in the small room, completely unsure of what to do. Intrude on
this highly emotional moment? Another nil would then know she and the Guardians existed.  Another  nil
would be sent to Paroo…
…and  Petrakos  would have bliss. This must be  the reason  he’d  clung so  fiercely to  his home  world.
There was a female he loved here.
She carefully dropped her rifle and her sweater to the floor, then, head high, she strode quickly toward
the sound of the music—and stopped. She expected to find Petrakos and a female standing, arguing. But
Petrakos wasn’t standing.
He was lying in a chair with an elevated  footrest,  a  blanket  draped  loosely over  his baggy gray pants.
White socks covered his feet. His eyes were closed, his bare chest rising and falling evenly.
The music faded.
“You’re being archaic,” a man’s voice said.
Jorie whipped her gaze to her left. A large screen—a vid! The female, the man, the argument were all a
vid! Relief washed over her. Petrakos didn’t love the beautiful red-haired female who now paced  what
appeared to be the bridge of a small scoutship on the screen.
A very nice scoutship. And since when did these nils have tech like that?
But her concerns were interrupted by the sound  of a  low sigh and  slight cough.  Real sounds.  Not  vid
entertainment.
Petrakos shifted in his sleep, his hands fisting, the blanket sliding off his legs to the floor.
Jorie picked it up and studied him for a moment. His short hair was still damp. He was probably chilled,
with no shirt on. She could see the slight redness on his shoulder from the implant. And the hard curve of
muscles on his arms and chest, both sprinkled with dark curling hair.
But it was his face that drew her gaze again. She couldn’t say exactly why she found it pleasing. Other

than it was an intelligent face, a hardworking face—a face that had laughed and a face that had wept.
The man and the female on the vid resumed  arguing, but she  ignored them and  leaned  over  Petrakos,
fluffing the soft blanket over his chest.
Strong hands slammed against her shoulders. Jorie flew backward, landing on her rump with a  yelp of
surprise. Her elbows hit the floor, pain shooting into her arms as  she  went flat on her back,  one  large
hand on her throat. Hard thighs locked her legs to the floor.
Then dangerously narrowed dark eyes widened and Theo Petrakos gave his head  a  small shake.  “Ah,
Cristos.  Jorie.”  He  removed  his  hand  carefully  from  her  throat  and  sat  back  on  his  haunches.
“I’m—regrets. You okay?”
She unfolded her fingers from around the G-1 on her utility belt with no memory of how her fingers had
gotten there. But then, from the look on Petrakos’s face, his reaction was the same. He hadn’t intended
to hurt her.
She could have killed him.
She relaxed her body. “Optimal,” she  said.  “But better  if I’m not on the floor.” She  levered  up as  he
grabbed her arm, pulling her toward him. Her face ended up brushing against his neck. He smelled warm
and male and slightly soapy. More than slightly blissful.
And it was insane, crazy for her to even think this way. She scooted back and was pushing herself to her
feet when he cupped her elbows, drawing her up against his so warm, so very bare chest.
She knew if she found her face in his neck again, she would be sorely tempted to take a taste of him. So
she looked up instead and found in his dark gaze an unexpected  confusion. Did he know  she  had  this
overwhelming, frightening desire to nibble her way down his half-naked body?
“Theo,” she said, wanting it to sound like a reprimand but, hell and damn, it came out sounding more like
a plea.
Noise  boomed  out from the vidscreen.  She  twisted  out of his grasp,  aware  of his gaze  following  her
before he shook his head slightly. He snatched a small rectangular box studded with buttons from the seat
of his chair. He pushed one and the voices stopped, the image going black.
He stared at the blank vidscreen for a moment, then ran one hand over his hair. He faced her. “I think it’s
time you told me what’s really going on.”
“I have told you—”
“Bits and pieces. Then you disappear back to your ship and leave me standing in the rain.”
She could tell by the sharpness in his voice that that had bothered him. “I know it makes no difference,
but that wasn’t my decision.”
“Let me guess. Rordan.”
She sucked in a slow breath. “Commander Rordan did what he thought was right.”
“Right for the mission or for himself?”
She hadn’t quite figured that out yet. “He maintains there was the danger of MOD-tech leakage.”

“So he doesn’t know what you do, or does he?”
Hell and damn, this was not where she wanted the conversation to go. She only returned to assure herself
of his well-being and to check current data on the tech running in his structure. Not to stare at his bare
chest and indulge in foolish fantasies. And not to argue about what had to be done. “I do what I think is
right for the mission and all involved, Sergeant Petrakos.”
“A minute ago I was Theo. I pissed you off, didn’t I?” He hooked his thumbs in the waistband of his gray
pants and rocked back on his heels.
She was at a loss with that last comment, but his body language spoke  to  her loud and  clear.  “I don’t
know what this ‘pissed you’ is. But if you would prefer to argue over words rather than cooperate with
me, then so be it. I still have a job to do.” She spun away from him. She’d go back to studying the data
on her MOD-tech in his small room. Nice, cooperative data that always spoke to her in a language she
understood.  Not  an  argumentative  nil  who  didn’t  know  how  to  follow  orders,  who  questioned  her
decisions in matters he knew nothing about.
And that, she knew, was one of the key problems. Petrakos was not a man to blindly follow orders. He
refused to act like a nil. He wanted full information on what was going on.
Jorie  was  a  commander  who  was  used  to  working  with  team  members  who  already  had  the
information—or had faith that Commander Mikkalah did.
Petrakos took nothing on faith.
And—even if doing so didn’t violate ten different gen-pro regs—Jorie had no time to fill in the gaps in his
knowledge.
If only he were a Guardian tracker…For a moment she  let that  fantasy blossom,  seeing him—with his
talents—as her teammate, her partner. He was a bit more conservative, where she was impetuous. But
he was also more proactive,  where  she  had  a  tendency  to  be  too  analytical. With a  start  she  realized
they’d probably work extremely well together, balancing each other’s shortcomings. And they might even
possibly—
No. Of all the things she had no time for, she had no time to be distracted by the heat generated by his
touch.
She’d settled cross-legged on the floor, keyed in her first request, and was studying the pattern when he
padded in. He folded himself down on the floor and held a tall glass out to her.
“Truce.”
She looked at the glass—water?—and then at him. In spite of her mental chastisements, her annoyance
at him faded. If he really wanted to make amends, she noted wryly, he’d put on that  shirt he’d  draped
around his neck. But she couldn’t tell him that, couldn’t risk his laughter if he figured out how increasingly
disconcerted  she  was  by  him.  Handsome  Kip  Rordan’s  smiles  left  her  cold.  But  this  nil’s  feral  grin
tempted her beyond reason.
It must be that she was tired, hungry, and thirsty. She took the glass with a nod and sipped at it. Water.
Ice cold. She knew this planet-bound  nil had  no idea  how precious  a  commodity ice water  was  on a
ship. She closed her eyes a moment in appreciation.
When she opened them, he’d pulled his knees up and rested his arms on them. “What happens next with
the zombies?”

“That  depends  on  what  Lorik—Dr.  Alclar  finds  with  the  one  we  captured.”  She  nodded  her  head
upward as if the ship was directly above  them, which, for all she  knew,  it was.  “The herd  is in a  rest
period again. The feeding frenzy—”
“That wasn’t supposed to happen.”
She looked back at the screen. “That may have been my fault.”
“Because you tampered with the tech stuff.”
“Theo.” She let out a short sigh. “It’s best that you forget I ever mentioned that.  If you were  to  say  it,
even in accident—”
“When Rordan’s around.”
“—it could have negative consequences.” She turned back to him.
“I can keep a secret.” He grinned. “So what happened?”
“I  don’t  know.”  She  flicked  her  fingers  at  the  screen.  “Nothing  indicated  a  frenzy  would  result.
I’m…better  than that.  And now everything is as  it should be.  The zombies are  in a  state  of  negative
activity. But…”
“But?”
“But if the zombies have developed the ability to think, to plan, then that would explain their unexpected
reaction. The frenzy. It might also mean that everything we’ve  known  about  them to  this point may no
longer apply.”
He was quiet for a long moment. “How would they learn to plan?”
“Only two possible ways. One, a highly unlikely but natural mutation. Or two, an unnatural tampering. A
reprogramming.”
“You think someone reprogrammed them, don’t you?”
This time she was silent, wrestling with what genpro regs said she could and could not reveal. What Pietr
would do if he knew she’d disclosed certain  aspects  of Guardian history and  procedures  to  a  nil. Yet
ignorance could kill him. “It’s not supposed to be possible. Someone would have to gain access  to  the
C-Prime without killing it or getting killed. The only way would be through the Mastermind Code.”
“And that’s not possible because…?”
She slanted him a glance. “The only person who knew the code  died  over  two  hundred  galactic years
ago.  No  one  has  been  able  to  re-create  it  since.  We’ve  tried.  Believe  me,  we’ve  tried.  Our  best
scientists, mathematicians, and no one has been able to obtain it.”
“Until now.”
She nodded slowly. “Until now.”
“And whoever has this code controls the zombies?”
“No. Whoever has this code, Theo, controls the universe.”

 
12 
Life, Theo Petrakos decided, was not cooperating with him at all. It ruined his vacation, trashed his car,
dumped unwanted houseguests into his accustomed solitude, threatened his planet, and made him start to
care—far too much—about a woman he had no business caring about.
All in about twenty-four hours.
He couldn’t wait to see what the next twenty-four hours would bring.
Invasion and subjugation by something called the Tresh, according to Jorie. Though probably not in the
next twenty-four hours. That would take a little longer, she assured him. Like a week. Just when he’d be
back on the job.
Oh, joy.
It was almost midnight. Tomorrow, he realized with surprise, was Christmas Eve. Aunt Tootie and Uncle
Stavros would be sitting at their kitchen table sharing vasilopita, the traditional Christmas cake with the
lucky florin inside. And he was sitting across his kitchen table from the woman he had no business caring
about, watching her devour her second first-ever peanut butter and jelly on white bread sandwich with an
expression so rapturous it was damned near erotic.
When she lovingly licked stray morsels of peanut butter off her fingers, Theo  shoved  himself out of his
chair and headed for the refrigerator. He needed a glass of something cold. He really needed to pour it
over his body, but drinking it would have to do. He reached for a beer but changed his mind and pulled
out a can of orange soda instead. He might not be formally on duty, but he needed his mind clear.
“These Tresh tried to take over  your government ten years  ago?”  He  thought of all the wars  that  had
erupted on Earth over the centuries. Most inevitably boiled down to you have something and we want
to control it, even if that something, like with the terrorists, was the way you thought and believed.
“The Border Wars started eighteen years ago, ending about ten years past. But we—the Interplanetary
Concord—have had issues with the Tresh  since before  I was  born.”  She  broke  off the corner  of her
sandwich and chewed thoughtfully. “You have wars on your world, yes?”
He nodded. “Lots.”
“Then you know.  It’s  never  clearly only one  issue.  It’s  always part  economics.  With us,  the concord
regulates  the  spacelanes,  regulates  trade  for  the  seven  systems  and  thirty-four  sectors  within  its
jurisdiction. Over two  hundred  fifty years  ago,  the Tresh  broke  all agreements,  pulling out.  They tried
blockades. We tried sanctions.” She shrugged. “I’m not a politician.”
“Two hundred fifty years is a long time to fight.”
“Not when the people you are fighting have no words in their language for compromise or negotiation.”
Point well taken. “So the concord invented the zombies to keep the Tresh from using your spacelanes to
trade?”
“Initially, zombies were used to monitor the Hatches and detect possible contamination from visiting ships
and crew. Infections. Viruses.”

Like the CDC.  Or  perhaps  more  like  the  way  shuttle  astronauts  were  quarantined  upon  return.  He
nodded.
“When  the  Tresh  became  a  threat,  the  functions  of  the  herds  were  augmented  to  be  proactively
defensive. But,”  she  continued,  “as  I  told  you  when  we  were  on  the  ship,  that  failed.  The  zombies
themselves became a problem. The Guardian Force then had to take over security of the Hatches  and,
with the tracker division, eliminate the zombie threat. Most of the zombies were successfully terminated
when the concord realized the malfunction. But a  few rogue  herds  escaped.  Those  are  what Guardian
trackers have been hunting ever since.”
“So when will this Lorik guy have an answer on the zombie’s brain?” He leaned against the front of the
refrigerator, regretting for a moment that he’d pulled a T-shirt on. The cold metal against his skin would
help. Jorie had dipped her spoon into the peanut butter jar and was now sucking on it with that beautiful
mouth of hers as if it were a peanut butter lollipop.
Lord, give him strength.
“Twenty sweeps, most likely.”
Twenty hours  before  Jorie  would have to  present  her captain  with two  options: Plan  A—continue  to
destroy the zombies, or Plan B—prepare for an attack and invasion.
On Christmas Eve.
“But Lorik will not accept that as final proof,” Jorie continued. The tip of her tongue traced the edge of
the spoon. Theo took a long swig of ice-cold soda from his can.
“He’s already indicated we need to bring him another zombie. Alive. Not a juvenile this time. He needs
to see how far this mutation has progressed.” She hesitated. “You understand my words?”
He nodded. He did, more and more, now that his ear had become accustomed to her accent and  now
that her English—or Vekran, or whatever it was—had improved. “So that means you’re going to have to
do funny stuff with your computer again to capture one.”
She shot him a look that clearly said he wasn’t supposed to mention her funny stuff. “Essentially, yes.”
“When and where?” He intended to be there.
She examined her empty spoon,  seemed  to  consider  dipping it in the peanut  butter  again, but after  a
moment placed it on her plate. “Thank you. That was most excellent.”
She pushed her chair back and stood.
“When and where, Jorie?”
She was heading out of the kitchen. In two strides he was right behind her.
“Jorie.”
No answer.
“When and where, Jorie?”
“I don’t know yet,” she told him when they reached the middle of his living room. She turned left into the
hall.

Evasiveness, thy name is Jorie Mikkalah.
He followed. “When will you know?”
“Not in the next few sweeps.” She stopped in front of her blinking computer equipment and rubbed one
eye with the heel of her hand. “I need a three-sweep nap, minimum. Five would be bliss.”
She’d turned away from him, and something told him she was…prevaricating. Not lying, not quite. She
was tired. Hell, he was tired. But there was another layer to whatever was going on here.
He stepped around until he could see her face. She had a smudge of peanut butter on one  cheekbone.
Probably had it on her fingers and it came off when she rubbed her eyes.  In spite  of the situation, that
made him smile.
“Hey,” he said softly. “You missed some.” He swiped at the peanut butter with his index finger and held it
out for her inspection.
“Ah, treasure!” She grasped his hand, brought his finger to her mouth, and licked.
Heat rocketed through his body. That was followed by a sudden cold draft on the back of his neck, an
icy chill, as if someone had opened a door to the North Pole. He watched Jorie’s eyes—which moments
before had fairly sparkled—narrow.
“Commander,” she said, releasing Theo’s hand.
She wasn’t talking to him, he knew that. Not just because that wasn’t his rank—she  wasn’t  looking at
him. And he had a feeling he knew who she  was  looking at.  His initials would be  P.A.  Uncle Stavros
would call him a malaka.
Theo angled around. Yep. Pompous Asshole Rordan had joined them. And, from the expression on his
face, was none too happy.
Rordan stepped toward them. Six-one, two-ten, Theo judged. Even in his stocking feet, Theo was taller,
though  not  by  much.  Pretty  ponytail  aside,  a  lot  of  Rordan  was  muscle.  Theo  judged  that  too.  He
wouldn’t look forward to going hand-to-hand with the guy. But he could  take  him down  if he had  to.
He’d taken down bigger ones.
“Jorie,” Rordan said, then a long sentence in their alien language. It  left Theo  feeling at  a  disadvantage
again, though he’d begun to catch a few familiar words. Like nil. But the rest was still unintelligible. He
didn’t like that, so he used the time to watch the man’s expressions and movements as Jorie replied with
a short series of more unknown words.
What he’d initially thought was anger on Rordan’s face shifted to something else. Disapproval? Maybe.
But why?
Because you’re a nil, Petrakos, that’s why. And she’s here talking to you.
“Problems?” Theo asked Jorie, keeping his own expression neutral.
Jorie opened her mouth to answer, then stopped. Theo realized he needed to teach her to speak Greek,
a language he hoped Rordan wouldn’t know. Fair’s fair.
“Commander Rordan was concerned because I wasn’t on board the ship,” she said after a moment.
Is he  your  keeper?  Theo  wondered,  then  gave  Rordan  an  understanding  nod.  They  were,  after  all,

supposed to be on the same side. “She’s safe here.”
Rordan ignored him and spoke to Jorie again.
“Sergeant  Petrakos  is also  part  of our  team,  Commander,”  Jorie  said  evenly. “A team that  will work
much better if we all speak the same language.”
Theo watched Rordan closely. The man did not want Theo party to what was said. So he was surprised
when, seconds later, Rordan lowered his gaze for half a heartbeat, then shrugged.
“My Vekran,” Rordan  said  slowly, “need  have practice.  But,” and  he faced  Theo,  “when things have
importance, I speak such. Since is impossible that nil speak Alarsh.”
Nice little put-down. The nil could never learn Alarsh. Wanna bet?
“So I say again,” Rordan continued. “You are over your time to work here. Nothing has critical. Five, six
sweeps, you have nap.”
“I’m not sure we have five sweeps.” Jorie crossed her arms over her chest. “The zombies have changed.
We can’t trust old data to be accurate any longer.”
“And you are not accurate with no nap. Is that not truth, Petrakos?” Rordan glanced at Theo.
So we’re buddies now? Theo wanted to argue with the man, but there was no sense in it. Jorie had to
be as exhausted as he was. “Go nap. I need some downtime—to nap too.” Sleep would definitely help.
Maybe it would clear his mind and stop his heart—and his hormones—from doing double time whenever
she came close to him.
She glanced at him with that slight tilt of her head. The words were out of his mouth before he could stop
them. “You could nap here.” With me.
“I stay here to monitor tech,” Rordan said. And Theo poured  cold  water  on his fantasy of Jorie  in his
bed—even if he played the gentleman and slept in his recliner.
“And guard the nil,” Rordan added. He held out one hand. “The G-One. The one Commander Mikkalah
provided. Return, please.”
The Guardian weapon was in his nightstand. But Theo had no intention of returning it—at least, not until
the zombie problem was solved. He didn’t discount that Rordan  would feed  him to  the creatures  if he
could. “I—”
“I have it already,  Commander.”  Jorie’s  voice rode  over  his.  “Your  diligence  is  appreciated  but  not
necessary.”
She could  be  flawless when she  wanted  to  be,  Theo  realized.  There  wasn’t  a  trace  of  deception  on
Jorie’s  face.  No  fluttering hand movements, no little side  glances,  nothing  to  give  away  that  his  alien
one-woman war machine was lying through her teeth.
Yet he’d been so sure he could tell when she was lying—well, prevaricating—before. Or  maybe she’d
been flawless then too.
But she was letting him keep the laser pistol. Was that her way of telling him she trusted him more than
she trusted Rordan? Or were she and Rordan playing a game? Why should he think that good cop–bad
cop was confined to his planet?

So he watched to see if Jorie passed her scanner—or any magic Kill the Nil button—to Rordan before
she left. Nothing changed hands. And then it was just him and Rordan as Jorie disappeared into a cold
rush of air.
Rordan turned his back on Theo and—without a word—lowered himself to the floor next to the pulsing
screen.
Was that trust, stupidity, or a dare? Theo had no valid reason to harm the man, but he could still hear his
field-training officer telling the rookie  cop  Theo  Petrakos,  Be professional  and  courteous,  but  never
forget that the next person you meet you may have to kill. Rordan, he suspected, never learned the
professional-and-courteous part. So Theo locked his bedroom door, shoved a full clip in the gun he kept
in his nightstand, and put it under his pillow. He put his service weapon on the floor under the edge of his
bed. The Guardian laser pistol he tucked into the box spring through a tear in the fabric. He worked on
the  assumption  that  if  someone  or  something  came  through  his  door,  the  floor—with  his  antique
wrought-iron bed between him and whoever—would be the safest place to be. From there, it would be
clear access to his bathroom and out the casement window with its now-unlockable lock.
Something else he should be concerned about. But that was also what the gun under his pillow was for.
He settled back on the lumpy pillow and stared at  the ceiling in the dark,  less  worried  about  intruders
outside than those making inroads from within. He’d started to trust—wanted to trust—Jorie Mikkalah.
But that, he knew now, could be a huge mistake on his part.
He was probably correct in his earlier assessment: all women were zombies. Especially the beautiful ones
like Jorie Mikkalah. They show up in your life, bite your head, suck your brains out,  and  leave you on
your lumpy pillow to die.
 
Jorie contacted Captain Pietr’s office when she woke from her nap, but his message ’bot  informed her
the captain was in conference. Just as well. She had a number of things to do before she returned to the
surface, not the least of which was indulge in a hot shower. Several issues plagued her. The shower was
her favorite place to plan.
Forty  minutes later—some  plans already  in motion—she caught up with Captain  Pietr  in  the  corridor
leading to the ready room.
“Did you get sufficient rest, Commander?” he asked her.
“About five sweeps, sir. My team is still on the scene. Lieutenant Herryck—”
Pietr’s raised hand stopped her words. “You needed  rest,  Mikkalah.  Your  tendency  to  work  yourself
into exhaustion is no secret. And, yes, I’ve seen Dr. Alclar’s preliminary report. I assume that’s why you
skipped first meal and tracked me down?”
Was there nothing this man didn’t know? It seemed impossible that Pietr could keep an eye on the over
four  hundred  fifty  on  board  the  Sakanah,  but  somehow  he  did.  More  than  one  crewmember  had
remarked how little got by the Old Man.
“Sergeant Petrakos keeps a  stocked  galley, sir.” And something so  delightful that  it should have a  far
more magnificent name than peanut butter. “I’ll have first meal there when I brief him. But I wanted to
go over the report with you first.”

The captain tapped the palm pad at the ready-room door. She followed him inside.
“Brief the nil?” he asked her as he settled into the chair at the head of the table.
“Only  about  necessities,  sir,”  she  replied  calmly,  knowing  damned  well  that  good  Guardian  agents
following regulations didn’t brief nils. “Petrakos’s presence insures that my team’s arrivals and departures
aren’t a source of speculation in his neighborhood.”
“Of course. Sit, Commander. Tell me what troubles you about Alclar’s report.”
Jorie sat, reluctantly. She’d have preferred  to  stand.  She  really wanted  to  pace,  but that  would be  an
obvious sign to Pietr that she was not in control at the moment. And she was. She had to be.
“I’ll try not to take up too much of your time, sir.” She wanted to get back to Theo’s structure. Herryck
had  relieved  Rordan  on  watch  two  sweeps  ago,  and  the  brief  conversation  Jorie  had  had  with  her
showed the zombie herd still in a negative energy state. That was good and bad. Good that there was no
immediate threat.  Bad  because  the herd  should be  showing some  movement, and  it  wasn’t.  “I  know
there’s  yet work  to  be  done.  But  I’m  concerned  that  Dr.  Alclar  is  not  pursuing  the  option  that  the
zombies’ increased learning capabilities might not be a natural mutation. I think we can’t yet rule out that
someone might have uncovered the code. Sir.”
There.  She’d  said  it.  And  Pietr  hadn’t  thrown  back  his  head,  snorting  with  laughter  at  her
pronouncement. Or busted her down to ensign for being a fool.
Yet.
His eyes did narrow, however. Then he sighed. “If someone—and I assume you have a certain group in
mind—did uncover the code and now controls the zombies, don’t you think they’d be doing more than
playing with a herd on this remote world?”
So. Captain Pietr had not only read Lorik’s preliminary report, he’d spoken to him too. That was almost
word for word how Lorik had ended their conversation not ten minutes before.
“I know Dr. Alclar believes that the Tresh would have moved  on the Hatches  immediately, yes,”  Jorie
told him. Lorik’s pronouncement was no surprise;  he echoed  the same  belief that  the Guardian Grand
Council had held for over a hundred years. “But what if they weren’t sure the code would work? Maybe
they’re testing it, testing some changes, both here and at Lraknal.”
“Then  they’d  know  we’d  found  them  and  uncovered  their  secret.”  Pietr  leaned  back  in  his  chair.
“Commander, the Tresh—and I think you know this better than most—are far more  devious  than that.
Aside from the fact that we have no evidence of the Tresh in this system,  on the highly remote  chance
they obtained the code before we did, they’d not be so ineffectual as to let us get access to any altered
zombies. And I think, in your heart of hearts, you know that. You need  to  look  beyond  your personal
issues with Lorik Alclar. He’s one of the best. He knows what he’s doing.”
Personal issues. Jorie sat very still and kept all emotion off her face. “I have the highest respect for Dr.
Alclar’s work. I have no personal issues with him, Captain.”
“I  told  him  I  was  sure  that  was  the  case.  Just  as  I  assured  him  your  previous  captivity  with  the
Tresh—and those nightmares he says you still occasionally suffer from—in no way affect your perception
of this mission.”
She would kill Lorik Alclar. First chance she got. No. Better. A quick fist to his far-too-pretty jaw, bind
his hands and feet, drag his body to the PMaT, and send him on at least a dozen emergency transports to

the surface  and  back.  When  he  was  weak,  retching,  dizzy,  and  shivering,  his  head  on  the  verge  of
exploding, she’d do it again. Make him beg, whine, scream for mercy.
Then she’d strap a leaking T-MOD to his ass and leave him for the zombies to chew on. The same ones
he believed were undergoing a natural mutation.
She stood. “Thank you for your faith in me, sir. I won’t let you down.”
“Good. Concentrate on getting Dr. Alclar the specimens he needs, then terminate the herd. Then we have
matters in the Gendarfus sector the council wants me to look into.” He sighed. “Trouble never rests, does
it, Commander Mikkalah?”
“No, sir. It doesn’t.”
She saluted smartly, tapped open the doors, then headed down the corridor, every inch of her furious.
And afraid. To ignore that the Tresh might be behind this, to ignore that someone might have uncovered
the code, was not only foolish, it could damned well be fatal.
It was time to take a chance—a big one. One she wouldn’t take if she felt there were any other options.
She saw none. She saw only what she had to do with the one person she could honestly trust.
And that revelation scared her almost as much as breaking gen-pro regs did.
It took her a sweep to dig out what she needed, which required pulling in more than a few favors. And
there would still be a lot of work to do before anything would actually be functional once she transported
it to Theo’s structure.
On top  of that,  she  had  to  do  it all before  the next craving spur  hit the zombies and  without Rordan
finding out.
Pietr was right. Trouble never rests.
 
Theo plodded out of his bathroom the same way he did most mornings: naked, his hair still damp  from
the shower, a towel draped across  his shoulders.  Except  this morning Jorie  stood  in the middle of his
bedroom, hands on her hips, one eyebrow arched.
He yelped and whipped the towel from around his neck. Fumbling and cursing, he wrapped it around his
waist.
“Don’t  you  believe  in  knocking?”  he  asked  more  harshly  than  he’d  intended  to,  but  his  heart  still
pounded. And though Sergeant Petrakos would never admit to blushing, he could feel a definite heat on
his face.
“Knocking?” She did that head-tilt kiss-me-now thing that made him want to turn around and head back
to his shower. A cold shower.
“The door.”  He  pointed.  The towel  slipped.  He  grabbed  it. “Before  you come  into someone’s  room.
Someone’s private bedroom.”
“I didn’t use the door.”

Then he noticed the square black containers stacked between his dresser  and  his guitar case.  “Okay.”
He took a breath. “Maybe I didn’t explain myself sufficiently yesterday. You can use the spare bedroom,
the hallway if you need to. But my bedroom is off-limits. Got it?” God damn it, a man had to have some
privacy, somewhere.
“I’ve  acquired  knowledge,  yes,  as  to  our  permissible  areas.  But,  regrets,”  and  she  hesitated,  an
uncertainty playing over  her features.  “Theo,  I need  your help.  This,” she  thrust one  hand toward  the
containers behind her, “is not permissible.”
He tucked in the edge of the towel tighter as he stepped toward her. It slipped again. He  gave up and
hung on to it. “What do you mean by ‘not permissible’?”
“It’s a lot—a very big lot—of…funny stuff. If Rordan finds out—if my captain  finds out—it would be
serious  in  a  most  negative  manner.”  She  raised  her  arms  slightly,  then  let  them  fall  to  her  sides  in
exasperation, words spilling from her, quick and nervous. “They think the mutation is natural. They’re not
willing  to  consider  the  Tresh  might  be  involved.  I…I  don’t  know  what  else  to  do.  This  has  never
happened before.”
“Your captain’s always agreed to every suggestion you made?” Great place to work, if true, he thought
wryly.
“Of course not. But there are other things in this situation now. Things that…” She  pursed  her lips and
shook her head. “I am so stupid.”
No, she wasn’t stupid. Theo could hear that clearly in the desperate,  almost downtrodden  tone  of her
voice. And he could  see  it clearly in the tightness of her mouth. He  regretted  his flippant comment of
moments before. She wasn’t stupid at all. She knew exactly what was going on. And she was hurt. And
afraid.
He had a sudden urge to put his arms around her, hold her, tell her things would be okay, except he had
no idea if that was true. And worse, to do that, he’d have to let go of the towel. Not good.
“Let me put some  clothes  on,” he jerked  his thumb toward  his closet,  “then you can  fill me in on the
situation.”
She nodded, then sat on the edge of his unmade bed, looking at him as if she expected him to drop his
towel then and there.
Are the Guardians nudists?
He refused  to  let his mind follow that admittedly enticing thought. He  grabbed  clean  boxers  from  his
dresser, a pair of faded jeans and his favorite black Tommy Bahama T-shirt from his closet, and headed
back into his bathroom.
Something was very wrong,  he told  himself as  he quickly pulled on his clothes.  Admittedly, he’d  only
known Jorie Mikkalah for about a day—Sweet Jesus, was that all it had been?—but he’d yet to see
her exude anything but confidence.
Okay,  so  it had  only been  a  day.  But his job  required  him to  be  able  to  size up people  quickly  and
accurately. Commander Jorie Mikkalah was no wilting wallflower. Hell, she could probably kick the shit
out of BVPD’s SWAT team.
He opened the bathroom door. She was still on the edge of the bed and turned toward him as he walked
up to her.

“Start at the beginning.” He sat on her right—an instinctual move guaranteeing he’d be between her and
anything that tried to come through his bedroom door.
She drew a deep breath, then launched into a detailed explanation of how Guardian trackers worked on
a mission. How the mission commander structured the plan, how her team followed it. How divisions on
the ship acted in support with tracking ’droids and weaponry and scientific analysis.
It was the latter where things had gone wrong.
“So Lorik—this Dr.  Alclar—he’s  a  scientist who works  with zombies? And he’s  the one  who  won’t
listen to the possibility that the Tresh are involved?”
“And convinced the captain of this, yes.”
“How?”
“Lorik…revealed  information that made  the captain  believe I  discounted  his  conclusions  for  personal
reasons. That I’m reacting emotionally and not logically.”
“Is it true?”
She slanted him a quick glance, a light sparking dangerously in her eyes. “The fact that I would willingly
feed Lorik Alclar to a herd of frenzied zombies has nothing to do with my capabilities as mission leader.”
“Whoa, whoa!” He held up his hands. That was the first surge of energy he’d seen from her in the past
fifteen minutes. It fairly sizzled. He  didn’t know  what poor  Lorik  had  done  to  deserve  her ire,  but he
wouldn’t want to leave the two of them alone in a room.
She shoved herself off the bed and paced several steps. “What happened between Lorik and myself has
nothing to do with this mission.”
Her choice  of phrase  registered.  And he didn’t think it was  a  dispute  over  who got the  desk  by  the
window. It was personal. Emotional. And judging from the defiant lift of her chin, it hadn’t been one bit
pleasant for Jorie.
Bastard. Theo didn’t even know who Lorik was, but he didn’t like him. Because whatever that personal
emotional thing was, Lorik had run tattling to the captain, making Jorie look bad in the process. He didn’t
have to be a detective to figure that out, but being a detective helped him put those pieces together that
much more quickly. And helped him frame a response  that  would pull the rest  of the information from
her—information he knew she didn’t want to admit. “So Lorik  used  you and  is now using that  against
you.”
Some of the anger bled from her, her shoulders dipping slightly. She stopped pacing and nodded.
“You were…” It took a moment for him to remember her term. “Spoused?”
“We had a concord. It’s not quite the same as being spoused. You understand?”
“You were serious about each other. Maybe get married someday, have kids.”
“Yes,  we  were  serious.  But  children  aren’t  possible  without  a  contract  and  removal  of…”  and  she
touched her side briefly and said an unfamiliar term. Built-in permanent contraception, he gathered.
So a concord was like an engagement? The term didn’t matter. The hurt he saw in her eyes did. “What
did the bastard do?”

She sat back down on the bed, folding her hands for a moment before continuing. “Over three  galactic
years now, we’ve been lovers. But four months ago, that changed.”
Three years should have been the start of a decent relationship. Jorie and Lorik had a bit more longevity
than he and Camille. “So Lorik ended the, uh, concord?”
“I ended it. He violated the concord by taking other females as lovers. I confronted him. He  professed
regrets,  but  I  couldn’t  stay  with  him.  Not  after  that.”  She  looked  away  from  him  now,  her  voice
dropping. The memory hurt her.
He understood. His memory of Camille’s infidelity hurt him too.
Funny that he and Jorie were galaxies apart, and yet they had this one deep ache in common.
She shrugged. “I don’t know if on your world it’s important to be faithful—”
“It is. At least, it is to me.”
“It is to me too.” Another shrug. “But Lorik, I don’t understand him anymore. He’s always listened to the
information I’ve  brought  him on the zombies because  he knows  I’m in  the  field,  that  I  see  things  he
cannot. Every mission is a cooperation between the tracker dirtside and the science officers on the ship.
But now…” She shook her head. “Now Lorik’s data is infallible. And my observation, my experience, is
worthless.”
“Because you left him.”
“That makes no sense! Lorik is a professional. Why can’t he act like one?”
“Because  you left him,” Theo  repeated,  and  realized  he  was  damned  glad  she  had.  “You  made  the
decision to leave. You took that control away from him.”
Jorie looked at him for a long moment, and he was aware—very aware—of the bed they sat on and the
softness of her mouth, and of a shared pain. It would be so very easy to kiss her again, to touch her, to
numb that pain—his and hers—for a little while.
But the space commandos were in his spare bedroom, and the zombies were theoretically just outside his
door.
And Jorie Mikkalah was not the type for a quickie.
Neither,  he  noted  with  a  self-effacing  mental  nod,  was  he.  Maritana  County  had  no  lack  of  badge
bunnies. Not one had made it to his bed.
“So how do we prove that Lorik’s wrong?” he asked.
“We don’t know he’s wrong. I only know that  we  cannot  afford  to  ignore the possibility of the Tresh
being here. My only option”—she drew a deep breath—“is to establish a second mission. Very covert.
One only you and I know about.”
A second mission? He was flattered, but: “I know Rordan’s a pain and Jack’s not sure who’s in charge,
but I thought Tammy was your friend.”
“She is. But I won’t risk her career on an illegal mission.”
He understood that. “What do you want me to do?”

“I have to set these up first.” She  motioned to  the crates.  “Then, Sergeant  Petrakos,  we  should go to
your security department.”
“We go where?”
“Where you are a sergeant.”
“It’s restricted.  I can’t—”  Walk  in  there  with  an  alien  one-woman  war  machine.  She  had  no  ID.
There was no way he could get her a visitor’s badge. Though if he walked in with her by his side,  she
might not need one. But Jorie  would definitely be  noticed  in her shorts  and  long sweater.  At the very
least, he had to find her something else to wear. Unless…“You want me to show you the building where
I work?” Maybe she only wanted to gauge the size of the department, in case they needed backup.
She was shaking her head. “It would help to see all incidents of zombie attacks that happened before I
arrived.  Information my ship doesn’t  know  because  we  couldn’t  recover  everything  from  our  agent’s
tech.”
As far as Theo knew, there had been no other zombie attacks. At least, not in Bahia Vista.  And since
neighboring police departments  didn’t routinely send  lists of their homicides—or  any other  crimes—to
his, the only way to get that kind of information was through a search of the data on VICAP and FCIC.
Zeke had probably already put in requests for all cases of spontaneous mummification both  locally and
statewide. But a positive hit wasn’t the same as having a case file. Answers could take days, even weeks,
especially during the holidays. Granted, Theo as a sergeant might be able to escalate  a  request.  But he
was on vacation. Poking his nose into Martinez’s and Holloway’s case was bound to raise questions.
Questions that could easily result in an implant and a trip to Paroo for Zeke or Amy. Yet by protecting
his friends, he could well be risking the lives of everyone in Bahia Vista. Everyone in Maritana County.
Theo leaned his elbows on his knees and dropped his head into his hands for a moment, wishing he could
suddenly wake up from this nightmare. Then he straightened.
Everything had changed and he hadn’t even seen it happen. What did he have to do, walk around with
his gun clipped to his belt, his damned badge on a damned chain around his neck, just to remind him to
think like a cop?
His  sole  reason  for  not  getting  someone  like  Zeke  Martinez  or  David  Gray  involved  had  just
disappeared. This was an illegal mission, Jorie had said. One  outside  the boundaries  of the Guardians’
knowledge.  Therefore,  revealing Jorie’s  presence—and  purpose—here  to  Zeke  or,  hell,  to  the  entire
BVPD wouldn’t result in a  trip to  her ship  or  ultimately  to  Paroo  for  anyone  involved.  Because  her
captain would be the one to order that, and there was no way Jorie could afford to let her captain know
about this second mission—or those participating in it.
But would Commander Mikkalah be willing to break a  regulation, an oath,  that  he suspected  she  held
inviolable?
There was only one way to find out.
 
13 
“It is the oldest of Guardian regulations. It was in force for centuries before I was even born. Petrakos,

you have no idea what you’re asking of me.” Jorie pinned him with a hard stare, then turned back to the
futuristic gizmos she was assembling in the middle of his bedroom floor.
She was calling him Petrakos again. “But—”
“No.”
“Jorie, there’s no other  way.” He  squatted  next to  her.  “Lorik and  your captain  have you backed  up
against a wall, don’t you see that? You need our help.”
“No.”
“You said it yourself: this is an unofficial mission. No one will know—”
“That I betrayed the Guardians’ existence to a nil world? That I violated the most sacred of my oaths?
Even assuming your people were capable of being trusted with that information, I would know.” She shot
him another hard glance. “I would know.”
“And this funny stuff you do with your computers,” he waved his hand at the assortment of parts in front
of her, “this violates nothing?”
“That’s not the same.”
“It is. It’s for a greater purpose, a greater good.” A phrase echoed suddenly in his mind, and he spoke
before he realized what he was saying: “The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the one.” Christ, he
was quoting Star Trek to her now, but for the life of him he couldn’t remember if it was Spock or Kirk
who said the line.
Surprise flickered across her features, her lips parting slightly. Then her eyes narrowed. “It’s the  needs
of the many outweigh the needs of the few. If you insist on citing Vekran sacred  text,  at  least  cite it
correctly.”  She  inserted  a  thin metal  card  into  a  small  box  she’d  been  working  on  for  the  past  few
minutes, then snapped the cap on.
This time he stared at her. Sacred—No. Don’t ask. You don’t want to know.
She shoved herself to her feet. “I have to speak with Lieutenant Herryck. She’s due to return to the ship
shortly. Ensign Trenat will transport down.”
Which meant, as Jorie had explained to him earlier, that she couldn’t spend so much uninterrupted time
working on her secret  project  in Theo’s  bedroom.  Tammy, a  longtime friend and  colleague,  accepted
Jorie’s occasional absences during a mission.
Jack was another matter.
Theo  watched  the  bedroom  door  close  behind  her,  then  got  to  his  feet,  retrieved  his  worn  pair  of
Top-Siders  from his closet,  and  slipped  them on.  He  stuck  his  head  in  the  spare  bedroom  just  long
enough to see her talking quietly to Tammy. It was almost ten o’clock and he hadn’t had a cup of coffee
yet. No wonder he wasn’t thinking clearly. Given the lack of caffeine in his system, he was surprised he
was still alive.
He tried not to think about how tenuous an existence he might have—coffee or no coffee—and instead
concentrated on spooning in enough grounds  for six cups.  He  poked  the switch,  and  his coffeemaker
responded with its familiar gurgle and hiss.

Now  that  he’d  found  a  way  to  circumvent  the  usual  Paroo  trip  for  any  newcomers,  he  still  had  to
convince her to let him tell Zeke what was going on. Zeke, Amy Holloway, maybe David from FDLE.
Barrington over at the sheriff’s office. Other names, faces, ran through his mind.
She’d managed to  secure  his laser  pistol without Rordan  catching on.  She’d  managed  to  beam  down
boxes of tech. Getting a few more weapons shouldn’t be a problem.
They’d need them. He’d already seen one zombie feeding frenzy, and those were  juveniles. There  was
no way, if he and Jorie had to handle an adult frenzy, they could do so  with only the two  of them. He
could still hear the foosh! foosh! foosh! of the green circles in the air. It made the hair on the back of his
neck stand up.
No, they’d need help.
He was leaning against his kitchen counter, halfway through his first cup of coffee, when she walked in.
“I don’t like the data I’m seeing,” she said. She was frowning and, even though she was speaking to him,
Theo had the feeling that the majority of her brain was focused miles away.
“The zombies are moving?”
“They should be. They’re not.” She walked past  him, stopping  at  his kitchen window.  She  rested  one
hand on the marble sill, her fingers tapping lightly in some silent refrain. “Lorik calls it bliss luck. He feels
the C-Prime’s weakening.”
“And you don’t.”
She stared out the window, her face in profile. Her fingers stopped tapping.  “I need  your land vehicle.
Something is happening. Bring that G-One I gave you. We’re going to find out just what it is.”
 
Jorie so very much missed a decent four-seater gravripper with a locator system. Left, right, left, right in
this large land vehicle was incredibly inaccurate. And a waste of time when they had  no time to  waste.
Something was wrong with the way the zombies were acting. Or not acting, in this case.
She didn’t know what bothered her more: the fact that she couldn’t pinpoint the problem or the fact that
she almost could.
It was as if the answer was just out of reach, hovering at the edges of her mind. But she couldn’t come
up with it. Even running theories  past  Tamlynne  hadn’t  helped.  And  Theo—Petrakos,  she  reminded
herself. Petrakos was like a one-note symphony: my people can help. My people can help.
He started again while they were momentarily stopped at the intersection of two streets, waiting for the
approval  of the dangling colored  lights before  they could  proceed.  “But  you  must  have  worked  with
some local police—security agencies—when you’ve tracked these things before.”
“We no longer do so on nil worlds,” she told him, studying a large expanse of green on her right while the
scanner was integrating the next data update. The green space was very much like a park, except for the
nils navigating it in small, square, open-air vehicles. Others walked, stopping only to swing long sticks in
the air. But she could see nothing there to strike. Very odd.
“Why?”

“It  caused  wars.  Cities  against  cities,  nations  against  nations.  They  want  our  tech.  Then  they  want
participation  and  representation  in  our  council.  But  they’re  not  yet  at  the  point  where  they  can
comprehend what that entails.” She glanced at her scanner, then over at Petrakos, as his vehicle glided
forward.  “Turn  left,  next  chance,  please.  Did  your  security  chief  simply  hand  you  weapons  with  no
training?”
He slowed the vehicle as they came to another set  of colored  lights over  the traffic way.  “I had  to  go
through the police  academy.  I was  trained  to  handle weapons.  It  wouldn’t take  all that  much  for  the
Guardians to train us.”
For the Guardians to train nils? Jorie doubted this entire planet was comprised of people who could
handle weapons in the way Petrakos could. But that wasn’t the core problem. “It would take a  special
edict passed by the council. Then it would take an allocation of funds and of personnel. Things that are
currently needed in other areas.”
“A temporary expenditure. Once we’re trained, we’re an asset.”
“One of limited use. It was a touch of bliss luck one of our scouts picked up zombie emissions in your
remote sector. Captain Pietr almost decided against investigating. Do you hear my words?  Your  world
has no purpose  for us other  than to  terminate the zombie herd.  Your  world  has  nothing  to  offer  the
Guardians, nothing to offer the council.”
“We have peanut butter,” he said as he made the turn.
A small smile found its way to her lips in spite of her current apprehension. “So misnamed. They should
call it glorious butter.” Jorie sighed and watched the power  grid pulse weakly—and  illogically—on her
scanner. “Continue straight on, as much as possible.  I’m not a  senior  council member.  I’m not even a
junior council member. I can’t change what has been in force for hundreds of years.”
“What if we alerted only a few of the people I know we can trust? No city leaders. Just a few more eyes
and ears out here. We tell them what to look for—”
“They’d see nothing without this.” She raised her scanner.
“But the herd—”
“Is difficult to detect until they activate a portal. I thought you acquired knowledge on that.”
“I’ve been trying hard to acquire knowledge, Jorie.” Theo pinned her with a hard stare. “But you have a
tendency to keep me in the dark.”
She didn’t completely understand.  He  was  lapsing into his locale’s  phrases  again. “There’s  insufficient
light in this vehicle?”
“What I mean is, what are we looking for, driving around?”
“Scent trails. We need to turn left again, when possible. Do you remember what I said  last night about
scent trails?”
“That zombies leave behind trails that you track on your scanner? Yeah.”
“Zombies navigate by scent trails. The data from the scent trails is like a personal letter from them to me.
You understand?”

“These scent trails tell you what they’re going to do next?”
“What they likely will do, yes. There’s always a chance of error.”
“Turn left here?”
She  checked  the  readout  again.  The  power-grid  figures  were  still  so  weak.  Hell  and  damn.  “A  bit
farther.”
Data fluctuated, flattened. A slight rise in energy, then an almost simultaneous drop.  It  made  no sense.
They should—
Hell. And. Damn!
“Right! Now. Turn right!” She barked out the order and was about to give an exact heading, but—damn,
damn!—they weren’t in a gravripper.
“I can’t now,” Petrakos shot back.
A quick glance away from the scanner’s damning data to the landscape outside showed Jorie that turn
now would put them into the center of a three-story building.
“What’s going on?” he continued, with a flick of his hand at her scanner.
What was going on was that she hoped, she prayed she was wrong. But until she  got closer,  until she
could  get  a  definite  clear  reading…Another  ghost  of  data  flickered  across  her  screen.  Her  heart
thumped—hard—in her chest.
“Theo,  it  is  essential  we  travel  to  the  right.”  She  heard  the  tension  in  her  voice  and  knew—by  his
frown—that he did too.
“I will at the next intersection, just a few more feet. What is going on?”
“Trouble. Very big trouble.” Hell’s wrath, sometimes she hated when she was right. Or about to be right.
But  she  wouldn’t  contact  the  ship  until  she  had  confirmation.  Nothing  like  Commander  Mikkalah
reporting one  of her nightmares to  Captain  Pietr  to  hasten  her  ride  into  career  oblivion—if  she  was
wrong.
Theo  slowed  the  vehicle,  a  low  clicking  sound  starting  as  it  always  did  when  the  vehicle  changed
direction. “What kind of trouble?”
“Preliminary data appears to indicate the possible presence of an additional entity with the capabilities of
altering PMaT emissions,” she said, as carefully as if she  were  sitting in Captain  Pietr’s  office. But this
wasn’t the captain  beside  her.  This was  Theo  Petrakos.  He  didn’t  know  about  her  nightmares.  She
dropped the formal edge from her tone. “This could be why nothing seems logical. It’s not the zombies
alone causing the problem. It has to be an outside source. The Tresh.”
“The—Why would they do that?”
The data on Jorie’s screen came more quickly now that  she  knew  what she  was  looking for,  and  she
made a few key adjustments to the scanner.
“Essentially,” she told him, “because we defeated them during the Border Wars. If they can control  the
zombies, they could control the—Can this vehicle not increase speed?”

“Not here. Sorry.”
She glanced at the small residential structures fronted by thick trees, then back  to  her scanner.  She  bit
back a sigh of frustration as the data scrolled down her screen and she saw energy patterns she  hadn’t
seen in ten years. Masked Tresh transport trails. Tresh fuel signatures were  unlike the Kedrian  fleet or
Guardian ships. For decades they’d perfected masking them. But flying combat in the Border Wars had
taught Jorie how to look for what wasn’t there.
Which was almost exactly what she was seeing now. Almost. She had to be sure.
“What’s in the direction we’re heading?” Water, there had to be water.
“Gulfview. A small town center. A few bars, restaurants, some little shops—”
“Water?”
“The bay, yes. Why? Jorie, why would the Tresh be in Gulfview?”
Ah. A bay. Small body of water. She risked a moment to change screens, bring up the map downloaded
from seeker ’droids’ data, and integrate that with the current data.  She  saw  the water  and  where  they
were in relation to it. Then she flipped immediately back  to  her tracker  screen.  She  couldn’t  afford  to
lose this trail, couldn’t afford to make a mistake. Not if the Tresh were here.
“The water,” she said, her voice taut but professional. She was back in combat mode. “Direct me to the
water, and I should be able to answer your question.”
She threw an extra scrambling filter over her scanner.  If the Tresh  were  dirtside,  she  didn’t want their
tech picking up hers. Though they’d have to have seen the Sakanah, she realized with chilling clarity. But
her ship would  have  seen  theirs,  and  alarms  would  have  immediately  been  sent  to  her  scanner,  her
team….
And she’d received nothing.
So were the Tresh here, or was the information scrolling down her screen some aberration—hell’s wrath,
she hated nil-tech environments—caused by Petrakos’s world?
A small trickle of apprehension slithered again up her spine. She flipped her mouth mike down, about to
open contact with the Sakanah, then stopped, fear of looking like a fool holding her back once more. If
she was wrong, the mission would end for her now.
Equally, if she was right, contacting the Sakanah could lead the Tresh directly to her and Petrakos.
Wait. Assess. Then act. It was only a little farther.
“This is as far as I can go.”
She jerked her head up. A short grassy area and a wooden walkway met her gaze. Then a small sandy
beach and, beyond that, a short expanse of dark-blue water. She could see the spiky outlines of buildings
on a distant opposite shore.
She needed to be over that water, hovering, picking up scent trails and PMaT trails captured in the rising
water vapors…but this was as far as Petrakos could go.
She saw the confusion and  frustration on his face.  Her  own frustration and  helplessness  roiled like an
angry storm inside her.  She  snatched  the Hazer  from the floor behind her seat,  then shoved  open  the

vehicle’s door.
“Jorie, wait!” Theo’s cry ended abruptly as she slammed the door behind her.
She couldn’t wait. If the Tresh were here, every second’s delay meant they were all that much closer to
death.
No, not death. A slow, painful, torturous descent into a hell she was far too familiar with. One she could
not, would not, face again.
 
God  damn  her!  Theo  bolted  after  Jorie,  hitting  the  remote  lock  on  the  key  chain  as  he  ran.  His
one-woman war machine was heading like a bat out of hell for the bayfront beach, an obvious weapon in
one hand and—if her long sweater hiked up any more—two more obvious weapons on her hip.
“Jorie!” Damn, she could run. Thank God it was Christmas Eve and only a few people were in the park.
And none close enough to see the weapon she carried or the Glock on his hip under his T-shirt. Still, if
one of the fishermen on the pier turned…
He gave an extra push and—lungs burning—came up inches behind her.  He  grabbed  the rifle’s strap.
“Jorie!” Her name came out as a harsh rasp.
She tried to wrench away from him, but he locked his hand on her arm. “Damn it, stop! You can’t…have
weapons…here.”  He  was  sucking  in  air.  She  twisted  again.  “Stop  it,”  he  hissed.  “You  want  every
police—security department here asking questions?”
She faced  him, eyes  wide,  face  flushed, mouth slightly parted  as  if both  questions  and  answers  were
finally coming to her now.
So was unwanted attention. Running after her and shouting had not been the best idea, but he’d had no
choice. Now two men in baseballs caps and dark T-shirts with faded logos watched him turn Jorie in a
slow, dancelike movement as he tried to get control of this situation—and her—and hide her weapons.
He yanked her arm and the rifle between them, and knew the only way he could  legitimize their stance
would be to be extremely stupid and kiss her again.
They had to look like lovers, perhaps lovers having a fight. He had to divert suspicion.
Their kiss was brief, intense, and far too pleasurable. Even the small taste of her made him want more.
Which  was  very  stupid.  Useless.  Downright  dangerous.  Some  kind  of  outer-space  bad  guys  had
evidently arrived, and all Theo could think about were all the other places on her body he wanted to put
his mouth. He was definitely, as Zeke was prone to say, thinking with his little head and not his big one.
He rested his face against hers, the hard length of her rifle between them. “Listen to me,” he whispered,
his fingers threading their way into the softness  of her hair. “You can’t  walk around  with pistols  here.
People over there,” and he raised his face and jerked his chin to his right, “are  watching you,  watching
us. I don’t know what’s wrong, but you have to go back to my car now or  we’re  going to  have a  lot
more trouble than just these Thresh things. Understand?”
“Tresh,” she corrected,  her voice soft against his neck,  her rapid  breathing starting to  slow.  “Regrets,
The—Petrakos. I have to—”
Theo saw the taller of the two men put down his fishing pole and stride off the pier just as—judging from

her halted explanation—Jorie did. The man headed directly for them, his intention to find out what was
going on clear from the frown on his face.
“Hell’s wrath,”  Jorie  said  harshly. Then she  kissed  him. She  kissed  him, arms going around  his neck,
pulling his  face  down  to  hers,  bodies  merging,  rifle  pressing  painfully  into  his  chest.  Jorie  had  more
padding in that area, padding he was very acutely aware of as her tongue toyed with his and her hands
stroked his shoulders.
Theo broke the kiss with undisguised reluctance and peered over the top of her head to see the fisherman
slow, then, with an amused shrug, turn. The fisherman no doubt inferred from Jorie’s actions that she was
a willing participant in kiss-and-make-up. His role as rescuer wasn’t required.
“Regrets,” Jorie said again, turning her face as Theo did to watch the man clamber back onto the fishing
pier. “But I must get to the water to take a sample. I didn’t think—I forgot the rules on your world.”
He  shoved  away  thoughts  of  how  pleasant  her  body  felt  against  his—rifle  and  all.  “Are  we  in  any
immediate danger from these Tresh things?”
A quick glance down at the gizmo in her hand. “Immediate?”
“Are they attacking us?”
“At this point, no. But until I take readings from the water vapor, I can’t tell anything more.”
Water vapor. Well, Native  Americans had  used  smoke  to  send  signals. He  guessed  the Guardians  or
maybe the Tresh could use water vapor.
He shifted her rifle between them and, holding her close  against his side,  urged  her back  to  the SUV.
“There’s an old boatyard a block or so from here. We can go out on the dock, but, for Christ’s  sake,
don’t take that rifle out where people can see it.”
Theo unlocked the doors with the remote. When he cranked the engine, the two  fishermen didn’t even
turn to watch. Good. He cut through one of the back alleys that crisscrossed the small town, then turned
down the short, rutted road that led to the ramshackle marina. The newer waterfront condos, complete
with private boat slips, had put a hurt on the small boatyard business in the area. This one had closed a
few months back, the large yellow-and-white signs nailed to the fence proclaiming its transformation into
an enclave of luxury waterfront town houses next year.
Jorie was quiet but clearly tense as he drove past the fence, her concentration on her scanner,  the seat
belt he insisted she wear pulled taut as she leaned forward. She was going to bolt  again as  soon  as  he
stopped the car.
He exited as she did, hit the remote lock, and sprinted around the front of the SUV to catch up to her.
He grabbed her arm. It was time to push for more information. “What are you looking for in the water?”
“Proof that someone is using zombie scent-trail energies to mask his PMaTs,” she said, striding forward
in spite  of  his  hold  on  her,  the  parking-lot  gravel  crunching  under  her  boots.  The  marina  might  be
abandoned, but the smells of paint, pitch, and varnish still lingered, mixing with the slight fishy tang of salt
in the air.
It took  him a  moment to  remember  that peemat  was  actually an acronym  for  her  ship’s  transporter.
“These Tresh don’t want you to know they’re here?”
“That is my estimation, yes.”

“Are they like the zombies or are they human?” Only after he asked did he wonder if Jorie was human or
even used that term. “Like you, me, Tammy, and Rordan?”
“They’re soft-fleshed, bipedal sentients,” she said, mounting the steps to the wooden dock. He released
his hold on her elbow but stayed close to her side. “In physical appearance, I could be  one  and  you’d
not know. But they’re not like us.” She glanced up at him, golden eyes narrowing. “They’re not like us at
all.”
Something in the tone  of her voice made  his  skin  crawl.  And  Sergeant  Theo  Petrakos  didn’t  spook
easily.
“What happens if you find proof they’re here?” he asked.
“It will change this whole mission,” she said, the dock creaking as she picked up her pace. “It may well
change your whole world.”
A warm breeze buffeted his skin as they neared the end of the long dock. Sunlight dappled the water in
silver-blue patches that reflected a bright blue sky and white cottony clouds. Had Theo not spent almost
two  decades  as  a  cop,  the  threat  implied  in  Jorie’s  words  could  seem  almost  out  of  place  on  this
picture-perfect Florida day. But evil was often the very definition of equal opportunity.
The cop with almost two decades’ experience felt hampered by the fact he still knew very little about the
zombies and nothing of this evil called the Tresh. “Jorie—”
She held up her free hand, halting his words. In the other hand she waved her scanner  in a  slow,  wide
arc. Water slapped softly against the dock’s piling. Her scanner was humming, pinging, beeping.
She was frowning. Then she stopped, frozen in place like a statute for two, three heartbeats before she
spun quickly toward him. “Here.” Her voice was a harsh rasp. “They’re here.”
“Who?”
She flipped the curved mouth mike up, her foreign-sounding Alarsh words  short  and  intense.  Then she
stopped, looked at her scanner, and tapped at it.
“What’s going on?” Theo  could  almost sense  her adrenaline racing. His had  started  to,  and  he didn’t
even know what in hell was going on.
She ignored him, flipped up her mike again. More words. Another pause. Then she smacked her scanner
against her thigh, her  eyes  sparking  in  anger.  “Dead  zone!  You  understand  these  words?”  She  was
marching down the dock, back toward his SUV.
He trotted hurriedly after her. “You can’t transmit, can’t receive.”
“It happened before. At the residence where Danjay was killed. I discounted it then. Stupid!  It’s  not a
dead zone.”
“Then what is it?”
“I’ll know more when I find it.” She stopped at the top of the dock stairs and  made  a  small half circle
with her scanner. “The Tresh have appropriated a structure  somewhere  near  here,  just as  I use  yours.
It’s…good. There.” She shoved the scanner back under her sweater and bounded back to the SUV.
Theo was on her heels.

“I need the Hazer,” she called out over her shoulder.
“Jorie—”
“Petrakos, now!” She’d reached the vehicle and yanked on the passenger-door handle.
He palmed the remote but didn’t unlock it. “You can’t go charging around with a rifle in plain sight. Tell
me what needs to be done. I’ll find a way to do it.”
She faced him, eyes narrowed. A gust of wind from the bay blew strands of her hair across her face. “I
need the Hazer.”
“Not until you—”
A series of chimes he’d not heard before sounded from under her sweater. She  spat  out a  short  harsh
word, shoved him aside, and took off at a dead run for the street. Again.
“Fuck.” The woman was  a  goddamned  gazelle. Theo  hit the unlock  button,  grabbed  her  Hazer,  and
pounded after her.
 
14 
Theo caught up with her in one of the unpaved narrow alleys that ran behind most houses  in Gulfview,
only too aware that a Bahia Vista cop had no jurisdiction in this town and no business running around it
with a rifle in his hand. If the local cops didn’t shoot him, the residents might. Florida was a gun-friendly
state.
Jorie slowed just as they came  to  a  ramshackle-looking  detached  garage  with some  kind of flowering
vine growing in wild abandon over one side. Theo was sucking air in great gulps but had enough energy
to grab her arm and jerk her back against him. Not for the first time, he thought of taking her down to the
ground, knee in her back, hands locked behind her, until she told him exactly what the hell was going on
here. He was getting goddamned tired of this, in more ways than one, and told her so.
“You run from me one more time like that and I’m cuffing you to the fucking car.” Which probably would
have sounded a lot more threatening had he not still been wheezing as he said it.
She shot  a  dismissive look  at  his  hand  clamped  around  her  upper  arm.  “This  way.”  Her  voice  was
hushed. She lifted her chin in the direction of a house barely visible beyond  the garage.  “Where’s  your
G-One?”
It took him a moment to remember she meant the laser pistol. “I have it.” He kept his voice low as well.
“But we just can’t go running into a house shooting—”
“Agreed.” She grabbed the Hazer from him, looped the strap over her shoulder, then pulled the scanner
out again. He watched her gaze dart back and forth from it to the thick foliage in the backyard ahead of
them. The screen appeared mostly blank to him, save for a  few squiggles. She’d  said  there  was  some
kind of dead zone.
“How do you know who’s in there if you can’t get a reading on that?” He pointed to the scanner.
“Because I can’t get a reading on that, that’s why,” she answered softly.

“You could also have an equipment malfunction.”
“I had a memory malfunction. I forgot the last time I saw something like this. But I remember now.”
She tugged him toward the side of the garage. “Quiet. Covert, yes?”
Covert, yeah. And if this turned out to be some kind of computer glitch, he swore he would throw  her
over his shoulder, take her back to his house, and handcuff her, once and for all, to his bed.
Could be fun…
Shit, Petrakos, pay attention.
He sidled along the garage with her, praying the gray clapboard house with the rusted metal awnings was
vacant of innocent civilians, which at this point included kids smoking dope or  some  drunk  sleeping off
the morning’s binge. Zombies he could handle. But she said these Tresh looked like people. They—
A loud hum flashed by his ear just as Jorie’s boot kicked his leg. His vision hazed  blue-white,  and  the
next thing he knew he was facedown in the grass and gravel, an answering hum sounding over his head.
“Theo!” Jorie’s voice was strained.
He came up on his hands. She was kneeling next to him, her Hazer  against her shoulder,  her left hand
blindly grabbing the back of his shirt.
“I’m okay,” he said as she fired the rifle again.
Small starbursts erupted at them from a broken picture window.
She was swearing, scrambling backward. Light flashed overhead.
He levered up, fired his laser pistol where he’d seen the last flash, then punched off a few more shots to
the right of that, assuming whoever, whatever, was in there was moving.
A barrage of starbursts exploded in answer, showering him and Jorie with chunks of leafy branches and
palm fronds from the trees above them.
All this was happening with nothing more than a barely audible hum and hiss. He could be sitting in the
yard next door and think nothing more was going on than a couple of birds fluttering and fighting in the
trees.
One thing he knew  for sure: whoever,  whatever,  was  in there  was  no Florida  resident  he’d  sworn  to
protect and to serve. He had a feeling he’d just met the Tresh. He also wished he’d brought his tac vest.
There was a tug on his waistband.
“This way!” Jorie rasped.
She was backing up again.
Nothing wrong with fighting in the opposite direction, he could hear Uncle Stavros say. He scurried
back, staying low, trying to watch his six and her.
They rounded the garage and came into the alley again. He squatted down next to her, his back against
the wooden  garage  door.  He  hoped  those  starburst  weapons  couldn’t  cut through the garage.  If they

could, he hoped the garage was full of enough junk to stop them. “Tresh?” he breathed.
“Tresh.” She nodded. “Three. I want to try going down this side.” She motioned behind her to her left.
“Find a doorway in. There are some small structures we could use as cover.”
He’d noticed the shed and the stack of old siding about four feet high.
“Risky. They could come up on either side of us.”
She glanced at him. “No.” She angled the barrel of her rifle up. “Sunlight. They’re deep-space adapted.
They can see in direct light for only a minute or so and can’t tolerate the sun’s rays on their skin unless
they use special apparatus and a protective suit. But after moonrise…” She nodded. “Trouble.”
Cristos. First zombies. Now  vampires.  He  was  about  to  ask  her if they sucked  blood  too,  when her
scanner chimed out in warning.
She swore,  shoving herself to  her  feet.  He  rose  at  the  same  time.  She  was  tapping  furiously  at  her
scanner, squiggles racing across the screen. Then the screen went blank.
She let out a strangled cry of frustration, spun, and kicked the garage door. It rattled, creaking.
He guessed. “They’re gone.”
“I jammed them!” She shook the scanner in his face. “Exactly what they did to my tech, I did to theirs.
But they—” And she let out a string of Alarsh curse words.
He made a mental note  to  have her teach  him some,  if and  when their lives ever  calmed down.  They
sounded as good as the ones he knew in Greek.
He motioned back toward the house. “Maybe they left something behind. We can—”
An explosion burst through the air behind them, shaking the garage and the alley under his boots.  Theo
shoved Jorie to the ground, covering her body with his. Dust and  debris  flew past  them, and  he could
hear things—big things—bouncing off the garage’s roof.
“The only things the Tresh like to leave behind,” Jorie said harshly as he pulled her to her feet, “are death
traps.”
A siren wailed in the distance. He tucked the rifle between them and, arm over her shoulders,  held her
against his side. Neighbors would be pouring out into the alley at any moment. They needed to get out of
there quickly and without raising suspicion.
“Walk, don’t run. Yet,” he told her. And when a bare-chested balding man in cutoff blue jeans  almost
bumped into them at the back of a house two doors down,  Theo  grabbed  the man’s arm,  bringing his
attention to himself, not Jorie. And not the barely visible rifle.
“Could be a gas leak, man. Get back! Keep away!”
“Shit!” The man’s eyes went wide, then he whipped around. “Serena! Don’t light that grill!”
 
Keying the remote, Theo popped the rear hatch as they reached the SUV in the marina parking lot, then
quickly took the rifle from Jorie. He stowed it in the cargo compartment beneath the floor. “In case we

get stopped and questioned,” he told her. “Pistols. G-One,” he said, remembering the term and listening
to the sirens grow closer. She handed them to him without question.
First time. Amazing. If they weren’t so obviously where they shouldn’t be, he would have kissed her, just
to say thank you for finally listening to him.
It  wasn’t  until  they  were  on  the  road,  heading  away  from  the  sirens,  that  he  asked  her  what  had
happened. How did she know the Tresh were in the house, but more important, how did the Tresh know
Jorie and Theo were there?
She held one hand up. Her headset ringed her hair again, the mike over her lips. She hadn’t said anything
but had been tapping at her scanner since, he realized now, they’d pulled out of the parking lot.
“Sakanah,”  she  said  hurriedly.  “Sakanah.”  Then  a  few  short  Alarsh  words,  her  name,  and  more
Alarsh words. Short. Tense.
When she repeated the name of her ship again, more insistently, Theo knew something was wrong. Very
wrong.
He glanced at her. “What’s the matter?”
“I cannot contact my team.” Her voice was a harsh rasp.
“Another dead zone.”
“No.” She held the scanner up. He glanced away from the line of traffic and saw lots of squiggles, which
he assumed meant it was working.
“Maybe they’re busy talking to your ship.”
“You don’t understand. I cannot contact my team or my ship. I cannot warn them about the Tresh. The
transcomm streams are all dead.” She clasped his arm. “We must get back to your residence. The Tresh
may have found my team!”
Her panic flowed into him. Her team. Who were in his house, protected from sunlight. But not from an
attack.
 
Theo went Code 3 and, with strobe flashing and siren screaming, headed  down  Twenty-second  South
Avenue,  out  of  Gulfview.  Watching  cars—and  for  anything  else  that  didn’t—move  out  of  his  way.
Listening to the chatter on his police radio for any problems occurring not from the explosion behind them
but in his neighborhood. He crossed the intersections with extra care and tried like hell not to let the panic
in Jorie’s voice affect the driving skills he’d learned years ago on patrol.
“We  have  six  normal  communication  streams  for  surface  to  ship—three  emergency  and  two  other
high-priority command private. Our transcomms, what I use to contact my team, can synchronize through
any of them,” she explained in between her continued attempts to reach her ship. “None is responding.”
“You’re sure it’s not a hardware malfunction on your end?”
“I have triple-checked that. Plus my scanner functions as a backup transcomm. It’s sensing the ship, but
it’s showing no Guardian communication traffic of any kind.”

“When’s the last time you talked to someone back at my house?”
“I  sent  the  preliminary  data  on  the  possible  Tresh  emissions  to  Tam,”  she  glanced  at  her  scanner,
“thirty-seven minutes ago. She confirmed receipt.”
That had to be while they were at the beach park and not in the firefight with the Tresh.
“I thought she was going back up to the ship.”
Jorie shook her head. “She agreed with my theory on the Tresh and opted to take Trenat’s shift.”
Because Tammy had to know Jorie trusted her more than she trusted Jack.
“So she doesn’t know what happened at that house?”
Jorie was shaking her head. “It was another  dead  zone.  The dock.  The residence.  That whole area.  I
started transmitting to her as soon as we cleared its perimeter. No response.”
“But you took readings of the Tresh in the house. You jammed their signal.”
“Readings, barely. And only because I knew how to counterprogram for a short-range scan. But scans,
readings,  aren’t  transmissions.” She  shook  her head.  “I can’t  explain our  tech  now.” She  was  clearly
frustrated. And for the first time, she sounded frightened. “You simply have to accept I know what I’m
talking about. We have a problem.”
Theo pulled out his cell phone and flipped it open. He punched in his home number. He doubted Tammy
would answer—she’d been specifically told not to. But if his answering machine picked up, that at least
meant the Tresh hadn’t beamed a dozen zombies into his living room and trashed his house. “Who else
should be at my house?”
“Kip Rordan. Trenat comes on duty in four sweeps. But only Kip would have a Hazer,” she added, as if
reading  his  mind  and  his  concerns.  “Tam  just  has  her  pistols.  Under  nil-world  regulations,  all  other
weapons must stay on the ship until we see another craving spike forming.”
The  phone  rang  in  his  ear,  then  his  answering  machine  kicked  on,  and  he  listened  to  his  own
not-home-leave-a-message. “Remember the telephone I showed you in my kitchen? The one I told you
never to touch?”
She nodded. He held the cell phone out toward her. “I’m calling, contacting, my house. My answering
machine picked up, which means there’s a good chance there’s no major damage there.”
“The Tresh will not destroy your residence without provocation. When I jammed their tech back  there,
they knew someone had found them. With the dead zone they created, I needed to force them to reveal
themselves. But at your residence,  if they can  attack  my team successfully, they will do  so  and  leave.
Quietly.”
He noticed her hand move up to touch her collar, something he’d seen before when she  mentioned the
Tresh. That made him curious, but this wasn’t the time to ask.
“But thank you for attempting contact,” she added.
He flipped his cell phone  closed  and  used  it to  point to  his radio.  “That’s my security force’s  central
communication. If there  was  any disturbance  at  my  address,  we’d  hear  about  it.”  For  a  moment  he
considered calling Sophie Goldstein but quickly opted not to. If there was some kind of problem  at  his

house, he didn’t want Sophie to go charging into the middle of it. “Any more weaponry  in all the extra
equipment in my bedroom?”
She huffed out a short sigh. “Two standard  Hazers  and  the double-stack,”  she  motioned to  the cargo
hatch, “which is my personal  rifle. But I  didn’t  tell  Tam  I  transported  the  Hazers  or  the  MOD-tech
down.”
Because Jorie wouldn’t risk her friend’s career. Unfortunately, it didn’t escape  her that  she  might have
risked her friend’s life, and she was probably berating herself about it. “The minute I suspected the Tresh
were  here,  I should have had  Tam lock  down  all the tech  in  your  structure  on  heavy  scramble.  We
automatically shield against zombie detection. But after the war we ceased to consider the Tresh a major
threat. Plus we had no reason to believe they’d be interested in a system as remote as yours.”
Scenes from movies like Independence Day and War of the Worlds filled Theo’s mind, with ovoid ships
and helmeted outer-space  aliens decimating what was  left of his oleanders  and  scaring the hell out of
Sophie Goldstein.
He crossed  U.S.  19,  siren wailing, and  headed  for the northbound  ramp  of the interstate.  He’d  seen
zombies. He was very sure that these Tresh could do a hell of a lot more than just scare  people.  “You
could have ignored the whole Tresh  angle, like your captain  and  that  other  guy  wanted  you  to.  You
didn’t. You told your theories to Tammy. You beamed down that extra  stuff. You’re  still ahead  of the
game.” He glanced at her. “Rordan’s a big boy. Tammy’s no slouch.” Then, because he knew she knew
that—even if she didn’t quite understand his expressions—he added what he knew she really wanted to
hear: “We’ll get there in time.”
She nodded, then went back to tapping commands into the screen on her scanner,  her voice tight with
tension as she repeated the ship’s name into her mouth mike. In front of him, a knot of cars  refused  to
move, ignoring his lights and siren. He  was  forced  to  pull to  the right, squeezing the SUV  past  on the
shoulder and clipping the curb more than once on his way to the ramp.
Traffic on the interstate was blessedly light. He cut the siren but kept the lights flashing. Fifteen minutes,
max, and they’d be home.
They’d just passed the baseball dome and the second downtown exit when she pulled her mouth mike
down. She closed her eyes briefly, and when she opened them, her expression was grim.
“What is it?” he asked, not liking at all what he saw on her face.
She didn’t answer for a moment, and when she did, he could hear a slight tremor in her voice. “My ship
is gone.”
“What do you mean, gone?” He stopped himself from asking if it had been destroyed. This was  a  ship
she’d said she’d spent years on. He was sure she had friends, and,  experienced  zombie hunter or  not,
contemplating the destruction of everyone she’d known for the past several  years  had  to  be  horrifying.
“Maybe it’s in a different orbit?” he added lamely.
There was a bleakness  in her eyes  when she  faced  him. “My tech  no longer picks  up evidence  of its
existence in any orbit  around  your  world.  If  they  had  to  flash  out,  I’d  have  received  an  emergency
notification, even with the transcomm inoperative. We have seeker ’droids for that purpose.  You don’t
abandon  a  team—regulations  define our  emergency procedures.”  She  held up her scanner.  “The only
thing I show now is this.” She touched a pulsing teardrop shape on her screen. “It’s a Tresh—a possible
Tresh—resonance within range of where my ship was. Until I synchronize with the MOD-tech  back  at
your structure, I won’t know more.”

Two more exits and they’d be almost home. A dozen insistent thoughts whirled through Theo’s mind as
he pushed the SUV’s speed up over eighty, not the least of which was the possibility that Jorie Mikkalah
might be spending the rest of her life on his planet. In Bahia Vista, Florida. As much as that oddly pleased
him—logistical problems of her lack of verifiable citizenship aside—it had to terrify her.
The fact that his planet might now have little in the way of defenses against not only the zombies but the
Tresh came pretty close to terrifying him.
“It’s time you told me everything, Jorie. And I mean everything.” He  shot  her a  determined  glance as,
slowing, he flicked on the SUV’s turn signal. The Thirty-eighth Avenue North ramp was up ahead. “We
have to work on the assumption your people can’t help you at this point. Not with the zombies. Not with
the Tresh.  But my people  can.  You’re  going to  have to  ditch regulations, change the structure  of this
mission, and make us all part of your team.”
Or all of us, Theo feared, reading all too well the expression on her face, are going to die.
“There is nothing your governments can do,” she said, after a long moment of silence. “If the Tresh want
to take your world, your cities, you don’t have the weaponry to stop them. Regrets.  I know  that’s  not
what you want me to say, but it’s fact. We—the Chalvash Interplanetary Concord—were barely able to
defeat them ten years ago. If they start a war against you, you will lose.”
Theo hit the siren again as they came to the end of the ramp, anger supplanting the fear he’d felt moments
before. Traffic moved out of his way as if it sensed the coming explosion. “God damn it, I refuse to give
up and do nothing!”
“The Tresh hold no belief in deities. And I’m not advocating surrender. I do, however, want you to fully
understand the situation. I’m the only one  with any direct  experience  with the Tresh.  I spent  six years
flying combat during the Border Wars. Both Kip Rordan and Tam are career Guardians. They know  a
lot about zombies, but they’ve never fought the Tresh.”
Any more bad news? Theo turned onto  his street  and  was  slightly relieved by the lack  of emergency
vehicles. He had feared another scene like the one they’d left behind in Gulfview. “But they know how to
shoot. I know how to shoot. And I can get you a lot more people who are trained, who know how to
shoot.”
“Petrakos, you do not hear my words! If Tresh ships are here and the Sakanah is gone, we cannot stop
them by shooting handfuls of their people here and there. The only way we can stop them is by thinking.
We must be smarter than they are. We must be more devious—you understand devious?”
“Completely. We have to find out their plans and use that against them.” Finding out the Tresh’s  plans
was something he believed Jorie could handle. Using everything his world had to offer to stop the Tresh
was his area of expertise. Galactic baddies or not, starburst weapons or not, they were on his turf now.
His mind played with a few scenarios: Jorie locating Tresh  hideouts  like she’d  done  in Gulfview, Theo
sending a SWAT team armed with Hazers in after them. More jamming scanners so they couldn’t beam
up and escape. Of course, Jorie would have to be the one to explain how to do that. But, hell, there had
to be some special ops geek at MacDill AFB who could duplicate her scanner gizmo.
And what a  coup  Guardian tech  would be  for  his  country!  Maybe  he  and  Jorie  would  even  get  an
invitation to the White House….
But there was a downside to his daydream. He sensed that but couldn’t quite grasp what it was, and then
they were  approaching  his house.  He  shifted  his  mind  back  to  real  time,  daydreams  and  downsides

forgotten.
He slowed. All appeared normal, but then, he honestly didn’t know what to look for: an X-wing fighter
parked on his front lawn? No starbursts appeared in his windows.
“Continue on,” Jorie told him. “We—”
“Can’t risk that the Tresh  are  inside and  see  us coming. We’ll leave the car  at  the  park  and  double
back.”
He backed  the SUV  into a  parking space  under  a  large oak  tree,  turned  off the ignition, then hit  the
remote to open the rear door. Shaded from view by the tree  and  adjacent  shrubbery,  he retrieved  her
rifle and the G-Is from the cargo hatch, handing her weapons to her.
Jorie plucked his G-1 from his hand and touched two buttons on the side. “Now it’s set back to stun,”
she said. “If the Tresh are there, we try to take them alive. We  need  to  know  what they know.  But if
there  are  serious  problems,”  she  pointed  to  the power  buttons,  “change settings to  hard-terminate  by
pressing both.”
He tapped his index finger on the buttons above the trigger and watched the power lights go from yellow
to blue. It was an easy move. “Got it.”
She held his gaze for a long moment. “You’re very good at what you do, Sergeant Theo Petrakos. There
may have been things I’ve said to make you feel I don’t value you. That I don’t respect your experience.
I want you to know that’s not the truth. I value you more than you realize. And I am honored to have you
not only on my team but,” and she hesitated slightly, “I hope, as a friend.”
Something in his chest tightened at her words and the emotion he heard underlying them. He  pulled the
rear hatch shut, then, before she could step away, reached over and cupped his hand around the side of
her face. “I’m the one who’s honored,” he said, and didn’t even try to hide the emotion in his voice. Then
something about the way they were standing facing each other—facing danger, facing death—made him
think of a line from a movie, even though this was a shady park in Bahia Vista and not the smoky interior
of a bar in Casablanca. “Of all the crime scenes in all the towns in all the world,  you had  to  walk into
mine.”
“Crime scenes?”
He sighed and patted her cheek gently. “Give me the rifle. My neighbors won’t question my carrying it.”
She hesitated for a moment, then, with a nod, handed it to him.
He locked the SUV and guided her on the grassy area along the curb and onto the brick-paved street. A
little more  than a  day  ago  they’d  walked  this same  path: he,  fresh  from  his  meeting  with  Doc  White
Braids, and she, having pulled some trickery to get him his laptop with the evidence tag.
It startled him to realize how much his life had changed in that short period of time. And how much a total
stranger—an alien one-woman war machine—had come to mean to him.
She was, for all intents and purposes, alone on his world. Even if Tammy and Rordan were alive—and
Theo had to work on the premise they might not be—Jorie could give the order to abandon the mission.
There was no ship to report to, no captain to question her decision. He suspected—because they had set
up Wayne in the rental—that they had some resources here. She could walk away and leave Theo and
his world to fend for themselves.

Yet he knew in his gut she wouldn’t. Even if she was the sole Guardian on his world,  she  would never
stop  fighting to  protect  his people.  The very essence  of Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah  was  a  sense  of
honor and duty.
When everyone else would be running away from a crazed, worm-covered, razor-armed zombie, Theo
knew Jorie would be running toward it.
Theo also knew he’d be at her side.
The brick-paved street that circled the park ended after half a block.
“We’ll cut through my neighbors’ yard, stay hidden by the bushes,” he told her as they walked at a brisk
clip. “Greg and Stacey are up north visiting relatives this week.  Then we  approach  my house  from the
west, use that big tree”—the one that the zombie shaved a fair chunk out of—“as cover. If we come
through the back door, the kitchen window is our only problem. But we can duck under that.” Plus, his
front screen door—his homemade intruder alarm—squealed like a cage full of screaming monkeys. But
then, he never thought he’d be breaking into his own house.
For a moment he thought of the broken lock on his bathroom window. But that would mean the two of
them climbing through one by one. It would restrict access to their weapons if they needed them quickly.
Not the best idea.
“Can you tell if the Tresh are already there?” he asked as  Jorie  hiked  up the edge  of her sweater  and
darted a glance at her scanner screen again. He thought for a moment about the implant in his shoulder.
He suspected her gizmo controlled that too. But he no longer viewed her or that device as a threat, and
not just because her ship was gone.
“If you hear the hum of laser fire, then they’re there,” she said grimly. “But at this distance, unless they’re
running a dead zone or some tech I can positively identify as Tresh, I can’t. That’s what I’m watching for,
what I saw earlier—something that shouldn’t be  there.  But they wouldn’t be  here  to  appropriate  your
residence. They’d kill or kidnap my team, take the data from my MOD-tech, and leave.”
It had been at least forty minutes since Jorie had last heard from Tammy. Chances were good they were
either going to walk into the middle of a firefight or a morgue. Great.
A blue Chevy minivan loaded with kids in the back and two women in the front seat breezed by. Theo
recognized the driver as  he casually put his arm around  Jorie,  shielding  their  weapons:  a  young  legal
secretary who lived with her schoolteacher husband and their twin boys a block away. He’d seen them
many times rollerblading together. Now the mom and boys were out with a friend and her kids, probably
heading for the mall to  see  Santa.  The normality of their activity made  his own seem  that  much more
bizarre.
Dear Santa, All I want for Christmas is a container of double-stack Hazer rifles so I can kill all the
zombies, and a couple of intergalactic starships to blow holes in the Tresh fleet.
It wasn’t a fleet they’d face in his house, though, but a Tresh team who looked human, according to what
Jorie  had  told  him.  And  if  her  ship  had  realized  the  Tresh  were  here,  they  might  have  sent  down
reinforcements. He hoped. “If we come into the middle of a fight, how will I know a Tresh from one of
your people?” he asked, stepping back from her again as the minivan passed. “I couldn’t see them at that
house. Do they wear specific uniforms?” Or have  fangs  like  vampires?  He  remembered  her remark
about their sensitivity to light.
“If they’re operating covertly in a nil environment, no.  They’d adopt  your mode  of dress,  as  my agent

did.”
“Dan Wayne.” He almost said Mr. Crunchy but caught himself in time. “So how will I know?”
She slanted him a glance, then pointed to her eye with her index finger. “The color of their eyes shimmers.
Iridescent? You know this word?”
“Like a rainbow,” he said, taking her arm and pulling her into Greg’s empty driveway, catching a glimpse
of the front of his house as he did so. All still appeared normal. Quiet. He hoped it wasn’t  the quiet of
death. “Blue, green, purple, yellow—”
“To me, sunbow. But Tresh eyes aren’t so bright. The colors are more muted, and they shift and change.
It’s also why they cannot see in planetary daylight.”
“And that’s it? Nothing else?”
A slight shrug. “Only their beauty.”
He  turned  the  corner  and  stopped  at  Greg’s  back  steps.  “Beauty?”  After  seeing  the  zombies,  her
comment was unexpected.
“Beauty. They’re incredibly, flawlessly beautiful.” She tilted her face and looked up at him. “Does  your
world believe in angelic beings, Theo?”
“Angels? Yeah.” He’d been shooting at angels in Gulfview?
“The Tresh are a visual heaven. But in truth, they’re the living embodiment of hell.”
He headed for the tall oleander hedge that separated Greg’s property from his. It seemed illogical that an
entire race or breed or whatever the Tresh were could be uniformly beautiful. But a lot of what Theo had
long accepted as fact—or as impossible—had been blown out of the water when he’d stepped off that
transporter platform and followed his one-woman war machine into that ready room with its view of the
star-studded galaxy.
“I know they have weapons, lasers. But are they trained  in hand-to-hand  combat?”  he asked,  handing
the double-barreled rifle back to her when they reached  the wall of shrubbery.  Maybe  they had  other
handicaps besides limited day vision.
She glanced at the Hazer’s yellow lights, then looped the strap over her head. “They’re masters in the art
of pain.”
And Jorie wanted to take them alive. Oh, Christ. For the second time in one hour, he wished he had his
tac vest. He thrust the laser pistol into the waistband of his jeans and double-checked the Glock in his hip
holster. That had only one setting, but he’d try real hard not to kill any Tresh unless he had to. Unless one
threatened Jorie. Then all bets—and promises to try to capture one alive—would be off.
 
15 
The street cop called Theo Petrakos wanted to be first through his kitchen door, gun out, clearing each
room for Jorie. But Detective Sergeant Petrakos knew Jorie had a much better chance of recognizing her
own people and assessing any potential Tresh threat than he did. So—with great reluctance—he shoved

his ego into his back pocket, kept his Glock holstered, and agreed to let her take point. He’d follow and
cover her with the laser pistol on stun.
They reached the corner of his house and stopped. She pulled her scanner out.
“Dead zone?” he whispered, not sure if a yes was good or bad news.
She  shook  her  head.  “Only  my  MOD-tech.  Nothing  from  the  ship.  No  response  from  my  team’s
transcomms.”
“And people?”
“Incomplete data.”  She  frowned,  tapping the screen,  then: “Tamlynne.” There  was  hope  in her voice.
“I’m reading Tamlynne!”
Tammy was in there but not answering. If she was singing in the shower and unaware anyone was trying
to reach her, he’d gladly help Jorie bust her lieutenant down to ensign.
“Okay,” he said. “Let’s go.”
They flanked his back door for a moment, listening. No cursing, no crashing of furniture. But that was the
way fights happened in his world, not hers. He remembered the soft, eerie hum of the laser fire as it split
the air in Gulfview. It gave a whole new meaning to the term deathly quiet.
At  her  nod  he  yanked  the  screen  door  open,  then,  as  it  bumped  against  his  shoulder,  twisted  the
doorknob and shoved. She inched in quickly, crouching, pistol out, eyes narrowed, focused.
He muffled the sound of the door closing with his foot and then was right behind her, swinging his laser
pistol opposite to hers, looking left when she looked right. His kitchen was empty,  a  half-filled glass of
water sitting on the drainboard by the sink. He saw her eyes widen as she stared at it. He didn’t know
why, but it was important. And it troubled her.
She squatted  down  quickly on the right side  of the doorway  to  his living room,  motioning  for  him  to
follow suit.
He dropped down, one shoulder against the refrigerator, adrenaline surging.
And then he realized what else was wrong. It was too quiet. Every other time the space commandos had
been in his back bedroom, he’d had to keep the kitchen radio on to mask their conversation.
There was no sound in his house. None at all. Not even the shower running.
With a sinking feeling Theo realized they had come back too late. He was about to walk in on his second
homicide crime scene in two days. But the killers would never be brought to justice.
Jorie switched her pistol to her left hand and brought the scanner up in her right. She balanced it on her
thigh and tapped furiously at it, frowning, glancing up in the direction  of his living room,  then frowning
again.
Finally she stopped and brought her hand and the pistol to her lips in a clumsy signal for silence. At least,
that’s what he hoped she was signaling.
He nodded.
She tapped the scanner one more time, then let it fall back to her side. Quickly she switched her pistol to

her right hand, raising her left, five fingers splayed. Then four, three, two…one.
A  high-pitched  squeal  reverberated  through  his  house,  damned  near—he  was  sure—cracking  his
windows. It hurt his ears like hell, but she was rising and so was he. Diversion tactics, he guessed. She
swept  into  his  living  room,  hugging  the  walls.  Theo  was  on  her  heels,  swinging  around,  pistol  out,
double-checking for anything in the shadows.  For  once,  he was  glad there  was  very little furniture for
anyone to hide behind.
She flattened herself against the wall by the entrance to his short hallway. He sidled up next to her just as
the squealing abruptly ceased. Just as something or someone moved like a blur past them into the living
room.
Without hesitation, Jorie fired. The woman—Theo saw now that it was a woman—spun, twisting, raising
a square black pistol in her hand. Theo pulled off two shots, center mass. The woman’s arm jerked up as
she fell, gun tumbling from her fingers, platinum shoulder-length curls flaring out around one of the most
incredibly beautiful faces Theo had ever seen.
This was a Tresh?
“Watch her!” Jorie’s  voice was  a  low rasp.  She  snatched  the small  black  pistol  from  the  floor,  then
hitched up her sweater and pushed it into her belt.
Theo stared at the Tresh woman lying motionless in front of his television. But breathing: he could see the
rise and  fall of her chest  under  her pink Life’s  a  Beach  T-shirt.  She  looked  like  a  Victoria’s  Secret
model lying there.  No,  she  looked  better  than any Victoria’s  Secret  model  he’d  ever  seen.  Perfectly
sculpted, classical features. Long legs encased in white jeans, slender waist, and one helluva rack.
Damn.
Then a noise in his hallway had him and Jorie flattening themselves against the wall again.
Next victim, he thought, wondering how many more cover-model types were in his bedrooms. He and
Jorie could simply stand here and pick them off one by one as they came out of the hallway.
But, of course, the Tresh had to realize that too. Then it would turn into a standoff until he and Jorie could
force them out of the rooms. A smoke bomb or tear gas would come  in real  handy then.  Or  maybe a
row of high-intensity UV lights. Unfortunately, he had none of those.
But this blonde had been stupid enough to come out. Maybe the others would too. Jorie had  said  they
couldn’t beat the Tresh by outshooting them but rather by outthinking them. If this was any indication of
Tresh thought processes, this wasn’t going to be difficult at all. All they had to do was wait.
Unless—shit  for  brains—they climbed out the windows,  like the  one  in  his  bathroom,  and  came  in
through the front or back door. Jorie had  said  they could  withstand sunlight for a  minute or  two.  And
that’s about all it would take.
Watch your six.
He spun back, heart pounding, pistol aimed at the kitchen doorway just as Jorie’s scanner emitted two
short screeches from under her sweater.
She holstered her pistol and brought her rifle up in a smooth, practiced move.
But it was too late.

The Tresh didn’t need to use the windows.
A tanned, pale-haired man shimmered into existence in the far corner of Theo’s living room, just to  the
right of his leather sofa, looking like he stepped off the cover of GQ magazine. The man jerked his short
rifle up, and a bright starburst flared from the muzzle.
Theo hit the floor, firing, as behind him a woman screamed in pain.
 
The first of Jorie’s shots missed as she dropped to the floor, partly shielded by Theo’s chair. Laser fire
slashed overhead. But the second from her specially modified double-stack Hazer punched through the
shields—L-1s,  according  to  her  rifle’s  readouts—around  the  Tresh  Devastator.  A  Devastator!  She
should  have  guessed  that  elite  squad  would  be  involved.  In  the  back  of  her  mind,  she  thought  she
recognized the male as he staggered, but it had been ten years. There wasn’t time to dig out a name or
rank. Theo was on the floor off to  her right, firing, and  somewhere  else  in the structure  a  female was
screaming.
Hell’s wrath. Tam.
Jorie thumbed the Hazer to hard-terminate as she came up on her knees next to the chair. She had one
live Tresh—the unknown female. This one could be permitted to die. The male, stunned but still standing,
swung around toward Theo. “Terminate!” she  shouted,  and  put two  blasts  at  his back,  decimating his
shield completely. Theo’s laser flared blue—and fatal—against the Tresh’s chest.
The male bucked,  writhing. Jorie  sprang  to  her feet,  but Theo  was  faster,  knocking the rifle from the
male’s grip and pointing his laser at his head.
Only as the male lay sprawled—unmoving—on the floor did his name come to her: Cordo Sem. A Tresh
Devastator she’d sworn she’d kill if she ever saw him again.
She’d just gotten her wish. But if Sem was here, that meant…
She bolted into the hallway, heart in her throat. She knew who had Tam.
The back bedroom was empty, her MOD-tech shattered in pieces. She swiveled around, searching for
clues. She didn’t know who’d destroyed the equipment: Kip and Tam, picking up the Tresh  emissions
and not wanting to lead them to the Sakanah and Jorie; or the Tresh, spiteful and angry. It didn’t matter.
The deed was done.
The Sakanah was no longer there to render aid, anyway.
So that left only Theo’s personal bedroom. They wouldn’t have transported  Tam or  Kip  back  to  their
ship. She realized something she should have already figured out, something that hit her the moment she
recognized  Cordo  Sem.  Old  scores  had  not  been  settled.  They’d  tracked  her  down.  They  wanted
revenge.
Another scream.
Hell’s fire. These monsters stopped at nothing.
Jorie stepped quickly but cautiously into the hallway just as Theo did. Sem’s rifle strap was draped over
Theo’s shoulder, his laser pistol at the ready, chest heaving. She held up one hand.

“My game.” She wasn’t sure he understood.
“Jorie—”
Stars, the worry on his face  pulled at  her heart.  “Mine,” she  repeated,  her voice shaking. “They have
Tam.” She hoped to find Kip Rordan in the room too. Hoped her scanner was  malfunctioning and  just
not picking up his readings. “They want me. This is mine to do. Watch the Tresh female. Stun her again if
necessary.” She moved toward his bedroom door, knowing full well what lay behind it.
It was time. In fact, it was ten years overdue.
“Jorie—”
“No,” she  said  firmly, pointing to  the female on the floor.  “Watch  her.  We  need  her alive.” Then she
kicked in the door to Theo’s bedroom, her double-stack raised and ready.
Devastator Senior Agent Davin Prow  filled her sights, his angelic smile beaming from where  he stood
over Tamlynne Herryck, a restrainer field pinning her to the floor. Another  shield glistened around  him.
The readout  on her Hazer’s  tiny screen  showed  it to  be  a  Level-2  Defensive,  stronger  than  the  one
around Sem. Gritting her teeth, she checked fire—he was too close to Tam, the two fields intertwining. A
familiar Devastator maneuver, where an attack on the Tresh agent kills the hostage.
“Lieutenant—no,  forgive  me,  Commander  Mikkalah.”  Davin  Prow  gave  a  slight  nod  of  his  darkly
handsome, square-jawed face. “A pleasure to see you again.”
Jorie took  her eyes  off Prow—and  the small laser  pistol in his hand—only to  glance down  for a  few
seconds. Tam was alive. Bruised but alive. There was no sign of Rordan or  Trenat.  She  couldn’t  think
about them now. She had to concentrate on getting Tam out of here without getting them both killed by
Prow.
She’d done it before.
Though where’d they go—no, don’t think about that. Don’t think about the ship. Just get Tam and
get out alive.
“What do you want?” she asked him, her finger lightly on the trigger button of her rifle. Prow was a top
agent, but she doubted he could tell by looking at her Hazer that it had been modified and could punch
holes in damned near any shielding he erected—even an L-2, though it would take several shots. But until
he moved away from Tam, she was forced to hold back. “I’d say I’m flattered  you came  all this way,
after all this time, just because of me. But I very much doubt that’s why you’re here.”
“Judging from the tech  you’ve transported  down  to  this structure,  I’d  guess  you know  very well why
we’re here. Your being here, however, is the added honeyfroth on the pudding. It makes my mission that
much sweeter.”
She watched him, assessing him while he spoke. She’d always been fast with her pistol.  So  had  he.  It
had been ten years, but she was willing to bet his reflexes hadn’t slowed any more than hers had.
So why hadn’t he fired on her when she kicked in the door? She was unshielded. Then she saw why. His
pistol—a  newer  configuration of the powerful Slayer  6-1—would  create  too  much  backwash  if  fired
through a Level-2 personal defensive shield. He’d have to drop the L-2 to fire.
So he wasn’t here as an assassin, like Cordo Sem. He hadn’t drawn her in here to kill her. Yet.

Interesting.
“What do  you want?” she  repeated,  only then realizing they’d  been  conversing entirely in  Vekran—a
language the Tresh were rarely integrated for.
That told  her something else.  Prow  and  the Tresh  had  been  on this planet  for at  least  as  long  as  the
Guardians had, if not longer.
“You’re alone on this nil world. I’m sure that fact has come to your attention.”
Did you destroy my ship? The question was on the tip of her tongue, but she held back. Prow would lie,
or,  rather,  he’d  tell  her  whatever  would  make  her  easier  to  manipulate.  Which  was,  yes,  that  the
Sakanah was gone.
“I’ve worked solo or with a small team before.”
“They’re not coming back for you, Mikkalah.”
Because they flashed out or because you destroyed them? She shrugged. “Someone will. I can wait.
I’ve waited in worse places.” Like your prison compound.
“Waiting is a  waste  of your time and  considerable  talents.  Talents  we  recognize  and  could  use.”  He
smiled at her, and killfrost spun its way up the crevices of her spine. “I have an offer.”
“I’m not interested.”
“You haven’t heard it.”
“I don’t have to.”
He stepped to his left, his L-2 undulating as he moved. Jorie could hear Tam’s harsh, strained breathing.
Hang on, Tam. All Jorie needed was for him to take two more steps. One might even do. Her modified
Hazer packed one hell’s wrath of a punch he wouldn’t expect. Hopefully it would get to him before  he
had time to respond.
She could also use Theo’s bed between them for cover and, if Prow was still standing, her Hazer could
keep  him  away  from  Tam  while  she  set  off  another  earsplitter—all  that  Tresh  beauty  came  with  a
price—from the MOD-tech  behind him. Tech  he  hadn’t  destroyed  because  he  hadn’t  had  time?  Or
because he knew what she knew about the zombies? And he needed it like she did?
“Respectfully, I disagree,” he was saying. “You do need to listen.”
Respectfully? Jorie would have laughed out loud, but that would require her closing her eyes, however
briefly. She couldn’t do that.
“Your charm overwhelms me. Release my lieutenant. That might put me in a more blissful frame of mind.”
“I fear it’s a bit too late for that. And her.”
No, don’t look down. He wants you distracted.
She saw him tap a small band on his wrist. And she heard a corresponding thin, keening wail from Tam,
followed by a harsh panting. Then a short, very soft two-tone chime.
Bile rose in her stomach. She knew that sound. A Devastator restrainer implant recycling up to the next

power level. If her hands  had  been  free,  Jorie  knew  one  would already  be  clasping the scar  near  her
neck.
“Kill her and you’ll have nothing to bargain with,” she said harshly.
“Isn’t that like negotiate? Sorry, not in my vocabulary.” Prow touched his wrist.
Tam screamed.
“Stop it, Prow!”
“The memory never fades, does it? You know exactly what she’s going through.” He moved his fingers
to his wrist again as he stepped toward her. Away from Tam. “Are you ready to listen to me now?”
It was the only chance she had. She had to let him touch the implant signal. She had to pray that, in that
microsecond, he’d be focused on the implant, and  his reflexes with his pistol would be  just that  much
slower than hers.
Head shot. The rifle would lose a little after breaking through the shielding, but a head shot was her best
chance. She watched his fingers. Forgive me, Tamlynne. But it’s going to hurt for a little longer.
“Go to hell,” she told him through gritted teeth.
Prow’s shield suddenly flared bright red  and  he staggered  back,  body  twisting at  the waist,  iridescent
eyes wide in surprise.
Out of the corner of her eye Jorie recognized Theo, his large projectile weapon clutched in both hands.
Theo moving steadily toward her out of his bathroom doorway.
Prow stumbled, one hand now clutching his shoulder. Blood gushed between his fingers as if he’d been
stabbed. No, not stabbed—shot by Theo’s nil-tech pistol. How and why that was, she  had  no time to
consider. Prow raised his weapon.
Jorie darted sideways and fired, Hazer energy boring a  yellow ringed hole in the already  disintegrating
L-2 shield. Prow ducked, twisting again. Another loud crack from her left. Another red flare.
Prow screamed something into his transcomm, and before she could get him in her sights again, he was
gone.
The restrainer field around Tamlynne Herryck evaporated with his departure.
“Tam!” Jorie  dropped  to  her knees,  pressing  her hand  against  her  lieutenant’s  pale,  damp  face.  The
woman shivered, convulsions starting. There was no time to deal with them. The Tresh could be back at
any moment. She had to secure the structure.
“Theo—”
But he was already there beside her, on his knees.
“She’s going to convulse,” she told him quickly. “Keep her stable. Don’t let her hurt herself. I have to set
shields around your structure. Then I can help.”
She sprang to her feet, lunging for the row of tech along the wall. She pushed her mouth mike into place,
and with three  words  she  segued  her  scanner  to  the  larger  tech  units  and  continued  to  work  voice
commands while her fingers keyed in overrides.

Theo’s structure wasn’t large. She could lock it down for now. The Tresh  might eventually unscramble
her shielding, but it would buy her time. Time to get help for Tam. Time to search for Rordan.
“Grid One in place. Grid Two.” She spoke out loud, hoping Tam could hear her and would know what
her commander was doing, why she wasn’t at her side. “Grid Three. Holding, locking. Grid Four. Almost
there. Locking now. Grid Five. Synchronizing. Holding. Locking.” She took one last look at the security
pattern, checking for breaches. “We’re secure.”
She sucked in a long breath and pulled her hand away from the screen. It was shaking.
She turned  around.  Theo  had  wrapped  a  blanket  around  Tamlynne and  was  holding  her  head  back,
keeping her airway clear. He glanced at her.
“The Tresh can’t beam back in?”
“Not now,” Jorie said, crouching down beside them, scanner out.  She  picked  up the resonance  of the
unit Prow  had  injected  in Tam almost immediately. “He put an implant in her,”  she  told  Theo  as  the
scanner searched through hundreds of combinations to find the right code to neutralize the implant. “Like
yours. Except—”
“Much worse.”
“Much.” A series of numbers fell into line, then vanished.  No.  Close,  but not the code.  Vomit-brained
whore spawns!
“You had an implant,” Theo said. “A Tresh one—not one like mine.”
She pulled her attention from the screen and looked at him. He must have heard  her conversation  with
Prow while he was in his bathroom. How had  he gotten  in there?  And how had  he destroyed  an L-2
shield? Questions she needed answered—later. “I was taken prisoner by the Tresh during the war. They
put an implant in me, yes.”
He just nodded, his eyes darkening with emotion.
She went back to her screen. She didn’t want his pity.
More  numbers  lined  up.  She  held  her  breath.  Could  it  be…?  Yes.  Yes.  The  implant’s  power  field
dropped  down  three  levels. Tam’s shuddering halted,  and  her cries  of anguish were  replaced  by  soft
moans. Jorie couldn’t shut down the Tresh restrainer completely. But she  could  at  least  make  the pain
somewhat bearable, until a med-tech…
“Will she be okay?” Theo touched Jorie’s arm.
“I…For  now.” There  were  no Guardian med-techs  here.  And,  depending  on what kind of signal  she
could rig from whatever tech remained, it could be months, even a  year,  before  a  Guardian ship could
find them. Damn you, Prow!
“What’s wrong?” Theo asked softly.
Damn you, Petrakos, she wanted to say. Sometimes I swear you read my mind.
“Can you put her on the bed? If she’s warm and she sleeps, it will be better.”
Theo lifted Tam gently, Jorie unwrapping the blanket as he did so. Then she tucked it around Tam again
as Theo pushed a pillow under the lieutenant’s curls. Tam whimpered, but exhaustion and pain took  its

toll. Her eyes fluttered closed.
Jorie ran through the codes two more times but found nothing better. She put her scanner on the bedside
table. Its signal would block the implant as best it could until she could rig a dedicated unit out of what
was left of the tech in the spare room.
“It’s still hurting her.” It wasn’t a question. Theo seemed to know Jorie couldn’t shut down the implant.
“That’s not the only problem.” She  ran both  hands  through her hair, her muscles suddenly taught with
anger.  “It  will  kill  her.  Two,  three  days.  If  we  don’t  disengage  it,  it  will  kill  her.  And  the  ship,  my
med-techs, aren’t here to help. Damn it!” She spun away from him, from Tam lying helpless in the wide
bed, and headed for the hall, chest tight, eyes blurring.
Theo caught up with her at the doorway, one arm circling her waist, the other around her back, gathering
her and her rifle against him, hard. For a moment she stiffened, wanting to pull away, but she didn’t. She
couldn’t. Theo’s face—that very good face—was in her hair. He whispered her name, telling her, “Hush,
it will be all right.”
It would not be all right. Her ship was gone. The Tresh were here. The zombies were in Tresh control.
She was stuck on a nil world. Her top lieutenant and close friend was dying. And she had no idea if Kip
and Jacare were even alive.
So  she  clung to  Theo,  her good  friend Theo,  just for a  moment. Clung to  his reassuring  warmth  and
hard-muscled strength and closed her eyes, tucking her face against his neck.
It would not be all right. But at least for the next few moments, she was not alone.
“Hush, Jorie.”
She raised her face. “I have more problems. And work to do.”
He brought his hands to rest on her shoulders. “We have work to do. And we’ll solve these  problems
together.  But first,” and  he grinned sheepishly, “I have to  rescue  my  laser  pistol.  It,  uh,  got  wedged
behind the toilet when I climbed through the bathroom window to try to sneak up on Prow.”
“You climbed through…?” Jorie  shook  her head  distractedly  at  his embarrassment  and  at  the  mental
picture of Theo’s large form squeezing through the small opening. “Why didn’t you use the Tresh rifle?” It
was still draped across his chest.
“I’ve never shot it.”
She’d forgotten, again, that he was a nil. “I’ll show you later,” she said, and stepped into the hallway, her
mind already sorting through plans, options. A bit of bliss luck: they’d acquired two more weapons. But
their locale was her immediate concern. Theo’s residence was small enough; she might be able to set the
shields in a randomizer pattern that would baffle the Tresh for a good long while. That would provide her
with a secure base of operations but would also limit her movements.
A lot also depended on how large a base the Tresh had here. They must have more than that house she’d
found. Obviously the Guardians had underestimated them. Interrogating the Tresh female could—
She stopped in the main room. The female wasn’t on the floor. Hell’s wrath! She flipped the Hazer back
to stun, turning quickly. “Petrakos!”
Quick footsteps from the hall behind her. “Here. What—”

Jorie glanced over her shoulder at him. “Where is she?”
“She?” He had his G-1 out now. “Fuck.”
Jorie understood the emotion behind the word if not the meaning.
Theo crossed the room and stopped at the galley doorway,  his weapon  angled against his chest.  Jorie
sprinted behind him, listening for the same thing he was: a Tresh female, waiting for them.
She heard nothing. She checked the readout on her Hazer, looking for the possible resonance of an L-1
or L-2 shield—the best she could hope for without her weapon pointed at a target. Nothing again. She
signaled her lack of information to  Theo  with a  shake  of her head  and  a  slight shrug, then flipped her
oc-set into place.
“On three.” His voice was barely above a whisper. “One. Two—”
He swept into the galley, moving right. She followed, going left. The galley was empty. They both  spun
slowly around one more time, then lowered their weapons.
“Shit,” Theo  said  through tight lips. Jorie  held back  from  pointing  out  that  while  a  spoor  trail  would
certainly be helpful in finding the female, the Tresh didn’t routinely leave behind excrement in their wakes.
She’d begun to figure out that references to deities, excrement, and certain other bodily functions, when
uttered in anger, were a sign of intense displeasure on this world.
“Let’s recheck the house.” Theo pushed past her, out of the galley. Jorie hurried after him. Five minutes
later they were in the galley again.
Theo leaned  against the  counter  next  to  the  water  dispenser  and  shook  his  head.  “My  fault.  I  take
responsibility.  She  was  out  cold.  I  even  cuffed  her.”  His  eyes  narrowed.  “Bitch  has  my  best  cuffs.
Unless…”
He was reaching for the door to go outside when Jorie grabbed his arm.
“Don’t! Your structure’s shielded.”
He shot her a puzzled look, brow furrowing slightly. She stepped in front of him and pulled at the door.
“Here.” She took his wrist and  brushed  the back  of his hand against the faint haze visible through the
ocular over her right eye.
He jerked back with a short yelp. An alarm wailed briefly from the bedroom, then silenced. “That could
be a problem if one of my neighbors comes over unexpectedly. Is there any way we could set it to only
zap the Tresh?”
“No,  but  I  can  reset  the  security  perimeter  to  within  your  structure’s  wall.  Or  only  around  specific
rooms,” Jorie told him, again damning the fact she had to operate in a nil environment and not a military
one. “But then you’ll have to be more careful.” He didn’t have an ocular and couldn’t see the shield as
she could.
Theo gingerly pushed  the door  closed.  “I can  deal  with  that  better  than  I  can  deal  with  an  innocent
neighbor getting fried. Besides, if that Tresh woman does come back in, she’s not going to be much of a
threat with her hands cuffed behind her back.”
Jorie sagged back against the galley table, perching one hip on its edge.  “I don’t  think she’s  out there.
Sem’s body is gone. The Tresh must have transported them while I was confronting Prow.” And before

she’d locked the structure down in a grid shield. Damn! Hell and damn. Eight years of hunting zombies
with the Guardians and she’d gone soft on tactics against the Tresh.
Theo had been staring out the door’s viewport. He turned to her. “Tell me about Prow and the other two
Tresh.”
“They’re Tresh Devastators. An elite force. You understand—”
“Elite. Yes. Just go on. If I don’t understand something, I’ll ask.”
Both their language skills had improved. One less thing to have to compensate for.
“I only recognized  the two  males: Cordo  Sem,  the one  we  terminated  in the main  room.  And  Prow.
Davin Prow. He’s Sem’s superior, or was. I have no reason to think that’s changed. Their presence tells
me  this  is  a  very  serious  operation.  It  also  tells  me  they’re  close  to  completion  or  the  Devastators
wouldn’t be here. They’re not an advance team. You noticed Prow spoke Vekran?”
“I heard him speak English, yeah. No offense, but he has no accent. I understood him better  than I do
you.”
“He’s integrated—the Devastators can do that.”
“Integrated?”
Yes, of course, was on the tip of her tongue, but she stopped. The way Theo moved, the way he handled
weapons, the way he almost unconsciously seemed to pick up on what needed  to  be  done  kept  lulling
her into a false sense of who and what he was. A male from a nil planet who knew nothing of the past
several hundred years in the Chalvash System,  who’d  never  heard  of the council or  the Tresh  Border
Wars.
She sought the words she needed in Vekran, then simplified them as  best  she  could.  “It’s  like another
kind of implant, but one that enhances his brain’s natural abilities. A Tresh agent qualifies for this implant
when he reaches Devastator status.”
“A built-in translator?”
“Yes. Among other functions.”
“Like?” he prompted.
She shrugged. The variations were so vast. “It depends on the parameters of the original bioprofile.”
A slight drawing down of dark brows. “You’re telling me the Tresh are biologically engineered?”
Ah!  “You  have  that  technology  here,  then?”  There’d  been  nothing  on  that  in  Danjay’s  reports.  But
perhaps Theo’s security status afforded him access to that information.
“Rudimentary. Cloning of farm animals, that kind of thing. But it’s not common. And it’s never used with
people. Humans.”
“It’s  very  common  in  most  technologically  advanced  systems.  To  the  Tresh  it’s—how  is  it  said  on
Vekris?—the highest art.”
Theo nodded slowly. “They’re all perfect. By deliberate design.”

“Devastators most of all. If there’s a lack—as in linguistic abilities—it’s augmented biomechanically.” She
watched his face. He was still nodding.
“Got it,” he said after a moment. “So  these  Devastators  came  here  already  programmed  to  speak  my
language.”
No, he hadn’t quite acquired knowledge, and she told him so.  “Programmed  to  learn your culture and
your language—which is very similar to Vekran, as you know—at a faster rate. From his fluency I’d say
he’s been here longer than Danjay was. Which now also makes me question the zombie attack that killed
him.” Something hovered at the edges of her mind again. She  tried  to  focus and  articulate  it. “It didn’t
seem right somehow. Danjay wasn’t stupid. We flew together. He was my gunner and—”
And Prow knew that as well. Prow had had the files on her entire squadron and had taken great pride in
showing them to her. And had no doubt integrated them into his memory.
“And?” Theo prompted.
“And Prow knew that if I was on the Sakanah, Danjay’s death would bring me dirtside.” She’d been so
blind, so very blind. Like everyone  else,  she  viewed the Tresh  problem  as  solved.  What  else  had  she
missed?
“You mean you specifically? Or the Guardians?”
“We’ve been here for almost four of your months. The Tresh could have called their ships in to confront
us at  any point.” And they hadn’t.  Another  puzzle. “But Danjay’s  death…”  She  shook  her head,  her
mind still sorting through everything. “I think that was aimed at me specifically.” She  looked  up at  him,
wondering how he’d perceive her when she told him why. Yes, he was in his planet’s security force. But
he’d explained that his duties were protection. She’d been an assassin. “I killed Prow’s brother.”
“Because of your war—”
“Nikah Prow wasn’t a Devastator. He was a med-tech who designed the restrainer  implants the Tresh
use. It was happenstance my team came across him during a raid on a Tresh station. We were after their
data. We had no indication he would be in the lab complex. I made the decision to take him with us. That
was my error.  It  cost  us time to  subdue  him. The Devastator  team almost caught us.  So  I  needed  a
diversion and decided he was it. I put him—bound—into an airlock and rigged a small explosive to the
outer hatch. I knew his brother would stop to rescue him. They were”—Jorie put her index fingers side
by side—“twins.”
“Go on.”
“I knew his brother would try to rescue him. I knew about how long it would take for them to open the
door we’d jammed. At six seconds to go, I blew the outer hatch and spaced him.” She watched Theo’s
face and  then,  when she  saw  little change,  remembered  where  she  was.  His people  might have more
technological experience than she’d first surmised,  but Theo  most likely had  no direct  experience  with
what happens to a live body when it’s sucked into the vacuum of deep space.
“It is,” she continued, “a very horrible way to die. A horrible thing to witness. I’m not proud  of what I
did. But it bought us time. And…” She closed  her eyes  briefly. “And I kept  thinking of all my people
who’d been tortured by the device  he’d  perfected.  I was  angry. I wanted  him to  suffer. I wanted  his
brother to suffer.”
“That saved the lives of your team, allowed you to escape.”

“We would have escaped anyway. Using Nikah Prow as a diversion gave us the time we needed. I had
no reason to space him other than”—she drew a short breath—“other than I wanted to.”
“Was this before or after his brother took you prisoner?”
“Before.”
“And he didn’t try to kill you for that?”
A faint smile twisted her lips. “Personally, Davin hates me for killing Nikah. But he’s a Tresh Devastator.
Professionally, he appreciates a job well done.”
Theo was silent for a long moment. “And now he wants you to work with him.”
“Believe nothing a Tresh says, unless it’s ‘I’m going to kill you.’” She shoved herself away from the table.
The condemnation she’d halfway expected to hear from Theo over her actions hadn’t materialized. That
made her feel marginally better, but she still wasn’t sure he fully understood what she’d done. Though he
seemed to grasp why. “I have to check on Tamlynne.”
“Jorie.” His voice stopped her in the doorway.  She  turned,  expecting a  question  about  Nikah  Prow’s
death. “Your ship’s gone. All we have is you and Tammy. If you accept  his offer,  will that  protect  my
city, my world?”
His words jolted her. She stared at him hard, part of her recognizing it was merely a question. He was a
nil. Security trained or not, he didn’t know. But another part of her wanted to lunge at him and plant her
fist in his face.
She could face his condemnation for being an assassin. She could not live with being a traitor.
She flexed her right hand. “I have to check on Tamlynne. And reset  the shields.” She  spun away  from
him and this time ignored the sound of her name—and the pain in her heart.
 
16 
The shields were easy to reset within the structure’s walls, taking less than five minutes of her time. But
the  scanner  hadn’t  been  able  to  devise  a  better  combination,  even  after  twenty  minutes  of  intense
concentration  on  Jorie’s  part.  The  implant  in  Tamlynne’s  shoulder  still  pulsed  pain—with  spikes  of
death—into her system.
Tamlynne’s eyelids fluttered briefly, then closed again, when Jorie lay her hand on Tam’s forehead. Sleep
was a good escape. But eventually even sleep would fail to provide respite.
Jorie sat on the edge  of the bed,  fighting waves  of exhaustion and  frustration.  Right now she’d  gladly
trade all her weapons for a med-tech’s JS-6-4. Then she’d have a chance of removing the unit. She was
wondering if she could somehow modify her scanner into even a basic JS-6-1, when Theo appeared in
the doorway.
“I had to ask about Prow’s offer,” he said, coming to stand beside her. “I have to explore all options.”
Jorie adjusted the blanket around Tamlynne without looking at him. She didn’t know what she’d see on
his face—suspicion?  Dismay? Or  perhaps  neither,  just  a  basic  devotion  to  duty,  something  she  was

supposed to understand. Most times she did, except when it came to Theo Petrakos. Being with him set
off a chain of unsettling emotions she did not want to—could not—deal with at the moment. “I cannot
make decisions for you or your people, Petrakos. Perhaps that best be said now. But the Tresh are not
and will never be an option for me or any Guardian.”
Tam uttered a soft moan, then shivered. Jorie’s throat tightened. She’d lost team members  before.  She
didn’t know a Guardian—or a marine—who hadn’t. But there was something different about dying in the
heat of battle, leaving this existence kicking and screaming, and succumbing slowly, helplessly, to pulses
of unending pain.
And something was even worse about losing Tam after just losing Danjay. She was still trying to process
his  death,  going  over  and  over  in  her  mind  if  she’d  done  something  wrong.  Or  if  she  hadn’t  done
something that might have kept him alive.
And then there was Kip Rordan. What limited scans she could perform gave no hints of his whereabouts
or his fate.
“What are the Tresh doing here?” Theo’s question brought her out of her dark ruminations.
“Prow didn’t share that information with me. I can only guess.”
“Then guess.” Theo’s voice was insistent. “It’s crunch time, Jorie. Do or die.”
She did look at him this time and saw the intensity in his dark eyes, the taut line of his mouth. “I need data
in order to formulate my guesses.”
She  stepped  away  from  Tam’s  still  form  on  the  bed,  then  hunkered  down  in  front  of  her  array  of
MOD-tech on the floor. She pulled up her mouth mike and spoke soft commands in Alarsh. Data rose
and merged, scenarios and probabilities appeared. Her tech continued to  pick  up energy streams  even
after the Tresh had destroyed the main units in the other room. Why Prow had left these untouched…
It may have been simply that their return interrupted his plans. Or it might be something else.
She went back  to  her  data,  peripherally  aware  of  Theo  prowling  about  his  structure—but  evidently
remembering her warning  about  the  structure’s  shielding,  because  she  heard  no  curse-filled  yelps  or
jangling alarms. Which was just as well. She didn’t want to think about Sergeant Theo Petrakos, because
when she thought about him, she felt things. And she couldn’t afford that luxury now. Her worries about
her ship, about Tam, Kip, and Jacare could overwhelm her if she let them. Her disappointment in Theo
Petrakos—If you accept his offer, will that protect my city, my world?—threatened to choke her.
For no reason! He was a nil, a damned nil. Nothing more.
Except…
A soft nudge against her arm. Th—Petrakos with a glass of ice water. “You want something to eat? It’s
almost seven. Dinnertime.”
She accepted the water and sipped at it.
Then her scanner emitted three strident tones.
She dropped  the water  glass,  aware  of its thud against the floor,  aware  of the slosh of  the  precious,
invaluable liquid against her skin. She didn’t care. The harsh tones signaled a medical emergency.

Tamlynne Herryck had stopped breathing.
Jorie shot  to  her feet,  heart  pounding,  and  was  at  Tam’s  side  in  three  long  steps.  She  grabbed  her
scanner, saw the ineffectual codes, and damned the fact she had no functional med-kit  in the structure.
Her skin chilled in spite of the anger welling up inside her as she worked frantically to reset the codes and
block the implant.
“What’s the matter?” Theo clasped her shoulder.
“Respiratory failure! And this unit won’t—”
Theo shoved  her aside  and  grasped  Tamlynne’s face,  one  hand over  her lieutenant’s nose,  his mouth
covering hers, forcing his breath….
Manual resuscitation.  It  was  such an antiquated  method  that  it took  Jorie  a  few  shocked  seconds  to
process what she was seeing. She’d seen teachtapes of the method but never used it. With med-’droids
or med-techs everywhere—even during the war—there’d been no need.
Until now.
She prayed it worked. She tore her gaze away from Theo breathing life into Tamlynne and concentrated
again  on  the  scanner.  She  had  to  weaken  the  implant,  decrease  its  output.  The  jamming  codes  the
scanner  had  produced  weren’t  sufficient. She  needed  a  damned  JS-unit.  Unless  she  could  somehow
bypass the units codes altogether and—
“Keep her alive!” she rasped at Theo, and lunged back at her tech stacked along the wall. There had to
be something in the emergency datafiles, even though this was all Guardian tech—Guardians  who were
concerned  only with destroying  the zombies.  Not  with confronting the Tresh.  If she  could  access  the
ship…
But she  couldn’t.  She  barked  search  terms  into her mouth mike, barely  waiting for the results  of one
query to appear before demanding the next. Ten, twelve years ago she’d have had this information at her
fingertips. But she was no longer in the marines, with intelligence data on the Tresh coming in daily.
If she didn’t find those Tresh overrides, Tamlynne would die.
“She’s breathing on her own.” Theo sounded hoarse but elated.
Jorie glanced at him over her shoulder, relief rising, then waning. “It won’t last. This is the first of many
attacks. It just happened sooner than I expected.”
Theo dropped down on the edge of the bed, hands against his thighs, head slightly bowed. His shoulders
sagged, then he turned and seemed to study Tam’s still form. Jorie shared his frustration. The anger—and
helplessness—inside her seethed so virulently, she felt that if a zombie were to appear in the room right
now, she was perfectly capable of tearing the thing apart with her bare hands.
But that wouldn’t help Tamlynne.
“I thought that buffered the pain,” he said, turning back and pointing to her scanner on the bedside table.
“Only temporarily. I told you—”
“Yeah. It will kill her.” He wiped one hand over his face. “So what do we do?”
“I’m trying to find override codes. The Guardians were never involved in the war with the Tresh.  They

don’t archive data on them like the Kedrian Marines do. If the ship were here, I could access its library
or link to the military libraries at Central Command. But—”
“Can we remove the implant?”
“Remove?”
“Your med-tech put one inside me. How does it come out?”
“With a JS-Six-Four,” and as she said it she knew that meant nothing to him. “It’s essentially a miniature
PMaT. I don’t have one.”
“How about surgically?” Theo made a cutting motion with his hand down his shoulder.
“The JS-Six-Four is used in surgery.”
“No. With a knife. Or your laser on low power.”
Jorie stared  at  him, grotesque  barbaric  visions of sliced flesh oozing blood  coming to  her  mind.  “We
haven’t used those methods in hundreds of years. I wouldn’t even know how—”
“I know  someone  who does.  It’s  the way things are  done  here  all the time. She’s  a  doctor.  And  an
EMT—an emergency medical technician. The wife—she’s spoused to Zeke Martinez.”
“A nil?”
“A doctor.”
“Theo, to involve a nil med-tech would reveal our presence—”
“Damn it, Jorie!” He shot to his feet, hands fisted at his sides. “If you don’t get that thing out of Tammy’s
shoulder, she’s going to die. Is that what you want?”
A soft, pained whimper came from the bed behind Theo.
Jorie closed her eyes for a moment, her training and all the platitudes  about  a  Guardian’s  duty warring
inside her, battling against what she knew she had to do.
“No.” Jorie rose and faced Theo. Captain  Pietr  and  the entire council could  strip  her of her rank  one
hundred times over for violating gen-pro regulations if they wanted to. If it came to that, she would face
them. She would accept their punishment, their censure.
She’d already lost Danjay. But she was not going to let her lieutenant die.
 
Theo punched  in Zeke  Martinez’s  cell-phone  number as  he trotted  down  the  street  toward  the  park
where he and Jorie had left his SUV. Twilight was edging into night, the air cooling but still warm for late
December in Florida. He tried to remember if Zeke and Suzanne went to her sister’s for Christmas Eve
dinner. Maybe it was New Year’s. All he did know was this was a bad time to call and ask for a favor.
He had no choice. And it wasn’t just Tammy’s condition that forced him to take action. It was that Jorie
was alone on this mission. He wasn’t going to have her lose her life too, for his world.
Not if there were options. He felt there were.

He put the cell phone to his ear and waited for Zeke to answer.
It didn’t take long—third ring. With caller ID, Zeke already knew who was calling.
“Yassou, amigo. What you got?” Zeke asked, mixing the Greek word for hello with Spanish.
“Unofficial business. You and Suzanne with family or something?”
“Business? Man, it’s Christmas Eve. You’re supposed to be on vacation.”
“Unofficial, Zeke. And it’s actually Suzanne I need.” Theo could hear voices, laughter, and the clatter of
dishes in the background. “You at her sister’s?”
“The neighbors’. You were invited, if you remember.”
He did now. Zeke had mentioned it last week. Before  Liza Walters  offered  her cousin Bonnie to  him.
Before his one-woman war machine came into his life and turned everything upside down.
“So what do you got, a sick cat? You don’t even own a cat, Theo.”
Suzanne’s voice was faint but audible: “People don’t own cats, cats own people.”
“Suzanne says—”
“Yeah, I heard  her.  Listen, when will you two  be  freed  up?  You know  I wouldn’t ask  unless  it  was
important.”
“We haven’t even had dessert yet—ow!”
Theo could envision Suzanne smacking Zeke on the arm. He’d seen her do  it enough times. Especially
when he heard, “Zeke, ask Theo what he needs.”
“I need Suzanne to meet me at her clinic as soon as she can,” Theo said, before Zeke could repeat his
wife’s instructions. And because Jorie couldn’t unequivocally discount  that  the Tresh  might track—and
respond to—the implant’s removal: “I need you to bring your Glock and rifle, and it’s probably not a bad
idea to wear your vest.”
“My—what do you got, some kind of wild dog? Sure you shouldn’t be calling animal control?”
“No wild dogs. No cats either.” Theo  searched  for the right words  to  at  least  alert  Suzanne she’d  be
dealing with a human, utilizing her EMT skills as well as her veterinary ones. “I’ve got an illegal military
operative with a time bomb in her shoulder.”
“A spook?” Zeke dropped his voice to a harsh rasp. “CIA?”
“Something like that.”  He’d  reached  his car,  blessedly  still where  they’d  left it. It  beeped  twice as  he
unlocked it with the remote. “I need to keep this totally below the radar. When can you break free?”
“Sure you’re sober?”
“Completely.” Though when this was  all over,  a  three-day  binge might be  a  great  idea.  If he had  any
vacation time left.
“Hang on.”
Theo slid in and started the engine, then backed out of the tree-shaded space.

He shifted to drive and Zeke came back on. “Forty-five minutes okay for you? Quarter to eight?”
“Quarter to eight is great. And thanks, Zeke. I really mean this. I didn’t want to get you two involved, but
our backs are against the wall here.”
“Our? Wait. This operative. Is that the gal I met? Jorie?”
Theo hesitated.  “She’s  one  of them,” he admitted  as  he pulled down  his driveway.  “But  not  the  one
who’s injured.”
“There are more?”
“I’ll explain when I see you.” He flipped the cell phone closed, climbed out of the SUV, and locked  it.
Jorie nudged open  the back  door—she  must have turned  off those  sizzle shields. When he pulled the
door shut behind him, she was busy making peanut butter and grape jelly sandwiches. She stopped just
long enough to tap at her scanner. Shields back on, he assumed,  as  he grabbed  a  can  of orange  soda
from the fridge. Jorie  had  her usual glass of water.  Helluva Christmas  Eve dinner. No  vasilopita,  no
lucky coin. But they had to eat something. He couldn’t remember the last time he had  a  real  meal. He
didn’t know when they’d get the next chance to eat one.
“We leave in fifteen minutes,” he told her, snagging half a sandwich from the plate as they stood together
at the kitchen counter near the sink. That gave them plenty of time. It would take, max, twenty minutes to
get to Suzanne’s veterinary clinic. Less if he ran Code 3.
“You remember what you thought when you were on the Sakanah? When you understood exactly who
the Guardians were, why we were here?”
He bit into the sandwich, nodded, swallowed. “Yeah, I know—”
“Revealing our  existence  never  goes  well with nils. I accept  this is necessary  to  save  Tam’s  life.  I’m
grateful. But you need to be prepared. This will not be a blissful experience, Theo.”
That, he mused, finishing off the rest of the PB&J, was probably the understatement of the century. But at
least  she  was  calling  him  Theo  again.  He  took  another  swig  of  soda,  then  reached  for  his  second
sandwich half. “Zeke and I go back a long time. He trusts me. I trust him.” He wondered for a moment
how Jorie would react when she found out Suzanne was primarily an animal doctor,  not a  people  one,
her years as an EMT notwithstanding. He shrugged it off as the least of his worries.
Right now it was more important that he and Jorie start working as a true team. “Tell me what guesses
you’ve been able to come up with about the Tresh’s presence here.”
She stared past him for a moment, and he was aware of the shadows under her eyes. And he was aware,
once again, of what Commander Jorie Mikkalah had to be feeling, facing. When that Tresh agent, Prow,
had pointed  out how alone she  was,  she’d  said—with a  chin-raised  confidence  Theo  tagged  as  pure
Jorie—that someone would be back for her.
But pure Jorie, Theo had learned, didn’t always tell the truth. And he doubted  she’d  tell a  Tresh  how
frightened she was.
He didn’t know if the Guardians  would come  back  for Jorie.  He  didn’t think Jorie  knew  that  answer
either.
She turned to him. “Once  I factored  in the Tresh  presence  here  and  factored  in what I know  they’re
capable  of,  it all became  clear.  Or  more  clear.”  She  shook  her head  slightly.  “One  never  completely

knows with the Tresh.  But my best  guess,  and  I think you can  take  that  as  almost a  certainty,  is that
they’ve been using your world as a breeding ground for an altered zombie. A more perfect one.”
“Like the Tresh themselves,” he put in. And then, because he’d been a cop too long and making light of a
serious situation was second nature to him, he added, “Are they at least going to make them prettier?”
She shot him a narrow-eyed look, mouth pursed.
He held up both hands, one of which contained his half-eaten sandwich. “Guilty as charged. Go on.”
“I originally thought they might have acquired  the code.  Now  I think they’ve programmed  around  it.
Bypassed  it  somehow.  My  tech”—she  waved  one  hand  toward  his  bedroom,  where  Tammy  lay
asleep—“picked up duplicates of everything Lorik  transmitted  while we  were  out.  It  didn’t appear  he
knew what he was  looking at  but sent  it for my input because  he recognized—finally!—that he might
have been wrong in his primary assessment. His report didn’t state the Tresh were involved. But he did
agree that someone was tampering with the zombies. He delineated some tests to run on the next zombie
we encountered. Lorik always has to be more than one hundred percent sure on everything,” she added,
almost as much to herself as to him.
Theo pushed away his unease at the fact that Lorik no longer appeared to be on Jorie’s shit list. “Why do
the Tresh need a more perfect zombie?”
“Not perfect so much as obedient only to them. And this is a guess. But it’s one I’m fairly certain of, one
I’ve told you before: to control the Hatches—our ships’ gateways through space.”
He remembered that. The zombies had been built to maintain and guard the Hatches and check incoming
ships  for  potentially  deadly  infections.  Then  something  had  gone  terribly  wrong,  turning  them  rogue,
wreaking havoc on various planets. It all had meant little to him the first time she’d explained it—was it
only yesterday? Now it was all too real. And personal. The Tresh were using his world. And they would,
if they could, kill his Jorie in order to keep on doing so.
“How do we stop them?” He  put the empty plate  in the dishwasher.  It  was  almost time to  bundle up
Tammy and put her in the SUV’s backseat, along with whatever other gizmos Jorie decided they’d need.
“We can’t stop the Tresh. Even with your friend Zeke Martinez…even with your full security force.” She
let out a short breath, then raked one hand through her hair. “Our  only choice  is to  stop  the zombies.
Destroy any chance the Tresh have of altering them for their use.”
“All of them?” Last he asked her, she said there were over three hundred. Theo didn’t know how many
more parks  he could  close  under  the guise of a  wandering rabid  raccoon  just so  they  could  turn  the
zombies into fooshing green circles.
“That’s what the Tresh would expect a Guardian to do: terminate the herd, starting with the juveniles. It’s
standard Guardian procedure. And that’s exactly why we won’t do that.”
“Then what—”
“We must locate  and  terminate  the  C-Prime—who  will  be  heavily  guarded  by  the  juveniles  and  the
mature drones.” Jorie shoved herself away from the counter. “If Lorik’s last summations are correct, we
only have one replication cycle—roughly six of your days—in order to do so. Or else  the mutation the
Tresh have programmed  will progress  to  the next generation.  Six days  after  that,  the  next.  Once  the
hatchlings are  out,  nothing short  of a  full Guardian attack  force  will be  able  to  stop  them. And  that’s
something we no longer have.”

He followed her back to his bedroom in silence, his mind working over the import of her words. Then,
while  she  gently  woke  Tammy  and  prepped  her  for  the  ride  to  the  clinic,  he  grabbed  his  tac  vest,
heavy-duty  boots,  sweatshirt,  and  his ankle-holstered  backup  gun,  and  ducked  into  his  bathroom  to
change.
 
Theo waited for something to go radically wrong—in keeping with everything else that had happened so
far—on the drive to Suzanne Martinez’s veterinary clinic, with Tammy lying on the backseat  and  Jorie
talking softly to her in her own language. But other than his aunt Tootie calling on his cell phone, sounding
forlorn that he was  working and  might not make  Christmas  dinner tomorrow,  the twenty-minute drive
was uneventful. No  Tresh  zoomed  by in X-wing fighters, firing  starburst  lasers  at  them.  No  zombies
materialized in the intersection, slashing at the overhead traffic lights.
Traffic was sparse. He didn’t have to hit his lights or siren once.
That gave him too much time to think and only made his nerves worse when he pulled around the back of
the L-shaped white stucco clinic and saw Zeke’s unmarked Crown  Vic in the parking spot  marked  D
OCTOR S. MARTINEZ. Lights shining through the low palm trees shading the clinic’s rear  windows  told
him his friends were inside and waiting.
Well, here we go.
He had no idea how Zeke would react to the news that outer-space aliens resided in Bahia Vista. No, he
did. Every cop on patrol had had more than his or her share of Signal 20s who claimed to be the galactic
emperor from Alpha Centauri or who believed that FBI agents lived in his refrigerator and Martians were
camped  out  in  his  attic—which  was  the  reason  for  lining  his  baseball  cap  and  his  underwear  with
aluminum foil.
And shooting BB pellets at the neighbors.
All Theo had were Jorie, her gizmos, and his Paroo cube. The latter of which, he realized as he put the
SUV into park, wasn’t all that much unlike one of those high-tech toys found in a Sharper Image catalog.
Or on eBay.
But helping Tammy was his main priority right now. Let Suzanne get that damned thing out of Tammy’s
shoulder—he’d talk to her later about the one in his. Let Tammy be, if not overly mobile, at least able to
work with Jorie on the zombie problem verbally.
Maybe that would take some of the pinched look out of Jorie’s golden-hued eyes. God  knew  she  had
enough to worry about.
So did he. Zeke was going to Baker-Act him for sure.
“How’s she doing?” he asked over his shoulder as he turned off the engine. Jorie had spent the entire trip
on the floor wedged between  the front and  rear  seats,  her scanner  gizmo doing whatever  her scanner
gizmo did to keep Tammy alive and as pain-free as possible.
“I be…okay.” Tammy’s voice was strained, weak.
He looked at Jorie. She was shaking her head. “No change.”
“Wait until I come around to help you with her.”

The back door of the clinic swung open when Theo’s boots hit the ground, the muffled sounds of dogs
barking  flowing  out.  The  separate  kennel  wing—rebuilt  to  hurricane-proof  specifications  two  years
ago—was off to the right but attached to the main clinic a few feet from the back door. Zeke appeared in
the doorway, silhouetted by the light behind him, rifle in one hand.
“Does Suzanne have a stretcher, a gurney?” Theo called out.
Zeke ducked back inside and reappeared moments later, pushing a gurney.
Tammy tried to sit up. Jorie moved up on the seat behind her and held her upright until Theo could slip
his arms under her legs and around her back. He placed her carefully on the gurney.
“Ay, madre mia, so young,” Zeke  said  as  he secured  the straps  around  Tammy’s body.  She  tried  to
smile, but then her eyes fluttered closed.
Theo had no idea how old Tammy was.  He  had  no idea  how old Jorie  was.  So  he only nodded  and
stepped back, letting Jorie go ahead of him inside.
The barking became louder, a cat meowed, the sounds filtering through the metal crash-barred door that
led to the kennel wing.
“Theo!” Suzanne Martinez, in powder-blue scrubs dotted with frolicking kittens and puppies, hurried to
his side and brushed a quick kiss across his cheek. She  was  a  stocky—pleasingly  plump, Aunt Tootie
often said—brunette with a heart-shaped face and upturned nose. Her long hair was pulled back into a
ponytail and tied with a gold bow—incongruous with her outfit and obviously a remnant of their aborted
evening plans. Theo again felt a pang of regret for taking them away from their party—and quite possibly
risking their lives. But not only had he not known what else to do, he truly felt this was the best thing to
do.
He heard Zeke lock the door behind them.
Suzanne was already stroking the hair out of Tammy’s face.  “Hi. I’m Suzanne Martinez.” She  looked
back up at Theo. “Zeke said she has something in her shoulder? Shrapnel?”
“A  small  device.  Like  a  microchip,  I  think.  Jorie  can—Jorie.”  He  touched  Jorie’s  arm,  taking  her
attention from Tammy. She’d  been  hovering over  her lieutenant like a  nervous  mother hen ever  since
they’d arrived. He’d probably be the same way if he was in a hospital with Zeke  on the gurney. “You
remember Zeke Martinez? This is Suzanne, his wife. Doctor Suzanne Martinez.”
Suzanne nodded. “I hope Theo told you—”
Theo  held  up  one  hand,  halting  Suzanne’s  words  and  explanation,  he  believed,  of  her  status  as  a
veterinarian. “Suzanne, this is Commander Jorie Mikkalah.”
“Commander?” That from Zeke, now standing next to his wife.
“And this young lady?” Suzanne asked, looking back down at Tammy.
“Lieutenant Tamlynne Herryck,” Jorie supplied.
“I be…okay,” Tammy said softly.
Jorie patted her hand, said something Theo couldn’t understand. Tammy closed her eyes again.
“Is she in immediate danger?” Suzanne asked.

“She had a small seizure about an hour ago, but she’s stable right now,” Theo said.
Suzanne looked troubled. “I assume there’s a valid reason you brought her here instead of to  a  regular
hospital. And requested that my kennel staff be kept out of this. After all my years  being a  cop’s  wife,
I’m used  to  not  asking.  Or  rather,  not  getting  answers  when  I  ask.  But  I  want  you  to  very  clearly
understand  the  difference  in  my  skills  here.”  She  glanced  at  Jorie.  “He  did  tell  you  that  I’m  a
veterinarian?”
“No,” Theo said, before Jorie could answer. “English isn’t her native language.”
“Inuktitut,” Zeke told his wife.
“Eskimo?” Suzanne’s eyes widened.
“No!” Theo  said  again, forcefully enough that  both  Zeke  and  Suzanne turned  abruptly  to  him. “Zeke,
I’ll…I’ll explain in a bit. But first let’s get that thing out of her, okay?”
A parrot—at least, Theo assumed it was a parrot—chose that moment to let out a raucous shriek. A cat
meowed loudly in answer.
“You have companions here?” Jorie asked.
“Companions?” Theo and Suzanne said at the same time.
Jorie spread her hands, delineating something small, then something larger. “Creatures of feather and fur
for emotional comfort and guidance. You use them to heal your patients?”
Suzanne eyed Jorie quizzically. “No—that is, yes. I’m a veterinarian. A…companion doctor.”
Jorie nodded solemnly and Theo saw relief spread over her face, her shoulders relaxing. “That’s the first
blissful news  I’ve  had  since—well, thank  you.” She  turned  to  Theo  and  laid her  fingers  on  his  hand.
“Accept my regrets for doubting you.”
“Doubting me about what?”
“When you said  this female was  a  med-tech.  I was  afraid  the  skill  level…Regrets.”  Jorie  nodded  to
Suzanne again. “I was afraid she’d  not have the skills because  of the low level of technology on your
world. But a med-tech who heals companions is the most skilled of all. Thank you.”
The blatantly puzzled expressions on Suzanne’s and Zeke’s faces would have been funny if the situation
weren’t so serious.
Suzanne was the first, however, to catch on. “On our world?”
Theo was  saved  from answering by a  soft whimper of pain  from  Tammy.  Jorie  immediately  had  her
scanner out. Suzanne stared over Jorie’s shoulder, eyes wide.
“The implant.” Jorie pointed to an image on the screen.
“Is that a…handheld MRI?”
“It does a lot of things,” Theo told her. “Jorie will explain as much as she can later. But right now can you
remove that thing?”
Suzanne reached for the scanner. “May I?”

Jorie handed it to her, and for the next few moments, the blue-walled back room of the clinic was filled
with the soft sounds of the two women’s voices, the staccato barking of a dog, and the occasional shriek
of a feathered companion.
Theo leaned against a grooming table, feeling useless.
“Theophilus.” Zeke flanked Theo’s right side. “What in hell is going on?”
“I could tell you, Ezequiel, but you won’t believe me.”
Suzanne raised one hand, catching Theo’s attention. “I’m going to take her into surgery.  We’ll call you
boys if we need anything.”
“How long?” Theo asked.
Suzanne exchanged glances with Jorie. “I want to run some tests first. That shouldn’t be more than fifteen
minutes. Then, if we don’t encounter any complications, half an hour to forty-five minutes. That…thing is
fairly close  to  the surface.  But I’ll want to  monitor her in recovery  for at  least  two  hours  after  that.  I
suggest you two find the coffeemaker in the staff room and get it brewing.”
With that she turned and, with Jorie on one side, wheeled Tammy down the short hall.
Theo watched them go. He could feel Zeke staring at him the entire time.
“You won’t believe me,” he said before Zeke could repeat the question.
Zeke rocked back on his heels. “Try me.”
“Make some coffee. I refuse to be Baker-Acted without sufficient caffeine in my veins.”
 
17 
It took Theo over half an hour to explain—or try to explain—about Jorie and the zombies and the Tresh.
Then he sat in silence, sipping a cup of Zeke’s wonderful black-as-mud coffee, as his friend and former
partner examined the Guardian laser pistol, Hazer micro-rifle, and, lastly, the cube showing holographs of
Paroo.
“Looks like Tahiti,” Zeke said.
Theo leaned  forward  and  pressed  an icon on the side  of the top  screen.  He’d  figured  out  the  zoom
feature yesterday after returning from the confrontation with the zombies in the park.
“Tahiti with the cast from Star Wars,” Zeke amended. “Means nothing.” He  handed  the cube  back  to
Theo, who pressed two sides to flatten it, then shoved it back in his pocket.
“I know. But that and the weapons are all I have right now.”
“If it was anyone but you—”
“I know.”
Zeke picked up the rifle again, hefting it. Theo glanced at his watch. Almost nine o’clock. And this wasn’t

a residential neighborhood. “Okay,” he said, knowing what Zeke wanted and might finally take as proof.
“One shot. Outside in the parking lot. But I’m going to turn on my strobe so we don’t get any funny calls
from any passersby or Suzanne’s kennel staff reporting a strange blue flash.”
“I’ll call Nina on the kennel intercom and  tell her not to  worry  about  the strobe.”  Zeke  was  grinning,
clearly excited about seeing the rifle in action.
The air outside  was  still warm,  muggy. Zeke  propped  open  the clinic’s rear  door  with a  folding chair
while Theo unlocked the SUV and hit the switch for the blue strobe behind his rearview.
“Two settings,” he said, angling the Hazer so that Zeke could see the small buttons. “Stun.” A yellow light
pulsed down  the side  of the rifle. “And dead.”  The light  turned  blue.  “You  got  something  you  don’t
need?”
“Suzanne remodeled the nurses’ station last week. There are two old metal desks behind the Dumpster.
They’re heavy bastards. I’ll give you a hand.”
Theo looped the rifle’s strap over his shoulder, then pushed while Zeke pulled. Theo turned the desk so
the file drawers faced Zeke and were in line with the Dumpster. If the charge kept going, the Dumpster
should stop it.
Then he trotted to the far end of the parking lot, Zeke by his side. “Ready?”
“Fire at will.”
“Poor  Will.” Theo  shouldered  the rifle and  took  aim. “He’s  always getting  shot  at.”  He  punched  the
trigger button.
Blue light bored  through one  side  of the desk  with nothing more  than a  low hum, then flared  brightly
against the front of the Dumpster.
“Damn!” Zeke broke into a trot, heavy-duty flashlight in one hand, and stopped to kneel in front of the
smoldering three-inch hole in the desk. “It went completely through both file pedestals. Hot damn.”
Theo shut off the strobe, then walked over to the blistered, buckled section of the Dumpster. “If Suzanne
catches any shit about this, let me know. I’ll kick in some bucks for a new one.” He looked at Zeke.
His friend sighed and shut off the flashlight. “Okay, so you’ve got some really sweet weapons there. But
we’ve got lasers. That doesn’t prove she’s an outer-space alien.”
“I told you.” Theo grabbed the edge of the battered desk and pulled it toward the Dumpster. “I’ve been
on their ship.”
“Beamed up, yeah.” Zeke pushed, grunting. “You’ve seen The Wizard of Oz. Little girl gets smacked by
a tornado and dreams all kinds of things. You say you were out in the yard when the tornado hit—”
“Zombie,” Theo corrected.
“Tornado. Microburst,” Zeke countered. Together they shoved the desk back up against the Dumpster.
“The whole thing is just a hallucination.”
“Jorie’s real. This rifle’s real.”
“She could be some kind of terrorist. Or superspy.”

“Who just happened to be in my backyard at the exact moment this supposed microburst clocked me?”
Theo kicked at a stone and sent it skittering across  the asphalt  as  he walked  back  toward  the clinic’s
open door. “And who then set up an elaborate video display of fifteen-foot-tall monsters, not only in my
backyard but in the park by the mall? And, oh, the ones in my house where people beam in and out like
a scene from Star Trek? Why, Zeke, why?” They’d reached the doorway. Theo crossed his arms over
his chest. “If these are high-tech terrorists from some third-world country—who couldn’t afford this kind
of technology to begin with—why me? Why a Homicide cop in a small Florida city? Why not a  police
chief in Miami? Or an FDLE lieutenant who would have access to far-more-sensitive information than I
do? Why go to all this trouble for me?”
“Did you run NCIC on her?”
“I didn’t think NCIC included starship pilots’ licenses.”
Zeke stepped inside. “Fingerprints.”
Theo followed and closed the door. “You’re not going to find Jorie or Tammy in our databases.”
“Outer-space aliens don’t have names like Tammy.”
“Tamlynne,” Jorie’s voice said behind him. “Her name’s Tamlynne.”
Theo turned, quickly reading her face.  No  tears.  No  sadness.  Hope  rose  that  Jorie  would at  least  be
spared this heartache.
“She’s in recovery.” Suzanne was walking toward  them, surgical mask  loose  around  her neck.  “She’s
doing very well.”
Theo reached for Jorie. “You got it out? She’s okay?”
She took his hand. “Yes and yes. And it’s fully disabled. The Tresh have no way of tracking it.” Finally, a
small smile. “Dr. Suzanne is excellently skilled. Companion med-techs always are.”
He stood staring at her, aware  of the warmth of her hand in his, aware  that  Zeke  had  come  to  stand
beside him. He didn’t care. He gave her hand a small squeeze.
“Contact lenses,” Zeke said.
“Zeke, what are you babbling about?” Suzanne sounded annoyed.
“Her.” Zeke gestured at Jorie. “She has Theo believing she’s from some other planet. The hair, the gold
eyes. Has to be contacts.”
Jorie glanced at Theo. “Nils,” she said quietly, pulling her hand out of his. “I warned you.”
“Zeke,” Suzanne said, but Zeke had flicked on his flashlight and aimed it at Jorie’s face.
“But you can always see the lenses in an oblique light.”
“Zeke.” Suzanne, again.
Jorie blinked.
“Look that way.” Zeke pointed to the wall.

Jorie shrugged and turned in profile to him.
“Zeke!”  Suzanne  had  lost  patience.  Theo  heard  that  clearly.  He  wondered  what  had  happened  in
surgery, what Jorie had told or shown her. Something, obviously. Because Suzanne didn’t seem the least
bit disturbed by Zeke’s mention of “another planet.”
Suzanne—in a  very familiar move—smacked  Zeke  on the arm.  He  stopped  squinting at  Jorie’s  eyes.
“Suzy—”
“I believe Jorie is who she says she is.”
“What?” Zeke straightened.
“So is Tamlynne,” Suzanne continued. “Though whether they’re actually from this Chalv, Cal…”
“Chalvash,” Jorie said.
“Thank you. Chalvash System—that,  I don’t  know.  But I do  know  that  small  scanner  of  hers  is  far
beyond any kind of medical equipment we have. Nothing I’ve seen even comes close.”
Zeke looked at his wife. “You can’t really think that—”
“I do. I watched Jorie sonically seal my incision. I do know what I’m talking about, Zeke.  Nothing we
have here—nothing—can do that.”
Zeke switched a look from his wife to Jorie and back to his wife again. “So she’s not wearing contacts?”
Suzanne angled her face  around  toward  Jorie’s.  “Nope.  Interesting  eye  color,  almost  feline.  Do  you
know if it’s a dominant or recessive gene?” she asked Jorie.
“It’s what my parents chose,” Jorie said.
It took a moment for Theo to realize what she said, and then it startled him. Evidently the Tresh weren’t
the only ones who played with biological engineering.
Zeke shoved the flashlight back in his duty belt, disbelief playing across his features. “This is crazy.”
“I so know that feeling,” Theo intoned wryly. He clapped  Zeke  on the back.  “Now  that  we  have that
settled, let me give you the bad news: Jorie and her people aren’t the only outer-space aliens here. And
the zombies aren’t the only issue. We’ve got problems, big problems, amigo. Go fire up that coffeepot.
We need to tell you about the Tresh.”
 
Zeke was skeptical. No, more than skeptical. He could not, did not want to believe Jorie was a Guardian
who’d come to Florida via a spaceship right out of Star Trek. Theo could see it in the way the detective
leaned back in the chair in the staff room, arms across his chest, eyes narrowed.
“C’mon, Theo,” Zeke said, when Jorie paused in her recounting of the Tresh Devastators showing up in
Theo’s house. “Don’t you think NASA or NO-RAD or one of those agencies would notice a bunch of
space cruisers hanging out up there?” He waved his hand in a circle over his head.
Theo rested his elbows on his knees and scrubbed his hands over his face. It was almost eleven o’clock.
The end—or what should be the end—of another grueling, confusing day.

Another hour and it was Christmas.
Christ.
“We take considerable efforts not to be noticed by nil-techs,” Jorie said. She too had her arms crossed
over her chest and leaned back in her chair across the small staff room from Zeke.
This was not going well.
“I know it’s hard to believe,” Theo said finally. “I’m still having a difficult time processing what I’ve seen.
But I can’t change the facts: these zombie things are here, the Tresh are here, and Jorie’s ship and crew
are gone. We need help. But if you don’t want to get involved, I understand.  Suzanne’s  removing that
implant from Tammy is above and beyond the call. We really have no right to ask for anything more.” His
own implant could  wait.  He  shoved  himself to  his feet.  “If Suzanne says  it’s okay,  we’ll take  Tammy
back home now.”
Zeke grimaced, his mouth twisting slightly. “You really believe all this shit, don’t you?”
“I wish I didn’t,” Theo answered honestly.
“Let me print her,” Zeke said. “Her and her friend. I want name, DOB,  everything. Run them through
NCIC.”
“You’re not going to find anything.”
“Then what are you worried about?” Zeke replied smoothly.
Shit. Standard interrogation setup, and he’d walked right into it. He would have laughed out loud, but he
was too tired. “You got a kit in your car? Go get it.”
Zeke strolled out and Theo explained the procedure to a frowning Jorie.
“Why would there be a record of my biological signature in your criminal files?” she asked.
“There won’t be. That’s why I’m saying it’s no big deal. Not important,” he amended. “But he’s a friend.
And friends double-check each other sometimes.”
“He thinks I’m deceiving you.”
“He thinks it’s a possibility, because he hasn’t seen what I have. So he has to gather his own information,
to be sure.”
“Nils,” Jorie said softly as Zeke returned, but a corner of her mouth quirked up in a grin and she let Zeke
take her prints. She had no idea what a Social Security number was. Her response to his request for date
of birth was equally perplexing.
“Esare three nine seven Tal one Nifarris,” she told him, and even obliged by writing it down.
“Which makes you how old?” Zeke asked.
“My age on my world? Thirty-nine.”
He’d thought she was younger, but then, he didn’t know if his years were the same as Chalvash System
years, or wherever in hell she was from. She could be thirty-nine or nineteen or seventy-nine. He had no
way to know.

“And you have no driver’s license, no identification?” Zeke was asking.
Jorie pulled her scanner out from under her long sweater and flicked through several screens. “This.”
Theo stepped forward, craning his neck, and saw a small head-shot image of a  very serious  Jorie  with
shorter hair, and then lines of squiggly or angular characters to the left of the image. Characters like the
ones that had scrolled down the screen of Mr. Crunchy’s laptop and had graced the corridor walls of her
ship.
“Can you translate that to Vekran?” he asked.
“Trans…ah!” She tapped the screen a few times. The angular letters shifted until Theo saw a somewhat
recognizable alphabet.
Not totally English. But, damn, he could almost read it.
COMMANDER JORIE MIKKALAH, GUARDIAN FORCE HUNTER STATUS C7-1.
He saw the word Sakanah and recognized it as the name of her ship. Then there were lots of numbers
that meant nothing and a couple of symbols that meant even less.
Zeke made some more notations on his pad, then left to find out if Suzanne was  ready  to  give Tammy
medical clearance.
“You see why we don’t work with nil-techs?” Jorie asked as Zeke’s footsteps faded.
“You worked with me.”
“You’re…” And she closed her eyes briefly. “Different. Special.”
He almost asked  her to  define special  but didn’t want to  get his hopes  up that  she  meant  something
personal. It was safer to respond as a cop. “And that’s why you came looking for me?”
She sighed. “Unlike what Zeke Martinez believes, I did not come looking for you. I wanted my agent’s
T-MOD, which you had. Had you relinquished it when you should have, we would not now be  having
this conversation.”
Okay, score one  for Jorie  Mikkalah.  Yes,  he had  hoped  to  catch  her off guard  and  get her to  admit
she’d targeted him. Listening to  Zeke  had  opened  that  small, worrisome  doubt.  Illogical because  he’d
seen the zombies, the Tresh, her ship.
But he also saw himself starting to care very much about  what happened  to  her,  and  not just because
heat roared  through his body  when she  did that  head-tilt  thing. It  had  moved  beyond  that—he  didn’t
know quite when and where, because the past two days were now becoming a serious blur.
Like all cops, he was trained to never become emotionally involved with an investigation—especially not
with the subject of an investigation.
With Jorie  Mikkalah,  he’d  broken  that rule, big-time. And that  scared  him  almost  as  much  as  being
Baker-Acted to the psych ward.
It would be so much easier if Zeke was right and Jorie Mikkalah was some kind of foreign superspy with
James Bond–like toys. He could arrest her, turn her over to FDLE, which would in turn send her off to
the FBI. He could forget her. And they could deport her back to…the Chalvash System.

Except that not the FBI, the CIA, hell, not even NASA would know how to send her there.
Which was just as well. He didn’t want her to leave. He wanted her here, with him.
And that scared the hell out of Theo Petrakos even more.
 
Tamlynne should, would be fine. Jorie let that one worry drift away from her as Theo guided the white
land  vehicle—the  Essuvee,  she  corrected  herself—back  to  his  structure.  Her  fears  for  her  ship,  for
Captain Pietr, for Rordan, Trenat, Lorik, and everyone else plagued her. Maybe she should have asked
Prow if the Sakanah had been destroyed. Not that she believed he’d have told her the truth, but perhaps
she could have inferred something from his tone, the shift of his eyes. Then, at least, she’d know.
Not knowing was eating her up inside.
Once Tamlynne regained full consciousness—Jorie checked on her lieutenant with another  glance over
her shoulder at the rear seat—she might have some answers to a few of those questions. But up to this
point, with the pain from the implant lacing through her body,  Lieutenant Tamlynne Herryck  had  been
able to provide little coherent information about the Tresh attack in Theo’s structure.
Jorie didn’t discount that the Tresh  might have interfered  with Tamlynne’s memory of their arrival and
subsequent actions. She doubted Dr. Suzanne Martinez—as skilled as she was—would have any way of
restoring that. Her tech, like most everything else on this ball of dirt, was rudimentary.
Peculiar world, this planet named for dirt. So many large gaps in technology. Yet some of the nils—the
inhabitants—she’d met were so…special. Extraordinary.
She turned back to find Theo watching her, though in the vehicle’s dark  interior she  felt his gaze more
than saw it. The vehicle was stopped, idling, because of the colored-light edict. Foolish and unnecessary,
as there were no other vehicles in the immediate vicinity. She shifted in her seat, but Theo didn’t move his
gaze. She  couldn’t  read  his expression,  but,  oddly,  what she  felt  more  than  saw  pulled  at  her.  Heat
blossomed on her cheeks, and she was suddenly very aware of his presence mere minmeters from her.
His strength. His warmth.
“Theo?” she asked softly, not wanting to wake Tamlynne. Suzanne Martinez had given her a medication
to encourage a healing rest.
He said nothing for a moment, then shook his head and turned away. The vehicle moved forward again.
She shook off the sensation. She was stressed and tired. That was all.
When Theo pulled behind his structure, she already had her scanner out, verifying shield integrity before
she temporarily disengaged it. No breaches. Whether any had been attempted she wouldn’t know  until
she went inside and checked her tech.
“I’ll take her,” Theo  said,  after  Jorie  had  hopped  out of her seat  and  was  opening the rear  door.  He
pushed that metal ring he always carried into her hand, then picked out a  short  object  from the bunch.
“To open the kitchen door.
“It’s a key,” he said, when she held it up in his back porch light to examine it.
“Ah.” She nodded.

“Key to my heart.” His tone was light, but his voice was soft.
Heart? She knew he referred to his structure as a house. She shot him a puzzled glance and was about
to ask for an explanation when he shrugged.
“Never mind. It’s…it’s just a joke.” He gathered Tamlynne’s limp form into his arms.
They’d reached Theo’s bedroom door when a possible problem occurred to Jorie. “I’ll need to work in
there. And she needs someplace quiet to rest. Best I move my tech—”
“It would be better to open the sofa bed in the spare room. Let her stay there. That way I don’t have to
bother her to access my stuff.”
“Sofa bed?”
Theo set Tamlynne down on his bed. “I’ll leave her here for now. Come with me.”
The sofa bed turned out to be a colorful couch with a bed folded within. Not unlike the recessed bunks
on Kedrian troop ships but much nicer. Jorie ran her hand over the mattress, then helped Theo secure the
sheets and blanket he’d pulled from a corridor closet.
She moved the broken remnants of the Guardian MOD-tech to the corner behind his exercise machine.
Theo brought Tamlynne in.
“Nice, so nice,” her lieutenant murmured in Alarsh as she snuggled against the blanket.  Jorie  pulled off
Tamlynne’s boots and loosened the top of her uniform. They would need  clothes,  clean clothes,  soon.
There was nowhere to get supplies. The ship…
She pushed it away.
“So nice,” Tamlynne whispered again.
Jorie sat  on  the  edge  of  the  mattress  and  brushed  the  curls  off  Tamlynne’s  forehead.  “Nap,  Tam.”
Whatever medicine Suzanne gave Tamlynne must be working. Her skin was less clammy.
Tamlynne sighed, her eyes slitting open for a moment. “Theo is…so nice.”
Theo? Yes, Theo. Even Tamlynne wasn’t immune to his very good face or his delicious grin, it seemed.
Though it had been a while since Jorie’d seen the latter. “Yes, he is, Tam. Now nap. I’ll be in the next
room, working.”
“You work too much. Sir.” Tamlynne smiled dreamily. “Theo likes you.”
“And you’re hallucinating.” Jorie smiled back.
“Do you…like him?”
Did she like Theo Petrakos? Her body heated in answer. “Of course.”
“A lot?”
“Yes, a lot,” she admitted, surprised by her own truthfulness. But less surprised at the reasons why she
felt that way. Images of Theo  handling her weapons  with ease,  firing on the zombies,  escorting  her all
over his city without question,  breathing  life  into  a  failing  Tamlynne  filled  her  mind.  Yes,  he  had  the
Guardian implant in his shoulder, but she knew that wasn’t what motivated him. It wasn’t why he brought

her glasses of precious water or showed her how to make peanut butter and bread meals. It wasn’t why
he pushed himself as hard as she did.
There was an uncommon courage and dedication in him. It made her feel stronger just being with him.
“Good,” Tamlynne whispered. “I think you two—”
“Close  your  eyes  and  your  mouth.”  She  tapped  Tamlynne  teasingly  on  the  nose.  “That’s  an  order,
Lieutenant.”
“Sir. Yes…sir.” The last word was muffled as Tamlynne turned her face into the pillow.
Jorie smoothed the blanket around Tam, then got slowly to her feet. Tamlynne would be more herself by
sunwake. And if the Tresh hadn’t tampered with her memories, she’d be able to provide answers as to
Rordan and the Sakanah. She’d be functional, coherent, not babbling silliness about—
Theo. Standing just behind her, leaning against the edge of the doorway. He’d removed his security vest.
His tight-fitting black  shirt clung only too  well to  his broad  shoulders  and  defined,  only  too  well,  the
outlines of the muscles on his chest and arms.
Her breath caught, embarrassingly so. He was looking at her. She could see an intensity in his eyes that
she’d only felt before in the darkened vehicle.
Had he heard…? But no, she and Tam had spoken only in Alarsh.
Hadn’t they?
“Everything okay?” His voice was a deep rumble.
“A good nap will help,” she said, moving away  from the sofa  bed.  “I need  to…”  and  she  waved  one
hand in the direction of his structure where her tech still gathered data. But she couldn’t think of what he
called that room or even how to describe what she needed to do. Because the way he was looking at her
incinerated every sensible thought in her head.
Theo curled his fingers around her wrist and pulled her toward him. She went without resistance, as if she
were a ship caught in a tow field. He stepped back into the corridor and she followed, his gentle pressure
on her arm guiding her closer. Then he reached behind her and shut the door.
“Jorie.” His arm slid around her waist.  The fingers holding her wrist raised  her hand to  his mouth. He
brushed a lingering kiss across her palm. The incinerator in her brain unleashed a flash of heat that rushed
down her body and flared between her thighs.
Trembling, she  uncurled her fingers. She  traced  the  rough  line  of  his  jaw,  then  her  thumb  found  the
softness of his lower lip.
He pulled her more tightly against him. He lowered his face but she was already raising hers, her mouth
seeking his, not with the hard, desperate intensity of their earlier feigned kisses but more gently. Carefully.
Something was happening, changing between them. It made no rational sense. She knew with the same,
unerring clairvoyance  that had  kept  her alive all these  years  that  what she  was  doing was  dangerous.
Theo Petrakos was dangerous.
She didn’t care. But she would be careful.
His  mouth  brushed  hers,  the  warmth  of  his  breath  flowing  across  her  face.  She  answered  with  the

smallest of kisses, the slightest meeting of tongues. She dropped her hand from his face and splayed her
fingers against his chest. She could feel his heart beating rapidly.
It matched her own.
He rubbed his face against hers, his mouth touching her cheekbone, her jaw, and, as she angled her head,
trailing down her neck. A soft heat, gentle and searing at the same time.
He took another step back, bringing her with him as he leaned against the wall. She  went willingly. His
hand at her waist pressed her to him, clothes and weapons—bulky—merging.
His light kisses were sheer torture, but she didn’t push, didn’t ask for more, because his restraint was as
much of an aphrodisiac as his touch. A powerful man controlling his power.
A passionate man willing to take his time.
Her own desire teetered on the edge of exploding. It would be so  easy  to  tear  Theo’s  clothes  off and
blank her mind, lose her worries in a hard, driving sexual encounter with this man whose body trembled
under her fingers.
But that wasn’t what he was asking for. And it wasn’t what she wanted.
She was very aware that what he wanted and what she wanted might never come to pass. There  were
the Tresh and the zombies. There was a city about to be under siege. There was the very real problem of
survival.
And if—when—the Sakanah  returned,  she  would leave.  It  was  her duty.  Just  as  it  was  his  duty  to
protect his city.
A low chuckle rumbled in his chest as he ran his hands up the length of her back, as if he too suddenly
realized this was  a  desperate  foolishness. His voice was  a  husky whisper  in her  ear.  “You  make  me
crazy, agapi mou.”
Jorie  understood  crazy—especially  as  it  related  to  Theo  Petrakos—only  too  well,  though  his  other
phrase was lost on her. She turned her face, brushing his mouth with hers, then moved away. His arms
loosened around her, but he didn’t let go.
She sighed with more forcefulness than she wanted to and, when she looked at him, saw a sadness in his
smile that echoed her own.
She touched his mouth with her fingers one more time. “We have work to do,” she told him.
He nodded, then draped one arm over her shoulders. She wrapped her arm around his waist and headed
for his bedroom, where her blinking array of MOD-tech was now their only lifeline, their only hope.
 
18 
Agapi mou. My darling. My love. Theo knew the phrase because he’d been raised speaking Greek, but
he’d never before said it to any woman out loud. Not through his high-school years, not through college
or the police academy. He’d never said it to Camille.
To speak those words in the language he’d heard from infancy was too intimate. It exposed his heart.

Yet he didn’t give a damn that it had been only two days. He’d touched Jorie, kissed Jorie, argued with
Jorie, and fought by her side. There was no doubt. Agapi mou.
It was just another bit of damned irony that this was the worst possible time for him to feel that way.
He sat on the edge of his bed and watched her tap requests into the yellow-green screen, listened to her
utter soft commands  in Alarsh.  It  was  almost one-thirty  in  the  morning,  officially  Christmas.  Children
everywhere were snug in their beds, dreaming of Santa Claus and sugarplums or however the old poem
went. Yet zombies and the Tresh were more likely to land on their roofs than eight tiny reindeer.
Helluva Christmas present.
Jorie stopped tapping at the screen and rubbed tiredly at her face.
“Anything I can help with?” he asked, because he felt so useless and because he wanted her to know she
didn’t have to carry the burden alone.
She looked over her shoulder. “No, but thank you.” She went back to her computer with a soft sigh.
He stood, restless energy unsettling him. He wanted to stay awake in case she needed something, but to
just sit there and listen to his mind think—and his heart break—was driving him crazy. Hurry up and wait
had never been his strong point, which was why he liked detective work. He could always find something
to do.
But  here,  too  much  had  happened,  and  so  much  of  it  had  been  out  of  his  control.  He  needed  to
refocus…yes.  He  grabbed  his  guitar  case.  Duty  belt  and  weapons  were  carefully  placed  on  his
nightstand. Boots came off. He propped his pillow against the wrought-iron headboard and brought  his
guitar into his lap. The well-worn Brazilian rosewood was smooth and cool under his fingers—and very
familiar. He dug out his slide, then picked aimlessly at a few strings until a blues refrain he’d been toying
with came to mind. Zeke had been busting his butt for over a year now about his reclusive ways since his
divorce. You still singing The Down Home Divorced Guy Blues? was Zeke’s constant taunt.
So Theo actually started writing the song. He closed his eyes and let himself sink into the sassy notes of
the music, keeping time with one foot against the blanket.  He  hummed the melody softly—he was  still
working on the lyrics.
The tension leached  from his neck  and  shoulders.  He  went through  the  refrain  twice,  then  something
made him open his eyes. He realized the room had grown quiet. He no longer heard Jorie’s voice or her
tapping on the screen  just on the edge  of his hearing. That’s  because  she’d  turned,  her eyes  wide  in
question.
Skata. He should have asked if playing his guitar would bother her.
“Sorry. I’ll stop.” He shifted forward to put the guitar back in its case.
“No. That’s blissful.” A small smile played across her lips.
“I don’t want to disturb what you’re doing.”
“I’ve done all I can for now,” she said, and rubbed her hand over her face again. “Until the zombies take
a new action, I can only watch and wait.”
“And the Tresh?”

“I’m no threat to them until the zombies wake again,” she continued. “And since they know more than I
do about the Sakanah, they may not consider me a threat at all.”
Theo could hear the strain in her voice at the mention of her ship. He wished he had answers for her, but
that too was out of his control.
She motioned to his guitar. “Please. It sounds so nice. And I need  something else  to  think about  for a
little while.”
Was that why she let him kiss her? Was that part of the playacting they’d started—he’d started—earlier?
And he had started it, he admitted ruefully.
But somehow, no, he didn’t think she was toying with him. And he hoped  it wasn’t  only his male ego
making that claim.
He  glanced  at  his  watch:  two-ten.  He  pulled  another  pillow  against  the  headboard,  then  patted  the
mattress. “Come, sit with me.”
It  would  be  temptation,  Jorie  next  to  him  on  his  bed.  But  playing  his  guitar  would  keep  his  hands
occupied. Because after what had happened in the hallway, he knew if he touched her again, he wouldn’t
be able to stop.
She pulled off her boots,  then climbed across  his bed  on all fours,  looking almost childlike, an impish
smile on her face. She settled next to him and drew her knees up, wrapping her arms around them.
He found himself playing Traveling Ed Teja’s “Blue Light,” because it was  soft  but upbeat  at  the same
time. Somewhere  in the middle of the song,  Jorie’s  head  came  to  rest  on his shoulder.  He  smiled  to
himself and kept playing, going through the song a second time, then segued into Teja’s “Blue Dime.”
He plucked the last few notes softly. She’d curled up against him, her knees resting against his thigh.
He put his guitar and  case  carefully on the floor,  tucked  the G-1  under  his pillow, then turned  off his
bedside lamp and drew her into his arms. She murmured something unintelligible. He smoothed her hair
back from her face and she settled into slumber again.
Theo listened to  her breathing,  the muted clicking of her computer,  and  the rustle of the night  breeze
through the fronds of the palm trees outside.
It was Christmas, and somewhere, sweet voices were singing, Silent night, holy night…
While all of unholy hell waited just beyond his door.
 
Jorie woke  to  a  dim, shadowed  room  and  a  man’s  arm  draped  over  her  waist.  She  recognized  the
intermittent click-whir of her tech  and  saw  the green  glow of a  nil-tech timekeeper  on the wrist lying
across her forearm.
Theo. His breath ruffled her hair. Everything he was tugged at her heart.
She glanced at his wrist again—she knew how to interpret the symbols to  this locale—and  then at  the
pale light filtering through the covered  viewports.  It  was  just  before  sunwake.  She—they—had  been
asleep for a little more than four sweeps. Hours, she corrected.

With no emergencies, no Tresh transporting in, no zombies crashing past—bliss, that.
She slipped out from under his arm.
“Jorie?” His voice was thick with sleep.
She thought of the last few times she’d  slipped  out of a  man’s embrace  in bed.  She  hadn’t  heard  her
name whispered, but another female’s. She touched  her finger to  his lips. “I’ll look  in on Tam and  be
back.”
She would. She desperately needed rest, and if the zombies were in an inactive phase—she checked her
readouts as she padded by, and they were—then she wouldn’t look a gift fermarl in the ears. She needed
all her strength for when the next spur hit.
Her scanner showed Tamlynne to be resting comfortably, her shoulder healing with only a little swelling.
But some of the clamminess had returned to her skin. Jorie  remembered  that  well. The nightmares she
knew so intimately weren’t over for her lieutenant yet. The implant’s removal only halted further damage.
Suzanne Martinez had no way to correct what had already been done.
The med-techs on the Sakanah could help, she thought, as she slipped back into Theo’s bedroom. But
her ship wasn’t here.
She sat slowly down on the edge of the bed,  not wanting to  wake  him. She  was  fully capable,  as  her
brother often reminded her, of worrying enough for the both of them.
Galin. How long before a Guardian officer delivered the news of the destruction of the Sakanah and the
death of his sister? Just after he’d learned of the loss of his longtime friend? It wasn’t that  Galin wasn’t
strong—he was. It pained her that she would be the cause of such suffering….
“Hey.”
Theo’s arms went around her and  Theo’s  warmth encompassed  her as  he sat  behind her on the bed.
And only then did Jorie realize she was shivering, her breath coming out in small hiccuping gasps. Hell’s
wrath.  Would  the damage  the implant caused  never  grant her peace?  Or  had  seeing  Prow  and  Sem
reawakened old horrors?
“Hey,” he said again, his voice a low rumble. He drew her back against him. “Come here.”
She turned in his embrace and let him lower her to the bed, fitting herself tightly against him. She couldn’t
stop shaking.
“Is Tammy okay?”
She nodded under his chin. “Fine.”
“What is it, agapi mou?”
“Nothing.” She buried her face into his shirt and bit her lip to try to refocus her body’s reaction. It didn’t
work. “It’ll pass.”
Strong hands massaged their way up her spine and down again.
“You’ve had a very stressful few days,” he said.
“Yes.” But she’d had worse. She should be able to handle this. That too made her weary.

He worked the muscles on the back of her shoulders with a gentle pressure. She sucked  in a  series  of
long breaths, tried to focus on the sound of Theo’s  heartbeat.  Focus  on the fact  that  Cordo  Sem was
dead. Davin Prow, she thought, might have been wounded. There was  something about  that  encounter
she felt she was missing, but she couldn’t bring it to mind now. The last thing she  wanted  to  see  in her
head was Prow.
Slowly, the knife-edged insanity that wore a Tresh Devastator’s face slipped back into the depths of her
mind where it belonged. Thankfully she’d  only gotten  the shakes  and  not awakened  screaming from a
nightmare. She felt limp, a little boneless. Theo’s fingers slowed.
“Better?”
“Thank you.” She pulled her face off his chest with a sigh, then rolled away from him, onto her back.
He leaned over her, his lips touching hers with a light kiss, then pulled back. “You’re welcome.”
He propped himself up on one elbow and watched her. “You want to tell me now what happened?” he
asked after a long moment of silence, during which she was far too aware of the heat of him next to her.
She laid her fingers on the edge of her sweater near her collarbone. “Bad memories.”
“The implant the Tresh put in you.”
“Yes. Ten years past.”
He folded his hand over hers. “How long before it was removed?”
“Forty-four of your days.”
He uttered an unfamiliar series of harsh words. “But you still remember the pain.”
“It has nothing to do with remembering. The Tresh device is insidious,” she continued. “You know  that
word?”
“It causes collateral damage.”
“Even Tamlynne, with the few sweeps it was in her body, will have resultant issues. It’s good, then,” and
Jorie  realized  it  was,  “that  I’m  here.  She  may  have  small  episodes,  and  I  can  help  her  work  them
through.”
He was  nodding but frowning slightly. She  thought  she  knew  why.  “Guardian  restrainer  implants  are
noninvasive. Not like the Tresh one. There’s no neural interface.”
One corner of his mouth lifted. “So mine just gives me a zap if I piss you off.”
She owed him the truth. “Yours does nothing. I neutralized it.”
His eyes widened. “When?”
“When I did my funny stuff.” She gave him a small smile. She liked that phrase he used. It was so very
much Theo. “Before we went to capture the juvenile zombie at your park.  Kip  Rordan…”  She  forced
from her mind the question of whether he was dead  or  alive. “I was  worried  he had  some  issues with
you.”
“You mean an intense mutual dislike?”

“He had the command codes when I wasn’t here. And his understanding of the mission, his goals, were
different than mine.” She sighed, her mind coming back to the one fact she couldn’t push away. “If they’d
only listened—”
“Hey.” He kissed her lightly. “You can’t change the past. Let it go, Jorie. All you can do is what’s here
and now.”
“But—”
“I know.  Believe me, I know.  When you beamed  me up to  your ship,  I  thought  I’d  lost  everything,
everyone. I reacted stupidly, getting angry, going over all the mistakes  I’d  made  that  brought  me there
instead of thinking and looking at what I had where I was. What I could work with. What I could do.”
She remembered his bursts of temper and his subsequent, not always successful, attempts at self-control.
“And last year when Camille and I split up—”
“Camille?”
His mouth pursed wryly. “I was married. Spoused.”
“Oh.” There was a female he loved. Jorie’s heart wilted.
“Was,” he repeated. “I fell into the same stupid trap. Remember you told me about the guy who cheated
on you? Loren?”
“Lorik.”
“I went through the same thing.”
“She had you and chose someone else?”
“That was only one of the wonderful things she did, yeah.”
“Vomit-brained slut bucket.”
Theo barked out a laugh. “What?”
“It’s an expression. Sadly, it doesn’t render well in Vekran.”
Still chuckling, he dotted her jaw with kisses.
She turned her face and found his mouth. His mirth abated and he sighed against her lips.
“We should get some sleep,” he said.
“Yes.”
But he didn’t move and she didn’t move.
His mouth brushed hers again. “You should have kept that zapper implant in me working,” he said,  his
voice rough. “Keep me under control. Make me leave you alone.”
“I don’t want you to leave me alone.”
His breath fanned her cheek. “Last chance. Say, ‘Go away, Petrakos.’”

She ran her hand up the side of his face, then through his short hair. “No.”
He closed  his eyes,  leaning into her touch,  his capitulation sending a  wave  of desire  through her.  She
knew he was aware of how dangerous this was. It could only cause them both heartache.
But she might not live so long. All she had was now. Wasn’t that what he said? Here and now. And right
here and now, she wanted Theo Petrakos very, very much.
She wrapped her arms around his neck and brought his face  back  down  to  hers,  letting him lead  with
kisses and answering with caresses of her own. His body was taut muscle that yielded to her fingers. She
arched up into him and he groaned.
“You’re making me crazy, babe.”
“I think that’s good.”
“Do you?” He watched her through hooded eyes dark with passion.
“Yes.” Her fingers found the waistband at the back of his pants and pulled his shirt away. She needed the
heat of his skin under her hands.
“Oh, babe.” He kissed her hard, then pulled back. “You’d better be very sure what you want—”
“I want,” she told him, more than a little breathless because her fingers weren’t the only ones now doing
the exploring. His hand had slipped under her sweater and sleeveless tracker shirt to cup her breast and
tease her nipple. “Theo, I want you.”
She felt his body throb in response even as he said her name, his kiss deep and desperate. He tugged at
her sweater, and she pulled away from him just long enough to sit up and yank it and then her shirt over
her head.  Bliss, when she  rolled back  to  him, his own chest  was  bare  and  they were  heated  skin  to
heated skin.
Her shorts came off next, his pants,  their socks,  clothes  flying into the dim corners  of the room.  Then
hands  were  replaced  by  mouths,  kissing  and  nibbling  and  leaving  hot,  wet  trails.  His  touch  left  her
panting, damned near delirious with pleasure. She murmured to him in Alarsh because her brain couldn’t
find any Vekran words.
He moved up her body to claim her mouth again. “Tell me what you’re saying is good,” he rasped against
her lips, the touch of his hands and the feel of his body throbbing against hers intoxicating.
“Very good. Oh—”
He thrust inside her, hot and hard.
“—yes!” she gasped, heat and tingles of ecstasy spiraling through her as she moved in rhythm with him.
His kisses deepened as he took her over the edge with him. Sparks of pleasure raced again through her
veins as he groaned her name, shuddering into her. Then, even spent,  his fingers threaded  into her hair
and he nibbled on her ear, her neck, and back up to her mouth.
Their bodies were hot, sweat-slickened. He turned on his side, gathering her up against him, curving his
body around hers as he drew the sheet and blanket over them. He murmured something exotic-sounding
in her ear. It wasn’t Vekran or his English.
“Hmm?” she asked, his warmth lulling her into sleep.

He kissed her shoulder. “I’ll tell you in a few hours. Sleep.”
“Is it good?”
Laughter rumbled in his chest. “It’s good, agapi mou.”
“What does that—”
“I’ll explain that too. Hush now. Naptime.”
Jorie didn’t remember falling asleep. But waking up again was  a  blissful experience,  with Theo  trailing
kisses down her neck. She didn’t know the time, but the room was brighter. “I should look in on Tam.”
“Just did.” A strong hand slid slowly down  her hip, pleasure  radiating in its wake.  “Brought her some
water.” He nipped her ear. “She’s a little weak, but I think she’ll be okay.”
Decadent. Wanton. Jorie dutifully chastised herself as Theo shifted his body on top of hers, his hands and
his mouth working magic. She surrendered willingly, let herself stay in the here  and  now just for a  little
while. She’d have the rest of the day to ruminate about her problems.
And there might not be a tomorrow.
She returned  his magic with some  of her own,  mesmerized by the heat  in  his  dark  eyes  and  by  that
delicious, feral grin that had captured her from the moment she first saw it. He was a man who loved life.
He was a man who was not afraid of duty—or death. She felt as if she’d known him forever. And knew
that no matter how long she would know him, it would never be long enough.
She explored him more boldly as the morning’s soft light intensified, inexplicably pleased by the way her
touch made his breath hitch. But when his teeth  nipped  the soft  flesh of her inner thigh and  his tongue
traced every intimate corner of her body, she  was  the one  twisting the bedsheets  between  her fingers,
coherency once again fleeing.
“We’re good together,” he whispered huskily, when heartbeats finally slowed and she was cradled in his
arms.
Yes, they were.
Later,  while Theo  was  in the—wasteful!—freshwater  shower,  Jorie  borrowed  his soft  blue robe  and,
scanner in hand, slipped into Tam’s room to take  the next set  of medical readings.  Her  lieutenant was
sitting up, but her gaze and her concentration wandered if the conversation went on for more than three
or four sentences.
And the only answer Tam could provide about the ship or the crew’s whereabouts was that Commander
Rordan was in Theo’s galley, getting a glass of water. Wasn’t he?
It was as if time had stopped for Tamlynne Herryck.
Suppressing a shiver, Jorie remembered seeing the half-empty glass on the galley counter when she and
Theo had returned.
When she walked back into the bedroom, Theo was dressed in faded blue pants and a dark-green shirt.
Being decadent and wanton, she indulged in a  wasteful freshwater  shower—the  water  felt so  blissfully
better than the ship’s recycled synthetic liquid—and once again sorted out problems and priorities in her
mind.

It all came back to one thing: she had to terminate the C-Prime. It wouldn’t stop the Tresh. But it would
stop the Tresh from using the zombies to  destroy  this world’s  inhabitants and—ultimately—control the
Hatches.
She didn’t discount that the Tresh could move their entire experiment to another remote nil-tech world.
But at least this one—with Theo Petrakos on it—would survive.
 
19 
Theo was standing in his living room, taking the first few sips of coffee and flipping through channels to
find the news, when he saw the bright purple  horror  heading at  a  determined  clip straight for his front
door.
“Shit!” He hurriedly put the remote and his cup on the end table, sloshing hot coffee over his hand, then
bolted  into the bedroom.  He  prayed  Jorie  was  out of the shower.  He  had  no idea  how to  work  her
scanner gizmo, and frying Sophie Goldstein would not win him any brownie points with Aunt Tootie.
Jorie was standing naked near the end of his bed, small drops of water still beading on her tawny skin.
She turned, head tilted, and eyed him quizzically.
In spite of impending doom,  Theo  stopped  dead  in his tracks,  his breath  hitching as  his body  heated.
Sweet Jesus and Mother Mary. She was…incredible. And unless he’d missed something important in the
past few hours, she was his.
Sweet Jesus. And Merry Christmas.
“We have company. My neighbor,” he stammered out. “The house shields?”
She leaned over to retrieve her scanner from the nightstand.
Nice ass.
God, he was hopeless.
“Disengaged,” she told him.
“Thanks.” He stared at  her a  few more  long, worthy seconds.  “You might want to  get dressed.  Mrs.
Goldstein’s”—his doorbell rang—“here.”
When he opened the front door,  Sophie  was  already  shoving a  plastic  food  container  past  the screen
door  that  was  propped  against  her  shoulder.  She  had  on  a  purple  tunic-type  blouse  with  silver
embroidery on the round neckline, purple pants, and—Theo noticed with a quick glance down—purple
flip-flop sandals.
“Working during the holidays! Tootie  is upset.  I told  her I’d  bring you some  butter  cookies  and  fried
honey puffs. I’ve been making them since Hanukkah. It was no trouble to do up another batch.”
He  leaned  against  the  doorjamb,  blocking  any  attempts  by  the  purple  horror  to  enter  his  home.
“Thanks—”
“So you got some kind of big case? You want some latkes or brisket? I can make that too. You can’t
fight crime on an empty stomach.”

It wasn’t quite ten in the morning yet, but Theo’s mouth watered at the mention of Sophie’s brisket. The
honey puffs, little bits of fried dough drenched in honey and flavored with orange and cinnamon, were a
nice  treat  too.  And  potato  latkes—no.  He  had  to  keep  Mrs.  Goldstein—he  had  to  keep
everybody—away from his house.
“I really appreciate  this. But, yeah,  I’m working,  and  I have no idea  if I’ll be  home later  or  not.  But
thanks. I mean that.” He nodded and smiled down at her.
She nodded and smiled up at him. And made no move to leave his front porch.
“Thanks,” he said again. “Uh, happy holidays.”
“You should really at least try to see Tootie and Stavros. Not that I’m trying to tell you how to run your
life, Theophilus. But your uncle always managed to spend some part of Christmas with you and Tootie,
even if he had to sit in his patrol  car  in the driveway.” She  pinned him with a  hard  stare.  “They were
always there for you, especially after your meshuga mother decided her life’s calling was to be a craps
dealer in Vegas.”
Well,  yes.  The  four  months  he’d  spent  living  in  Sin  City  were  certainly  memorable  ones  for  a
twelve-year-old boy. Then his father and Uncle Stavros showed up with a court order. And the jingling
sounds  of slot machines and  “Place  your bets!  Ante  up!”  were  replaced  by  the  familiar  cries  of  the
seagulls down at the sponge docks and Aunt Tootie singing Greek hymns very off-key  in church every
Sunday.
Life was—if not as interesting—better.
“I’ll try to cut some time out and see them,” he told Sophie. So what if the fate of his planet teetered on
the brink? The zombies were in nap phase again, according to Jorie.
But the truth was, he didn’t want to leave Jorie alone. Not that she wasn’t capable of kicking serious ass.
The last time they left the house, however, the Tresh showed up and Rordan went missing. Two events
that Theo wasn’t sure weren’t somehow connected.
And then there was Tammy. Not rowing with both oars in the water yet. Which only made him wonder
even more what Jorie had gone through as a prisoner of war with the Tresh. And made him admire even
more her sheer determination to survive.
“I’ll call Tootie and tell her to expect you.” Sophie Goldstein reached up and patted him on the cheek.
“Merry Christmas.”
There was a little spring in her step as she returned to her house. Sophie Goldstein, Problem Solver and
Amateur Ann Landers, had made everything right again.
If only everything else was so easy.
Theo  locked  the  front  door,  then,  container  of  sweets  under  one  arm,  stuck  his  head  through  his
bedroom doorway. No Jorie. He found her dressed in her sleeveless top and funky shorts, sitting on the
bed with Tammy, scanner beeping softly as colors swirled over the screen. He pried open the container’s
lid and plucked out a sticky honey puff. They were still warm. “Take a bite. You’ll like this.”
She did. He waited. A rapturous expression crossed her face. He grinned and  handed  one  to  Tammy,
whose coloring was still too pale. She chewed, then leaned back against her pillows with an appreciative
sigh.

Both women were licking their fingers when Theo’s cell phone trilled. He handed the container to  Jorie
and dug the phone out of his pocket.
Zeke. He flipped it open. “Amigo. What’s up?”
“You home?”
“Yeah. Why?”
“I’m five minutes out. Don’t go anywhere. I have to talk to you. Now.”
 
Theo watched Zeke  roll up around  back,  nosing his sedan  just behind the white SUV.  House  shields
were off. When Theo saw Zeke tuck a manila case folder under one arm as he shut the car door, Theo’s
personal shields went up.
Zeke had found something in FCIC or  NCIC  on Jorie.  Even though he knew,  logically, there  was  no
way that was possible, that’s the first thing that  jumped  into his mind. Jorie  was  not who she  said  she
was. Their growing closeness, their growing intimacy, was a sham. It was Camille all over again.
He was cursed, just like his old man.
Stop it, Petrakos!
Zeke climbed the short steps to the porch, his short-sleeved button-down shirt tucked into dark slacks,
his detective’s shield and gun clearly visible on his belt. This was no social call. Theo shoved the kitchen
door open before Zeke could reach for it.
“Jorie here?” Zeke  asked.  No  greeting. No  perfunctory  off-color  joke.  Not  even “Merry  Christmas,”
and, Christ, it was.
Fuck. “Yeah.”
“Go get her.”
Theo stepped back, then something warred within him. He had to know the truth before  he faced  her.
“Tell me why.”
Zeke tossed the folder on the kitchen table and flipped it open.
Hands clenched at his side, Theo stared at the photographs on the table. Relief and fear tumbled through
him. Three  parchment-wrapped,  wet-eyeball  mummies stared  back.  He  grabbed  the  photos.  “I’ll  get
her.”
 
Jorie stood at the galley table, Theo’s hand lightly on her shoulder, Zeke Martinez’s flat photographs at
her fingertips. She would have preferred holographs, where she could examine the bodies in more detail.
But this nil world made that impossible.
This nil world also affected her MOD-tech. Zombies had fed and she hadn’t known about it. When Theo
brought the photos into the bedroom, she’d immediately run a scan and a backup data grab. There was

no trace of any craving spur in her data, which still assured  her the zombies were  in a  negative phase.
Napping.
Obviously they weren’t.
“Tell me again why you think zombies did this.” Martinez leaned both hands on the back of a chair.
He still wasn’t convinced that what she and Theo had told him at Suzanne’s med facility was  true.  She
could hear that in his voice, see it clearly in his stance. But he had come here asking for her input. That
seemed to matter to Theo.
She outlined as simply as she could how the zombies used the portals, how, in their now-perverted quest
for viral infections, they were drawn to the warm, humid environment, the high rate of electromagnetism,
and, under the right stimuli, the life force of soft-fleshed sentients. How his world, his city, provided them
the perfect haven, enhanced by the fact that it was so far off the usual spacelanes  that  no civilized fleet
would think to come here. Except the Tresh.
But whether or not they were civilized was debatable.
Martinez puffed out his lips and blew a  sigh of exasperation.  Frustration.  Disbelief. Then he shook  his
head and raked one hand through his dark curly hair.
“The lieutenant’s going to Baker-Act us both,” he said to Theo.
A cryptic comment. She’d ask Theo later what the act of making bread had to do with the zombies. She
also wanted to ask him what he’d said in those odd, softly lyrical phrases when they were in the heat of
passion. But that definitely would have to wait.
She went back to the photographs. “This happened yesterday. You’re sure?” she asked Martinez.
“The bodies were discovered yesterday by the SO—the Sheriff’s Office. Two down at the east beach
on Fort Hernando. One by the Gandy Bridge.”
The locales meant nothing to her. “All by water?”
Martinez nodded. “We won’t know time or date of death until we get the ME’s report.”
“Medical examiner,” Theo added when she looked over her shoulder at him. “Med-tech who investigates
dead bodies.”
Then it could have occurred the day before, when she’d captured  the juvenile in the park.  Or  it could
have been…anytime. It was one of a tracker’s worst nightmares: insufficient data due to tech failure.
“Let me run the data one more time.” She headed for the bedroom, Theo and Martinez on her heels. She
folded herself down on the floor and slipped her headset over her hair. “Voice system activate, confirm
ident,” she  said,  and  then stopped,  realizing she’d  spoken  in  Vekran.  She  repeated  the  command  in
Alarsh and ignored the impulse to smack herself.
But there was nothing in the data.  She  even recalibrated  search  parameters  to  double  their usual grab
rate. Nothing. It had to be the lack of input from the ship’s seeker ’droids that was hampering her. When
the Sakanah disappeared, so did the ’droids. It was like working with one eye blinded.
Maybe that’s why Prow didn’t destroy these units. He knew they were ineffective. He—
Prow. Prow had been in here with Tamlynne. And she didn’t know for how long and doing what. A chill

clamped around her heart like a graknox’s jaws on its luckless prey’s head.
Theo hunkered down by her side. “What did you find?”
“It’s what I didn’t find. And what I,  stupidly, didn’t even  consider.  Prow  was  in  this  room  with  my
T-MOD.” She initiated a diagnostic but was fully aware that Prow might have assumed she’d do so and
taken countermeasures. She would have.
“Ass-faced demon’s spawn!” She shoved herself to her feet. Theo moved up with her but stepped back
as if he knew she had an overwhelming urge to hit something, hard.
She  spun  away  from  him  and  Martinez  and  strode  into  the  spare  room,  which  now  functioned  as
Tamlynne’s bedroom. Her lieutenant was sitting in the middle of the foldout bed, rocking back and forth.
“You work too hard, sir.” Her voice was dreamy.
Jorie’s anger spiked, then dissipated. Oh, Tamlynne. “Merely the usual problems, Lieutenant. It will be
okay,” she told her in Alarsh.
“Theo likes you.”
“I know, Tam.” Sometimes a flower  grows  in  hell.  It  was  an old,  overused  Kedrian  saying, but the
truth of it hit Jorie as it came into her mind. In this hell, she’d found Theo. The only positive thing in the
midst of all this. Even Tam, as disordered as she was by the effects of the Tresh implant, recognized that.
With a sigh, Jorie squatted down and sorted through the broken remains of the MOD-tech. It was time
to get creative.
She brought what she deemed salvageable back to Theo’s bedroom. Theo and Martinez’s voices filtered
in from the structure’s main room.
“I agree with you, Zeke, but I don’t think we have the luxury of time here,” Theo was saying. “The brass
will want to set up committees, research teams. They’re not going to just take Jorie’s word for this. I still
don’t think you believe her.”
Jorie tuned them out as she stripped out the components from the secondary T-MOD and  inserted  the
salvaged ones. All house shields were disengaged, except for the roof. PMaT transports were primarily
vertical. If the Tresh transported into the backyard and came through the door, rifles flaring, she’d have a
battle on her hands.
But her two  MOD  units couldn’t  maintain the shields, continue to  scan,  send  out a  scrambled  seeker
signal,  and  continue  to  interpolate  data  while  she  swapped  out  components.  It  was  as  if  she  were
working  under  battlefield  conditions  again.  Except  this  was  Guardian  MOD-tech,  not  Interplanetary
Marines. And, yes, that meant there were crucial differences, including the lack of necessary redundancy
and a reliance on a correlative data source—the ship, now unavailable.
She  resealed  the  units  and  restarted  the  tech  programs,  holding  her  breath  for  the  ubiquitous
program-failure warning screen. The blue screen from hell. When none appeared after five minutes, she
relaxed somewhat. First hurdle cleared.
But it would be  another  ten  minutes  for  the  units  to  completely  synchronize  and  another  ten  for  the
diagnostic to initialize and complete.
She pushed herself to her feet. She was thirsty. And perhaps a spoonful or more of that glorious peanut

butter. And a honey puff if Theo and Martinez hadn’t eaten them all.
She clipped her scanner to her utility belt. It erupted with a screech, sending her pulse racing. She jerked
it up, noted coordinates, then spun and grabbed her Hazer from the bed,  damning herself for dropping
the shields.
 
Theo heard the familiar screech, dropped the plastic container of honey puffs on the kitchen counter, then
pulled his gun out of the hip holster  under  his shirt. Only as  he lurched toward  the living room  did he
realize it was his Glock. Not the laser pistol. Too late. Something was  already  oozing out of the green
glow on his living-room wall.
“What the fuck?” Zeke rasped from behind him.
Theo knew Jorie had to be on the way in here,  but he couldn’t  take  a  chance.  He  fired rapidly three
times, center mass.
The zombie screamed,  its cry grating on his ears.  A  juvenile,  he  realized.  Razor-clawed  appendages
thrashed, neck twisted—damn! His new leather couch!
He saw the pinpoint of white and fired once more.
The head jerked back.  Four  arms flailed outward.  The creature  slammed against the wall and,  with a
violent shudder, crumpled to the floor.
A stream of Alarsh curses reached his ears. He shot a glance to his left. Jorie, double-stack rifle in her
hands.
“Is it…?” he asked her.
She angled the rifle down, then whipped up her scanner. She nodded. “Dead.” She turned to him, eyes
widening. She stared at the Glock in his hand. “You terminated it with…that?”
He looked down at his gun. “Yeah. But it didn’t disappear.”
She trotted over to where the zombie lay, serrated jaws agape, some kind of yellow liquid spilling onto
the floor. The worms writhing on its surface were slowing, spasming. She squatted down, ran the scanner
over the hideous length of the thing, then rose.
“Hell’s wrath,” she whispered,  and  raised  her gaze as  he stepped  next to  her.  “We  just might have a
chance.”
A gagging sound behind Theo made him turn. Zeke, hand over his mouth, looking decidedly green. The
detective’s  eyes  were  wide  as  he  bolted  for  the  kitchen  doorway  and  then—judging  from  the
sound—proceeded to lose his honey puffs in the sink.
 
Theo had never liked the yellow curtains in his spare bedroom, anyway.  Camille had  picked  them out.
He yanked them down and handed them to Tammy, who carried them without comment or question to
the living room. Jorie was explaining the different functions of the zombie’s appendages to  a  thoroughly
embarrassed Zeke  Martinez as  they awaited  Suzanne’s  arrival. If they had  to  move the zombie—and

Theo suspected Suzanne might want to take it back to her clinic—the curtains would come in handy. If
they didn’t move it, they would still come in handy. Just because he didn’t puke his guts out like Zeke did
when he first saw one didn’t mean he enjoyed looking at that thing on his living-room floor.
“Why didn’t the shields stop it?” he asked. Tammy was on his leather couch next to the pile of curtains.
She gave him a smile as he walked toward Jorie.
“I disengaged the shields when Martinez arrived,” Jorie said, and Theo nodded, remembering now. “All
but the overhead. I couldn’t reactivate them and repair my tech, so they stayed off. But I forgot that I’d
reduced their dimensions to fit within this structure’s walls. Because of her.” She pointed toward the front
window and, ultimately, Mrs. Goldstein’s house. “That left a gap. A slight one, but enough that a vertical
insertion could occur.”
“You’re saying the Tresh sent the zombie?”
“The Guardians have worked with the fact that the zombies’ appearances were at random locales even
when spurred by a craving. That no longer appears  to  be  true.  The Tresh  now can  control  them. It’s
almost as if they’ve returned to their original programming.”
“You sound pleased about that.”
“I am. Anything that can be programmed can be reprogrammed. Our problem has been that the zombies
defied programming for all these years. But there’s something that pleases me even more.” She glanced
up at him, head tilted, mouth slightly parted.
Oh, hell, yeah. He knew what pleased her more. Same thing that pleased him, and they’d done it twice
since early this morning. But he had a feeling that wasn’t at all what she was talking about.
Down, boy. Heel.
“Don’t keep me in suspense.”
“The Tresh sent this zombie in shielded. Another reason I know the Tresh now control them. I told you
about the shields the Devastators used here, the L-One and L-Twos.”
He nodded, grateful for all those years watching Deep Space Nine and Next Generation. He wouldn’t
even begin to guess what she was talking about if he hadn’t.
“This,” she pulled at the rifle strap slung over her shoulder,  “is the only thing I have that  can  penetrate
those shields. Devastator shield technology utilizes extremely complex phase patterns.”
“But you modified that Hazer, right? We don’t have any more of those.”
“We don’t need them. We have that.” And she pointed to his hip and his gun’s holster peeking out from
under the edge of his T-shirt.
He pulled out his gun and held it in his palm. “This?”
“Very basically, the shields are high-level energy fields used to counter high-level energy weapons. Not a
nil-tech projectile weapon that no one has seen, let alone used, in hundreds of years.”
He slid the gun back into his holster. “But the house shields reacted to my hand.”
“Because  they’re  patterned  to  counter  denser,  physical  intrusions.  A  body.  An  asteroid.  They  also
require a larger generator and a much larger energy source. Ships and  structures  can  maintain them. A

single individual’s personal portable shield generator cannot. It would be”—Jorie lifted her scanner—“at
least five times this size. It takes both my MOD-tech units in your bedroom  to  generate  a  basic  shield
around this structure, and that’s working them at capacity.”
Theo stared at her, trying to grasp all she said. It sounded like good news, though he wasn’t totally sure
why.
“How does this help us defeat  the Tresh?”  he asked  as  he heard  the sound  of a  car  pulling down  his
driveway. The edge of a red roof moving past his side window told him it was Suzanne’s Jeep Cherokee.
“It doesn’t, not exactly,” Jorie said. “What it does tell me is that I can get to the C-Prime  with far less
problems than I anticipated. The drones and juveniles guarding it will all be L-One  or  L-Two  shielded.
With only one  modified Hazer,  there  was  no way I could  defend  myself on all sides.  Even the Hazer
takes several concentrated shots to dissolve a shield. But if we have help,” Jorie glanced at Zeke sitting
on the arm of the recliner, listening, “and sufficient projectile weapons, we have a damned good chance.”
That sounded encouraging. “But why is its body still here?”
“First  guess,  without  studying  data?  Same  thing.  Your  projectile  weapon  simply  punctures,  thereby
ceasing the zombie’s functions. But it doesn’t  utilize energy as  an implosion catalyst  the way a  G-One
would.”
His porch door clanked  closed  and  then there  were  quick  steps  across  his tile kitchen floor.  Suzanne
arrived in blue jeans and a red T-shirt bearing the image of a  scowling orange  tabby  cat  wearing fake
fuzzy antlers on its head. Paw-Humbug! was in white lettering across the top.
“What do we have—” Suzanne stopped and stared down at the dead zombie lying against the wall. Then
she put her hands on her hips and, with a shake of her head, turned to Theo. “That’s the most butt-ugly
thing I’ve ever seen in my life.”
 
As Suzanne Martinez examined the zombie, Jorie checked on both MOD-tech units and,  satisfied they
were functioning, reinstated the house shields. Then she keyed in another diagnostic, looking for anything
Prow might have left behind. The program would run slowly due to the power drain from maintaining the
shields. But now that she had a possible solution close at hand, she was willing to wait for the results.
She returned to the main room and touched Theo on the arm. “House shields are activated.” She looked
at Martinez, then at his spouse. “You understand? Don’t exit, don’t open a window,  without telling me
first.”
“No more zombies, no Tresh?” Theo asked.
“In this room, no.”
“How’d they know we were here?” Martinez asked.
“They’re not sensing us.” Jorie gestured to Martinez, then to Tamlynne. “They’re sensing the resonance
of Guardian equipment. They may have been monitoring the shields, looking for changes.  Or  they may
have simply been taking a routine sweep of the area, knowing we’ve been here in the past. Either way,
when I changed shield patterns, they knew.”
That was why repairing tech in the field was  so  risky.  She’d  thought she’d  secured  the locale—it was

secured by Guardian standards. But not by marine field-combat standards. She had to work that way in
the future or it could cost lives.
Damning herself, she walked over to Tam on the couch and repeated her instructions about the shields in
Alarsh. Tam nodded. “Understand, sir.”
“I’ll keep  an eye  on her,”  Martinez  offered,  evidently  figuring  out  what  she’d  said  to  Tamlynne.  He
looked a little less pale, but Jorie noticed he was keeping his distance from the zombie. “How is she?”
“There’s some memory loss, some disorientation,” Jorie  told  him, moved  by his concern.  “I’ve seen  it
before. If we weren’t in this situation, it wouldn’t be an issue.”
“You really are from outer space.”
Jorie grinned wryly, in spite of her consternation. Martinez’s earnest  amazement was  almost endearing.
“It’s not outer space to me. The Chalvash System,  the worlds  of the Interplanetary  Concord,  and  the
spacelanes that connect them. That’s home to me. To us.” She nodded at Tamlynne.
“What are you going to do if you can’t get back?”
Jorie opened her mouth, then hesitated. It was the one thing never out of her mind, and yet she had  no
answer. Then she felt Theo’s hand brush her shoulder and come to rest against the back of her neck.
“She’ll be fine,” Theo said.
“Sorry.” Martinez splayed one hand outward in apology. “I shouldn’t have asked that.”
“The Guardians never abandon a team member,” she said finally. But they couldn’t rescue her and Tam if
they didn’t know they were alive.
Yet if they did, that would mean she’d never see Theo again. She wouldn’t let them send him to Paroo.
She’d tell whatever lie she had to in order to prevent that. His life was here: his friends, his neighbor, his
duty, his aunt and uncle he spoke so fondly of. She could never ask him to make that sacrifice. No, the
pain would be hers alone.
She pulled away from the warmth of Theo’s fingers—and the growing ache in her heart—and knelt down
next  to  Suzanne.  “There  are  some  components  I  need  extracted  from  its  chest.  It  will  have  to  be
invasive.” Next nil world she visited, she would make sure a JS-6-4 was standard equipment in all field
packs. “There may be fail-safes, autodestructs. The Tresh are famous for that. Can you do an extraction
here, or should we take this to your clinic?”
“The clinic. I have access to all my equipment there. Nina’s on duty again, but she won’t come in from
the kennel wing unless I ask her to, and I won’t. Plus, I don’t think it’s a good idea to leave this in Theo’s
living room. The neighbors might object when putrefaction sets in and it begins to smell.”
“God, Suzy, please!” Martinez looked pained.
“Ezequiel, my love, I’m still baffled how you ended up in Homicide.”
Martinez waved dismissively at Theo. “His fault.”
“I’ll drop  the rear  structure  shields,” Jorie  said  as  Theo,  behind her,  tried  unsuccessfully not to  laugh.
“Which vehicle?”
“Mine’s larger,” Theo said. “I’ll fold down the backseats. Zeke can ride with me—”

“I’ll ride with Suzy, thank you,” Martinez said quickly.
That feral grin Jorie loved so much played over Theo’s lips. “Okay, Jorie rides with me and the zombie.
What about Tammy?”
“She can come with us,” Suzanne offered. “You won’t have room.”
That was  probably  for the best.  Until Jorie  was  very sure  of  shield  integrity,  she  wasn’t  comfortable
leaving  Tamlynne  alone  in  Theo’s  structure,  even  though  physically  she  functioned  well.  She  hadn’t
panicked when the zombie appeared, and she’d assisted Theo with removing the viewport draperies with
no problems. In those ways, the lieutenant seemed to be healing.
Her conversations, however, were still disjointed. And there were no answers on the Tresh’s appearance
or Rordan’s disappearance.
“Let’s wrap this thing up.” Theo nudged the dead zombie’s shoulder with the toe of his boot. There was
a gurgling sound, and another gush of yellow liquid ran through its jaws. “Zeke, give me a hand?”
But Martinez’s hand was over his mouth. And he was moving as fast as he could out of the room.
 
20 
“I told you before. We don’t have that kind of time.” Theo paced the back hallway of Suzanne’s clinic.
Zeke had hoisted himself up onto a metal grooming table and sat, palms planted against the top, keeping
out of Theo’s way in the narrow corridor.
Smart move. Theo’d had a feeling this conversation was coming and, on the drive over, had done a lot of
thinking. His amusement over Zeke’s reaction to the zombie had faded in light of the very real problems
the creature portended. So he’d run through a  few scenarios  again, just as  he had  when he and  Jorie
returned to his house after the confrontation with the Tresh in Gulfview.
But this time, he caught the one big mistake. The downside to his answer to all their problems.  He  just
hoped it wasn’t too late to fix it.
He’d also made some very big decisions. And now that he had, he wanted to act on them. Stalling was
driving him crazy. There was too much at risk.
“Seeing that zombie thing will speed up the process, I think,” Zeke said.
“Negative. The chief will want FDLE called in, and FDLE will want the feds. Then there’ll be the usual
fight  over  who  heads  the  Zombie  Task  Force  and  who  gets  to  staff  it.  Us?  County?  The  National
Guard?” He understood Jorie’s objections so much more clearly now. “And where’s the funding coming
from? By that time the Tresh will have the whole herd in the ‘new and improved’ aisles and we’ll be  in
really deep shit.”
“We’re already in deep shit, amigo. She said  there  could  be  three  hundred  of these  things. There  are
only three of us. Those are not good odds.”
“Yeah, I know.” Theo stopped pacing and ran one hand through his hair. Okay, so he hadn’t worked out
all the kinks in his plan yet. “Plus, Tammy’s not much help.”

“Even if she could be, four is not good odds. We need to request at least a couple SWAT  teams.  For
starters.”
Theo shot a glance at Zeke. Yeah, he remembered thinking that was the answer. “I’m not dragging Jorie
into the chief’s office the day after Christmas.”
“I don’t think this can wait until tomorrow.  You said  yourself it’ll take  a  couple  days  to  set  things up.
Sooner  the  better.  Besides,  Brantley  knows  how  to  play  the  game.  If  anyone  can  cut  through  the
bureaucratic bullshit the feds can generate, the chief can.”
“That’s not the point.”
“Then what is? Face  facts.  We’ve  got a  potentially catastrophic  situation about  to  erupt  here.  Okay,
there’s going to be red tape, there’s going to be politics. But do  you really think they’re  going to  drag
their feet if hundreds of people could die? If nothing else, they’d be crucified by the news media. It’d be
the Hurricane Katrina fiasco all over again.”
“And what do you think,” Theo asked quietly as his friend voiced the one downside he’d overlooked and
now feared, “the news media will do to Jorie?”
Zeke’s mouth opened, then closed quickly.
“A freak  show,  Ezequiel. It’d  be  a  fucking freak  show.”  Everyone  would  want  a  piece  of  Guardian
Commander Jorie Mikkalah. The National Enquirer. The Jerry Springer Show. And worse. Bile rose
in Theo’s throat. How could he have been so stupid as not to realize what would happen? All this time
he’d seen the Guardians’ reluctance to reveal their presence as a selfish act. And he’d ignored what Jorie
told them the Guardians learned from experience: nil-tech worlds  routinely acted  illogically—sometimes
even violently—when faced with someone from another galaxy. “I’m not putting her through that.”
“The feds will never let that happen. They’ll put her under lock and key.”
Another scenario he’d come up with and feared. “I’m not letting that happen either.”
“Theophilus. I don’t think you have a choice.”
“Like hell I don’t.” Theo spun away from him and resumed pacing.
“What are you going to do, risk hundreds of people’s lives because you don’t want a bunch of scientists
in some  basement  room  of  the  Pentagon  asking  Jorie  questions?  I  think  she  can  handle  that.  She’s
probably been trained to handle that.”
Theo could see the tight, pained expression on Jorie’s face as she told him about her captivity with the
Tresh.  He  could  feel her shivering against him. He  could  see  her fingers  trace  the  rough  scar  on  her
shoulder.
He could see her getting into a black government sedan with darkened windows, knowing he’d never see
her again.
His breath shuddered out. This was the only scenario he’d agree to. And it too had flaws. “I’ll give them
the zombie, the weapons.” They had both Guardian and Tresh now. “I’m not giving them Jorie.”
“You can’t hide her in your spare room the rest of her life. She has no Social Security  number, no ID.
She can’t even get a job.” Zeke raised his arms in an exasperated motion. “Talk about an illegal alien!”

“I’ll get her an ID. A whole identity.”
Zeke stared at him. “Be serious.”
“I am.”
“You know what that costs, a good fake identity?”
“I can take equity out of my house to pay for it.”
Zeke barked out a harsh laugh. “Brilliant, Einstein. Traceable funds. There goes your career.”
“I’m not going to write a fucking personal check.” Theo glared at him. “I’m not that stupid.”
“Then listen to yourself, damn it! You’re talking felony jail time. Your life down the shitter. You do know
what they do to cops in the Graybar Hotel, don’t you?”
“You’re assuming I’d get caught.”
“No, she’d get caught, suddenly surfacing in all the databases.” Zeke ticked the items off on his fingers.
“She’d have to get a job, buy a car, rent an apartment—”
“Not if she’s living with me, she won’t.”
“Living with—what’re you going to do, Theophilus? Marry her?”
Theo raised his chin and met Zeke’s question with a hard stare. This was one of the decisions he’d made
driving through the bright Florida sunshine in the middle of Christmas Day with Jorie by his side. And a
dead zombie behind them. “Yes.”
“You’re—Ay, Jesucristo.” Zeke dropped his head in his hands, then lifted his face slightly and peered up
at Theo. “You got a thing for women with fake identities?”
The not-so-veiled reference to his disastrous marriage hit him like a  sucker  punch.  Theo  looked  away,
keeping his temper in check. But he couldn’t keep the anger out of his voice when he turned back. “I’m
sorely tempted to kick the shit out of you for saying that.”
Zeke straightened slowly, eyes wide then narrowing. “You want to take it outside, Theo? We can take it
outside.”
Theo needed to hit something. He really did. But Zeke Martinez wasn’t whom he needed to hit. It was
Rordan  and  Lorik  and  Jorie’s  captain  and  all the Guardians  who,  by their reluctance  to  consider  the
threat  of the Tresh,  got him and  Jorie  to  the point where  they were  now,  backs  against the wall  and
nowhere to go. And it was the Tresh and this guy Prow. Oh, how he needed to hit Prow. Get him in a
choke hold and watch the life drain from his iridescent eyes.
But Zeke wasn’t Prow or Rordan or the Guardians. Zeke was his partner. His best detective. He ran his
hand over his face.
“You got your fancy clothes on, amigo.” He looked at Zeke out of the corner of his eye. “Suzanne will
kill me if you get them dirty.”
Zeke studied him for a few heartbeats, then snorted. “You ’fraid of my old lady?”
“Hell, yeah.”

“Me too.”  Zeke  brushed  invisible dirt off his thighs. “I probably  should have changed  after  Mass  this
morning, but when Barrington—we were talking in the parking lot after church—when he told me about
these weird mummy bodies one of his deputies had found, all I could think of was getting to the SO  to
see what they had.”
On Christmas. The bad guys never take a holiday, Uncle Stavros always said. Theo nodded. “Thanks.
And, hey, I’m sorry. I shouldn’t—”
“She’s got you all wrapped up in knots, doesn’t she?”
Actually, his feelings for Jorie were one of the few things he had no problems with. “This situation has me
wrapped up in knots. It’s not only Jorie. There’s Tammy. Jorie’s more worried about her than she says,
and I know she feels responsible for what happened. Both of them are suffering in their own ways.” He
shook his head. “I keep thinking I’m going to wake up and it’s all a bad dream.”  Except  for Jorie.  He
wanted to wake up and find her beside him.
“There’s only  one  way  to  end  the  bad  dream,  and  you  know  it.  We  contact  the  lieutenant  and  he
contacts the chief. Bring ’em here to see Big Butt-Ugly—”
“Baby Butt-Ugly,” Theo corrected.
“—and we go in loaded for bear.”
Theo’s brain knew Zeke was right. But Theo’s heart was afraid he’d lose Jorie in the process.
 
It was a damning discovery. One made possible, Jorie told Theo and Zeke as they stood in the doorway
of the brightly lit examining room, only because Lorik’s final report had pinpointed what she  needed  to
do to find proof of the mutations. Doing that had taken Jorie and Suzanne almost two hours.
Theo listened intently as she went down the list: a zombie with an embedded personal shield. A zombie
with an accelerated growth rate, a maturity beyond its stated numerical age. A zombie that not only took
data and guidance from the C-Prime but was now able to regenerate a portion of what it used and send it
back.
Making the C-Prime stronger. Making the C-Prime able to control a megaherd.
No longer a parasitic relationship, with the herd draining the C-Prime until the herd was forced to  split,
but almost trophobiosis: a feeding, a mutual protection.
Jorie put her scanner down on a nearby metal table. “Questions?”
From down  the corridor,  Theo  could  hear  Suzanne’s  soft  voice and  a  low squeal  of excitement from
Tammy. Suzanne had said she wanted to try something to help Tam focus, and judging from the glimpse
of fluff a few moments ago, she’d brought a kitten out of the kennel and placed the creature in Tammy’s
arms.
Just as well. Tammy didn’t need to hear about these new and improved zombies, anyway.
“How many are there, total?” Zeke was asking.
“Last count was three hundred eleven,” Jorie told him, “but we terminated a few. If they’ve regenerated

those, they’re still in the egg stage.”
Egg? Theo did not want to see what zombie eggs looked like.
Zeke nodded. “How long from egg to zombie?”
“In your planetary terms?” Jorie closed her eyes for a moment. “Two weeks, your time, egg to hatchling.
They  grow  quickly  after  that.  Three  weeks  to  primary  juvenile.  Another  four  to  six,  depending  on
availability of foodstuffs, to full juvenile.”
“But that’s  the old zombies,” Theo  said,  remembering information she’d  given him  over  the  past  few
days. “Not the new and improved.”
“I have no idea of the time line now, other than it would be faster. And I don’t know if it accelerates all
stages  or  just  one.  Egg  to  hatchling,  maybe.  Or  juvenile  to  drone.  I’d  need  time  to  determine  that
answer.”
And time, Theo knew, they didn’t have.
Zeke caught that as well. “In another two, three months there could be a hundred more of these things.”
“At minimum. There are no sexes. All zombies can replicate and can do so every six days when needed
to expand the herd or to populate out a new one.” Jorie motioned toward an adjoining room, where the
corpse of the zombie lay. “I can show you—”
“No thanks.” Zeke closed his eyes and waved his hands in front of his face. “Pass.”
Theo pushed away from the wall. There was something they were all missing here. Another factor. “The
Tresh know we know this. They have to know we have the zombie.”
“They also  know  I have no ship here,  minimal weapons.  They  must  know  what  I  figured  out—your
projectile weapons can easily pierce their shields. This isn’t a flaw they’ll fix by tomorrow. But three, four
days to design a correction?” She shrugged. “Another three or four to recalibrate their tech? I wouldn’t
discount it.”
She’d been elated when she’d realized a Tresh shield couldn’t stop a bullet. He had too, still thinking of
some kind of small, private army. Nothing official. Nothing that would put Jorie’s face in the news. Just
cops he could trust. With the full understanding that if something went wrong—if the brass or the media
found out about his band of zombie vigilantes—he would take the fall. No question. He accepted that.
But putting together  his vigilantes would take  time, with people  being on different shifts and  away  for
vacation. Two, three weeks, he could pull something together.
“So we have a small window in which to act, both on the zombies reproducing the mutation and on the
Tresh shoring up their defenses,” Theo said. “Do we have two weeks, at least? One?” New Year’s Eve?
Could he pull this off by New Year’s Eve?
“The more we delay, the more we give the Tresh the chance to reconfigure for projectiles,”  Jorie  said.
“Two weeks from now there will be more zombies, and two weeks from now Tresh defenses will have
improved. More people may die. My team and I have worked situations like that before, where we were
brought in much later than we should have been. But it was only the zombies we fought, not the Tresh.
And we fought them with full squadrons of gravrippers.
“Remind me someday,” she told him with a nod as he paced to the other side of the room, “to tell you

about  Delos-Five.  Three  hundred  fifty  thousand  people  died  before  the  Delos  pritus  agreed  to  let
Guardian squadrons into their airspace.”
He had no idea what a pritus was—some kind of head honcho or group,  he assumed—but  he clearly
heard the pain in her voice at what she must have perceived as failing in her duty. A duty he knew he was
asking her to delay.
“We have a chance to avoid that stupidity, the senseless waste of life here,” she said as he paced back.
“Without a squadron of those gravrippers?” Zeke asked.
Jorie picked up her scanner and slid it into its holder under her sweater. “I don’t intend to chase  down
the C-Prime. I’m going to trigger a craving and bring it to me.”
Bring the C-Prime to her? Panic jolted Theo. He gripped the edge of the table. “That’s suicide.”
“I’ve done it before—”
“A C-Prime? Alone?”
“No, but—”
Theo leaned closer. “With insufficient tech and no emergency transport?”
“You never transit in close proximity to a zombie. It’s too risky. Five maxmeters is the initial safe zone.”
“I saw that feeding frenzy, Jorie.  I got tagged  by one,  for Christ’s  sake.  When you’re  surrounded  by
zombies, there is no safe zone.”
“I just need one shot at the C-Prime.”
“One shot? At the heart, right? And if you miss?”
She met his gaze squarely. “I’m not going to kill it. I’m going to reprogram it.”
A vision of her climbing up the damned  thing and  shoving  a  DVD  in  its  jaws  jumped  into  his  mind.
Insanity. “Reprogram it?”
“I’m going to use the accelerated exchange rate at which the zombies now interact to spread  a  kind of
virus among them. If I start with the C-Prime, then everyone—every one,” she stressed, “will be infected.
The C-Prime will give it to the juveniles, who’ll give it to the drones, who’ll bring it back—multiplied in
strength,  unless  Lorik’s  calculations  are  in  error—to  the  C-Prime.”  She  paused.  “They’ll  terminate
themselves.”
“The Tresh can’t counteract that?” Zeke asked.
“They’ll try. If they hadn’t created a  megaherd  and  instead  worked  in smaller herds  with a  number of
C-Primes, they could isolate several of the herds and correct the problem, maybe only losing one or two
herds in the process. But here, everything is tied to one zombie. Once the C-Prime’s functions begin to
fail, the herd will lose cohesiveness. It can’t split for safety, because there’s no strong, healthy secondary
C-Prime rising in the ranks  to  give that order,  no uninfected secondary  C-Prime  to  keep  things under
control. Once the C-Prime terminates, the infected herd will feed on itself.”
The sound of Suzanne’s laughter filtered in. Theo glanced out the door as Zeke did, then he turned back
to Jorie. “Couldn’t you kill the C-Prime and have the same result?”

“That  would  disorient  the  herd,  yes.  But  it  wouldn’t  guarantee  that  a  secondary  C-Prime  wouldn’t
develop, especially with the Tresh involved. We need them all sick and dying, the stronger feeding on the
weaker,  ingesting  their  virus,  weakening  and  becoming  prey  themselves.  That’s  the  only  way  I  can
guarantee the Tresh will have nothing to work with.”
Theo massaged the growing ache between his eyebrows  with two  fingers. “I cannot  let you take  on a
C-Prime by yourself—”
“You do not hear my words.” Jorie was shaking her head, as if she were chastising him for forgetting to
pick his socks up off the floor, not discussing a suicidal attempt at bagging a giant zombie. “I never said I
was doing this alone. I said I would be the one responsible for targeting the C-Prime. Anyone else who
cares to help will have more than enough to keep themselves busy.”
Anyone  else  who  cares  to  help.  Meaning  more  than  just  Zeke.  Theo  stared  at  her.  “And  your
regulations that forbid contact with my people?”
“The regulations you kept demanding I break?” She raised her arms, then let them fall to her sides. “I see
no  other  possible  way  to  solve  this.  And  I  have  to.  I’m  a  Guardian  Force  commander.  It’s  my
responsibility to protect all worlds from the problem we created. The fact  that  I’m the only functioning
Guardian on this planet doesn’t change that. I have to violate the no-contact rule. But I will not break the
one demanding I follow my duty.”
“No. Wait.” Theo held up one hand.
“What do you mean, wait?” She put her hands on her hips. “You’ve been a one-note symphony since I
arrived on your world, telling me we must get your people involved.”
“And you gave me war  stories  of all the problems  that  happen  when Guardians  reveal  themselves  to
nil-techs,” he shot back.
“Yes. They want our ships, our jumpdrives, our tech, our weapons. Well, there’s no ship for your people
to have unless the Tresh  offer theirs,  and  I doubt  they will. I couldn’t  build a  jumpdrive if you held a
Hazer to my head. As for tech, I’m going to have to reconfigure much of what I have in your residence
just to adapt my Hazer and create the reprogramming dart with the virus. I have my scanner, of course.
And Tam’s, though I may need to use that for parts as well.” She shrugged. “I have the G-Ones and the
two  Tresh  weapons.  But  there’s  nothing  I  can  give  your  people  that  will  bring  them  up  to  the
technological level of the Guardians or help them get off this ball of dirt any faster.  I can  only tell them
that, yes, other civilizations are out there and, yes, interstellar travel is possible. If they even believe me.”
But they would believe her. Seeing the zombies and dissecting the dead ones  would convince even the
staunchest of skeptics. Which meant only two things: the zombies and Jorie would be all over the news
channels, or they wouldn’t—they’d be in the deepest basement of the Pentagon.
Theo couldn’t live with either outcome. He had to develop a third choice. A way to stop the zombies and
the Tresh. A way to keep Jorie safe.
In less than a week.
He saw  Zeke  flip open  his cell phone.  Theo  shot  him a  warning  glance.  “What  do  you  think  you’re
doing?”
“Just going to wish Lieutenant Stevens a Merry Christmas. And see if he wants to meet a zombie.”
Theo closed his hand around the phone. “Give me a few hours.”

“Theophilus—”
“A few hours.”
“The clerk’s office is closed. You can’t apply for a marriage license until tomorrow.”
He was aware of Jorie watching them and listening. He glanced over his shoulder at her while he hung on
to Zeke’s phone. “How long will it take you to make this reprogramming dart?”
“If the ship were here? Two sweeps. Now?” She blew an exasperated  sigh through her lips. “Earliest,
two days. Moonrise, day after tomorrow. Or sunwake of the next.”
Well, it beat the hell out of two hours.
“Two days.” He plucked Zeke’s cell phone from his fingers, snapped it closed, then handed  it back  to
him. “Two days.”
“Providing we’re not attacked by any more zombies,” Jorie added.
“You know, the fun just never stops.” Theo grabbed her hand and  pulled her around  the table  toward
him. “Go find Tammy. It’s time to go home.”
 
Jorie went in search  of Tamlynne, very aware  she  had  no idea  of what was  going on in Theo’s  head
anymore. She thought he’d be  bliss-infused to  learn she  was  willing to  work  with his people.  He  was
furious. She thought he’d want to attack the problem right away. He was hesitating.
Following the sound of Suzanne’s voice, she found Tam in the clinic’s small mess hall. It smelled of that
coffee Theo so loved. Tam and  Suzanne were  sitting at  a  square  table.  Between  them, a  dancing and
pouncing kitten—she was very sure that was the Vekran word—with bluish-gray fur attacked small balls
of paper that Tam, laughing, flicked across the tabletop.
Suzanne looked up when Jorie entered. “This has helped,” she said softly, motioning to the kitten.
“Look, sir! Isn’t he wonderful?” Tam ran her hand over the small back.
A sentence. A full sentence in Alarsh. No hesitation. No singsong inflection. Jorie shot a quick glance at
Suzanne, then back to Tam again. “He’s very handsome,” she answered, also in Alarsh.
“Suzanne say,” Tam switched to Vekran, “cute. The cat is cute.” She hesitated between each word, but
it wasn’t  the hesitation Jorie  had  heard  before  but rather  the normal one  of  someone  learning  a  new
language. Vekran. English.
“Yes?” Tam continued, looking at Suzanne. “Correct?”
“That’s correct.” Suzanne nodded. “The cat is cute.”
Tam patted the table. “Table. Chair. Maga. Zine.” She touched or pointed to the different items, naming
them. “Ceelink. Vindow.”
“I’ve been  doing basic  right-brain–left-brain  exercises  with her,”  Suzanne told  Jorie.  “You understand
what I mean by that?”

Jorie nodded,  her throat  tight.  Suzanne’s  compassion  for  Tam,  a  stranger,  was  a  rare  blessing.  “So
there’s hope?” she managed after a moment.
“Her mind and her body need time to heal. Your doctors have machines to speed that up. We don’t. All
I can do is keep her exercising her brain, her senses. And hope whatever memories were repressed will
surface.”
Tam cradled the kitten and placed a soft kiss on its head.
Jorie pulled out a  chair and  sat.  “Lieutenant,”  she  said  in  Alarsh.  “Guardian  Force  Field  Regulation,
Section Twelve, Paragraph Three, Subsection A.”
Tam blinked. “If…if shielding malfunctions and cannot be repaired, the T…the T…” She frowned. “The
T-MOD, yes! The T-MOD must be destroyed. Sir.” She looked at Jorie and smiled.
Jorie smiled back, a small weight lifting from her heart.
“What was that?” Suzanne asked, one eyebrow lifting.
Jorie switched back to Vekran. “Something every green-as-liaso-hedges ensign would know. One of the
most-quoted Guardian regulations. I gave her the cite. She replied with the regulation. She stumbled a bit,
but she repeated it.”
“Are you and Theo going to take her back to his house?” Suzanne asked as Jorie heard  the sounds  of
footsteps approaching.
“He asked that I retrieve her.”
Suzanne laid her hand on Jorie’s arm. “A suggestion. Let her stay with Zeke and me for a day or two.”
“Who’s staying with us?” Zeke Martinez came up behind Suzanne.
The dark-haired woman turned. “I’d like Tamlynne to spend a few days at our house, Ezequiel. Hear me
out.” She raised one hand. “I am a doctor.  Tam’s been  through a  traumatic experience,  one  her brain
associates with a certain location. I think the fact that she’s improved since she came here—aside from
the hour or  so  I’ve  worked  with her—is  because  she’s  no longer having flashbacks  or  reacting to  an
implanted autosuggestion triggered by being in Theo’s house. I want to keep her out of the environment
she associates with the attack.”
“But—”
“We have the room. The guest room your mother uses when she visits.”
“—it’s Christmas,” Martinez finished.
“Yes. And where’s your generosity of spirit?”
“It could be dangerous, Suzy.” Theo  perched  on the edge  of the table.  Jorie  felt his hand rest  on her
shoulder. “The Tresh could come gunning for her.”
“Then why haven’t they?” Suzanne asked. “They haven’t come to this clinic.”
Theo looked down at Jorie, one eyebrow slightly arched.
“They follow tech and PMaT trails,” Jorie said. “The Tresh knew about your residence  because  of the

Guardian tech there. The same way I found the structure they were using.”
“I know Zeke asked you this before, but are you sure there’s no way they knew you were in my house
when they sent  the zombie?” Theo  motioned to  the corridor  where  the dead  zombie’s body  now  lay
secured in a cold-storage unit.
“I can’t tell you what they know,” Jorie said. “But I can tell you that if I were working a  nil world  and
saw Guardian shields over a structure and Guardian tech trails emanating from that  same  structure,  I’d
feel fairly sure a Guardian was in that vicinity.”
Which was how they found Danjay Wain. She had no doubt of that now.
“And since I have Tamlynne’s scanner and the Tresh implant has been removed,” Jorie continued, “they
have no way of tracking her specifically. If anything, they’d return to the implant’s last signal, and that’s
Theo’s residence. Not here and not your residence,” she said with a nod to Martinez.
“It’s not rocket  science,  Theo.”  Martinez punched  Theo  lightly on the  arm.  “Get  it?  Rocket  science.
Outer-space aliens.”
Jorie frowned. “Starship propulsion has nothing—”
Theo ruffled her hair. “Don’t encourage him. Please.”
“So it’s settled?”  Suzanne asked,  glancing from Jorie  to  Zeke.  “Tam comes  home  with  us  for  a  few
days?”
“I think it’s wise.” Jorie reached over and stroked the kitten’s soft head. “I’ll tell her she has to help you
care for the companion. The kitten. Her family had many when she was a child. It’s a high honor on her
world.”
She  translated  everything  to  Alarsh  and  watched  a  light  of  happiness  glow  in  Tam’s  eyes  as  she
enthusiastically accepted her new “assignment.”
Theo pulled Jorie to her feet. “Zeke, keep in touch with me.”
“Yes, boss.”
Jorie reached for Suzanne’s hand and clasped it, trying to convey through touch what words could not.
Then  it  was  just  her  and  Theo  in  the  white  land  vehicle,  pulling  away  from  Suzanne’s  clinic.  And
Tamlynne Herryck. The only other Guardian—the only other person—on this world who spoke Alarsh
and who knew what it was like to travel between the stars.
Jorie had never felt so alone.
 
21 
“Hungry?” Theo’s voice broke into Jorie’s troubled thoughts as the Essuvee rumbled away from Suzanne
Martinez’s companion facility.
She  took  her  gaze  away  from  her  scanner,  where  she’d  outlined  the  initial  parameters  for  her
reprogramming virus, and—after  a  short  conversation  with her stomach—nodded.  “I need  to  get  this

transferred to my T-MOD. We have more peanut butter, yes?”
“Is three hours going to make a huge difference?”
She interpreted  that to  mean he wasn’t  intending to  head  back  to  his residence—and  her tech—right
now. “Overall, no.” Everything was so uncertain without the tech  and  a  team to  compile needed  facts.
“But I can’t afford any more mistakes here.”
“You haven’t—”
“I have.” She  recited  the list of sins  that  were  now  emblazoned  in  her  mind.  “I  should  have  alerted
Tamlynne and  the ship when I picked  up that  dead  zone.  I don’t  know  if  Captain  Pietr  would  have
listened to me. Probably not, and, yes, I could have risked his questioning my competence. But Tamlynne
would have listened. Acted. She would have been ready for Prow. And Rordan—”
His hand squeezing hers  stopped  her words.  “You don’t  know  for sure.  Second-guessing  yourself  is
going to create more mistakes, because you’re not going to trust your instincts when you need them.”
“My instincts say I need to get this program started.”
With a sigh, Theo turned the vehicle around. “Okay, get it started. But my instincts say you need a break.
You’ve immersed yourself in this for too long. We have an old saying about  not being able  to  see  the
forest for the trees. You understand that?”
She did. “But—”
“We’ll stop home. You get your computers working on this thing. Then I want to get you out of the forest
for a  while. Plus,” he paused  and  glanced  at  her  quickly,  then  back  to  the  traffic  ahead,  “I’ve  been
thinking about how the Tresh hone in on your tech. The more we’re there, the greater risk we have of a
confrontation with them.”
He had a point. Still…“You’d rather return to find a zombie has sliced up your main room?”
“Than confront it? Yes. Every confrontation distracts us—distracts you—from what needs  to  be  done.
Every confrontation risks lives. Something happens to you, Jorie, and we have no hope of stopping these
things. You’re the only one who understands how they function.” He slowed the vehicle as the dangling
lights changed to red. “If we could all go live at Zeke and Suzanne’s for the next week until the zombies
are stopped, I’d be a lot happier.”
“The shields are secure,” she argued.
“The shields tell the Tresh where you are,” he countered.
But the shields were necessary to protect the tech, and the tech was necessary to stop the zombies. She
understood  his concerns  but saw  no options.  She  went back  to  her  calculations  on  her  scanner,  not
raising her head until Theo guided the land vehicle behind his structure.
Armed, they both exited the vehicle and—as she temporarily dropped the back sector shields—entered
his residence. But nothing challenged them. She gave him an “I told you so” nod as  she  headed  for his
bedroom. Once on the floor, she segued her small scanner to the larger of the two MOD-tech units.
She was  peripherally aware  of Theo  moving about  his  residence.  At  one  point  he  changed  his  shirt,
buttoning up a new one, then brought her a glass of water.

“Done yet?”
“Almost.”  She  wondered  how  long  she  could  keep  saying  “almost.”  Once  the  programming  began
running, it didn’t need  her input.  But  working  with  the  familiar  MOD-tech,  speaking  Alarsh  into  her
oc-set’s mike, was comforting.
Then Theo was kneeling behind her, hands on her shoulders. “Now, Jorie.”
It wasn’t a question. She sighed and stood. She had a feeling she knew where he wanted to go, and she
fully understood. But it made her nervous—and not only because she’d be away from her tech.  “Two,
three sweeps,” she told him as they entered  his kitchen.  “Then I must get back  here.”  The back  door
clanked shut behind her. She sealed his residence’s shields and followed him down the porch steps.
“I want to see my aunt and  uncle. It’s  Christmas.  You understand  what that  means?” he asked  as  he
backed the vehicle out of his residence’s narrow paved accessway.
“Only that it’s a  day  of observation  for you.  An important one.”  She  glanced  at  him.  Moonrise  was
approaching, the world’s natural light dimming. It was an experience that still struck her as odd. Shiplight
was so much better. More consistent.
Plus, moonlight meant night, a  time the Tresh  preferred  to  move.  She  shook  off her unease  and  went
back to his question about his Christmas. “You’re also thinking you might not see them again.”
He looked over quickly. “You reading minds now?”
She’d  known  that’s  where  he  wanted  to  go  because  it’s  what  she  always  did  before  she  left  on  a
dangerous mission: see the people most important to her. “I’ve spent most of my adult life either targeting
a sentient or being a target. Every time I see Galin, I always treat it as if it’s the last one.”
“Galin?” Theo’s voice had a strained note. “Don’t tell me. Another concord?”
She frowned at him. “Not with my brother!”
“I didn’t know you had a brother.”
Sadness trickled past her heart. “Yes.” It had been three galactic years since she’d seen him.
“Is he a Guardian too?”
She shook her head. “He designs starship jumpdrives. The thing that makes—”
“I understand  jumpdrives.  Hyperspace.”  He  lowered  the  pitch  of  his  voice.  “Warp  Factor  Ten,  Mr.
Data.” He pointed one finger. “Engage.”
Warp factor? How did he know the term? “Warp Factor Ten is fiction and, besides, denotes an infinite
velocity and therefore is impossible.”
They were stopped due to the edict of multicolored lights. Theo stared at her. She stared back. She felt
that for some reason her comment had startled him. The vehicle moved forward again.
“What size do you wear?” he asked.
His question made so little sense in the current conversation about her brother  and  jumpdrives that  she
tried translating it in a few other galactic tongues. It still made no sense. She gave up. “Size?”

He plucked at his shirt. “Clothing size.”
“What does that have to do with jumpdrives?”
“Nothing. But it has everything to do with Aunt Tootie and Uncle Stavros.” He slowed the vehicle again,
then turned left into a large paved area. “God bless Walgreens. They never close.”
“Never clothes?”
Theo disengaged the vehicle’s engine and twisted in his seat. “The shorts,  sweater,  boots”—he  tapped
her arm, then her leg—“won’t pass muster with Tootie on Christmas. But I stopped here last week to get
a soda. It amazed me what these places sell now.”
“Soda?” Jorie was very lost.
That feral smile played over his lips. “You’ll see.”
What Jorie saw, as she followed Theo into the establishment, was a commissary. A decent-size one with
a wide selection  of  items,  most  in  brightly  colored  boxes.  He  threaded  his  fingers  through  hers  and
brought her to an aisle that contained…clothes. Not many. Most appeared to be shirts of the type Theo
favored—short-sleeved  and  round-necked.  But  these  were  lettered:  Life’s  a  Beach.  And  What
Happens in Bahia Vista Beach Stays in Bahia Vista Beach.
“Just some touristy stuff,” Theo said. “But this might work.”
It was a slender sleeveless dress, ankle length, deep green in color splashed with large white flowers. The
material was very lightweight but soft. It looked like something worn in Paroo, and she said so.
“Hawaiian,” he said.
Another nonsensical word.
“Flip-flops,” he said, dropping a pair of white sandals dotted with lots of tiny gold beads on the floor next
to her feet. “Women wear them everywhere these days.”
Dress and shoes were chosen in the proper  size. A colorful satchel  with a  shoulder  strap  was  added,
along with a soft, long-sleeved light-blue shirt—sweatshirt, Theo termed it—with Bahia  Vista,  Florida
on the front and  a  matching pair  of  shorts.  Jorie  followed  Theo  to  the  front  of  the  commissary  and
watched him hand greenish pieces of paper to a pale-skinned female with purple streaks in her short dark
hair and a line of gold hoop earrings draped over the outside curve of her left ear.
“Wow, who does your hair?” the female asked her.
“She’s not from around here.” Theo draped one arm over Jorie’s shoulder. “Somewhere she can change
into this dress?”
“You guys going to a beach party? Customer restrooms are in the back. Go down the vitamin aisle and
you’ll see the door.”
“Thanks.” Theo nudged Jorie forward. “Merry Christmas.”
Jorie  felt  silly  changing  her  clothes,  but  she  understood.  In  many  civilizations,  mode  of  dress  was
indicative of stature. Theo was taking her to see cherished elder family. When in Vekris…
She put her tracker clothes, socks, and boots into the plastic bag provided by the commissary and  her

scanner inside the satchel. She took a moment to scrub freshwater—so delightfully plentiful here—over
her face and run wet fingers through her hair. Then she pulled the dress over her head. It was rather nice,
narrow at the waist and flaring slightly over her hips. Slit up both sides. Good. If she had to run or kick
out in battle, she could do so. She slipped her feet into the sandals—definitely not battleworthy.
Then she marched out of the small room.
Theo was leaning against the wall. His eyes widened. For reasons she couldn’t quite explain, she blushed.
Theo stared at her as if she were the last morsel of peanut  butter  in the universe and  he was  starving.
“Hot damn.”
Hot? She did feel a little warm.
He slipped his hand into hers. “C’mon. Aunt Tootie can’t wait to meet you.”
 
“So nice to see you got dressed up, Theophilus,” Aunt Tootie said in mock sternness as Theo opened the
back door and stepped into her kitchen. Savory, mouthwatering aromas  of meat juices and  the yeasty
tang of baking assaulted him immediately.
This was the house that he’d always thought of as home—a rambling pale-yellow  stucco  Florida  ranch
with the ubiquitous barrel-tile roof, on a corner lot filled with scrub  palm, orange,  and  grapefruit trees.
The house was within a few blocks of the bayou—a  site of much boyhood  mischief—but it was  Aunt
Tootie’s kitchen that held the most memories.
He swept the small, silver-haired woman into his arms, chuckling. Tootie was laughing too. She’d been a
cop’s wife since she was twenty years old and was well used to her husband appearing in all manner of
dress when he was working, and she believed Theo—in jeans and a black silk camp shirt that covered
his gun on his hip—was working today.
Jorie’s outfit, however, was another matter. The shorts and long sweater would have been an immediate
negative in Tootie’s eyes.
He kissed her cheek. “Kala Christouyenna,” he told her, wishing her a Merry Christmas.
Tootie stood on tiptoes to frame his face with her hands and kissed him soundly on both cheeks. “Kala
Christouyenna! S’agapo.”
Theo watched dark-brown eyes twinkle. “Love you too.  Now…”  And he turned  her slightly. Here  it
comes. Tootie had hated Camille on sight. “Titania Petrakos, this is Jorie Mikkalah.”
“Jorie.” Tootie extended her hand, her face and tone completely unreadable. She would have made  an
excellent detective. “How nice to meet you. Welcome to our home.”
Jorie took her hand. “Thank you. Theo said”—she glanced up at him, and he saw an unexpected sadness
in her eyes—“this is a family time for you. I’m honored that you permit me to share it.”
The first flicker of emotion crossed  Tootie’s  round  face.  A softening? Theo  wasn’t  sure.  “It  must  be
difficult for you to be away from your family. Theo said you’re from—”
“Up north,” Theo put in with a wave of one hand, delineating some distant place. Real distant. “Way up

north.”
Tootie patted Jorie’s hand. “You’ll get to experience your first Greek Christmas, then.”
Thank God it was a Greek Christmas. Had it been one with a turkey and green beans on the table, there
would have been a lot more explaining to do when Jorie didn’t know what those dishes were.
But hungry people eat instead of talk. Theo and Jorie ate, and ate well. Jorie’s fondness for peanut butter
quickly extended to his aunt’s cooking, and the obvious delight on her face  as  she  tasted  each  offered
dish and treasured each morsel gave a whole new meaning to the word savoring.
Still, Theo could tell she was nervous. The small macramé tote bag with her scanner and G-1 was never
out of her reach, and several times he saw her touch it, as if for reassurance. And he suspected her trips
to the bathroom were more to check her scanner than to powder her nose.
At the end of the meal, Theo helped Tootie and Jorie clear the table and put back the traditional wooden
bowl of water with the basil-wrapped cross—a Greek tradition to keep the evil Kalikantzri at bay. He
hadn’t seen a zombie since this morning. Must be working.
Then he left the two women discussing Sophie Goldstein’s honey puffs and headed for the living room.
He  was  a  bit  concerned  leaving  Jorie  with  his  aunt,  but  not  overmuch.  Jorie’s  mastery  of  English
was—except for her accent, which was something of a cross between French and British—damned near
perfect now.
Besides, if she  blew it, it didn’t matter.  He  hadn’t  been  so  insistent on seeing his aunt and  uncle only
because it was Christmas. He was going to tell Stavros the truth.
In case he was killed. He hadn’t ruled out the possibility, because he knew Jorie was bound to try some
wild scheme. And he knew he’d be there, right beside her.
Theo settled on the blue-and-yellow tropical-print couch  in front of the television—a nice wide-screen
plasma.  Couple  years  old  but  still  had  a  good  picture.  A  basketball  game  was  on.  He  watched
disinterestedly for a few minutes while Uncle Stavros  brought  back  his second  plate  of syrup-covered
melomakarana.
Stavros Petrakos—a bear of a man with a full head of thick gray-streaked  dark  hair and  eyebrows  to
match—sat down with a grunt. “Want one?”
“No room.” Theo waved one hand. “Well, okay. One more.”
Stavros snorted. “Cops and doughnuts.”
“Pot calling the kettle…”
“How’s things on the job?”
“Job’s good.”  It  was.  Theo  couldn’t  think of anything he wanted  to  do  more  than being a  cop.  “Got
some budgetary wranglings coming up, but they’ve already approved the new MDTs.”
“How did we ever do the job without computers in the cars? Ha!” Stavros licked his fingers. “Pretty gal
you got there. How old is she?”
Theo knew the answer to that one now. “Thirty-nine.”
“Doesn’t look a day over thirty—Skata! You see that foul?” His uncle pointed to the television. “Illegal

elbow if I ever saw one.” He paused. “She divorced?”
Theo was ready with the recitation. “Never been  married,  though she  was  engaged  once.  Broke  it off
because the guy cheated on her. No kids. Has a lot of responsibility in her job—she’s fairly high up the
food chain. Well liked, well respected. Real team leader, you know? And, oh, she was in the marines.”
A melomakarana stopped in midair. “Marines?”
“Flew combat.”
“For Canada?”
“Multinational force, actually.”
“You’re pulling your old uncle’s leg, right?”
“Nope.” And it’s going to get worse. “Remember that UFO sighting out over  the Gulf when I was  a
kid? I was out with you and Dad night-fishing on the Tsavaris’s boat?”
Stavros shot him a narrow-eyed glance, but nodded.
“You told me later you’d seen others but said the stories would have to wait until I was older. Well, I’m
older.” Like thirty years older. He wondered now—given his longtime dedication to sci-fi and things Star
Trek–ish—why he’d never asked his uncle for the rest of the stories before.
Stavros was silent for a moment, chewing his melomakarana and darting glances between Theo and the
game on television. Then: “This is because your gal’s a pilot, right? They see those things all the time. She
saw one of those UFOs and no one believed her.”
“No.” Theo waited until Stavros swallowed the piece of cookie. “She is one of those UFOs.”
“Theophilus, you’re talking nonsense.”
Theo rubbed one hand through his hair. “This is not going to make sense. But I want you to know what’s
going on, because I want you to understand if something…happens.”
“Something—look, the job’s stressful. No one knows that more than me. I did thirty years on the streets.
But they have people who can help you.” Stavros laid his hand on Theo’s arm. “Counselors and such.”
Theo ignored him. “Jorie’s part of a group called the Guardian Force. They wouldn’t have bothered with
our planet except that these monster guard-dog things they created—they call them zombies—ended up
here.  Looks  like  another  nasty  outer-space  group,  the  Tresh,  are  messing  with  these  zombies’
programming. But, unfortunately, these  Tresh  attacked  Jorie’s  ship, and  now it’s just her and  me and
Zeke and maybe a few others to stop the bad guys.”
He glanced at Stavros. His uncle was wiping one hand over his broad face. “I’ll get you all the help you
need,” his uncle said. “If it takes every dime I have. It doesn’t matter. You know Tootie and I love you.”
“I love you too,” Theo said, leaning forward and pulling his cell phone from his back pocket. He flipped it
open and hit a number on speed dial. “Yassou, amigo. Listen, Uncle Stavros is about to Baker-Act me.
Will you talk to him? Thanks.” He handed the cell phone to Stavros. “It’s Zeke.”
His  uncle  took  the  cell  phone  gingerly,  as  if  it  might  bite  him.  “Zeke?  What  kind  of  skata  is  my
boy…Okay.” Silence. Longer silence. “What?” he bellowed. “Mou espasas ta arheedia!”

Theo knew from experience that when he heard  Stavros  accuse  someone  of busting his balls, Stavros
was not quite convinced but getting close.
Evidently, so did Tootie. “Stavros! Watch your language, please!” came from the kitchen.
Finally Stavros nodded, wished Zeke and Suzanne a Merry Christmas, and handed  the phone  back  to
Theo. “Tis Panagias ta matia!”
Now it was the Virgin Mary’s eyes being invoked. “Yeah, I know,” Theo said.
“If you’re playing a game on the old man—”
“I’m not. We’re not.” He filled his uncle in on the rest of the details, including the problem  with Jorie’s
lieutenant and the unknown status of the rest of her team and her ship. He  could  tell some  of it simply
didn’t register with the old man. He’d seen  too  many Signal 20s  in his day.  But there  had  been  those
UFO sightings he’d been tight-lipped about for decades. Theo asked about them again now.
Stavros shook his head. “The one with your father and you wasn’t the first, not by any means.  But I’d
stopped talking to anyone about them by that point. No one believes you, and you get a  reputation—I
had Tootie to think about. And you.”
“You ever get taken on board, like I was?”
“Skata, it was enough just seeing these things zipping around  the sky  at  night. If one  grabbed  me, I’d
probably start shooting.”
“That was my initial reaction too. But then you start thinking about where you are and who could get hurt,
all the while telling yourself this is not really happening.”
“But it did.”  His uncle studied  him. He  wasn’t  one  hundred  percent  convinced.  But Theo  was  family.
“What do you need me to do?” Stavros asked.
Stavros Petrakos had been one damned  fine shot  in his day,  but he was  seventy-eight  now.  A robust
seventy-eight who mowed  his  own  lawn  and  trimmed  his  own  fruit  trees,  but  seventy-eight.  “We’re
putting a task force together. But this is strictly under  the radar.  If anything should…happen,  what the
news media gets and what actually went down might be two different things. I just wanted you to know
the truth.”
Stavros’s gaze didn’t waver. “I still hope this is some kind of a joke.”
“Wish it was too.”
“When?”
“By New Year’s, I’m thinking.”
Stavros nodded. “The chief knows?”
“I’m trying to keep the brass and the news reporters out of it right now. I don’t think they’ll be able to
move quickly enough. And I don’t want to make a media spectacle out of Jorie.”
“Poor kid. She’s basically all alone in this.”
Theo patted his uncle on the shoulder, then stood. “She’s not alone. She has me.”

He wandered back into the kitchen, which was empty, then, hearing a  familiar tinkling sound,  followed
that to the spare  bedroom  in the back  of the house,  where  his aunt kept  her music-box  collection.  A
thoroughly enthralled Jorie was holding a miniature palm tree in her hand as it played a tinny rendition of
the Beach Boys’ tune “Kokomo.”
Yeah, that’s what he needed to do. Run away with her to the Keys and a little place called Kokomo.
“Bliss!” she said when he stepped into the room.
He smiled. “Time to go.”
“So soon?” Tootie plucked a music box in the shape of two intertwined cats from one of the shelves that
ringed the small room. “Jorie’s never seen these before. I guess there’s not a lot of use for them in those
Eskimo villages.” She shook her head.
Theo took the palm tree from Jorie and put it back on the shelf where it belonged. He knew where each
one belonged. He’d helped his uncle build the shelves as his aunt’s collection grew over the years. “You
know I’m working, Thia.”
“I know, I know. But if I didn’t make  a  fuss, I wouldn’t be  a  good  aunt.” She  shooed  him and  Jorie
toward the living room, where Stavros was waiting. “Maybe around New Year’s  or  after,  you’ll come
for dinner, yes?”
His uncle’s face didn’t betray a thing. Man was a damned good cop.
“Sure.” He hugged his uncle, then his aunt.
“She’s a nice girl,” Tootie whispered in his ear.
He bussed her cheek. “Told you so.”
Stavros was holding Jorie’s hand and patting it. Tootie pulled her away and gave her a hug, then put a
bag of leftovers in Jorie’s hand as they went through the kitchen. “Something to nibble on later,” Tootie
said.
Nothing like homemade Greek cooking to fuel a fight against zombies.
 
The bright moonlight and the glow of the porch light bathed Theo’s back steps in a white glow. But Jorie
let Theo handle the physical inspection of a structure he was more familiar with than she was. She studied
her  scanner.  Residence  shields  were  intact,  with  no  attempted  instrusions.  Still,  both  she  and  Theo
entered the back door with weapons out—and she kicked off her sandals as she came across the kitchen
threshold. There was no way she could run in those things.
Only after they cleared the residence did Theo go back out into the warm night air to  retrieve  the bag
with her clothes  and  Tootie’s  offerings  from  the  vehicle’s  rear  seat.  Theo  had  a  lovely  family,  Jorie
realized as  she  leaned  against the kitchen counter  and  slipped  her sandals  back  on.  It  made  her miss
Galin all the more.
“Somebody left this on the back porch steps.” Theo came though the kitchen door,  bags  and  Tootie’s
containers bundled in his arms. And something else.

Jorie automatically reinstated the residence’s rear shields as  she  stepped  toward  him. He  put the food
containers on the small table, the clothing bag on a chair, and turned as she  approached,  a  squat  silver
cylinder in his hand.
Jorie froze, her throat closing, a tremor shaking her body so severely she almost dropped her scanner.
“This was tucked to the side, I almost missed—Jorie?”
“Where did you get that?” Her voice was a hard rasp.
“This?” He angled the metal cuplike object away from him. “It was on the steps.”
Jorie sucked in a harsh breath and inched back.
“Babe, what’s the matter? It’s just some kind of capped soup mug with a built-in spoon thing—”
“A  feeder.  It’s  a  feeder.”  She  could  make  out  the  markings  engraved  on  its  side  now:  Detention
Compound  3  Ovzil.  Her  heart  pounded  and  she  felt light-headed.  She  let the scanner  slide from her
hand to the tabletop, then gripped the back of the closest chair.
“A feeder?”
Vekran, English words fled. She had to close her eyes for a moment and focus, seeking the explanation
in Alarsh, then in Vekran.
Theo’s fingers curled around her arm. “Honey?”
The…thing was inches from her body, still in his hand. With a strangled cry she struck out at it, hard. It
flew from his grasp and clattered to the floor, rolling back and forth a few times before it wobbled to a
halt.
She watched in sick fascination. How many times had she thrown hers against the cell wall?
“Jorie!” Both hands were on her shoulders, and Theo’s breath was warm on her cheek.
“A feeder.” Her voice was rough. She raised her face to his. “It holds a liquid-and-powder protein mix.
You slide the spoon  down  to  stir,” she  pushed  her thumb against nothing, yet she  could  feel the cold
metal feeder in her hand, “then take a scoop and swivel it to eat. It’s the only thing you get to eat when
you’re a prisoner of the Tresh.” Foul-tasting. Even now, she wanted to gag.
“Fuck.” Theo’s face blanked, then hardened. “Shields are up?”
She knew they were. But she grabbed the scanner off the table, because her whole world suddenly tilted
to one side. She nodded.
“You’re sure that’s what it is?”
Her gaze found the feeder  on the floor.  “Don’t you see…?”  But Theo  couldn’t  read  Supi,  the  Tresh
language. “Those letters. Detention Compound 3 Ovzil.” Ovzil Rok Por. A prison compound run by the
Devastators at the base of the Ovzil Neha mountain range. The wind never stopped there. She could still
hear its shrill moan through the ventilation system of her cell.
She shook her head, pushing away the memory. Theo released  her shoulders  and  dug his weapon  out
from under his shirt.

Her own hand shook as she studied the scanner again. “No sign of any shield breach. They—someone
left it here, knowing I’d find it.” That someone had to be Prow. And he knew what finding it would do to
her.
“Was Compound Three where you were?”
She swallowed. “Yes.”
“With Prow?”
“Yes.”
“They’re playing mind games  with  you,  Jorie.  Psychological  warfare.  Because  they  can’t  get  to  you
directly.” He moved back to her, one large hand on her shoulder once again. Warm, reassuring, steady.
“Don’t let them win.”
Jorie slid the scanner back into the small bag and palmed her G-1, forcing down the bile that threatened
to surge up her throat.  Forcing  the memories away.  Forcing  herself to  remember  she  was  a  Guardian
Force commander.
By the time they’d checked every closet, every corner of the small residence, she was calmer. And Theo
had spoken to Zeke Martinez. Nothing unusual there. Tamlynne was fine, the kitten sleeping in her lap.
But they were alerted.
Jorie sagged down into a kitchen chair and rested her forehead against her fingertips.
There was the scrape of wood against tile, and Theo sat down next to her. “Why would Prow keep that
feeder after all these years?”
“I doubt it’s mine.” The thing was still on the floor. Hers or not, she  wouldn’t pick  it up.  Could  barely
look at it. “There’s likely a matter replicator on board his ship. Or ship’s supply has  some  feeders  and
engraved it with the prison compound’s name.”
He pulled her hands away from her face and held them in his. “We can take it out in the backyard and fry
it with your Hazer, if that will make you feel better.”
Star’s end, but he had a very good face and an even better heart. “No. You’re right. The vomit-brained
bastard is playing games. He can’t win unless I let him. I’m not going to let him.” She drew a long breath.
“He wants me to remember. I will remember. And I’ll make him pay because I will not forget.”
Jorie pulled her hands out of Theo’s, strode to where the feeder lay on its side, and snatched it off the tile
floor. Her stomach spasmed as her fingers touched the cool, slick metal, but she didn’t drop it. Instead,
she marched to Theo’s bedroom and placed the feeder on the corner of his wooden dresser.
She would not forget.
Then cross-legged and teeth clenched, she went back to analyzing the reprogramming dart.
 
22 
At some point during the late-evening hours, Theo dropped one of his light-green long-sleeved pullover
shirts in her lap along with a pair of gray drawstring shorts, with the admonishment to “get comfortable.”

And at some point even later that evening, Theo tugged her away from her screen and her worries  and
back into his arms—and his bed.
“Last night,” she told him hesitantly as his hands slipped under  the green  shirt and  massaged  the aches
along her spine, “we probably shouldn’t have—”
His breath was soft in her ear.  “Last night was  wonderful. Perfect.  Don’t  change that.  Not  everything
happens according to plan.”
“My only plan is reprogramming the C-Prime. Beyond that, I cannot even begin to speculate.”
“Then don’t speculate,” he said, his voice husky with emotion. “I told you. Take what’s here and now.”
Jorie turned in his embrace and saw the undisguised heat in his gaze. She couldn’t remember Lorik ever
looking at her like that. It thrilled her—and frightened her. There was so much at risk, so much at stake.
So many unknowns.
And then there  was  Theo.  Infuriating, obstinate,  intelligent, compassionate,  loyal, brave  Theo.  So  she
sought the heat of his skin as she had the night before,  focusing everything on this one  man right now,
knowing full well this one man would haunt her dreams forever.
 
The  next  spate  of  bad  news  hit  at  about  nine-fifteen  local  time  the  next  morning.  Significantly  after
sunwake and significantly after a morning meal of coffee—which Jorie  was  slowly acquiring a  taste  for
when it was heavily sweetened—and peanut butter on toasted bread.
The scanner riding her hip under Theo’s borrowed shirt screeched out a terrifying high–low warning that
sent her careening out of the kitchen and into his bedroom. Structure shield failure. Her MOD-tech was
gasping its last breath but still trying to run the calculations on the zombie reprogramming dart  and  still
attempting to send signals to any Guardian ship that might be sweeping the sector.
She now understood Theo’s panic at nakedness.
They  were  naked,  exposed,  vulnerable.  If  the  Tresh  saw  the  structure’s  energy  pattern  suddenly
flattening, they were dead—and the terror the feeder cup symbolized would become real.
She  grabbed  her  Hazers  from  under  Theo’s  bed  and  tossed  him  the  spare.  “Hard-terminate!”  She
couldn’t take any chances. A team of Devastators or a dozen zombies could appear at any moment.
“What happened?” Theo slung the strap over his shoulder, his projectile weapon already in hand.
“Shields are gone,” she told him in English, then switched to Alarsh, forcing her MOD-tech units through
a series of resets and reinstallations through commands given tersely into her mouth mike.
“Tresh?”
“My fault.” She kept  watch  on her scanner.  Anything could  happen.  In a  way,  she  almost wished for
another attack by the Tresh. She wanted this damned thing settled! “Overloaded the system.”
He started for the door.
“Stay here. They’ll zero in on the tech. I can’t program and watch for them.”

“I got your six, babe. Do your work.”
She did, but there was no way she could resurrect full residence shields. Bliss luck it was  daylight, the
Tresh less likely to move easily then. But less likely hadn’t helped Tam, Kip, or Jacare. Of course,  she
was the instigator, tracking down the Tresh first that day.
The zombies appeared in daylight or dark.
She worked feverishly to get the shield program to resurrect, aware of Theo pacing behind her, aware of
every other noise in the residence, every land vehicle passing on the street, waiting for that cold draft that
preceded a PMaT transit—or the green glow of a zombie portal forming.
None of her patches held. The unit was overtaxed. She was asking too much of it: shield the residence,
design the zombie dart, parse the skies with a Guardian distress signal. Something had to go.
She gritted her teeth and deleted the distress signal, her heart sinking as she did so. The one chance, the
only chance she’d have of being found, of going home again, lay in that signal. Even a seeker ’droid on
mapping duties would have seen and reported it.
Now there was nothing.
With the deletion of that program, tech resources restructured, energy usage leveled. She had something
to work with. She might not get home, but she could protect where she was.
She resurrected the roof shield first. “Overhead in place,” she told Theo. Out of the corner of her eye she
saw him glance up, and if she hadn’t been  so  scared,  aggravated,  and  under  pressure,  she  might have
grinned. So typical.
But the next datastream gave her nothing to smile about. There  was  insufficient power  to  re-create  the
wall shields. A core  processor  must  have  burned  out  in  the  shutdown.  Capacity  was  under  seventy
percent of what she’d had last night. And she couldn’t reduce functions any more. She couldn’t stop the
dart-program computations.
“Ass-faced demon’s whore!” She hated no-choice situations.
Only when she  caught Theo’s  raised  eyebrow  did she  realize  she’d  sworm  out  loud  and  in  Vekran.
Alarsh  epithets  never  translated  well.  “I  can’t  shield  your  entire  structure  anymore.  My  tech  took
damage. I don’t have time to chase down the problem, and even if I did, I’ve nothing to  repair  it with.
So…” She keyed in changes to the shield program, shaking her head in frustration.
“What can you shield?”
“One room. This room, including your bathroom. That’s all.” She locked the shields in place, then flipped
her oc-set over her right eye and glanced quickly around. Everything looked good. She pulled the band
back  down  around  her neck.  “Perimeter  secure.  But anytime you go through that  door,  especially  at
night, you have to assume something you’re not going to want to meet might be out there.”
“You’re sure the Tresh didn’t cause this?”
“I checked  once  and  am running a  secondary  check  now.”  Best  she  could,  with  her  tech’s  reduced
capacity. “But I don’t think so. It’s just a basic overload on a unit that was never meant to do as much as
it’s been doing.”
“I thought it was maintaining the shields and designing the zombie dart. Your scanners track the zombies

and the Tresh, right?”
She’d never told him about the wide-beam distress signal. She’d convinced herself it was because there
hadn’t been time to discuss such things, but she knew it was really because of what she felt and what had
happened  the  past  two  nights.  Hesitantly,  she  told  him  now  and  saw  the  fleeting  expression  of
disappointment on his face. Then it was gone, his features relaxing. She remembered his ability to subvert
his emotions when they were in the cabin assigned to him on the Sakanah.
“We should be able to make a move on that C-Prime in a couple of days. Once that’s done, you can put
all your tech into contacting another Guardian ship.” He reached down and tugged on a lock of her hair.
“I know you want to go home, Jorie.”
She also saw the darkening of his eyes every time he realized that.
“It’s my duty to report what I’ve found out about the Tresh.”
He hunkered down next to her, shoving his gun in his holster  as  he did so.  “We  had  this conversation
three days ago. Only I was telling you about my duty to be here. Do you remember what you told me?
That you try to take what’s bad and make it into bliss. Well, I’ve been trying to do that for you. Trying to
let you know you’re welcome here. More than welcome here. With me.” He chucked her gently under
the chin with two fingers. “It’s not that I don’t understand, babe. I do. I just don’t know how to  make
things perfect for you.”
He rose, then strode to the large viewport and stared out it without further comment.
“Nothing’s ever perfect, Theo,” she said after a while. Such were the problems of living in the here and
now, she wanted to add but didn’t. They were both adults. They both knew that.
He turned, shaking his head.  “Ain’t that the damned  truth.” He  motioned to  the door.  “I need  coffee.
Drop the sizzle shields so I can go to the kitchen.”
“I’ll leave that door unshielded when you’re here. Any PMaT transits in the area,  or  portal  formations,
will set off the alarms on my scanner. But at night or when I’m alone, we should keep all shields up.” She
keyed in the change and nodded at him.
Then she went back to her programs, very aware of the silver feeder cup off to her left. The threat  still
existed; there was still a lot of work to do. She brought up the log on the zombie dart and a cry strangled
her throat. Her tech’s failure had done more than crash the shield program. It had corrupted all her work
to date on the dart. Almost twelve sweeps’ worth, useless.
Heavy footsteps hurried her way. “Jorie?”
She waved one hand at her blinking screen with an abrupt motion, not bothering to hide her frustration.
“Gone. All gone. I have to start all over again on the dart.”
“Christ. Well.” He huffed out a short sigh. “Just start over. It’s the only thing we can do.”
She thrust her hands through her hair and leaned forward for a moment, wondering if that was true. She
straightened.  “We  need  another  plan.  We’re  losing  too  much  ground,  Theo.  I’m  a  tracker.  I  know
survival programming and a bit more because I’ve made it my business to learn it. But I’m not part of a
tech team. And this,” she motioned to her T-MOD and  its auxiliary units, “may not hold together  long
enough, even if I figure out exactly what to do. We may have to just try to terminate the C-Prime without
the  dart  and  hope  the  herd  collapses  in  on  itself  from  there.  And  that  the  Tresh  don’t  take
countermeasures.”

The more she thought about it, the more she was convinced the feeder cup was a private message from
Prow. The Devastator team might well be unaware he sent it. It didn’t fit their normal method of attack.
So  that meant the Devastators  had  yet to  make  another  move against her.  She  was  sure  they  would
before the next zombie germination cycle completed.
“Right now all we have is you, me, and Zeke.”  Theo  didn’t sound  blissful. “A couple  guys I talked  to
earlier this morning aren’t interested or available to go on a private hunting expedition. I’m still waiting on
callbacks from a few others.”
A couple more people? With herself as the only experienced tracker, even ten people would be a tough
fight. “What if I met with your security chief, your regional leaders?”  She  tried  to  remember  the terms
from Danjay’s reports: major…mayor? And then some political figure over the larger populace. Meeting
with a nil world’s heads of state was forbidden by gen-pro regs. She no longer cared about genpro regs.
“It would have to go up through the chain of command, which could  take  weeks.  And after  that?” He
shrugged. “You told  me the horror  stories,  the governments fighting over  access  to  the  Guardians.  It
would all happen here. And you’d be at the center of it.”
“We may not have a choice.”
Theo’s eyes narrowed. “I’m not opting for that as long as we still have some options.” He pulled his cell
phone—she’d finally learned the terminology for that thing—out of his pocket. “Let me try David Gray
again.” He wandered back to the main room.
Jorie returned to her programming, rebuilding the dart,  very aware  how outnumbered  and  ill-prepared
they were. And even more aware there was nothing that could be done about it.
A few minutes later  Theo  returned,  hunkering down  again with a  glimpse of that  feral grin on his lips.
“David’s interested. I’ll need to get him to Suzanne’s to let him see the zombie. He knows—not what’s
going on, not yet, but FDLE has  reports  on mummified bodies—zombie  attacks—that  my department
wasn’t told about. The data wasn’t considered relevant to  our  queries  because  the attacks  weren’t  on
people but on a whole herd of cows, up in Pasco County. Fifty or so.”
“Cows.” She ran the word though her mind. “Ah. Cattle?” When he nodded, she continued. “Juveniles in
a feeding frenzy will often attack anything warm-blooded. And this Pasco  is a  location?” Another  nod.
“How far?”
“Twenty, thirty miles north—Wait, I’ll show you.” He left then returned with a fat paperbound book that
had printed maps in the front.
“Where exactly in the region?”
“I don’t know. I’ll get the complete story from David when I meet with him at about three o’clock.”
“He’ll accept what you tell him is true?”
“He’ll consider the facts and come to the only conclusion he can. He’s a logical kind of guy—he worked
SWAT at my department. Special Weapons and Tactics,” he explained.
“Sniper?” She thought she understood the acronym.
“Damned good one. Like I said, very logical, very calm.”

Sniper training was good. How Theo’s friend would react when confronted with a problem from another
star system remained to be seen.
And she was still the only experienced tracker.
“I want to see Tamlynne before we meet up with him,” she told Theo. She needed to hear a sentence in
Alarsh. And she needed not to feel so alone.
 
Theo never thought he’d see the day he’d willingly say, Hey, babe, let’s go shopping for clothes. But
Jorie had to have something to wear besides her Guardian shorts and a Hawaiian print beach dress, and
his T-shirts didn’t cut it. They may yet have to face his lieutenant or Chief Brantley. They may yet have to
do any number of other things to solve this zombie problem, which would require her fitting in visually in
Bahia Vista, and she didn’t.
Even the Tresh woman had worn white jeans and a touristy T-shirt.
Jorie, he knew, would look terrific in a pair of white jeans.
Plus, he sensed a growing unhappiness in her and had no trouble listing the reasons. Top of the list had to
be the fact she was stuck on his world. He was acutely aware he could have exercised more control and
not slept with her so soon. Okay, they were both adults. But in spite of her training and all that Guardian
crap she did, she was a woman and she’d been abandoned. He’d played on that, shamelessly, because
he couldn’t stop wanting to touch her.
It had been a long time since he’d seduced a woman—Camille had been a practiced tease. No seduction
necessary. But with Jorie, for all that he’d rushed it once he sensed  there  might be  a  mutual attraction,
he’d taken  his time with small caresses,  light kisses.  He  wore  her down  in inches. And added  to  her
problems.
So, hey, babe. Let’s go clothes shopping, pick up something for Tammy, then we’ll meet up  with
David  Gray  and  talk  about  zombies  covered  by  energyworms  and  Tresh  Devastators  with
iridescent eyes.
Just your average couple out for an afternoon. And all women loved to shop for clothes, didn’t they? Of
course, going to T. J. Maxx the day after Christmas probably wasn’t the brightest idea.
They managed to get her two pairs of jeans, a pair of black khakis, and some sweater and shirt combos
that looked  casual  and  covered  her G-1.  Tammy’s size was  more  of  a  guess,  so  they  went  with  an
unstructured tracksuit, workout pants, and a sweatshirt.
“I didn’t realize,” she said, back in the SUV  and  buckling her seat  belt,  “that acquiring clothing was  a
body-contact sport here.”
“We were amateurs up against professionals,” he told her, and backed out of the space.
Her scanner was  out.  Anytime she  was  sure  it wouldn’t be  seen,  she  had  it out.  Looking for another
Tresh safe house. There had to be more than the one in Gulfview. But she’d found none.
He didn’t know if that was good or bad news. He only knew it worried her.
Suzanne was home—her veterinary clinic operating  on holiday hours  this week—but  Zeke  was  at  the

department. Theo would be too, in a couple of days. That worried  him. If the zombie problem  wasn’t
solved, he didn’t discount that Jorie  might go out on her own,  find an abandoned  house,  work  out of
there. Not put him at risk.
All the more reason they had to solve the problem now. Meeting with David was one more positive step.
He left Jorie and Tammy alone in Suzanne’s guest bedroom and found Zeke’s wife in her home office at
the other end of the house.
“Telecommuting,” she said when he wandered in.
He immediately felt bad. “I’m keeping you from what you should be doing.”
“Not at all. Robin handled the routine cases this morning.” Robin was  a  bright, young veterinary intern
that Suzanne hoped  to  groom as  her partner.  “No  emergencies.  No  cats  eating  tinsel.  Robin  has  off
tomorrow and I’m handling the morning. We close at two all week.”
Which was why he’d told David to meet him there at three.
“How’s Tammy?”
“Tammy is quite a remarkable young woman.  I have to  pinch myself over  the fact  she’s  from another
galaxy. She’s regained a lot of spunk in the past twenty-four hours. But there’s  still amnesia over  what
happened at your house. Although Jorie says it could be artificially induced.”
“Any nightmares last night?”
“Not that Zeke or I heard. But I have caught her just staring sometimes, and  then she  shivers.  When I
touch her, she snaps out of it.”
He’d seen Jorie do that too and told Suzanne.
“Can you stop these people, Theo?” Suzanne’s eyes darkened. “I mean, here I am carrying on with my
cats, dogs, parrots, and ducks as if nothing’s changed in the world. But everything has. If you can’t stop
these Tresh and the zombies, what can we do?”
He squeezed her shoulder. “We’ll stop them.” But could they? With every  passing hour,  things looked
bleaker; Jorie, less confident. And with every passing hour, he was more and more  reminded—as  with
his talk with Suzanne—of all the reasons, the people he had to fight for.
He collected Jorie, accepted a surprise hug from Tammy, and, with Suzanne’s spare keys in his pocket,
headed off to meet the man whom he hoped would be his planet’s newest recruit in the war.
 
“Shee-it.” The former BVPD SWAT sniper and FDLE agent was from Texas and could draw that word
out the way only a  proper  Texan could.  Of medium height with dark-blond  hair  and  blue-gray  eyes,
David Gray also looked like everyone’s idea of the nice guy next door.
Theo had seen him in action during a few SWAT missions. Nice, unassuming David Gray was not a guy
you’d want to piss off.
David pointed  to  the dead  zombie in Suzanne’s  cold-storage  locker.  “You sure  George  Lucas  didn’t
build that thing?”

“Yep. It was in my living room,” Theo told him. “Alive. It’s no special-effects puppet.”
David’s gaze moved to Jorie. “It’s a baby zombie,” she told him. “The adult drones can get,” she closed
her eyes briefly, “fifteen of your feet tall.”
“Fifteen.” David nodded, looked down at the zombie, and rocked back on his heels.
Theo tried to read his friend and failed.
“And you say these are from another galaxy?”
“Technically, no,” Jorie put in before Theo could answer. “This was probably bred here. But the original
zombie, yes, that’s from the Chalvash System.”
David wiped one hand over his face and turned to Theo. “If it was anyone but you, bud.”
How often had  he heard  that in the past  few days?  “I wish it was  anyone but me. This is not how I
anticipated spending my vacation.”
“And you shouldn’t be. This is a bigger problem than a few of us can handle. You know that.”
“How well is anyone going to handle it when the news  trucks  and  the crew  from The  Oprah  Winfrey
Show arrive? And then the subsequent wild rumors? Stock market will crash, people will start shooting
their neighbors and looting the grocery stores. Perfect opportunity for some of those nutcase terrorists to
make a move. We can prevent all that with a small but effective operation here.”
“What’s to prevent these things from breeding more?”
“They’d need a C-Prime, a controller zombie,” Jorie said. “If I can take that out with a reprogramming
dart, the herd dies.”
“I repeat. What’s to prevent someone from bringing another C-Prime here?”
Theo looked at Jorie. He’d assumed  their problems  would be  over  with the death  of this C-Prime.  It
never occurred to him that someone—the Tresh—might import others and that this was not a  one-time
thing.
Jorie knotted her fingers together. “It would take at least a year by your calendar, given the location of
the closest herd off-planet.”
“A year.” David didn’t look happy. “And how do we stop them a year from now?”
Jorie sucked in a deep breath. “If the Sakanah wasn’t destroyed, or if she managed to send a  distress
report, it’s possible the Guardians already have another ship on the way.”
“And if they don’t?”
“Then there’s nothing you can do to stop the Tresh or the zombies except what I’m doing now: lure the
C-Prime and terminate it.”
“And who besides you knows how to do this?” David asked Jorie.
Theo knew where he was going with this. He knew, moreover, how valid it was. He  just didn’t like it.
Damn David for being so damned logical!

“At the moment, only me,” Jorie said. “The problem isn’t that I can’t teach you what a  tracker  does;  I
can. The problem is the MOD-tech that’s a necessary part of my job in tracking the zombies, in warning
us about  the Tresh,  communicates only in Alarsh.  My language. I  can  convert  some  to  accept  voice
commands and basic displays in Vekran—English. But much of it I can’t.”
David looked at Theo. “You try to do this alone, it’s a suicide mission.”
“It  is  either  way,”  Theo  countered.  “There’s  no  way  the  state  or  the  feds  could  move  on  this  in
four—max, six—days.  You know  that.  We  have  to  do  something  now.  That  means  me,  Jorie,  and
Martinez. If you feel you can’t, I understand. But that’s not going to stop the three of us from trying.”
David paced  over  to  the cold-storage  locker  and  stared  down  at  the zombie  again.  “Four,”  he  said,
turning around. “Four of us. I don’t like it, Theo, but count me in.”
 
23 
It took Jorie two and a half more days to finish constructing the zombie-reprogramming-dart virus. Or at
least, as she viewed it, to do all she knew how to do. Her abilities in that area were mostly self-taught, as
she told Theo more than once. They had to work with the possibility that the dart would do nothing. Then
hard-termination of the C-Prime would be their only option. That meant it would take longer for the herd
to fall apart. And that meant—during that time—more zombies could be born.
It also gave the Tresh more time to counter their move. Which was why, when she wasn’t working on the
virus dart or nestled in Theo’s arms, she put Theo through tracker training sessions. Gen-pro regs were
history, as far as she was concerned. She told him—and trained him for—everything she could think of
relative to the zombies and the Tresh.
They’d heard nothing from the Tresh or Prow since the feeder cup appeared on Theo’s back porch. The
lack of interruptions was good, certainly, but it only made her more nervous.
“Like waiting for the other shoe to drop,” Theo had said over dinner earlier that evening.
Jorie had never heard the expression before, but it was appropriate.
With the virus as complete as it was going to be, her next project was to  modify one  of the Hazers  to
carry the dart. “It’s not a physical object,” she explained to Theo when he sat beside her on the floor a
few hours later, the spare Hazer’s stock open to expose its core databoard. “We call it a dart because
it’s an encapsulated, self-executing program within the Hazer’s data energy stream.”
“You’ve done this before?” he asked, as she worked on lining up her scanner’s infrared with the larger
MOD-tech’s.
“Not exactly.”
“You’ve watched someone do it?”
“Only in a sim.” Damn, damn! She couldn’t get the scanner to synch with the main tech.  She  swore  in
Alarsh.
“I’m bothering you.”

“No,  I’m—”  She  wiped  one  hand  over  her  face.  Theo’s  presence  was  actually  calming.  She  truly
seemed to worry less when he was around. “I’m tired. I should be doing this in the morning, when my
eyes can focus.”
“Good idea.” Theo brushed her bangs back from her face. “It’s after midnight.”
“You  talked  to  Martinez?  Tamlynne?”  She  knew  he  did  at  least  twice  a  day,  but  she  needed  the
reassurance.
“Tammy’s teaching the kitten to  fetch balls of paper.  Martinez has  found two  more  incidents of what
appear to be zombie attacks. No idea of when they occurred until we hear back from the ME’s office.”
If they were recent, her scanners had picked up neither of them.
“We’ll get up early,” Theo said. “We still have a couple days yet.”
She knew they did. But she wanted to leave some time in case things went wrong. No, not in case. For
when things went wrong.
She put the disassembled spare Hazer carefully on the low table Theo had brought in for her to work on
and rechecked the residence shields. “I’m shielding the door. If you need anything from your kitchen, get
it now.”
“The only thing I need right now is you.” Theo’s voice was soft, his eyes smoky.
She sighed, set the shields fully around the bedroom, and turned back to him. A few hours’ bliss. She lost
herself and her troubles in him nightly now. Lost it all in his gentle yet expert touch, his fingers kneading,
stroking. Mouths and tongues searching, touching. A few hours.  And then another  day  of hard  reality.
And another day closer to hell.
 
The screech of an intruder alarm jolted Jorie out of a blissfully deep sleep. Theo’s arms were tangled with
hers at her waist, and there was some accidental bumping and shoving as she grasped for her Hazer and
he—she assumed—for whatever weapon he kept tucked under his pillow.
Only as her skin rapidly chilled did she realize she was  naked.  She  snatched  her sweatshirt  and  shorts
from the floor. Then, heart pounding and still naked, she knelt in front of her tech to check shield integrity.
Theo had  already  pulled on  a  pair  of  sweatpants  and  stood  at  the  doorway,  flashlight  in  one  hand,
weapon in the other.
No breach. But someone or something had tried to. She yanked the sweatshirt over her head as she gave
him the news.
“If that’s one of my neighbors,” he said when she looked at him, “we’re going to have some explaining to
do.”
She rose quickly and stepped into her shorts. “At four-thirty in the morning?”
“Good point. They’ll have some explaining to do too. What’s out there?”
With half her tech in disarray? “A live entity. Not a zombie. That’s all I know.”
“One?”

“One.”
“Armed?”
“We have to assume, yes.” She knotted her shorts. “Ready?”
“On a count of three. You drop the door shield. I’ll open the door, go out first. You follow, cover me.”
“On three. One, two—” She keyed in the change from the scanner, now dangling from her hip belt. Theo
yanked open the door, then, weapon out, moved  quickly and  quietly into the corridor.  Jorie  followed,
Hazer primed and ready.
They  swept  into  the  main  room,  the  glow  from  his  flashlight  moving  left  and  right,  then  stopping  at
something—someone—sprawled awkwardly on the floor near Theo’s couch.
She started to reach for her scanner but stopped. She didn’t need it. Her heart skittered. She recognized
him. “Kip!”
“Kip?” Theo asked.
“Kip. Commander Rordan.” She knelt next to the still form, angling her rifle away as she felt for a pulse in
his neck. Hope and fear clashed. “Alive, but I think my shield knocked him unconscious.”
“Kip Rordan?” Theo’s voice held a note of amazement.
She  fully  understood.  How  and  why  and  from  where  Rordan  had  returned,  she  had  no  idea.  She
checked her scanner, keying in for the Sakanah’s resonance. Hoping, praying—nothing showed on her
screen.
But Kip was here. And he was alive. Why? The surge of bliss she’d felt at finding him waned.  Distrust
raised its ugly head. The last thing left on her doorstep—so to speak—was the Tresh feeder cup. Now
Kip. It was possible the two events weren’t remotely connected. It was equally possible they were.
“Help me with him,” she said to Theo.
“Jorie, wait.” Theo  hunkered  down  next to  her.  “Are you sure  he’s  Rordan?  Are  you  sure  he’s  not
working with the Tresh? Or the Tresh didn’t send him?”
“I’m not sure of anything other than, yes, he’s Kip Rordan. My scanner confirms his identity through his
bioresonance and his palm print.”
Rordan let out a low moan.
“We need to get him back behind the shields in the bedroom,” she told Theo. “Help me lift him.”
Theo was clearly not happy with her command, but whether it was because he’d disliked Rordan  from
the beginning or  because  he didn’t trust  which side  Rordan  was  on now,  Jorie  didn’t know.  But  she
wasn’t going to try for answers in an unshielded part of the residence. She might not know if she trusted
Kip Rordan, but she knew for sure she didn’t trust the Tresh.
Together they dragged Rordan back to Theo’s bedroom and closed the door. Theo turned on a bedside
lamp. She brought up the shields and checked her scanner one more time. “Nothing else; no one else is
out there.”
Rordan’s eyelids fluttered open when she turned. “Jorie.” His voice was raspy.

Theo was sitting on the edge of the bed and had his G-1 out, set for stun, Jorie noticed. Rordan was less
than a maxmeter away, on the floor in front of the closet doors.
She pushed aside the fact she’d known him for years and grabbed for her professional personality. It was
safer until she knew what in hell’s fire was going on.
“Commander Rordan, what happened?” she asked, then, realizing she spoke in English, repeated herself
in Alarsh. “What are you doing here?”
She  studied  him  as  she  waited  for  him  to  answer.  He  was  in  the  green-and-black  Guardian
uniform—much as when she’d last seen him, several days ago. His dark hair was still pulled back but he
was unshaven, his skin reddened  and  rough-looking.  His uniform, she  realized,  looked  rather  worn  as
well.
Definitely not the usual impeccable Kip Rordan.
He was frowning, switching a glance from her to Theo and back to her again.
“Commander Rordan. Report.”
Rordan levered himself up on his elbows. Theo stood quickly, pistol out. “Don’t move.”
“Tell that danker-brained nil to put the pistol away,” Rordan snarled in Alarsh.
Well, that was definitely the Rordan Jorie knew and remembered. “Not until you answer my question,”
she  replied.  “The  Tresh  almost  killed  Tamlynne  Herryck.  You  disappeared.  Now  you’re  back.  I’m
waiting to hear how and why.”
“Not just the Tresh, Jorie. Devastators. There’s a full contingent of Devastators here,” Rordan said.
“Go on.” She curled her fingers around the Hazer but didn’t raise it. “What happened after Theo and  I
left in his land vehicle?”
The narrowing of Rordan’s eyes told her he didn’t miss the movement. “Herryck  and  I were  receiving
data from the ship. I told her to go back to the Sakanah. She insisted on staying a few sweeps longer.
Some project.”  He  shrugged slightly, as  much as  his near-prone  position would allow. “I went to  the
galley to get a glass of water when I heard the alarms go off. By the time I got to  the main room,  the
Tresh were everywhere. I fired on two but did little damage. They have some kind of shielding—”
“I know about that,” Jorie said.
“So I backed up into the galley and transmitted a distress call to the ship, alerting them to the situation. I
initiated an emergency PMaT  for  Herryck  and  myself,  the  ship  acknowledged,  then  something  went
wrong.”
“What’s he saying?” Theo asked, when Rordan paused.
Theo couldn’t understand Alarsh. And making Rordan use Vekran would slow them down and open too
many chances  for misinterpretation.  “In a  moment,” she  told  Theo  in English. “Continue,” she  said  to
Rordan.
“I felt the PMaT lock on, but I didn’t end up on the ship. I ended up…” He shook  his head.  “I’m not
sure where, exactly. But it’s taken me about four planetary days to walk back here.”
Walk? Jorie’s gaze raked  over  Rordan  again. Hell’s fire. It  did look  as  if he’d  been  walking for four

days.
“I haven’t been  able  to  contact  the ship on my scanner,”  he continued.  “I haven’t been  able  to  get a
reading on you until about  two  sweeps  ago.  I saw  the resonance  of Guardian shields. But  I  couldn’t
make voice contact with you through the scanner. I thought it might have been damaged in the aborted
PMaT.”
“The ship’s gone,” Jorie said.
“Gone?” Rordan looked genuinely startled.
Jorie nodded. “Relay ’droids, seeker ’droids, all gone. Plus this planet’s full of dead zones.” Any one of
those reasons would hamper scanner-to-scanner voice contact. But if Rordan was behind the destruction
of the ship, he’d know that.
“Flashed out?”
“I don’t know.”
“And Herryck?”
“Alive, but they put an implant in her. I had to use a local med-tech  to  remove  it. There’s  still residual
damage.”
“Ass-faced motherless whores!” Rordan sagged back, his eyes closing briefly.
Jorie agreed with his description of the Tresh.
He sat up again, this time completely but slowly, due to Theo’s pistol following his movement. “Tell the
dirt-sucker to—”
“Rordan.” Jorie didn’t keep the anger out of her voice.
He pulled his knees up and turned his beautiful unshaven face toward her.
“I’m going to get you a glass of water,” Jorie said. “Then I’m going to brief Sergeant Petrakos on what
you’ve told me. Understand we have no proof that what you’ve said is true—”
“Herryck can—”
“Herryck remembers nothing. So what would you do  in my place,  Commander?  Gen-pro  regs,  now,”
she prodded, but her tone was anything but light. “Teammate returns from unauthorized absence after last
being seen with enemy agents.” She fixed him with a narrow-eyed gaze.
He nodded. “Teammate is to be treated with all courtesy but assumed to be working with the enemy until
facts show otherwise.”
“Then we understand each other.”
“Completely.”
“Then understand this as well: the people of this planet are not now or ever again to be referred to as nils,
dirt-suckers, or any other creative disparaging epithet. They have ranks, they have names. You will refer
to them with those ranks and names. Or you will find my courtesy toward you to be seriously lacking.”

Jorie strode into the bathroom to retrieve a glass of water, wondering how much of Rordan’s story was
true. Wondering how she was going to prove it was—or wasn’t. Any error  in judgment here  could  be
fatal.
 
“Oh, I could definitely tell you if he’s lying. That’s part of what I do as a Homicide detective,” Theo said,
half listening to the thrumming of the shower behind him. It was now almost six o’clock in the morning.
He and Jorie had agreed letting Rordan get cleaned up didn’t pose any immediate threat.  If he tried  to
escape through the bathroom window, he’d get zapped again.
“But I’d need to speak Alarsh, and I don’t,” Theo continued. “So all I can do if you ask him about that
Tresh feeder cup is watch his body language. But I suspect he’s had training just like I have.  It’s  not a
foolproof method.”
Jorie, with a pillow propped up behind her, was leaning back against her side—as Theo already thought
of that half of his bed—of the wrought-iron headboard. He sat at her feet, the small G-1 pistol still in his
hand, still set for stun.
As was Jorie’s rifle. He noticed that too.
“All Guardians get interrogation training,” Jorie confirmed. “We’ll wait on that, then.”
“Does he have an implant?” Theo  asked,  wondering what else  might affect Rordan’s  responses  if and
when he decided to confront him, for Jorie’s sake.
“None  my scanner  could  find—and,  yes,  I checked,  right after  I took  his palm print.  But  as  Rordan
noted, much of our tech is keyed to relay or booster through either our ship or the ’droids we put in your
atmosphere for that purpose. With both of those gone, our range and capabilities are reduced.”
It would be like having a cell phone with no cell-phone towers. That had happened to him on vacation in
the Virgin Islands. He understood her frustration.
“So you’re saying he could have an implant and you wouldn’t pick it up.”
“I can’t rule that out.”
“How did he walk right into the house shields if he has a scanner?”
“That’s easier.  The scanner  verifies that the shields exist but not their perimeters.  I use  my oc-set  for
that.” She flipped the band up from around her neck and pushed the eyepiece down.
He’d noticed her doing that, never knew why. “Rordan doesn’t have an oc-set?”
“He owns one, all trackers do.” She pushed the band back down around her neck. “I haven’t seen him
wear one since this mission started, no. But he’s also stayed in standard ship uniform, not tracker gear.”
He’d noticed that too. He also knew cops on patrol wore a lot more gear than detectives did. Evidently
there were similarities with the Guardians.
“Have you ever heard of a beam-up go wrong and send someone elsewhere on the planet, like he said
happened to him?”
She pursed her lips and blew out a small sigh. “Rare,  but yes.  If Ronna—our  PMaT  chief—knew the

ship was under attack and knew Rordan and Tamlynne were in danger, she could have simply tried for
an emergency relocate.  If we  have several  field teams  operating  on a  world,  an  emergency  transport
could take an agent from his location back to field base, rather than up to the ship. But there’s no other
base here that Ronna could have locked on to. To blindly send him somewhere—it’s horribly risky.”
“Because you don’t know what’s in the spot you’re sending him to,” Theo guessed, hearing Montgomery
Scott’s  accented  voice from various Star  Trek  episodes  giving the warning  about  materializing  inside
solid rock.
She nodded.
“So—assuming that’s what happened—why didn’t this Ronna send Tammy?” Theo asked.
“She may have tried—assuming that’s what happened. But if Prow already  had  a  security field around
Tamlynne, Ronna wouldn’t have been able to get a lock on her bioresonance.”
The sound of water ceased, the shower door slammed.
“What’s your gut-level feeling?” he asked her, his voice low.
She sighed again. “He still hates you. If he was a Tresh operative trying to ingratiate his way in, that’s not
the way to do it. He’d try to befriend you, find out what we were planning.”
“Or he’s been a Tresh operative  and  part  of this zombie-breeding  program  all along and  this is just a
continuation of his usual, delightful personality.”
“That would be hugely coincidental. We had no plans to come to your world. But, yes, it’s something I
will consider. The sad thing is, if none of this is true,  we’re  hampering ourselves.  Rordan’s  experience
with reprogramming darts far exceeds mine. He’s also an excellent tracker. I could use his help with this,
desperately.”
Theo knew that. He also knew he had to look past his personal dislike of the man and try—for Jorie’s
sake, for all their sakes—to figure out if Rordan was telling the truth.
He also knew one more thing: his private time with Jorie was over. Until they knew whose side Rordan
was on, one of them would have to be awake and keeping an eye on the man at all times.
The bathroom door opened and Rordan padded out in a pair of Theo’s gray sweatpants and a plain gray
T-shirt. His long hair was unbound, hanging wet past his shoulders. He was scrubbing the towel over his
face but stopped. Theo saw his eyes shift from Jorie with her rifle to himself with the G-1, sitting rather
closely on the bed. Sooner or later—probably sooner—the man was going to figure it out, Theo knew.
The only room in the house that was shielded was his bedroom. And there was only one bed in the room.
Rordan said something in Alarsh.
“Vekran,” Jorie told him. “Become used to it. It’s the language of the world where you live.”
“As I learn for four days,” Rordan said gruffly. He wiped  the towel  over  his face  one  more  time, then
draped it over one shoulder. “So. I am not yet worthy of trust?”
“There’s a lot at risk here,” Jorie said.
“A long time you know me, Jorie Mikkalah.”
“Yes.”

Rordan said something in Alarsh that sounded unpleasant, then turned away. Jorie’s gaze didn’t waver.
Theo could  almost sense  her anger  and  disappointment  with one  more  problem  she  didn’t  need  right
now. He had to remind himself this was her teammate. He had to let her handle Rordan her way.
“You need food,” Jorie said to Rordan, then looked at Theo. “Coffee?”
Theo nodded. “Drop the shield and I’ll start a pot.”
“We’ll all go to the kitchen.” Jorie tapped her scanner. “We all need food. And we need to talk.”
“I do not work with Tresh,” Rordan said as Jorie stood, adjusting her rifle.
Theo watched the man’s eyes, watched his expressions, tried to read him as a detective should. Rordan
was reacting as most innocent people would when accused. But Theo was also very aware Rordan was
not “most people.” He had military training. He was a Guardian. And he was from another galaxy.
But if there was a way to break him down and get at the truth, Theo would find it. He knew they were
almost out of time to deal with the zombies. They couldn’t afford any more mistakes now.
 
24 
After a full day—and night—of trying to work around Kip Rordan and watch him at the same time, Jorie
knew she had no choice. As much as  it made  her nervous  to  do  so,  she  had  to  trust  him. She  pulled
herself off Theo’s bedroom floor, away from her blinking and humming and uncooperative tech, slipped
her feet into the sandals  Theo  had  bought for her,  and  headed  back  for the kitchen,  where  Theo  and
Rordan  were  finishing off midmeal—lunch, Theo  called it. Probably  giving each  other  a  good  case  of
indigestion.
Their mutual dislike was obvious. Worse after Rordan watched her get the into Theo’s bed last night.
She’d “turned grounder.” A derisive term for an agent or tracker—or any spacer, really—who’d chosen
to be  planet-bound.  Dirt-locked.  Forgotten  what  they  were  and  adopted  the  ways  and  culture  of  a
nil-tech world. Or worse, taken a grounder lover.
She hadn’t forgotten she was a spacer. She never could—not even clad in the shorts and sweatshirt so
indigenous to this locale. But she had taken a grounder lover. And now she was about to turn their only
weapon against the zombies and the Tresh over to a man who might be a Tresh agent.
Life just became more blissful from one moment to the next.
She pulled out a chair across from Theo and sat. “I’ve come up against another technical problem,” she
said to Theo without any preliminaries. “One I can’t solve alone.”
He’d been leaning back in his chair, sipping that orange fizzy drink he so loved from a metal can. He let
the front legs of the chair hit the floor with a thump. That was the only noise in the room. Neither he nor
Rordan had bothered exchanging any mealtime pleasantries that she could hear.
“The dart?” Theo asked.
She nodded and noticed Rordan looking at her now. He knew about the dart. She’d brought him up to
date over firstmeal—breakfast—but without too many specifics. And without letting him look at her tech.

Rordan’s gaze was neutral, as if he sensed she’d come to a decision but didn’t want to let any emotions
play on his face.
She knew how that went. She’d worn the same expression herself many times with Captain Pietr.
She raised her chin slightly as she spoke to Rordan. “I am going to check everything you do. But I need
your help. Or we’re going to lose an effective time frame in which to confront the C-Prime.”
“We’d be closer to a resolution if you’d let me work on it since yesterday,” he told her in Alarsh. Rordan
waved one hand before she could berate him for using their language and glanced at  Theo: “I tell Jorie
she wasted much time to come late to this decision.”
“You’d be just as cautious if the situation were reversed,” she shot back. They both knew damned well
he was the one always spouting gen-pro regulations at every turn.
Rordan arched one eyebrow. “But also I would place traps,” he said in Vekran. “So have you. Good.”
He stood. “I only hope, once you believe again that I’m with you, we still have enough time to stop the
C-Prime.”
So did Jorie, desperately.
 
She hunkered down in front of her main unit, with Rordan on her right, and showed him what she’d done.
He nodded, asking very Rordan-like questions, then scrolled back through her work,  making notations
on his scanner. She watched him and listened to Theo pacing in his main room, talking on his cell phone
to either Martinez or Gray. She wasn’t sure which.
“Ah,” Rordan said softly. “Here’s your first problem. We’re using a Hazer, yes?”
She nodded.
He pointed to a line of data. “This range parameter is too low.”
“No, that’s correct.”
“No, it’s not.” He glanced at her, mouth pursed. “Where are you, Jorie?”
Hell  and  damn.  She  was  on  a  planet  aptly  named  after  dirt.  And  she  was  working  with  regional
atmospheric and environmental settings for Port Lraknal.
That corrected, he kept scrolling, now and then muttering, “Good, good.” And on two occasions a short
laugh and, “Excellent!”
After a while it ceased to register in her mind that neither she nor Rordan was in uniform, that  the tech
they worked on was cobbled together and  limping at  best,  and  that  he’d  been  missing after  last being
seen confronting Tresh agents. It was as if this was just another Guardian field mission. She  fell into an
easy patter of exchanges with Rordan and so was surprised when Theo knelt down by her side.
“Will it work?” he asked in Vekran.
Vekran. She’d been speaking in Alarsh, and the words jarred her momentarily.
Not Vekran. English.

“Yes,” she  told  him, feeling more  confident than she  had  hours  before.  “If we  get a  clear  shot  at  the
C-Prime, yes.”
He nodded and she saw his gaze flick toward Rordan, then back to her again, his expression unreadable.
“David Gray has the reports on what might be zombie attacks in Pasco County, but I’d need to go to his
office to view them.” He hesitated. “He’s in Tampa. That’s at least thirty, forty minutes travel time each
way.”
He’d  mentioned  that  information  yesterday,  showed  her  this  Pasco  County,  north  of  their  current
location. Any expansion of zombie activity concerned her.
“I need that data,” she told him.
“It would be risky to get you into his office. It’s a secure facility and you don’t have workable ID.”
Yes, there was that. Jorie understood security requirements.
“And I definitely couldn’t get you both in,” Theo continued.
Jorie thought she saw what he was really asking: could he leave her alone with Rordan?
It was now late afternoon. If Rordan was allied with the Tresh, they’d had more than enough time to take
some kind of action. Things at Theo’s residence had been blissfully quiet.
“I need Gray’s information,” she repeated. “Commander Rordan still has work to  do  here.  Bring back
copies of whatever you can.”
She could sense his indecision, his discomfort.  He  didn’t want to  leave her alone.  Finally, he nodded.
“I’m turning the answering machine off,” he said,  motioning to  the small square  object  on his bedside
table. “Phone rings, you answer. Every time. Got that?”
“I  have  acquired  knowledge,”  she  replied  with  a  small  smile.  She  couldn’t  remember  the  last  time
anyone—other than her brother—had worried about her. Jorie Mikkalah, ex-marine and Guardian Force
commander, was well known for being able to take care of herself.
Yet Theo tried to take care of her, anyway. That amused her but warmed her at the same time.
“You don’t answer, there’s going to be a shitload of trouble on your doorstep, quickly,” he said, but he
was looking at Rordan. “I can do that, no matter where I am.”
“I have same interest in staying alive as you do,” Rordan said with a quick glance away from his scanner.
“It’s not your life I’m worried about.”
“And same interest,” Rordan continued as if Theo hadn’t spoken, “in Jorie’s life.”
Theo pushed himself to his feet, grabbing Jorie’s arm as he did so. She rose with him.
“Answer the phone every time,” he said, his dark eyes serious. Then, taking her by surprise, he pulled her
against him, his mouth on hers, one hand threading up into the back of her hair.
Her “Oof!” turned into a hard but quick kiss of passion  and  desperation  that  set  her heart  hammering.
Theo pulled back slightly with a whispered, “No regrets,” as he brushed his mouth over her ear. Then, in
his normal tone: “I should be back no later than six-thirty or seven.”

She waited until Theo disappeared into the main room before turning to look down at Rordan, expecting
disapproval, and finding on his face what she expected. She knew  she  should be  annoyed  at  Theo  for
staking  his  claim,  as  her  brother  would  call  it.  Part  of  her  recognized  the  childishness—or  the  very
maleness—of his actions.  But she  also  knew  he cared,  very much. And the kiss  was  not  so  much  a
message to Rordan as it was a message shared between themselves.
For if something were to happen, she knew that, yes, she would regret not having kissed him again.
She settled back down on the floor, aware of Rordan’s gaze on her. She turned and awaited one of his
usual remarks.
“Why?” was all he said, and that surprised her. Bothered her. She didn’t understand and so gave him a
perfunctory answer.
“What’s between Theo Petrakos and myself is my personal business.”
Rordan stared at his scanner. She could see his mouth thinning, she could  see  the tension in his fingers
wrapping  around  the  scanner’s  edge.  Finally,  he  looked  back  at  her.  “You  question  my  allegiance
because I’ve been gone for four days. Now I’m wondering, should I question yours? This is not the Jorie
Mikkalah I’ve  worked  with on  the  Sakanah.  If  Lorik  were  here,  I’d  understand.  A  revenge  game.
Stupid, but it might work. But he’s not.” Rordan shook his head, closing his eyes for a moment.
“This has nothing to do with Lorik.”
“Then what does it have to do with?” His voice rose. “We call you the Ice Princess on board, you know
that, don’t you? We had bets years ago, when Lorik wanted you, how long it would take—”
Jorie shot to her feet and spun away from him, knowing if she didn’t she’d smash her fist into his pretty
face.
She was aware of the nickname a few of the men had bestowed on her. She’d heard the whispers, the
snickers. She hadn’t cared—it was almost a badge of honor on the Sakanah.  Shipboard  affairs fueled
the long times between missions and filled the need for excitement.
When she  was  bored,  she’d  grab  her Hazer  and  pull up a  zombie-attack  sim in the ship’s  weapon’s
range. She’d never bed-hopped.
And then there was Lorik.
She didn’t care to know if he’d won or lost the bet on how quickly he’d bed her.
“Jorie.” The hard tone was gone from Rordan’s voice. “Regrets. I spoke without thinking. It’s just that I
value you—”
“You value me?” She  spun back  to  him.  “So  much  that  when  Lorik  was  cheating  on  me,  you  said
nothing? You even helped him in his duplicity! Tell me again how much you value me, Kip Rordan.”
“Jorie—”
“Pietr offered you a captaincy too, didn’t he?”
He studied her before answering. “I was  aware  of the offer,  but that’s  not the only reason  I took  the
assignment.”
She  bristled  at  his  admission,  but  part  of  her  anger,  she  knew,  should  be  directed  at  Pietr.  He’d

deliberately  made  a  difficult  mission  more  difficult  by  pitting  two  teammates  against  each  other—a
method he’d been known to use before. And now look where they were.
She almost said as much, but it was useless. Pietr was gone, and the offered captaincy was a moot point.
“The assignment has changed,” she said tersely. “I doubt it’s one you would have signed up for originally.
But it’s what we  have to  do  now: finish the dart,  infect the C-Prime,  and  keep  this world  from being
overrun by the Tresh.”
“And Petrakos?”
She  almost  asked,  “What  about  him?”  but  didn’t  want  to  let  the  conversation  get  personal  again.
“Gen-pro regs no longer apply. It would be different if the Tresh weren’t involved, if the zombies were
dormant. We could stay covert, wait and see if a ship comes looking for us in a year. But that’s not the
case here. We need the locals’ help if we’re to have any chance of success.”
“That’s not what—”
The phone rang, interrupting Rordan’s remark. She grabbed the handset and hit the button as Theo had
showed her. Only as she opened her mouth did she remember to switch from Alarsh to English. “This is
Jorie.”
“Everything okay, babe?”
Theo’s deep voice was like balm to her frayed soul. “As usual,” she said, a small sigh accompanying her
words.
“Rordan behaving?”
“That is as usual too.”
“Being a pompous asshole, is he? If you zap him with your stunner, I won’t complain.”
She could almost see his feral, delicious grin. “Sadly, there’s too much work to do yet.”
“Well, keep it in mind. I’ll check in with you later.”
“Got it,” she said, using his phrase.
“Very good!” He chuckled. “Later, babe.”  A click in her ear  signaled the disconnect.  She  tapped  the
button again and replaced the handset in the holder.
Rordan had turned back to his calculations on the main unit. Jorie stared out the bedroom window for a
moment, at the street bathed in late-afternoon sunlight, at the tall, thin trees with their long fronds, at the
stouter trees with thick foliage draped in dangling gray mosses, and  at  the residences,  neatly kept,  that
lined the street.
Two  laughing  children  glided  by  on  their  wheeled  shoes—Rollerblades.  They  spied  Mrs.  Goldstein
arranging flowers in pots on her front porch and they waved. She waved back, calling out something that
Jorie couldn’t hear.
The children answered and continued on.  A small blue land vehicle came  into view from the opposite
direction, moving slowly, aware of the children, no doubt. It went out of sight.
Mrs. Goldstein’s front door slammed and her porch was empty.

But they were there, they were all there. In every street surrounding Theo’s  residence,  the same  scene
was being enacted in a  variety of ways.  Bahia Vista.  Florida.  Earth.  People  living their lives. None  of
them knowing what lurked only a breath away.
Yet all depended on Jorie to stop it.
She stepped away from the window and  resumed  her place,  cross-legged,  in front of the MOD-tech.
She concentrated on Rordan’s work and tried very hard to keep all her worries at bay.
 
Theo telephoned three more times before Jorie was surprised by a rumbling sound outside the residence.
Trotting quickly into the main room, her flip-flops slapping against her feet, she caught a glimpse of him in
his large land vehicle moving past the window, heading around to the back.
Unexpectedly, her heart fluttered, and she felt silly and stupid and girlish but couldn’t keep the smile off
her face. He was back early. Or else—knowing Theo  as  she  was  coming to  know  him—he’d always
intended to return at this time but didn’t want Rordan to know that.
And Rordan  wouldn’t know.  Exhaustion after  his four-day  trek—or  perhaps  just  from  staring  at  the
configurations on the screens since his return—had caught up with him. He was lying on the small couch
in Theo’s spare room, one arm slung over his eyes.
Still, taking no chances, Jorie had managed to adjust the security fields just enough that if Rordan left the
room, she’d know. It wouldn’t stop him, but he couldn’t sneak up on her or out of the residence.
She waited for Theo in the kitchen, then stepped into the circle of his embrace as he held one arm out to
her.
“Everything okay, babe?”
It was now. She nodded against his chest, then raised her face. “Program is complete. And it’s a good
one, I think. What did you find?”
“Something that will probably mean more to you than to me. Where’s our friend Rordan?”
“Sleeping.”
“Do we still need to keep him under guard?” He drew her away from his chest and nudged her toward
the table, tossing a large tan envelope on its top. She pulled out a chair and sat, as he did.
“Only time will truly answer that question. I managed to set a motion-sensor field around the spare room,
but my basic instinct is he told the truth. The emergency PMaT dumped him somewhere out of danger,
either by accident or design. There have been any number of chances for him to contact the Tresh or for
the Tresh to make a move on this residence after you left. Neither happened.”
“Yet.”
“Yet,” she agreed. “You’re back early.”
He grinned. “I’m back right on time.”
Ah! She’d been correct in her estimation of him. “And this?” She tapped the envelope.

He opened  it and  pushed  a  stack  of papers  her way.  “All reports  David and  I could  find that  fit  the
zombie-attack profile. You need to go through them. Ask me anything you don’t understand.”
She thumbed quickly through the pages, nodding.
“You might want to turn off the field around Rordan,” he told her. “We need to eat. I’ll see what I can
scare up for dinner for the three of us.”
She frowned at him. “You need to frighten food?”
He stood and, reaching over, ruffled her hair. “More funny English.”
“I prefer my food complacent, not frightened.”
“How about complacent pizza?”
“Pizza?”
“You’ll love it.” He  headed  for the  kitchen’s  cold-storage  unit,  then  pulled  out  a  can  of  his  favorite
beverage.  She  neutralized  the  sensor  field  around  the  spare  room,  turned  back  to  the  papers  he’d
brought, and began reading.
She was aware he left the kitchen after that, aware he was talking on his cell phone again. Aware even of
Rordan’s voice in the background, though only briefly.
The papers he brought her had her full attention. When he returned, she asked for explanations of some
terms and odd acronyms. That solved, she went back to the papers  again, her heart  sinking with each
page she turned.
A chime sounded, startling her. She grabbed her scanner, but it wasn’t that. Theo was at his front door,
talking to someone. The door closed with a  thump. Then Theo  came  in with two  large flat boxes  that
emitted a wonderful aroma, and for a moment her stomach overruled her troubled mind.
“Go tell Rordan dinner’s ready,” he said.
She stood but held up a handful of the papers. “This isn’t good news.”
“Eat first,” he told her. “Bad news always goes better on a full stomach.”
Yes, it did. Especially as it might be the last meal they’d have.
 
25 
Pizza was wonderful—not as blissful as  peanut  butter,  but definitely an experience  Jorie  would like to
repeat.
The news Theo brought was much less so. Yet it was exactly what she needed, what her tech—without
its interface with her ship—could no longer provide.
The northern  area  that Theo  referred  to  as  Pasco  County  wasn’t  the  only  site  of  expanded  zombie
activity.  The  zombies  had  struck  south,  in  a  region  he  called  Manatee  County.  The  expansion  was
worrisome but, as even Rordan agreed, predictable given the size of the herd.

“Big mission,” Rordan noted in his halting Vekran as he perused the data. Theo’s  papers  had  replaced
the  pizza  boxes  and  the  delicious  spicy  food  they’d  contained.  Jorie  had  arranged  the  papers
chronologically. Theo was now aligning them to a crudely drawn map of the area.
Big mission, indeed. Not only what they had to do, but what the Tresh were evidently planning: a rapid
zombie-breeding program that could provide them with the means to take control over a large number of
the spacelane Hatches in a short period of time. What it had taken the Interplanetary Concord decades
to put in place, the Tresh could accomplish in mere months.
“The key area,” Jorie said, pointing to a small peninsula on the map, “is here.”
Rordan agreed, nodding, confirming the location on his scanner.
“Fort Hernando Park,” Theo said.
The name meant nothing to Jorie, but she vaguely remembered hearing it before and said so.
“Two bodies were found there a few days ago. Those were the pictures Martinez brought here.”
She  remembered  fearing  when  she  first  saw  them  that  one  might  have  been  Kip  Rordan.  She
remembered also that Fort Hernando was a remote beach area, a T-shaped finger of land with very few
residences and not accessible at night.
“That’s the Skyway Bridge,” Theo was saying, dragging his finger across a long line. “Fort Hernando is
just west of that, jutting out into Tampa Bay. It’s a county park and recreation area.”
It was also—judging from the reports of attacks and unknown disturbances in the area, integrated with
what Jorie could pull from her scanner—a hotbed of zombies.
“When do we do this?” Theo asked.
“We have to  incorporate  the virus program  into  the  Hazer’s  datastream,”  Jorie  said.  “That  will  take
several sweeps—”
“Tomorrow, most early time,” Rordan put in, and Jorie knew he was correct. Recalibrating the rifle was
delicate work under the best of conditions and not something to be rushed. They didn’t have the best of
conditions—only some basic tech components on the floor of Theo’s bedroom.
“Probably tomorrow,” she agreed. “Which is still workable. We have a few days yet.”
But what they didn’t have was a sim. On missions like this, they’d always practice first in a sim on board.
Work out all possible angles of attack.
That meant going into a mission blind with two operatives—Martinez  and  Gray—who’d  never  faced  a
zombie before and one—Theo—who had but had limited experience. The juvenile feeding frenzy Theo
had encountered was mild compared to what a C-Prime could do. In spite of the training Jorie had put
him through, things could go horribly wrong.
At the very least, they needed to draw up plans and contingency plans, she told Theo.
He understood. “That means we need a day where you, me, Rordan, Zeke, and David can all sit down
and go over everything.”
It wouldn’t be a sim. She had serious doubts if it would even be enough. But it would have to do.

 
Bedtime, when it eventually happened, was as awkward as the night before. Jorie worked on the Hazer
with  Rordan  until  her  eyes  blurred,  then—because  she  still  wouldn’t  chance  Rordan  working
alone—ordered  him to  rest  on the mattress  Theo  had  taken  from the foldout in the spare  room.  The
mattress, along with a pillow and blanket, was shoved against the bedroom wall near the bathroom.
“I’ll sleep on the couch in the other room,” Rordan said.
“I can’t shield the entire house.”
“You and Petrakos don’t want your privacy?” Rordan’s voice held a petulant tone.
“I have one thread of patience left,” Jorie snapped, “and you’re fraying it. Sleep here or sleep standing in
the shower, for all I care. But you’re not leaving this room.”
She kicked  off her sandals  and—still wearing the soft  shorts  and  sweatshirt—climbed  onto  the larger
bed, plumping a pillow to put under her head. Rordan eventually sat on his mattress, then, a few minutes
later, laid back, his arm thrown over his eyes.
Jorie tucked her scanner and G-1 against her side and dozed lightly until Theo came in. The bed jostled
as he crawled over next to her, his presence a welcome warmth in spite of the fact that Rordan was in the
room. She watched through lowered lashes as Theo tapped on her scanner and sealed the bedroom, just
as she’d taught him.
If Rordan tried to leave the room, he’d be zapped, as Theo  was  so  fond of saying. If he tried  for her
scanner, he’d have to pull it from between Theo and herself.
Rordan tried neither, because when she woke, sunlight filtering through the windows, he was still on the
floor—snoring lightly—and her scanner and G-1 were undisturbed.
Theo’s hand brushed hers, sending flutters around her heart. She turned her face, lifting her chin so their
lips met briefly.
“Coffee, agapi mou?” he asked.
“Blissful idea.” She grabbed a pair of pants Theo called jeans and a short-sleeved green T-shirt  on her
way to the shower.
Things became less blissful as the morning progressed. The Hazer—evidently in as  grouchy a  mood  as
Rordan—refused to accept the virus-dart programming, in spite  of all the tricks  and  tweaks  Jorie  and
Rordan tried.
Frustrated and swearing in Alarsh, Rordan went to the kitchen for a glass of ice water. It was almost time
for midmeal. Perhaps that would help. Jorie wandered into the spare  room,  where  Theo—in jeans  the
same light blue as  her own—had  set  up his own small computer.  It  was  very rudimentary tech,  but it
accessed  his world’s  databases—something  Jorie’s  could  not.  She  plopped  down  next to  him on the
small flowered couch.
“Are you sure it’s not his programming that’s screwing up?” Theo asked quietly.
“I’m double-checking everything he does,” she told him. Which was also slowing down  the process.  It
was hard to solve problems and watch for problems at the same time.

“But you can’t rule it out.”
“No,” she admitted, a weariness enfolding her. She closed her eyes and let her head drop back against
the couch. She was trying to do too much in too short a time, with too little resources.
Give up, a small voice prodded. There’s no shame in acknowledging your limitations. They’re not
even your limitations. If Pietr hadn’t played games, if Lorik had listened, you wouldn’t even be in
this situation.
It’s no  longer  a  Guardian  problem.  There  aren’t  enough  Guardians  here  to  make  a  difference.
Eventually, the security forces on this planet will recognize the zombies’ existence and be  forced
to handle it their own way.
But there would be so many deaths before they did.
There already have been more deaths. You couldn’t stop those. You didn’t even know about them.
Your tech is ineffectual now. The ship is gone, It’s no longer a Guardian problem.
You can  protect  Theo.  You  can  protect  his  family.  You  can  protect  your  team.  That’s  all  you
should be expected to do in this situation.
True. It was all true. Why couldn’t she accept that?
Because you have to solve everything. You’re the big important zombie tracker. Pietr even said it:
there’s not a zombie around that’s a match for the intrepid Commander Jorie Mikkalah.
Lorik even said it: you’re not a woman, you’re a zombie-killing machine. It’s all you care about.
It’s more important than anything else. Your kill record. A captaincy.
Ice Princess. Living in a castle of ice-cold corpses…
“Jorie? Jorie!”
Theo’s voice in her ear, Theo’s arms around her, holding her against him, against his warmth.
Jorie opened her eyes, shivering uncontrollably.
“Jorie?”
She stared into his dark eyes and tried to speak, but her mouth only made little gasping sounds. Where
was she? What was happening?
“It’s okay, babe. I’m here. I’ve got you.”
“Theo?” she finally managed to croak. She wanted to reach up and touch his face, but her arms wouldn’t
obey. She clutched her spasming hands against her stomach.
“What—Jorie?” Rordan sat quickly on the other side of her. His fingers curled around her arm. “What’s
the matter?”
Alarsh. She recognized the language Rordan spoke. Alarsh. The language of her people,  her ship. The
ship where the intrepid Commander  Jorie  Mikkalah  tallied her kills with notches  in the wall of her ice
castle. The ship where her bed was cold and vacant because Lorik had left to find a  woman who was
warm.

Not the Ice Princess. Killer of zombies.
She closed her eyes. A low, desperate moan filled her throat.
“I’m losing her.”
Theo’s  voice.  He’d  leave too.  No  Ice  Princess  belonged  with a  man with a  very  good  face.  A  nice
family. He should be spoused. Loved. Surely all the females on his world weren’t blind and unsexed. He
would find love. But not with the Ice Princess.
“She…Lorik tells me of this. She dreams, cries. Cannot wake.”
Vekran. Someone speaking very bad Vekran—ah. Kip Rordan, friend of Lorik’s. Kip Rordan, beautiful
man who knew she was cold, unloving. Lorik tells him this….
Ice Princess.
“She’s come out of it before. Jorie. Babe.”
Large hands, warm, against her face. She leaned into the warmth, but the keening cry started  again. A
thin wail. Pain. So much pain. And so cold. Shivering, shivering.
“C’mon,  babe,  c’mon.”  Hands  moved  rapidly  up  and  down  her  arms.  Another  set  massaged  her
shoulders, her back, through her thin T-shirt. “You’re safe. I’m here. Nothing’s going to hurt you.”
More warmth. She was being pulled against someone, away from the hands at  her back.  Arms circled
her, held her, rocked her. A low rumbling in her ear. A man’s voice, singing softly.
She knew the voice. She knew the melody. Not Alarsh. Not the ship. Nothing cold, but warmth. A deep
voice that sang to her before. Such bliss…
“Theo?” her voice cracked, her throat dry. But her face and Theo’s neck were wet.
“It’s me, babe. Easy. Take a deep breath.”
She did as she was told, aching. But the shivering had stopped.
She was in Theo’s lap, her face buried against his neck, her hands fisted into his chest. She could feel the
tight bands of his arms around her legs and back. She took another deep breath. He was still rocking her,
humming softly.
She tried to raise her face. He nudged  her head  back  down.  “Relax, agapi  mou.  It’s  over.  I’m here.
You’re safe.”
“Theo.” She wrapped her arms around his neck, pulling herself more tightly against him, and fell into his
warmth with a quiet sigh.
 
“She just needs to rest,” Theo said, shifting Jorie slightly so his arms held her more securely. Rordan had
reached for her two, three times during her nightmare or seizure or whatever it was. There was no way
he was  going to  let  the  bastard  touch  her.  He  didn’t  discount  that  Rordan  might  have  caused  what
happened.

He stood, intending to take her to the bedroom.
“I will—”
“No.” He put the same force behind that single word as he had when he was on the streets in uniform.
Rordan said nothing more. Theo angled around him, Jorie held tightly against his chest,  and  headed  for
the bedroom.
She murmured softly, her eyes fluttering open when he laid her on the bed. “Theo?”
“Naptime, agapi mou. Short nap.”
“Mmm, yes.” Her mouth curved in a small smile.
He kissed it lightly. “I’ll be right here.” He squeezed her hand. “Right nearby.”
He  straightened,  then  opened  a  drawer  in  his  dresser  and  grabbed  the  Tresh  feeder  cup  before
confronting Rordan in the hallway, where he knew the man would be waiting.
“Kitchen,” he told Rordan, holding the cup out of sight behind him. “Now.”
When Rordan sat, Theo pulled back the chair catty-corner to Rordan’s, sat down, and placed  the cup
with the unfamiliar inscription on the table. He watched Rordan’s eyes and mouth and tried to keep the
man’s hands in sight as well. Some things didn’t need a common language.
He’d done this before, placing a murder weapon or a bloodied scrap of clothing between himself and a
suspect. Just put it there, watched and waited.
Rordan looked at him expectantly.
Theo sat, hands loosely on his thighs, as if Rordan’s reaction mattered not at all.
Finally Rordan picked up the cup. When he turned it to the inscription, Theo saw him start slightly. Saw
the minute widening of his eyes.
“Tresh,” Rordan said. “You get this where?”
“You tell me.”
“I…have no information.”
“You know it’s Tresh.”
“These.” Rordan ran his index fingers over the inscription. “Tresh words. Not my language.” He put the
cup back on the table.
“But you know they’re Tresh words.”
“Of  course.  Guardians  know  many  things.”  Rordan’s  frown  deepened  and  he  looked  away  for  a
moment,  muttering  a  long  list  of  something  nasty  in  Alarsh.  His  cursing,  Theo  noted,  was  more
monotonous  than  Jorie’s.  Hers  was  melodious,  even  melodramatic.  Rordan  was  obviously  a  rank
amateur when it came to ass-faced vomit-brained demon’s whores.
“You’ve known about the Tresh for a long time,” Theo commented.
“Not like you want me to say, no. I learn of Tresh through study. We all learn through study. On my ship,

on Sakanah, only few like Jorie learn Tresh through war.”
Theo remembered her saying she was the only one on this team with direct combat experience.
“The war was over years ago. Yet the Tresh are here. So are you.”
“I do not work with Tresh!”
Theo pushed the cup closer to Rordan. “Someone left this on my steps,” he motioned toward the porch
door. “Then you showed up.”
Rordan shook his head. “No, no.” He met Theo’s hard stare without wavering.
“The Tresh  are  powerful,” Theo  continued,  trying  now  to  keep  it  simple  enough  that  Rordan  would
understand. “They have this shielding. Better than the Guardians. I could understand someone wanting to
be part of that. Part of their power. They even control zombies. Very powerful, the Tresh.”
“Yes. Powerful. Dangerous—that is word? Dangerous.”
Theo poked the cup again. “Why is this here?”
“Why? I don’t have answer.”
“You have power, Commander Rordan. You can be dangerous.”
Rordan slammed one fist on the table. “I do not work with Tresh!”
Theo  watched  him,  desperately  wanting  to  see  signs  that  the  man  was  lying.  But  all  words  aside,
Rordan’s body language and continued denials only proclaimed his innocence.
If he was reading Rordan correctly. There was no guarantee he was.
Rordan flexed his fingers, then clenched them again, his gaze hard and angry. He spat out a few Alarsh
words, glanced past Theo toward the living room, then back to Theo again.
“Hear my words,  nil.” He  pointed  one  finger at  Theo,  his voice lower  now.  “I  tell  you  once  so  you
understand and stop this stupid game. I do  not work  with Tresh.  Not  because  I am Guardian.  Forget
Guardian. I do not ever hurt Jorie. You hear me? I do not ever hurt Jorie.”
Rordan  sat  back,  color  rising on his face,  and  Theo  saw  clearly that  the animosity  he’d  sensed  from
Rordan  had  nothing to  do  with Theo  being a  nil but with Theo  being a  male.  And  a  male  Jorie  was
interested in.
“I would never hurt her either,” Theo told him.
Rordan crossed his arms over his chest. “You understand nothing of her. I understand. I live same life as
Jorie. Same dreams. She is not for you.”
Theo forced his anger down before answering. “I think that’s Jorie’s decision, not yours.”
“Jorie has dream to be captain. You can give her this?”
“Your ship’s gone.”
“If—when—ship comes again, Jorie will be captain. And you say, no, Jorie? Stay and be nil with me?
You love her, Petrakos?”

“I—”
“You love her and take away her dream?” Rordan shoved his chair back and stood. “I do not ever hurt
Jorie.”
And he strode from the kitchen, leaving Theo alone with the Tresh feeder cup and an overwhelming urge
to smash that cup against the wall.
He forced himself to go to the refrigerator instead. It was past lunchtime. A can of soda  would suffice.
He’d lost his appetite.
Rordan’s  words  hit home.  As  much as  he didn’t want to  admit  it,  it  was  something  he  had  to  face.
Everything  Jorie  was,  everything  she’d  lived,  was  something  he’d  never  experienced.  They’d  found
themselves thrust together because of emergency circumstances. But when normalcy returned—any kind
of normalcy—they might find their lives didn’t fit well together at all.
He knew that. He just didn’t want to face that, because she’d made him feel alive again. She’d made him
love again. She’d made him trust again.
That  Rordan  understood  Jorie  better  than  he  did,  he  had  no  doubt.  They  had  years  of  shared
experiences.
Familiarity also breeds contempt.
He could only hope.
His cell phone trilled a familiar tune. He dug it out of his pocket and checked caller ID: Martinez.
“Yassou, amigo.”
“Theo, listen. Don’t be mad at me. We got trouble. I’m doing all I can to help.”
Theo’s gut clenched. He did not like the sound of Zeke’s voice. “What kind of trouble?”
“You and Jorie home?”
“Yeah.” He was walking through his living room and could see her sitting up in bed, talking to  Rordan.
He didn’t like that either. Though she did appear to have some animation back in her face. “What—”
“We’ll be there in about thirty minutes.”
“We?”
“Trust me on this.”
“Who’s we?”
Zeke hesitated. “Chief Brantley.”
“Brantley?” Theo stopped in his tracks.
“Just don’t go anywhere, okay? I’m only trying to help. See you in thirty.”
Theo flipped the cell phone closed. Panagia mou! The chief of the Bahia Vista Police Department was
coming here  to  find out just what Detective  Sergeant  Theo  Petrakos  was  doing  harboring  two  illegal
outer-space aliens in his city.

He could see the news-media trucks rolling in right behind him.
And then The Jerry Springer Show.
And then the feds’ dark sedans with blackened windows.
Fuck.
 
26 
Gerard  Brantley  was  proof  that  brains  were  as  important  as  brawn  to  a  cop.  That  the  slender,
spectacled,  pale-haired  man  was  a  scholar—with  master’s  degrees  in  public  administration  and
criminology—was  well  known.  Even  more  well  known  was  his  impressive  record  as  a  detective  in
Special  Investigations. Officers he worked  with considered  him  persistent  and  thorough.  Suspects  he
caught considered him relentless.
He was also often fair. At the moment, Theo was praying for fair.
“Sir,” he said, stepping back to let the chief enter the front hallway. “Sir,” he said a second time, to the
taller,  burly  man  behind  Brantley  whose  tightly  curled  dark  hair  was  sprinkled  with  silver.  Jamont
Sanders,  head  of  BVPD’s  Forensic  Services  Unit.  Like  Brantley,  he  was  in  khaki  pants  and  a
short-sleeved  white  knit  shirt  with  a  green  embroidered  BVPD  emblem.  The  department’s  casual
uniform.
Behind Sanders, in jeans but the same knit shirt, was an uneasy-looking Zeke Martinez.
“Ezequiel,” Theo said, with a nod.
Zeke had the good graces not to say anything. Theo wasn’t sure what Zeke could say that he’d want to
hear.
The only positive note was that Internal Affairs wasn’t  also  part  of the entourage.  So  he wasn’t  being
stripped of rank—yet.
The  four  of  them  ended  up  in  Theo’s  kitchen,  because  Sanders  needed  a  table.  When  the
broad-shouldered man pulled Jorie’s battered T-MOD from his large briefcase,  Theo  knew  he was  in
trouble.
“The lab tells me this is made of an unknown alloy,” Sanders said without preamble, his deep voice laced
with a Southern drawl. “Martinez tells me you can explain how we came into possession of it.”
For  a  moment, Theo  was  shocked  into silence. It  never  occurred  to  him that  the  laptoplike  T-MOD
would be  analyzed for anything other  than  its  data.  He’d  almost  forgotten  about  the  unit,  what  with
zombies climbing out of green glowing portals and Tresh Devastators popping in and out surrounded by
magic shields. Had Jorie’s cover been blown by the firefight with the juvenile zombies in the park or after
the encounter with the Tresh safe house in Gulfview, that would have made sense.
But the T-MOD…
“I can explain, sir,” he told Sanders. “But I can’t guarantee you’ll believe everything I tell you.”
“We might,” Brantley said, pulling off his wire-rimmed glasses and buffing one lens with a cloth he pulled

from his pants pocket. “We just came from Suzanne Martinez’s veterinary clinic.”
“Suzanne was busy with an emergency,” Zeke said. “I had to get Baby out of cold storage myself.”
No wonder Zeke looked a little green around the gills. Theo almost felt sorry for the man, but he still was
disturbed by what he saw as a defection. Why did Zeke bring Sanders and Brantley into this? He knew
how much Theo was opposed to any outside resources being brought in at this point—until he was sure
Jorie was safe.
He no longer had a chance to do that, he realized grimly. While Brantley’s involvement could result in a
more  effective  attack  on  the  C-Prime,  it  almost  certainly  guaranteed  that  Jorie—and  Tam  and
Rordan—would become property of the media and the feds shortly thereafter.
“How much did Detective Martinez tell you about the zombie?” Theo asked Brantley.
It was Sanders who answered. “We limited his recounting to what he had experienced himself. He told
us about Baby’s appearance here.”  Sanders  motioned to  the wall behind him that  separated  the living
room and kitchen. “But I understand you’ve had other encounters, not only with these creatures but with
people who claim they’re hunting them.”
So Zeke had told them everything. His last small hope that he could keep Jorie out of this shivered and
died.
“The biggest part of their proof—their ship—is gone,” Theo told him. “It’s a lot of hearsay at this point, a
lot that will have to be taken on faith.”
Chief Brantley leaned his hands on the back of the kitchen chair, his shoulders hunching as if he was tired
or annoyed. “Sergeant Petrakos, understand very clearly that the only reason we don’t have FDLE here
right now—not to mention Homeland Security—is because Detective Martinez insisted we have faith in
you. I personally think what we have here is something far beyond our department’s abilities. Far beyond
even FDLE’s. But Martinez refused to tell us anything more unless we first promised to  give you a  fair
hearing.” Brantley straightened and glanced at his watch.  “You have forty-five minutes, Sergeant.  Start
talking. Or I’m getting on the phone to the governor’s office and the Homeland Security task force.”
 
Jamont Sanders  had  big hands  for  a  cop  who  was  also  a  forensic  scientist,  with  fingers  like  brown
sausages. But he was well known for his deft, sure handling of even the smallest bioswab or entomology
needle probe. Sanders poked the air in front of him with that same controlled delicacy. “Force field, eh?
Shit!” He  jumped  back  as  the invisible shield sizzled and  a  corresponding  alarm erupted  from  Jorie’s
MOD-tech on the bedroom floor. “Feels like a damned Taser!”
“It could feel worse,” Theo told him. “That’s the low setting.”
Brantley was silent, watching.
Next came the G-1 and the Hazer, both demonstrated in the backyard by an obviously condescending
Rordan, who clearly didn’t care that Brantley was chief of police in Bahia Vista. Theo could almost see
NIL tattooed on all their foreheads.
Then the scanner, which of the three alien items was the least convincing. Any twelve-year-old whiz kid
could probably rig something like that, at least visually.

Sanders picked up the Hazer again, examining the touch  pads  on the stock  closely.  Rordan  sauntered
over and—with exaggerated motions, as if showing a child—went through the weapon’s settings.
Theo knew  language was  a  problem  with  Rordan,  but  not  that  big  of  one.  He’d  certainly  made  his
intentions about Jorie clear enough.
He glanced at her standing on the bottom step of his back porch, hands locked loosely behind her back.
They’d had little time to speak since Zeke’s phone call and no time at all for anything private, other than a
squeeze of her hand along with her reassurance that she’d recovered from her brief nightmare. He didn’t
tell her he  was  still  worried—he  wondered  if  the  Guardians  had  something  like  posttraumatic  stress
syndrome.
Her gaze darted to him as if she felt his eyes  on her.  A corner  of her mouth quirked  briefly in a  small
smile, then faded. She was nervous, but whether it was because she was still drained from her nightmare
or was picking up on his unease, Theo couldn’t tell.
And couldn’t ask. Not with Brantley next to him. Not with Rordan within earshot.
Minutes later they filed back into his kitchen. Sanders grabbed a chair and motioned Rordan, Jorie, and
Theo to sit. The chief declined  the offered  chair and  leaned  against the counter,  watching again. Zeke
Martinez stood by the refrigerator, arms folded, looking decidedly anxious.
Theo  was  no  longer  immensely  pissed  at  Zeke.  He  had  somewhat  figured  out  the  scenario  in  his
mind—the lab bringing their odd findings to Sanders, who then cornered Zeke as primary on the Wayne
case. And Zeke had no answers other than the truth, as bizarre as it was.
All he had was Baby, back in Suzanne’s clinic. Any twelve-year-old might be able to fabricate an “alien
scanner” and maybe even come up with some kind of Taser-like force field. But no twelve-year-old whiz
kid could concoct Baby.
“So these  zombies,” Sanders  was  asking Jorie,  “progressed  beyond  their  original  programming?  And
spread?”
She nodded. “They were designed to be defensive but obedient. When the Mastermind Code was lost,
we could  no  longer  control  them  or  prevent  the  adaptations  from  occurring.  All  we  can  do  now  is
terminate them as we find them.”
“Killer bees,” Sanders said softly.
Theo saw Jorie frown, not understanding the analogy: a hybrid honeybee that was accidentally released in
the late 1950s and became known for its vicious and defensive behavior. It was never bred for that—the
bees  were  bred  for  better  honey  production.  But  once  in  the  wild,  they  became  a  force—and  a
legend—all their own.
“Why do they mummify the people or animals they kill?” Sanders asked.
“Again, a perversion of their original function. They were constructed to take bodily fluid samples  from
sentients they detained  for analysis as  protection  against the spread  of disease.  They’d then secrete  a
chemical to seal the area where the sample was taken—putting the probed area in isolation. Stasis.” She
looked at Sanders for confirmation that he understood her explanation.
He nodded. “Now they suck the entire body dry and then seal it.”
Gave a whole new meaning to overkill, Theo noted silently.

“It wasn’t always so,” Jorie said. “The first attacks, a sentient might lose an arm, a leg. But now,” and she
shook  her  head,  “it  becomes  worse  as  time  passes.  Worse  with  each  new  generation.  The  original
program  that  initiated  their  testing  function  now  goes  out  of  control  when  stimulated  by  certain
frequencies  and  the  presence  of  a  sentient.  It’s  no  longer  sample  and  seal.  It’s  drain,  absorb,  and
kill—and crave more in a frenzied function to eradicate anything the zombie sees as capable of carrying
an infection. Which is any warm-blooded living creature. That’s why we call that their craving.”
“Up until now you’ve stopped them.” Brantley finally spoke.
“The zombies respond to frequencies emitted by tech,” Jorie said. “That means they seek out—up until
now—a  ship, world,  or  station  sufficiently  advanced  that  we,  that  the  Guardians,  have  no  problems
integrating with them. Or a low-tech world where the Guardians have established a small research colony
or defensive outpost so that there are already resources in place we can use.
“Your world is different.” Jorie waved one hand toward the porch door. “You don’t house a  Guardian
outpost. And your tech is not yet at the level where the zombies would be drawn here—which is why we
ignored you, for the most part. But the Tresh didn’t. I think the Tresh  brought  them here  because  they
believed they could  use  your world  and  be  undetected.  It  was  happenstance  that  we  found  you.  But
because you are what you are—a  low-tech  world  not capable  of star  travel,  with no experience  with
other star systems—we’re handicapped in solving the problem.
“Now, with my ship no longer here,  we  are  handicapped  even more.  But, yes,  up until now we  have
stopped the zombies. And, yes,” Jorie said, raising her chin and meeting Brantley’s skeptical gaze clearly,
“even now I will try.”
And that, Theo knew with a sinking heart, was why he cared so very deeply about her. It was something
he’d seen in her from the very beginning: a sense of honor. Not blind duty. But a sense of honor because
the lives she saved meant something to her.
It was a sense of honor—considering the odds—that could also get her killed.
Chief Brantley pushed himself away from the counter. “Sanders?”
“Sir?”
“I need to speak privately with you.”
“Sir.” Sanders stood, glancing around. “Sergeant, may we use your back porch?”
Theo doubted  they were  interested  in his landscaping by zombie.  “Please.”  He  motioned  toward  the
porch door. “We’ll stay here.” And sweat in the air-conditioning.
Sanders followed Brantley out. Zeke hesitated for a moment, then came and took Sanders’s seat at the
head of the table, opposite Theo, with Jorie and Rordan flanking him. Rordan was poking at his scanner,
ignoring the conversation.
“You still want to kick my ass, amigo?” Zeke asked quietly.
“Not as much as before. I can see where they had you—”
“By the cojones?” Zeke blew out an exasperated breath. “Like you wouldn’t believe.”
“I’m wondering if Brantley believes.”

“You should have seen his face when I showed him Baby.”
“I take it he’s been tight-lipped about what he wants to do.”
Zeke nodded. “You know Brantley.”
“I do not,” Jorie put in, fisting one hand on the tabletop. “Will he be a hindrance or a help?”
That brought a comment in Alarsh from Rordan, which received a quick, narrow-eyed look from Jorie.
He  decided  Rordan  wanted  an  argument.  And  Theo  had  no  intention  of  giving  Rordan  anything  he
wanted.
“Chief  Brantley  could  isolate  the  beach  area,  give  us  additional  shooters,  and  pretty  much  insure
innocents don’t get hurt. That would be a help,” Theo admitted. “But that help might come  at  a  price.”
One that Theo didn’t want to pay but one he couldn’t refuse—unless he was willing to walk away from
the job. An inconceivable thought two weeks ago. At the moment, this hour, with Jorie across from him
and the memory of holding her while she shivered and cried in his arms still very real,  it was  no longer
quite as inconceivable.
And that shocked him. Not Officer Theo Petrakos who became Detective Theo Petrakos who was now
Sergeant Theo Petrakos. Nephew of Stavros Petrakos, a thirty-year vet of the same job.
It was the only thing he’d ever wanted to do: be a  cop.  And he swore  he’d  never  let a  woman come
between him and his career. Yet here he was with that possibility raising its ugly head.
And here  he was—with  Rordan’s  challenges echoing in his mind—capable  of asking  Jorie  to  do  the
same thing. What would he do if a Guardian ship returned?
An earsplitting sound halted his answer and doubled his heart rate.
Jorie was on her feet, lunging for the Hazer on the table. “Zombie!”
Rordan answered with a series of short commands in Alarsh that Theo ignored as he shoved away from
the table. He grabbed his gun from under  his shirt and  was  on Jorie’s  heels as  she  bolted  through the
porch door.
Theo was immediately aware of two  things: Sanders  and  the chief rearing back  and  reaching for guns
secured on their hip holsters as he and Jorie charged onto the porch, and—slightly to the left of the two
men and about twenty feet behind them—a pale green glow starting to solidify into a circular shape.
Panagia mou!
“Behind you!” he shouted, praying both men trusted him enough to  turn around  and  not perceive  Jorie
and himself—both armed—as the enemy.
Rordan bumped past Theo, laser pistol out, as Sanders glanced over his shoulder. “What in hell?”
The high whine of the Hazer punctuated Sanders’s question. Jorie fired, the head and upper arms of the
zombie already  in full view. This was  no juvenile. It  slithered through the portal,  twisting  as  laser  fire
sizzled against the energyworms writhing frantically over its body.
Jorie’s shouted exclamation drew Theo’s attention. The zombie’s lower arms slashed out in a wide arc.
Jorie dropped to the ground as Theo flew down the porch steps toward her.
Eyes, he remembered. Opticals. Then go for the heart. He squared off, fired. Missed. Fuck.

The arms swung back. Theo dropped, rolled, came up again, and  saw  Rordan  sprinting off to  his left,
trying to get behind the zombie. “Crossfire!” he called out. “Watch crossfire!” He didn’t know if Rordan
understood.
But there  was  no time. Razor-clawed  arms were  moving, reaching, grabbing,  coming far too  close  to
Jorie, who was—Theo realized with a surge of fear and anger—too close to this zombie.
Damn her!
The head dipped as he tried for the eyes again. Then one of Rordan’s laser shots caught the zombie in
the neck, and for a split second it reared back. Theo took aim with his Glock. Fired.
Pow-pang! An eye exploded with a hard crack, the impact from his bullet sending a  chunk of zombie
cheek flying in its wake.
The creature’s  head  dipped,  and  when  it  raised  it,  Theo  was  ready.  Pow-pang!  Another  eye.  One
more—
The zombie lunged as Jorie darted forward, Hazer raised, her concentration on the white heart and  not
on the clawed arm coming swiftly toward her. Theo damned the fact that he was in love with a woman
who was constantly intent on bucking the odds.
“Jorie!” He jogged toward her, firing on a joint in the arm in an attempt to sever it. More zombie chunks
flew, but the arm kept coming. “Jorie! Down!”
A stream of energy burst from her Hazer  just as  Theo  reached  her.  There  was  a  blinding green-white
flash. He grabbed the waistband of her jeans, yanking her to the ground. She landed on her butt with a
yelp and a sharp exclamation, cursing him, for all he knew. He didn’t care. He threw himself on top  of
her as a rush of wind across his arms told him just how close they’d come to getting shredded  like the
roof of his car.
“Theo,” she  said  into his neck  as  he was  breathing in big gulps  of  grass  and  Jorie-scented  air.  “The
zombie’s gone.”
He rolled off her, raising his gun as he did so. Everything was eerily quiet. And empty. Except for Rordan
trotting toward them at a rapid clip, looking none too pleased at Theo’s arms around Jorie. And Sanders,
Brantley, and Martinez standing stiffly on his back porch.
The zombie was gone. Jorie must have hit its heart.
Theo shoved his gun back in his holster. Then he drew her to her feet and didn’t let go of her hand, even
though Rordan was a few steps to their left and Brantley and Sanders were now bearing down on them
from their right.
“I thought I felt its arm swinging—”
“You felt the portal collapsing.” She cocked her head at him, and it was all he could do not to plant a kiss
on her smudgy, grass-streaked face. “Next time, retreat a few maxmeters from a portal  before  pushing
me to the ground. Yes?”
“I’d like there to be no more next times,” he murmured, because  Rordan  was  approaching,  spouting a
stream of unintelligible Alarsh. “What now?” Theo added. He was tired of being left in the dark  where
Rordan was concerned. This was, damn it all, his planet. His chief was on the scene. Rordan needed to
learn to speak English or—

“How many of those creatures did you say are here?” That was from Chief Brantley, his mouth set in a
grim, determined line. Sanders, striding behind him, looked equally disturbed.
“About three  hundred,”  he told  Brantley,  already  seeing  National  Guard  trucks  rolling  down  Central
Avenue. Followed by the media, of course. “But they’re not all that  big. Many are  smaller, like Baby.
And we really only need to deal with the main one, the C-Prime.”
“Three hundred.” Brantley gestured to where the zombie no longer stood. “Of those.”
Now  it was  the black  sedans  with  their  darkened  windows  Theo  could  see  in  his  mind.  FBI.  CIA.
NASA. Some alphabet-soup agency that would take Jorie away from him.
As if sensing his fears, she pulled her hand from his and turned to Rordan.
Jorie said something low and short in Alarsh. Rordan was silent a moment, then answered.
Feeling lost in more ways than one, Theo  turned  back  to  the chief. “I don’t  think this has  to  be  a  big
operation,  sir.  I  already  have  some  volunteers.  A  smaller  group  would  keep  any  wild  rumors  from
causing problems.”
“That’s not your decision  to  make,  Petrakos.”  The chief pulled out his cell phone  and  glanced  up  at
Sanders. “I’m contacting Secretary Warren at the Homeland Security Task Force. And unless she has a
better idea, the next call I’m making is to the governor.”
Theo’s gut clenched at Brantley’s words. He didn’t dare argue with the chief. But he had to. “Sir—”
“I hear you on the rumors, Sergeant. I know the problems we could face if the television stations got hold
of this. But DHS is very experienced in dealing with exactly those kinds of situations. Let’s let the experts
do their jobs.
“In the meantime, I expect you and Commander Mikkalah to make yourselves available to anyone from
DHS the minute they ask.” He pinned Theo  with a  hard  stare  through his wire-rimmed glasses.  “Your
vacation is officially over.” And with that, Brantley turned away and, cell phone to one ear, headed down
Theo’s driveway, Sanders in tow.
Theo waited until they’d rounded the corner of his house before letting his shoulders sag.
Zeke stepped back, his hands splayed in silent apology. “Theo—”
Theo waved away whatever his friend had to say. Words couldn’t  change things at  this juncture.  Only
action could, and he wasn’t sure what action to—
A blur of movement on his left and  the sharp  sound  of a  fist against flesh. Theo  spun to  see  Rordan
stumble backward, eyes wide, and land on his ass on the ground with a grunt. Jorie stood over him, eyes
narrowed, rubbing her knuckles.
“What’s going on?” Theo asked quickly, his right hand resting on his gun’s grip as Zeke shouldered  up
next to him.
“Get up, Commander,” Jorie ordered tersely. “In the residence. Now.”
“What did he do?” Theo watched Rordan rise stiffly, a reddened patch on his jaw.  When Jorie’s  hand
shot  out  again,  Theo  thought  she  was  moving  in  for  a  second  punch,  but,  no,  she  was  pointing  to
Rordan’s scanner.

The man held on to it for a moment, then, with a brusque movement, yanked it from its holder on his belt
and shoved it into Jorie’s waiting hand.
She said something short and hard in Alarsh. Rordan answered, equally short. Then he strode off toward
the rear door.
“What did he—” Theo repeated, but Jorie waggled the scanner in front of his face.
“That zombie,” she said, “was not sent by the Tresh.”
“Rordan did something to the scanner so the zombie would attack? But why?”
“How?” Zeke put in.
“That,” Jorie answered as Theo fell into step with her, Zeke trailing behind, “is what we are now going to
find out.”
 
27 
“What do you mean you did it for me?” Jorie hated questioning Rordan in Alarsh. She was all too aware
of Theo’s strained look as he sat at the head of the small galley table, arms folded and unable to follow
the conversation. She was all too aware of Martinez’s nervous, narrow-eyed stare from where he leaned
against  the  refrigeration  unit.  But  she  couldn’t  afford  any  miscommunication  right  now  between  Kip
Rordan and herself. His life, quite honestly, hung on what he said.
“We’re  surrounded  by nils,” Rordan  replied  easily. Her  punch to  his  jaw  didn’t  seem  to  hamper  his
speech,  but then,  for all his annoying  qualities,  Rordan  had  never  been  one  to  whine  about  physical
discomfort.  “Inexperienced,  dirt-sucking  nils  who  have  no  comprehension  of  the  seriousness  of  the
situation that faces them. I decided to show them.”
“You decided.” Jorie cut the rest of her sentence short, reining in her temper because she knew she was
tired and she knew she was stressed. She also knew—in a way she didn’t want to  face—Rordan  was
partially right.
But his method was so very wrong. “That zombie could have killed Theo’s superior officer.”
“With both you and me on the scene? The nil and his associate were also armed. I assume they’ve had
the same training Petrakos has. And we’ve learned their projectile weapons can be somewhat effective.
Given those factors, it was an acceptable risk.”
“A risk you took without consulting me.”
“I didn’t foresee your cooperation.” Rordan touched his jaw gingerly. Then, to her surprise,  a  wry grin
played over his mouth. “You pack a good one for a lightweight.”
“This isn’t the time for levity, Commander.”
A trilling noise came  from  Martinez’s  direction.  Jorie  angled  around  and  saw  him  pull  out  the  small
communication cell phone, then place it against his ear. “Sir,” Jorie heard him say. “Yes, I…yes, sir.”
With a nod toward Theo, Martinez sidled out of the kitchen and  into the main room,  his conversation
muffled.

Theo rose  halfway, then settled  back  down.  Jorie  had  a  strong  suspicion he didn’t want to  leave her
alone with Rordan.
“Jorie.” Rordan turned his hand toward  her,  palm open.  “I’m trying to  remind you I’m not the enemy
here.”
“Pulling that stunt—”
“We need to establish our dominance. I can see you allying with the nils. You’re forgetting that  we  are
the Guardians. This is our mission. If terrorizing the nils a little gains their cooperation, then it’s worth it.
They need to remember who and what we are.” Rordan paused, then the hard edge  dropped  from his
voice. “You need to remember who we are.”
Jorie waited for him to say it—you’ve turned  grounder—but he didn’t.  Perhaps  he had  no desire  to
experience  another  lightweight  punch.  Or  perhaps,  and  more  likely,  he  knew  she  already  heard  his
condemnation.
“We,” she told him, “are out of our  element and  outnumbered.  Utilization of available resources  is not
only a recommended but a sane course of action.”
Rordan leaned back in his chair. “Have you ever seen a nil society react to a Guardian—or to any what
they call ‘extraterrestrial presence’ before?”
She  knew  what  he  was  getting  at.  Rordan  had  been  part  of  the  rescue  unit  assigned  to  recover  a
Guardian research team from the nil-tech settlement on Borangari. She’d viewed the official reports and
more than once listened to Rordan’s stories over a pitcher of ale.
“No one’s lashing us to boulders and pushing us off a cliff as a sacrifice to their god,” she said.
“Goddess,”  he  corrected.  “No,  they’ll  do  things  a  bit  differently  here.  But  our  presence  will  cause
problems, and we will not be easily accepted.”
“So you suggest what? Sit by and let the Tresh take over this world? Let  them breed  zombies so  they
can control the Hatches?”
“We risk that if you let Petrakos’s people control this mission. They might decide—and  they will—that
we are as much of an unknown as the zombies. I’ve been going over Wain’s notes. Plus, Petrakos has a
number of printed periodicals in his residence. You know I read Vekran better than I speak it. Everything
points to a culture that is highly xenophobic. They classify as fiction the fact that sentients populate other
star systems. We are the very things their nightmares are made of.”
Jorie knew  that.  She’d  read  Wain’s  notes  too.  And  she  was  trained  in  nil-tech  contact  procedures,
almost all of which she’d violated in the past several days. Even since Sergeant Petrakos has ceased to
be a nil and become Theo—colleague, friend, and lover—to her.
“So you add to their nightmares by dropping a live zombie in their midst.” She shook her head. “And you
add to mine by making me question your motives, your allegiance.”
“I intended to warn you. It just appeared more quickly than I anticipated. I don’t quite have your touch
when it comes to that kind of thing.” He hesitated, his eyes darkening. “You can’t possibly still think I’m
working with the Tresh?”
“I can think of a lot of different scenarios, Kip.” She hefted his scanner.  “For  now,  this stays  with me.
Your G-One too.”

She saw the flash of anger in his eyes. So did Theo, apparently, because he shifted position, watching but
very obviously coiled for action.
Not for the first time, Jorie felt torn between her upbringing, her training, and what experience was now
teaching her. By all elements, Theo Petrakos was a nil. But he’d  meshed  so  completely with her style,
picked up so intuitively how Guardians operate, and she felt so comfortable with him.
But he was a nil.
Then why was she so much more attuned to him than to Rordan?
Because she loved him? Her silent admission shocked her, but even as she considered the truth behind
the words, she knew what she and Theo  had  went far beyond  the boundaries  of the bedroom.  She’d
never felt so secure. And so afraid. And with so many larger problems looming over her.
Like Rordan’s misguided loyalty—and ego. “The G-One,” she repeated to Rordan, hand out. “Because,
yes, I am a Guardian. And you know you’d do the same thing if the situation were reversed.”
He slid the weapon across the table toward her, clearly not happy, but the tension that had  surfaced  in
him was gone. Theo evidently sensed it too, relaxing somewhat. But not completely.
That was something else she’d noticed about Theo Petrakos. He never really relaxed. Even when she’d
found him sleeping in his reclining chair, he’d lunged out of it, pinning her within seconds.
“But I will give you an assignment,” she  continued,  pushing away  the memory of Theo’s  body  against
hers. “We will be dealing with the local security force. And I fully believe their xenophobia will come into
play. Finish that research. Build out from Wain’s notes. I have no intention of sacrificing you, Tamlynne,
or myself to their fears.”
It took a moment before  Rordan  nodded.  Then he arched  one  eyebrow.  “And I’m supposed  to  stop
them when you take my weapon away?”
“We’re  going to  deal  with them with an even more  powerful weapon.  You can  terminate ten,  twenty
sentients with this.” Jorie raised the laser pistol. “But with knowledge,  you can  control  thousands.  And
that, Commander Rordan, is what we have to use if we have any chance of survival.”
She waited until Rordan left the kitchen and was several steps into the main room before she eased her
forehead down on her arms, folded on the tabletop. Hell’s wrath. She physically ached, though she knew
part of that was the result of another nightmare episode she remembered only snatches of.
Snatches of feeling so safe with Theo’s arms around her…the same arms that—after  a  short  scrape  of
chair legs against the floor—encircled her now.
Jorie leaned against him for a moment, then let him pull her to her feet. She rested her face on his chest
and listened to the sound of his heartbeat. Martinez’s voice flowed into the room every few moments, a
low exchange of sounds.
“So what’s happening?” Theo asked quietly.
Too much, too fast, she thought. She pulled back slightly but kept her hands resting on his chest.  She
needed  his warmth. “Rordan  does  not play subordinate  well.  He  triggered  the  zombie’s  appearance,
believing to do  so  would insure your chief’s cooperation  with us.  With the Guardians,”  she  amended.
Theo was not “us.”

“That was incredibly stupid.” Theo’s voice went hard.
“Not to Rordan’s way of thinking.”
“You’re sure he didn’t do it to help the Tresh?”
“One hundred percent? No,” she admitted. “Ninety-nine percent? Yes.”
“You took his gun away from him. And his scanner.”
“Because I don’t want him trying to play hero again. And he will. It’s in his nature and—”
“He wants you.”
Jorie raised her chin and blinked hard, not sure Theo had said what she thought he did.
“Rordan wants you. Wants in your pants. You understand the expression?” Theo asked, eyes narrowing
for a moment as if he contemplated something unpleasant.
She nodded. She did understand.
“He’s never told you?”
“He—not exactly, no.” Their conversation in her office had  held those  overtones.  But she’d  tried  hard
since then to convince herself she was wrong. “He’s Lorik’s best friend.”
“Goes after his buddy’s girl, does he? Wonderful guy.” Theo brushed her hair away from her face.
“But he was my friend too. For many years. I think you’re misreading—”
“He warned me away from you. I’m not misreading anything, Jorie.” He paused. “He knows I’m in love
with you.”
She stared at Theo, at that now-familiar face. Heat flared, blossomed. Fear spiked. Theo loved her. She
wanted desperately to kiss him. She wanted desperately to push him away, so she could run and never
have to face the consequences of loving him too.
“Theo—”
He covered her mouth with his, turning his name into a kiss that was heartbreaking in its gentleness.
“I know, agapi mou,” he said after he pulled back slightly. His breath fanned her face. “My timing sucks.
But I had to tell you in case something happens. I love you, Jorie. I don’t care what planet you’re from. I
don’t care who created the zombies or why. I don’t care that I’ve never seen a gravripper and you didn’t
know peanut butter existed. I love you. I believe in you. And if need be, I will follow you into the jaws of
hell, without question.”
“Theo.” Her voice wavered. She almost said it, almost told him she loved him. But fear kept the words
from crossing her lips. Instead, she kissed him fiercely, far too aware that following her into the jaws of
hell might be exactly what she’d have to ask him to do. Far too aware that loving Theo was also a hell of
its own for her.
A noise made her suddenly pull back.
Martinez, clearing his throat. She sensed his disapproval and realized in some ways he wasn’t unlike Kip

Rordan. He was here to remind Theo who he was and what he was required to do.
“Sanders  has  scheduled  a  preliminary  meeting  for  oh-eight-hundred  tomorrow,”  Martinez  said.
“Information sharing, he calls it. Informal, but I take it DHS will be there.”
Jorie tried to place the acronym and failed. But she guessed it was another government entity.
“I didn’t tell anyone about Tammy,” Martinez continued quickly, with a slight nod to Jorie. “I thought you
should know that. Suzanne and I discussed  it. Tammy’s vulnerable. Can’t  defend  herself verbally. We
thought…”  Martinez  shrugged  and  glanced  at  the  floor  for  a  moment.  “You  and  Theo  can  protect
yourselves. Commander Rordan’s tough. But Tammy’s not.
“If I’m wrong, boss, tell me,” Martinez added, looking at Theo. “But we thought if Jorie  knew  Tammy
was safe, it would be one less thing for her to worry about.”
An unaccustomed tightness formed in Jorie’s chest. Nils—Rordan’s xenophobic nils—weren’t supposed
to act like this.
Theo seemed equally touched. “And if the brass finds out?”
Martinez shrugged,  though  a  corner  of  his  mouth  quirked  slightly.  “Then  we’ll  both  be  singing  ‘The
Down-Home Unemployed-Cop Blues.’”
 
After Martinez left, Jorie returned to the floor of Theo’s  bedroom  and  the reassembled  Hazer  that  still
fought accepting the dart program. If they couldn’t get the dart to infect the C-Prime, then the only choice
they’d have would be to initiate a full-scale hunt. But how, on this world,  with herself and  Kip  Rordan
being the only trained Guardians?
Granted,  Theo’s  projectile  weapons  were  efficient  for  termination.  Granted,  it  seemed  as  if  Theo’s
government  might  be  a  workable  problem—there  would  be  questions,  distrust,  but  there  would  be
cooperation. Eventually.
But  people  would  die  while  they  tried  to  put  all  this  together.  And,  worse,  the  Tresh  would  grow
stronger,  armed  now  with  zombies  capable  of  closing  the  Hatches.  Those  living  in  the  outer
colonies—like her brother—would be the first to be cut off. Trapped. Stranded.
Some colonies could survive off the planet’s natural resources.  But others  could  not.  And the stations,
like the one she was raised on, would be forced to evacuate to the nearest habitable world. If there was
one.
Or worse—they’d be forced to bargain with the Tresh for their lives.
She went back to working on the Hazer with renewed determination.
“Jorie.”
She started, turning at the sound of Theo’s voice. Her back complained in wrenching spasms.  She  had
no idea now long she’d been bent over the rifle. She stretched her legs out slowly, carefully. Painfully.
Theo folded himself down on the floor beside her and ran his hand down her leg. “It’s past  dinnertime.
Cramp?” he asked, massaging a knot in her calf.

His  ministrations  hurt  so  much  they  actually  felt  wonderful.  She  locked  her  arms  and  leaned  back,
nodding.
“I brought David up to date,” Theo said, dragging her other leg onto his lap and continuing his delicious
massage. “Had a small talk with Uncle Stavros too. Both asked a lot of good questions, many of which I
can’t answer as well as you can.”
She didn’t want to  answer  any questions  right  now.  She  wanted  to  let  Theo’s  fingers  continue  their
exquisite  torture  and  then  reward  him  in  kind.  She  sighed.  Duty  first,  then  pleasure.  “What  kind  of
questions?”
“Zombie breeding cycles, most vulnerable areas. Things like that. I told David about their heart and also
the importance of hitting the eyes. But some of the details he wants I don’t know. Like their life span.”
“If David will be at tomorrow’s meeting, I can answer everything then.”
Theo shook his head. “At this point, no.”
“Then why involve him now?”
“Because  a  good  cop  always  appreciates  backup.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  whether  I  think  Chief
Brantley is capable of handling this. He is. It’s just that—”
Her scanner emitted three short, sharp trilling sounds that were duplicated by the T-MOD in front of her.
Her heart  stopped,  then pounded  a  frenzied beat  in  her  chest—a  sound  as  loud  as  the  thumping  of
Rordan’s boots in the corridor.
She pulled her legs from Theo’s  lap and  swung  forward,  her  fingers  flying  to  the  T-MOD’s  screen.
Rordan burst into the room.
Theo’s “What? What is it?” was almost drowned  out by Rordan’s  demands  for coordinates  and  herd
size.
She didn’t answer either until she was absolutely sure.
“The C-Prime,” she said, surprised at the calmness in her voice. “The C-Prime has scented a craving, a
feeding frenzy.”
“Where?” Theo asked.
She dragged over a paper map he’d used earlier and pointed to a T-shaped finger of land jutting out into
the bay. The words—in Vekran or English—read Fort Hernando. “There. And we have less than one
sweep, one hour, in which to get in position before it arrives.”
Rordan pointed to the Hazer. “Working?”
She shook her head, anger and frustration suddenly roiling inside her. “I finally have the program loaded.
But the Hazer is only recognizing half the command string—”
“It loaded?” Relief was obvious in Rordan’s voice. “I think I can fix problem.”
Theo was already standing. Jorie accepted his hand and  let him pull her to  her feet.  “We’ll handle the
hardware,” he said. “I want every weapon checked. We’re not going to get a second chance.”
No,  they  weren’t.  This  was  a  mission  riddled  with  errors,  plagued  with  missteps.  This  one

thing—infecting the C-Prime—had to unfold flawlessly. Because there was no option for an emergency
transport if things went wrong.
 
This was it. Jorie raised her gaze from the line of weaponry  on Theo’s  galley table  that  had  been  their
sole focus for the past  ten minutes, aware  of time pushing them inexorably toward  the most powerful
zombie in the herd.
Do or die.
“Theo.” She swallowed her fear and wrapped her fingers around his wrist.
He looked up from the projectile weapon he was working on, a slight frown on his very good face. He
was so focused on the mission now. So was she. But there was something else she had to do first, and it
frightened her almost as much as the C-Prime.
“Theo,” she said again, because the frown had turned into a questioning arched eyebrow. “You need to
know. Before this happens tonight.” She was fumbling, her Vekran failing her.
“Babe, what’s the matter?”
She sucked in a breath. “Theo, I love you.”
Both eyebrows arched. Then he released his hold on his weapon and dragged her into his arms.
Bliss.
 
28 
“David? It’s  a  go.  Forty-five  minutes. You in?” Theo  sat  on the  edge  of  his  bed  and  kicked  off  his
Top-Siders,  pinning the cell phone  between  his  shoulder  and  his  ear.  He  pulled  on  his  socks  as  he
listened to David Gray’s exclamation of excitement. His own heart pounded, but it wasn’t solely due to
the zombies.
“Shit, yeah. This is the big one?”
“The big one.” He snagged his left boot  and  shoved  his foot  inside. “Meet  us at  the 7-Eleven?”  Theo
didn’t have to say which one. There was only one on the chain of finger islands leading to the state park
beach area. It was a notorious cop-stop-for-coffee hangout.
“I’ll be there in thirty.”
Theo went over weapons and gear with David one more time, feeling slightly foolish considering David’s
expertise but not wanting his friend to forget this was an unusual, high-risk circumstance.
Very high-risk. He hadn’t contacted Chief Brantley. He didn’t intend to.
He hoped  he wasn’t  making the biggest mistake  of his life. Because  the best  thing in his life had  just
happened five minutes before.

Jorie loved him. So he’d told her what agapi mou meant and  answered  her in Greek  with s’agapo.  I
love you.
The love of his life walked in when he was sealing his tactical vest over his T-shirt. She wore  the same
funky shorts and half-sleeved outfit she had the first time he saw her. He knew what all the gizmos were
now, even knew  how she  could  power  her  weapons  through  the  small  ports  in  what  she  called  her
technosleeve. And how those same ports could transmit data to her ship.
If her ship was there. It wasn’t, but he suspected she used the devices now to segue with Rordan.
Theo checked his Glock. “You give Rordan back his pistol?”
“He said to tell you thank you for your trust.”
Theo doubted that. He glanced toward the corridor and lowered his voice. “You have a plan if he turns
out not to be on our side?”
He saw the brief flash of pain in her eyes. It was never a pleasant course to contemplate—having to take
down a partner, a colleague. A longtime friend. She’d admitted Rordan was one.  That still made  Theo
pause and still made Theo hear Rordan’s insistent challenge: Jorie has dream to be captain.  You  can
give her this?
No, but he could love her. And she could love him.
She’d  been  tinkering with something on her  technosleeve.  She  looked  up.  “If  he’s  working  with  the
Tresh, we should know that very quickly.”
“They’ll react to the C-Prime?”
“They will probably note the onset of the craving. It seems to be a regular feed cycle, if somewhat early.
But it wouldn’t normally be something the Devastators would be concerned about, except they know I’m
here.”
That worried him. “Any chance they’re using this C-Prime to draw you out?”
She shook her head. “I thought about that. If they didn’t know where I was, yes. But they know. Prow
was here.”
Theo didn’t miss the thinning of her mouth when she said the Devastator’s name. He wondered if the man
was dead or alive.
Evidently so did Jorie. “And if he still lives,” she continued, “I cannot see him relinquishing to  a  zombie
the chance to kill me. He likes, how do you say it here, the personal touch?”
She glanced at him again, head titled, eyes narrowed, looking defiant and confident and determined and
saucy, all in one.
He knew that look well and brushed that saucy mouth with a kiss because he could. She was his. And he
would do everything he could to keep that fact a fact.
He was rewarded with a small smile.
He draped one arm across her shoulders and pulled her tightly against him. “Let’s go kick some zombie
ass.”

 
Rordan waited for Theo and  Jorie  in the kitchen,  wearing borrowed  jeans  and  sweatshirt  but with his
Guardian  weapons  affixed  to  his  belt.  Theo  noticed  he  didn’t  have  the  technosleeve  that  Jorie  did.
Tammy did—but  Tammy was  safe  with Suzanne.  Zeke  would  meet  Theo,  Jorie,  and  Rordan  at  the
7-Eleven, just like David Gray.
Theo called Zeke on the cell phone when he pulled out of his driveway. “I’m ten–fifty-one,” he told him.
En route.
“Ditto,” Zeke said. “Fifteen minutes.”
The chatter  in his SUV  was  a  mix of English,  Vekran,  and  Alarsh,  with  Jorie  doing  double  duty  on
translations. He was amazed at the calm tone of her voice but didn’t miss her white-knuckled grip on her
scanner.
He loosened his own tight grasp on the steering wheel and focused his mind into what he thought of as
Code 3 mode: lights, sirens, and unknown trouble.
There were no lights flashing or sirens blaring on his vehicle. But there was unknown trouble. And known
trouble. He’d faced a zombie before. He could extrapolate that experience to what it would mean to face
a C-Prime.
Jorie checked the altered Hazer again, frowning. Rordan believed he’d corrected the problem, but Theo
knew that the weapon  and  the program  were  untested.  Things might have to  be  done  the  hard  way,
killing off the zombies as they appeared.  Theo  had  no illusions they were  going to  eradicate  the entire
herd tonight.
That meant Brantley would be involved eventually. Like tomorrow.  Theo  ran through a  list of possible
excuses  in his mind as  to  why he hadn’t  alerted  the chief: he and  Jorie  were  at  Fort  Hernando  for  a
moonlight stroll. With Rordan. And an SUV full of weapons. Surprise! David Gray was there. Surprise!
Zeke Martinez was there. Surprise! The zombies showed up.
Maybe  a  picnic.  A  sunset  picnic.  A  few  friends  along.  David.  Zeke  without  Suzanne.  The  zombies
showed up….
He thought of ten more  scenarios,  but they all ended  the same  way: Brantley was  pissed.  And  Theo
would be lucky not to lose his job.
But he did not want the media here at this point. And he could see no way to keep the newshounds  at
bay if BVPD and DHS joined forces. It would leak, just as it always did. And Theo would lose Jorie.
As he crested  the bridge  leading to  Tierra  Grande,  off to  his right were  the  lighted  caged  pools  and
palm-tree-laced landscaping of the high-priced homes the island was known for. It was past seven-thirty;
the sun had  set  more  than an hour ago.  The  backs  of  the  homes  were  dotted  with  squares  of  light:
windows, sliding glass doors, and skylights. Other lights flickered from the small commercial buildings at
the base of the bridge. The 7-Eleven sign was lit. He spotted  David’s  red  pickup  on the southernmost
corner of the parking lot.
His cell phone rang.
“Yassou, amigo,” Zeke said. “I got your six.”

Theo glanced in his rearview mirror and saw headlights flash. Zeke in his black Ford Mustang.
Right on time.
The battle for Earth was about to begin.
 
Theo pulled his SUV next to David’s pickup and motioned for Jorie and Rordan to stay put. Even though
David had found a darkened corner of the lot away from the glare of the convenience store’s lights, they
were all obviously armed. That could bring unwanted attention. At least Theo’s vest said POLICE in large
white letters across the back.
So did Zeke’s. Theo leaned against David’s door and unfolded the map with Jorie’s notations on it. Zeke
and David studied it in the light from the pickup’s interior while Theo went over, again, what they needed
to know about zombies: the heart, the eyes, and for God’s sake watch those razor-edged arms!
“Leave the C-Prime to Jorie and Rordan,” Theo said. “We need it alive to  contaminate the rest  of the
herd. Our job is to take out any zombies protecting the C-Prime. Jorie needs a clear shot.”
A loud bang and  a  staccato  series  of pops  sounded  behind him. Theo  spun,  reaching  for  his  Glock.
David jerked around in his seat.
Then out of the corner of his eye Theo saw the colors—red and blue—sparkling, streaking, falling….
Fireworks. His heart slowed to a normal rhythm, then he shook his head. It was New Year’s Eve.
“Concert on the beach in Pass  Pointe,”  Zeke  said.  “There’ve  been  big ads  for it in the newspaper  all
week.”
Pass Pointe—a Gulf-front finger of land two blocks wide and  thirty-one  blocks  long—was  just across
the  channel  from  Tierra  Grande  and  Fort  Hernando.  Theo  briefly  wondered  if  the  noise  from  the
fireworks and concert would affect the zombies but then hit on the real benefit: a big party in the Pointe
was bound to draw locals and tourists away from Fort Hernando’s beaches tonight.
Satisfied everyone was on the same page, he climbed into the front seat  of his SUV.  Jorie  was  staring
intently at her scanner.
“Visitors?” he asked, anxious to get his own party started yet very aware and more than a little nervous
about what could happen.
She shook her head. “Not yet. But we won’t have to wait long.”
He cranked the engine. “Tresh?”
“No indication. But I discount nothing.”
“So we go in loaded for bear.”
She frowned. “Full, but with no clothes?”
It took Theo a moment—while pulling out of the parking lot and keeping an eye on Zeke’s Mustang—to
unscramble her misinterpretation.  Bear.  Bare.  He  grinned  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  his  adrenaline  was
threatening to race again.

Zombies loomed. A C-Prime. The Tresh. His career. And the foremost thought in his mind—even with
Rordan no doubt glaring daggers at the back of his head—was Jorie naked.
Hopeless. He was sincerely, unequivocally hopeless.
“A bear,”  he said,  then spelled  the word,  “is a  large,  fierce animal. It  means we  go in  ready  to  fight
anything.”
Jorie hefted the Hazer. “If this doesn’t work, anything is a good possibility.”
Rordan’s voice was a bearlike growl from the backseat. “It will work.”
Theo had no means to judge that. He only sensed that Jorie was worried. And that worried him.
The road from Tierra Grande to Fort Hernando narrowed from four lanes to two, the palm-tree-dotted
center median giving way to a plain tarmac road with rutted, sandy shoulders. Traffic disappeared  as  if
someone  had  beamed  the cars  away.  The state  park  didn’t have any residences,  and  the gates  to  its
overnight campground were locked at nine P.M. That meant another hour where people could yet come
and go into the park.
Theo hoped they all went over to the Pointe for the concert. The fewer innocent civilians around to  get
munched on by a zombie, the better.
Headlights approached. Two boxy campers, a pickup towing a camper, and an old VW convertible with
three teens inside bounced by as Theo headed over the small bridge and  into the park.  A few minutes
later, the solitary road dead-ended at park headquarters. The old fort, fishing pier, and the popular north
beach were to the right; the east beach to the left. No headlights twinkled from either direction. Theo had
been out here dozens of times, but he was never more aware of its isolation than now.
And he had another cop, an FDLE sniper, and two Guardians with him.
“Which way?” he asked Jorie, mentally tallying the pros and cons of the smaller east beach area against
the north beach and its picnic tables, shelters, restrooms, and playground. There was more cover on the
north beach and it faced directly out into the Gulf of Mexico. The east beach faced the towering Skyway
Bridge. He kept telling himself that both were too remote for there to be a concern about being seen, but
the north beach had more advantages.
“That way,” Jorie said, pointing out the window.
Theo’s heart sank. East beach. Little cover once they passed the small picnic area. The majority of the
beach faced the bridge and the channel. If there  was  night boat  traffic—people  fishing, partying, doing
what people did on the water under cover of darkness—it might be an issue.
He headed east—the lights on the Skyway Bridge glowing in the distance—and filed the location away
as one more thing he could do nothing about.
They parked almost at the end of the beach road, the three vehicles in a half circle. Theo leaned against
the front fender, smelling the tang of salt in the air and listening to the wind whistle through the dune grass,
while Jorie and Rordan had their heads together over her scanner.
Zeke and David—standing by David’s pickup—were checking their weapons,  including the Tresh  rifle
Jorie had given David. Theo let himself fixate on Jorie, on the tilt of her head, the curve of her shoulders,
the soft short curtain of hair brushing her cheek.  He  saw  her in patches  of light and  shadow  from the
vehicles’ headlights and the full moon now rising overhead.

Some urge he couldn’t  identify forced  him to  memorize what he could  see  of  her  in  this  chiaroscuro
landscape. It was as if he wanted to capture a prebattle picture so, when it was over, he could recall her
satisfaction, her joy.
But something else said that wasn’t it at all.
He couldn’t let himself think about that. You go home the end of each shift. It was something all rookies
learned, a motto that was supposed to keep you alive through whatever came your way on the streets.
Don’t focus on what can go wrong. Focus on getting home.
They would. End of this mission, he and Jorie would go home.
“Theo!” Jorie straightened abruptly,  swinging the scanner  toward  him. The screen  swirled with colors,
with data. Then it screeched.
His heart jolted accordingly and his gaze locked on movement behind her.
A faint greenish glow swirled twenty-five feet down the beach from where they stood. He drew his G-1
pistol as it became less translucent. It was easily three times as large as any he’d seen before.
“C-Prime,” Jorie announced. “Hold fire.”
“Holy shit,” said David as four more green portals, smaller but solidifying quickly, suddenly popped into
the air. Theo targeted the closest one and traced its edges with laser fire.
Then all hell broke loose.
Two of the smaller portals  erupted,  zombies slithering through them like  oiled  snakes  going  downhill.
Laser  fire spit from  Rordan’s  weapon,  slashing  at  the  remaining  expanding  portal.  David  leveled  his
assault rifle and hit an emerging zombie with three quick, clean shots to the eyes.
But that only blinded it. It didn’t stop it.
Zeke fired as a razor-edged arm raked too close to David’s head.
“Get its heart,  under  the chin!” Theo  dropped  to  one  knee  for a  better  angle and  punched  out  three
bursts. But the zombie—damn, the thing had to be more than fifteen feet tall!—took that moment to lunge
sideways toward Rordan.
Theo fired again at  the  creature’s  jawline.  You  owe  me  one,  he  silently  told  Rordan  as  the  zombie
dissolved into a roiling cloud of green gas.
Rordan darted a narrow-eyed glance at Theo, as if he’d heard.
There was  no time for a  quick  comeback  or  kudos.  Two  other  zombies moved  into the glare  of  the
vehicles’  headlights,  lunging  toward  Theo  yet  staying  close  to  the  C-Prime.  The  C-Prime  was  fully
through  the  portal,  huge,  almost  bloated-looking,  the  wormlike  creatures  on  its  surface  writhing  so
frantically that they flung themselves off in spinning clumps.
Theo saw Jorie nimbly sidestep  a  squirming clump and—Cristos!—suddenly realized how close,  how
too goddamned close, she was to the C-Prime.
Even though he knew  better  than  to  distract  her,  he  couldn’t  help  himself.  Fear  and  possessiveness
warred with practicality. He shouted her name but she didn’t turn, didn’t even glance his way.  Rordan
did, but only for a second.  Then the Guardian commander  was  keeping  pace  with Jorie,  covering her

back per prearranged plan. Both moved too dangerously close to the biggest zombie he’d even seen.
The sharp,  rapid  crack  of David’s  assault  rifle  brought  Theo  back  to  his  own  problems.  Four  large
zombies—the one  he’d  killed had  been  replaced  while he was  watching  Jorie—advanced  across  the
sand toward Zeke. An upper arm lashed out, lengthening as if by magic before Theo’s eyes. He fired at
an arm joint as Zeke hit the sand, rolling to safety by a margin of inches.
“Extenders!” he called out to David and Zeke as  he jogged  toward  them, his boots  sinking in the soft
sand. “The arms grow. Watch it!”
Another slash by a different zombie sent the tops of several medium-size palm trees flying. Theo ducked
as fronds  sailed past  him, then straightened  again, firing. He  took  out the zombie’s topmost  eye.  The
zombie reared back with a keening roar. Theo fired again. The laser’s energy smashed into the creature’s
white heart, and in an almost blinding green flash it disappeared.
A larger one stepped up immediately in its place, its extenders filling the gap made by its missing partner.
Behind it, Theo saw two more portals form. He swore harshly in Greek. He had to function for Jorie as
Tamlynne had—destroying the portals before they could become zombies. David and  Zeke  would just
have to handle the ones that got through.
He bounded for the pavement, trying to keep clear of the zombies as he headed for the forming portals.
He heard David shout out a warning, followed immediately by the harsh sound of gunfire. He dropped to
his knees behind a palm tree, cursing at the pain as stones cut through his jeans. A whining sound told him
a razored claw had passed inches from his head.
“Clear!” Zeke called out. Theo sprang to his feet and ran. Three portals now glowed a sickly green, and,
claws or not, he had to take out at least two of them, or Jorie wouldn’t be able to get a clear shot to fire
the dart.
These zombies were not like the juveniles he’d fought in the park.  These  were  full-grown, nasty-assed
pieces of shit. And they were deadly as hell.
He sited the largest portal and ringed it with laser fire from his G-1, barely waiting to see what happened
before moving to the next one. That odd fooshing noise a suddenly collapsing portal made was the only
way he knew if he’d succeeded—or not.
One down… But the next two—God  damn  it!—weren’t  so  cooperative.  For  every  one  he fooshed,
another appeared. He felt as if he were inside a giant pinball machine with the damned things popping up
left and right.
Fire! Jog left. Fire! Jog right. Duck, drop, roll, because a zombie noticed him again. Sweat ran down his
face in spite of the cooling night air and the breeze off the bay.
He darted another glance at Jorie. Rordan was doing a good job of keeping the zombies away from her
and hitting the few portals that formed nearby,  but Jorie  hadn’t  been  able  to  get into position.  Several
times he saw her drop to one knee and prepare to fire, only to have to bolt out of the way of a clawed
arm or worm-covered leg.
Seven zombies now guarded the C-Prime, with three directly in front of it. Jorie and Rordan hit them with
a barrage. Zeke and David took on the other  four, with David now using the Tresh  laser  rifle to  very
neatly drop two with nice shots under their chins. Theo laced two growing portals, going back and forth
from one to the other, but he failed to see the third off to his left until a zombie was already halfway out of
it.

He spun, fired, and missed. When he turned back, claws were reaching through the two portals in front
of him.
One closed with a hard foosh! A glance to his left showed Zeke taking on that zombie, yellow goo flying
as bullets plowed into its face. Zeke wasn’t going to eat for a week after this.
Theo peppered the remaining portal with laser fire, slicing across a zombie’s extended arm. It fell to the
sand, spasming as the portal snapped closed.
A harsh shout in Rordan’s voice made him turn quickly. The spate of Alarsh words  meant nothing, but
they didn’t have to. David’s excellent marksmanship had eradicated all but two zombies—and one was
reeling from Zeke’s fire. Jorie surged between them, heading straight for the C-Prime.
Theo’s heart stopped, but his brain and  feet  didn’t.  He  bolted  toward  her,  watching her focus on the
towering monster as it seemed to focus on her, upper extenders uncoiling with an almost sinuous grace.
She was too close. In the dark, cut by swaths of light from the cars’ headlights, there was no way she’d
see those upper arms bearing down on her.
The only reason he didn’t shout her name was it would have required an expenditure of energy. And he
needed every ounce if he was to reach her in time.
Rordan was too far away. She must have slipped past him as she had through Theo’s grasp days ago.
She dropped to her knees a few yards from the C-Prime’s  feet,  then shouldered  her rifle. Theo  heard
Rordan’s angry shouts to his left. He slowed, Glock out now, G-1 in his other hand, his gaze locked on
that descending arm.
He had to let her fire first. If he fired and  the zombie jerked  away,  her shot  would go wild. And they
didn’t have a second dart.
“I got your six, babe!” He shoved the G-1 into his waistband. The Glock was firmly in his right hand. “Hit
’im!”
Somewhere in the distance there was a high whine underscored by gunfire—David’s laser  rifle. Zeke’s
Glock.  Rordan’s  G-1  flashing through it all. But Theo  couldn’t  let his attention  waver.  There  was  the
C-Prime. There was Jorie. The first threatened his world. The second was his whole world.
Nothing else mattered.
The Hazer  jerked,  a  barely  visible white-hot  trail spitting upward—not  at  the  C-Prime’s  heart  but  at
another vulnerable spot under its jaw. A miss of inches would hit the white heart, killing it and the chance
to infect the herd.
Teeth clenched, Theo waited for the flare of the laser  against the zombie’s charged  skin. He  fired the
Glock at  the arm,  so  close  now  he  could  see  the  worms  twisting  and  turning.  Three  shots  in  rapid
succession.
“Down!” he screamed at Jorie. “Get down!”
He lunged toward her, firing one last time as yellow goo exploded, splattering around him like pus-filled
rain. He tackled her, covering her body with his as something slammed hard  into his back.  He  tensed,
waiting for the searing pain of claws ripping through his flesh, but whatever  it was  bounced  off, leaving
him gasping and groaning and very aware that he hurt like hell. But Jorie was alive.

Swearing a blue streak at him in Alarsh, but she was alive.
He glanced up. The C-Prime towered over them, seeming stunned, one arm missing, the others splaying
outward slowly.
He didn’t know what that meant. He didn’t care. He pulled himself to his feet and her with him. “Go!” He
took his gaze off the zombie just long enough to catch a wicked grin playing over Jorie’s lips. It was the
image he’d waited for. “Did you—”
Then  someone  shouted,  “Move,  now!”  Theo  grabbed  Jorie’s  arm.  They  barreled  back  toward  the
vehicles, where Zeke and Rordan fought with the last zombie.
A piercing roar sounded behind them.
“It’s working,” Jorie huffed out as they ran. “The virus burns. The C-Prime feels it. It  will return to  the
herd. Seek healing. Kill them—”
Theo saw it as she did, her voice halting abruptly. His boots dug into the sand. She raised her G-1 at the
translucent milky square jutting out of the night darkness and shouted something in Alarsh.
Her words needed no translation.
The Tresh had arrived.
 
29 
Theo dragged Jorie behind David’s pickup, then shoved another clip into his gun. The sound of Rordan’s
laser filled the air. Theo edged around the front of the pickup, sighted one of the humanoid forms visible
through the shimmering translucence, and fired.
No screams, no sounds of a body hitting the sand. Nothing.
Skata.
“Ass-faced demon’s whores!” Jorie, beside him, poked frantically at her scanner.
“Their shielding,” Theo guessed.
“Enhanced to counter projectile weapons.” She said something in Alarsh as  Rordan  scrambled  to  their
side of the truck. From the look on Rordan’s face, Theo guessed Jorie had just delivered the bad news.
Nil weapons don’t work.
David—just off to Theo’s left and using Zeke’s Mustang for cover—let loose with three shots from his
assault rifle.
“No good,” Theo called out to him. “Shields!”
“And that big one?” David shouted back.
The C-Prime  hadn’t  created  a  portal  and  returned  to  the herd,  as  Jorie  said  it would.  It  stood  in the
moonlight swaying, serrated jaws grinding. Something was wrong.

“Are the Tresh controlling the C-Prime?” Theo asked her.
She was working her scanner and talking in soft but urgent tones to Rordan. “They’re trying,” she said,
after a long moment during which Theo’s nerves continued to fray down  to  the last strand.  He  did not
want things to go wrong like this. He did not want to have to call for backup from Chief Brantley, who’d
arrive with the media—and probably the end of Theo’s career.
“They know we did something to the C-Prime but not what—yet,” she said. “They can’t risk it returning
to the herd until they know. But they also can’t terminate it—a herd that size would be insane without its
C-Prime.”
Suddenly Jorie barked out a short, mirthless laugh.
“They have an additional problem. They constructed their shields strong enough to prevent any incoming
fire. But they also prevent outgoing. This is a blissful recurring problem with them.”
Theo leaned around the edge of the pickup  and  eyed  the three  Tresh  encased  in the translucent haze.
Definitely not happy. Like Jorie, they had handheld gizmos that two of them were furiously tapping. The
third, armed with a rifle…
He ducked back. “Is that Prow?”
Jorie’s gaze met his. “Yes. And I’m sure he knows I’m here.”
Rordan said something, his voice low and urgent.
“My problem,” Jorie answered him. “I will handle it.”
Theo knew she meant Prow, and her answer  didn’t please  him any more  than it pleased  Rordan.  For
once, he and Pompous Asshole were in agreement.
Movement near  Zeke’s  Mustang caught Theo’s  attention.  David and  Zeke,  motioning  that  they  were
coming over to the pickup. The two vehicles were almost dovetailed at the front, but there was a gap—a
potentially dangerous gap—of a few open feet. “We’ll cover you,” Theo called out.
The rush of bodies made Prow jerk his head in their direction, but nothing more. Zeke hunkered next to
Theo,  his  brows  down,  his  mouth  tight.  Theo’s  cop  senses  went  on  overtime.  Something  was
wrong—more than the obvious swaying of the C-Prime and the trio of Tresh.
Zeke shot a glance at Jorie, then back to Theo again. He patted the cell-phone case on his belt. “Suzanne
text-messaged me. I…” He glanced at Jorie again. “Shit. Okay. Tammy’s missing.”
Theo saw the color drain from Jorie’s face as he felt his own heart drop. “Tammy? When?” He draped
his fingers over Jorie’s wrist, trying to reassure her through his touch. I’m here for you.
“She leaves your residence?” Jorie’s voice was strained.
“Yes—I mean, I don’t know. About a half hour ago. They were folding laundry in the den. Suzanne went
to the bathroom to put the towels away. When she came back, Tammy was gone. It was only seconds,
she said. Not even half a minute. The doors were all locked. But she’s not in the house, she’s not in the
yard, she’s nowhere to be seen in the neighborhood. I’m…I’m sorry,” Zeke stuttered, and Zeke  never
stuttered. “She’s just…gone.”
“The doors were locked,” Theo repeated.

“Locked from the inside. There’s no way she could leave and lock them behind her.”
Theo knew that. That’s why he asked. That meant there was only one other way out of Zeke’s house.
“Tresh,” Rordan said, spitting out the word. “The Tresh now take Tamlynne.”
Jorie turned abruptly and glared at Prow. If looks could kill, Prow  would be  flattened,  pulverized, and
incinerated. Theo would gladly help, but he didn’t think the takedown moves he’d learned in the police
academy would be sufficient.
He was, he realized with a sinking feeling, out of his league. Killing zombies was one thing. Dealing with
intergalactic politics and the kidnapping of a Guardian officer was far and away another. He didn’t even
know if Brantley and DHS could—
“Something’s happening.” David’s voice held an urgent note.
Jorie was  already  rising, Rordan  behind her.  Theo  glanced  at  her  scanner,  even  though  the  swirls  of
colors and ASCII-like letters meant nothing to him. Then he looked at the C-Prime, because Jorie was.
A green glow encircled the monster’s head, spilling over its shoulders and damaged upper-arm socket.
“It’s returning to the herd?” Finally, something going right. He hoped.
“Trying,” Jorie said, as Rordan carried on a monologue in Alarsh. “Perhaps I can help it.” Her voice held
a harsh note.
“We,” Theo said, but she was already ignoring him, tapping at her scanner. She brought her G-1 up to
the unit. By the cascade  of lights down  the  weapon’s  side,  Theo  guessed  something  had  transferred
between the two.
She flipped her eyepiece down and her mike up. “Cover me,” she told Theo over her shoulder.
“Wait a minute, young lady,” David drawled, inching forward.
“Jorie.” Theo clamped his hand on her shoulder firmly enough to let her know he meant business. Just in
case she missed the warning tone in David’s voice.
She jerked  her face  toward  him, brows  down,  golden eyes  narrowed,  and  the intensity he saw  there
fairly sizzled the air between them. “Petrakos,” she said. “They have Tamlynne. Now it’s my turn.”
“We work as a team—”
“My problem. My solution.”
He’d heard that before. Didn’t like it then, liked it even less now.
She shook off his hand. Then someone bumped him, moving past.
Rordan.
Jorie staggered. She regained her footing quickly. Rordan’s name was the only thing Theo understood as
she shouted  after  the man who’d  already  cleared  the half circle of vehicles. Then  she  bolted.  Theo’s
desperate grasp for her rewarded him with nothing but air.
Fuck!

The Tresh had Tamlynne. The only chance Jorie had of getting her back would be to force the Tresh to
drop their shielding and try to kidnap Prow. A fact Rordan must have figured out seconds before Theo
did.
Rordan, who wanted to play hero.
Damn him.
Theo tore after Jorie and Rordan, who were skirting the edge of the low dunes that lined the beach road.
And who were arguing volubly if not understandably.
The Tresh  turned,  watching in their shielded  space.  Prow  raised  his weapon.  He’d  have  to  drop  the
shielding to fire, but that wasn’t the only thing the Tresh could do.
Three greenish circles suddenly hovered over the sand. Theo  had  a  feeling he would run out of ammo
long before the Tresh ran out of zombies to send.
Jorie laced the closest zombie portal with her laser, then shouted at Rordan. He’d stopped, dropped to
one knee, scanner out. Theo was only a few feet from Jorie when the C-Prime let out an eerie screech. It
lurched toward Rordan, arms lengthening as it moved.
Jorie screamed Rordan’s name, but Rordan was already racing to  meet the zombie, scanner  raised.  A
clawed arm shot out, clacking as it zeroed in on Rordan’s head. The C-Prime’s mouth opened, and, in a
flash, Theo knew what had happened to Jorie’s agent whose mummified head bore the indentations of a
zombie’s  jaw:  Guardian  tech  set  to  spur  a  reaction,  and  a  Guardian  agent  who  couldn’t  move  fast
enough.
So did Jorie, who put on a burst of speed just as Theo almost reached her.
“No!” he shouted, but she wasn’t stopping and the arm was coming down. He heard gunfire. He didn’t
know if it was David or Zeke. It didn’t matter. The zombie’s claw struck Rordan’s shoulder, sending him
sprawling in the sand, the scanner spinning a few feet to his left. But a  second  claw was  there,  coming
from the opposite direction.
If Theo stopped to aim and fire, he’d never reach Jorie. And she was already at Rordan’s feet.
Theo’s  heart  stuttered  as  Jorie  reached  up for the claw,  his own cry of horror  almost  strangling  him.
Lungs burning, he lunged for her, intent on hanging on to her, no matter what. If he couldn’t pull her away
and the C-Prime took them both, so be it.
Cristos!
He tripped over Rordan’s boots and grabbed her waist. She jerked up, the zombie lifting her. Her arms
moved  frantically,  and  only  then  did  Theo  realize  the  C-Prime  didn’t  have  her.  She  held  on  to  the
C-Prime.
“Theo! Loop this—”
The scanner’s strap. She fumbled with the strap around one of the long bolts dotting the claw. With one
arm still around her waist and his boots barely touching the sand, Theo reached  past  her and  wrapped
the strap once, twice around the bolt.
“Let go!” he bellowed at her.

“No. One more!” She hung on to  the edge  of the metallic arm and  flipped the entire scanner  over  an
adjoining bolt. “Now! Jump!”
She fell against him as they dropped to the sand. He dragged her to her feet. There was a third arm.
“Move!” He shoved her away.
“Rordan!” She spun, reaching for the man lying motionless behind them.
“I’ve got him. Now go!” He grabbed Rordan’s wrists. As soon as he was clear of the C-Prime’s arms,
he’d throw the man over his shoulder, fireman style. But right now speed was critical.
He caught a fleeting glimpse of a grin on Jorie’s lips. “Good work, agapi mou!”
Her  Greek  accent  was  lousy,  but  his  heart  swelled.  “Move!”  he  said  again.  He  didn’t  know  why
attaching the scanner to the C-Prime was important, but they’d done it. They were going to make it.
She darted past him as he dragged Rordan away from the zombie. Theo was aware  of David shouting
something. And Zeke—
“Down! Get down!” Zeke’s command was clearer.
Another spate of gunfire. Then the high-pitched whine of a laser rifle. Theo jerked toward the sound. The
Tresh shielding was gone. Prow raised his rifle and fired.
“Jorie, down!” Theo screamed as he released  Rordan’s  wrists.  He  yanked  his Glock  from the holster
and fired three shots at Prow, center mass. He pulled off two more as the Devastator lurched backward
from the impact of the bullets, laser rifle sliding from his fingers.
Both Tresh on Prow’s right fell too, but Theo didn’t know if it was David or Zeke who took them out,
because someone else was falling.
Jorie.
Jorie, twisting sideways, her G-1 slipping from her grasp, her eyes wide, her knees folding.
Theo bellowed out an anguished cry and raced toward her. She lay on the sand  when he reached  her,
four neat holes puncturing her right shoulder, two more on her right side charring her skin, the edge of her
uniform, and the top of her technosleeve. Her eyes  were  still wide,  her breath  coming in hard,  rasping
gasps.
“Th-Theo?”
Cristos.  Cristos!  “Babe.”  His own voice was  as  breathy  as  hers.  “Don’t  move.  Stay  still.  We’ll  get
help.” He  reached  instinctively for his police  radio,  but it wasn’t  on his hip, and  for a  long,  agonizing
moment, confusion flooded him. Then he remembered: he wasn’t  a  cop  now.  He  was  Theo  Petrakos,
who’d acted without Chief Brantley’s approval or help. Without the Bahia Vista PD as backup.
“Zeke!” Heart thudding painfully in his chest, he fumbled for the cell phone on his belt. The 911 dispatch
would get an EMT unit here. There was a small fire station on the island, not far from the 7-Eleven. Three
minutes, maybe five.
Jorie’s eyelids fluttered, her gaze unfocused as Zeke and David knelt beside him in the sand.
“Agapi mou.” He took her cold fingers in his left hand, flipped open the cell phone with his right. “Stay

with me, agapi mou.”
“David’s got dispatch,” Zeke said, closing his hand over Theo’s phone. “We—”
Voices shouted something behind him. But not in English. Something…
“…Mikkalah! Mister Zeke!”
Theo looked quickly over his shoulder. Tamlynne Herryck and a team of Guardians sprinted toward him
across the sand.
Tammy?
“Tammy!” Zeke thrust himself to his feet.
“Mister Zeke,” she answered, then it was all Alarsh and hands shoving Theo away, scanners beeping and
pinging and something that looked like a short Wookiee placing silvery pads on Jorie’s wounds.
“Time is critical,” a familiar voice said behind him.
Rordan,  blood  dripping  down  the  side  of  his  face  and  staining  one  arm  of  his  uniform  where  the
C-Prime’s claw had ripped through. He leaned heavily on a shorter man’s shoulder. Another Guardian in
green and black. “Serious injury, she has,” Rordan added.
The  shorter  Guardian  said  something.  Rordan  shrugged,  then  winced.  “I  go  med-tech.  Jorie  go
med-tech.”
Med-tech.  Theo’s  brain  finally  kicked  into  gear,  overriding  the  panic  that  had  encompassed  him.
Med-tech. “Your ship’s here?”
“New ship,” Rordan said. “Find Tamlynne. Search us. See Tresh.  We  go now.” He  hesitated.  “Thank
you, Theo Petrakos.”
Something in the man’s tone chilled Theo. “You go to the ship?” But he asked the question of thin, cold
air.  Rordan  and  his  escort  faded  before  his  eyes.  “No!  Jorie!”  Theo  whipped  around.  Jorie,  the
Wookiee, and the medical team were gone. Only Tammy remained, hand on the transcomm unit on her
belt.
Jorie. His Jorie was gone. Desperately, he motioned toward the night sky. “Beam me up there, Tammy.”
“Regrets, Sergeant Petrakos.” Tammy’s voice was soft, her words uttered slowly. “Mission is over. It is
good. The C-Prime is with herd.”
Theo shot a glance to his right, only then realizing the towering zombie was gone.
“Virus spreads now,” Tammy continued. “Tresh lose this herd.”
“And Jorie?”
Tammy  hesitated,  drawing  a  breath.  Then:  “She,  my  commander,  is  strong.  She  hurts  much,  much
serious. You…” and she stopped again, glancing first at Zeke, then at  David.  “You have deity?  Faith?
Yes? You pray. I pray very much now. For my commander.”
Cristos, Cristos. Yes, he could pray. But he didn’t believe anymore that his prayers would be answered.

Tammy splayed one hand outward. “Mister Zeke, tell Miss Suzanne much thanks.  You are  very bright
stars in my sky of memory. You understand?”
“I’ll tell her, Tamlynne,” Zeke said quietly. “We’ll miss you. And we’ll pray for Jorie.”
A  tremulous  smile  played  across  Tammy’s  lips.  She  tapped  her  transcomm.  Theo  watched—his
shoulders so stiff they hurt almost as much as his heart—as she faded into the darkness.
Jorie. A bright star in the sky of my memory.
A breeze kicked up, peppering his face with fine grains of sand.  The air tasted  of fish and  salt.  Lights
twinkled on the Skyway Bridge across the water, which made a soft, shushing sound as it lapped invisibly
against the sand.
In the distance, a siren wailed.
“Theo.” David said his name.
Theo shook his head. He couldn’t speak, because to speak he’d have to unclench his jaw, and if he did
that, he wouldn’t be able to contain the pained, anguished cry he knew would come out.
“Theo, the EMTs will be here shortly.”
He’d never see her again. He’d never know if she lived or died.
“Guess we can give them those Tresh guys,” Zeke intoned. “And the zombie arm. The ME might enjoy
that. What do you think, amigo?”
The siren grew louder. Theo looked away from the lights on the bridge and toward the southern horizon,
where the dark water met the dark sky. Flashes of light caught the corner of his eye. Fireworks off to the
west, like shooting stars. He’d never be able to see them again without thinking of her.
“She’s safe, Theo.” Zeke’s voice softened. “They have technology we don’t. She’ll be fine. She’s back
with her own people now.”
Back with Rordan. Jorie has dream to be captain. You can give her this?
He had,  he realized.  If she  lived,  he  had  given  her  the  chance  for  her  captaincy.  The  C-Prime  was
infected, the herd would die soon. The Tresh were out of business. All because of one Commander Jorie
Mikkalah.
Captain Jorie Mikkalah.
He held on to that thought, his prayer for her.
It was all he had.
 
30 
“Captain Mikkalah, glad you’re back with us. You’ve had us worried.”
Jorie slowly opened her eyes at the sound of the unfamiliar female voice. The high-pitched tone with the

clipped Gendari accent wasn’t Marai, the med-tech on the Sakanah. The Sakanah was…She  blinked
from the room’s bright lights. This wasn’t the Sakanah, but she was in a sick bay. She’d been here for
several days being poked and prodded and hooked up to tech because…because…
It came back to  her in a  rush: the C-Prime,  Rordan’s  use  of her program  to  lure it and  stimulate the
formation of a portal to send it back once it had been dealt with—a complicated little maneuver that had
taken her years to create—and Rordan’s failure to attach the altered tech to the zombie’s arm.
She’d done it so many times to a normal zombie. Never before to a C-Prime.
Neither had Rordan. Thieving ass-faced demon’s spawn. Try for her captaincy, would he?
Captaincy. Captain. Captain Mikkalah?
She blinked again. The  unfamiliar  female  voice  belonged  to  a  familiar  female  face.  She’d  never  met
Admiral Nerzanya, but she recognized  the thin, pale-eyed  Gendari  woman with the bright yellow hair.
Who in the Guardian ranks  wouldn’t?  And there  was  thieving ass-faced  demon’s  spawn  Kip  Rordan
behind her.
“Admiral, sir,” she said, her voice sounding distinctly rusty. Her body felt correspondingly disused.
Of course. The C-Prime. The Tresh. And Theo—
Theo.  The man with the very good  face.  The man who—She  glanced  quickly  around  the  room.  No
Theo. The Tresh…no. She remembered him firing at Prow. Just after Prow fired at her. So Theo had to
be alive. Where was he?
Her heart sank. Rordan. Thieving bastard. Rordan knew about the restrainer implant. Rordan knew Theo
knew about the Guardians.  Theo  might already  be  on Paroo.  Or  worse.  Admiral Nerzanya  hated  nils
even more than Captain Pietr did.
Pietr. “The Sakanah?”
“The ship was rescued by a battle squadron that we diverted to this sector, based on new intelligence the
Vekrans provided. They tracked one of their missionary ships missing for over half a century now…”
Missionary ship? Theo’s misquote sounded in Jorie’s mind: The needs of the many outweigh the needs
of the one. Is that how he, his people, knew Vekran sacred text? And starship warp factors?
“…to this system, and they alerted us to Tresh energy trails,” the admiral was saying. “My flagship was
part of that squadron. The Sakanah took damage, but casualties were light. And my cruisers destroyed
the Tresh ship that attacked her. So rest easy, Captain.”
Captain.  Nerzanya  said  it  again.  “My  rank  is  commander,”  Jorie  chanced,  knowing  that  correcting
Nerzanya wasn’t something one did if one wanted to stay a Guardian.
The woman smiled. “I’m aware of Pietr’s offer. You have more than earned the promotion.”
Jorie held herself very still, while every  fiber in her body  wanted  to  dance  with blissful glee. Captain.
Captain Jorie Mikkalah! She did it! She—
Theo.
“We’re establishing an outpost in this sector,” Nerzanya was saying. “This nil world is a  useless  ball of
dirt, but the Tresh want it. We need to find out if it’s for more than to breed zombies. Plus, as we expand

the Hatches,  it might become  useful. This sector,  if you accept  the commission, would be  under  your
command, Mikkalah.”
This sector. Earth, the planet aptly named after dirt. The planet that was Theo’s home.
Theo. She couldn’t ask yet.
“Earth’s planetary governments are aware of this?”
“I don’t think the nils are yet ready for us, though that is something that will be considered at a later date.
We’ve deleted all traces of our visit by reclaiming Agent Wain’s body and the zombie corpses.”
Jorie hesitated, not sure she wanted to know the answer. “And Th—Sergeant Petrakos and his people?”
“Unfortunate casualties  but not unexpected,  knowing the Tresh,”  the admiral said  with a  slight nod  to
Rordan. “Full details are in the commander’s report. Fortunately, he neutralized the nil sergeant’s implant,
so there will be no record of it if the bodies are autopsied.”
The bodies… Theo. Theo, Zeke and David Gray.
Theo. Her breath caught painfully. Please, please, no…
She stared at Rordan, her body rigid. He stared back at her.
The admiral—who’d made her a captain, who had little respect for nils—waited.
“Thank you, Commander Rordan,” Jorie said evenly.
Nerzanya  smiled. “Congratulations on your promotion,  Captain.”  With a  nod,  she  turned  and  left  the
small room.
Rordan stayed, with only the sound of voices in the main sick bay and then the muted thump of the large
doors closing behind the admiral filling the silence between them.
“I neutralized Theo’s restrainer,” Jorie said finally.
“I know. You have a knack for those kinds of things. I’m still learning.” He pulled his scanner  from his
belt and held it out toward her. “Here’s the report. What do you think?”
She almost couldn’t look at it. Zeke Martinez. David Gray. Theo…
She changed screens, looked at  the coding behind the images, looked  at  time-date  stamps,  looked  at
everything, even though her heart was breaking and the tears filling her eyes sometimes made it damned
near impossible to see.
And then Tamlynne’s report on Suzanne’s death…
Tamlynne…
Tamlynne wasn’t nearly as skilled as Rordan in forgeries. But she was good enough to  put this one  by
Nerzanya’s scrutiny.
“You slut-bucket bastard,” Jorie whispered, but she was smiling.
Rordan smiled too.

“The admiral’s shuttle departs within the sweep,” he said.  “I told  her you weren’t  one  for any kind of
captain’s ceremony. You’d want to get right to work. She’s  leaving us this ship—a  rather  decent  Red
Star Class Seven. Not as big as the Sakanah, but it has an upgraded PMaT. Much less disconcerting. I
thought—once Nerzanya was gone—you’d want to test it. Until then, as your first officer, I suggest you
take a relaxing cleanser and find something to eat. Captain.” He inclined his head in a gesture of respect.
“I’ll be on the bridge if you need me.”
Jorie watched him leave, tears of gratitude and amazement spilling down her cheeks.
 
“I’ve always loved a man in uniform.”
Theo closed the door of his marked patrol car and turned at the sound of Sophie Goldstein’s voice. She
strode up his driveway, a veritable rainbow of colors, from her red shoes to her blue-and-red polka-dot
pants to her yellow-and-blue shirt with a green-and-blue polka-dot vest. She held some kind of covered
dish in her arms.  Again. He  couldn’t  imagine what it was  this afternoon.  So  far this  week  he’d  been
treated to brisket, cheese blintzes, noodle kugel, potato pancakes, and more honey puffs.
“Kasha varnishkes.” She shoved the dish at him. “It’s got rice, noodles, and  mushrooms. It’s  good  for
you. Have you heard from your lady friend?”
His “lady friend” had returned to northern Canada to be with her family for some kind of emergency. It
was somewhat the truth. And it kept Sophie from poking further into his obvious blue mood.
A mood that had little to do with his return to uniform.
That early-morning meeting almost a week ago with Chief Brantley and DHS hadn’t gone so  well. The
zombie corpses—including Baby—had disappeared, giving DHS little to put into their top-secret file on
the matter other than the Paroo cube, his G-1, and his, Brantley’s, and his team’s accounts. And sworn
statements by all involved to reveal nothing without explicit permission from the feds. But at least Internal
Affairs hadn’t been there, and Theo hadn’t lost his job. Nor his rank. He was still a sergeant. He was just
a sergeant in uniform working street patrol.
It was a way to keep his mind off Jorie. And to do his penance to Saint Brantley.
He was damned lucky to still have a job.
He transferred  his duty duffel  bag  to  his  left  hand  and  took  the  covered  dish.  “You’re  spoiling  me,
Sophie.” The dish was still warm, and the aroma, as  always,  was  tantalizing. But in truth he’d  found it
hard to enjoy much of anything since New Year’s Eve.
“So what’s the news from Jorie?”
“Still tied up with family.” He tried to smile and failed.
Sophie Goldstein made the tsk-tsk noise that some women had down to a fine art. She patted his arm.
“Things will work out.”
Juggling the dish and his duffel, Theo unlocked his back door, then dropped the duffel on the floor.  He
slid the dish onto the counter. A cold orange soda waited for him in the fridge.
He took a swig, then plodded through his living room, stripping off his uniform shirt as he went.  A wry

grin played over his mouth at Sophie’s comment about a “man in uniform.” There was nothing remotely
sexy about a white polyester shirt and green polyester pants. And a bulky tac vest. Though Aunt Tootie
might not agree. She always said Uncle Stavros—
“Theo?”
He stopped dead in his tracks in his bedroom doorway, shirt halfway down one arm, and stared at the
woman in the green-and-black jumpsuit rising from the edge of his bed. His heart thumped so loudly in
his chest that it momentarily trapped the name he was trying to say.
She looked like…
“Jorie?” His voice rasped with emotion. He unglued his feet from the floor and sent the command to his
legs to move, now! “Jorie!”
Then she was against his chest and in his arms, and warm and real, and, Cristos, Cristos, she was alive.
She was alive and he was holding her, touching her, kissing her. He tasted the salt of the tears on her face
as they mixed with his own.
Jorie.
He yanked the shirt off his arm, then thrust his hands in her hair, giving her mouth no escape from his. But
she  leaned  into  him,  her  arms  locked  around  his  neck.  He  had  no  escape  either.  And  this  was  a
wonderful, beautiful prison.
Only when his hands roamed down her body and up again did he remember the ugly charred wounds on
her skin. “Are you okay?” He ran his fingers lightly over her shoulder.
“Now, yes.” She tilted her head slightly, her eyes half-closed, her smile incredibly enticing.
“What happened? Can you—” A hundred  questions  raced  through his mind, but as  desperately  as  he
wanted answers, he had to kiss her again.
“Please tell me you’re not here to say good-bye,” he murmured as he released her mouth.
Keeping her hands linked around his neck, she leaned back and looked up at him. “Actually, I’m here to
offer you a job.”
A job? With the Guardians? Relief flooded him—and a surge of excitement. There’d be problems if he
left, but somehow, some way, he’d handle them. “Do I have time to see Tootie and Stavros?”
She grinned broadly. “No good-byes, Theo Petrakos. We’re staying here.” Her expression turned more
serious, in direct contrast to the seductive way her fingers were playing with his hair at  the nape  of his
neck. “The C-Prime and the herd are dead. But we believe the Tresh have the code and will be  back.
Your world—especially your Florida—is too perfect for what they want to do with the zombies. We also
suspect they’re here for other reasons and may still have operatives on your world.  We  need  to  know
where they are. And stop whatever else they try to do.”
She nodded upward. “My ship will guard your world. But the Tresh appear to be able to manipulate the
zombie portals in ways we cannot. Yet. So we need someone on the surface, someone who knows this
locale and  knows  zombies.  Someone”—and  her voice turned  throaty  and  soft—“I  can  work  closely
with. As head of the mission. As captain of the ship.”
Captain. Her dreams had come true. And his prayers had been answered.

He pulled her closer, weapons—his and hers—and bodies—soft and  hard—merging. “That calls for a
special celebration. Your place or mine?”
She touched her lips to his. “Yours,” she  whispered,  her fingers already  working to  undo  his tac  vest.
“You have glorious peanut butter.”
 

About the Author
A former news reporter and retired private detective, Linnea Sinclair writes  award-winning,  fast-paced
science-fiction  romance  for  Bantam  Spectra,  including  Finders  Keepers,  Gabriel’s  Ghost,  An
Accidental  Goddess,  Games  of  Command,  and  The  Down  Home  Zombie  Blues. Her  books  have
won or been finalists for the RITA, Sapphire, Pearl, and Prism and  in various regional RWA  contests.
Sinclair is also a John W Campbell Award nominee. When not on duty with some intergalactic fleet—or
playing human slave to her two spoiled felines—she can be visited at www.linneasinclair.com.
 

If you enjoyed
The Down Home Zombie Blues
be sure not to miss
SHADES OF DARK
the next exciting novel from
Linnea Sinclair
—and the long-awaited sequel to her RITA Award-winning novel
Gabriel's Ghost
Court-martialed captain Chasidah Bergren, once the pride of the Sixth Fleet, races against time to  stop
the powerful Hayden Burke from inciting a civil war in the empire, and placing blame for the atrocities on
the man Chaz loves: Gabriel Sullivan—poet,  mercenary,  and  hated  shape-shifting telepath.  But Chaz’s
world collapses around her when corruption surfaces among her crew, her friends, and even her family,
pushing Chaz and  Sully to  their limits. Everyone  has  a  price.  Everyone  can  make  a  choice.  But when
Sully makes his, Chaz must choose between what Sully has become—and what her heart demands she
must do.
Coming in summer 2008, from Bantam Books
 

Also by Linnea Sinclair
Finders Keepers
Gabriel’s Ghost
An Accidental Goddess
Games of Command

THE DOWN HOME ZOMBIE BLUES
A Bantam Book / December 2007

