Scanned & proofed by unknown.
Converted to HTML, cleaned, re-formatted & proofread by nukie.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10- 11- 12- 13- 14- 15- 16- 17- 18- 19- 20- 21- 22- 23- 24 
Gabriel’s Ghost
Linnea Sinclair (as Megan Sybil Baker)
 
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are either the product of  the  author’s  imagination
or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to any  person  or  persons,  living  or  dead,  events,  or  locales  is  entirely
coincidental.
Gabriel’s Ghost
ISBN 1-55316-081-9
Published by LTDBooks
www.ltdbooks.com
Copyright © 2002 Megan Sybil Baker
Artwork copyright © 2002 Megan Sybil Baker
Published in Canada by LTDBooks, 200 North Service Road West, Unit 1, Suite 301, Oakville, ON L6M 2Y1
All rights reserved. The use  of  any  part  of  this  publication  reproduced,  transmitted  in  any  form  or  by  any  means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written consent of  the  publisher  is
an infringement of the copyright law.
National  Library  of  Canada  Cataloguing  in  Publication  Data  Baker,  Megan  Sybil,  1954-Gabriel’s  ghost  [electronic
resource] ISBN 1-55316-081-9 (electronic) ISBN 1-55316-923-9 (REB 1100 & 1200) I. Title.

PS3552.A37G32 2002 813'.6 C2002-900076-9
 
Author’s Note
Gabriel’s Ghost was inspired by and written to “Put Your Lights On” featuring Everlast on
Santana’s album Supernatural (copyright 1999 Arista Records Inc.)
 
Dedication
To  Rob,  husband  of  infinite  patience  who  believed  in  me;  To  my  wonderful  crit  parters:
Nancy and Darlene, who threatened me with bodily harm should anything happen to a certain
secondary character in this book; To my feline four: Daiquiri, Doozer, Artoo and Fat Tammi…
FUR all your help.
 
Table of Contents
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve
Chapter Thirteen
Chapter Fourteen
Chapter Fifteen
Chapter Sixteen
Chapter Seventeen
Chapter Eighteen
Chapter Nineteen
Chapter Twenty
Chapter Twenty-One
Chapter Twenty-Two
Chapter Twenty-Three

Chapter Twenty-Four
Chapter Twenty-Five
Chapter Twenty-Six
Chapter Twenty-Seven
Chapter Twenty-Eight
Chapter Twenty-Nine
Chapter Thirty
Chapter Thirty-One
Chapter Thirty-Two
Chapter Thirty-Three
Chapter Thirty-Four
Chapter Thirty-Five
Chapter Thirty-Six
Chapter Thirty-Seven
Chapter Thirty-Eight
Chapter Thirty-Nine
About the Author
Chapter One
^ » 
Moabar
Only fools boast they have no fears. I thought of that as I pulled the blade of my dagger from
the Takan  guard’s  throat,  my  hand  shaking,  my  heart  pounding  in  my  ears.  Light  from  the
setting sun filtered down through the tall trees around me. It flickered briefly on the dark gold
blood that bubbled  from the wound, staining the Taka’s coarse fur. I felt a  sliminess  between
my fingers and saw that same ochre stain on my skin.
“Shit!” I jerked my hand back.  My  dagger  tumbled  to  the  rock-strewn  ground.  A  stupid
reaction for someone with my training.  It  wasn’t  as  if  I’d  never  killed  another  sentient  being
before, but it had been more than five years. Then, at least, it had carried the respectable label
of military action.
This time it was pure survival.
It  took  me  a  few  minutes  to  find  my  blade  wedged  in  between  the  moss-covered  rocks.
After  more  than  a  decade  on  interstellar  patrol  ships,  my  eyes  had  problems  adjusting  to
variations  in  natural  light.  Shades  of  grays  and  greens,  muddied  by  Moabar’s  twilight  sky,
merged into seamless shadows. I’d never have found my only weapon if I hadn’t  pricked  my
fingers on the point. Red human blood mingled with Takan gold. I wiped the blade against my
pants before letting it mold  itself  back  around  my  wrist.  It  flowed  into  the  form  of  a  simple
silver bracelet.
“A Grizni dagger, is it?”
I  spun  into  a  half-crouch,  my  right  hand  grasping  the  bracelet.  Quickly  it  uncoiled
again—almost  as  quickly  as  I’d  sucked  in  a  harsh,  rasping  breath.  The  distinctly  masculine

voice had come from the thick stand of trees directly in front of me. But in the few seconds it
took me to straighten, he could be anywhere now. It looked like tonight’s agenda held a second
attempt at rape and murder.
I tuned out my own breathing; listened to the hushed rustle of the thick forest around me
and farther away, the guttural roar of a shuttle departing the prison’s spaceport. I watched for
movement.  Murky  shadows,  black-edged  yet  ill  defined,  taunted  me.  I’d  have  sold  my  soul
then and there for a nightscope and a fully-charged laser pistol.
But  I  had  neither  of  those.  Just  a  sloppily  manipulated  court  martial  and  a  life  sentence
without parole. And, of course, a smuggled Grizni dagger that the Takan guard had discovered
a bit too late to report.
My newest assailant, unfortunately, was already forewarned.
“Let’s  not  cause  any  more  trouble,  okay?”  My  voice  sounded  thin  in  the  encroaching
darkness. I wondered what had happened to that ‘tone of command’ Fleet regs had insisted we
adopt.  It  had  obviously  taken  one  look  at  the  harsh  prison  world  of  Moabar  and  decided  it
preferred to reside elsewhere. I didn’t blame it. I only wished I had the same choice.
I drew a deep  breath.  “If  I’m  on  your  grid,  look,  I’m  leaving.  Wasn’t  my  intention  to  be
here,” I added, feeling that was probably the understatement of the century. “And if he,” I said
with a nod to the large body  sprawled  to  my  right,  “was  your  partner,  then  I’m  sorry.  But  I
wasn’t in the mood.”
A brittle snapping sound started my heart pounding again. My hand felt as slick against the
smooth metal of the dagger as if the Taka’s blood still ran down its surface. The sound was on
my right, beyond where the Taka lay. Only a fool would try to take me over the lifeless barrier
at my feet. A fool, or someone not intent on harming me. At least, not right away.
The first of Moabar’s three moons had risen in the hazy night sky.  I  glimpsed  a  flicker  of
movement, saw him step out of the shadows just as the clouds cleared  away  from  the  moon.
His  face  was  hidden,  distorted.  But  I  clearly  saw  the  distinct  shape  of  a  short-barreled  rifle
propped against his shoulder. That, and the fact that he appeared humanoid, told me he wasn’t
a prison  guard.  Energy  weapons  were  banned  on  Moabar.  Most  eight-foot  tall  Takas  didn’t
need them, anyway.
The  man  before  me  was  tall,  but  not  eight  feet  tall.  Possession  of  the  rifle  meant  he  had
off-world sources, and probably wielded some power among the other convicts as well.
I took a step back  as he approached. His pace was casual, as if he were just taking his gun
out  for  a  moonlit  stroll.  He  prodded  the  dead  guard  with  the  tip  of  the  rifle.  “Perhaps  I
should’ve  warned  him  about  you.  Captain  Chasidah  Bergren.  Pride  of  the  Sixth  Fleet.  One
dangerous woman. But, oh, I forgot. You’re not a captain anymore.”
With  a  chill  I  recognized  the  mocking  tone,  the  cultured  voice.  And  suddenly  knew  the
dead  guard  and  the  rifle  were  the  least  of  my  problems.  I  breathed  a  name  in  disbelief.
“Sullivan. This is impossible. You’re dead—”
“Well, if I’m dead, then so are you.” His mirthless laugh was as soft as quiet footsteps on a
grave. “Welcome to Hell, Captain. Welcome to Hell.”

 
We found two fallen trees, hunkered down and stared at  each  other,  each  waiting  for  the
other to make a move. It was like old  times.  Except  there  was  the  harsh  glow  of  his  lightbar
between us, and not the blackness of space.
“I never pegged you for an easy kill,” I told him. Which was true. The reports of his death
two  years  ago  had  actually  surprised  me  more  than  his  reappearance  just  now.  That  simply
disturbed me. I balanced the dagger in my hand, not yet content to let it wrap itself around my
wrist. “When I heard what happened at Garno it sounded too easy. I didn’t buy it.” I shrugged
and pushed aside what else I’d thought, and felt, when I’d heard  the  news.  My  opinions  and
feelings about the death of a known mercenary and smuggler mattered little anymore.
He  seemed  to  hear  my  unspoken  comment.  “It  wasn’t  planned  to  fool  anyone  with  a
modicum of intelligence. Only the government. And, of course, their news-hounds. But tell me
the news of my passing pained you,” he continued, dropping his voice to a  well-remembered
low rumble, “and I’ll do my best to assuage your fears.”
A  muted  boom  sounded  in  the  distance,  rattling  through  the  forest.  Another  shuttle
arriving,  breaking  the  sound  barrier  on  descent.  He  turned  toward  it,  so  I  was  spared
answering  what  I  knew  to  be  a  jibe.  Regardless,  I  had  no  intention  of  telling  him  about  my
pain.
Patches of light and shadow moved over his face. Sullivan’s profile had always been strong,
aristocratic,  dominating  the  Imperial  police  bulletins  and  Fleet  patrol  advisories.  He  had  his
father’s lean jaw line, his mother’s thick dark hair. Both were more than famous in their  own
right, but not for the same reasons as Sully. They were members  of the Empire’s elite; he was
simply elusive.
The  lightbar  reached  full  power.  It  was  almost  like  shiplight,  crisp  and  clear.  He  turned
back to me, his lips curved in a wry smile, as if he knew I’d been studying him.
He’d aged since I last saw him, about six months before his highly publicized demise. The
thick, short-cropped black hair was sprinkled with silver. The dark eyes had more lines at the
corners. The mouth  still claimed its share of arrogance, though, as if  he  knew  he’d  always  be
one handsome bastard.
However,  something  else  had  changed,  something  deeper  inside  him.  It  was  nothing  I
could see, sitting there under the canopy of the forest. It was something I knew. Because I was
sitting there with Gabriel Ross Sullivan and I was still alive.
All the more reason to ignore his attempt at taunting me. His existence had been far more
troublesome  in  my  life  than  his  purported  passing.  “What  went  down  on  Garno?  You  cut  a
deal?” Moabar or death had been offered to a lot of people, though not me. Most chose death. I
hadn’t had that luxury.
He snorted. It was a disdainful sound I remembered well. He shoved the rifle almost to my
nose. “What’s this look like? How long have you been here, three weeks?”
I knew what it was. A  rifle.  Illegal.  Damn  difficult  to  come  by.  They  didn’t  wrap  around
your wrist like my dagger, or fit in the sole of a boot.

A thought chilled me. Maybe the Taka weren’t the only guards the prison authorities used.
“Yeah,  three  weeks,  two  days  and  seventeen  hours.  You  know  what  they  say  about  how
time  flies.”  I  held  his  gaze  evenly.  His  eyes  were  dark,  like  pieces  of  obsidian,  unreadable.
“That’s  a  rifle.  Norlack  473,  Sniper  model.  Modified,  it  appears,  to  handle  illegal  wide  load
slash charges.”
He laughed. “On point as ever, Bergren. Dedicated captain of a peashooter squad out in no
man’s  land.  Keeping  those  freighters  safe  from  dangerous  pirates  like  me.  Then  they  damn
you, ship you here and still every inch of you belongs to Fleet Ops.” He shook his head. “Your
mama wore army boots and so do you.”
“What do you want, Sully?” I jerked my chin toward the dead Taka far to the right of us in
the clearing. “You cleaning up after him? Or finishing what he didn’t?”
He  turned  the  rifle  in  his  hands.  “This  isn’t  Fleet  issue.  Or  prison  stock.  This  is  mine.
Contraband,  wasn’t  that  how  your  orders  phrased  it?  Stolen.  Modified.”  He  paused  and
pinned me intently with his obsidian gaze. “Mine.”
We’d  had  conversations  like  this  before,  most  often  with  me  on  the  bridge  of  my  small
patrol ship, in the captain’s sling. He’d be on the bridge of whatever fast vessel suited his fancy
that week, his pilot and bridge crew flickering in and out of the shadows behind him. He rarely
answered anything directly. He threw words at you, phrases, like hints to a puzzle  he’d  taunt
you to solve. Or like free-form poetry, the kind that always sounded better after a few beers. I’d
heard he used to write poetry, had won awards for his verse. He loved to play with words.
I didn’t. “Okay. So no deal was cut and you’re not working for the Ministry of Corrections.
Don’t tell me you’ve added Moabar to your vacation plans?”
He laughed again, more  easily  this  time.  But  not  easily  enough  for  me  to  put  my  dagger
back around my wrist.
“A resort for the suicidal, but faint at heart? Don’t bother to slit your own throat, we’ll do it
for you.” He gestured theatrically. “It could work. If I couldn’t market it, hell, no one could.”
“Not a lot of repeat business.” I couldn’t help myself. I had to say it.
“Ah, but that is the operative word. Business.”
“Is it? What are you funding here, prison breaks?” If he  wasn’t  with  the  M.O.C.,  then  he
had to be working against them.  But I’d never heard of any  successful  escapes  from  Moabar.
There was no prison, per se. No formal structure. Just an inhospitable, barely habitable  world
of long frigid winters that brought airborne viruses, and  bleak,  chilled  summers.  Like  now.  I
was  lucky  my  sentence  started  when  it  did.  I’d  have  time  to  acclimate.  Others,  dumped
dirtside in the midst of a blizzard, often died within hours.
“If I’m funding anything, it’s freedom for a cause. I’ve found, since my untimely but useful
demise, that this place can provide me with a source of cheap, willing labor.”
“Willing being the operative word, I take it?”
“Willing being the operative word, yes.”

“Doing  what?”  I  knew  many  of  Sully’s  operations  before  Garno:  stolen  cargo,  weapons,
illegal drugs, ships and everything that fell in-between.
I just couldn’t see why he’d chosen to seek me out. My expertise lay in none of those areas.
Unless he’d lost his pilot, needed someone to captain a ship for him. But why come to me?  He
could have his pick from those who lined the barstools in any spaceport pub.
But then, I’d ignored his all-important earlier comment. My mother wore army boots.
“You know the  system,”  he  told  me.  “You  were  born  and  raised  in  it.  Your  parents,  and
your  parents’  parents  were.  I  know  your  personnel  file.  Captain  Chasidah  ‘Chaz’  Bergren.
Daughter of Engineering Specialist Amaris Deirdre Bergren and Lt. Commander  Lars Bergren.
Sister  of  Commander  Thaddeus  Bergren,  currently  second  in  command  at  the  Marker
Shipyards. Granddaughter of Lieutenant—”
I held up my hand. “I know who I am.”
“So do I.”
“Good. Then you know my mother’s been dead for almost twenty years, I haven’t spoken
to  my  father  in  over  ten.  And  my  brother,  since  the  trial,  won’t  permit  my  name  to  be
mentioned within earshot. What’s the point?”
“The point, my lovely angel, and no, don’t look so skeptical. Though I  may  be  a  veritable
walking list of negative personality traits, the one thing I am not, and never have been, is a liar.
It’s my great downfall, Chaz. So if I say you’re lovely—” He reached as if to touch my chin with
his fingertips. I jerked back,  almost fell off my log. I dragged my boot heel in the dirt to keep
my balance.
“Don’t tumble for me yet, darlin’. We have business to attend to first. As I was saying, the
point is death has afforded me a new perspective. A new maturity, if you will. While my goals
haven’t changed, my methodology had to. That’s where you come in.”
“A mere captain of a pea shooter squadron?”
“That’s Fleet’s appraisal of your talents. Not mine.”
“No, you always called me an interfering bitch.”
“If you must quote me, please be accurate. A beautiful interfering bitch.”
“Get to the point.”
“Gladly. I find I’m in need of one particular beautiful, interfering bitch.  Can’t think of one
better. So tell me, my angel, are you ready to leave this veritable paradise and make a pact with
the ghost from Hell?”
I turned the dagger in my hand, watched the light play over the blade. I’d been willing to
sell  my  soul  earlier  for  a  nightscope  and  a  laser  pistol.  On  Moabar,  that  would  guarantee
survival.
Sully  was  offering  me  more.  He  was  offering  me  a  way  off  Moabar.  Freedom.  On  Hell’s
terms, but freedom nonetheless.

I nodded, stuck my hand out. “Officer’s agreement.”
He clasped my hand firmly, then went down on one knee and brought it to his lips.
I pulled my fingers away from his mouth,  angry at the invisible  firemoths  that  seemed  to
dance across my skin at his touch. “This is a business deal, Sullivan.”
He sat back on his heel, grinning. “Whatever you say.”
“Damn straight.” I pushed myself to my feet, transferred the dagger to my right hand and
started  to  let  it  wrap  around  my  left  wrist.  Then  stopped.  He’d  retrieved  the  rifle  and  now
stood towering over me, his dark eyes glinting brightly from the lightbar in his hand.
I let my fingers close around the hilt  of  the  dagger,  kept  it  between  us  as  I  followed  him
into the forest. Maybe I’d hold onto it this way, for a while. Just in case my ghost’s good humor
dissolved like mist from the moons.
 
Sully tabbed the lightbar down to half-power, just enough to guide us over fallen logs and
rock-filled ditches. He held it lowered,  our  bodies  blocking  its  telltale  glow.  I  lengthened  my
strides to match his.
The  only  sounds  were  our  footsteps  crunching  against  the  carpet  of  brittle  twigs,  the
occasional slap of a branch against our jackets. His, like mine, was black, spacer-issue plain.
We slipped like shadows between the shaggy trees. It was as if I were twenty-two years old
again,  back  in  basic  training,  on  a  dirtside  recon  exercise.  Sully  moved  that  way  too,  with  a
cautious grace. A bright patch of moonlight cascaded through an opening in the forest canopy.
As one, we edged around it.
I caught a wry, half-smile on his  face.  He  angled  his  mouth  down  to  my  ear,  echoed  my
thoughts. “Feels like boot camp.”
I  hated  boot  camp,  thirteen  years  ago.  But  it  had  taught  me  some  invaluable  lessons.
Apparently,  Sully  had  learned  them  as  well,  though  I  couldn’t  remember  any  stint  in  the
military on his dossier. I was about to ask where he’d trained when something glinted ahead of
us, far off to the right.
Instinctively  I  flattened  against  a  tree.  My  fingers  tightened  on  the  dagger.  The  lightbar
blinked out as my heart rate picked up. Then my face was in Sully’s chest as he clasped me in a
protective move. I flinched back involuntarily, surprised, not only by his action, but by a rush
of heat that seemed to encompass me. Then it was gone and I tagged it as nothing more than
adrenaline fighting against a severe lack of sleep. He pushed me to my knees, crouched down
with me. He flicked the safety off the rifle, angled it up.
His  left  hand  cupped  the  back  of  my  head,  drew  my  face  against  his  shoulder  again.
“Damned redhead,” he whispered. “You glow like a jumpgate beacon. Now, hush. Be still for a
moment.”
A rush of wind rattled the leaves around us. I ducked my head further down, even though
I knew my hair wasn’t that red. It was dark auburn and, after three weeks on Moabar, far from
glowed. I doubted the color was Sully’s real reason now. I didn’t know if there were something

out there he didn’t want me to see—or he was simply feeding his ego by playing hero.  Either
way, I wasn’t about to argue. My strange lightheadedness had returned. I needed a moment  to
steady myself, find focus.
His breathing was deep and even. He turned away from me, his gaze locked on something
on the right. As  I  was  hunkered  down  between  him  and  the  large  tree,  I  could  only  see  the
outline of his hand on the rifle and the dark, skewed shadows of the forest floor.
“What  is  it?”  I  asked  as  quietly  as  I  could.  His  fingers  threaded  into  my  braid  as  if  he
wanted to unravel it. Or, I realized with a blinding flash of stupidity, as if he searched for a way
to get a strong and painful grip on me.
I remembered what had been on that Takan guard’s agenda. I tried to jerk my head back.
Then I heard it.
A  wheezing  noise.  A  crackling.  The  sound  that  tissue  paper  would  make  if  it  were
composed of glass. And another rush of wind, air pushing past me.
My mouth suddenly went dry.
Sully shifted his weight, slowly brought the rifle up to eye level. The faint greenish glow of
the nightscope reflected back on his face.
The crackling stopped.
I smelled  something  foul.  My  stomach  clenched  in  response.  A  jukor.  A  vicious,  fanged
mutant  beast  with  the  distinctive  scent  of  rotting  garbage.  A  breeding  experiment  by  the
M.O.C.,  jukors  were  a  distorted,  hideous  version  of  ancient,  imaginary  soul-stealers.  They’d
been bred to combat the more current, very real telepathic Stolorth Ragkirils. The government
halted the jukor experiment ten years ago, when it had become apparent the creatures couldn’t
be controlled. Not like Takas.
I knew the  smell  because  I’d  had  escort  duty  with  a  ship  hauling  a  pack  of  jukors  to  be
destroyed. It was a smell I’d never forget.
It was one I knew I shouldn’t be remembering now.
A long wheeze, closer. My heart thudded at the sound. It was scenting for something. Us,
most likely. Or its mate. Either option was a bad one. If it chose us as prey, its powerful  hind
legs and winged upper forearms would make it damn near impossible to evade.
If it were scenting for a mate, it would kill any other creature in its path in its lust.
A frightening thought. If it were scenting for a mate, that meant jukors were alive, breeding
again, for  M.O.C.  purposes.  Perhaps  even  new  and  improved?  There  might  be  another  new
and improved one around in the forest, somewhere.
Either way,  we  were  dead  unless  Sully  killed  it  first.  My  dagger  would  barely  be  able  to
pierce its hide.
Fingers tugged at my scalp. He was unraveling my braid. I mentally questioned my ghost’s
sanity and jerked my head away, frowning.
He yanked it back. His breath was hot against my ear. “Your hair wrap. I need it. Now.”

Hair wrap? I swore silently, slapped the dagger back  around my wrist then as quickly, and
as quietly, as possible, unraveled the leather and fabric laces. My hair fell almost to  my  waist,
drifting  over  my  arms  as  I  shoved  the  cords  into  his  outstretched  hand.  My  mind  still
questioned his sanity.
He thrust the rifle at me. “Keep a lock on it.”
As I brought the nightscope to my eye I caught a glimpse of Sully grabbing a stout, broken
tree limb from the ground.
Two moons dotted the night sky, adding their light. The  jagged  form  of  the  jukor  almost
jumped through the eyepiece at me. It  was  twenty-five  feet  from  us.  Upwind.  Its  long  snout
moved slowly side to side. I heard the crackling again as  it  flexed  one  wing.  Barbed  tips,  like
tiny razors, glinted sharp and cruel.
Its lower arms and legs were furred A hide formed of rock-hard scales covered its chest and
back. Only the base of its throat was vulnerable. A soft spot, unprotected.
Damned small.
I moved the rifle slightly as it moved its head.
Damned small.
Sully’s hand covered mine, traded rifle for a leather and fabric-wrapped tree branch.
“It will see it, scent it.” He put the eyepiece to his eye again, the greenish glow like a small
alien moon on his face.
I understood. The leather and fabric held my scent.
“Beer toss,” he said.
I understood that, too. Wasn’t a station brat in civilized space who didn’t. Old pub game.
“On  three.”  He  adjusted  his  balance  slightly.  He’d  have  to  move  the  moment  the  jukor
sprang.
“One.” The word was a soft rustle of leaves.
I rose slowly, becoming part of the tree on my left.
“Two.”
I started my windup.
“Three.”
I hurled the branch high, arcing it upwards in the clear moonlight. The dark form lunged.
Powerful wings snapped out, pushed downwards. An unbearable stench rolled toward me just
as three flashes of light erupted on my right.
Sully, springing, moving, firing.
The dagger snapped into my hand. If he missed, or only wounded  it,  it  would  be  here  in
seconds.

A roaring sound. An enormous blot of darkness descending from the air at an unbelievable
rate of speed. Wings beating, fingered forelimbs yanking itself through the trees at us.
Sully, firing. “Run!”
He hadn’t hit the jukor’s throat.
I bolted sideways, headed for the thickest brush, hoping it would snag a wing, entangle an
arm.
Branches whipped at my face. But the only pounding footsteps I heard were mine.
I stopped,  spun  about.  Saw  Sully  drop  to  the  ground,  roll,  come  up  firing  again  as  the
jukor’s barbed wing slashed inches from his body.
Shit! I plunged back  through the trees just as the  jukor  roared  and  slammed  Sully  to  the
ground.
 
Chapter Two
« ^ » 
The hideous body of the jukor reared back, then flailed sideways. It landed almost at my feet, a
tangle of wings and limbs. Its long head lolled to one side.  In  the  bright  light  of  the  moons  I
could see a sizable hole in the charred flesh of its soft throat.
I heard Sully cough, gag. “Hell’s ass! That thing stinks!”
I jumped over the beast’s hindquarters, fell to my  knees  on  the  hard  ground  beside  him.
“You okay?”
He grasped my arm. I helped him into a sitting position. He was breathing hard. He wiped
one hand over his face then grimaced. No doubt the jukor’s oily scent was on his skin as well.
“Hell’s ass,” he said again. The poet, never at a loss for words, repeating himself.
“You missed the first time.”
He nodded, still gasping for air. “You noticed.”
“I’ve never bagged one. Not even in the old sims.” There were no jukors in the new training
sims  since  there  were,  we  were  told,  no  living  jukors.  Why  learn  to  kill  something  that  no
longer  exists?  We  had  to  be  content  to  hone  our  hand-to-hand  combat  skills  on  simmed
mind-sucking Stolorths and giant Takas. Plus the usual crazed human scenarios.
Sully struggled to his feet. I grabbed his elbow, stood up with him. He leaned one hand on
my shoulder for a moment.  “This is not,” he  said,  looking  down  at  me,  “a  fortuitous  turn  of
events.”
“Maybe it’s time you tell me just what in hell is going on.”

“I will. But I think it best we keep moving.” He stepped back  toward the barely discernible
path we’d followed. Turned, probably because he didn’t hear my footsteps.
I was  wrestling  to  rebraid  my  thick,  wavy,  now  totally  disheveled  hair.  Stupid,  but  all  I
could  think  of  was  the  debris  and  leaves  that  would  attach  themselves  to  me  if  I  didn’t.  I
hurried up to him, arms angled awkwardly behind my neck.
“I prefer it down.” He reached to smooth the wild strands from my forehead. “I’ve told you
that before. Remember?”
I ducked away. “Too bad.” Yes, I remembered.  Even though it’d been almost four years. I
was  glad  he  couldn’t  see  the  flush  of  color  on  my  cheeks.  I  brought  the  braid  over  my
shoulder,  fished  in  my  pants  pocket  for  a  small  tie.  With  hair  like  mine,  it’s  absolutely
necessary to carry extras.
We picked up our pace. The moonlight was bright, the lightbar no longer needed. I kept a
vigilant watch ahead, and to the left.  Sully  did  the  same,  to  the  right.  From  behind  we  were
vulnerable.
Nobody’s perfect.
But that night, four years ago almost could have been. If Sully hadn’t been perpetually on
the wrong side of the law. If I hadn’t been shaken back to my senses by my shipbadge pinging
an  incoming  transmit  advisory  that  had  interrupted  kisses  far  more  passionate  than  I’d  ever
experienced. It had left a lot of questions unanswered. But  it  had  soothed  a  deep  ache  in  my
heart, if only for a little while.
It had been strictly a physical  attraction,  aided  by  one  too  many  pitchers  of  the  Empire’s
finest ale. But that night I’d desperately needed to know that I was attractive.
He’d  confirmed  that,  in  a  dark  little  bar  in  Port  Chalo  where  Fleet  captains  and  known
smugglers could leave their reputations and vocations outside the doors for a while.  Then  my
shipbadge had pinged, saving me from making a fool of myself. Doing yet another thing that
would have shocked and puzzled my ever-righteous brother.
Though not quite as much  as the appearance  of  the  jukor  shocked  and  puzzled  me  right
now. I shoved the troublesome memory  away,  returned  to  my  productive  habit  of  analyzing
my situation, gathering facts. Sully hadn’t seemed to be surprised by the creature’s appearance.
Had  he  heard  that  the  Empire  was  resurrecting  the  project?  That  was  one  of  the  many
questions  plaguing  my  mind  as  we  walked.  Questions  that  had  been  stilled  by  a  need  for
silence, for stealth.
But after Sully’s firing  of  his  rifle,  any  pretense  of  a  silent  approach  on  our  part  was  just
that: pretense. Plus, my need for answers was growing. “Where’re we going?”
He pointed over the treetops, past the higher moon, into the star-filled sky. “Second star to
the right—”
“—and  straight  on  ‘til  morning?  Yeah,  I’ve  heard  that  before.  Lit  of  the  Ancient
Homeworlds, 101. Where are we going, Sully?”
“Most immediately, to a secure dwelling, within a fifteen minute walk from the spaceport.
Eventually, to the spaceport itself.”

I threw him a questioning glance. “You are suicidal.” The spaceport was M.O.C.  controlled.
More Takans to the square inch than anywhere else on Moabar, save perhaps  for  the  Temple
on Solstice-Day.
“Most definitely not. I assure you I have a lusty—” he leered down at me “—interest in life.”
The path curved, narrowing. We were shoulder to shoulder, or rather, my shoulder  to  his
arm.  He  smelled  more  than  faintly  of  jukor.  “I  hope  this  secure  dwelling  of  yours  has  a
bathtub.”
“That bad?”
I shrugged. “Unique.”
“It has. As well as a change of  clothing.  Which  is  required  for  us  to  access  the  spaceport.
Our shuttle leaves in about two hours.”
It occurred to me, not for the first time during our trek, that this might all be a setup. Sully
could  be  an  Imperial  agent  for  the  M.O.C.  or  any  of  the  numerous  ministries.  They  were
trapping me, testing  me,  baiting  me.  I  couldn’t  figure  a  reason  but  then,  I’d  never  known  a
government to require reasons to act.
However, there were far more politically important and dangerous prisoners on Moabar. I
was a mere pebble in the asteroid field of personalities on the prison world.
It also occurred to me that my brother could’ve hired Sully to kill  me.  Or  to  put  me  in  a
position  where  the  M.O.C.  would.  That  would  nicely  clear  up  for  Thaddeus—not  my
half-brother Willym, who’s only nine—the stain I’d placed on the family name.
Sully increased his pace, he seemed disinclined to further conversation. That gave me time
to think, as well. When we approached the edge of the forest, twenty minutes later, my dagger
was back in my hand. He kept just inside the line of trees, paralleling a narrow, graveled road.
Behind me, it went to the spaceport. Every few minutes, lights from the tower beacons strafed
our path.
At a curve in the road, he took my arm,  hesitating  when  he  saw  the  dagger  in  my  hand.
“Still don’t trust me, Chaz?”
“You noticed.”
“Wait for the tower lights to pass again. We’ve got to cross the road, pick up the path over
there.” He pointed to the thick  trees.  “Wish  our  nocturnal  luminaries  weren’t  so  enthusiastic
this evening. But then again, it is definitely romantic.” He let his voice drop to a sexy drawl.
“Your fragrance, Sully. I can’t tell you how it makes me feel.”
He chuckled. The lights approached, flared. We ran just behind them.
The woods closed around us again.  He  resumed  his  dogged  pace.  I  quickened  my  stride.
“How are we getting on a shuttle? Without the M.O.C. noticing us, that is.”
“With M.O.C. permission, of course.”
And M.O.C. rifles pointed at me as I tried to board? I grabbed a handful of his jacket with

my left hand, yanked. “Damn it, Sullivan!”
He stumbled, stopped and glared at me with obsidian eyes.
I glared back. “How much did Thad pay you?”
“Thad?”
“Thaddeus. Commander  Thaddeus Bergren. Second  in  command  at  Marker.  Firstborn  of
the Bergrens. What did he pay you to set me up?”
His gaze flicked down to the dagger I held between us.  His  rifle  was  slung  over  his  back.
Foolish  move  on  his  part.  If  he’d  studied  my  dossier  as  he’d  claimed,  he  knew  I  ranked
consistently high in my division in small weapon, hand-to-hand combat  competition. And not
just  in  sims.  I  didn’t  care  that  he  was  at  least  ten  inches  taller  than  me,  outweighed  me  by
probably eighty or more pounds. He’d have to swing the rifle around to flick off the safety, and
then turn it on me.
I’d have the dagger in his chest, or his throat, by then.
“Problems with sibling rivalry, Chaz?”
“Sullivan!” My warning tone was clear.
“Think,  Chasidah  Bergren.  Think.  Who  am  I?  Who  is  your  esteemed  brother?  Spit  and
polish company man, all the way. Him, not me. I’m the  antithesis.  The  anti-hero  to  his  hero.
Even in the abstract we could not coexist.
“In  the  flesh,  he  resents  my  family’s  wealth,  where  yours  had  none.  I’m  the  wastrel.  He
finds that appalling.” He shook his head. “I don’t know which pains me more, my angel. That
you think so low of me that you believe I’d accept employment as a common  assassin. Or that
you  see  me  not  only  to  be  a  vulgar  cad,  but  one  who’d  work  for  your  supercilious  ass  of  a
brother as well.”
He’d obviously met Thad at some point. The description was accurate.
But he was right. Thad might wish me dead, daily. But there were light-years between him
and Sully, in more ways than one. And I was on Moabar. That was the same as being dead. For
Thad to have me killed would only be redundant.
I let go of his jacket. “I need answers. I don’t like  walking  into  things  blind.  What  you’ve
told me so far sounds too easy, too convenient. If getting off Moabar is a simple as a change of
clothes and boarding the shuttle, why isn’t everyone doing it?”
He  grinned  and  in  spite  of  his  pungent  odor,  still  managed  to  exude  a  rakish  charm.
“Because they don’t have me to help them.  Come on. Drogue’s waiting for us. And I’ve got to
evict Ren from the bathtub.”
 
Moabar  hadn’t  always  been  a  prison  world.  It  was  the  only  human-habitable  world  in
Quadrant E-5, a region so remote  it  didn’t  even  warrant  a  name,  like  the  inner  quadrants  of
Aldan or Baris. A region otherwise worthless  to  an  Empire  thriving  on  galactic  trade  and  the
conquest of neighboring systems.

History vids said  Moabar  had  been  acquired  as  the  result  of  the  spoils  of  victory.  Reality
said Moabar was part of the Empire because no one else wanted it.
The Empire tried colonizing it, farming it. But the soils that produced lush, thick forests in
abandon were caustic to edible plants. They withered, died. Colonists fled.
A scientific research team moved  in  next.  But  the  atmosphere  corroded  their  equipment.
And the winters  brought  a  strange  plague-virus.  Most  died.  Those  that  could  make  it  to  the
shuttles, fled.
So the Empire decreed it a penal colony. Well-being of lifers was not their concern. Survival
of one winter’s  frigid  temperatures  and  plague-filled  storms  was  luck.  Survival  of  two  was  a
miracle. Three guaranteed an immunity to the virus, but never the cold.
Yet,  Takas  thrived  on  it.  I  thought  of  all  this  as  I  stared  at  the  ‘secure  dwelling.’  Sully’s
secret.
A Takan monastery.
A low, sprawling stone structure that appeared suddenly as the forest thinned. Lights from
the spaceport stroked its mottled surface, flared in its tall windows. We were closer to the port
here than we were on the graveled road.
Englarian  religious  symbols  were  carved  into  the  wood-planked  gate-the  arch-and-stave
chiseled  over  the  doorway.  The  Taka  had  had  no  religion  until  Jared  Eng  had  preached  to
them,  some  three  centuries  past.  We  had  vids  on  that,  too,  in  the  academy’s  required
Non-Human Cultures class.
I followed Sully through a back door that opened at his code. Evidently we were expected.
I stepped cautiously into  a  large  communal  room,  a  kitchen,  replete  with  the  aroma  of  a
meal recently finished. Something salty, tangy hung in the air. Three long wooden tables were
on my left, with benches. One round table on my right, with six high backed wooden  chairs.
Behind that, a long cook top and the matte metallic doors that fronted most refrigeration units.
A thick clear coating covered the flagstone floor. Our footsteps echoed to the  high  ceiling,
and left smudgy marks, forest mementos, behind.
“Brother Sudral? That you?” A voice called out from a hallway adjacent to the kitchen.
Sudral?
“Aye,” said Sully.
Brother Sudral? I shot him a glance. He winked.
A squat man, human, bustled through the arched doorway. Englarian monks  were usually
human, though I’d heard they recently were accepting Takas to their ranks. All were, however,
devoted to the care and spiritual enlightenment of Takas.
The  man  wore  the  traditional  monk’s  garb  of  wide-legged  pants  and  high-necked
over-tunic  in  a  coarse,  grayish-tan  fabric.  Thick-soled  brown  boots  explained  his  otherwise
silent approach.

“Blessings of the hour, Guardian Drogue.”
“Blessing of the hour upon you, Brother Sudral.” Drogue steepled his hands in front of his
face and bowed.
I’d seen Drogue before, perhaps once or twice. The rank of Guardian granted him access to
all M.O.C.  buildings on Moabar. Just as  it  would  in  any  Imperial  station  or  port.  I  thought  I
remembered  seeing  his  round,  almost  cherubic  face  when  I’d  picked  up  my  allotted
supplies—two  blankets,  a  folder  of  ration  chips  and  the  ubiquitous  and  useless  pamphlet  of
M.O.C. Rules and Regulations—when I’d arrived dirtside, and perhaps another time after that.
But Englarian monks  were the least of my concerns. Sanctioned by  the  Empire,  they  were  in
no position to make a difference in the life of a disgraced  Fleet  captain,  wrongly  convicted  or
not.
Drogue’s  bright-eyed  gaze  ran  up  and  down  my  length,  or  lack  of.  “Captain  Chasidah
Bergren. Yes.” He stuck out his hand.
I accepted it.
“You are well?” he asked.
I tried to place his accent. South system, Dafir? Possibly. “All things considered, yes.” Some
of my wariness returned. The  Englarians  were  invariably  cooperative  with  the  government.  I
still had visions of a firing squad as a reception committee,  Sully’s protestations to the contrary
notwithstanding.
“Considering  we  had  an  intimate  encounter  with  a  jukor.”  Sully  clapped  Drogue  on  the
back then hesitated, holding his arm near the man’s nose.
Drogue’s head jerked backwards. “Praise the stars! Yet you live.”
“I’m a stubborn son of a bitch. Where’s Ren? Soaking?”
The  bathtub.  I  remembered  Sully’s  earlier  comments.  Could  water  immersion  be  a  little
known Englarian ritual?
“He left the hydro not ten  minutes  ago.  He  should  be  down  shortly.  He  knows  time  is  a
factor tonight.”
Sully pushed up the sleeve of his black jacket, glanced at his wrist. “Hour forty-five. You’ll
be ready? I need to soak this stench off me first. Feed her some  tea,  will  you?”  He  jerked  his
thumb at me.
His  abrupt  dismissal  rankled  me.  Especially  as  I’d  been  thinking  so  kindly  of  his  kisses
earlier. “Sullivan—”
If was as if he’d heard my thoughts. The fingers that moments  ago pointed at me grabbed
my  hand.  He  planted  a  long  kiss  against  the  inside  of  my  wrist  before  I  could  jerk  back.  “I
won’t be long, my angel. Every second we’re apart pains me. I promise I’ll return to your side
with all due speed.”
“You stink. Go wash, or whatever it is you’re going to do.”
“Come bathe me. The touch of your hands could restore my weakened form.”

My  hands  wanted  to  smack  him  a  good  right  cross  on  the  side  of  his  jaw.  He  appeared
anything  but  weak.  His  wide  shoulders  filled  out  his  jacket  only  too  well.  There  was  any
number of derogatory appraisals of Gabriel Ross Sullivan over the years. But none of them  ever
suggested he was anything less than extremely pleasant to look at.
Why were all the handsome ones always such bastards?
I smiled at Drogue. “I’d love a cup of hot tea.”
The short man grinned affably, motioned to the round table. “Sit, please, sit! I will make a
cup. I’m sure Ren will join us, momentarily. You too, Brother Sudral, when you have finished
your ablutions.”
“Tea’s about all we’ll have time for.” He strode for the arched doorway, turned. “She’ll need
more  time  than  you  think  to  get  changed,  Drogue.  Likes  to  fuss  with  her  hair.  So  get  her
moving, as soon as possible.” His footsteps echoed down the hallway.
Kettle in hand, Drogue watched Sully’s retreating form. I caught his eye before  he  turned
back to the cook top. “Would you please explain to me what’s going on?”
He put the kettle on the thermal grid, tabbed it on. “Brother Sudral’s said little?”
“Brother Sudral talks in circles.”
“For  security  purposes,  I’m  sure.  Should  we  be  captured  prior  to  departure,  none  of  us
would be able to place the mission at risk.”
Mission?  Involving  Englarian  monks  and  the  ghost  of  a  poet  turned  mercenary?  All
suppositions. I stuck to what I did know.
“You don’t seem surprised we ran into a jukor.”
He placed a steaming cup  of  fragrant  tea  in  front  of  me.  His  smile  was  still  pleasant,  but
something flickered in  his  eyes,  something  tense  laced  his  words.  “Little  surprises  me  at  my
age, captain.”
He  wasn’t,  in  spite  of  his  bald  head,  that  old.  Fifties  at  most.  My  father  was  older.  “It’s
Chasidah. Or Chaz. Jukors were banned. Exterminated.”
“I’m a theologian, not a scientist.”
He was also frequently at the spaceport.
“You saw them  off-load a shipment, didn’t  you?”  Live  cargo,  other  than  prisoners,  didn’t
come into Moabar. Someone would have noticed. It wasn’t unlikely that it would be Drogue.
“Do you not like your tea?”
I hadn’t sipped it.  It  didn’t  interest  me  as  much  as  things  I  couldn’t  explain.  Things  that
hinted of something more wrong than my travesty of a court-martial for dereliction of duty in
the face of a direct order. A dereliction that resulted in the deaths of fourteen officers and crew
in the Imperial Sixth Fleet.
An order the court said I’d acknowledged, then ignored.

An order I swore on  all  I  held  holy  I’d  never  received.  My  ship’s  logs  showed  otherwise.
Forgery, the court said, was impossible.
As impossible as jukors, alive, prowling the forests of Moabar.
I saw one. Sully had killed one.
I sipped my tea, listened to my brain argue with itself and engage in a familiar litany.
This was Moabar. Why should I give a damn what happened here? Jukors or Takans. Illegal
or legal. If the Empire needed more devils for its Hell, this was the place to grow them.
It  wasn’t  my  concern.  I  was  neither  scientist  nor  theologian.  I  was  alive—praise  the
stars—and an hour from freedom.
“Tea’s fine,” I told Drogue. I meant it. Time to focus on  what’s  now,  not  what  should  be.
What could have been.
At a soft sound in the archway, I turned, expecting Sully.
For  two  seconds  I  froze  in  my  seat.  It  was  as  if  one  of  the  old  training  sims  had  come,
horribly, to life. The dagger snapped flat into my hand. My chair fell backwards, crashed to the
floor. I was almost to the door when Drogue’s voice stopped me.
“Leave now, captain, and you will surely die.”
 
Chapter Three
« ^ » 
Chaz! He won’t hurt you.”
This  time  I  did  see  Sully,  freshly  scrubbed,  his  hair  still  damp  and  glistening.  And  in  a
monk’s uniform, its pale sand-like colors contrasting sharply with his dark hair and eyes.
His humanness contrasted sharply with the Stolorth filling the archway. Sully squeezed by
the tall, humanoid form and strode toward me, hand outstretched.
I backed up a step. If he thought I’d give him my dagger he was wrong. Dead wrong. But I
did take my hand off the door leading outside. I did lower the dagger. “Explain.”
He stopped, two dagger lengths away, and glanced over his shoulder. The  Stolorth  hadn’t
moved, save to lean a little to its left on a cane it held in its six-fingered left hand.
His hand. The Stolorth was  definitely  male.  Like  Sully,  he  wore  the  pale  sand-gray  pants
and tunic of a monk. But his biceps and thighs strained the fabric. He topped Sully’s height by
four, five inches.
He could almost pass, if you didn’t see the gill slits on his neck,  for human.  Could  almost
pass, if you didn’t notice the thick silvery-blue hair plaited in a braid not  unlike  my  own,  for
human. Could almost pass, if you didn’t see the webbing between the fingers, for human.

Now I understood the role of the bathtub.
“I’m sorry.” The Stolorth spoke. His voice was deep, surprisingly soft. In it, I heard  waves
echoing on a shore I’d never visited. “I thought she knew.”
Sully had the good grace to look sheepish. “I was going to tell her. I fell asleep in the tub.”
The Stolorth angled his face toward me. “Captain Bergren, it wasn’t my intention to startle
you.”
Startle  me?  No,  when  a  Stolorth  Ragkiril  was  finished  with  a  human  mind,  there  was
nothing left to startle. Nothing left at all.
Sully took a half step closer. I could smell the soap on his skin. A small drop of water lost its
grasp on his tousled hair, made a rivulet around the edge of a thick eyebrow, trickled down the
right side of his face. “It’s okay, Chaz. Trust me.”
I could  think  of  a  dozen  reasons  not  to.  They  didn’t  matter  as  reality  dictated  I  had  no
choice, and nothing to go back  to. If I died on Moabar, death would be slow, painful. At least
with a Stolorth, he could plant pleasant memories as he ripped my mind to shreds.
“He’s blind, Chaz. He can’t hurt you.”
Blind? “That’s impossible. They kill their—” But even from  across  the  kitchen  I  could  see
the film over his silver eyes, dulling them.
By all I held holy.  A  blind  Stolorth  in  an  Englarian  monastery.  And  a  full-grown  male  at
that. We were told Stolorths killed defective young, and weak elders for that matter. Blindness
was especially heinous to them.  Their telepathy, their Ragkiril mind talents,  depended  on  eye
contact with their victims. With their own kind, it was their primary means of communication.
I saw the cane, grasped by six fingers. And let the dagger wrap itself around my wrist. He
couldn’t hurt me. He own kind wanted him dead. Oddly, I felt  a  small  pang  of  kinship  with
him. I knew what it was like to be rejected by people who were supposed to love you.
“We were just having a nice cup of tea.” Drogue sounded immensely relieved. “Please, all,
sit and join us?”
I noticed, not for the first time, the spotlessness of his kitchen.  The blood bath my  dagger
could have created would have been hell to clean up.
 
His  name  was  Frayne  Ackravaro  Ren  Elt.  Sully  performed  the  introduction.  Ren  was  his
birth  name,  Elt  the  name  of  his  grandmother.  Frayne,  his  mother  and  Ackravaro,  his
clan-of-region.
He answered to Ren.
In spite of  his  size,  and  his  blindness,  he  moved  gracefully  to  the  round  table,  selected  a
chair, sat. Drogue handed out fresh cups of tea.
I sat  across  from  him,  with  Sully  on  my  left,  and  tried  to  make  sense  of  this.  I’d  never
known  Englarians  to  associate  with  Stolorths.  They  were  even  more  fanatically  opposed  to

telepaths than the Empire was.
“Again, I apologize, Captain Bergren. I sensed no disquiet in your presence—”
“How  can  you  sense  if  you’re  blind?”  My  caution  resurfaced.  My  Non-Human  Cultures
class had been known to be wrong.
“My blindness negates those aspects you fear, my mind-speech with my people. As well as
any threat you may feel I present to yours. But my empathic abilities remain.”
“And  are  put  to  use  through  prayer  and  meditation,  as  taught  by  Abbot  Eng,”  Drogue
added.  “Brother  Ren  is  a  fine  example  of  the  results  of  studying  the  purity  of  thought.  His
blindness, through the grace of the Abbot, has become a gift.”
My academy class was very wrong. Englarians didn’t view all Stolorths as soul-stealers. And
blind Stolorths did survive to adulthood.
“So you sensed my presence? As, what?”
“Human female, inquisitive variety.” Sully raised his cup as if  in  mock  salute.  “Drink  up.
We have a shuttle to catch.”
“We?” I wasn’t questioning Sully’s participation. I realized for the  first  time  there  were  to
be two more: Drogue and Ren. The latter still worried me but I understood the pressures of a
flight schedule.
“We.” Sully laid a stack of ID cards on the table, spread them  with the flair of a dealer in a
casino.
Apt, I thought. We were placing bets with our lives.
Four  cards,  all  bearing  the  crossed  arch  symbol  of  the  Englarian  clergy.  Drogue  picked
them up, one by one, examined them.
I finished my tea and stood, damning Sully for not telling me of his plans.
Drogue  ushered  me  to  a  back  room,  complete  with  a  lavatory  and  a  wide  couch.  A
wooden-fronted closet was half open. Tan-gray tunics and robes filled it. I had a feeling I was to
be Brother Chaz.
“We have you logged as Sister Berri.” Drogue rifled through the closet, pulled out a cowled
robe, and held it up against me. If I had to run for it, I’d trip, fall on my face.  But  other  than
that, it was fine.
A shift-like gown went underneath. My boots I could keep. My clothing and jacket Drogue
said to leave on the couch. It would be bundled with the luggage on the shuttle.
I found a wide-toothed comb  on a dresser, ran it briskly through my hair while I stood in
front  of  a  large  mirror.  The  room  stared  back  at  me  in  reverse.  The  arched  doorway  was
directly  behind  me.  On  one  wall,  there  was  a  wooden  replica  of  the  arch-and-stave.  On  the
other was an artist’s rendering of Abbot Eng, stave raised, about to kill a soul-stealer. It was one
of the more common depictions, showing the imaginary demon in its true form, wings splayed
wide. Legends claimed that soul-stealers were not only telepaths, but shape-shifters that could
hide  their  true  form  and  masquerade  as  humans.  The  winged  man’s  mouth  was  open  in  a

scream. Lovely décor.
The  bathroom  was  small  but  had  nice  thick  towels  on  the  rack.  I  splashed  water  on  my
face. I longed for the bath, but  there  was  neither  time  nor  inclination.  I  was  traveling  with  a
Stolorth, an aquatic humanoid that could gut a mind as easily as my dagger  could  gut  a  fish.
Things deep and watery were best avoided, for now.
I donned  the  shift,  then  the  robe  and  was  securing  the  wide,  fabric  belt  when  a  knock
sounded on the door.
“Come.” It took me a moment to remember certain technologies couldn’t exist on Moabar.
I had to walk to the door and manually open it.
Sully was on the other side, grinning that disarming grin.
And no doubt was also impatient. I hadn’t been ten minutes. “I’m ready.”
He grabbed my shoulders, turned me around. I glimpsed something in his right hand. He
waddle-marched me toward the long mirror on the wall.
“Not yet.” He snatched the comb from the dresser on his right.
“What do you think you’re—?”
“Hush.”
He sunk his hands into the long mass of hair I’d half-braided and tucked down the back  of
my robe. He began unraveling my braid. In the mirror I saw a length of corded leather, dotted
with shiny silver beads, dangling from his fingers.
“We don’t have time—”
“Hush!”  His  grin  faded,  his  brows  slanting  down.  Concentrating.  Braiding  my  hair,
weaving in the beads and leather.
Making amends for my hair wrap I’d tossed  to  the  jukor?  Or  remembering  that  night  in
Port  Chalo?  I’m  sure  it  had  meant  nothing  to  him.  Or  maybe  he  thought  a  few  kisses  had
earned him the right to taunt me now.
I wasn’t in the mood to be teased. “I can do that a lot faster than you.”
“Hush, hush, hush.” Softly. His voice was not much more than a deep rumble in his throat.
His hands were firm, yet more gentle than I would have  thought  he  could  be.  And  warm.  A
whisper of soft heat played down my neck where his fingers brushed against my skin. I didn’t
pull away when they stroked my hair, my scalp, the back of my neck.
I let myself sink into the sensations, bargaining with myself as I did so. Just a few seconds.
It’d been so long. What harm was there in letting him braid my hair for me?
My  eyes  wanted  to  close.  I’d  fought  exhaustion  for  hours  now.  He  was  so  warm.  His
knuckles brushed my jaw. Fingers traced my lips… His intimate caress jolted my brain awake.
I lurched forward, my hands splaying against the rough-hewn mirror frame. I caught a glimpse
of his face, his obsidian eyes half-hooded, molten.
I felt my own face flame with heat. I didn’t look back in the mirror for fear of confronting a

fool I knew only too well. I turned. My braid swung heavily against my back. The beads on the
leather cord tinkled lightly against the glass of the mirror.
“Business deal, Sully. Strictly business.” I sounded far more breathy than I wanted to.
He still watched me through hooded eyes, though the sensual curve on his  lips  was  gone.
We were almost toe-to-toe. But my hand already encircled the bracelet on my wrist, fingers on
its spring-points.
He let out a long, slow sigh. “Chasid—”
“Brother Sudral? Sister Berri?” Drogue rapped on the door, walked in. And seemed totally
oblivious to what was going on. Or else, with Sully, he was used to it. “We must be going.”
Sully spun around, reached for the short, stocky man and clapped him on the shoulder. “I
was ready an hour ago. It’s this one.” He jerked his hand back in my direction, but didn’t turn.
“Has to fuss with her hair.”
Why are all the handsome ones always such bastards?
 
We walked down the graveled road toward the spaceport, four robed  figures  of  divergent
sizes. An anti-grav pallet with our meager luggage trailed behind.
Anti-gravs and thermal grids worked on Moabar. Auto-doors, medi-stats and a long list of
other technological necessities didn’t.
Humans fared only marginally better. Winter was  approaching,  with  its  recurring  plague.
Abbot Eng’s followers were devoted, but not stupid.
“Our replacements will be on station already,” Drogue told me as we walked in the bright
moonlight.  No  need  to  hide,  to  dart  though  the  trees.  “They’ve  shown  an  immunity  to  the
plagues. They’ll run the monastery, sit devotions with the Takas, lead the festivals until spring.
I’ll return then.”
Sully had said we were going to Moabar Station to intercept an outgoing freighter, bound
in-system. Step Two in freedom for Chasidah Bergren. I had to live through Step One first.
“You’re not coming in-system with us?”
“Oh, no, Sister. We have a very active temple on station. And it’s Peyhar’s Week, don’t you
know?” His round face poked out from under his hood. “Oh,  perhaps  not.  We  haven’t  quite
made the inroads in our missionary work with the military as we have in other arenas.”
As far as  I  knew,  the  Takans  were  the  only  ones  they’d  made  inroads  with.  But  I  wasn’t
going to deflate his attempt at proselytizing.
“The M.O.C. isn’t going to question my presence in the group? Or Ren’s?”
Another  negative  from  Drogue.  “Brother  Ren  Ackravaro  has  visited  Moabar  Monastery
several times on retreat.”
“But I haven’t.”

“Neither has the real Sister Berri. But her reputation will do you well. She’s a much-lauded
missionary,  known  for  her  tireless  works.  Her  ID,  your  ID  bears  the  arch-and-stave.  As
Guardian, I vouch for your veracity.”
Why?  What  had  caused  this  gentle  man  to  align  himself  with  the  ghost  from  Hell?  Was
there a financial gain? “You’re taking quite a risk.”
He sighed. “More is at risk if I do not, Sister.”
The mission. And in Sullivan, a different kind of missionary.
“Brother Sudral is still being vague about that.”
Sully fell into step with us. He’d lagged behind, talking to Ren who walked with one hand
on the pallet, the other on his cane. “For good reason. Curiosity tends to be an overrated trait.
I’m  sure  the  Empire  taught  you  that  at  some  point.  At  the  moment,  your  overwhelming
gratitude toward me is best expressed through silence. There’s  nothing  you  can  contribute  at
this point, but there’s much to be lost by being premature.”
His sudden formal phrasing irked me. Sully the mercenary. Sully the poet. And now Sully
the pedant. “I’m glad to know you think so highly of me.”
He slanted me a glance. “Highly enough to risk my life to save yours. I was outvoted, you
know. Fortunately I rarely listen to my advisors.”
“Really? I’d never have guessed.” Nor could I picture him having advisors. In all the years
I’d known him, he’d always been the one in command, pilots and techs following his orders.
Sully dropped back, picked up his conversation with the Stolorth.
Drogue and I walked on in silence. We were close enough to the spaceport that I could hear
the distant clank and clatter from the cargo hangars. The occasional shout of human voices, the
rougher call of the Takan guards. It was a chilly night when we started but now my body felt
warm under the robes. I could feel small wisps of hair starting to curl around my face.
Thoughts,  equally  as  annoying,  coiled  and  uncoiled  in  my  mind.  You  know  the  system,
Sully had said, sitting across from me in the clearing, lightbar between us and a dead Taka  at
his back. Therefore he needed access to military information, military procedures.
He’d recited my pedigree.
Access to military personnel.
Why?  My  simplistic  early  assumptions  revolved  around  money,  even  a  heist  of  a  Fleet
payroll ship. Then I saw Ren.
During  the  Boundary  Wars,  twenty  years  ago,  Stolorth  Ragkirils  had  excelled  at
interrogating  prisoners.  Torturing  them.  I’d  seen  vids  on  the  results  of  their  handiwork.  Or
mind work, actually. That’s why seeing one on Moabar so frightened me. Perhaps the Empire
had  finally
 realized
 that
 more
 than
 inmates
 died
 on
 this
 prison
 world.
 Their
secrets—co-conspirators, sources—died with them as well.
Reason,  and  a  Non-Human  Cultures  class  I  was  beginning  to  doubt,  told  me  a  Stolorth
wouldn’t  adapt  well  to  Moabar’s  climate.  Ren  wore  a  close-fitting  shirt  under  his  tunic.

Thermal, probably. I’d seen the edge of the sleeve as he’d sipped his tea.
And the ponds here were all poisonous. At least, poisonous to humans.
Ren might not belong here, but the jukor fit only too well. The Stolorth would best survive
on  Moabar  Station,  providing  there  were  no  others  of  his  kind.  Because  a  Stolorth  Ragkiril,
sensing  Ren’s  handicap,  would  be  duty-bound  to  kill  him.  That  much  I  did  believe,
Non-Human Cultures class and all.
We  were  near  the  main  gate.  Drogue  touched  my  arm,  passed  me  the  slim  ID  card.  I
tucked it into the slit in the front of my belt.
“And your name, Sister?” he prompted.
“Berri Solaria, Sister of Mercy in the Order of Abbot Eng the Merciful.” I rattled off my ID
number,  my home convent and the date of my  fictitious  arrival  at  the  Moabar  Monastery.  It
was  nothing  compared  to  what  Fleet  had  me  memorize  over  the  years,  just  to  requisition  a
med-kit. Or to retrieve my personal transmits.
But the consequences of an error in this recitation were vastly more  serious.  I  tried  not  to
think about that, nor about the nervous flutterings in my stomach.
I ended the recitation with the ritual, “Praise the stars.”
Drogue’s face relaxed into a smile.
We  climbed  a  steep  rampway.  I  glanced  back.  Sully  flanked  Ren,  the  ramp  not  wide
enough to accommodate the Stolorth and the pallet. I remember  how he’d shielded me in the
forest, when we’d first seen the jukor.
No, he’d seen it. And put himself between the creature and me.
Had it been about to spring, then?
With his back to it, Sully would have been killed, immediately.
But  his  rifle  would  have  fallen  into  my  hands.  And  in  the  time  it  would  have  taken  the
jukor to rip Sully apart, I could’ve killed it. I would’ve survived because of Sully’s sacrifice.
The thought chilled me. I almost bumped into a Takan guard who stepped in my path.
“Restricted. Present ID.” The Taka’s voice was harsh and  choppy,  like  most  of  his  kind.  I
kept my head bowed, folded my hands at my waist. My fingers drifted lightly over the Grizni
bracelet under my sleeve.
“Blessings of the hour upon you, my friend.” Drogue beamed a smile that was completely
genuine. “Truvgrol, isn’t it?”
The guard’s small eyes darted rapidly as he assessed our group. “Guardian! Blessings. Travel
up?”
“It’s time for me to commune  with my brothers on station,  help  in  temple  matters  there.
We have a wonderful Peyhar’s Week festival planned. One in the temple here, as well. Brother
Frannard will be leading you.”

“Frannard,  yes!”  The  Takan’s  shaggy  head  nodded.  Evidently  Frannard  was  a  popular
figure.
“Will you require our ID passes? You know Brother Sudral, Brother Ren Ackravaro. Sister
Berri Solaria… I do apologize. Have you not met Sister Berri?”
I could  almost  feel  the  Taka’s  gaze  on  me.  My  heart  pounded  in  my  ears.  I  steepled  my
hands in front of my face, bowed low. To a Taka. A few hours ago, I’d killed one.
Truvgrol mimicked my gesture. “Blessings,” he growled out.
“Praise  to  the  stars  in  the  Abbot’s  holy  name.  May  fortune  smile  upon  you  this  week,
brother Truvgrol.” I raised my head slightly, handed  him  my  card.  He  passed  it  through  the
scanner, barely looking at it.
“Good journey, good journey.” He waved us on.
I quietly let out a small sigh of relief.
We were similarly waved through three more checkpoints before we were admitted to the
spaceport itself.
I pulled the hood of my robe closer. Even Drogue’s presence wasn’t completely reassuring
now that I was in a closed building, with M.O.C.  personnel hurrying back  and  forth  through
the gray-walled main terminal.  Drogue  nodded  at  faces  I  would  only  glimpse  at,  nodding  as
well.
“Praise the stars. Blessings of the hour.” I kept my voice bland, uninteresting.
Sully had booked passage on one  of  the  Chalford  fleet  supply  ships,  a  squat  short-hauler
contracted to M.O.C. service. The ship had come in a few hours before; might even be the one
that  had  punctuated  my  first  conversation  with  Sully  with  its  booming  entry.  The  ship  was
berthed at Cargo Dock One.
Moabar Prison Spaceport had three docks; one passenger, two cargo. Dock  One was down
a short corridor the jutted off to the right. A solitary window just before the rampway afforded
me my first view of the ship.
Chalford’s Lucky Seven was a B10-Class ‘load-up-and-go’ or ‘lugger’ as they were called in
the  freighter  trade.  Compact  ships  with  dirtside  capabilities,  which  the  larger  starfreighters
lacked. What wasn’t cargo holds were engines;  heavy-air  and  sublight.  Luggers  had  no  jump
drives.
And  no  passenger  cabins.  A  ruddy-faced  crewmember  escorted  us  to  the  lounge.  His
suitpatch said Chalford Cargo Services. Wilard, P.—Navigation.
“Bulkhead seats got harnesses.” He pointed to three pairs of fold-downs. “Don’t unstrap ‘til
you hear the all-clear from the bridge.”
I watched him leave. This is too easy. Much too easy. Pull a robe over my head, flash an ID
card with a religious symbol, walk off Moabar and into freedom.
This is too easy. I chose a seat from the pair nearest the exit out of habit, folded down  the
armrests. My throat suddenly seemed dry, my hands cold.

This is too easy. I tried to think about what P. Wilard was doing on the bridge at nav. The
captain would be running through  his  or  her  preflight,  doing  a  last  minute  systems  check.  I
knew the routine well.
But that little voice in the back of my mind wouldn’t shut up. This is too easy.
Sully unfolded the seat next to mine. “You’re frowning, Sister. Don’t tell me flying  makes
you nervous.”
I was  about  to  remind  him  of  all  the  hours  I’d  logged  at  the  helm  when  I  realized  our
conversations might well be heard on the bridge. I answered as I hoped Sister Berri would. “I
was trying to decide which  of  the  Twelve  Blessings  I’d  recite  for  our  departure.  Perhaps  you
have a suggestion, Brother Sudral?”
I snapped the harness across my chest. Sully glanced at Drogue and Ren on his right. Bright
orange straps crisscrossed the front of their pale robes.
“I’m fine,” Ren said.
Sully  hadn’t  asked.  Ren  must  be  used  to  Sully’s  almost  protective  attitude  by  now,
anticipated it. He stared straight ahead, one hand resting lightly on his cane tucked through the
straps.
“I  always  enjoy  the  Blessing  for  Good  Fortune  through  Purity  of  Effort,”  Drogue  said.
“Permit me to lead.”
“That was about to be my suggestion as well.” Sully turned back  to me, dropped his voice
to a low rasp. “However, perhaps later we could perform the lesser known Invocation  for  the
Convergence of the Male and Female Physical Essences—”
Intraship chimed twice. It was followed by a man’s voice, sounding bored. “This is Captain
Newlin. We’ve got clearance. Push-back coming up.”
I closed  my  eyes,  leaned  my  head  back  against  the  padding  of  the  seat,  waited  for  the
jerk-and-thump as we were towed to the taxiway.
All hatches were sealed. Ship  was  secure.  I  was  either  headed  for  freedom  or  into  a  trap.
Either way, there wasn’t a damned thing  I  could  do  about  it  right  now.  I  listened  to  Drogue
recite  the  blessing.  Purity  of  Effort.  I  guess  the  road  to-and  from-Hell  was  paved  with  good
intentions.  The  tow  disengaged  from  us  at  the  taxiway  with  a  final  shimmy.  The  heavy-airs,
which had been idling, were thrown to full. A muted roaring rumbled through the ship. Then
we were moving, rising, my back flattening into the seat. I was free. Or I was dead.
 
Chapter Four
« ^ » 
Artificial gravity kicked on with a thud. Something, somewhere, hadn’t been strapped down. I
only hoped someone hadn’t been underneath it when it fell.

Captain Newlin sounded the all-clear. I was already unhooking my straps. Habit. My body
knew the routine, knew the feel of a ship as her heavy-airs kicked off  and  sublights  switched
on. I wriggled the stiffness out of my  shoulders.  The  lights  on  the  commissary  panels  on  the
opposite wall beckoned. Tea, hot, with plenty of sugar. My mouth felt chalky.
Sully’s eyes opened  when  I  stood.  Whether  he’d  been  sleeping,  daydreaming,  praying  or
plotting through most of our ascent I didn’t know. I was just thankful he’d been quiet. He had
a marked tendency to try to bait me. I was too tired, and too wary, to want to play his games
right now.
“Two hours to station,” he told me.
I remembered  my  trip  down,  three  and  a  half  weeks  ago.  Seven  of  us  had  started  our
sentences together that trip. We were all quiet, fear and anger hanging heavily in the silence on
the small transport ship. None of us were fools; we knew what awaited us on Moabar.
I was still afraid. I had no idea what awaited me on station, or beyond that. Fear sharpened
the senses. Mine had to match my dagger if I were to survive.
Sully  followed  me  to  the  commissary  panels,  leaned  one  shoulder  on  the  bulkhead  as  I
tabbed in my request for tea. His lazy smile reminded me of our encounter on Port Chalo and
made me force my mind back to the business at hand.
“Who’s running us in-system?” The unit’s hum provided a nice, bland background noise to
my quiet question, in case someone had the lounge rigged for listening.
Sully arched an eyebrow. “You sound very sexy when you whisper.”
I shot him a warning glance. “Brother Sudral—”
“Drogue’s known Newlin for a long time.” He glanced back at Drogue, seated at a far table.
A microscreen was slatted out of the tabletop in front of him. His face was relaxed. He seemed
to be enjoying whatever he watched or read. “And Newlin knows better than to ask questions.
Or be concerned with what happens in the lounge.
“He’s  not  going  to  risk,”  he  continued  as  I  pulled  the  capped  mug  of  tea  from  the
dispenser, “losing his glory-seed connection.”
“Newlin’s Takan?” His  voice  had  sounded  human.  Which  he  was,  I  realized  as  my  brain
caught up with Sully’s words. Glory-seed connection. Takas wouldn’t  need  a  connection  or  a
source for a narcotic that was legal for them. They could grow them, chew them  or distill them
into honeylace, a nectar they used to reach a meditative state during their religious festivals.
Festivals run by Englarian Guardians.
Sully  watched  me  with  a  bemused  smile  as  if  he  knew  I’d  answered  my  own  question.
“Newlin’s  always  glad  to  assist  the  followers  of  Abbot  Eng  whenever  he  can.  And  Chalford
likes to keep Newlin happy because it’s hard to find crew willing to work the Moabar run.”
I cupped my tea in both hands and headed for one of  the  small  tables.  “He  better  not  be
doing  shots  of  honeylace  on  the  bridge.”  Or  he  wouldn’t  know  which  of  the  six  stations
spinning in front of him was the real one. I put my mug down.

“Not quite regulation?”  Sully  leaned  his  forearms  on  the  back  of  the  chair  next  to  mine,
then reached over, and with a brush of his hand, pushed my hood back. I didn’t jerk away this
time. I finally caught on. Just as he baited me with his words, I figured out he liked to see my
reaction to his touch. It was a game with him: let’s see just how nervous we can make this very
proper, respectable, military born-and-bred female. Whose mother wore army boots.
I’d promised myself I wasn’t going to play his games anymore. I regarded him coolly.
He chuckled. “Don’t fret. Newlin’s been flying this bucket for years.”
A typical Sullivan non-answer, which in no way reassured me the  captain  wasn’t  in  some
drug-induced fog. The only thing I did know now was that I  didn’t  have  to  be  cautious  with
my questions. “In-system, Sully. Can you tell me now what this is all about? How we’re getting
there?”
Ren’s cane lightly clacked against the chair on the other side of me. He sat down, threaded
the cane through a small loop on his belt. It took a moment  for my stomach to  unclench.  He
was blind, harmless. I focused on Sully.
“There’s  a  tri-hauler  waiting  for  us.  Diligent  Keeper.  She’s  a  regular  but  engine  troubles
have  her  momentarily  delayed.  Her  troubles  will  be  fixed  just  shortly  after  we  arrive.  She’ll
head back in-system.”
“And then?” I prompted.
Sully knotted his hands together, glancing briefly at Ren before answering. “Then I put you
to work on this small project of mine.”
The one that needed a good, interfering bitch.  The one  that  had  made  him  go  against  his
advisors’ recommendations, search me out on Moabar. Kill a jukor.
The one that could yet get me killed. Moabar Station was restricted to M.O.C.  and Imperial
Security  personnel  only.  Just  because  my  boots  weren’t  touching  Moabar  soil  didn’t  mean  I
was free. “Tell me.”
He  was  still  leaning  over  the  back  of  the  chair,  his  posture  casual.  His  eyes  narrowed.  “I
need you to get me into the Marker Shipyards.”
“Why?”
He hesitated only a second. “We’re going to destroy them.”
“What?”  It  was  a  good  thing  I’d  just  put  my  tea  down.  If  I’d  been  holding  the  mug,  I
would’ve dropped it.
“Ren and I’ve spent the better part of the past year  following  the  trail  of  some  interesting
rumors. Involving Marker. Involving gen-labs.” He watched me very closely.
“That jukor you killed.”
Ren turned as if he could see me. “I learned of a breeding pair.  Sully  and  I  were  tracking
them. Moabar was one possible destination.”
I turned back to Sully. “Then you knew—?”

He shook his head. “One possible destination. Confirmed now, of course.”
“Or  perhaps  not.”  Ren  made  a  small  gesture  with  his  wide  hand.  “This  information  is
buried deeply. Because we’ve learned of one pair, doesn’t mean there aren’t others.”
One pair was far too many for me. Though it was half a pair now. “If this is coming out of
Marker, then it’s an Imperial sanctioned project.”
“We’ve considered that,” Sully said.
The  definitive  tone  of  his  answer  spoke  volumes.  This  wasn’t  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan,  the
poet. This was Sully, the mercenary.
And  if  the  gen-labs  were  an  Imperial  project  at  Marker,  my  brother,  Thad  might  have
knowledge.
I leaned my mouth against my fist. Maybe if I didn’t say it, it wouldn’t be true. Thad might
well  be,  as  Sully  had  said,  a  supercilious  ass.  But  could  he  condone  a  project  that  created
mutants, whose sole purpose was death of any living thing they saw? Two hundred and seven
men, women and children were brutally, horribly massacred on Corsau Station ten years ago,
when a shipment of jukors escaped from  the  transport  ship.  It  was  then  the  Empire  realized
the beasts they’d bred to replace border patrol security  dogs  had  evolved  into  something  far,
far from that.
The  only  positive,  if  it  could  be  said  to  be  that,  was  that  the  jukors  had  escaped  onto  a
station—a closed environment.  Had  they  been  dirtside  their  recapture  would’ve  been  almost
impossible. With their genetically enhanced rapid breeding rate, they could easily decimate the
population of a small city in months, perhaps weeks.
I pulled my hand away from my mouth.  “How many labs do they have? What’s their date
for project completion?”
“Those are exactly the kinds of things that I need a beautiful, interfering bitch to find out.”
Sully smiled grimly at me. “Would you happen to know of one, Captain Bergren?”
I did. And she knew the shipyards very well.
“You might want to look at this, Brother Sudral.” Drogue leaned back in the chair, swiveled
toward our table.
Sully turned. “You have a schedule?”
“Partial. Brother Verno regrets he could not get more.”
Sully swung back to me. “Marker’s made some interesting requisitions as of late. Items one
wouldn’t expect they’d need for the two new Arrow-Class destroyers under contract.”
“What office is issuing the requisitions?” Marker was a big shipyard and sometimes served
as  a  waystation  for  supplies  going  outbound  to  small  repair  facilities.  Sully’s  mention  of
schedules told me he’d tapped incoming cargo. But if that same cargo was outbound again, he
might be way off in his theory about gen-labs. Though the appearance of the jukor told me at
least part of his theories were valid.
“Shipping manifests, best we can tell, are just tagged for Marker.”

“Wouldn’t be.” I drummed  my fingers against my mouth.  I’d sat in my mother’s office at
the shipyards for too many hours, as a child. Helped her sort and code incoming and outgoing
requisitions for Marker’s Quartermaster’s Office, Sublight Division. Once in a while something
tagged  for  Enviro  or  Nav-Pack  would  come  in,  erroneously  linked  to  her  files  by  a  junior
data-tech who  hadn’t  had  his  or  her  second  cup  of  coffee  that  shift.  She’d  clean  up  the  file,
send it back along with a reprimand.
Details, Chaz. Efficiency and security are built on details.
Once  she’d  even  found  a  weapons  req  sent  by  mistake  to  the  uniforms  warehouse,  a
non-secure site. That time her reprimand also resulted in a demotion.
“Wouldn’t  be,”  I  repeated.  He  straightened  as  I  stood  and  motioned  toward  Drogue’s
screen.
Drogue started to rise.
“No, sit.” I leaned over the back  of Drogue’s chair much  as  Sully  had  moments  before  at
my  table.  The  slice  of  data  had  been  taken  from  an  Imperial  transit  beacon,  recording
starfreighter movement in Baris. Overlying that was a ship’s manifest from its departure point
at Port January.
The beacon data logged the ship’s heading, speed and cargo category. Biohazards  and  any
other  potentially  dangerous  cargo  were  always  routed  through  the  outer  lanes,  away  from
populated stations and worlds. Away from commercial passenger traffic.
A freighter squawking a Hazard Code would activate an immediate  security  breach  when
passing  an  inner  beacon.  Patrol  ships,  like  the  one  I  commanded  up  until  six  months  ago,
would pursue.
A captain could deny what he carried was hazardous. He could claim the wrong code had
been logged in his ship’s systems. But he couldn’t deny me  and  my  boarding  party  access  to
his ship or his systems.
I  was  well  used  to  unraveling  altered  manifests,  tweaking  out  hidden  shipping  codes.
Breaking into cargo holds, if I had to. I’d built a career on it.
I  studied  the  data  before  me.  Drogue  was  right;  it  was  only  a  partial.  A  pre-shipment
manifest, not verified and  lock-signed.  “This  isn’t  a  final.  Container  codes  haven’t  even  been
entered completely in column three.”
“Brother  Verno  is  working  on  a  source  for  the  final  manifests,”  Drogue  said.  “For  the
moment, this is the best data we’ve been able to get.”
Brother Verno. At some point I wanted to know why the  Englarians  were  involved,  other
than the similarity in appearance between Abbot Eng’s winged soul-stealers and the jukors. But
at the moment, the data held my attention. “This comes from Core Central Medical Designers.
Their shipping codes always carry an M-432  prefix. Sometimes  they ship as Core  Em-Ex,  but
you’ll  pick  them  up  from  the  M-432.”  The  truncated  data  told  me  little  more  other  than
pickup and estimated delivery dates. But I knew Sully knew how to read that.
“How  about  those  four  containers  that  are  coded?”  Sully  leaned  one  hip  on  the  edge  of
Drogue’s table.

“The only thing you need to look for is this section right here: M-432-NH1. All that tells me
is nonhazardous, class one. Which means no special care required. Exposure to heat, light, cold
permitted. I’d say non-breakables, hard goods. But you might,” I continued,  reaching  around
Drogue to scroll the data to the left, “look at the container classes themselves. See, they’re not
duro-hards. So we’ve got lightweight non-breakables. You could have four gross of bedpans.”
“Does Core Central manufacture bedpans?” Sully sounded disappointed.
“Core  Central  contracts  with  a  lot  of  small  factories  for  just  about  everything.  If  you’re
looking for supplies that would build a gen-lab,  though,  I’d  be  watching  for  shipments  from
Core Em-Ex. That’s their high-ticket, research division.”
Drogue  turned  his  broad  face  up  to  mine.  “You  have  a  remarkable  memory,  Captain
Bergren.”
I shook my head. “Repetitive. I’ve seen this stuff almost  every  day  of  my  adult  life.”  And
much of my childhood, as long as my mother had been alive.
Sully folded his arms across his chest. “Now you understand why we need you.”
A good  interfering  bitch  with  a  working  knowledge  of  Marker  and  Imperial  shipping?  I
was  far  from  unique.  Every  other  patrol  captain  in  the  Imperial  Fleet  had  my  knowledge  of
cargo codes. And last I knew, over five hundred and fifty people worked at Marker.  Many  of
them possibly had knowledge of Marker’s routines and those same codes I did. But I was  the
only one sitting on Moabar.
Some of my unease about my pact with the ghost from Hell subsided. “All right. Count me
in,”  I  told  Sully.  “But  let’s  make  sure  of  your  information,  first.”  Five  hundred  fifty  people,
including my brother, worked in Marker.  I wasn’t going to convict them  on  partial  evidence,
or misinterpreted data. I knew only too well what that felt like.
 
Newlin came back  on the intraship when we  were  cleared  for  docking.  “Strap  down  and
secure. I mean it, this time.” Evidently he’d heard that ominous thump  two  and  a  half  hours
before.  We  were  a  little  behind  schedule.  Newlin  said  only  that  the  station  was  having  a
problem with their escort tugs.
Ten minutes later a long shimmy rattled through  the  ship  as  she  was  gated  to  one  of  the
station’s  extended  docking  ramps.  Two  hard  jolts.  Clamps  secure.  We  were  probably  lower
level.  Luggers  usually  didn’t  rate  the  better  berths.  A  tri-hauler  like  Diligent  should  be
somewhat higher, closer to the M.O.C. command center, stationmaster’s office, rec facilities.
I made a mental appraisal of how much  longer I’d  be  in  the  M.O.C.’s  company.  Another
five,  ten  minutes  until  we  were  cleared  to  disembark.  I  didn’t  know  if  we’d  have  to  pass
through  an  ID  scan  again.  We’d  come  in  as  approved  commercial  transit,  not  prisoners.  In
theory, it was always possible the lugger could have been intercepted between Moabar and the
Station, taken cargo or passengers off or on. If I ran the station, there’d  be  another  ID  check.
But then, I tried to run my life, and my ship, the way my mother had taught me.
Details. Ask questions. Get facts.  Something  the  Imperial  Fleet  and  the  M.O.C.  had  been
known to ignore.

If they did recheck ID, that would delay us another five. Then we had to find the lifts, find
the Diligent. Fifteen  minutes.  Sully  had  said  they’d  file  for  departure  as  soon  as  we  were  on
board.
Half-hour.  Forty-five  if  they  were  having  a  problem  with  the  tugs.  I’d  be  generous.  An
hour. An hour to wait and then I’d be heading in-system. Free.
It’s still too easy.
Shut up.
Sully unsnapped his harness as I did. “You stay with Drogue.” He stepped away from me,
headed for Ren. A light touch of his hand on  the  Stolorth’s  elbow  preceded  his  quip.  “Show
time.”
Hazy silver eyes turned toward Sully. “I’m ready.”
Wilard arrived to escort us off ship. All conversation ceased as we filed after him toward the
airlock. Drogue touched the wide belt at his waist, signaling I should have my ID ready.
Okay, five minutes, Chaz. Five minutes. This is the toughest part. You can do this.
Drogue  didn’t  know  the  Taka  waiting  at  the  bottom  of  the  ramp.  We  went  through  the
ritual greetings but without the easy familiarity of the spaceport.
“Blessings of the hour to you, brother.”
“Blessings of the hour. Guardian?” The Taka spent much  more time on our ID cards  than
his kin dirtside. When he tapped his comm badge and growled in a request, my heart stopped
for a few beats.
An M.O.C.  officer  in  a  dark  brown  uniform  appeared  quickly.  Female,  mid-fifties.  Short
dark  hair  with  one  wide  streak  of  silver  on  the  left.  Her  almond-shaped  eyes  showed  only
boredom as our cards processed through a second time.
Then her right hand rose. “Sister Solaria?”
I’d  taken  perhaps  two  steps  past  her.  A  slight  chill  of  fear  rippled  through  me.  I  forced
myself not to flinch, turned slowly, plastered what I  hoped  was  a  holy,  and  wholly,  innocent
look on my face. “Praise the stars, sister. How may I assist you?”
Her name tag said Tran, D.. “Your immunizations aren’t up to date.”
Minor  problem.  Go  to  Medical,  get  a  hypospray.  Not  a  minor  problem.  My  bio-prints
wouldn’t  match  the  real  Berri  Solaria’s.  But  they  would  match  Chasidah  Bergren’s  in  the
M.O.C.’s central files.
Drogue spoke up quickly. “An error, I am sure, Officer  Tran.  The  Guardianship  has  even
more stringent medical requirements than the Empire. Sister Solaria is one of our most active
missionaries.  She  would  not  be  permitted  to  carry  on  her  work  unless  she  had  full  medical
clearance.”
“I’m aware of that, Guardian, but her card file shows—”
“Perhaps  I  can  assist.”  Ren’s  soft  tones  flowed  over  Drogue  and  Tran,  standing  almost

nose-to-nose.
I waited to see her reaction to the Stolorth’s presence. Most people would have backed up a
step. Or five.
Tran  peered  up  at  the  silver-tinged  face  under  the  hood.  “Brother  Ren  Ackravaro.  Back
again?”
I didn’t know if her recognition  of  Ren  were  a  good  or  bad  sign.  Things  were  starting  to
look slightly less easy.
“Final trip, for awhile, I’m afraid. Moabar’s winters and I do not get along.” Ren motioned
toward me, knowing where I stood, I guessed, by the sound of my voice. “Sister Solaria and I
are  heading  in-system.  There’s  much  work  to  be  done  at  the  orphanage  in  Kressal  on
Walker-Three.”
Tran glanced at me. “You’re a teacher, Sister?”
“We’re  all  teachers  and  students  to  each  other,”  I  said  softly.  “I  guide  the  poor  orphans
through the light of Abbot Eng shining his wisdom through me.”
“Sister  Solaria’s  medical  files  were  appended  at  the  convent.  Perhaps  they  were  entered
incorrectly?” Ren held his card toward Tran. “Ours came  through  the  Guardianship  in  Dafir.
Perhaps if you compare them?”
“It might just be a difference in origination code.” Sully lightly touched Tran’s shoulder as
he offered  her  his  card.  “Could  we  trouble  you  to  make  sure  this  is  not  the  case,  before  we
must experience a delay at Medical?”
Tran stared at Sully for a moment.  Then obviously taken in, as most women were, by that
slow, sexy smile of his, she shrugged and tabbed at the screen. She slid the three cards through
again. Sighed. “Someone logged them with the wrong parameters. They’re fine. Jalvert?”
The Taka stepped over. I caught a brief flash of irritation in  the  small  eyes.  Didn’t  like  an
M.O.C. officer correcting his mistakes, most likely.
“She’s clear. Just a skewed entry.”
Drogue bowed. “Our apologies. We  often  have  our  young  novices  do  the  clerical  work.  I
appreciate your diligence, Officer Tran.”
The woman nodded, waved us on. “Praise the stars.”
“Praise the stars,” I called  back  to  her.  For  the  first  time,  I  meant  it.  No  one  said  a  word
until the four of us were alone in the lift. “I thought we cleared up that glitch in the program.”
Sully glanced over at Ren. “I believed we had as well.”
How could Ren see to program if he were blind?
Sully flashed me a wry smile. “Sorry, my angel. I guess I’m not perfect after all.”
My first inclination was to reply with some biting  comment  in  agreement.  But  two  could
play at this flirtation game. I went with my second. “Pity. Wedding’s off, then.” I was rewarded
with a moment  of surprised silence than a deep chuckle.  “Perhaps two weeks on the  Diligent

with me will convince you to change your mind.” I wasn’t even  thinking  about  the  next  two
weeks. I still needed to get through the next two hours.
The  lift  doors  opened  on  Corridor  Level  Seven-Blue.  Brown  M.O.C.  uniforms  wove  past
freighter blues, greens and grays, and past security’s darker gray with the  telltale  white  stripe
up the pant legs. The hulking, furred presence of the Takas towered over all.
I was just  shaking  off  the  chill  of  fear  from  Tran’s  questions.  I  wanted  to  run,  board  the
ship, seal the airlock. We walked instead at a leisurely pace. “We’ll part company at your ship,”
Drogue said. “We’ll meet again, praise the stars, under more pleasant circumstances.” “I hope
so.”  Pleasant  circumstances  sounded  wonderful.  “I  appreciate  your  help.”  “No,  sister.  We
appreciate yours.” Drogue held my gaze for a moment. Clearly, Sully’s mission was personal to
him. I had two weeks with Sully and Ren to find out why. Not that it mattered, overall. If the
Empire  were  breeding  jukors  again,  that  was  sufficient  reason  for  me.  “What  berth  are  we
looking  for?”  “Seven-Blue-Nineteen,  I  believe.”  Drogue  glanced  back  at  Sully,  who  nodded.
We  were  at  Berth  Twelve.  Then  Fourteen.  At  Sixteen  I  fought  to  keep  from  quickening  my
pace,  played  my  little  time  game  in  my  mind.  Ten  minutes  to  board.  Half-hour,  maybe
forty-five minutes to get clearance to undock.
At  Eighteen  I  stopped  dead  in  my  tracks.  A  thin  chill  raced  up  my  spine.  Bright  yellow
security ‘bots ringed the next airlock, lights flashing. Sully’s hand splayed against my back.  His
voice growled in my ear. “Stay here.”
I had no  intention  of  getting  anywhere  near  the  security  ‘bots,  or  the  half  dozen  M.O.C.
guards  and  Security  stripers  standing  in  a  tight  knot  under  the  illuminated  “19”  on  the
overhead. Illuminated in orange: ship under security seal or quarantine.
“Face me,” Sully ordered.
I did, turning away from the scene that sent my heart into my throat. Drogue and Ren kept
moving. Their credentials, I surmised, weren’t forged like mine. Or Sully’s. “What’s going on?”
“I  don’t  know.  And  I  don’t  like  it  when  I  don’t  know.”  “They’re  under  a  Code  Orange.”
“Obviously. But I can’t imagine Milo doing anything to elicit that. He excels at being cautious.”
“An  accident?  A  fire?”  A  supposed  engine  malfunction  that  had  become  real?  “Crew
problem?”  “Milo’d  never  let  anything  on-ship  get  to  the  docks.  He  knows  better.”  Sully
frowned, his gaze over my shoulder.
“You’re sure it’s the Diligent?” Ships switched berths for any number  of legitimate reasons.
He answered my question with a squinting of obsidian eyes, then, “Still reads so.”
Shit. Easy was disappearing fast. “Options?”
“Let’s cross that—Ren. Talk to us.”
The Stolorth stepped next to me, bowed to Sully, fingers steepled.  “Brother  Sudral.  Sister
Berri. I feel a need to meditate. I suggest we return to the Temple, and pray.” Oh, shit! Easy hit
a jumpgate and was gone. I bowed my head as Ren and Sully flanked me.
“Where’s  Drogue?”  I  asked  quietly.  Berth  Seventeen.  Sixteen.  “He  will  meet  us  at  the
Temple,” Ren said. Fourteen. Twelve. “The M.O.C.  received information a certain ship was  to
assist in a prison break.” Ren’s voice was as calm as if he were commenting  on the color of the
decking below our boots. My heart pounded. Berth Ten. “That information  pointed  to  a  ship

called  the  Diligent  Keeper,”  Ren  continued.  Sully  was  silent.  A  cluster  of  blue-uniformed
freighter crew  strolled  by,  laughing.  As  we  passed  Berth  Nine,  Ren  added,  “An  attempt  was
made  to  take  the  ship,  two  hours  past.  The  Diligent  broke  dock.  However,  I  regret  that  her
captain, Nathaniel Milo, is dead.” “Bastards.” Sully’s voice was harsh, bitter. My downcast gaze
saw his fists clench. Moabar Station suddenly felt very small. Seven. I noticed Ren’s cane now
tucked through his sash, as if it were no longer needed.
“Authorities believe a ship, with the escapees, is due in at seventeen-hundred, station time.
Manned by supporters of Sheldon Blaine and possibly with Blaine himself on board.”
That was four hours from now. I wasn’t Blaine—I had no royal blood in my family—and I
was already here. That was no guarantee they wouldn’t look at all ships making station within a
much larger time window, triple check all IDs. Especially if they were watching for Farosians; a
small  but  pervasive  band  of  terrorists  based  on  Tos  Faros,  who  upheld  Blaine’s  claim  to  the
throne.
We passed Berth Five. “There will be much  security activity until they  determine  whether
or  not  Captain  Milo  warned  the  other  ship  in  time  to  abort  the  escape.”  Or  whether  it  had
come in earlier than anticipated. The Temple was two levels up. We stepped into the  lift  with
an M.O.C. officer on my right, two Takas behind us.
“Praise the stars. Blessings of  the  hour.”  I  tried  not  to  listen  as  my  voice  shook.  Fear  and
anger, again. Just like the shuttle trip dirtside. Fear at being discovered, interrogated, tortured.
Being sent back to Moabar was the least of my worries.
Anger.  To  come  so  close.  To  be  stopped,  not  just  in  my  attempt  at  freedom.  But  to  be
stopped from unmasking the gen-labs, the jukors. Somewhere  during that  trip  on  the  Lucky
Seven my reasons to leave Moabar had shifted. The picture had become  larger, encompassing
more  than  just  Chasidah  Bergren’s  personal  survival.  It  brought  in  Drogue’s  and  Ren’s  and
Sully’s as well.
Sullivan. I had no idea what the Empire would do when they found out he was  still  alive.
No, I knew what they’d do. And that’s what really frightened me. There wouldn’t  be  enough
left of him to ship down to Moabar. He should’ve listened to his advisors.
 
Chapter Five
« ^ » 
The  doors  to  the  Temple  of  Abbot  Eng  the  Merciful,  Moabar  Guardianship,  looked  like  all
other  commercial  establishment  doors  on  station.  Auto  double-wides  in  green,  the  color
designating this level. They were flanked on the left by a wide window. But  these  doors  were
stenciled with  the  arch-and-stave.  Through  the  large  window,  rows  of  benches  facing  a  long
raised platform were visible. The wall behind it was backlit. An outline of the Englarian symbol
filled most of it. No one sat on the benches at this hour but as we walked by, I caught a glimpse
of a robed figure moving past the platform.
Entrance to Temple offices was through  a  single  green  auto-door  a  few  feet  farther  down

the corridor. It slid open as Ren approached. That meant Temple doors weren’t locked. Locked
right now would be preferable. It wouldn’t stop the M.O.C.  or the stripers. But it  might  slow
them down.
We entered a short gray walled corridor with bright overheads and three doors. The one to
my left I assumed went into the rear of the Temple. Then there was one directly ahead, and the
last just to the right of that.
I thought we were going to the one straight ahead but Ren stopped and held out one hand
in  Sully’s  direction,  halting  him.  Perhaps  they  were  having  second  thoughts  about  coming
here?
“My quarters, for now,” Ren said. “I’ll wait in the office, in case anyone else comes in.”
Anyone else, I knew, meant stripers. Ren’s presence here was official. Ours wasn’t.
I followed Sully through the doorway on the right. Another hallway, longer, with five doors
this time. Three left, two right. The first on the left was open. I glimpsed a  round  table  and  a
commissary panel. Ren’s quarters were the last door on the right.
I let out the breath I was holding when the doors cycled behind me. “How much  did Milo
know?”  I  was  in  damage  control  mode  now.  Don’t  accept  that  you’re  boxed  in.  Gather  the
facts. Look for loopholes, options. There had to be options.
Sully pulled back  his hood, ran his hand over his short, dark hair.  His  mouth  was  a  thin,
angry  line.  But  I  didn’t  know  if  he  was  angry  at  himself,  or  Milo,  or  the  whole  damned
universe.
“Waste of a damn good man.” He spat out the words.
Angry at  the  universe,  then.  Milo  must  have  been  a  friend.  I  waited,  giving  him  time  to
compose himself, and took in the sparse room. An arch-and-stave hung on the far wall, over a
long, narrow bed half shielded by a privacy curtain. Kitchen panels on the left.  Fold-out  desk
on the right with a door beside it that was probably a water-closet and bath. Ren’s quarters had
to have  a  bath.  Stolorths  could  survive  without  water  for  max  forty-eight  hours  before  their
gills dried permanently shut.
In the middle of the room was a long, padded bench,  not unlike the ones in the Temple. I
pushed my  hood  back,  eased  down  on  one  end.  The  stiffness  in  the  set  of  Sully’s  shoulders
spoke volumes to me. And made me want to let him know he wasn’t alone. “I’m sorry.”
Sully slanted a glance at me then raised his  arms  and  thrust  both  hands  through  his  hair
this time. “Damn it!”
He plopped down next to me, the bench wobbling slightly under his weight. He leaned his
elbows on his knees, rested his eyes against the heels of  his  hands.  I  knew  he  was  concerned
over the abrupt  change  of  plans,  at  the  new  risks  we  now  faced.  But  I  also  felt  that  Captain
Milo’s death pained him on a very personal level. It was an unexpected glimpse at a side of him
I didn’t know existed.
This  wasn’t  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan,  the  poet.  Or  Sully,  the  mercenary.  This  was  almost
someone  else.  Someone  closer  to  the  man  who’d  met  me  in  that  bar  in  Port  Chalo,  who’d
seemed to intuitively know I was hurting that night. I had an urge to put an arm around him,

hold him, say something comforting, and meaningless.
But I wasn’t sure who I’d be comforting, or if it would even be welcomed. So I waited.
He raised his face, steepling his fingers in front of  his  mouth.  “Waste  of  a  good  man,”  he
said  finally.  “And  no,  Milo  wouldn’t  talk.  He  didn’t  know  who  I  went  down  to  Moabar  to
retrieve. You learn not to ask questions in this business.”
“His crew?”
“Six. Ship was mostly automated. But she’d been running legit for two years now. He was
doing  me  one  last  favor  because  I  did  him  one,  years  ago.  The  M.O.C.  should  never  have
tagged him.” He turned to me. “I don’t make mistakes like this, Chaz. I can’t afford to.”
I almost pointed out to him that my forged ID card wasn’t perfect, either. But now wasn’t
the time. “Ren said someone tipped off the stripers.”
He nodded, calmer. More thoughtful. “That’s of deep concern. If there’s a leak within  my
crew, I can’t risk bringing you on board. Anyone with half a brain, and a few of those still exist
in the government, would eventually discern  the  value  of  your  particular  area  of  knowledge.
Your family’s connections.”
“My mother’s choice of footwear?” I gave him a half smile.
He caught it, though the one he gave back was tinged with sadness. “She taught you well.”
I had  a  feeling  he  knew  far  more  about  me  than  I  was  comfortable  with  him  knowing.
Especially as I had no idea of his source. If we lived long enough  to  get  off  Moabar  Station,  I
just might ask him.
Inherent in that ‘we’ was part of the danger. “Maybe Newlin should take me back  dirtside.
They might not think—”
“No!”  Strong  fingers  grasped  my  forearm.  “You’re  not  going  back  there.  We  still  have
options. They’ll take a bit more time, but we have them.” His seemed conscious of his sudden
intensity. His grip relaxed, his hand draped over my arm.
“This is only a setback. It  seems  worse  because  of  Milo.  Well,  it  seems  worse  to  me.  You
didn’t know him.” He talked more to himself than to me. “He knew the risks. And that death
is one of them. One he would accept only because there was no other choice.”
Was the breeding of jukors something a man would give his life to stop? Evidently Captain
Milo  believed  so.  And  it  was  enough  for  Drogue,  a  gentle  monk.  And  for  Ren,  who  was
everything  I’d  been  taught  Stolorths  couldn’t  be,  to  take  a  similar  risk.  If  caught,  Drogue
would most likely face Moabar, as I had. But Ren could well be turned over to his own people.
His death, the Empire could honestly say, wouldn’t be on their soul’s slate.
Sully was, purportedly, already dead. The Empire was large. Add to that  the  few  outlying
systems  that  lived  peacefully  nearby  and  there  were  hundreds  of  worlds  on  which  Sully
could’ve taken a new identity. A new life.
Yet,  after  a  two-year  absence,  he  was  back,  moving  again  through  dark  and  dangerous
shadows.  I  couldn’t  understand  why.  But  then  Sully  had  always  been  an  enigma  to  me.  An

intriguing enigma.
I almost voiced that, almost put my question into words.  But  his  hand  had  slipped  down
my forearm and now encircled my wrist. My pulse fluttered under his fingers.  His  dark  gaze
held  my  own,  then  flicked  down  to  my  mouth.  I  felt  a  very  real  heat  start  in  the  pit  of  my
stomach, flare up through my chest, singe my cheeks.
Chasidah. I heard my name whispered so softly that for a moment  I thought I’d heard it in
my mind. But it was Sully’s voice I’d heard and it was Sully’s face now so very close to mine.
I don’t know what frightened me more. The  very  real  hunger  I  saw  in  his  eyes  when  his
gaze flicked back up. Or the fact that the hunger wasn’t only his.
I bolted up from the bench.  You’re losing your mind. It’s the stress. Lack of sleep. And an
overabundance of one extremely enigmatic, very sexy, sensual male.
Why are all the handsome ones always such bastards?
I  buried  my  unbidden  emotions.  Mentally  ran  down  the  list  of  names  I  called  myself
whenever  I  found  myself  doing  something  stupid.  I  forced  myself  to  refocus  on  the  real
problem: the M.O.C., the stripers, the reappearance of the jukors.
“Time’s
 not
 on
 our
 side
 right
 now,
 Sullivan.”
 I
 adopted
 my
 official
Fleet-issue-the-captain-is-speaking-now tone. “Station can wait, put us all in a lock-down, peel
back  ID by ID. This is what they do  every  time  it’s  even  hinted  the  Farosians  are  involved.  I
know the routine.” I crossed my arms over my chest.
His only response was a slightly surprised expression. Did he think I didn’t understand the
problems we faced?
“Staying  together,”  I  told  him,  “is  the  biggest  risk.  You,  me,  Ren,  Drogue.  You  might  as
well hand them your whole operation in a duro-hard.”
I  hoped  his  silence  meant  he  was  considering  my  words.  But  there  was  that  slight
puzzlement in his expression. Something  in  his  heated  gaze  again  sent  a  little  flare  up  inside
me. Finally, he shook his head.
“I’m not sending you back down.”
“Why not?”
“I have my reasons.”
“Which are?”
He studied me for a long moment. “Valid ones.”
I wanted  to  call  him  an  idiot.  I  wanted  him  angry,  not  offering  me  this  odd  mixture  of
patience and something I couldn’t define. I wanted him to see what I saw, the lives he risked,
including his own. I didn’t want his to be one of them. I wasn’t worth it.
I  was  on  Moabar  for  a  valid  reason.  Whether  or  not  I  remembered,  whether  or  not  I
believed the Empire’s evidence against me, fourteen people were dead because of a decision I’d
made while in command.

And now Nathaniel Milo. Make that fifteen. I didn’t want to count the Takan guard. He’d
attacked me first.
“Reach Newlin. Or anyone. Send me back while you still can.”
His chin lifted. “I never pegged you for a coward.”
“I’m not,” I snapped. “I’m an Imperial Fleet officer,  trained  to  assess  and  make  decisions,
based on facts. There’s no shame in pulling back, regrouping.”
He rose. “Martyr doesn’t suit you, either, my angel.”
His flippant use of the affectionate term grated at me. “Damn you, Gabriel Sullivan,  listen
to me!”
He grabbed my shoulders so quickly I didn’t have time to step back. His eyes were dark yet
empty—his touch almost searing. When he spoke, bitterness, pain, and frustration mixed in his
deep,  harsh  tone.  “Gabriel’s  already  damned.  He’s  been  consigned  to  a  Hell  he  can  never
escape.  It  haunts  him,  consumes  him.  Until  all  that’s  left  are  things  that  make  him  angry.
Things that make him feel a pain I hope to God you never have to feel. Anger and pain are very
valid reasons for what Gabriel does. Remember that.”
He released me and turned abruptly away.
I hugged my arms tightly around my middle. In all the years, in all the situations I’d faced
Gabriel Ross Sullivan, I’d never seen him as deeply angry, as deeply hurt as I had just now.
The sound of the door sliding open  startled  me.  Ren  followed  Drogue  in.  The  Guardian’s
round face showed clear signs of tension. “This is most disturbing,” he was saying.
I slanted a glance toward Sully, wondering if he were still angry and caught his gaze fixed
on  Ren.  Ren’s  face  tilted,  questioningly  and  out  of  the  corner  of  my  eye  I  saw  the  slightest
shake of Sully’s head. A dismissive shrug of his shoulders.
A sharp chill crept up my spine.
I’d seen a vid, in training years ago. Two  Stolorth  telepaths  having  a  conversation.  To  the
listener, the questions and answers were disjointed. Until the teacher pointed out to watch for
movement. All humans and most humanoids unconsciously tilt their heads when listening. All
humans  and  most  humanoids  nod,  even  in  response  to  their  own  silent  thoughts.  Stolorth
Ragkirils  were  no  different.  Certain  gestures  stubbornly  remained,  even  if  the  words  were
silent.
I started adding up the gestures, the  answers  to  questions  unspoken.  Something  I  sensed
but couldn’t before define.
Ren might be more than an empath. In spite of Sully’s protestations, in spite of what Fleet
had us believe, Ren might have the ability to communication  telepathically.  Link  his  mind  to
another’s. To Sully’s, I was beginning to suspect.
Ren  stated  he  couldn’t  link  with  his  own  people.  He  never  said  whether  he  could  link
minds with a human.
Why not admit that? He was obviously blind. I still believed that negated his ability to rip a

mind apart. So  why not admit to a  limited  telepathy?  I  didn’t  have  answers.  And  didn’t  like
when I didn’t have answers.
“We must sit, discuss things,” Drogue said.
I sat, somewhat more cautious, on the end of the bench. I didn’t like being lied to. But there
was  nothing  I  could  do  about  it  right  now.  I  recognized  it  could  all  just  be  conjecture,  an
overreaction on my part.
However,  the  first  chance  I  had,  I  was  going  to  ask  some  serious  questions.  And  not  of
Sully; we had a shared past that raised other issues, dragging us off topic. I had to talk to Ren.
I took a deep breath, settled myself down, calm. Professional.
Sully leaned back against the desk, his arms folded much  as mine had been a few minutes
ago. Classic defensive posture. Ren sat on his bed, drew the curtain  back  to  the  wall.  Drogue
stood in the middle of us.
“We have lost brother Nathaniel. This saddens me, as I know it saddens both of you. And
you, Chasidah, had you known him. But we have greater concerns.”
“What’s the status on the Diligent?” Sully asked.
“She  has  eluded  pursuit  to  this  point,  I  am  told.  At  least,  her  capture  has  not  been
announced. The Fleet has been alerted.”
“What did the M.O.C. learn?” Ren asked. “And from whom?”
Drogue shook his head. “The stars, in their wisdom, have not yet convinced the authorities
on  station  to  share  that  with  me.  I  only  know  at  the  moment  the  Temple  is  not  under
suspicion; they still seek  Blaine’s  people  and  we  have  no  ties  with  Tos  Faros.  They  stated  we
were free to continue with the festivities and rituals for Peyhar’s Week. I strongly suggest we do
so.”
Peyhar’s  Week.  Non-Human  Cultures  Class  101  again.  It  wasn’t  one  of  the  more  serious
Englarian  holidays,  full  of  chastisement,  but  a  time  of  celebration  and  renewal.  Glory-seeds,
honeylace would be shared. A station full of mellow, happy eight-foot tall guards wasn’t a bad
idea at all.
Still, I wanted off Moabar Station. “Can we get another ship in that time?”
“Of course.” A Sully-like smirk accompanied his words.
“Is there somewhere I can stay until then?” I asked Drogue. “I don’t think my ID will pass a
second scan. I’d prefer it if the M.O.C.  and the stripers could forget they ever saw Sister Berri
here.”
“The wisdom of the  stars  blessed  me  with  a  different  idea.  If  you’ll  permit  me?”  Drogue
motioned to Sully, who nodded, obviously curious. Ren sat forward on the bed.
“The stripers, as you call our security force, would find it odd that  Sister  Berri  Solaria  not
participate  in  Peyhar’s.  You  have  been  seen  on  station,  as  has  Brother  Ren  Ackravaro.  Your
absence would cause remarkings. Your person, would not.”

“Best place to hide is in full view,” Sully quipped.
“Wait a minute.” I held up one hand. “I can talk the basic lingo. Praise the stars. Blessings of
the hour. But I’ve never been to a Peyhar’s celebration and my Non-Human Cultures class was
a long  time  ago.  I’ll  sweep  out  the  Temple,  fold  prayer  rugs,  whatever.  But  I’m  an  obvious
amateur—”
“Virgin,” Sully put in.
“And not a sacrificial one,” I snapped back. Damn him! He was baiting me again.
“She has a point,” Ren said. I thought I began to see a pattern. Sully gets me riled and then
Ren empathically reads me like a datascreen on max-download. Wonderful.
I didn’t  care  that  Ren  knew  I  was  afraid.  I  was  hardly  a  virgin  but  my  ignorance  of  the
Englarians was wide and vast. I hated going in to something without the facts, unprepared. No
details.
Sully  was  disagreeing.  “She’ll  be  functioning  as  an  acolyte.  Most  of  the  focus  will  be  on
Drogue and Clement. She just has to put in a few appearances. If a ship gets here that we can
use,  we’ll  just  say  we  had  the  call  to  meditation.”  He  shrugged,  shot  a  glance  at  Ren,  who
turned, almost as if he could feel Sully’s gaze on him.
“Brother  Sudral  sees  well.”  Drogue  turned  to  me.  “Formal  festivities  start  tomorrow.  I
suggest we all get some rest. I can assure you the Temple is secure. I’ll provide you with some
basic descriptives of the ceremonies, if you like, Captain Bergren.”
“Please.”
Ren stood. “You may have my quarters. They’re clean. The office has room for a cot which
will serve me well.”
“No,  I  can’t  put  you  out.”  My  answer  was  automatic.  Yet  even  as  I  declined  his  offer,  I
knew it was more than that. Of all of us, Ren was the least adapted to a human environment,
the most in need of special accommodations. In spite of my suspicions, I had no desire  to  see
him inconvenienced. I doubted the office had a bathtub.
The  Stolorth  offered  me  a  small  smile.  “The  Temple  has  a  baptismal  pool,  if  that’s  your
concern.”
Was I that easy to read? Obviously. “None of us can afford to be less  than  optimum  right
now.”
“Then know that I would do nothing to jeopardize your safety, or my own.”
Or Sully’s?
It hit me. They didn’t trust me. That’s why  Ren  was  here,  to  see  if  Chaz  Bergren,  former
Imperial  Fleet  officer,  would  cooperate.  As  if  I’d  say  no,  let  me  stay  on  Moabar.  It  was  just
starting to get cozy down there.
I  had  to  get  Ren  alone.  Surprisingly,  that  thought  didn’t  discomfort  me  as  much  as  it
should  have.  As  it  had  even  a  few  hours  earlier.  Amazing  how  three  weeks  on  Moabar  can
suddenly make one more receptive to a wide range of ideas and experiences.

“I’ll compromise,” I told him. “Bring the cot in here. I’ll use it. It’s probably more my size,
anyway. Then you can have your own bed, and bath. It shouldn’t  be  for  more  than  a  day  or
two, at best. Unless you’d feel uncomfortable with me here?”
I felt and heard, more than saw, Sully straighten and push away from the desk. He hadn’t
counted on my offer. Good. Nothing works better than divide and conquer.
Ren’s  reaction  surprised  me.  His  mouth  softened,  some  of  the  lines  disappeared  from
around his clouded eyes. His face tilted slightly, as if he weren’t sure if he should be amused by
my offer, or even believe it at all.
Several hours ago I’d run from him in fear, unwrapped my dagger in defense. Now I  was
telling him that I, a human  female,  trusted  him,  a  Stolorth  male.  Or  rather,  I  knew  I  had  to
convince him to trust me.
I had a feeling he knew that as well.
 
We ate a small meal in the Temple common room at about the time those on station would
be having dinner. It was a way to force our bodies into the station’s rhythm. And if we couldn’t
sleep, perhaps a small draught of honeylace. Strictly to enhance prayer and meditation, Drogue
said.
I knew I’d decline. I never touched narcotics, illegal or legal. I like my  beers,  my  Imperial
brown ales just fine. A gin and soda on occasion, but I was very particular about the gin. Glory
seeds, honeylace or a dozen other chemical combinations held no interest for me.
Another man in monk’s garb that Drogue introduced as Brother  Clement  came  in  just  as
we  were  dishing  out  the  stew.  He  greeted  me  with  a  reassuring  pat  on  my  shoulder  and  a
promise that the stars would keep me safe. But he called Sully ‘Brother Sudral,’ so I was unsure
of exactly what Clement knew, or didn’t. Or, like Sully said, the less everyone knew, the safer
we all were.
Thick slices of bread—baked, not  replicator  issue—were  stacked  in  the  center  of  a  round
table not unlike the one at the monastery, dirtside. Clement led the Prayer of Thanksgiving. He
was about Drogue’s age, mid-fifties, with skin the color of my favorite Imperial ale and glossy
silver curls. He had a wiry build, a rumbling laugh and a demeanor that was much  less serious
than Drogue’s.
He ate a bowl of stew then wrapped some bread in a napkin and left, pleading a file full of
unread theological treatises in his quarters.
“He’s  quite  the  scholar,”  Ren  told  me.  He’d  relaxed  noticeably  since  our  pact  to  be
roommates. Sully alternated between unconcern and dropping into long, serious conversations
with  Drogue.  I  heard  ship  names  mentioned.  None  were  familiar  to  me,  and  I  knew  a  fair
amount of the freighters that worked the Empire’s rim worlds.
We finished the stew, the bread and a bottle of dry wine. It was a meal, six months  ago,  I
never thought I’d have again. Prison rations  were  replicator  issue,  square  bars  with  no  flavor
but, we were told, more than sufficient nutrition. Moabar offered the same.
I helped Drogue stack the dishes in the scrub-unit, swiped down the table with a handvac.

Sully and Ren were by the door, talking. By all appearances it was a friendly discussion.
Then  Drogue  headed  for  the  Temple.  Last  minute  preparations  for  the  festival  to  be
checked  one  more  time.  He  declined  any  offer  of  help.  “You  know  where  the  cot  is  in  the
storage room, Brother Sudral? Good. Blessings of the hour, my friends. Morning meditations at
six. Listen for the chimes at quarter of.”
I followed Ren to his quarters. “You don’t use a cane on station?” I remember  he’d left it in
his quarters.
Ren  seemed  slightly  puzzled.  “You  thought  it  was  for  guidance.  No,  Moabar’s  climate
disagrees with my body. I find my legs and my back much weakened by the cold.”
“Makes me do all the work,” Sully intoned, but his voice was light. The anger and darkness
I’d sensed in him earlier were gone. He flipped  the  latch  on  a  narrow  closet  door  next  to  his
quarters. “I’ll get the cot while you rest your aching bones.”
Ren chuckled as we stepped inside,  then  tabbed  off  the  auto-door  so  it  would  stay  open.
“You’re tired,” he said as I sat on the bench.
“Slightly frazzled, yes,” I agreed. “But I probably won’t fall asleep  for  awhile.  My  mind  is
still  sorting  through  too  many  things.”  Did  he  know  what  they  were?  I  wanted  to  open  the
door to that discussion. “Will that bother you, keep you awake?”
Ren eased down on the edge of his bed,  shook  his  head.  “Do  you  mean  do  I  watch  your
thoughts  like  a  vidcast?  No.  I’m  not  a  telepath.  But  even  if  I  were,  we’re  taught  selectivity.
Control. If we weren’t, everyone’s emotions would overwhelm us, drive us close to insanity. Of
course as an empath, if someone is experiencing intense emotions, I’d be aware of that. But in
most cases I rarely read people’s emotions. I only do if I feel I could be of some help, perhaps to
pray with them.”
I caught that he denied, again, being a telepath. I also heard his ‘even if I were.’
The muted thud of a door closing in the hallway, and the heavy sound of footsteps  halted
any further questions on my part.
Sully appeared, grinning, in the open doorway, cot  and  folded  blanket  tucked  under  one
arm. “Someone here order a cot?”
I  played  to  his  jovial  mood.  “Should  have  been  here  an  hour  ago.  Hope  you’re  not
expecting a tip.”
He  dropped  the  cot  on  the  floor  behind  me,  dumped  the  blanket  over  my  head.  “Hope
you’re not expecting a pillow.”
“Sully!” Ren sounded honestly horrified.
I flipped the blanket over my head and laughed. And wondered again what Ren ‘saw.’ Or
did he just sense a playfulness?
“Chaz  needs  someone  to  tease  her.”  Sully  pulled  the  blanket  off  my  shoulders,  tossed  it
onto the cot. “After all those years  of  being  called  captain,  she  takes  herself  far  too  seriously.
What do you say, Ren, shall we teach her how to play with the big boys?”

I was about to protest when he  suddenly  leaned  over  and  scooped  me  into  his  arms.  His
body felt hot and hard, very male. Something  glinted in his eyes  that  I  thought  I  recognized,
and  it  wasn’t  playfulness.  I  yelped,  my  arms  flailing  behind  him  as  I  squirmed,  wanting  to
reach  for  my  dagger.  His  arms  tightened  around  me  with  a  strength  that  seemed  almost
non-human.  Fear  flashed  through  me.  I  had  no  intention  of  finding  out  what  his  version  of
playing with the big boys meant. I had no intention of landing flat on my back in the middle of
Ren’s narrow bed, my dagger still around my wrist, Sully grinning down at me like the devil’s
own kin. I scrambled backwards, almost kicked Ren in the process. “Sullivan, you—”
“Play cards? Of course I do, my angel. Scoot  over now, will you?” He plopped down next
to me, threw a deck of cards in my lap.
Ren, who was reaching for Sully, stopped.
For a few seconds the entire scene froze in my mind.  Sully’s  wicked,  sensual  smile.  Ren’s
face, tight with fury, right arm lashing out, stopping only inches from Sully’s throat.
Ren had clearly felt my fear at what I thought  was  going  to  be  an  attack,  a  possible  gang
rape. And Ren had reacted, defending me, from… …Sully. Whose joviality masked something
much deeper. Anger. Pain. Which Ren had to have felt as well.
But not an intention to hurt me. Once Sully had dropped me on the bed, I saw that. There
was  nothing  threatening  in  his  posture,  nothing  but  childish  mischief  on  his  face.  I’d
misjudged him. Mistaken his continuing game of ‘bait Chaz’  so  Ren  could  empathically  read
my emotions.
Well, if they wanted to know what fear and anger felt like, they’d just seen it.
I was breathing hard. So,  I noticed, was Sully.  Only  Ren  had  pulled  back  within  himself,
calmly, his hand resting peacefully against his knee. But his voice had an odd timbre to it when
he spoke. I had the feeling he didn’t approve of Sully’s actions just then.
“Sully. Hand me the cards. I will deal.”
The cards had fallen from my lap when I’d tucked my legs underneath. Sully picked up the
deck  and  held  it  out  to  the  blind  Stolorth.  The  six-fingered  hand  closed  around  his  with  a
surety, a firmness. Quite possibly a message.
Sully laughed and pulled his hand away. “Keep an eye on him, Chaz,” he said as Ren shook
the deck from the box, feathered the cards with a professional air. “He cheats.”
 
Chapter Six
« ^ » 
I learned several things that night.
I learned  the  blind  could  play  cards  if  the  cards  have  raised  areas  they  can  distinguish
through  touch.  “There  are  other  words  for  it,  in  other  cultures,”  Ren  told  me.  “We  call  the

system vaytari.”
I learned that other blind Stolorths do exist. But predominantly in  a  small  community  on
Cal’fedar, supervised by the Englarians. One more bit of information that ran opposite to what
I’d  been  taught  in  Non-Human  Cultures.  We  were  told  the  Englarians  viewed  a  Stolorth’s
Ragkiril mind talents as something akin to soul-stealing. But the  blind  ones,  their  blindness  a
‘gift’ from the Abbot as Drogue said, were considered acceptable.
Which made me question, again, the extent of Ren’s talents. Drogue seemed so sure he was
nothing  more  than  an  empath.  Or  was  a  limited,  but  harmless,  telepathy  acceptable  to  the
Englarians as well?
Ren had lost his sight gradually, had been brought to the compound  when  he  was  seven,
fully blind by then. He still remembered being able to see.
“What do I miss seeing the most? My ocean. It’s a brilliant blue-green. And there’s a flower
we call a maiisar that grows along the shore. Quite lovely. A deep reddish-brown in color  but
streaked with gold. It glistens. It’s very soft, with a marvelous scent.”
I was watching Ren describe his memories and didn’t know Sully had reached for me until
his hand ran down my braid.
“Like Chasidah’s hair,” he said.
Could empaths receive a sense of color?
I learned that Ren had spent very  little  time  with  humans.  The  Englarian  compound  was
staffed by Takan families devoted to the church.  Humans he saw only  on  rare  occasions,  and
then mostly males.
I was the third human female he’d ever spoken to at  any  length.  He  admitted  he’d  never
met the real Sister Berri, only listened to reports of her work. I was one of two human females
he’d ever shared a meal  with,  played  cards  with.  Obviously,  the  only  female  roommate  he’d
ever had.
I learned he was thirty years old,  five  years  younger  than  myself.  But  that  was  in  human
terms. Stolorths had longer life spans. If his own kind didn’t kill him, he could expect to live at
least one hundred and fifty years.
It was almost 2330 hours, station time, before I could dislodge Sully from the game and the
bed. No M.O.C.  or stripers came calling. Save for several outbursts of colorful epithets related
to  the  sequence  of  the  cards,  it  was  blissfully  quiet.  The  earlier  tensions  between  Sully  and
myself had dissolved. And I accepted that much of what I’d thought was about to happen had
been due strictly to misinterpretation.
It didn’t take much self-analysis to note I was overwrought and exhausted.
Sully left, grumbling.  He  owed  Ren  four  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty  one  credits.
Add that to the one million, seven hundred thousand credits he already owed the Stolorth and
someday Ren would be very wealthy. If Sully ever paid.
I broke even, was tired enough to almost trip on my robe on the way into the shower. I fell
gratefully into the cot, which now held a pillow as well, while Ren went to soak in the tub.

I read Drogue’s pamphlet on Englarian rituals for a little while, but couldn’t keep my eyes
open.  Any  questions  I’d  wanted  to  pose  to  Ren  slipped  from  my  mind.  I  don’t  remember
hearing  Ren  finish  his  bath  or  climb  into  his  own  bed.  But  he  must  have,  because  when  I
awoke, disoriented for  a  moment,  I  could  see  the  outline  of  his  form.  The  clock  on  the  wall
read 0420.
Morning  meditation  was  at  0600.  I  rolled  onto  my  back.  I’d  had  only  about  five  hours
sleep, but it was more than I’d had in one stretch since I’d been taken to Moabar. And I’d slept
deeply, with no dreams, no nightmares. I could make it to morning meditations.  But  I  didn’t
know if I were expected to attend.
I’d ask Ren when he woke. Maybe  ask  him  about  other  things,  as  well.  I  found  I  looked
forward to that, not so much because I could get some questions answered. But because he was
truly pleasant to talk to. It felt odd to feel a friendship toward an adult male Stolorth, yet not.
He wasn’t a Ragkiril. And he might be  a  thirty  year  old  male,  but  he  was  in  many  ways  the
most innocent thirty year old male I’d ever known. There was an eagerness in him, an honest
desire to please that reminded me of Willym, my nine year old half-brother.
I’d seen Willym a few times  last  year  when  my  orders  had  brought  me  through  Marker.
That’s  when  Thad  and  I  still,  marginally,  got  along.  And  my  stepmother,  Suzette,  was  in  a
mood to irritate my father.
I’m sure they’d told Willym I was dead. I hoped  they  had.  He  was  a  good  kid.  He  didn’t
need to grow up with any shadows. Or ghosts.
“Sadness, Chasidah?” Ren’s voice was as soft as pale glow of light filtering under the door.
He was reading my emotions. Given the early hour, I felt guilty for awakening him. “Sorry.
My mind was wandering.”
“I’ve been awake for awhile, reciting my meditations. It was no disturbance. And please, I
didn’t mean to intrude.” His covers rustled as he turned on his side.
“You’re not.” I knew he was doing what Sully had asked him. But he was also, I suspected,
genuinely concerned.
“Your sadness is so very singular. This is normal for all human females, yes?”
“Singular?” That struck me first as an odd comment,  and then terribly true. We did suffer
quietly, within ourselves. “Humans can’t share emotions like you can.”
“And  when  you’re  sad,  you…  think  about  it?  You  hold  it  within  yourself  until  it  goes
away?”
That was an accurate description. “Usually. Some people cry a lot. Some  drink. Or just talk
to a friend.”
“This dispels it?”
“For awhile. What do you do, Ren, when you’re sad?”
“I rarely am.”
This from a blind Stolorth cut off from his own people by a death sentence. Like I’d been.

“Stolorths just don’t get unhappy, or you don’t?”
“My people are always linked to the Great Sea. To the stars. Through the wisdom of Abbot
Eng, I reconnect with that.”
“But not as a telepath?” This was my key question.
“This still concerns you. I lost the High Link when I lost my sight. I was very young. I miss
my sight more than I miss that link.”
I accepted his answer for the moment. There were times to press, times to pull back.  “And
your family?”
“Was that the source of your sad thoughts, Chasidah? My family were the Takas who raised
me, and all my brothers and sisters in  the  church.  And  now,  I  have  more  family  with  Sully,
Marsh, Dorsie and Gregor. And you.”
I recognized  two  of  the  names.  Gregor  was  Sully’s  pilot,  Marsh  his  second  in  command
before his well-publicized demise, two years ago on Garno. I’d often wondered what happened
to them.
I also had a feeling they were the ‘advisors’ who’d voted against my rescue. I’d never made
their lives particularly pleasant.
I sat up in the darkness, now wide-awake. 0435. “Join me for some tea? Coffee?”
“That’s always needed at this hour, yes.”
I’d slept in the long shift. It was probably wrinkled but my robe would cover it. I splashed
water on my face and when I came out of the bath Ren had tabbed the lights to mid-brightness
and was dressed.
I was sitting on the cot, combing  the knots out of my hair when he came out of the  bath,
his long hair also unbound. Something else we had in common.
I held up the comb and then belatedly realized he couldn’t see it. “I’ll do yours if you’ll do
mine.”
He tilted his face.
“Hair,” I told him. “I’ll do your braid, if you like. Unless your arms bend backwards more
easily than mine do.”
He chuckled. “There are some times that I miss what families do for each other.”
He sat on the edge of the bench.  I straddled it behind him, combed  out  his  hair.  It  was  a
beautiful shade of blue; its texture thick,  silky, magnificent.  In  the  room’s  lighting,  his  damp
skin was silvery. He closed his eyes as I worked his braid, his lashes dark against his cheeks.
I leaned slightly sideways to study Ren’s profile as the braid flowed through my fingers. His
nose was straight, his mouth  generous,  the  lines  of  his  jaw  and  cheekbones  almost  regal.  He
had a handsomeness defined by elegance. Which was reflected in the fluid way he  moved.  In
the gentleness—and genuineness—I heard in his voice.
He handed me a short leather tie as I finished off the braid. “Thank you. My marala used to

do that for me.”
“Marala?”
“It is a Takan term of affection for mother.”
“My mother used to braid mine, too.” I switched places with him,  pressed  the  comb  into
his hand. It was webbed and six-fingered. It didn’t bother me as it would have, a week ago.
He  pulled  my  hair  back  through  both  hands.  “Your  hair’s  very  long.”  He  sounded
surprised.
Empaths couldn’t see images, then.
“It’s thick, though, so it braids up shorter,” I told him. His fingers moved in an unfamiliar
pattern. I reached back, felt his work. Intricate. I’d have to look in a mirror, later. Though from
what my fingers could feel, I doubted I could replicate it.
“It’s all right?”
“Fine. Different pattern. I like it.”
“The color’s beautiful. Like a maiisar blossom.”
“You can sense the color?”
A moment of silence. “Sully told me.”
I remembered  that.  I  handed  him  a  short  hair  tie,  let  him  wrap  the  end.  Ran  my  hand
down it one more time. Good braid. It would stay nicely in place.
“It’s ten after five,” I told him as he stood and reached unerringly  for  the  desk  to  put  the
comb  on  top.  The  red  numbers  glowed  on  the  wall.  “I  want  to  get  coffee.”  I  hesitated,
remembered I was talking to an empath, plunged ahead. “But first I need—”
“Something disconcerts you. How I can help?”
His responses were an admission that he was sensing me, reading me. “Did Sully ask you to
watch, to read my emotions because he thinks my allegiance is still to the Fleet?”
He  thought  for  a  moment.  Or  perhaps,  read  some  more  of  my  emotions.  “Sully  is  very
worried about you. But I’m his friend, not his spy. He knows what you’ve  been  through.  His
respect, and faith toward you, is greater than you realize.”
“I don’t think he trusts me.”
“He trusts you, Chasidah. He fears you do not trust him.”
“I believe in what he’s trying to do. Shut down an illegal gen-lab.”
“So do I, or I’d not be here.” He ran his hand across the row of hooks  on  the  wall  by  the
bed. Both our robes hung there. He fingered the small tag at the neckline, correctly  chose  his
own. Touch-labeled, like the playing cards Sully carried.
He draped the robe over his arm. “Chasidah…”

When  my  name  hung  in  the  air  without  anything  further  I  nodded,  then  remembered
again he couldn’t see that. “Umm?” The universal noncommittal.
“May I ask… may I request a small favor in return?”
“Sure.” After all, he’d just answered my prying questions.
“May I see you?”
“See me?” I didn’t quite understand.
“Yes,  see  you.  I’d  like  to  see  your  face.  I’ve  not…  I’d  like  to  believe,  in  spite  of  our
beginnings dirtside, we are friends. Am I presuming too much?”
“No, you’re not.” I thought I understood his request. Blindness was an infirmity unknown
in humans in the Empire. I’d read accounts, in ancient history classes in the Academy, of times
when blind humans could ‘see’ a face through touch. “If you touch my face, you’ll know what
I look like, is that it?”
He nodded. “If this is too intrusive, tell me. I just, it’s just that I’ve not known anyone like
you before.”
“Don’t  know  many  court-martialed  Fleet  captains  turned  prison  escapees,  is  that  it?”  I
grinned wryly.
A small laugh. “You are unique, Chasidah Bergren.”
“I’m not the one with blue hair and six fingers,” I quipped.
I sat on the  bench.  Ren  dropped  his  robe  to  the  floor  and  sat  facing  me,  his  back  to  the
door. He raised both hands, cupped my face.  His  touch  was  soft  yet  firm.  His  clouded  silver
eyes watched me, unmoving.
Both  thumbs  moved  up  my  jaw,  fingers  traced  my  ears,  moved  across  my  cheekbones,
down  my  nose.  Ren’s  explorations  reminded  me  of  a  sculptor,  examining  the  details  of  a
carving. I was very aware he was male, but there was  nothing  intrusive,  nothing  erotic  in  his
touch.
“I have freckles,” I told him. “But you can’t feel those.”
“Freckles?”
“Tiny  darker  spots  of  pigment,  across  my  cheeks  and  nose.  I  was  always  told  they  were
cute,  when  I  was  little.  Once  I  passed  the  age  of  twelve,  I  hated  them.”  I  hated  being  cute,
though I long ago resigned myself to the fact that the description probably fit.
“Ah, freckles. Kisses  from  the  suns  on  the  face.”  His  fingers  brushed  across  my  brows.  I
closed my eyes. He softly touched my lids, my lashes.
“What color are your eyes?”
“Like my hair. Brown and gold.”
His hands cupped my jaw again. “Sully told the truth, then. You’re a beautiful woman.”

I laughed off the compliment. “I have a feeling Sully thinks all women are beautiful.”
“That’s not what he tells me.”
I didn’t have an answer to that one. But I remembered  the fool I saw in  the  mirror  in  the
monastery, and the obsidian eyes watching her. And I remembered a mouth brushing mine, in
that  dark  bar  in  Port  Chalo.  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan  was  a  dangerous  man,  who  played
dangerous games. I didn’t even know the rules.
Ren held my face a moment  longer. “Thank you.” He leaned  his  forehead  against  mine.  I
felt a strange calmness, a warmth flutter through me.
Then a sound, a hushed whoosh. And a sharp intake of breath.
“Lovely. What do we have here?” The voice was harsh, deep, very male. Very Sully.
I jerked back. He stood in the doorway in his monk’s sand-gray robe. His dark brows were
slanted into a frown.
Ren turned  toward  the  door.  His  hand  drifted  down,  casually  clasped  my  wrist.  A  slight
pressure, a squeeze. Reassuring warmth traveled up my arm from his touch. “Sully. Blessings
of the hour. We were going to get tea.”
“Really?” One word, heavily laced with sarcasm.
“Sully.” Ren’s voice was a combination of gentleness and firmness. I  didn’t  know  how  he
did that. He should give classes in the Academy.
A long pause. “You said she was beautiful. She is.”
Sully snorted. “It’s a requirement for Fleet patrol captains. Disarms the enemy.” He stepped
back  into  the  hallway,  one  hand  on  the  door  to  keep  it  from  closing.  “You  want  tea  before
service, you’d better move it.”
He pulled his hand away. The door slid closed on his retreating footsteps.
 
Morning meditations, I learned, consisted of two  parts:  primary  or  essentials,  then  after  a
short  break,  secondary  or  supplications.  I  sat  quietly  between  Ren  and  Sully  through  the
essentials, listened  to  the  tinkling  of  the  bells  as  Brother  Clement  played  them  on  the  raised
platform. I mimicked  Ren and Sully’s posture, head  bowed  under  my  hood,  steepled  fingers
touching my forehead. But I had no idea what words went through their minds.
My  own  raced  over  too  many  things.  My  strange  and  unexpected  sense  of  kinship  with
Ren, a Stolorth. The constant threat of the M.O.C.  officers and stripers just outside the Temple
doors.  The  Takas  I  no  longer  feared,  at  least,  not  here  on  station.  Too  many  of  them  were
Englarian;  the  Temple  was  half  full  this  morning.  Almost  all  of  them  would,  at  some  point
today, began Peyhar’s celebrations. Sully confirmed my earlier theory over tea. A station full of
mellow Takas was a good thing.
His anger over Ren’s ‘seeing’ my face—if that’s what it was—had dissipated when Ren and I
entered  the  common  room.  He  sipped  tea,  talked  animatedly  about  the  celebration,
complained to Brother Clement about his ever mounting financial debt to Ren.

He  was  still  in  a  lighthearted  mood  when  we’d  walked  down  the  short  corridor  and  in
through the Temple’s back  door. When the bells chimed again, his right  boot  snaked  around
my left. Playing ‘footsie,’ like a mischievous child in church.
I tilted my face just far enough to catch a glimpse of his. He peered around his fingertips at
me, winked.
I fought the urge to stick out my tongue, and thereby reducing us both to errant  ten-year
olds.
Three  deep  chimes.  Brother  Clement  rose  from  the  short  bench  in  the  center  of  the
platform,  spread  out  his  arms.  “May  peace  and  wisdom  fill  your  hearts  today,  brothers  and
sisters. Supplications for the devout will follow shortly.”
The  Takas  around  me  shifted,  sighing  deeply  rumbling  sighs.  Heads  lifted.  Some  stood,
others stayed seated.
Sully’s hand cupped my elbow. “Come on,” he said softly.
I glanced at Ren. He nodded. But he didn’t rise as we did.
I followed Sully to the common room. He pushed back his hood as the doors closed behind
us.  I  did  the  same,  knowing  this  meant  we  were  safe  here.  Only  in  the  public  area  of  the
Temple did we keep our heads and faces covered as much as possible.
“You want tea?”
I shook my head. “Maybe later. Do we have to go back?”
“As long as we were seen at the essentials, that’s good enough for a few hours.” He pulled
out a chair. “Sit.” He took the one next to mine.
I folded my hands on the tabletop.
He did the same. His expression held that familiar arrogance, chin slightly tilted up. “I have
us a ship. All you have to do is fly it for us.”
I straightened. Praise the stars! ran through my head. Shit.  I was turning into an Englarian.
“Here?”
“Scheduled  to  make  station  tomorrow.  I  don’t  have  an  E.T.A.  yet.  But  she’s  listed  on
incoming, slated for a berth on Level Six Green.”
The  Temple  was  Nine  Green.  Three  levels  below  us.  Not  lugger  territory.  Another
tri-hauler, like the Diligent? “How large a freighter?”
“She’s not a freighter. She’s a Lancer-class P40.”
I sat, stunned. My last command  had been a Lancer-class P40.  A little peashooter, as Sully
had  called  it.  An  Imperial  patrol  ship.  “How  in  hell  are  you  going  to  convince  an  Imperial
patrol ship to get us off station?”
He grinned. “I’m not. You are. I told you, you’re going to fly it for us.”
“There’s no way—”

“It’s our best chance, Chaz. You know those ships, their security systems and overrides.”
“You’re  talking  about  commandeering  an  Imperial  P40!”  “They  can’t  court-martial  you
twice.”
“That’s the least of my  worries.  You’re  putting  the  three  of  us  against  ten,  fifteen  officers
and crew. Armed officers and crew.  Berthed  at  a  military  station.”  And  one  of  us  was  blind.
“Yeah, I know. Sounds like fun to me, too. I can’t wait.” “Sullivan!” “It’s the last  thing  they’ll
expect. Surely you appreciate  that.  I  spent  a  couple  of  hours  last  night  roaming  through  the
stripers’  reports  on  us.  They  can’t  confirm  whether  Milo  sent  a  warning  message  but  they
suspect  he  did.  There  were  some  scrambled  transmits  that  went  through  the  M.O.C.  filters
dirtside yesterday. I sent two more last night and back-transsed them,  just to keep them  busy.
So they’re watching ships coming up from dirtside. Watching short-haulers and luggers.”
I must be crazy. He was starting to make sense.
“Plus,  there  were  some  antigovernment  demonstrations  on  Tos  Faros  last  week.  Wish  I
could claim credit for that, but I can’t. Now the stripers are sure that’s  what  the  Diligent  was
doing here. Looking to spring Sheldon Blaine.”
Blaine’s  trial  had  been  about  two  years  ago.  He  was  a  flamboyant  figure  who  claimed  a
distant relation with Emperor Prewitt the Third. Or the Emperor’s mother. Or mother’s cousin.
Nothing had ever been confirmed except  for  his  part  in  funding  an  assassination  attempt  on
Prew so that he could take his rightful place on the throne.
He was sent to Moabar for that. I’d been in rather elite company down there.
“They’re concentrating on anything coming from or through Tos Faros,” I guessed. “Or any
crew  with  Farosian  ties.”  And  not,  I  hoped,  for  a  ghost  and  a  court-martialed  patrol  captain
who could run a P40 in her sleep. “She’s due in tomorrow?”
“Updates should be in Ops by 1300.  I’ll have more then.” “Do we know which  ship?  The
captain?”
“That  I  do,  my  angel.  Captain’s  listed  as  Kingswell.  Ship’s  the  Meritorious.”  My  mouth
hung open for a moment  before the words exploded out of it.  “Meritorious?  God  damn  you,
Sullivan! You know that’s my ship!” He was grinning, widely, dangerous lights dancing in his
dark  eyes.  “Told  you  this  would  be  fun.”  I  sat  back  in  the  chair  and  stared  at  him.  The
Meritorious.  Coming  here.  With  that  pompous  son-of-a-bitch  Lew  Kingswell  sitting  in  the
captain’s sling. My captain’s sling. Sully was right. This was definitely going to be fun. I didn’t
even pull my hand away when he reached for it and planted a kiss on my wrist. It just seemed
right, somehow. Like my getting the Meritorious back.
 
Chapter Seven
« ^ » 
Peyhar’s Week celebrations officially began at 1930 hours station time. Our celebrations started
a little earlier.

Sully  accessed  his  link  to  station  ops  shortly  after  1300  hours.  He  confirmed  the
Meritorious, under Kingswell’s command,  would arrive at  1100  hours  tomorrow,  completing
her duties as special escort for the new assistant stationmaster. Commander  Hilary Burnell was
retiring. Commander Izak Chaves got her post.
Lucky Izak. I wonder whom he’d pissed off to warrant a five-year stint on Moabar Station.
I’d  handled  special  escort  service  before;  all  patrol  ships  would  from  time  to  time,  when
something small and fast was required. Especially when the dignitary was someone as minor as
an assistant stationmaster.
So I knew the routine. I spelled  it  out  to  Ren  and  Sully  as  we  lunched  privately  in  Ren’s
cabin, the long bench an impromptu table, the floor, our chairs. We sat in various cross-legged
or angled positions and enjoyed our celebratory lunch. Sully had even cadged another bottle of
wine.
“It’s going to be by no means easy.” I pointed my fork at Sully, who was still gloating. “If I
can get on board, yes, I can take her systems. But I have to get on board first. And we have to
get the crew off. As quietly and quickly as possible.”
I didn’t like Lew Kingswell. Never had. But I had no grudge against him and whoever  his
crew  was  now.  I  only  knew  his  crew  wasn’t  mine.  My  exec  and  second  had  stood  in  my
defense.  They  were  demoted,  busted  down  to  supply  barge  duty  somewhere,  last  I  heard.
“Sparks,” my engineer, had put in for early retirement, and had sent me a long transmit when
I was still in starport lockup. He’d lost faith in the Fleet, he said. And in the Empire.
His sentiments were echoed, in one form or another, by the eight others serving under me
on  that  fateful  tour  of  duty.  None  stayed  with  the  Meritorious,  though  I  doubt  they’d  been
offered the chance.
So we would face an unknown crew, anywhere  from  ten  to  fifteen  counting  Kingswell,  a
pompous, loud, braggart who took great pleasure in bullying junior officers and crew.
I didn’t like him, but I didn’t wish him dead.
Ren dunked the hard  crust  of  his  bread  in  his  soup.  “Could  we  stowaway,  take  the  ship
when she heads back in-system?”
“Ten or more of them against the three of us? Not great odds,” I told him.
Sully shook his head. “Workable, if we take them out, one, two at a time.”
“You might be able to take out two, trank and stow them  somewhere. But by the time you
grabbed crew number three, the other eight or so would notice. You’re talking a P40.  This is a
small  ship.  Three  decks.  Bridge  backs  up  to  the  captain’s  cabin  that  abuts  common  room,
crews’  quarters.  Whole  lower  deck’s  engines  and  cargo,  or  troop  space,  depending  on  your
orders that tour. Sickbay, weapons, repair and enviro on second. That’s it.”
He wasn’t easily dissuaded. “Let’s leave it as an option.”
“We can leave it as an option, but not a top choice. Keep in mind that an action taken in the
lanes could result in a mayday. Could result in a response from Fleet, in the form of a cruiser,
or worse, destroyer. Then you’re facing down the big guns.

“No, we need to take the ship here, on the rim, slip somewhere out-system for awhile. Keep
them wondering.”
Sully’s lips curved in a teasing smile. “Is that what I used to do to you?”
I laughed. “I never wondered about you, Sully. You were consistent in your inconsistencies.
I never had any trouble finding you in the midst of some wild escapade.”
He leaned his elbow on the bench. “Did it ever occur to you that’s because I wanted you to
find me?”
I shot  him  a  disbelieving  look.  “Did  it  ever  occur  to  you  that  you  have  a  difficult  time
admitting you’re not infallible?”
“Why,” he drawled, “would I admit to something that’s not true?”
I touched Ren’s arm. “No more wine for him. He’s delusional.”
A deep, soft laugh, like water tumbling over stones.
“Gentlemen,” I said, “we still have a problem to solve. And less than four hours in which to
do it.” Our presence  would  be  required  at  the  Temple  ceremonies  this  evening.  Drogue  had
insisted on that.
Sully poured another round of wine. “We could invite them  to Peyhar’s. Get them  all furry
on honeylace.”
“Kingswell doesn’t get furry. He swaggers around, finds something he thinks is  small  and
weak, beats on it and claims victory.”
“Delightful. Introduce us, will you?”
“You don’t fit the requirements.” He  wasn’t  remotely  small  or  weak.  He’d  picked  me  up
last night without a struggle. “Besides, he hates Takas.”
“Probably,”  Ren  posited,  “because  they  don’t  fit  his  requirements,  either.  Still,  won’t  his
crew take some liberty here? There are several pubs popular with off-duty station security and
M.O.C. personnel.”
And it was a long run from in-system. “Depends on their tour. More than likely they didn’t
come from Aldan or Baris Prime, but ran an intercept to a cruiser that had Chaves on board.”
“Even  if  they  intercepted  at  Dafir,”  Sully  said,  “it’s  still  a  good  week  at  top  speeds  to
Moabar.”
“True.”  I  sipped  my  wine,  played  with  some  scenarios.  The  Empire  was  gridded  on  an
ancient  linguistic-numeric  character  set.  The  inner  quadrants  were  Aldan  and  Baris,  Prime
through  Four.  Further  out  were  Calth  and  Dafir,  Prime  through  Six,  with  Six  being  rim.
Moabar was in No-Name Quadrant E-5. A good seven-day run  for  a  P40  from  Dafir-Six.  My
own  trip  from  the  Imperial  prison  on  a  starport  in  Baris-Three  took  three  weeks  and  two
jumpgates, just to get to Dafir-Six and the waiting M.O.C. transport ship.
So it was a week back  to Dafir for Kingswell and his crew. Fleet rarely posted a patrol P40
out here. If someone wanted  Moabar,  they’d  give  it  to  them.  “They  just  might  take  liberty.”

Ren’s idea began to have some possibilities. “In shifts, of course.”
Ren  splayed  his  six-fingered  hand  against  the  bench.  “Working  on  the  most  negative
scenario. Captain plus crew of fourteen. How would liberty be structured?”
“On an unsecured port, small shifts, minimal exposure. But this is a secure port. Very little
commercial traffic. Mostly military, government. No civilians.”
“Except us,” Ren said.
“You’re clergy. The government loves you  because  you  keep  the  Takas  happy.”  That  was
true. We had standing no-interference orders on Englarians.
“So if they take liberty, or can be encouraged to take liberty,” Ren continued, “we will then
have a much smaller onboard situation to deal with.”
Sully made a dismissive gesture with his hand. “Then  all  we  have  to  do  is  break  docking
clamps,  drop  into  the  lanes,  and  offer  prayers,  of  course,  that  no  one  in  Ops  or  departure
control  notices  our  slight  transgression.  Or  the  alarms  blaring  on  their  consoles.”  He  leaned
toward me. “That’s the risk, Chaz, of pulling anything right here.”
He was opting for the stowaway scenario. But he was wrong. “We’re not  going  to  have  to
blow the clamps. Ops will gladly withdraw them. And we’ll get clearance to undock, as well.”
Station  might  figure  out  something  was  wrong  when  we  hit  the  lanes,  but  we’d  have  at
least ten minutes on any pursuit ships at that point. And my little P40  could do a lot with ten
minutes if she were up to speed.
Ren smiled. “I believe the captain has a plan.”
I smiled back, knowing he couldn’t see it, but hoping he could feel it. “Yes. I do.”
Sully arched a dark eyebrow.
“Tugs.” My gaze switched from Sully to Ren then back  to Sully again.  A  second  eyebrow
slowly  rose.  “When  we  came  in  on  Chalford’s  ship,  we  were  delayed  because  the  tugs  were
busy  moving  a  couple  of  luggers  off  dock  due  to  interface  malfunctions.  What  if  we  can
duplicate those problems at Six-Green-Three? Kingswell’s not going to have his ship sit with no
fresh  water  and  only  intermittent  power.  And  no  trans  link.  He’ll  have  to  move  to  another
berth, and won’t call back  a full crew on liberty to do so. Engineer probably, and  helm.  Plus,
he won’t need a tug. P40s are designed for close maneuvering.”
“And we’ll just happen to be on board,” Sully said. A slow, wicked smile spread across his
face.
“Fancy that,” I told him.
Ren, beside me, let out a quiet sigh. “Praise the stars.”
“No.  Praise  Chaz.  The  best  interfering  bitch  in  the  quadrant.  Maybe,”  Sully  added,
reaching for my hand, “even in the entire damn universe.”
He planted a soft kiss on my wrist, winking at me from over my own fingers.
Brazenly,  with  a  newfound  confidence,  I  winked  back.  It  had  begun  to  feel  as  if  I  had  a

chance at winning this game.
 
Showtime. Not the more dangerous one, taking the Meritorious. We were still a few hours
from that.
But the beginning of Peyhar’s, with me in a silver gown and gauzy, hooded robe, standing
on the raised platform of the Temple. Sully, in a deeper gray robe, stood next to me. We were
both  to  the  right  of  Drogue  and  Clement  in  the  center,  wearing  bright  gold  robes  trimmed
with wide bands of silver.
All eyes were on them.  Yet I felt exposed, tried to keep  my  face  shadowed.  Which  wasn’t
easy with the lights shining on the large arch-and-stave behind me on the platform.
Clement struck the chimes, Drogue’s voice lilted into a song-like prayer. Ren, in dark gray
like Sully, moved down the center aisle with two other acolytes, swinging incense lanterns left
and right.
The Temple smelled smoky-sweet. A very mild mixture of glory-seeds and some harmless
herbs, Drogue had told me shortly before the ceremony. Relaxing, but far from intoxicating.
The  Takas,  and  a  few  humans,  on  the  bench  seats  breathed  deeply,  almost  as  if  one.  I
fought the urge to sneeze,  focused  instead  on  the  mural  on  the  back  wall.  Abbot  Eng  again,
silver  cape  billowing,  a  shape-shifted  winged  soul-stealer  kneeling  before  him.  No,  not
kneeling—collapsing, the Abbot’s stave sticking out of its spine. Long black hair, matted with
blood,  fell  almost  to  the  ground,  hiding  the  demon’s  face.  It  was  naked  from  the  waist  up,
wings  unfurling  from  a  muscled  back.  Wonderful  image  to  hold  in  your  mind  while  you
breathed glory-seed fumes.
Yet an oddly appropriate one. A few thousand years ago Eng had  fought  the  soul-stealers.
Now, his followers would be  taking  up  the  same  fight,  against  jukors,  the  distorted  lab-bred
version  of  their  mythical  cousins.  Fortunately,  jukors  lacked  any  shape-shifting  abilities.  I’d
hate to be next to one and not know it.
The  chimes  tinkled  again.  Sully  touched  my  arm,  indicated  we  should  step  back  to  the
wall.
My sole function, and Sully’s, at tonight’s ceremony was to hand Drogue and Clement the
sacred objects from the low table behind us. Then replace, clean or refill them as necessary.
We also had to bow when Drogue bowed, kneel when Drogue kneeled, or sit, huddled, in
contemplative silence when Clement recited the long meditative invocation.
All I could think about was taking back  the Meritorious. The slow, languid movements of
the ceremony felt like torture.
I caught a slight nod of Drogue’s head, the first signal. I  turned  to  the  table,  as  Sully  did,
reached for a metal flask. Sully’s warm hand covered mine for a moment.  I  looked  at  him  in
surprise.
“Relax.” His voice was just above a whisper. His small smile just  the  slightest  curve  of  his
mouth.

My heart pounded. Every time I thought of my ship, adrenaline raced through me. I gave
him a short nod as I handed him the flask. “Okay,” I whispered back.
I picked up the metal plate with four squat goblets, held onto the plate with both hands.
“Breathe,” he told me as we walked to the center of the platform.
I didn’t want to breathe. The incense tickled my throat. I inhaled deeply anyway. Fleet had
taught me long ago how to stay focused. This was far from my first mission.
Clement  took  the  plate  from  me;  Drogue  took  the  flask.  Sully  and  I  waited  while  they
poured a golden liquid into the goblets.
A short invocation, then Drogue and Clement drank the liquid in one swallow.
Honeylace, I realized belatedly. Good thing those goblets are small.
Drogue  smiled  at  me,  took  the  remaining  two  goblets  from  the  plate,  held  them  out  to
Sully and myself.
They  expected  me  to  drink  this  stuff?  Tomorrow  would  be  tough  enough  without  a
hangover.
Drogue must have caught my frown. “Sip and put it back,” he said softly.
I tilted the goblet, let a drop fall on my tongue. Sweet, cloyingly sweet. I placed it, full, on
the tray.
Sully’s went back empty.
Oh,  great.  I  hoped  he  didn’t  share  Newlin’s  predilection.  I  needed  him  sober  and
functioning  tomorrow.  It  would  be  difficult  enough  taking  the  Meritorious  with  a  blind
Stolorth. A blind drunk would make it damn near impossible.
More singing, more chanting, more incense, more honeylace. Three more times we refilled
the  goblets.  Three  more  times  Sully  finished  not  only  his,  but  when  we  turned  back  to  the
table, mine.
“Sullivan!” I hissed when he put down my empty goblet.
“Relax.” Obsidian eyes, half-hooded, glinted.
Oh, great.
But he moved easily, without faltering. Maybe the stuff  wasn’t  as  strong  as  the  honeylace
the Takas used. Logically, it shouldn’t be. Drogue and Clement wouldn’t be able to conduct a
ceremony totally furred.
Ren and the other acolytes brought the incense lanterns to the platform, positioning  them
in the center. Gray smoke spiraled upward.
One of the acolytes drew a larger flask from a side alcove, while Ren retrieved  a  basket  of
small  goblets.  The  Takas  and  humans  filed  out  of  the  benches,  lined  up,  hands  open
expectantly.

Clement  filled  goblets,  Drogue  bestowed  them  along  with  blessings  of  the  stars,  of  the
hour, for wisdom, for peace… Sully was missing. I suddenly realized I stood alone by the small
table. Then I spotted him at the end of the line, Ren beside him.
They took their goblets, drank. I noticed Sully held a third and was bringing it toward me.
The Temple emptied out. Sully strode up the short steps, his robe rippling  over  his  body,
outlining  his  wide  shoulders,  narrow  hips.  His  gaze,  shadowed  by  his  hood,  was  directly  on
me; his mouth curved slightly in a smile, as if he wanted to grin but knew this wasn’t the time
or the place for it.
“Chazzy-girl.  Peace,  wisdom  and,  most  of  all,  love.”  He  offered  me  the  goblet.  “You  did
fine.”
Behind him stood Ren and Drogue, heads bowed, hands clasped, talking in hushed tones. I
had a feeling they were saying good-bye.
I took the goblet, but only to put it on the table behind me. “I didn’t sneeze or trip over my
robe. I consider that a rousing success.”
His gaze went over my shoulder to the table. “Sacrilege to waste that.”
“I can live with that sin.”
“You’re much  too beautiful to be consigned to Hell.” He took  the  goblet  back,  drained  it.
“That makes twice now I’ve saved you from perdition.”
He put the empty goblet on  the  table,  hooked  his  arm  through  mine  as  he  moved  back.
“We’re not needed here any longer.”
Ren turned as we passed him. Sully put his free hand on Ren’s arm, held his sightless gaze.
“All of life’s a risk, isn’t it?” His voice was wistful.
Drogue bowed slightly. “Our prayers and the guidance from the stars  go  with  you.  All  of
you.”
It  dawned  on  me  that  Sully  and  Ren  were  probably  as  nervous  as  I  was  about  the
Meritorious.  About  getting  off  station  alive.  About  evading  any  pursuit  the  M.O.C.  or  the
Imperial Fleet might send after us.
That  was  easy  to  forget  around  Sully  because  he  seemed  to  show  only  two  emotions:
confidence, or anger and confidence. Yet he had to know the odds weren’t overwhelmingly in
our favor. He’d been in the business, as he called it, a long time.
I let him lead me through the Temple’s back doors, past Abbot Eng and his winged demon,
and forgave him his slight indulgence in honeylace.
His  fingers  slipped  through  mine  as  we  stepped  through  the  second  doorway.  The  wall
clock in the common room glowed 2115. But we didn’t stop there.
We came to the end of the hallway. He turned me away from Ren’s doorway, touched the
palmpad for his own. He held my hand tightly and for the first time I saw something hesitant
in  his  obsidian  gaze,  something  in  the  way  his  lashes  lowered  quickly,  then  flicked  up.
Something in the way he started to speak, his mouth parting, then quickly closing.

Oh,  God.  The  Meritorious  wasn’t  coming  in.  It  was  the  only  thing  I  could  think  of  that
would make him appear so dismayed, so unsure. He knew what it meant to me. The infallible
Sullivan hated failure.
“All of life’s a risk,” he said softly. “I’m about to take a big one.”
He pulled me against him, his arms locking around me. His mouth covered mine, taking in
my gasp of surprise. He answered with a kiss I remembered  well, a kiss of intense passion, his
tongue stroking, probing. His hands splayed on my back,  pushing me against the hard planes
of his body.
Heat  seared,  flared  through  my  senses  as  if  I  were  absorbing  it  from  his  touch.  For  a
moment I was lost, breathless, dizzy, as if I’d downed a bottle of honeylace… Honeylace.
Fool.
I twisted my face away. “Sullivan. Stop it.” My voice rasped into the folds of his robe.
His lips had been brushing kisses down my neck. He stopped though his arms still held me
tightly. I could feel him breathing hard, his chest rising  and  falling  rapidly  against  my  face.  I
could  smell  the  clean,  soapy  scent  coming  off  the  heat  of  his  skin.  I  could  taste  the  tingling
sweetness of the honeylace from his mouth.
I  could  ignore  the  warning  sirens  screaming  in  my  mind,  tell  my  self-respect  to  hit  a
jumpgate, and could very, very easily rip his robe off. With my teeth.
I wanted to. Praise the stars I wanted to. I wanted him.
But I couldn’t. I pulled my face out of his chest. And tried not to see the desperate hunger
in  the  depths  of  his  obsidian  eyes.  A  hunger  that  matched  my  own.  But,  I  suspected,  for
different reasons.
“Not this way, Sully,” I told him.
“Why?” His voice was as raspy as mine.
I curled my hands into small  fists,  drew  a  deep  breath.  “Because  you’re  furred.  Seriously
furred. And I’m…” I let the breath out. “…confused.”
Strong fingers stroked my spine. “Maybe I like my women confused.”
His women. There probably was a lengthy list.
Yes, why were all the handsome ones always such bastards?
I pushed away from him, a wry smile on my lips. “Maybe I just don’t want to be  another
one of your confused women.”
“Chaz?” He reached for my hand but I’d already stepped toward Ren’s door.
I hit  the  palmpad.  “Get  some  sleep,  Sullivan.  The  real  show  starts  tomorrow.  Common
room, 0600.”
I was still  sitting  on  the  edge  of  my  cot,  turning  my  dagger  over  and  over  in  my  hands,
when Ren came in an hour later. He tilted his face up in a gesture I recognized as  his  sensing

for a presence. The door closed behind him.
“Hello, Ren.”
He  shook  his  head.  “Sully,”  he  said  softly,  in  a  voice  that  rippled  of  breezes  over  a
long-forgotten pond, “is very angry with Sully.”
I didn’t doubt that. He wasn’t used to failure. Or, I suspected, to a woman turning down a
chance—my second chance—to snag a coveted place on the list of  his  women.  Probably  very
few had.
But  all  I  had  left  was  my  self-respect.  The  Imperial  Military  court  had  stripped  me  of
everything else. And I’d be damned, just because they’d fucked me over, if that gave everyone
else the right to do the same.
I let the  dagger  wrap  around  my  wrist  as  I  stood.  “I’m  going  to  take  a  shower.”  I  didn’t
want to hear him make excuses for Sully. I didn’t want to hear anything about Sully at all.
He only nodded, began  to  undo  the  sash  around  his  robe.  “I’ll  have  tea  ready  when  you
come out.”
The kindness, and acceptance, behind Ren’s simple offer made a lump form in my throat. I
wondered how I’d ever thought he was innocent. He had a wisdom deeper than those oceans
he so treasured, and so missed.
I’d have to find him one. Hell, I was Chasidah Bergren, Court-Martialed Captain. The Best
Interfering Bitch in the Universe. If I could highjack a P40  and sabotage the Marker shipyards,
I should be able to commandeer an ocean.
And maybe even drown Gabriel Ross Sullivan in it when I got the chance.
I came out of the shower, clean, refreshed and smiling.
 
Chapter Eight
« ^ » 
In the morning I pulled on my fatigue pants and black jacket. Later, I’d add the robe. It would
feel bulky, almost clumsy to walk with the layers of clothing, but I wouldn’t have to walk far.
Just to the lift, then down three levels to Six-Green.
Ren  was  in  the  bath  when  I  slipped  from  his  quarters.  I  headed  for  the  common  room,
intending to return his gesture of the night before and bring back  tea. I  knew  it  was  possible
I’d run into Sully. Better to get it over with, face the ghost in his own lair. We had too much  to
accomplish  to  let  inebriation  and  hormones  become  an  issue  right  now.  Because  that’s  all  it
was, all it could be. I’d thought about it all night. Twice he’d kissed me, twice he’d been drunk.
Sober, the flamboyant, charming Sullivan wouldn’t even notice someone like me.
Which  was  probably  one  reason  why  I  found  him  so  damnably  attractive.  Why  every
woman did.

He was seated at the table, a steaming mug cupped between his hands. He  raised  his  face
when I walked in. He looked like a man who’d done some serious drinking. His dark eyes were
shadowed. He’d not shaved. His short, thick hair was tousled.
“Chaz.”
“Sullivan.” I headed for the commissary panel, tabbed in two orders of tea. Leaned against
the wall while the unit hummed softly.
Sully had turned in his seat, and watched me. He had on  a  black  jacket,  spacer-plain  like
mine, dark pants. His jacket was open to reveal a black, high-necked shirt underneath.
I damned the fact that he could look so good while looking so bad. “You pick up a confirm
on  Kingswell’s  E.T.A.?”  Business,  let’s  stick  to  business.  It  was  0545.  Fleet  regs  would  have
required the Meritorious to relay her position and speed to ops forty-five minutes ago.
If they were going to be early—or late—we needed to know.
“On schedule.” He propped one arm on the back of his chair.
I took the first mug of tea as it appeared, hit the tab to okay the second. “Kingswell will be
early. He doesn’t like the big wide darkness.” There was a lot of nothing between Moabar and
the closest station in Dafir.
I grabbed the second tea, walked past his chair.
“Chaz.”
I closed my eyes briefly, then half-turned. The pungent aroma wafting up  from  the  mugs
set my stomach to growling. The trepidation in his voice when he said my name shot  a  small
pain through my heart. I knew what was coming. The apology, the disclaimer. Sober,  I wasn’t
his  type.  Even  though  I  expected  it,  it  would  still  hurt  to  hear  it.  I  opted  for  the  quick  and
painless route. “I’ve got to get this to Ren while it’s still hot.”
His gaze zigzagged for a moment,  as if he were reading lines of data in the air between us.
“About last night. I’m sorry.”
I shrugged, careful not to spill the tea. Careful to keep my expression impassive. “You were
furred. It makes people do stupid things.”
He stared at me, didn’t say anything.
I  was  giving  him  a  legitimate  out,  damn  it!  Why  didn’t  he  take  it?  Make  it  easy,  less
embarrassing for both of us. The hot mugs began  to  burn  my  fingers.  I  drew  a  deep  breath.
“It’s not important.” I held up one mug. “Let me get this to Ren, okay? Then I need an absolute
confirm on berth allocation so we can start skewing their dock interfaces.” I backed up toward
the door. “And we need to know if a Taka’s assigned to ramp security.”
I was almost into the hallway before he nodded. “Ren will handle that.”
“Fine,” I called out over my shoulder. I juggled  both  mugs  in  one  hand,  hit  the  palmpad
with the other.
 

Ren was by his bed, straightening the long sleeves of the black thermal  shirt  I’d  glimpsed
the other day under his robe. He smiled when I walked in.
“It’s me. Got tea.”
“I know. I can smell the tea. Many thanks.”
I set his mug down on the small bed table behind him. He wasn’t wearing the light colored
wide legged pants of an Englarian monk,  but dark fatigues, similar to my own. I’d never seen
him in civilian garb before. His muscular form was even more striking in the tight fitting shirt
and straight pants. Another admittedly handsome male specimen. But he didn’t affect me the
way Sully did.
“How’d you know it was me?”
A slight frown. “I know your voice.”
“No. When I walked in. You knew it was me before I even spoke.” Imperial Fleet ships all
had  ID  scanners  over  cabin  doorways.  But  even  if  the  Temple’s  quarters  had  them,  Ren
couldn’t see them.
“I know your resonance.”
“You mean, you scan, or read someone who walks in.”
“No. Reading you empathically is different than my seeing your resonance.”
“Explain.”
“An empath sees or senses individuals by the vibrational colors their bodies resonate. Each
one is unique. All I need to do is see your pattern, attach your name to it in my mind, and it, to
me, is you.”
“A walking rainbow?”
He sighed. “It’s been many years since I’ve seen a rainbow, but yes. Something like that.”
“Can I change my colors? Disguise them, so you wouldn’t know me?”
“Your  pattern  is  your  pattern.  But  it  does  vary  slightly  depending  on  many  things,  like
illness. Or moods.”
“Sadness?” I remembered his questions from the other morning. “Fear?”
“Yes. But your pattern does not tell me your thoughts. Or the reasons for your moods. So  it
is not intrusive. It still retains  the  holiness  and  purity  of  your  mind.”  He  reached  for  his  tea,
unerringly.
“Thermals. You sense or see heat. That’s how you know where the tea is.”
He smiled. “Very good.”
I laughed. “The tea, or me?”
“Both. But you are better.”

“Then  you’re  not  completely  blind.  You  don’t  move  around  in  total  blackness.  You  can
see…”
“Indistinct images or forms outlined in colors.” He took another sip.
“Living  things  and  inanimate  objects?”  Not  all  objects  emitted  heat,  though  most
everything contained some form of energy.
“Yes.”
I began to understand. And saw how I’d misinterpreted  that  for  telepathy.  He  could  ‘see’
someone walk in and would nod in greeting just as a  sighted  person  would.  “So  you  can  tell
how tall I am, for example, compared to…” I waved my hand in the air, not wanting to name
the first name that came to my mind.
He did. “Sully. Compared to Sully, I know you are smaller.”
“He was in the common room, when I got the tea.”
“Was he?”
It  was  a  question  that  wasn’t  a  question,  and  that  told  me  Ren  knew  Sully  was  there.  I
wondered if different colors tumbled through my rainbow when I thought about him.
A dangerous  man.  Dangerous  to  even  think  about.  I  had  other  problems.  “He  said  you
might be able to find out if a striper or a Taka was set for ramp duty for Six-Green-Three.”
“Probably a Taka. With Peyhar’s this week, they all reschedule to early duties in order to be
able to attend the services at night. It’s one of the few times you will see many Taka during the
day, and few after services start.”
I finished my tea, tossed the empty mug in the recyc. “I don’t want anyone hurt, if we can
help it. Any chance we could get a Taka to look the other way for awhile?”
He  felt  on  the  bed  for  his  jacket,  found  it  on  the  second  try.  I  guess  jackets  didn’t  have
strong rainbows. “Possible. If not, we could set off some kind of diversion.”
“Good.  Let’s  run  this  by  Sully.  Then  I  need  to  get  to  work  on  those  docking  interface
programs.”
Sully was coming down the hallway toward  us  and  motioned  toward  his  door.  “Clement
and Drogue will be in the common room after services this morning. Let’s talk in here.”
Ren  touched  the  glowing  palmpad,  guided,  I  understood  now,  by  the  unit’s  energy.  I
followed him through, Sully behind me.
“Lights,” he said. The room brightened. His short-barreled Norlack Sniper was on his bed.
So  were  two  small  laser  pistols  in  shoulder  holsters.  I  took  one  out,  tested  its  weight  in  my
hand. It fit comfortably in my palm. Fleet-issue  Stinger.  Modified  for  slash,  like  the  Norlack.
Nice work.
Sully  took  the  laser  pistol  from  my  hand  and  thumbed  off  the  power  panel.  “Still  has  a
short range safety setting. I thought you’d prefer to work that way, on station.”
I could feel the heat of his body where he leaned against my arm. His face was tilted toward

mine, his breath ruffling my hair. I couldn’t look at him. Every time I did I felt things I didn’t
want to feel. I tried to keep them all of them out of my voice when I answered.
“Yeah, I do. I think  we  all  do.”  Short-range  safety  reduced  the  risk  of  bystander  injuries.
Fatalities. Our purpose was to get off station. Not massacre people.
I  picked  up  the  other  laser  pistol.  It  was  slightly  larger  than  the  Stinger.  It  took  me  a
moment to place it. With Sully so close to me, my brain and my body didn’t seem to want to
think about weapons right now.
“A  Carver-12,”  I  said,  when  my  brain  finally  kicked  in.  “Damn.”  Very  accurate.  Very
expensive. The elite of high energy hand weapons. Prew’s personal  bodyguards  reportedly  all
carried them.
Sully’s hand slid over mine, locking it against the small curved grip. A  burst  of  sweet  fire
surged  unexpectedly  through  me,  made  my  heart  skip  a  beat,  made  me  catch  my  breath.
Made me realize that Ren had to be seeing fireworks right about now and there wasn’t a damn
thing I could do about it.
Except to damn Sullivan, the handsome bastard.
And to damn Chasidah, the fool denying her fears.
“Mine,” he said softly.
Somehow, I knew he meant more than just the laser pistol.
I raised my face, met his obsidian gaze. Chose my words carefully. “An expensive play toy
to some people. It’s different, so they want it. They don’t understand  value.  Just  image.  Then
they get bored, look for something newer, better. I don’t work that way.”
A slow nod of a face badly in need of a shave. “I don’t either.”
I slipped my hand from under his, picked up the Stinger again. “There’s much  to  be  said
for  dependability.  Reliability.  Consistency.”  I  held  it  up,  as  if  in  inspection.  It  was  plain  and
functional compared to the sleek Carver. “It’s not fancy. No frills. But it will never, ever let me
down.”
He  brushed  the  back  of  my  hand  with  his  fingers.  “Neither  will  I,”  he  said  softly,  but
without hesitation. “If you believe nothing else, Chasidah, believe that.”
I  damned  myself  for  wanting  to  believe  him,  for  needing  to  believe  him.  For  even
wondering if maybe those kisses in Port Chalo, and the one  last  night,  meant  more  than  just
inebriation and hormones.
This wasn’t the  time  to  think  of  such  things.  I  grabbed  the  shoulder  holster  then  turned
and caught  a  wide  grin  on  Ren’s  face.  And  wondered  what  colors  I  could  send  through  my
body that would tell him, oh, shut up.
I peeled off my jacket. Sully tabbed up the micro-screen from the desk. He leaned over it,
keying in programs while I adjusted the shoulder holster over my T-shirt. Ren sat on the prayer
bench,  the Norlack resting on his knees. I had a feeling he  was  a  better  shot  than  I  would’ve
given him credit for earlier.

I peered around Sully’s shoulder. “You’ve something to keep them from tracing you?”
His smile was warm  and  confident.  “Don’t  need  it  right  now.  The  Temple  has  legitimate
access  to  a  number  of  areas  that  might  surprise  you.  Surprised  me  when  I  found  out.”  He
touched the screen, opened a data box. “Because the Taka are tied so closely with the church,
no  one  thinks  twice  when  we  look  at  work  schedules.  Or  a  particular  individual’s  current
location. The church  serves as a liaison to their homeworld. If Grandfather dies, it’s Clement’s
job to find Grandson, and tell him.”
“So who’s on duty at Six-Green-Three around 1100?”
“Grevarg.” He turned toward Ren. “Know him?”
“He’s saddened when Guardian Drogue returns dirtside. He doesn’t think Brother Clement
can sing.”
“Will he help us?” I asked.
“I  don’t  think  he  will  hinder  us,  or  ask  too  many  questions,  if  we  appear  to  have  a
legitimate reason to be at Six-Green-Three.”
“We’ll have to accept that, for now.” Sully tabbed through a few more screens. “Let’s check
ops again. See if Kingswell has anything new to report.”
He touched his thumb to a data box on the lower part of the screen, brought up a filter I’d
not seen before. He segued into ops smoothly. The Meritorious was still on schedule. Still set to
berth at Six-Green-Three.
Getting  into  station  schematics  took  him  a  little  longer.  Sully  pulled  down  the  attached
desk chair, sat and frowned. Ren left for tea, came back  with a pot and three mugs. Then left
again and returned with a plate of fruitbread.
I handed Sully half a thick slice in a napkin. “Pull  up  the  old  work  order  from  when  the
Lucky Seven came in. See what the dock malfunctions were, pick up their axis and sequence.
The system might let you in as a maintenance verification, or follow-up. Then—”
“Got  it,  got  it.”  His  fingers  flew  over  the  screen.  Data  tumbled,  merged,  dropped  into  a
pattern. “Got it!”
 
Two  hours  passed  quickly.  I  went  for  tea  this  time.  Morning  meditations  were  finished.
Drogue was in the common room.
“Sister?” His round face bore signs of worry.
“Things are coming together.” I gave him what I hoped was a reassuring smile.
“But in  other  ways  they  are  falling  apart.”  He  shook  his  head.  “I  was  just  on  my  way  to
Ren’s quarters to tell you.”
My stomach tensed. As Sully had so well pointed out, the church  was tied in to the Takas,
and through them,  the M.O.C..  If there were questions  about  the  Diligent  or  her  supposedly
illicit purpose, Drogue would hear of them, eventually.

“We’re in Sully’s quarters. You want to come back with me?”
Drogue followed, his footsteps heavy.
Sully  was  seated  at  the  desk,  Ren  leaning  over  his  shoulder.  Both  turned  as  we  stepped
inside. Drogue’s presence seemed to surprise Ren. But I knew now how he knew who was with
me. Rainbows, not illegal and invasive telepathy. “Guardian. Blessings. Is there a problem?”
“An unfortunate incident. I don’t know if it will affect your plans, but it is singular. And, I
fear,  not  unrelated  to  the  larger  issue  we  face.  I’ve  just  learned  of  it,  and  I  apologize  for  not
coming immediately. But I needed a cup of tea to settle my thoughts.”
Sully stood, dark brows slanting. He motioned to the prayer bench. “Sit, please.”
Drogue’s  shoulders  slumped  slightly  under  his  pale  robe.  “One  of  our  Takan  brothers,
Jalvert, has been taken into custody by station security.”
Jalvert.  The  name  sounded  familiar.  Then  I  remembered  the  narrowed  eyes  of  the  Taka
who’d cleared my ID card yesterday.
“Charges?” Ren asked.
“Rape. And murder.”
My mind flashed to a wooded clearing,  a  muddy  twilight,  and  a  large  Taka  guard  who’d
tracked  me,  silently,  until  he  thought  we  were  far  enough  from  anyone  that  my  screams
wouldn’t be heard.
Yet, even with my experience, I  knew  a  Taka  attacking  a  human  was  rare.  I’d  concluded
my  confrontation  was  not  only  unusual,  but  due  most  likely  to  the  mentality  of  the  Taka
recruited  for  dirtside  service.  Certainly  the  ones  on  station,  and  the  ones  who  worked  the
spaceport, were cleaner, more alert, more professional.
Jalvert had none of the stench, none of the slurred speech my attacker had.
“Against one of their own?” I followed my thoughts to what I felt was a logical conclusion.
“No. This is the concern, Sister. Jalvert  is  charged  with  the  rape  and  murder  of  a  human
female. An M.O.C. officer.”
“Stars protect us,” Ren said softly. “May her soul find peace.”
“Security  has  been  tightened,”  Drogue  continued.  “There’s  talk  of  suspending  Peyhar’s
until more is known. I don’t  know  how  much  this  will  hamper  what  you  must  do.  But  it  is
clear. You must get off station as soon as possible. You must act on what we know is happening
at the shipyards. Or this incident may well herald the start of something far more  serious,  far
more bloody.”
I understood the security considerations. But I didn’t see what an isolated incident, though
violent,  had  to  do  with  the  gen-labs  or  Marker.  “Do  you  know  who  Jalvert’s  charged  with
killing?”
“Delia Tran. The officer who questioned your medical records when we made station.”
“I thought Jalvert looked upset over that. Could that be why he attacked her? Was she  an

overbearing superior officer—”
“She was human, Chaz.” Sully stepped toward me, rested his hand lightly on my shoulder.
“He attacked her because she was human and she was female. He did to her what the Empire’s
doing to his people.”
“Yeah, they fucked me over, too, but—”
“This is about the gen-labs. The jukors. The  Empire’s  using  Taka  females  as  surrogates  to
breed the jukors.” There was a hardness, an  anger  in  the  obsidian  eyes.  “The  newborn  jukor
literally rips the Taka female apart as it’s born.”
The horror of his words was almost beyond my comprehension.
“This is what we have to stop.” His hand  tightened  on  my  shoulder.  “Or  the  Empire  will
face an enemy, a war from within far more dangerous, and bloody, than  it  can  ever  imagine.
And the enemy will deserve to win.”
 
Chapter Nine
« ^ » 
Takan  females  forced  to  breed  against  their  will.  Mutilated,  murdered  by  the  very  creatures
they gave life to. And all this under the auspices of the Imperial government.
“How long has this been going on?” I stared up at Sully,  my  voice  sounding  thin.  Horror
strangled my words.
“A year, perhaps a little more.” His grip loosened, his thumb moving over my shoulder in a
brief caress, a small apology, perhaps for his  angry  grasp  a  moment  ago.  He  glanced  back  at
Ren, standing by the desk.
Ren. A Stolorth. Raised by a Takan woman he called his mother.
Ren made a small, aimless motion with one hand. “We do not have the all the  facts.  Only
small pieces. Much may be conjecture.”
I spun on Sully, anger welling up inside me. “Why didn’t you tell me all this before?”
He seemed to expect my reaction, was unperturbed by it. “Because we’re still trying to put
the  information  together.  I…We  were  following  rumors  of  the  gen-labs.  We  kept  hearing
stories of Takan females, taken by force. It didn’t seem related until a Taka showed us a holo of
a female’s body, bloodied. And a bit of a jukor wing stuck in her chest.”
His face turned toward Ren again, as if he were worried about the effect of  his  words.  No
emotion  showed  in  Ren’s  hazed,  silvered  eyes  but  he  must  have  seen  the  colors  in  Sully’s
rainbow change. He nodded.
Sully turned back at me. “That was about a month ago. When I started searching for you.”
“You’ve  been—how  long  were  you  on  Moabar?”  I  added  up  days,  and  tried  to  put

everything in a time line.
“Almost as long as you. Three weeks.”
“Trying to find me?”
He nodded.
“Because of this?”
“That was one reason.”
My ties to Marker,  my Fleet training no doubt were others. That and  my  court-martial.  It
increased the probability I’d be a willing accomplice.
Sully’s words spun through my mind. I tried to analyze the information as I’d been taught.
Details. “You said a Taka showed you a holo. Genuine? Not altered?”
“Best  I  could  determine,  genuine.  I  wasn’t  the  first  to  see  it.  It’s  known  in  the  Takan
community.”
“I heard rumors weeks before Sullivan approached me,” Drogue said. It was the first time I
heard  him  call  Sully  anything  but  Brother  Sudral.  “I’ve  never  seen  this  holo,  nor  any
documentation. But things are very tense with the Taka right now. Sullivan tells me you were
attacked?”
And  I’d  killed  my  attacker.  A  Taka.  The  very  beings  Drogue  was  trying  to  protect.  “I
thought he was drunk, crazy. And he, well, he didn’t know I had a knife.”
I glanced  at  Ren,  saw  his  soft  smile  of  acceptance.  “You  had  to  defend  yourself.  Killing
human females at random will not solve this problem.”
“And Jalvert?” I asked Drogue. “You think his attack on Tran was motivated  by  stories  of
Takan females being used to breed jukors?”
“There’ve  been  three  other  similar  attacks,  in  the  past  six  months,”  Drogue  said.  Sully
nodded. “Two in Dafir. One in Baris. The reports came to me through our missions. The Takas
caught, and accused, all carried a small carved disk in their vests. It has symbols on it, and the
symbols are linked with the slogan, ‘The circle of life breeds death.’ Jalvert had one of these.”
The circle of life breeds death. The clock on Sully’s wall glowed 0900.  The Meritorious was
due to arrive at 1100. I would take her back, completing another circle.
“What’s the mood on station now?” Sully swiveled the chair around and faced Drogue.
“The  Takan  community  knows.  Security  has  tried  to  keep  the  incident  quiet,  but  not
successfully. Plus, I gather it’s possible Jalvert may have spoken to others of his plans.”
“Perhaps  you  should  check  ops  again.”  Ren  touched  Sully’s  arm.  “Grevarg  may  not  be
scheduled at the ramp. Security might not want to risk an incident with a new stationmaster.”
“We could still gain access,” I said. It would be a little more difficult, but it could be  done
through the same diversion we’d planned. It was as easy to draw away a human security guard
as a Takan.

“If  not  this  ship,  you  must  find  another  one.”  Drogue’s  expression  was  insistent,  almost
pleading. “You know  the  church  will  help  in  any  way  it  can.  Not  openly,  yet.  We’d  be  shut
down. Lose our contact with the Taka. But anything else we can do, be assured we will.”
I  understood.  At  the  moment,  the  Englarians  were  the  only  sane  voice  in  this  matter.
Whoever was behind this breeding of jukors clearly was not.
Sully  confirmed  Grevarg  was  still  on  the  duty  roster.  The  Meritorious  was  still  slotted  to
Six-Green-Three.
I touched the dagger wrapped around my wrist for reassurance, like a talisman. “We have
work to do. And not much time left to do it.”
Drogue stood. “Tell me how I can help.”
I thought of all I knew about ships on liberty. Tens years worth. More than that. I’d grown
up on Marker-2. “Do you have a connection with any of the pubs on station?”
“Master Penley is a friend, yes.”
“Human?”
Drogue nodded.
“We need some quiet, untraceable invitations to  be  issued  to  the  officers  and  crew  of  the
Meritorious. She’s due in around 1100, Six-Green-Three. I need as many of her crew off-ship as
possible. Shouldn’t be any more than fifteen. Captain is Lew Kingswell. I  need  them  well-fed
and well-furred.”
“I  will  make  sure  word  of  Penley’s  superior  ale  and  hearty  portions  reaches  the  proper
ears.”
I had a newfound respect for the round-faced, gentle monk. “Thank you.”
“Praise the stars.” He grasped Ren’s hand, held it, then let his other rest on Sully’s shoulder
for a moment. “Blessings, blessings.” I reached out my own in a parting gesture. He clasped it
tightly  then  stepped  for  the  door.  His  footsteps,  muffled  by  the  fabric  of  his  robe,  receded
softly.
 
Kingswell had no love of the big wide darkness.  The  Meritorious  arrived  early.  Her  berth
confirmation and clearance flashed on Sully’s  deskscreen.  I  swiveled  the  chair  around  just  as
Ren dealt a new hand onto the middle of Sully’s bed.
“Put the cards away, boys. It’s time.”
There were two others in the lift when Sully, Ren and I stepped through the parting doors.
Both human, one in a brown M.O.C. uniform. The other wore utilitarian gray coveralls with no
ship’s patch. I figured the woman for a tech, or dockworker.
The M.O.C. officer was male, portly, his belly straining the seams of his shirt. He glanced at
us, his lip curling slightly as we offered blessings of the hour.  We  were  just  a  bunch  of  crazy
people who chanted to the stars and waved incense.

The hooded robe covered our dark clothes, our weapons, and Ren’s blue  hair  as  well.  His
hands he kept folded in the wide sleeves. It wasn’t a  precaution  he  normally  took  on  station.
He was, he’d told me, an accepted oddity. A blind Stolorth Englarian monk.
But  it  was  a  precaution  we  needed  now.  No  one  should  remember  anything  particular
about a trio of Englarians on this particular day, or this particular hour.
It was 1205. The Meritorious had been in for an hour. Chaves had already been greeted by
a small contingent of M.O.C.  officers at the ramp, bearing, no  doubt,  the  latest  news.  A  rape
and murder on station. On Chaves’s first day.
Welcome to Hell, Izak. Welcome to Hell.
 
Level Six-Green. We left behind the officer and the techie heading to different destinations.
Maybe even Penley’s. There was talk of a challenge having been issued. The crew of a Chalford
lugger was betting meals  for  all  at  Penley’s  that  the  crew  of  an  Imperial  patrol  ship  couldn’t
drink as much ale as they could.
Everyone  knew  that  Penley’s  had  the  best  Imperial  ale  on  station.  Everyone  knew  that
Penley’s had the best food. Real food, not from commissary panels.
Six-Green-Three.  A  lone  Taka  ambled  between  Berth  Three’s  ramp  and  Two’s.  The  laser
pistol strapped to his hip was visible just below the edge of his brown vest.
“Grevarg.”  Ren  said  the  name  softly,  confirming  the  Taka’s  identity  for  us  through  his
rainbow  image.  Shortly,  the  guard  would  be  called  away  to  answer  a  message  Sully  had
arranged from an untraceable source, and wouldn’t be there when we returned.
We walked past, by all appearances a trio of monks handing out blessings of the hour to the
stationers traversing the corridor.
Six-Green-Five.  Eight.  Ten.  Three  gray  suited  maintenance  techs  trotted  by.  One  spoke
rapidly into the comm badge clipped to his shirt. “Interfaces are down again?”
I could see the small, slow, wicked smile on Sully’s lips.
“Praise the stars,” I told him.
Eleven. We stopped, looked toward the rampway. Another Taka, his back  to us, stared out
the viewport. The curved bow of a freighter was visible. An unfamiliar ship’s name glowed on
the overhead. I couldn’t make out the company markings on the hull. But the blackness of the
starfield beyond beckoned.
We turned.
Eight.  Sully  drifted  toward  a  row  of  seats  in  a  small  waiting  area.  I  kept  pace  with  Ren.
Moments later, he caught up with us.
Seven. “Just a little fire,” Sully said modestly. “More smoke than damage.”
Five.  A  maintenance  worker  hurried  by,  tool-kit  wagging  behind  on  an  anti-grav  pallet.
“Sorry, coming through. Sorry.”

“Blessings. May your work be fruitful.”
Three. The Meritorious’s hatchlock was open at the top of the ramp. Grevarg was nowhere
in sight. A maintenance worker stood at the base of the ramp, leaning over the control podium,
shouting. “Tell Ops the captain wants her moved. No, don’t need no tug. This is one  of  them
Imperial boats. Fifteen still open?”
The answer was softer, but I clearly heard it. “Fifteen’s cleared. Request approved. Slotting
them to Departure now.”
Sully stepped up to  the  worker.  “Pardon,  brother.  We  seek  a  Takan  brother  with  urgent
family news.”
The  man  barely  glanced  at  Sully  as  he  ran  his  hand  through  his  thinning  hair  in  an
exasperated motion. Chatter still came from the podium speaker.
“What’s that? Hang on, I got some religious guy here needs to find a furry.”
Sully half-turned toward the hatchlock, as if  looking  for  someone.  He  raised  one  hand  to
adjust his hood, shielding his face.
I walked  toward  him,  hands  curved  over  my  mouth  and  nose,  my  breath  catching  in  a
squeak as if I were crying. Such urgent, sad family news.
“Shit, what now?” The worker waved us on. “Yeah, go ahead. He might be in there, trying
to get the damn clamps unlocked. If not, check Berth Five.”
Ren hurried behind me, ducking his  head  through  the  Meritorious’  hatchlock  just  as  the
fire alarms wailed far down the corridor.
Sully stepped quickly aside to let me lead. This was my ship. I knew every inch of her.
We were on main level, amidships, just aft of the bridge. I opened the seal-seam of my robe
with a quick  thrust of my hand, drew the Stinger from its holster.  We  needed  somewhere  to
stay, unnoticed, for the five minutes it took the ship to undock.  The ready room, across  from
us, was too risky. Sickbay was the most likely.
We soft-footed down the  narrow  access  stairs  in  a  blur  of  sand-gray  robes.  Sully  had  the
Carver drawn and primed. Ren had the Norlack’s strap resting on one shoulder. The sublights
already hummed noisily beneath my feet.
I knew all the sounds of my ship and it sounded empty, in spite of the noise of the engines.
Intraship was quiet. But there had to be someone else on board, maybe two. Someone  was on
the bridge, handling the short ride to Berth Fifteen.
We’d take the bridge as soon as she was moving.
I stopped at the hatchway to deck two, threw back my hood, listened. My heart pounded. I
could feel Sully’s breath on my hair.
“Okay,” I breathed. I stepped out, laser pistol in both hands and swept the corridor quickly
left and right. “This way.”
The  auto-door  to  sickbay,  sensing  my  presence,  opened.  Sickbay  was  one  large  room,

containing  three  small  automated  regen-beds.  Behind  a  moveable  panel  was  a  hydrotherapy
tub. All was quiet, empty. Patrol ships rarely carried a medical officer.
A long half-wall shielded a workstation.  “There.”  In  four  steps  I  was  behind  it.  Sully  and
Ren followed.
I  sat  and  stared  for  a  moment  at  the  microscreen.  It  was  active.  I  touched  a  databox,
brought  up  ship’s  status.  Sully  leaned  over  my  shoulder,  his  hand  lightly  on  my  arm.  Ren
stood close behind him.
We spoke in whispers. “Docking clamps should unlatch… now.”
The  ship  jerked  slightly,  shimmied.  Thrusters  fired.  More  shimmies.  Then  a  lurch  as  we
dropped away.
Whoever was at helm had pie plates for hands.
I waited a few more seconds just  to  be  sure.  “We’ve  got  ten  minutes,  boys.  Let’s  do  it  in
less.”
I peeled off my robe then started for the door. Sully and Ren followed, now all in black, like
me. Ren held the rifle with an obvious  familiarity  and  ease.  It  was  not,  I  figured,  a  skill  he’d
learned at the monastery.
Back to the hatch at the stairs, up again. We faced only two possible scenarios. Two crew or
officers on the bridge. Or crew and officers split, one on the bridge and one in engineering, on
deck three. Given what  was  going  on  at  Penley’s  I  figured  the  chance  of  finding  three  sober
crew was rare. Therefore, we  worked  to  take  the  bridge  first.  If  anyone  were  in  engineering,
we’d deal with him or her, later.
I eased the hatchdoor to Deck  One open, listened again. This time, I  could  hear  voices  on
the bridge. One lower pitched,  male.  One  higher,  female.  I  wished  for  the  hundredth  time  I
knew more about Kingswell’s crew.
I nodded to Sully. My job was to take the captain’s sling. Sully’s was to secure engineering.
Ren had to prevent anyone from accessing communications, or interfering with us.
It was that simple.
It was far from easy.
I nodded once more. “Now.”
We moved quickly, weapons raised, our backs skimming the bulkhead. Like hard shadows
we flowed past the single door to the  captain’s  quarters,  then  the  ready  room,  past  a  narrow
maintenance panel, and across from that, the airlock to the emergency escape  pod.  Listening,
watching. Ren reading thermals and rainbows.
The hatch to the bridge was open-sloppy, sloppy. Voices filtered out. A man’s drawl: “Yeah,
well, what do you expect. Out here. Bunch of assholes with no brains.” His voice was slurred,
drunk.
We  stopped  just  short  of  the  hatch.  Ren  hunkered  down  almost  in  the  middle  of  the
corridor, his face tilted up, sightless eyes reading thermals and  rainbows  fifteen,  eighteen  feet

away. He moved back in a fluid movement. “Male in the center. Female on the right.”
Someone in the captain’s sling. Someone at engineering.
“Go,” I whispered.
Sully and I moved first. Ren was immediately behind. I focused  on  the  man  in  my  chair.
Brown  hair,  slicked  back,  right  arm  outstretched,  fingers  grasping  a  lightpen,  wiggling  it.  A
nervous habit.
I recognized it just as I thrust the barrel of the Stinger against the base of his skull. A  sick
feeling rose in my throat.
Captain Lew Kingswell.
I knew him. He knew me. I was going to have to kill him.
 
Chapter Ten
« ^ » 
Meritorious
Down, captain! Now! On your knees! On the floor!” I shouted the orders, knowing  Kingswell
might recognize my voice.
Praying  he  didn’t.  Prayed  that  the  man  stumbling  out  of  the  chair,  falling  forward,
wouldn’t turn around and see me. His identification would  be  absolute.  Anyone  else’s  would
always be just conjecture.
I kept my laser pistol in his back  as he hunched over, watched his hands, making sure he
couldn’t  yank  my  feet  out  from  under  me.  “Face  down!  Hands  behind  your  back!”  He
flattened  himself  with  a  grunt.  Ren  moved  beside  me,  grabbing  Kingswell’s  hands,  locking
them in a sonicuff. “What do you  want?”  Kingswell  bellowed,  his  face  against  the  decking.  I
ignored him and glanced at Sully. A young woman with short, curly blonde hair lay trembling,
and cuffed, at his feet. Her face was half-hidden by his boots. He caught my glance, jerked his
head toward the floor. Mouthed Kingswell’s name. I nodded. He mouthed another word. Shit.
There were still a few brains left in the government. And they might eventually figure out what
Chaz Bergren knew.
He motioned to the woman, moved his  feet  slightly.  I  could  see  her  a  lot  better  than  she
could see me. She  had a short nose, her blonde hair the color of honeylace. I shook my head.
Didn’t  know  her.  I’d  caught  of  glimpse  of  her  ID  on  her  uniform  when  we  barged  in.
Lieutenant.
And  that  was  all  we  had  time  for.  We  were  expected  to  re-dock  in  five  minutes.  Sully
holstered the Carver, stepped quickly away from the woman, touched Ren’s  arm.  They  lifted
Kingswell away from me. My job,  by agreement, was to fly the ship.  I  left  Kingswell  and  the
lieutenant  to  Sully  and  Ren,  and  took  the  sling,  angling  thrusters,  pulling  us  away  from  the
station. I could hear Kingswell struggling behind me as he was carried to the rear of the bridge.

His anguished demands echoed. “Who are you, damn it! You can’t do this!” “Meritorious, this
is  Moabar  Departure.  You’re  heading  off  course.  Repeat,  you’re  heading  off  course.
Acknowledge.”
I hit the red alert. Sirens wailed through the bridge. Sully grabbed a headset at the comm
panel, keyed it open, well knowing how the game was to be played. “Having  slight  problems
here. Will advise.”
He keyed if off. I killed the sirens.
Kingswell’s  boot  hammered  the  bulkhead  in  front  of  him.  “You  Chalford’s  people?  This
some kind of game, assholes?”
Don’t damage my ship, you bastard.
Then there was a muffled cry of anguish, as if someone tried  to  shout  through  material.  I
looked  back  quickly,  saw  Sully,  grinning,  an  open  medical  kit  in  one  hand,  a  small  roll  of
gauze in the other.
I pointed  to  engineering.  He  tossed  the  kit  into  the  nearest  chair  and  stepped  over  the
woman on the floor. He slid into the seat, made a few adjustments to the board before him.
“Move her,” he said to Ren.
Ren was more gentle with her than they had been with Kingswell. But I caught the look of
pure  fear  on  her  face  when  she  saw  the  webbed  hands  on  her  arms.  She  was  Fleet—had
worked the same training vids I had. I knew what she was thinking. Ragkiril. A creature who
could rip apart her mind.
Ren placed her along the base of the opposite wall, on the other side of the hatchway from
Kingswell. She  lay on her  side,  her  head  angled  crookedly.  Soft  sobbing  sounds  filtered  past
the beeping chatter of the screens and scanners.
Moabar departure tried to  contact  us  again.  Did  we  have  an  emergency?  Did  we  require
assistance? So far, no one was in pursuit. That’s just the way I wanted it.
I hit the red alert again. Sully keyed the comm mike on the engineering console. “Got a fuel
leak. Advise traffic to stay clear. Repeat. Hazardous fuel leak.”
Red alert fell silent. I knew that would keep them away from us for awhile.
At least, until we hit the lanes at full bore. Then, they might just suspect something else was
going on.
But by then, it wouldn’t matter. As long as I stayed at max speeds, they wouldn’t catch me.
Once I got to the jumpgate, they’d never find me.
A  series  of  three  tones  sounded  on  my  right.  Moabar’s  outer  beacon.  I  sent  back  an
acknowledgment  from  the  list  on  my  screen.  Nice  of  Kingswell  to  have  the  ship  fully
functioning, all systems open and online. I’d change his passwords later.
The beacon chimed back. We were clear. My fingers played over the keypads as if it’d been
only six hours, not six months, since I’d sat in this chair.

My entry flashed on Sully’s board. “Full power, active now.”
The  Meritorious  shot  away  from  Moabar  at  top  speed,  her  sublights  blazing  like  the
brightest fires in Hell.
“Captain. May I get something from below?” Ren’s voice was soft as he  stood  next  to  my
chair, rifle slung over his shoulder.
I took a quick  glance at the boards. Everything was secure. No threat from Moabar,  yet.  I
nodded.
I heard  his  footsteps  recede,  then,  minutes  later,  return.  I  glanced  over  my  shoulder.  He
had his robe over his arm. He lifted the young woman’s head. She tried to jerk from his touch.
He tucked the robe underneath, eased her head against it. She stopped struggling and lay there
motionless, except for the rapid rise and fall of her shoulders.
Ren went back  to his seat, but his hands, I noticed, didn’t touch the comm  controls. They
were  cold  things,  lifeless,  though  I  knew  he  could  see  their  outlines.  Just  no  thermals  or
rainbows for him to read their different functions.
Twenty-minutes out and we had no pursuit. Nothing to do but wait an  hour  to  reach  the
jumpgate Sully wanted to take. He had a ship positioned on the border of Aldan and Baris. The
Diligent would have taken us there, directly.
Now, we were forced to  take  the  long  way  around,  through  no-man’s  land.  Running  the
rim  in  a  stolen  ship.  While  jukors  were  born,  and  Takas  died,  somewhere  in  the  Marker
shipyards.
Sully stood, no better at this waiting game than I was,  I  thought.  He  leaned  his  hands  on
the armrest of my chair and stared at me for a long hard moment.  He still needed a shave, but
the shadows were gone from his eyes.
The  questions  weren’t.  I  didn’t  know  quite  what  had  happened  between  that  passionate
but unexpected kiss in the Temple hallway and  his  none-to-subtle  message  when  I  inspected
the  Carver  laser  pistol.  But  something  had.  He  might  have  been  slightly  furred  when  he’d
kissed me, but he’d known exactly what he was doing when he’d clasped my hand.
“Mine,” he’d said. “Trust me” seemed to be just a breath behind that.
And hours before that, something about taking risks.
Hell, why couldn’t we have met again in a nice little spaceport pub, like the last time? On
liberty. It all would’ve been so much simpler. This wasn’t. This was a tangle of fears and desires
and anger and faith. Lives hung precariously on our actions, including my own.
Yet there was an intensity in his gaze that told me that, in spite of  all  the  turmoil  swirling
around us, this unanswered question mattered as much. Or more.
Mine. Could I risk that, again? He was a man  I’d  known  for  years,  yet  didn’t  know.  Our
interactions had often been colored with flirtatious innuendoes. But they’d just as often hinted
at  something  deeper.  And  not  just  since  he’d  pulled  me  off  Moabar.  It  was  something  I’d
always felt. Even when he was my constant adversary. And I was his beautiful interfering bitch.

“You okay?” he asked softly.
Kingswell kicked the bulkhead again. But at least he’d stopped grunting.
“Yeah,” I said. And took a risk, chanced it. I brushed my fingers across his mouth.  Watched
surprise flash across his features, watched obsidian turn molten.
His hand curled around mine, his lips warm against the pulse on  my  wrist.  Then  another
few inches and his lips were against my mouth, hesitantly, not like last night’s demanding kiss.
But tasting, testing. Exploring.
I explored back. Heat fluttered on velvet wings around my heart.
Thump-thump-THUD-thump. Not my heart, but Kingswell’s boots.
“Damn  him,”  he  said,  but  he  was  grinning  a  Sully-grin,  full  of  confidence,  like  the  true
handsome bastard he was. “You’re distracting enough.”
“So  are  you.”  Heat  rose  to  my  face.  I  touched  his  mouth  again.  A  surprising  warmth
tumbled through my fingers, down  my  arm.  God,  how  the  man  affected  me!  But  I  couldn’t
afford further distractions.
“And we’ve still got work to do.” I pulled my hand away, keyed in a slight course  change
toward the jumpgate. Risked one more heated glance.
“We make a good team,” he said softly.
I returned my focus to the data on my screens. We had one last item to attend to before we
hit  the  gate.  Kingswell  and  the  lieutenant  had  to  be  placed  in  the  escape  pod.  They’d  be
rescued within twenty-four hours. The pods were rigged to last a week.
Of course, twenty-four hours in a small pod with Kingswell might feel like a week.
Sully straightened a bit, surveying  the  bridge  in  a  proprietary  fashion,  but  kept  his  voice
soft. “Nice ship. Always liked it.”
I cuffed him lightly on the arm. “Gee, thanks.”
“I always liked her captain more.” He caught my hand, folded it in his own.
I  was  about  to  comment  that  hijacking  freighters  in  my  sector  was  a  strange  way  of
showing that when Ren came over and  leaned  on  the  other  armrest.  I  felt  as  if  two  tall  trees
flanked me.
“The robe was a kind gesture,” I told him.
“She’s very afraid.”
“Bad rainbow time?”
“She believes we mean to kill her.”
“You  have  my  permission  to  tell  her  we  won’t.  Will  that  help?”  I  realized  Ren  was  on  a
small bridge  with  two  people  whose  fearful  emotions  probably  churned  out  of  control.  And
two more who had adrenaline and hormones pumping. It probably  like  having  four  nonstop

red-alert sirens blaring.
“Tell her she has my sincerest apologies, not only for her current inconvenience. But more
so  for  the  necessity  of  placing  her  in  an  escape  pod  with  Captain  Kingswell.”
Thump-thud-thump still resounded behind me.
“I will convey that. Thank you.”
I swiveled halfway around to watch him as he knelt behind the young woman, careful not
to touch her. His head angled down as he spoke to her, his words inaudible.
A few hesitant nods of the curly-haired head. Then Ren sat,  silently.  Praying,  perhaps.  Or
meditating. Or just sitting.
An abrupt movement behind Sully caught my attention.
Kingswell.  No  longer  wedged  against  the  bulkhead.  Somehow  in  his  squirming  and
kicking, he’d turned. He was flat on his back and glaring at me. He grunted two sharp syllables
through the gauze stuffed  in  his  mouth.  But  I  heard  them  as  clearly  as  if  he’d  said  them  on
intraship.
Berg. Gren.
The identification was absolute.
Sully clenched his fist. “Now we’ve got problems.”
 
Twenty-two  minutes  to  the  jumpgate’s  outer  beacon.  We  had  to  get  Kingswell  and  the
lieutenant strapped in the pod and jettison them  before we went  through.  But  Kingswell  had
recognized  me,  would  tell  Fleet  that  Chasidah  Bergren  was  no  longer  on  Moabar,  but  had
possession of an Imperial P40.  And that she had  help  in  the  form  of  two  males,  one  human,
one Stolorth.
If  Kingswell  had  recognized  Sully  he  didn’t  say,  or  rather  grunt  confirmation  when  Ren
and Sully hoisted him into the open corridor just behind the bridge. I didn’t think he  would.
Sully had always been  my  territory.  Kingswell,  a  few  years  behind  me  in  the  Academy,  had
never  worked  patrol.  He’d  flown  a  desk  on  Starport  6  in  Baris,  the  Meritorious’s  homeport.
That’s  how  I’d  known  him.  Sucking  up  to  the  brass  and  pushing  around  thin-shouldered
ensigns  had  taken  up  most  of  his  time.  Patrol  duties  would’ve  interfere  with  that.  And  just
might get his impeccable uniform dirty.
Besides, Kingswell was too busy staring at Ren to pay  much  attention  to  Sully  when  they
laid him on the floor of the corridor, in front of the escape pod hatch. Every training vid Fleet
had on Stolorth Ragkirils was no doubt replaying through his mind.
My  own  was  snagged,  looping  like  a  fractured  computer  program  on  a  decision  I  didn’t
want to make.
I couldn’t let Kingswell tell what he’d seen.
But I couldn’t kill him without destroying a part of myself.

I  stood  at  the  apex  of  the  bridge,  in  front  of  my  chair,  arms  folded  across  my  chest.
Kingswell glared at me from the corridor, but he was still cuffed and gagged.
Ren  propped  the  young  woman  into  a  sitting  position  across  from  Kingswell  then  came
back to where Sully and I stood. We talked softly, but not to hide my identity anymore.
“The news will hit Marker before we will,” Sully said. His hand on my arm was  meant  to
be reassuring. “You know that. You know we have no choice.”
“Fifteen  people,  fifteen  innocent  people  have  already  died  because  of  me.  Sixteen  if  you
count the Taka. I don’t want one more.”
“You had to kill the Taka, in defense. This isn’t anything different—”
“Damn it, it is! The Taka attacked me. Kingswell’s here by happenstance. And what about
the lieutenant? She doesn’t know me, but she’ll know he does. Do we put two dead bodies in
the pod?” I swung away from Sully, abruptly dislodging his hand and stared out the  forward
viewports  at  a  starfield  that  I’d  always  found  comforting  before.  Now  it  looked  cold,
threatening.
I  felt  the  heat  of  his  body  as  he  moved  up  behind  me.  “A  trank  overdose  would  be
painless.”  He  ran  his  hands  down  my  arms,  threaded  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  through
mine and squeezed lightly.
I shook my head. “They’re still my kills. Dirty kills. I’m not a wanton murderer. Neither are
you. I don’t want us to be like them. Like the ones at Marker.”
There was a moment  of  silence  where  all  I  felt  was  Sully,  breathing  against  my  hair.  My
own heart pounding, angry, confused.
“There is an option,” Ren said softly.
I  turned  to  him.  Sully  did  the  same.  The  gentleness  on  Sully’s  face  hardened,  brows
slanting. He drew in a sharp breath and pulled his hand out of mine. “No.”
Something that felt like fear prickled at my skin where his hand had held my own.
Ren’s face tilted slightly.  “Are  you  not  asking  Chasidah  to  make  a  worse  sacrifice?  To  be
something she’s not?”
“It’s not remotely the same.” Sully’s answer was clipped, harsh.
“No. Her risk is greater. The option you’re giving her violates what she truly is. The option
I’m suggesting does not.”
“What?” I glanced rapidly from Ren to Sully. “What option?”
“It’s not an option.”
“It is.”
“Damn you, not now!” A viciousness filled Sully’s voice. It was directed at Ren.
“What not now?” Something  felt very wrong. I touched Sully’s arm but  he  didn’t  look  at
me, wouldn’t take his gaze from Ren’s clouded one.

“She will eventually know.” Ren’s soft, calm voice was the complete opposite of Sully’s.
“Shut the fuck up.” Sully jerked away from me, grabbed for the back of my chair. He tried
to push past Ren. But the Stolorth gripped Sully’s forearm, hard. The skin on Ren’s  knuckles
whitened. The muscles of Sully’s arm bulged under the black fabric as he twisted back  around,
brought his fist up, clenched. Cold, angry fear hardened obsidian eyes into two chips of black
ice.
“Risks,” Ren said softly.
Sully was breathing hard, his  mouth  a  taut  line.  My  heart  pounded,  my  hands  suddenly
clammy.  Rainbows,  very  dark,  ugly  storm-filled  rainbows  hung  between  the  three  of  us.  I
couldn’t see them, but I could feel them.
Sully lowered his arm, flexed his fingers. His gaze locked on Ren’s.
I glanced at the console on my  left.  Fifteen  minutes  to  outer  beacon.  “What  option?”  My
voice shook.
Ren released his grip.
Sully  shot  a  quick  glance  toward  the  corridor  where  Kingswell  glared  at  us,  and  the
curly-haired  lieutenant  leaned  wearily  against  the  bulkhead,  an  Englarian  monk’s  robe
wrapped around her shoulders, her face pale.
He shoved his hands in the pockets of his pants,  stared  down  at  his  boots  for  a  moment.
When  he  brought  his  gaze  up,  his  eyes  were  shadowed  again.  “Mind-wipe,”  he  said.
“Kingswell’s, and the woman’s. Their memories of all this can be erased.”
Fear slammed through me like a ship hitting a jumpgate cold. He’d lied. Ren had lied. Even
blind,  the  Stolorth  could  rip  minds  apart,  shred  them.  Destroy  them.  He  wasn’t  a  harmless
empath. He was a Ragkiril. I closed my eyes, willed my heart to stop hammering in my chest,
ignored the nauseous feeling in my stomach.
Grabbed for facts.
I knew Ren. Granted, only for a few days but even in that short time he’d been nothing but
gentle. Calm. Controlled. Logically, I had more reason to fear Sully. Known terrorist, smuggler,
mercenary. A passionate, volatile man. Angry, for valid reasons, he’d said when I’d called him
Gabriel. Gabriel Ross Sullivan. Poet. Warrior. Lover.
But it would be Ren doing the mind-wipe. He would be  considerate,  if  such  a  thing  even
existed in tandem with the destruction of a mind. The thought sickened me, but Ren was right.
It was the only option. It left them both alive. Murder sickened me worse.
I opened my eyes, took a steadying breath. “I need to know two things. First, is it painful?”
I was concerned for the young lieutenant. She was the most innocent. Kingswell could do with
a little discomfort. “Second, how much damage will it do? Turning them  into vegetables is not
an acceptable option.”
Sully glanced at Ren, then answered. “It doesn’t have to be painful, no. It won’t be. It’s zral,
a memory-wipe. Not zragkor.”

I  remembered  the  Stolorth  words  from  my  training.  Zragkor.  Mind-death.  Hideous.
Painful. Terrifying. Complete. It took a Ragkiril’s telepathic link to perform a zragkor.
But not for a zral. It was easy to forget the distinction between the two. Ren, blind, couldn’t
do  a  zragkor.  But  he  evidently  could  perform  a  zral.  Still  an  invasion  of  the  only  thing  we
humans feel is totally our own: our minds, our thoughts. But it wasn’t a total emptiness, a total
negation of the person. Something would remain.
I hated the words even as I said them. “You’ve got ten minutes, Ren. Twelve max.”
“I cannot do a zral, Chasidah.”
“But you just said…”
But he hadn’t. Sully had said. Mind wipe.
Sully.
An abysmal, foul cold wave  gripped  me.  I  forced  myself  to  look  at  the  man  I  knew,  but
didn’t know at all. Gabriel Ross Sullivan.
Obsidian eyes like ice. Hands jammed  in pockets. And a mind that could shatter another’s
with the force of a thought, a touch.
“Ten’s all I need.” His voice was hoarse.
He spun around and strode toward the corridor.
 
Chapter Eleven
« ^ » 
I sat hunched over in the command chair, elbows on my knees, my chin resting on my hands.
My  fingers  were  steepled  over  my  mouth  as  if  holding  back  words  I  couldn’t  bear  to  say.
Words that stabbed my mind as if they were carved out of ice.
Sully. Mind-wipe.
“He will need my help getting them into the pod.” Ren touched my shoulder. I nodded.
“Chasidah.”
I shook  my  head.  Chasidah  wasn’t  here  right  now.  She  was  on  a  little  trip,  looking  for
someplace warm and safe and quiet. Someplace no one would ever find her.  Someplace  with
no ghosts, no handsome bastards. Someplace with no mirrors, reflecting back the face of a fool.
Ren  left,  closing  the  hatchway  of  the  bridge  behind  him.  I  breathed  a  shuddering  breath
against my hands, straightened. Mechanically, I checked all screens and monitors. We were on
course  for  the  jumpgate.  All  systems  optimal.  Good  ship,  a  P40.  A  light  flashed,  a  soft
double-chime.  Two  minutes  to  jumpgate  outer  beacon.  Where  had  the  time  gone?  Must  be
having  fun.  Three  chimes.  The  quintessential  beacon  calling-card.  I  keyed  back  my  answer.
Hello out there. Nice to meet you. Have any minds you need destroyed? We’re  having  a  sale.

My hands shook. I clutched them  to my midsection, doubled over. Took long, deep breaths. I
can deal with this. Just as I accepted Ren as an empath. I can deal with this.
I straightened. We are, after all, on the same side, aren’t we? A team? Friends? Not lovers,
no, not that. It’d been only a kiss  or  two.  Nothing  serious.  A  few  overly  emotional  moments
resulting in some playful behavior.
And besides, Sully wasn’t doing a zragkor. Just a blanking of a small part  of  memory.  He
wasn’t, he couldn’t be, a Ragkiril. Just an empath.  Like  Ren,  only  human.  And  Ren’s  okay.  I
can deal with this. I can. The hatchway cycled open, admitting the sound of footsteps. I didn’t
turn  around.  Ren’s  voice  sounded  gentle,  like  raindrops  pattering  against  a  placid  stream.
“They’re in the pod. Secure. Comfortable.” I tapped the screen, brought engine controls to my
keypad, decreased power. Engines cycled down past  one-quarter  sublight.  I  angled  thrusters,
arcing  us  around  the  beacon.  I  tabbed  on  intraship,  spoke  to  my  invisible  crew.  My  ghosts.
“Stand clear. Pod clamps releasing—”
The  lights  on  my  short-range  scanner  suddenly  flared.  Sirens  wailed  through  the  ship,
red-alerts  engaging  automatically.  I  stared  at  the  screen  in  disbelief.  Incoming.  Two  armed
Imperial cruisers, running hard, fast. And heading directly for us.
I slammed my hand on the keypad. “Releasing pod! We got bogies, two. Coming in hot!”
I lunged  for  engineering,  threw  the  sublights  into  emergency  overdrive.  The  Meritorious
surged forward with a wrenching jolt.  I  careened  back  toward  my  chair.  The  ship  lurched.  I
stumbled against Sully, heading for his seat.
For three long seconds his hands grasped my wrists. His gaze, wary, tired, locked on mine
before  I  wrenched  away,  pulled  myself  into  my  seat.  I  raked  the  straps  across  my  chest,
dragged the armrest controls in front of me.
I  heard  Ren’s  straps  click  to  my  left,  at  communications.  Then  another  click,  from
engineering  on  my  right.  I  checked  status,  swore.  We  were  fifteen  minutes  out  from  the
working edge of the gate. At top speed, the cruisers would never catch us. But we were under
one-quarter sublight moments ago. We might as well have been standing still.
I disconnected safety overrides with three quick taps. “Bring hyperdrive online, now!”
I hated hitting a jumpgate cold, but I had no choice.
Sully worked the board quickly, his movements sharp, precise. No hesitation in his fingers,
no second thoughts.
No time.
I called out shield status, distance to jumpgate, time to intercept with the cruisers streaking
toward us.
“Got it.” Sully’s voice was sharp. “Got it.”
“I need those hypers!”
“Working on it.”
A shimmy racked through the ship. The hypers were cold, and angry at  being  awakened.

Another alarm blared. Pressure warning. An unhappy sound.
Then  a  third.  Weapons.  “Cruisers  in  range.  They’re  targeting  us.”  I  segued  power  to
defense. “Aft shields at max.”
Movement on my screen flickered in a deadly staccato. Incoming from the cruisers. Small.
Lethal. “Birds incoming. Taking evasive action.”
I banked my ship, hard. It skewed us off the course to the jumpgate, sent us away from our
only chance at freedom. But the plasma torpedoes heading for us gave me no choice.
I  released  a  scatter-field  from  the  ship’s  underbelly,  hoping  to  confuse  the  torpedoes’
guidance systems. Two followed the debris, veering. The other kept coming straight on.
I slapped the alarms into silence. I needed to outrun the bogie, get back  to that jumpgate. I
needed the hypers, pulsing, online.
“Sulliv—”
“Returning fire.”
“Damn it! We don’t have time. Hard edge in two minutes, ten seconds!”
Hard edge, no hypers and a torpedo, hot, with my name on it.
The shimmying quieted, the pulsing began.
“Hypers online. Twenty percent.”
Smirking. Damn him, he was smirking. I could hear it. Bastard. It felt good to feel angry at
him. I didn’t want to think about why.
“Two minutes.” I flattened vanes, scanner dishes. Torpedo still closing but losing speed, the
looming gatefield muddling its tracking sensor.
“Thirty-five percent.”
“Minute forty. I need sixty percent at crossover.” God. Sublights were still online. They had
to  be  disengaged  before  hypers  hit  fifty  percent  or  the  ship  would  rip  apart.  Like  a  mind
undergoing a zragkor.
“Forty-seven percent.”
“Edge at thirty seconds. Cut sublights!”
“No can do, Chazzy-girl. Fifty-three percent.”
I felt the gate grab us, felt the ship skew, slide. “Damn it, Sully!”
Ren’s  voice  answered,  soft,  serene.  “Merciful  Abbot  Eng,  grant  us  now  your  everlasting
protection—”
We slammed through the jumpgate, screens  erupting,  sparking.  Drives  pulsing,  sublights
grinding up the neverwhen, the nowhere-everywhere of jump.
My body jerked forward. The straps cut into my chest,  branding  my  shoulder.  I  couldn’t

breath. Bridge lights flashed off, flickered on, died.
Someone groaned, grunted in the blackness.
Then a piercing sound, like metal screaming, torquing.
I was whipped to my left, the armrest impaling my ribs. I clawed at my straps, tried to pull
myself upright, away from the pain coursing through my body. Something slammed me back,
lifting my feet off the decking, my arm off the control pad, my body ached. Must’ve been one
hell of a party. I couldn’t remember a hangover this bad. My head throbbed. My arms and legs
felt as if they weren’t a part of me, yet.
My eyes wouldn’t open. Then something warm surrounded me. Something gray and fuzzy
and soft. For a moment,  I felt as if I knew it, recognized it. But  no,  how  could  I?  Still,  I  let  it
surround me, let it draw me back together, piece by piece.
I opened my eyes. The world was dimly lit, red-tinged on the edges. Lights twinkled in the
distance. Nice colors, red, green, yellow. I was in the middle of a room. No. A ship’s bridge. A
chair, my chair, the captain’s sling, was in front of me.
Interesting. If I weren’t sitting there, where was  I?  Something  soft  and  warm  was  behind
me.  I  tried  to  turn  but  my  shoulders  protested.  I  glanced  down.  Decking,  under  my  legs.
Another  pair  of  legs,  longer,  angled  against  mine.  Black-sleeved  arms  crossed  over  my
midsection. Large hands covering mine.
Mine.
I forced myself to be very, very still.
“Chaz.” A deep voice, soft, rumbling. “Back with us?”
Sullivan.
A shadowy movement on my left edged my vision. Ren, kneeling down, a few inches away,
cloudy eyes studying me. His braid had partly unraveled and his lips were pinched. He looked
worried, or in pain.
I drew a deep breath, struggled to sit up away from the enveloping warmth. Away from a
man who could perform a mind-wipe. But one who  needed  my  help,  with  Marker,  I  argued
mentally. Needed my help because of the Takas. The jukors. Needed my help with this ship. I
was still alive and thinking, wasn’t I? He needed me that way. I was the  only  captain  he  had.
Sully wasn’t trained  as  a  pilot.  He  needed  me  alive  and  my  mind  intact.  Time  to  remember
that.
“Status?” My voice cracked.
Sully answered. “We’re fifteen minutes into transit. Hypers working at seventy-two percent
efficiency. Sublights took some damage but we’ve got them operative.”
By all I held holy. I’d been unconscious for fifteen minutes? Then I remembered  slamming
into jump, cold, sublights grinding. I wrenched around, my concern for my ship overriding all
else, even my fear of the man sitting next to me. “What in hell did you think you were doing?”
A half-smile quirked on his lips but didn’t reach his eyes. His mouth,  like Ren’s, was taut.

“What  I’ve  done  before,  when  I  had  to.  Used  the  torque  of  the  sublights  to  slough  off  the
resistance coming into a jump cold.”
I stared at him. Why did all the handsome ones always have to be such brilliant  bastards?
And why did they have to have  minds  that  could—I  halted  the  thought,  threw  that  into  my
mental duro-hard container in cold storage with all the others. “You could’ve warned me.”
He could’ve warned me about a lot of things.
“We were all busy with other matters.”
Understatement of the century.
I drew my knees up and rested my elbows on them. My fingers found the release-points on
the Grizni bracelet on my wrist. It tingled reassuringly. I took another deep breath.
Fifteen minutes into jump.  Probably an hour forty yet to  go.  I’d  know  more  when  I  read
the data at my console. Good old, consistent, reliable data. “No one followed us in,  I  take  it?”
That should’ve been one of my first questions, if I’d been thinking like a captain. But I hadn’t
finished putting Chasidah back together yet.
“They saw us go in pretty cold. Probably figured we wouldn’t make it.”
The torpedo wouldn’t have been able to cross the gatefield. So  we  were  safe,  for  the  time
being. Relatively speaking. I pushed my hands flat against the deck,  struggled  to  stand.  Sully
grabbed me easily under the armpits, lifted me, turned me to face him when I wobbled on my
feet.
“I suggest you sit for awhile, captain.”
Good idea.
 
Bridge  lights  were  back  on.  I  adjusted  the  straps  locked  across  my  chest.  They  were
half-torn. Just as well, because they didn’t chafe the bruises I knew were blooming on my skin.
Bruises  that  matched,  no  doubt,  the  one  on  Sully’s  right  cheek.  Even  Ren  moved  stiffly,
probably wishing he’d remembered to bring his cane.
We all looked like we’d been through one hell of a good pub fight.
It  took  me  fifteen  minutes  to  run  a  thorough  systems  check  from  the  controls  at  my
armrest pad. I knew Sully had already had done one,  but  I  needed  to  see  for  myself  that  we
were  alive  and  slicing  through  the  neverwhen  without  any  more  than  the  usual  problems.  I
needed  to  keep  my  mind  busy  with  ship  operations,  ship  data.  I  didn’t  need  it  wandering,
asking questions until I’d calmed down and could face answers I might not want to hear.
I couldn’t even face Sully right now. Because that started the questions surfacing.
I finished the check, shoved the arm pad away. My body ached for reasons I didn’t care to
explore. I leaned my head back  against  the  cushion  and  stared  at  the  ceiling,  listening  to  the
ship’s noises. Sensors beeped softly every five minutes signaling the completion of a sweep and
initiation  of  a  new  one,  like  wings  reaching  outward  from  the  skin  of  my  ship,  brushing
through  the  neverwhen.  Other  data  clicked,  trilled.  The  sound  of  the  hypers  was  a  soft  but

familiar hum.  I glanced down at my armrest controls just to be sure,  ran  another  test,  leaned
back  again.  I  had  work  to  do  and  systems  to  coordinate  but  my  body  was  reluctant  to
cooperate.  A  few  minutes  later  I  forced  myself  back  to  work.  When  the  aching  resurrected
itself we were thirty-eight minutes to exit. I rested my head against the cushion, tried to will the
ache into a far galaxy. Footsteps sounded on my left. Ren’s face  came  into  my  field  of  vision.
His braid was almost completely unraveled, blue strands tangling around his shoulders.
If he were reading rainbows, he had to know I was unraveling, too.
“Commissary panels are off-line. But I can get some water. Would you like some?”
“Thanks. Big mug.”
He brought back one for Sully, one for myself. Mine was in mug marked with the captain’s
insignia. It was standard issue, but Kingswell had probably been the last to use it. I thought it
was just coincidence until I realized the insignia was raised. Ren could feel it with his fingers.
“I washed it clean, first.” His webbed hand rested lightly on the armrest on  my  right.  My
controls were inches from him, but he  couldn’t  see  them,  only  my  outline  and  probably  the
outline of my hands as they held the mug.
I tried to make my voice light, not reflect the strange numbness  I felt in my soul. “I’ll put a
commendation in your file.” I took a sip, my fingers tracing the same raised areas his had. My
thoughts rested for a moment  on the other  captain.  I  wondered  if  he’d  know  me,  if  we  ever
met again. Would he thank me for sparing his life? Did he even know he had one, or was the
Lew Kingswell placed in the rescue pod more than an hour ago someone else now?
“Ren?” I hesitated, anxiety clashing with fear. I forced myself to ask. I had to ask. I had to
gather my facts. It was the only thing I knew how to do, the only thing  that  had  never  failed
me. “Kingswell. And the woman. They’ll be okay?”
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Sully turn at his station.
Ren answered. “No worries, Chasidah.”
Oh, yeah. My rainbow. I wondered what color worry was. “They’ll remember nothing?”
Sully’s  chair  squeaked  as  he  leaned  forward.  “They  know  who  they  are.  Where  they’re
from. Things in their past.”
I took another sip. “How far past?” I asked the hazed, starless jump  darkness through  the
viewport. Not Sully. I couldn’t look at Sully. “Childhood? Academy? Current Fleet posting?”
A long silence. “It depends. I… I did what I could. There wasn’t a lot of time.”
So  it  had  been  an  imprecise  cut.  Jagged.  Memories  torn  away  like  the  fabric  of  a  sleeve
caught in a doorway, ripping, unraveling. Events trailing like broken  threads. Hopes,  dreams,
shredding.
I felt sick.
“I did Kingswell last. I took more time with Tessa because I know you—”
“Damn  you,  Sullivan!  Don’t  tell  me  her  name!”  I  wrenched  around  to  face  him,  anger,

shame  rising  in  me.  I  didn’t  need  to  know  her  name,  didn’t  need  to  make  her  real  and
personal. Didn’t need to add her to the list of the other fifteen.
I knew  all  their  names.  And  except  for  Nathaniel  Milo  and  the  Taka,  their  histories.  The
husbands and wives they left behind. The children. The parents.
I knew them all. And now I had Tessa. An innocent, her mind gutted.
A stranger stared back  at me through Sully’s eyes. Then suddenly he ripped off his straps,
thrust himself to his feet. For one long terrifying moment  I thought he was coming at me, his
expression hard and bleak. Dangerous. But he charged by me, past Ren reaching toward him.
He stepped over the hatchlock. His arm lashed out. His fist slammed against the corridor wall.
Two more steps, another slam. And another. And another. Echoes of anger. Echoes of pain,
fading when he reached crew’s quarters.
“Chasidah.” A harsh, disapproving tone came from somewhere I never expected it. Ren.
I swiveled  around.  His  face  was  pinched,  his  lips  thin.  His  voice  shook  slightly  when  he
spoke, like ice-crusted waves crashing against a frozen shore.  “I  do  not  know  how  to  explain
this. It is not my part to do so. But I must. I cannot let you destroy him.”
“I didn’t—”
“You are. He sees, he feels your rejection, just as I do. Your fear. You know this, now.”
I nodded, numbly. Rainbows. Ren wasn’t the only one who could read rainbows.
“I  will  tell  you  what  you  do  not  know.  He  offers  his  life,  to  save  yours.  On  Moabar.  He
knew the risks. He was alone in this, searching for you. I couldn’t help. The planet drains me,
physically. He did this, alone. To find you.”
I splayed my hand. “I know the shipyards. I know—”
“Nothing, Chasidah Bergren! You do not understand. He couldn’t live with the knowledge
that you were on Moabar. That you would be harmed. That you would be alone, afraid.”
He was right. I didn’t understand. We were talking about Gabriel Ross Sullivan. About six
years of tag-you’re-it out on the rim. About highjackings I’d interrupted and  illegal  escapades
I’d appeared in the middle of, like an unwanted guest at a party. Our brief, chance encounter
at Port Chalo didn’t seem to be sufficient motivation to pull me off Moabar.
“Final day of your trial. The starport experienced a major power loss,” Ren said. “He tried to
free you, so you wouldn’t have to go to Moabar. Damned himself because he failed.”
I froze, memories washing over me. I was back sitting in lockup, deep in the starport’s brig.
Judgment  against  me  had  just  come  down.  Sentencing  would  follow,  but  my  options  were
clear. Moabar or Moabar. They’d never offer me death.
Then darkness. All I could think of was an attack on the starport. Starports had too many
back-up generators to have power failures. The corridors rang with hard-booted guards,  rifles
glinting in the red-tinged emergency lights flickering on.
They’d flanked my cell. Belatedly I realized the force-field was down. I could’ve run. Don’t

know how far I would’ve gotten. But I could’ve tried.
Two hours passed before the power came back on.
A prank, a guard told me nervously. Bored station brats.
Not a prank.
Sullivan.
Gabriel Ross Sullivan had tried to rescue me, because  he  didn’t  want  me  to  be  alone  and
afraid.
I turned to Ren, but had no words. I didn’t need them. Ren could read rainbows.
His voice softened, the waves still coming, but no longer to an ice covered shore. “He knew
you couldn’t live with yourself if  Kingswell  died.  But  he  also  knew  you’d  hate  him  when  he
gave you the only option that would let Kingswell and the lieutenant live. This is what he risks
for you. To feel your hatred, because he cannot do otherwise, being what he is. And he offers
this, so that you won’t have to feel the pain.”
Suddenly, my fears seemed foolish, stupid. “I didn’t know.” It was a weak, horrible excuse.
But it was all I had.
A small smile met my trembling voice. “I’ve told him often to give you all those poems he’s
written to you. But he’s been afraid. Until you showed you could be friends with me. Showed
you didn’t mind someone reading what you call  rainbows.  He  reads,  has  been  reading  yours
for a long time. Hoping. Waiting.”
“Hijacking  cargo  to  get  my  attention?  Getting  himself  killed,  hoping  I’d  come  to  his
funeral?” I wasn’t disbelieving his words. But I needed to put all the facts together.
“The first I’ll let him explain to you. You’ll be surprised to learn the truth on that. But  the
second, I will tell you, because you know more of the truth than you realize. You know who he
is, the wealth and power his father held in the Empire when he was  alive.  You  know  also  his
family disowned him. Two years ago, shortly before his mother died in  a  shuttle  accident,  he
believed she was open to reconciliation. But that meant the mercenary, the smuggler known as
Sullivan had to die. He agreed to that, faked his own death, not because he had any interest in
his inheritance. But because he wanted respectability, so the next time he met you in a bar, you
wouldn’t run away.”
Port  Chalo.  Ren  knew  about  Port  Chalo.  I  started  to  say  something  but  he  held  up  his
hand.
“His mother died before he could reconcile with her. Her unexpected death put the estates
in the hands of a cousin. So he has nothing to offer you now, except what he is. Someone  you
can trust with your life. Someone who will never let you down.”
I closed my eyes, felt as if my heart had been ripped in half. Then I opened them,  quickly.
Because I knew where that other half of my heart was: at the end of the corridor behind me, in
the Meritorious’s crews quarters.
 

Chapter Twelve
« ^ » 
He was leaning against the bulkhead at the end of the corridor, arms spread wide. A figure in
black outlined against the light gray wall. He could go no further. His back was to me, his head
was  angled  down.  I  could  see  the  rapid  rise  and  fall  of  his  shoulders.  His  palms  were  flat,
fingers splayed. He looked like a man trying to push his way through the wall.
Or like a man who awaited crucifixion. Damned by an Empire that labeled mind talents as
filthy, cursed. Damned by a woman whose life he’d saved.
I couldn’t change the former. Only the latter.
I wrapped my arms around his waist and lay the side of my face against the hard planes of
his  back.  I  could  feel  him  trembling,  his  breath  shuddering  against  me.  A  frigid  chill  raced
through  me,  met  up  against  a  rushing  heat.  The  heat  mushroomed,  flowed  outward  as  if
through my hands. Then it cascaded back into me, tingling, intense, passionate.
I said nothing, didn’t have to. I sent rainbows. And accepted the ones he sent back to me.
It took a few  minutes  for  the  trembling  to  stop,  for  his  arms  to  relax,  for  the  warmth  to
settle to a steady glow that had nothing to do with  his  body’s  heat,  or  mine.  He  straightened
away from the wall, then brought his hands down to cover mine.
I threaded my fingers through his and said the one word I thought he might want to hear.
“Mine.”
He squeezed my hands. Heat surged, spiraled, settled. Then he turned, drawing me into his
arms, pulling us both back against the wall. He pressed me tightly against his body, his face in
my hair, his fingers stroking, kneading.
Needing.
I ran  my  hands  up  the  front  of  his  shirt,  across  his  shoulders,  responding  in  kind.  The
muscles in his biceps were taut, powerful. My hands circled back to his shoulders, stayed there
as I clung to him, sending rainbows.
He tucked my face  at  the  hollow  of  his  throat.  His  breathing  had  slowed,  but  it  was  still
ragged. I could feel his heart pounding.
“Sully? I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have—”
“Shhh. Hush, hush.” A hoarse request.
His  fingers  wriggled  into  my  hair,  wound  through  the  braid  but  didn’t  undo  it.  Just
stroked, caressed. I leaned my head back  into his hand. His eyes were closed. Then  his  lashes
lifted slightly.
I ran my fingers over his lips, searching for a hint of that  Sully-smile.  His  lips  parted.  My
fingers met the tip of his tongue, and I heard a soft intake of breath. His lips closed against my
fingers, sucked.

Heat  fluttered,  spiraled  through  me.  I  stood  on  tiptoe,  pulled  my  hands  down  to  his
shoulders, and let my lips brush his, softly. Let the tip of my tongue touch his, softly.
He groaned, pulled me into his chest, held my mouth  in a long, deep kiss while fireworks
arced just beneath my skin. I wrapped my arms around his neck, raked my fingers through his
hair. His hands lost their gentleness, traveled boldly, insistently.
I tilted my face away from his, breathless, and ran my thumb across his mouth.  Kissed him
again. And this time I heard bells, chimes.
Then Ren’s voice. “Excuse me, captain. But I think we’re about to exit the jumpgate.”
Lips still touched lips. “Shit.” We said it at the same time. He pushed away from the wall. I
turned, almost stumbling over my own feet. So  much  for the  captain  in  control.  He  grabbed
my elbow, propelled me forward. “Go, Chaz!”
We raced around Ren, hopped over the hatch-tread and tumbled into our chairs just as the
last set of triple chimes sounded.
I swung  the  armrest  controls  around  with  one  hand  and  tapped  in  commands  with  the
other. “Initiating exit  sequence.”  I  hooked  on  my  tattered  straps  and  was  back  in  command
mode.
“Bringing sublights on line,” Sully answered.
I heard Ren’s footsteps, the squeak of the chair at the comm  station as the rumbling noise
started beneath my boots. Nice, friendly sublights, ready to go after a short nap.
I picked up the exit beacon, verified coordinates, locked them  in.  “Three  minutes  to  hard
edge.”
“Got it.”
We traded more chatter, all of it intense and  technical.  Personal  lives,  all  the  joys  and  the
conflicts,  disappear  during  a  jumpgate  transit.  I  ran  over  the  data  for  mass,  velocity  and
inertia—checked for dump points. Sully monitored weapons. We didn’t know what might be
waiting out there when we came through. We still squawked an Imperial ID. There wasn’t time
to alter the Meritorious’ codes now.
“Thirty seconds to hard edge.”
“Got it. Preparing to disengage hypers.”
“On my mark. Twenty seconds.” I watched the screens and monitors, felt the first shimmy
as the jumpgate’s hold on us began to recede.
“Ten seconds. Eight seconds. Four. Mark. Now!”
We  dropped  out  swiftly,  the  black  starfield  suddenly  glistening  through  the  forward
viewports.
My  fingers  flew  over  a  series  of  touchpads.  “Max  sensors,  full  sweep.  Bogey-check,
bogey-check.”
“Weapons  active.”  Sully  was  reaching,  tabbing,  watching  monitors  just  as  I  was.  “Clear,

clear.”
I let out a short sigh of relief. Either those cruisers following us had no idea which exit we
would take out of the jumpgate, or they believed our cold entry had been fatal. Or we were just
plain lucky.
I didn’t know how long our luck would hold out.
“I need to delete all the Imperial codes. Take the helm for me, get us on course.” I yanked
off my safety straps, pushed out of my chair. I glanced over my shoulder just as Sully turned in
his seat. And damned the heat rising to my face as his gaze followed me. Then realized that the
color on my checks was probably nothing compared to what else I radiated. Which only made
my cheeks heat up more.
“Need my help?” he asked.
“Take the helm,” I repeated. “I won’t be long.” We had unfinished business, lots of it. Lots
of questions,  explanations.  But  if  I  didn’t  get  those  codes  changed,  those  explanations  might
not matter.
He seemed to catch that. “I’ll be waiting for you.” He added a slow grin to his words.
“Just don’t get us lost.”
Ren’s smile was wide as I tripped over the hatch-tread. I sent him my oh, shut up rainbow
and didn’t look back. I strode toward the captain’s cabin. This, at least, was familiar territory.
Lew Kingswell had kept his command code file exactly where Fleet regs said we should. I’d
never  kept  mine  there.  I’d  kept  a  partial,  just  in  case  during  a  surprise  inspection  someone
wanted to see if Chasidah Bergren knew the rules.
I did. I also knew that most of civilized space did as well.
I’d  kept  the  full  command  codes  in  a  buried  file,  surrounded  by  trip-alarms.  It  took  me
about fifteen minutes to create another. Then I reset all commands  and passwords. But not the
Meritorious’ s ID. I had to be on the bridge to do that.
I made copies of everything on a small datapad I found in a shelf next to the desk. This was
slow work. The ship was  under  full  power,  with  the  hypers  the  only  cold  system.  I  couldn’t
shut  down  the  sublights,  couldn’t  shut  down  enviro,  recode  and  bring  them  up  again.  So  I
inserted patches that would hamper any attempt  by  intruders  to  take  the  ship.  I’d  make  the
permanent changes when we met up with Sully’s ship on the border.
A  noise  from  the  open  doorway  made  me  raise  my  head.  Sully  cleared  his  throat  and
leaned against the doorjamb,  arms folded over his chest. Unshaven, dark hair tousled, clothed
all in black, he exuded an undeniable sensuality.
He  arched  an  eyebrow.  “Ten  minutes  I’ve  stood  here,  and  you’ve  yet  to  notice.
Demoralizing to be so quickly forgotten.”
My brain seized, fogged and overheated. It was rare for me not to have a rejoinder for one
of Sully’s quips yet I couldn’t think of one. A slight twinge of apprehension mixed in with the
sensations from the past two days. The heat of his body, his kisses, his hands caressing my skin

all  flooded  through  my  memory.  At  the  same  time,  I  remembered  another  heat,  surging,
spiraling  through  me  when  we  touched.  I  knew  empaths  read  emotions,  some  could  even
transmit them. But I didn’t understand it. That made me nervous.
And there had been that unsettling coldness in him when he’d agreed to handle Kingswell.
As if even he weren’t comfortable with what he could do. Why? Part of me longed for answers,
for the facts.
But part of me didn’t know if I feared the answers more than the questions. Maybe  that’s
why  the  routine  of  changing  ship’s  codes  had  seemed  so  preferable  once  we’d  cleared  the
jumpgate.
I gestured toward the desk screen on my right, stuck to that safe topic. “It takes longer  to
do this when we’re underway.”
He stepped inside. “We’ve time. Two and a half weeks yet.”
“The Aldan-Baris border’s at least three and a half—”
“I take risks.” He pushed the datapad to the center of the desk and sat, angled on the edge.
“The Boru Karnwill meet us in Calth.”
“Not  at  the  A-B?”  The  Aldan-Baris  border  contained  a  number  of  asteroid  belts  and
abandoned miners’ rafts. They provided excellent places to hide, especially for a ship the size of
the Boru Karn. It was one of the few places Sully had ever managed to lose me when I was on
his trail. Calth was more open, more heavily trafficked by Imperial ships. “Is that wise?”
He responded with the quiet, gentle stare I suddenly tagged as Sully’s way of reading  me,
like Ren’s barely perceptible head tilt.
“Wisdom’s only proven in hindsight, my angel. Without application, it’s but theory. Lofty,
unstained.” He spread  one  hand  in  an  almost  elegant  gesture.  “True  wisdom  is  theory  that’s
been tested through risk.”
We’d  just  kidnapped  two  Imperials  officers,  highjacked  a  patrolship,  had  been  almost
incinerated  by  plasma  torpedoes,  and  could’ve  killed  ourselves  in  a  cold  jump.  And  I  was
listening  to  a  lofty-sounding  monologue  on  wisdom  better  suited  to  the  halls  of  a  university
than  the  quarters  of  a  patrolship  captain.  Who’d  just  found  out  the  man  before  her  was  an
empath. Maybe I wasn’t the only one not quite ready to face the questions and answers.
“Sully—”
“Hush, Chasidah-angel.” He put his finger against my mouth. “Gabriel has a question.”
It took me a second to comprehend. He used his first name so rarely. The only other time I
remembered hearing it was in Ren’s quarters, at the Temple. And I was the one who’d used it
first.
‘Gabriel’s damned,’ he’d told me. As if he weren’t Gabriel.
His fingers moved under my chin. “Truth, now. I want to know if you still think it wise to
come down the corridor after me.”
He withdrew his hand and waited.

I thought of his lecture on wisdom. And other times I’d heard this tone in his voice, when
he’d played  the  poet,  the  pedant.  They’d  almost  always  been  times  of  intense  emotion.  Like
Port  Chalo.  I’d  written  off  his  words  that  night  because  of  the  beer.  But  he  was  sober  now,
though no less intense.
I wasn’t sure I understood him. I needed, however, for him to understand  me.  There  was
too much at risk here, in too many ways.
“Were my actions wise?  I’m  a  Fleet  officer,  trained  to  assess  situations,  act  on  the  facts.  I
don’t think  ‘impetuous’  has  ever  been  noted  in  my  service  record.  Obviously,  there’s  a  lot  I
don’t know about you. But there’s a lot I do know, after six years. Especially after the past few
days.
“But I’m also not a fool,” I added softly. “I have fears.”
“Because of risks you don’t understand.”
“Oh, some I understand very well.” I breathed a small, harsh, laugh. “I have had my heart
trashed. That’s not in my service record, either.”
His slight frown was encouraging. By all I held holy, I did have some secrets left, even from
an empath.
“That’s not at risk, here.”
“I’ve heard that before, too.”
“Chasidah—”
I touched my finger to his lips, mimicking his gesture of moments ago. “Hush.”
He gave me a small smile, wistful yet oddly warm.
I took my hand away. “So was my coming after you wise? I owed you an apology. It wasn’t
my intention to say hurtful words. I said them  because  I  was,  I  am  hurting.  And  confused.  I
told you the other night. There are a number  of things in my  life  that  I’m  not  handling  well,
that confuse me. You’re one of them.”
“Because of what happened with Kingswell?”
“And because of what happened, or didn’t happen, in Port Chalo.”
“I never regretted my choice of career until I met you,” he said, his wistful smile fading. “I
had  certain  commitments  to  fulfill.  Once  they  were,  I  had  what  I  thought  was  a  plan.  A
reinvention of Gabriel Ross Sullivan, if you will. Into someone Chasidah Bergren would meet in
an Officers’s Club. Not in one of the disreputable bars in Port Chalo.”
“I would’ve preferred Port Chalo to Moabar.”
“I would’ve preferred it as well. Then Kingswell, and what I had to do, wouldn’t be an issue
of confusion.  One  that,  if  I  could  clarify,  I  would.  But  with  that  issue,  my  answers  are  long,
complicated. I can’t guarantee clarification is a solution. It hasn’t been, for me.”
Growing  up  an  empath  in  a  society  that  condemned  mind  talents  hardly  provided  any
avenues for clarification. I could see why his friendship with  Ren  was  important.  I  could  also

see why my acceptance of Ren was equally as important to him.
His  gaze  flicked  down  to  the  desktop,  then  back  to  my  face.  “Gabriel  has  another
question.”
I nodded.
“Did you come looking for me, freely, or because of Ren?”
“Ren didn’t ask me, or tell me, to apologize to you. But he did give me facts I didn’t  have
before. They reinforced my feelings.”
“For me?”
I  thought  my  subsequent  actions  in  the  corridor  were  self-explanatory.  I  was  sure  I
broadcasted  everything  in  the  appropriate  colors.  But  then,  even  Ren  had  questioned  the
source  of  my  sadness  that  morning.  Identifying  an  emotional  resonance  didn’t  evidently
include the source, or motivation behind it, even for an empath. Especially for an empath.
Which also answered an unasked question of mine. If he were a telepath, he’d know what I
thought. And why I felt what I did.
“Would it help if I told what I thought  when  you  kissed  me  yesterday,  after  the  Peyhar’s
service? I believe it was something in the order of a desperate desire to take your robe off, with
my teeth.” I stared hard at him, ignored the heat rising to my cheeks.
A smile played across his lips. “That would be totally acceptable behavior.”
“Not when you’re furred. And talking about adding me to your list of women.”
He opened his mouth  then closed  it.  Gabriel,  the  poet,  the  wordsmith,  at  a  lack.  Gabriel,
chagrined. “There’s no list of women.”
“Good.”
“But you still have confusion.”
“Why didn’t you tell me you’re an empath, like Ren?”
He met my question with a long silence. “Fear. I couldn’t bear losing you over this darkness
that lives deep inside me.”
“Is  that  how  you  think  of  yourself?”  I  asked  softly.  He’d  told  me  Gabriel  had  been
consigned to Hell. Is that what it felt like, being an empath?
“It’s how everyone thinks of me.”
“Everyone thinks I murdered the fourteen officers and crew of the Harmonious. Do you?”
“No.”
I arched an eyebrow. “Well, then.”
He closed his eyes briefly,  shook  his  head.  “It’s  not  the  same.  When  the  truth  about  you
comes out, and it will, you will be exonerated. The truth about Gabriel, the facts about Gabriel
are only damning.”

“That’s not—”
His finger pressed against my lips again. “Hush. Gabriel  has  one  last  question.”  He  didn’t
wait  for  my  nod.  “Can  you  accept  me  as  I  am,  now,  on  faith?  With  what  you  know,  and
nothing more? Gabriel,” he paused, “fears your need for facts, your need  for  explanations  for
things that perhaps can never be explained, will destroy the only chance he has. And he’ll lose
you.”
His fingers brushed against my cheek then tucked a strand of hair around my ear. His voice
was hoarse when he continued. “I promise, I swear I will never hurt you, could never hurt you.
This is no lie.” He hesitated, his gaze searching my face. “Gabriel does not lie.”
A memory  surfaced: one of  three  moons  had  risen.  We  sat  across  from  each  other  as  we
had a hundred times before, but this time, the blackness of space didn’t separate us.
Though I may be a veritable walking list of negative personality traits,  the  one  thing  I  am
not, and never have been, is a liar. It’s my great downfall, Chaz.
I reached for him as I stood. My arms wrapped around his neck.  His thighs closed around
my legs, locking me to him. His hands framed my face.
“Can you accept me as I am?”
I wondered what Kingswell and Tessa had seen haunting the fathomless depths of Gabriel’s
obsidian eyes. I saw a ghost, locked in his own personal Hell. And a man named Sully, badly in
need of a shave. And an answer.
I gave him mine. “Yes.”
 
Chapter Thirteen
« ^ » 
Intraship trilled, halting a kiss that could have run away into  something  we  truly  didn’t  have
time for right now with only two of us able to run the ship.
Something  I didn’t know if I were quite ready for, right now. Just because I’d given  Sully
my trust didn’t mean I was any less confused. But  I  was  very  aware  of  the  pain  he  carried.  I
didn’t want to add to that.
I reached for the touchpad. “Bergren.” My voice was distinctly throaty. His arms wrapped
around my waist. He rested his face on my shoulder.
“A transmit incoming, I believe,” Ren said. I could hear the soft ping from the comm  panel
over the intraship.
“On our way.” I angled back  to him, brushed my hand up the side of his face, which was
rough—through his hair, which was soft, sprinkled lightly at the temples with silver.
His eyes half-closed, briefly. He was still in the pleasure mode. Heat rippled down my arm

when I touched him. I wondered how he did that, but I’d agreed. No questions.
He  exhaled  a  long  sigh.  “Alterations  can  be  made  to  convert  some  of  the  systems,  like
communications, to voice-response.”
Like Ren’s clock, or the commissary panels in the temple common  room. Ask, it tells you.
Tell it, it does. That would help. Reality  dictated  we  were  still  looking  at  only  two  of  us  who
could handle the ship. That most likely meant two-twelve hour shifts,  one  his,  one  mine.  For
the next two weeks.
He said nothing more. But at the doorway, he stopped. He pulled me abruptly against him,
his mouth coming down hard on mine, demanding, claiming. Sparks danced through me.
Just  as  suddenly  he  drew  back  and  rested  his  face  against  my  forehead  for  a  moment.
“Thank you,” he whispered, as breathless as I was. His hands found my shoulders, pushed me
back slightly. He grinned, a wry, quirky, sexy Sully-grin. “Regrettably, we have work to do.”
The  transmit  was  from  Admiral  Weston  Rayburn,  commander  of  the  Sixth  Fleet.  My
stomach churned for a second. The Meritorious was part of the Sixth;  Rayburn was my C.O..
Had Kingswell remembered me?
Rayburn’s  recorded  transmit  said  otherwise.  The  Empire  wouldn’t  tolerate  such  actions
from Farosian terrorists looking to force the release of Blaine. If we returned the ship now, we
would be granted fair treatment in the Imperial courts.
No mention of Kingswell, or his lieutenant.
I deleted the transmit.  It  didn’t  apply  to  me.  Plus,  I’d  already  been  through  the  Imperial
court system. Their version of fair treatment didn’t interest me.
I went back  to the desk in Kingswell’s  quarters—my  quarters,  and  retrieved  the  datapad.
Sully checked my patches, verified everything through the command  console. Then he altered
the Meritorious’s ID.
I tackled the comm  panel, converted what I could to voice-mode  activation  and  response.
Enviro  and  systems  analytics  as  well.  But  things  like  weapons,  helm  and  navigation  needed
eyes.
That took us almost four hours. Commissary panels still  produced  nothing  but  water,  tea
and  coffee,  though  now  to  voice  commands.  We  couldn’t  get  the  sublights  to  crank  over
seventy-five percent. That would add an extra day or two to our agenda.
Ren looked tired, his shoulders sagging as he sat at the comm  station.  Almost  eight  hours
had passed since we’d left Moabar Station.
I pushed out of my chair, went over to him and unraveled his braid full of lake and ocean
and  river  colors.  “There’s  a  hydro  tub  in  sickbay.  Go  soak.  I’ll  rebraid  this  when  you’re
finished, if you want.”
He tilted his head back in my hands, eyes closed. “I should be of more help.”
“You’re an immeasurable help.” I didn’t know how to explain to Ren that much of my faith
in Sully was because of Ren’s trust in him. Ren knew the facts. His acceptance became mine.

“Go  play  fish,  Ackravaro.”  Sully  watched  us,  leaning  one  elbow  on  his  armrest,  half
swiveled  in  his  chair  on  the  other  side  of  the  bridge.  “It’ll  be  a  struggle,  but  I  think  we  can
handle the universe by ourselves for an hour.”
Ren straightened, grinning. He moved out of his chair  in  a  graceful,  fluid  movement.  His
hand rested briefly on my shoulder as he passed me. Warmth flared.
He  stopped  at  the  hatch-tread.  “One  million,  seven  hundred  and  four  thousand,  two
hundred twenty one.”
It took me a moment to place the figures. The amount Sully owed him for losses at cards.
Sully stood and pointed toward the corridor. “Off my bridge, you swindler, you wastrel!”
Ren’s laughter echoed in the corridor.
I put my hands on my hips and faced Sully. “It’s my bridge, thank you.”
“Is it now, my angel?” Two long strides and his arm slipped around  my  waist.  He  turned
me in a half-spin, lifting me up. My arms went around his neck  and then I was in his lap. And
he was in my chair, the captain’s chair.
He pulled me against him, his mouth  against my ear. A deep voice,  incongruously  gentle,
whispered, “Gabriel wants to hold Chasidah.”
Heat seeped into me, brushed my senses. I relaxed, lay my head on his shoulder and closed
my eyes. “It’s still my bridge, Sully.”
Laughter rumbled quietly in his chest. His kissed my cheek. “Mine,” he said softly. “Mine.”
We were still there, indulgently idle, talking quiet nonsense when Ren returned. He handed
me his comb. Sully lifted me off his lap, depositing me on my feet with a sigh. “I can’t live on
tea until we hit Calth. Where’s the base unit for the panels?”
“Deck Two, amidships,” I told him as he left.
Ren sat at comm. I combed out his hair, did my basic three strand-braid.
I’d promised Sully no questions. But I didn’t think asking Ren about who I’d face when we
got to the Boru Karn violated that. Or what could be shared with those  on  Sully’s  ship  about
events on the Meritorious. And what yet might have to be done. “Who knows, besides you and
me?”  I  hesitated.  “About  Gabriel.  Sully.”  I  didn’t  know  if  Ren  knew  of  Sully’s  odd  way  of
referring to himself and to his empathic abilities.
A thoughtful silence was my answer.
“Gregor  and  Marsh?”  I  prompted,  trying  to  make  my  question  clearer.  Obviously  they
knew Sully. But did they know what Sully could do?
“No.”
Ren’s answer told me he understood my question.
“Drogue?”

“No.”
That  meant  Brother  Clement  didn’t.  Or  Sister  Berri,  who  seemed  well  known  in  the
Englarian community. Enough that Sully had easily copied her ID.
Then  I  wondered  about  Winthrop  Sullivan’s  unconditional  rejection  of  his  son.  If  he’d
known  his  son  was  an  empath,  had  mind  talents  that  much  of  the  Empire  viewed  with
condemnation,  that  might  explain  his  vehemence  to  distant  himself  from  his  son.  But
Winthrop had died before he could accomplish it legally. Sullivan was still a Sullivan.
It had been left to Sully’s mother to fulfill her husband’s wish to clear the family name. I’d
occasionally  caught  her  elegant  features  gracing  the  society  vid  clips,  before  she  was  killed.
Sophia Giovanna Rossetti Sullivan, often on the arm of someone like First Barrister Darius Tage
or  another  of  the  Empire’s  elite.  The  Rossetti’s  had  money,  too.  I’d  seen  estimates  of  the
combined  wealth. It was staggering, at least, to my Fleet-issue pay grade  way  of  life.  “Did  his
mother know?”
“His mother preferred to believe he was dead, Chasidah.”
Okay, I heard that. No more questions. I wrapped a tie around the end of Ren’s hair  then
swiveled his chair around. “Sorry.”
“Nothing  to  be  sorry  for.  You  don’t  seek  out  of  curiosity,  but  out  of  concern.  You  must
learn to ask him these things, though. He needs to explain—”
“He said he can’t. Won’t.”  Ren  didn’t  know  what  Sully  had  asked  of  me.  Acceptance  on
faith.  No  questions.  I  made  a  small,  helpless  gesture  with  my  hands.  “I’m  not  trying  to
circumvent  that.  I’m  just  not  sure  where  the  boundaries  are.  I  don’t  want  to  do  something
stupid.”
“He will tell you what you need to know about Marsh, Gregor,” Ren said after a moment.
“And the others, who come and go. This, I think, will not be a problem. But  as  to  Gabriel…”
Ren  reached  out  his  six-fingered  hand  toward  me.  I  clasped  it.  Warmth  flooded  me.  But
something else. Certainty. Trust. Compassion. Courage.
He pulled his hand back, smiled. “That is all I can tell you.”
He headed down to Deck Two.
I sat  in  my  chair,  swung  the  command  controls  around  and  stared  out  at  the  starfield.  I
thought  about  wisdom  and  trust.  And  faith.  And  risks.  And  empaths.  And  about  how  very
much I had yet to learn.
 
Not surprisingly, exhaustion set in after we had dinner in the small  ready  room.  It  wasn’t
the  best  of  dinners;  selections  were  limited  by  a  recalcitrant  commissary  unit.  But  it  was
sustenance, filling and reassuring.
I angled the micro screen in the middle of the round table  so  that  it  faced  me,  giving  me
current status. Everything the bridge knew was there, but in condensed, no-frills form. A P40
could  run  on  auto-guidance,  but  not  for  very  long.  And  not  without  someone,  somewhere,
monitoring the basics.

Sully  and  Ren  were  talking  about  Sheldon  Blaine  and  the  Farosians.  I  tuned  them  out.  I
propped my chin in my hand, watched the data, watched distance  and  time  trickle,  watched
auto- guidance keep us on course. If anything large or small tickled long range sensors, they’d
start screaming. Should something get  by  long  range  before  the  bridge  could  respond,  short
range would automatically bring shields to max, weapons on line. And scream louder.
Good ship, my little P40.
A warm hand on my shoulder jostled me. “You’re falling asleep, Chaz.”
“Huh?” I was face down on the  table,  my  cheek  resting  on  my  crossed  arms.  I  lifted  my
head. Blinked. Sully came into focus.
“I had an hour’s rest in the hydro,” Ren said. “I can stand watch, four, six hours if you need
me to.”
I sat up. “We need to work out shifts. We need—”
“Sleep. We need some sleep.” Sully pulled me to my feet. “Let Ren take these four  hours.
I’ll take the next eight. We’ll work it from there.”
“It’s my ship,” I grumbled as he propelled me toward the door. “I’m responsible—”
“You’re exhausted. So am I. Ren’s the only one with half a brain left.” He turned me to the
left, toward my door, hit the palmpad.
“I should shower.” But damn, the bed looked really good.
“Shower when you wake. It’ll help.”
No argument, there. I sat on the edge of the bed, undid my boots. The bed sagged next to
me. Sully was doing the same.
I stood, undid my belt.
Sully stood, doing the same.
It hit me that I wasn’t going to bed alone.
My  fingers  hesitated.  It  was  only  a  small  lack  of  movement,  a  slight  tension  in  the
shoulders, a half a breath, skipped—but they hesitated.
I felt Sully’s quizzical, gentle gaze on me. Goddamned rainbows. It’s not fear,  I  wanted  to
tell him. I’m not afraid of you. But I was. I knew that. I knew he knew that.
I finished unthreading my  belt,  hung  it  on  the  hook  on  the  wall.  Stripped  off  my  pants,
hung them  up, too. Thought about faith, about risks. About  all  that  Ren  could  tell  me  about
Gabriel.
I pulled my shirt over my head, realized I didn’t have anything to  sleep  in  other  than  the
thin  T-shirt  and  underpants  I  had  on  now.  And  that  the  closets  were  probably  full  of
Kingswell’s things. I wasn’t ready to touch them yet. Nor go searching for Tessa’s.
Hell. I turned around. Sully  stood  by  the  bed,  shirtless,  bootless,  his  pants  unzipped  and
angled halfway down his hips.

By all I held holy, he was magnificent. His arms and chest were sculpted with muscles, his
shoulders wide. His was a body I could explore for hours, or just as easily curl against, feeling
safe and protected. Warmed.
His gaze caught mine again, quizzical, gentle. Reading me. His pants dropped to his ankles.
He picked them up and tossed them onto the small chair. Then he held out his hand.
“It’s okay. Gabriel just wants to hold Chasidah.”
I took his hand.
Warmth.
 
When I  woke,  it  was  0820.  Sully  was  gone,  the  bed  empty.  But  the  rumpled  covers  and
dented pillow told me I didn’t dream falling asleep in his arms. I rolled over. His clothes were
absent from the hooks.
I’d slept for a little under six hours. The Meritorious had switched to station  time  when  it
had docked at Moabar. So the 0822 was accurate for my body as well.
The  shower  helped.  Kingswell’s  towels.  Kingswell’s  soap.  I’d  strip  the  cabin  later,  when
shifts were worked out and I had my off-time allocated.
And clothes. These would go in the laundry as soon as I could scrounge something  out  of
another cabin, from a female crewmember  left behind at Penley’s. Not from a lieutenant who
wouldn’t  remember  a  woman  with  long  auburn  hair,  a  man  with  six  webbed  fingers,  and
another man, with hauntingly dark obsidian eyes.
I threaded my belt through the loops  of  my  pants  as  I  stood  in  front  of  my  desk.  Bridge
status danced on the microscreen. I tapped on intraship. “Captain’s heading for the bridge.”
“Bring coffee,” came the reply. Sully.
Ren wasn’t there. “Soaking,” Sully said,  sitting  comfortably  in  my  chair,  legs  crossed.  He
took a mouthful of coffee, closing his eyes in appreciation. And probably, I suspected, to ignore
the fact that I stood next to him, waiting for him to vacate my chair.
“How long have you been up?”
“About two hours.”
“Why didn’t you wake me?”
“Feels rather nice sitting in the captain’s chair.”
I gave up on dislodging him and sat at engineering, sipped my coffee. We worked on shift
schedules. He argued against two twelves. “This isn’t the damn Fleet.”
We settled for eight on-six on the bridge,  two  on  standby—four  off  for  Sully  and  myself.
Ren would work his schedule to overlap ours, but no more than four on the bridge by himself.
There still could be bogies out there, searching for a ghost ship.
In jump it would change. In jump there were no bogies. We were all ghosts. But jump  was

five days away.
I stayed up for another few hours, tinkering. I coaxed the commissary panels to remember
they  could  make  fruit.  I  also  found  that  the  ship  had  had  two  other  female  crewmembers
besides Tessa. I pilfered  some  clothes.  I  was  looking  for  shirts  for  Sully  and  Ren  when  Sully
found me.
“It’s past your bedtime.”
I shoved three shirts into his  arms.  All  were  plain,  scoop-necked,  long-sleeved.  Two  were
dark blue, one dark gray. “These look like your size.  Maybe  Ren’s,  too.”  Ren  was  about  four
inches taller than Sully, but they were both equally broad-shouldered.
“Bedtime.”
“I’m really not tired—”
“You will be if you don’t reset your body clock.  You  go  on  duty  at  1800.”  He  tucked  the
shirts under one arm, wrapped the other around my shoulders. “I’ll read you a bedtime story.”
Ren was in the corridor. Sully handed him the  shirts.  “Chaz’s  been  shopping.  Keep  what
fits.  I’ll  take  what’s  left.  I’ll  be  back  on  the  bridge  shortly,”  he  added,  guiding  me  into  my
cabin.
Our cabin.
I pulled off my boots, stripped down. Washed my face, unbraided my hair. I’d slept with it
braided last night and when I woke, my scalp had hurt, as usual.
I grabbed my pilfered comb and ran it through my hair as I padded back  to the bed. Sully
sat on the edge, fluffing pillows.
He turned, stopped fluffing. “Stars have mercy,” he said softly.
He pulled me to the bed and took over my grooming. I closed my eyes. Fingers and comb
laced through my hair, down my arms, my back. “This could become an obsession.”
I reminded him he already had a job. And that he was on duty.
He  pushed  my  hair  to  one  side,  planted  a  light  kiss  on  my  collarbone.  “Get  under  the
covers.”
I did. They were cool, pillow nicely fluffed. I lay my hand on his arm. “Sully—”
“Hush, Chasidah.” He touched his fingers to my lips. “Close your eyes.”
I was  about  to  protest  I  wasn’t  sleepy  when  I  felt  his  fingers  on  my  forehead,  then  my
eyelids, then  my  mouth  again.  A  soft  breeze  ruffled  over  me—and  my  eyes  opened.  1605.  I
couldn’t believe I’d fallen asleep  that  quickly.  Or  that  I’d  slept  for  that  long.  I  wasn’t  muzzy
from it. I knew my body clock hadn’t reset yet, but I felt fine.
I splashed more water on my face then pulled on someone else’s clothes. I bound my hair
back loosely with a ribbon. “Captain’s heading for the bridge.”
“Hell’s ass. There goes our card game.” Sully’s lackadaisical drawl made me smile.

They were sitting on the floor of the bridge, to the right of the captain’s chair, playing cards.
At least I didn’t have to fight for possession of the chair.
I leaned on the armrest and watched the game over Sully’s shoulder. “Who’s winning? No.
Delete that. How much does he owe you now, Ren?”
“One million, seven hundred and sixteen thousand, four hundred and five.”
“That’s all?” I teased. “You’re slipping.”
Sully pointed at Ren. “Thieving chiseler. Swindler.”
I chuckled. “Status?”
“He cheats. That’s status. It’s always been status.”
“I don’t think that’s what she’s asking you, Sully.”
“Well she should be. Your lack of integrity is appalling.”
I held up one hand. “Gentlemen, I need status.”
Sully picked up the stack of cards, arced them  into his hand, feathered  them  back  down.
“On  course,  all  systems  stable.  No  bogies.  No  transmits  from  politically  wary  admirals.”  He
shuffled the cards again with a skill even the best casino dealer on Garno would envy. Then he
angled around to face me, fanning the deck in his hands and held it up to me. “Pick three. No,
four. No, wait. What’s your favorite number?”
“Five.”
“Perfect. Pick five. Ah! Don’t look at them  yet. Just hold them.  Between your palms, that’s
right.”
I pursed my lips together to keep from laughing.
“Good. What’s you favorite card?”
“Favorite card? You mean, suit?” I’d seen tricks like this  in  spaceport  pubs,  though  never
with  five  cards.  Two  at  most  and  I’d  end  up  holding  two  gold-novas,  high-nebulas,
moon-drops or heart-stars.
“No, card. Favorite card.”
I raised one eyebrow. There were no five cards alike in a deck.
He was grinning his wicked Sully-grin.
Hell’s ass. “Angel of heart-stars.”
“Fitting. Very fitting. Be a good girl, Chasidah, open your  hands  and  look  at  the  cards.”  I
fanned them out in my hand. Five angel of heart-stars. Five familiar images of slender women,
clearly angels because of the halos topping their cascading hair. All identical. He stood, brushed
his hands against his pants. “Tea, anyone?” “Please,” Ren said.  I  was  still  staring  at  the  cards,
my mouth  open. “You’d best get Chasidah some too,” Ren called as Sully  strode  through  the
door. “How’d he do that?” “Offer to get tea?” There was the hint of a smile on  Ren’s  lips.  He

knew I was surprised by something. But unless he touched the cards, he wouldn’t know what.
“Five heart-stars. I’m holding five angel of heart-stars. There aren’t  five  angel  of  heart-stars  in
one whole deck!” Damn,  he was good. I didn’t even see him switch  decks.  “Gabriel’s  playing
tricks again, is he?” “Damn good tricks. This could get you more than a few beers on liberty.” I
closed the cards and shook my head, laughing to myself. Ren rose, scooping up the remaining
deck where Sully had left it on the floor. I shuffled the ones in my hand, absently, feeling their
raised symbols. Then I stopped  shuffling  and  turned  them  over.  Five  angels.  I  felt  the  raised
symbols again. This  wasn’t  a  trick  deck.  It  was  the  same  deck  Sully—Gabriel,  Ren  had  said.
Gabriel’s playing tricks. I handed the  five  cards  back  to  Ren.  He  patted  me  on  the  shoulder,
gently. Warmth.
 
Chapter Fourteen
« ^ » 
Lose this hand and you owe me two million credits, my friend.” Ren  arched  his  left  eyebrow
slightly.
We were an hour from the jumpgate that would take us through most of Dafir and almost
to  the  Calth  system.  Another  four,  five  days  after  that  and  we’d  be  near  the  intercept
coordinates for the Boru Karn. Six days of long shift duty had brought us to this point, safely,
though from Sully’s viewpoint, not inexpensively.
He stared coolly at Ren, dark eyes narrowed, a hint of a smile on his lips. The quintessential
gambler,  lounging  on  the  decking,  one  elbow  on  a  raised  knee.  I  could  see  both  their
expressions  from  my  chair,  as  Sully  no  longer  sat  with  his  back  to  me  when  they  played.
Didn’t want me to send signals to Ren about the cards in his hand, he said.
I gave a low whistle. “Two million. What are you going to do now?”
He fanned the  cards  shut,  held  them,  fanned  them  open  again,  never  taking  his  eyes  off
Ren. “Double or nothing.”
“Sully…” Ren was clearly giving him a chance to rethink his statement.
“You heard me, Ackravaro. Double or nothing.”
Ren stroked his cards. “Agreed. Double or nothing.”
“You’re witness to this, Chaz.”
“I’m witness to this, Sully.”
There would be no tricks with these cards. After six days, in the a few  hours  I  spent  with
him  between  shifts,  I  was  beginning  to  be  able  to  tell  Sully  from  Gabriel.  Or  rather,  I  was
beginning to be able to tell when Sully was Sully, and when Sully was feeling like Gabriel.
Gabriel never called me Chaz.
Gabriel said ‘hush,’ touched my eyes and pleasant warmth moved through me  until  sleep

claimed me.
He’d touched other eyes as well. Kingswell and Tessa hadn’t met Sully. They’d met Gabriel.
A Gabriel,  I  was  beginning  to  believe,  far  more  gentle  than  I  would’ve  suspected.  Far  more
concerned about what had to be done to Kingswell, to Tessa.
I worried a little less about them now.
Sully looked at Ren, a triumphant smile on his face. He laid his cards on the deck, one by
one, calling them  out as he did  so.  All  gold-novas.  Sequential.  Seven  through  Angel.  A  good
hand. A damn good hand.
Ren sighed and looked distinctly troubled.
Sully’s grin widened.
Ren  lay  out  his  cards.  All  high-nebulas.  Ten,  Angel,  Empress,  Emperor,  Galaxy.  “Four
million. You owe me four million, my friend.”
Sully leaned forward. He stared at the cards in front of Ren, then back at his own. “This is a
beautiful hand. One of the best I’ve had. Then you pull…” He switched his gaze  back  to  Ren
again. “You cheated. There can be no other explanation.”
“You say that every time, Sully.”
“Yes, I know. Ante up?”
“Ante up. Who’s dealing?”
“I am. You’re obviously not trustworthy.”
I  laughed.  “Make  it  a  quick  game,  gentlemen.  I  need  you  at  your  stations  in  fifteen
minutes.” I pulled my armrest controls around, rechecked our coordinates. A longer jump  this
time than the one off Moabar. Six hours jumptime.
We could all use the time off. It was tense, doing nothing, waiting for something to happen,
and worrying. While jukors were born and Takas died.
Two thousand, five hundred twenty five credits later Sully was at engineering and Ren sat
at comm, monitoring internal systems through voice commands.
Sublights disengaged at forty-eight percent, hypers were on full. The gate grabbed us, drew
us in, no twists, no shimmies. The Meritorious glided into the  neverwhen  flawlessly.  Just  like
old times.
I stayed an extra  half  hour  on  the  bridge,  watching  the  read-outs  on  the  hypers,  making
sure  guidance  wasn’t  picking  up  a  skew  from  the  remnant  of  an  old  ion  trail.  I  leaned  over
Sully’s shoulder. He pulled me around and into his lap. “You’re supposed to be off duty.”
“I will. I just like to take my ship through jump.”
“And out again, I suppose?”
“Yes, and out again.”

“That leaves about five hours with nothing for you to do. Tea sounds good. Can you defend
the universe without us for awhile, Ren?”
“Most certainly.”
“We won’t be far.” Sully stood, grabbing my elbow. In the common  room he  coaxed  two
mugs of hot tea from the panels. I pulled the chairs out from the table but he shook his head.
“Our cabin. Decor’s better.”
Yes. It had a bed.
Six days. In the past  six  days,  he’d  done  nothing  more  than  kiss  me,  tuck  me  in,  let  me
sleep. But he’d made sure, every hour I spent with him, a little more of Sully, a little  more  of
Gabriel, came to the surface.
It was as if he were showing me in small ways what I couldn’t ask and what he couldn’t tell.
But he watched my rainbows, cautiously, waiting for my fears to subside.
They were subsiding, in equally small ways. That Sully was an empath like Ren was clear.
So were a few hundred, or perhaps thousand others in the Empire, from what I’d heard. And I
hadn’t heard much,  other than those who admitted to the  rare  mind  talents  often  worked  as
government  sanctioned  med-counselors,  once  testing  confirmed  those  were  the  only  talents
they had.
I could understand their usefulness in that field. Though it had been disconcerting at first to
feel the warmth flowing through my body from the touch of Ren’s and Sully’s hands, it wasn’t
intrusive. I didn’t fear that. It was a giving, comforting thing.
But I still wondered about the differences between empaths and Ragkirils. The Empire, and
Fleet, called all Stolorth telepaths Ragkirils. Knowing Ren now as I did, I knew that wasn’t true.
Ren was an empath. He didn’t have what he called the Higher Link.
But what was Sully? Was the ability to do a zral, a cleansing of memory,  a part of empathic
abilities, not Ragkiril? Could it be just a stronger version of a reassuring touch, a blurring of a
memory rather than the removal? He never said he could do a zragkor. That procedure was a
mind suddenly inside another’s mind, violent, harsh.
I sensed no violence,  no  harshness  in  him  or  Ren  anytime  their  warmth  flowed  into  me.
None at all. I didn’t even know if they were aware they sent the sensation, or that I could feel it.
Sully’s card trick perplexed me a little more. You can’t alter matter by touch,  by  thought.
Even my Grizni was mechanical, a hybrid fluid metal reactive to heat and pressure  applied  at
certain key points, coded only to my fingerprints.
There  were  only  two  logical  explanations:  either  Sully  did  have  second  deck—why  did  I
have to assume Ren’s reference to ‘Gabriel’s tricks’ meant something on the extrasensory level?
Or he sent the emotional resonance of surprise, and acceptance, into me when he handed me
the cards. I saw five heart-stars because that’s what I wanted to see.
He put the tea on the bedside table, drew me into his lap in the middle of the bed. He took
a moment  to undo my boots and his own, pulled them  off. He wrapped his arms around my
waist, nuzzled his face in my neck. “Tea’s for later. Though it’ll probably be cold by then.”

Warmth  trickled  through  me,  then  a  flash  of  heat,  flaring,  spiraling.  Its  unexpected
intensity made my eyes open in surprise.
His own sharp intake of breath matched mine. The heat simmered. Gentled. “Sorry. I want
so badly to make love to you, Chazzy-girl. But only if it’s what you want. Tell me to wait—”
I closed my hands over his. “I don’t want to wait.”
Another flare, flames dancing, but I was ready for it this time.
I draped my legs over his thighs, took his face in my hands. Kissed him with small, teasing,
nibbling kisses.
He groaned. Tiny explosions rained inside my body.
He kissed me back, hard.
I opened my mouth, tasted him.
His hands found the edge of my shirt, pulled. I broke  from the kiss, stripped my shirt off,
then the undershirt. He ran his hands lightly over my breasts, his thumbs  circling my nipples.
His fingers slid down  to  my  waist,  stroking,  then  up  again.  The  heat  came  in  long,  coursing
flares.
I reached behind my head, unraveled my braid and shook my hair free. It fell to my waist,
tangled and curled.
“Chaz,” he said softly. He ran his fingers through my hair, pushing it back  from  my  face,
letting it drift down through his hands.
I pulled the edge of his shirt out of his pants. His hand covered mine, impatient. He yanked
the shirt over his head then  grabbed  me,  rolling  me  onto  my  back.  His  hard  length  covered
me. His mouth  claimed mine, demanding,  insistent.  A  strong  hand  cupped  my  breast.  Then
his  lips  burned  against  my  neck,  my  shoulder,  closed  around  a  nipple,  sucked  with  a
tenderness that made me ache.
A hot  wave  rolled  over  me,  soothing  the  ache,  caressing  it.  Mouth  back  on  mouth  now.
Breaths shuddered.
I arched my hips against him, felt him throbbing, felt liquid fire racing through my veins. I
ran my hands over the sinews of his shoulders, down to his waist, pushed my fingers into the
waistband of his pants. “You going to take these off, or do I have to use my teeth?”
His dark  eyes  glittered  with  a  dangerous  passion.  “We’ll  save  that  method  for  next  time.
When  we  have  more  than  five  hours.”  My  pants  and  underwear  came  off,  too,  tossed
somewhere over his shoulder. Then there was nothing but heat and hardness, hands stroking,
fingers tracing, tongues leaving hot, wet trails. And  fire,  searing,  cresting,  spiraling.  I  knew  it
was  his  emotions  I  felt,  overwhelming  me,  augmenting,  and  feeding  my  own.  I  found  his
mouth  again,  wanting  to  kiss  that  Sully-smile,  that  wicked,  wicked  Sully  grin.  My  hands
moved up his chest, through the thick mat of dark hair, and clung to his shoulders.
His hand slide under my backside, kneading me, lifting me, his hardness  stroking  against
me,  slick.  I  wrapped  my  legs  around  his  waist,  stroked  back  with  my  body.  He  trembled,

kissed me with a passion that made me gasp.
“Sully, please!”
I didn’t  have  to  ask  twice.  He  plunged  into  me,  sparks  surging,  cascading,  swirling.  My
body  answered  with  a  fervency  I  didn’t  know  I  had,  pleasure  streaming  through  me  at
hyperspace speeds. Everything collided, arcing. He rasped my name, stroking deeper.
And then  I  swear  three  suns  went  nova,  half  a  galaxy  was  blown  away  and  the  universe
shifted at least a hundred feet from where it had been before. But it was just Sully, his body hot
and damp and heavy against mine, breathing long, ragged breaths  against  my  neck.  Sending
warm, pulsing waves through me. I unwrapped my legs, let my feet drift down the back  of his
thighs  in  a  slow  caress.  I  stroked  his  hair  and  when  he  moved  slightly,  bit  his  shoulder.  He
chuckled. “You’re a wicked woman, Chazzy-girl.”  “You’re  a  wicked  man,  Sully.”  And  it  was
Sully. Because I was Chaz, not Chasidah. I dozed, curled against him, listening to the rise and
fall of his breath. Warmth fluttered through  my  hand  and  up  my  arm  when  I  touched  him,
traced the line of his jaw.  His  eyes  slitted  open.  He  grabbed  my  hand,  nibbled  kisses  on  my
fingers.  “No  regrets?”  “None.  Well,  maybe.”  A  small  flash  of  concern  touched  his  eyes.  His
mouth turned into a slight frown. Wicked woman, Chazzy-girl. “I like my tea hot.” Something
between a groan and a grumble rumbled in his throat. He pushed me back,  slid on top of me,
slid inside me, hard, throbbing. “Let’s talk about heat.”
I couldn’t. Talk. Passion, hot, molten passion streamed through  me.  Then  a  second  wave,
but different, almost intoxicating. Then heat again, melting me, melting into me. Then another,
floating, rising.
The  heat  returned,  more  intense,  probing,  wrapped  around  me.  Parted,  pleasure  surged,
building,  cresting—“Oh,  God,  Chaz!”  Shuddering,  soaring,  taking  me  with  him,  clinging  to
each other.
Desperate, frenzied kisses. Then warmth, soft as the  breath  on  my  face,  enveloping  me.  I
opened my eyes to find Sully watching me. Reading rainbows?
“You  can  do  that,  control  what  you  send?  What  you  make  me  feel.”  Like  sensations  of
intense passion alternating with ones of languid pleasure. Like a  sensation  of  acceptance.  Five
heart-stars in my hand.
A long wait was filled with the sound of his ragged breathing, finally slowing. He watched
me the whole time.
“I’m sorry,” I said softly. “I’m not supposed to ask—”
“No. It’s okay.” His was an equally as soft reply. Then Sully’s face was next to mine on the
pillow, his arm across my chest, hand on my shoulder, pulling me closer against him.
“Yeah,” he said in my ear, just a breath of a whisper. A near silent confession. “Yeah, I can.”
 
Fifty  minutes  to  exit-gate.  The  numbers  glowing  on  my  bedside  clock  focused  and
unfocused  in  my  sleepy  vision.  Sully’s  arm  was  heavy  across  my  chest,  his  breathing  deep,
steady.  I  studied  his  face.  Thick  brows,  dark  lashes,  straight  nose.  No  Sully-grin  on  those
slightly parted lips. Shame,  that. When I’d heard he’d been killed on Garno, it was one of the

first things I’d thought of. One of the things I knew I’d miss.
That,  and  the  verbal  sparring.  Over  six  years  of  it.  I’d  pick  up  an  ID  on  the  border,
somewhere in the bad lands. Somewhere a ship with that ID shouldn’t be. Send  out a hail. Get
an answer, a flash on the vidscreen. A dark-haired pirate with a wicked smile. His pilot, bridge
crew, always moved in the shadows behind him.
“Slumming, Captain Bergren?”
“Weeding my garden, Sullivan. You wouldn’t happen to be waiting for the Osborn Mining
long-hauler, now would you?”
“I’ve no use for synth-emeralds.”
“Never said they were hauling synth-emeralds.”
A languid shrug, almost aristocratic. “Lucky guess on my part, then.”
“You’re in a restricted area. You know the rules. Move it, or we’re boarding. You know how
the Empire feels about forged ownership files.”
“I’m in free space, captain. Well,” and there’d be that glance down at the armpad controls
on his left, on the empty pilot’s chair, “most of me is.”
My own downward glance always mirrored his own. Bastard. Sitting right on the border of
the restricted zone, only his  bridge  and  a  small  portion  of  the  forward  section  of  the  ship  in
violation. “You’re playing a dangerous game here.”
“It’s the only kind worth playing.” Then a hand would be offered across the small starfield
between  us.  And  a  look,  dark  and  suggestive.  “Come  play  with  me,  Chazzy-girl.  I’ll  let  you
win.”
 
The memory  dissolved as a long intake of breath feathered  against  my  face.  A  heavy  arm
moved  slightly,  and  a  hand  stirred  against  the  side  of  my  neck.  His  face  tilted.  Our  lips
touched.
“Forty minutes to exit-gate, Sully.”
“Umm.” Another long sigh brushed my mouth. “You’re off duty.”
“I’m the captain.”
His eyes opened slowly. His thumb  rubbed  across my mouth  where his lips had just been.
“And I suppose the captain wants her tea hot this time.”
I nipped his thumb  then rolled quickly, avoiding his  grasp.  “Quick  shower.  And  yes,  hot
tea. Not coffee. I’ll never get back to sleep.”
A  raised  eyebrow  and  a  Sully-grin  challenged  my  last  statement.  There  were  always
Gabriel’s bedtime stories.
When I came out of the shower, tea was waiting,  hot.  Sully  was  gone.  But  a  playing  card
fluttered out of my pants pocket when I picked my clothes off the floor.

Angel of heart-stars.
Thirty minutes to exit-gate. “Captain’s heading for the bridge.”
“Hell’s ass. There goes our card game.”
 
We flowed through the gate like honeylace from a crystalline cup. Sweet, sweet little ship,
my P40. I thought about that, thought about how good it felt to be at a stellar helm again. And
pushed aside those sullen whispers in my mind,  those  questions  I  didn’t  want  to  face.  Those
fears…
 
Chapter Fifteen
« ^ » 
We hit the C-D border at Calth early on the fourth day after jump.  Ahead of schedule,  praise
the stars! Sublights were back to specs; better than specs because I didn’t have Fleet safety regs
to worry about anymore. That Sully knew ways to coax more power out of the engines came as
no  surprise  to  me.  I’d  figured  out  long  ago  that  rules  existed  to  a  great  extent  so  that  Sully
could break them.
And  that’s  when  he  was  just  Sully.  Not  pirate,  lover,  ghost,  friend,  poet  and  mercenary,
sitting at my engineering station, weapons silent but active. All ship’s sensors on serious watch
for Imperial bogies.
Ren had integrated data we’d gleaned, illegally, from the  Imperial  transit  beacon  in  Dafir.
We looked for anything to do with Marker.  He’d sorted it by  voice  parameters,  talking  softly
into his headset.
I reviewed the updated meet-point  coordinates  we’d  picked  up  on  a  blind  transmit  from
the Karn last shift. A  private  yacht  turned  ghost  ship.  Sully’s  home  base  that  I’d  never  been
able to catch. It was about twice the size of the Meritorious. But rigged to run with a minimum
crew complement  of six.  Rigged  with  other  things,  too.  He’d  laid  them  out  for  me  in  detail.
These were things he wanted me to know. Weapons systems, tracking, sensor jamming  arrays.
Sublights, hypers, all with overrides. A comm  pack that would make an  Imperial  techie  faint
with joy.
And a custom, highly illegal, ion trail diffuser. Waves on a beach dissolving the footprints in
the sand.
There was no way the Meritorious could find her. We’d have to wait at meet-point, let her
find us.
Ren  slipped  his  headset  down  around  his  neck  and  swiveled  toward  me.  “There  was  an
unusual series of shipments inbound to Marker a few weeks ago. You might want to—”
An alarm wailed shrilly, my adrenaline spiking along with it. Red lights flared over my long

distance scanner. I switched screens on my armpad automatically and saw the configuration of
an Imperial cruiser. An hour behind us, but her appearance might not be coincidental.
The Meritorious’s old files confirmed her ID: the Andru Kendrick. Captain Gemma Junot.
I tapped off the alarm. Sully studied the main screen, which showed the same data as  my
armpad. I read off the ship’s and captain’s name for Ren.
“Know her?” Sully meant Junot not her ship. He knew what a Maven-class cruiser signified
as well as I did.
“By reputation.” Junot was a gruff woman  in  her  late  forties.  But  well  liked,  fair.  Though
that was from a fellow officer’s point of view. I  wasn’t  one  of  those  anymore.  Now  I  was  the
enemy. “If she has someone sharp on scan who’s spotted us, she’ll be looking for reasons why a
P40  configuration  isn’t  broadcasting  an  Imperial  ID.  She  has  to  know  a  couple  mining
corporations  use  P40s  for  transport.  But  she  also  knows  a  P40’s  missing  from  Moabar—and
hasn’t been confirmed dead yet.”
We  had  to  keep  enough  distance  between  us  so  that  the  answer  to  Captain  Junot’s
questions would confirm our cover as  a  mining  transport.  If  she,  or  any  bogey,  came  within
visual range, the Meritorious’s name and Imperial insignia were clearly visible on her hull.
We  cruised  at  max  sublight,  per  spec  not  per  Sully.  I  didn’t  want  to  attract  attention  by
pushing the ship to a speed a P40  normally couldn’t provide, a speed that a mining  transport
had  no  need  of.  I  could  tell  Sully  to  push  her  now,  ten  over  spec,  put  some  more  distance
between us and Junot. But I needed the Kendrick to go away, not get suspicious, and kick  her
own engines hot in pursuit.
“Hold speed for now?” Sully echoed my thoughts.
I nodded. “Unless she’s got friends coming in from the opposite axis, we should be able to
talk our way out of this.”
A second alarm wailed.
She had friends.
“Shit.” I had no choice. Subtlety was out. I raked down my straps. Sully and  Ren  did  the
same. “Change course, ninety degrees. Options, Sullivan. Get me options.”
“Changing course. Working on it.”
An asteroid field would be nice, somewhere to play duck and hide. Mining rafts even nicer.
We’d have a legitimate purpose then. Mining transport working the rafts. But  this  was  Calth,
not the A-B border where such things were possible.
“Bogey Two an hour ten ahead. Kendrick an hour behind, but closing,” Ren  said,  headset
back on.
“ID on Bogey Two?”
“Not yet,” Ren replied.
That was one piece of good news. If I couldn’t recognize them,  they couldn’t recognize me.

Yet.
“Kendrick  changing  course.”  Sully  worked  the  console  with  a  calmness  that  belied  our
situation. “Following.”
“Damn it, I hate when everyone wants to dance with me at the same time.”
“You’re just a popular girl, Chaz. Ready to lose them, yet?”
“Not until I have somewhere to hide.”
“Got to let go of that rule book sometime. All life’s a risk.”
“I’m at quota for risks this week, thank you. Just keep us moving.”
“Bogey Two coming in sensor range,” Ren said. “Confirm ID.  Imperial  Destroyer  Morgan
Loviti.”
I  froze,  for  less  than  a  half  a  second.  I  was  still  a  Fleet  officer.  I  was  still  in  red-alert
conditions. My mind still focused on data, my fingers moved over the armpad. But I froze as if
ice had been sprayed through my insides.
Philip.
“Captain is Philip Guthrie.” Ren announced what I already knew.
“Chaz.”  Sully’s  dark  gaze  moved  to  me,  searching,  probing.  Ren’s,  too,  probably.  My
rainbow had just turned glacial, cracked and shattered.
“Know him, too,” I said. I couldn’t find an offhand smile to tag my words. I fell back  into
Fleet-issue-captain mode. “Hold course and speed.”
A duro-hard rattled in my personal cold storage, knocked hard against my mental walls. Or
maybe  that  was  my  heart.  Shit.  I  didn’t  know.  Couldn’t  tell.  It  didn’t  matter.  I  had  two
Imperial bogies on my tail and not a hidey-hole in sight.
And one of the bogies knew me, very, very well.
“Kick us up ten.” I was running now, running from more than just bogies.
“Plus ten,” Sully replied evenly. “Loviti changing course to intercept. Kendrick still coming
on. Forty-five minutes behind, closing fast.”
I tapped at my screen, searching desperately for answers. Running would only bring more
ships, more intercepts. They’d box us in, if they didn’t start firing first. I had to lose them.
Or I had to negotiate.
“We  can  take  plus  twenty.”  Sully’s  voice  was  calm,  but  I  felt  an  underlying  question,  a
gentle nudge of concern, as if he were asking, what’s wrong? What aren’t you telling?
Lots. A  whole  duro-hard  full.  Maybe  two.  And  it  wasn’t  that  I  didn’t  want  to;  there  just
wasn’t time for explanations. “Hold course and speed. No, belay that  order,  Sullivan.  Change
course to intercept the Morgan Loviti. Hold speed at plus ten.”
“Bringing weapons on—”

“Stand down, Mister Sullivan. I need weapons cold, shields on minimum.”
“Chaz—”
“Do it!” God, Sully don’t argue with me. Not now. I’m at-quota on risks and still hip-deep
in confusion.
“Changing  course.  Twenty  minutes  to  intercept.”  His  flat  response  told  me  he  was
complying with my orders. But clearly, he didn’t like it at all.
Twenty  minutes.  Twenty  minutes  to  throw  words  together  that  would  either  save  us,  or
damn us. The only thing I knew for sure was that if it came down to the latter, my choice was
clear. My life in exchange for Sully’s and Ren’s. Philip would do that.
He wouldn’t even hesitate.
Philip Guthrie  had  always  had  his  own  agenda.  And  he  had  seniority  to  Junot.  She’d  do
what he told her. That I also knew for sure.
“Fifteen minutes to intercept.”
I turned away from Sully’s voice. “Ren.”
He looked over his shoulder, nodded. His clouded gaze probed me.
“I’ll need you off the bridge before  intercept.  Fleet  knows  a  mind-wipe  was  done  on  two
officers. They see a Stolorth and nothing I say is going to make a difference.”
“Understand, Chasidah.”
“Wait in my cabin. My desk screen has sufficient voice capabilities that you should be able
to follow what happens on the bridge. They will not—” I said firmly, with a glance to Sully on
my right. His hard obsidian eyes met my gaze. “—they will not take this ship. I will not permit
that.”
I turned back to Ren. “If I’m removed to the Loviti—”
“That’s unacceptable!” Sully’s voice, angry, rode over mine.
My own rose, correspondingly. “If I am removed to the Loviti understand it’s because this
is my choice. I’m placing you in command if that happens, Ren Ackravaro.”
Behind me, I heard the sharp snap of a safety harness unlatching.
“My  orders,  if  that  happens,  are  this:  depart,  with  all  possible  speed.  No  shots  are  to  be
fired. I repeat. No shots are to be fired.”
“Chasidah!” Sully grasped my forearm, tried to pull me around.
I yanked back, away from the surge of heat that flared through me at his touch. “Ren. As a
friend, you must do this.”
Ren’s face was impassive. His chest rose and fell rapidly. The emotions on the bridge had to
almost suffocate him. And Sully as well, who had my arm in a hard grip, who had to be feeling
everything roiling through me.

Which is why I had to put Ren in charge. I couldn’t trust that Sully  would  react  logically,
unemotionally. Not with what I was about to do.
“Do you understand, Ren?”
“The other ship following. They will listen to the Loviti if we’re permitted to leave?”
“Junot will do what Guthrie says, yes. He’s got seniority.”
Sully wrenched me around to face him. Heat rose, crested. Ice cold came in hard after that.
Sharp, biting. Scraping me raw on the inside. He was hurting, afraid. But so was I.
“Take your hands off me, Mister Sullivan and sit down!” I had to get away from his touch,
from the emotions he poured through me. I needed to be thinking clearly to face Philip.
He released my arms but didn’t move.
“This ship is under my command as well,” he said finally, his voice harsh.
“But I’m her captain. We agreed on that from the beginning. I also know Fleet, know how
Fleet thinks, reacts. You don’t. So listen to your own wisdom, for once. You can’t outrun them.
You’re deep in Fleet territory. You’ve got two starports in this quadrant of Calth. The only way
you’ll make it to jumpgate is if they let you.”
I took a deep breath. “That’s what I’m trying to do. Get their permission. If it means I have
to stay behind, so be it. It’s a risk I have to take.” A wry smile finally found its way to my lips.
“I’m guess I’m not at quota after all.”
“We’re being hailed on all channels, Chasidah.”
I turned  to  Ren.  “We’ll  hold  position  here.”  I  tabbed  the  sublights  down  to  one-quarter
power. “Off the bridge, Ren. I’ll open comm from here.”
Ren  stood,  laid  his  hand  briefly  on  my  shoulder,  then  left.  A  sad,  troubled  warmth
remained.
I turned  back  to  Sully.  “I’m  going  on  visual.  It’s  imperative  Guthrie  believes  I’m  in  total
command of this ship. It’s imperative you act in all ways as if I am. Stay in the background, let
him  see  you  as  little  as  possible.  You’ve  not  changed  that  much  in  two  years.  You  get
recognized and it’s over. Now, sit.”
A wrenching, gnawing anguish suddenly shot through my  mind,  my  thoughts.  Cold  and
hot  at  the  same  time,  it  was  cutting,  stark.  Probing.  It  grasped  at  memories.  My  breathing
stuttered, caught. My hand clenched the armpad. I stared at obsidian eyes, at a man standing
three feet in front of me, not even touching me. And I couldn’t breathe.
Then just as quickly it was gone.
This  was  not  the  warm  sensation  that  had  caressed  my  body.  This  was  not  an  empath’s
gentle touch. This was deeper, in my mind, tearing open my thoughts with blatant ownership.
I felt violated, naked. And too stunned to face the horror of what he’d just done.
“Gabriel will not lose Chasidah.” His voice was as quiet as the vast emptiness of space. And
as dark. He sat.

I clenched my fist to steady my shaking hand, then hit the keypad. The center viewscreen
opaqued, locked on the hailing signal from the Loviti. It segued through instantly, because this
was, after all, Imperial ship to Imperial ship.
An image flickered, hazing into focus. The Loviti’s bridge. A  much  larger,  grander  bridge
than my little P40’s. And in the middle, a man in Imperial grays, captain’s stars over his breast
pocket.  He  wasn’t  sitting  in  the  captain’s  chair.  Philip  Guthrie  liked  to  stand,  reinforce  his
imposing  presence,  his  slate-gray  hair,  his  piercing  blue  eyes.  His  impeccable  posture,
well-muscled body.
Forty-eight years old and in command  of  a  Galaxy-class  destroyer.  He  was  a  figure  and  a
face that turned heads regularly in bars on liberty. Classic, undeniably masculine. Confident.
I tamped down the shock rolling through me at Sully’s intrusion into my mind. Threw it in
that duro-hard and somehow dragged out my Fleet-issue confidence. My Fleet-issue resolve. I
lounged sideways in my chair as Philip’s image solidified, crossed my legs, propped my chin in
my hand. I knew Philip would see my image at the same time I saw his. But I, at least, had the
element of surprise.
Blue eyes widened and chiseled lips parted, but only slightly. “My God. Chaz.”
I arched an eyebrow, mimicking Sully at his best. “Hello, Philip, darling. Miss me?”
 
Chapter Sixteen
« ^ » 
A strong, sharp stab of pained confusion cut a second time into  my  mind.  Again,  it  was  sent
deliberately, without physical contact, from the man sitting off to my  right.  I  shoved  it  aside,
just as I’d shoved aside the questions that had surfaced with  Sullivan’s  last  intrusion,  the  one
that had me gasping, clutching the armpad.
I’d lost my right to ask questions.
But I hadn’t lost my focus. I knew what I had to do.
I  kept  smiling,  a  slow,  lazy  smile  as  I  waited  for  Philip  to  find  words.  It  was  almost  a
pleasure to see him at a loss like this. It’d been a long time.
I  could  see  his  crew  diligently  working  the  consoles  behind  him.  We  weren’t  in  visual
range. He knew this was a P40. But not which one.
He would have, eventually, if we’d run and they’d blockaded us. Then we’d be looking at a
few  more  destroyers,  a  good  half-dozen  cruisers  and  patrol  ships.  There’d  be  no  bargaining
then.
But  it  was  only  Philip,  Junot  and  Chaz  Bergren  right  now,  out  here.  And  Gabriel  Ross
Sullivan on my bridge, and a blind Stolorth in my cabin.
Philip gestured sharply toward his comm officer. “Transfer this to my office.”

The screen blanked. When it came back  on, Philip was still standing. But  the  background
was different. A wide viewport, a high backed chair. And no one else to overhear what might
be said.
“Chaz.”  Philip  repeated  my  name  as  if  he  needed  verification  of  my  identity.  “There’s  a
report of your—a ship being taken by force. At Moabar.” He was recovering from the shock of
seeing me. He frowned, looking stern. The venerable Fleet captain, quantifying the facts. “This
doesn’t bode well for you.”
“I’m aware the Meritorious was taken. But not by me.”
“No. The Farosians. With a Stolorth Ragkiril. We know that. How you would get involved
with them, how you would get involved with that I cannot understand.”
‘That’ meant a Stolorth. A Fleet-issue sentiment of disgust.
“Kingswell, Lieutenant Paxton were near death when Fleet recovered them,” he continued.
“Their minds viciously raped, all but destroyed.”
Liar! The word speared my mind, blazing with anger. It was as clear as if he’d shouted it in
my ear.
I pushed it off; let horror, loathing flicker across my face. The emotions were only partially
feigned. “Are you blaming me for this?”
“Are you going to tell me this isn’t the Meritorious?”
“I am. It’s not.”
Another moment of shocked silence. Good. I liked when Philip didn’t have a ready answer.
“She’s a Ninacska Mining Cooperative transport ship, the Far Rider. You’ve been scanning
me for five minutes. You know my ID.”
“Yes, but—”
“Be logical. Let’s assume this was the Meritorious. Let’s assume I’d taken her from Moabar
with your Farosian terrorists and some Stolorth mind-fucker. Do you really think I’d be sitting
here with minimum shields and weapons cold? Would I have changed course to meet you?” I
shook my head sadly. “By all I hold holy, Philip. I thought you knew me better than that.”
“You’re supposed to be incarcerated on Moabar. Am I supposed to believe you didn’t steal
this ship?”
I leaned to my left, recrossed my legs, propped my chin in my other hand, shrugged. “You
never asked me if I stole this ship. I just said she’s not the one you’re looking for.”
“Then this ship is stolen.”
“Not exactly. Let’s say I negotiated a trade.”
I could  tell  Philip  was  having  a  difficult  time  putting  my  facts—my  deliberately  widely
divergent facts—together. He was Fleet, like me. He liked his databoxes all stacked neatly in a
row.

I  plucked  out  the  first  box,  opened  it  for  him.  “N.M.C.  services  Dafir  and  the  rim,
including Moabar.”
“I’m aware of that,” Philip snapped.
I  opened  the  next  one.  It  contained  a  small  bomb.  “I  service  the  boys  at  N.M.C..  In
exchange, I get work-release duty. It’s almost freedom.”
This time it was Philip’s face that showed disgust. “By all I hold holy, I never thought I’d see
the day where Chaz Bergren would whore—”
“You  have  no  idea  what  Moabar  is  like!”  I  shot  to  my  feet,  fists  clenched.  “Damn  you,
Philip. How dare you judge me.”
“I can and I will. I offered you a choice. You rejected it.”
“The court would never have believed—”
“They would have. Because I said so.” His mouth thinned. “It was your choice. You’d rather
have Moabar than me. Or our child.”
“That wasn’t the problem—”
“No, you married me readily enough.”
“Because I loved you! You knew I was career Fleet. We’d  agreed  children  were  not  in  our
plans.  Five  years  later,  when  I’m  up  for  a  captaincy,  suddenly  you  want  to  be  a  father.  You
weren’t  willing  to  take  leave,  or  a  desk  job  and  share  the  responsibility.  So  that  means
everything I’ve worked for stops. It would have been knock  up Chaz, leave  her  on  a  starport
and see you once a year, my darling!”
I was shaking, shouting at him. God, I thought I’d gotten over this.
From behind me on my right, was silence. Total silence. Verbally and mentally.
“I told you the child could be raised in a crèche. Then your career—”
“No  child  of  mine  would  be  raised  in  a  damned  crèche!  With  droid  nannies,  med-techs.
And a mother and father who are total strangers.” Not like Willym, poor thing.
“You’re being archaic. You’re just like your mother.”
“God damn right I am.” I glared at him. Amaris Bergren didn’t raise a fool for a daughter. I
knew my fears. I grew up with them:  crèche-kids, holos of lieutenant daddy and commander
mommy  on  expensively  furnished  dormitory  walls.  That  was  the  acceptable  option  in  Fleet.
Breed and abandon. Check in once a year, pat it on the head, ship out.
“What would your mother say about  her  virtuous  daughter’s  record  now?”  Philip’s  voice
softened, but carried a bitter edge. “Convicted criminal. Murderer. Whore.”
My  hand  clasped  my  Grizni  bracelet,  felt  it  tingle,  ready,  waiting.  But  Philip  was  just  an
image on the screen. I couldn’t hurt him. He couldn’t hurt me.
Then why did I feel such a pain in my heart?

Philip ran his hand over his face, eyes downcast. “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean what I said just
now.”
I took a deep breath. “Do you have an order for the seizure of this vessel, Captain Guthrie?”
“Chaz—”
“Do  you?”  I  demanded.  I  had  to  push  now.  I  had  to  force  a  resolution.  Junot  had  to  be
wondering what was going on.
“I loved you. I still love you. It’s why I married you.”
“Do you have an order for the seizure of an N.M.C. transport vessel!”
A heartbeat. Two. Three. I was presenting him with a legitimate out.
“No.”
One down. One to go.
“Philip, listen to me. You offered to lie for me, seven months ago. I turned you down. Yes, it
was partly because I’m not  cut  out  to  be  a  mother.  And  if  I  were,  I  would  never  abandon  a
child to a crèche. But the other reason is that, with each lie, we become  less and less a person. I
am  innocent  of  the  charges  against  me.  But  I  loved  you  too  much  to  ask  you  to  lie,  even
knowing that. You’re an exemplary officer. A fine man.”
“Chaz, we can—”
I held up my hand. “Listen, damn you! I wouldn’t have you lie for me then. I’m not asking
you to lie for me, now. You have no seizure order on this ship. Therefore, by law, you can no
longer detain her. You must let her go. The only issue then, is me.” I clasped my hands behind
my  back,  stood  in  perfect  military  posture.  “If  you  request  that  I  be  removed  from  the  Far
Rider, I will comply. Because of the nature of my… agreement with N.M.C.,  my papers won’t
stand  up  to  detailed  inspection.  But  you  cannot  hold  this  ship.  You  must  let  her  and  this
N.M.C. officer here go.”
“If I take you into custody,” he said quietly, “you know you could be returned to Moabar.”
“Yes.”
Philip shoved his hands in his pockets, stared down at his boots. Then back  at me. “Other
than your… agreement, N.M.C. is treating you well?”
“I’m at a stellar helm. You know that’s the only thing I’ve ever loved.”
He rocked back on his heels. “More than me. Obviously.”
I waited. There was no answer to that. And nothing more to  say.  He  had  all  the  facts.  He
was a Fleet officer, like me. He’d make a decision, based on facts.
His  shoulders  sagged  slightly.  Then  a  small  nod.  He  clasped  his  hands  behind  his  back,
straightened  his  stance.  “You’re  absolutely  correct,  captain.  I  have  no  seizure  order  on  an
N.M.C.  P40.  Please  accept  my  apologies  for  detaining  you  and  your  crew.  You  may  resume
your previous course and heading. I will put out an advisory  that  you  not  be  delayed  again.”
He saluted me, crisply.

I returned his salute, my heart pounding, my knees suddenly weak. “Thank you, captain.”
My damn voice cracked.
He reached for the end-transmit tab but hesitated, his blue-eyed gaze searching. But  there
was nothing left to be said. It had all been over, five years ago.
The screen hazed, blanked. The starfield reappeared. I stepped back, shaking, and collapsed
into  the  chair  behind  me.  I  jammed  my  finger  at  the  armpad,  opening  intraship.  “Ren!  Get
your ass on the bridge!”
I tabbed it off as I swung to face Sully. His hands were fisted on his knees, his obsidian eyes
unreadable, fathomless. “Get us out of  here,  now!”  I  barked  at  him.  “And  while  you’re  at  it,
stay out of my goddamned mind!”
I  turned  abruptly  away  from  him,  raked  my  straps  over  my  chest,  then  grabbed  my
armpad controls. I felt the shimmy of the sublights as they drew power, heard  Ren  step  onto
the bridge and heard the sharp clicks as he fastened his  strap.  The  starfield  moved  off  to  my
right as we pulled smoothly away from the Morgan Loviti.
I was angry, frightened and couldn’t stop shaking as I stared  at  the  viewscreen  then  back
down to my controls. Five minutes. Ten minutes. No one followed. Not Junot. Not Philip.
Ren’s  voice  in  the  background,  talking  softly  into  his  headset,  was  the  only  noise  on  the
bridge.
Fifteen minutes. My screen showed us at plus twenty. Specs be damned, we were moving.
I still shook. I couldn’t stop. But it was only me causing my pain.
Figures danced on my screen showing coordinates to the  meet-point.  Two  days  yet.  Then
we wait for Sully’s ship.
Sully. I crossed my arms at my waist. I couldn’t stop shaking.
Sully. What I’d felt. What I’d said. Stay out of my goddamned mind.
I’d meant it. Stars forgive me, but I’d meant it. And he knew that. When he’d invaded my
mind I’d been shocked. It was like everything I’d read; it was like rape. A forced intrusion on
my self, my soul.
This wasn’t the gentle sensations of a touch-empath. This was something else.
Mind-fuckers. We’d always called Stolorth Ragkirils mind-fuckers. Now I knew there were
human mind-fuckers, too.
I heard Philip’s voice again. Kingswell, Lieutenant Paxton… Their minds viciously raped, all
but destroyed.
Then another voice: Liar!
I had to get off the bridge. Everything I thought, everything  I  felt,  I  was  sending.  He  was
reading and, for all I knew, hearing. I  pushed  the  armpad  to  my  right,  unlatched  my  straps.
Stood. “Captain’s off the bridge,” I announced. Stepped forward, turned left, toward Ren, not
Sully. Looked at neither. Kept walking. Legs kept moving. Eyes focused on the corridor.

Stepped over the tread, didn’t fall on my face. Found my cabin door, hit the palm pad. Five
more  steps.  Saw  the  bed.  Didn’t  turn  around.  Didn’t  look  at  Sully’s  jacket,  hanging  on  the
hook.
Just lowered myself onto the wide softness. Grabbed my pillow, clutched it to my chest and
sat, hugging it.
Breathed. One in. One out. One in. One out.
Thought about faith. Betrayal. Philip. Sully.
Sully. A telepath. Even though I’d never known one before, I knew  that’s  what  I’d  felt  in
my mind. A Ragkiril. Who’d sensed my fear, my trepidation when I saw the Loviti and had to
know why. Who’d raked my thoughts, found my private images of Philip and myself. Images
he had no right to see. Images that I knew pained him and angered him.
And taught him that sometimes you don’t always like the answers to your questions.
I knew the feeling.
A Ragkiril. I was well acquainted with  all  of  the  Empire’s  official  prejudices.  They’d  been
easy to accept because a Stolorth’s appearance was just different enough from humans. Us yet
not us. A reason to hate. A reason to fear.
But I knew Ren, and those prejudices had dissolved.
Did I know Sully? Did I even know what Sully was?
Time passed. I knew it did because the clock told me, in little red numbers.  I no longer felt
totally shattered. Only mediumly wretched. Still confused. Still angry. A  little  less  frightened.
And only mediumly wretched.
That was an improvement, and in less than two hours. Stars be praised.
I  sat  up  and  dropped  the  pillow  behind  me.  I  wiped  my  hands  over  my  face.  What
happened,  happened.  It’s  over.  There  are  larger  issues  here.  Marker.  The  Takas.  The—My
cabin door shooshed open.
My  heart  froze  for  a  beat.  When  it  restarted,  I  rested  my  elbows  on  my  knees,  my  chin
against my clasped hands and prayed that whoever came through the door was Ren. I was still
sorting  my  thoughts,  still  examining  my  anger.  I  couldn’t  face  someone  other  than  Ren.  I
couldn’t even think his name.
Footsteps  came  toward  the  bed.  They  hesitated,  then  continued.  An  arm’s  length  away,
maybe two, and the footsteps stopped.
There was the silence of two people  breathing.  Then,  “Chaz.”  The  voice  was  rasped,  raw,
but I recognized it.
Not Ren.
I responded quickly. “I’m sorry.” I was. I shouldn’t have spoken out as I had. Nothing had
been gained by hurting him. I should’ve waited until I was calmer, and not angry at Philip, at
myself. At him.

“No.  You  don’t,  you  shouldn’t  be…”  He  took  a  deep  breath.  “Chaz.  I’m  sorry.  It  was
wrong. What I did, I…”
His voice seemed to lose its energy. Silence resumed.
I stared at my  knees,  at  the  tips  of  my  boots,  at  the  Fleet-issue  low  pile  carpeting  on  the
floor. I could hear his breathing, harsh and ragged.
I ached all over. But the pain was all my own.
I opened  my  hands  as  if  they  might  hold  answers.  But  they  were  empty.  I  closed  them,
grasping nothing.
“I was very wrong,” he repeated softly.
I brought  my  gaze  up.  The  pain  in  his  voice  was  reflected  in  his  face,  in  his  stance.  The
shadows were back under his eyes. His mouth  was tight. One arm was crossed over his chest,
his hand cupping his elbow as if part of him were holding back, part of him reaching. “I would
never hurt you.”
I nodded, listening now. Gabriel’s promise. He would never hurt me. Scare the hell out of
me, yes. But never hurt me.
But how would he know what hurt me?  When he stopped  me  from  asking  questions,  he
also stopped finding answers for himself. There’s a reason to ask  questions,  to  gather  data,  to
look at facts.
He could avoid that, if he wanted to. But I couldn’t. Not for myself. Not for the Takas.
“We have a lot of work to do yet,” I told him. “Ren has data on ships inbound to Marker.  I
want to go over it.”
“You don’t have to. You’re free to go.” He turned his hand, as if he wanted to reach for me
but changed his mind. “I mean that. Once we intercept with the Karn, you’re free.  This  ship,
ID, whatever you need. I won’t force you to stay. I won’t force you to work with me.”
“And  jukors  are  born  and  Takas  die,  but  it’s  not  Chaz’s  problem  any  more?  Didn’t  you
hear anything I said on the bridge?”
He leaned against the wall as if the force of my words had pushed him back.
“I’m not saying I know what those Taka females are going through. That’s an abomination.
But I do know what it’s like to be told you’re going to bear a child, or else. I could have had a
very nice, comfortable life. With a well-respected, intelligent husband who loved me. Providing
I was willing to give up everything that I was, everything I’d worked to become. And then raise
a child in the same manner I would as… as a painting I’d loan out to a museum! There’d be my
name, on a little thank-you plaque, and I could visit it for free whenever I liked.”
I stood abruptly, swept one hand out. “The fact that  my  child  might  have  needs,  the  fact
that I might have needs was not to be considered. Others’ feelings be damned, Philip Guthrie
would have what he wanted or he’d see me in divorce court. Well, guess what. He saw me in
divorce court. And the wisdom I learned from that is this: be careful when someone says they
care about you, only if. Only if you do what they want. Only if you ask no questions.”

He closed his eyes briefly, shook his head. His lips parted as he started to speak.
I shook my head, too, and spoke before he could. “Did you think at all, Gabriel, before you
ripped into my mind, just what my feelings might be? Did you stop to consider that?” I thrust
my finger at him. “Or was your anger, your, I don’t know, petulant jealousy, your ego’s temper
tantrum  more  important  than  anything  else?  More  important  than  Ren’s  life,  your  life?
Drogue’s,  Clement’s  and  all  we  think  is  going  on  at  Marker?  And  if  that’s  just  a  little  too
altruistic for you, was it more important than those promises you made, never to hurt me?”
I  shoved  my  way  past  him.  At  the  bedroom  door  I  turned,  threw  my  hands  out  in
exasperation. “How in hell would you know what hurts me? You never even bothered to ask.”
 
Chapter Seventeen
« ^ » 
I sent Ren for a soak and a nap. He left the bridge, sensing, no doubt, I was in no mood for a
discussion. I sat in my chair and played with the data on the ships flowing into Marker the past
few weeks. It kept my mind off Sully’s pained expression when I’d stormed out of my cabin.
Our cabin.
We  had  two  days  yet  to  meet-point.  I  didn’t  want  to  think  how  I  felt  about  Gabriel’s
bedtime  stories.  Or  more.  I  had  mental  duro-hards  filled  with  things  I  didn’t  want  to  think
about, and almost all were tagged with Sully’s name. Better to busy myself playing with data.
Marker  was  busy,  too.  Marker  was  always  busy  but  ships  came  and  went  in  the  usual
illogical patterns of repairs. You can’t schedule for when something breaks down or fails.
New ship production was  different.  That  had  a  definite  schedule.  But  I  wasn’t  looking  at
outgoing. I was looking at incoming.
I made  a  grid  and  stuck  my  data  in.  Then  integrated  the  data  Drogue  had  shown  us  on
Chalford’s Lucky Seven, on our way up from Moabar. It took some time, but  that  was  okay,
because it kept my mind on a narrow track, kept it  away  from  things  I  didn’t  want  to  think
about. Finally, it all came out to a nice fit. But only if you knew to look for it.
The Meritorious’s databanks were crammed with Imperial data. Not as much  on Marker as
I’d  like,  but  some.  I  cross-referenced  that  with  the  newsbanks  every  ship  grabbed  from  the
beacons. Months,  years of it had been stored in my ship and archived. A captain  never  knew
whom she’d run across on patrol. Never knew what she might need to know about them.
It was standard  operating  procedure  when  I’d  held  command.  Kingswell  had  been  more
lax. But enough was there. I was sure the Boru Karn held more.
I’d  need  that.  One  name,  sometimes  as  a  source  of  funding,  sometimes  as  an
advisory-concept group, kept drifting through my data. It was always an offhand mention, an
annotation.  Crossley  Burke.  I  couldn’t  place  it,  but  I  kept  seeing  it.  I  might  not  even  have
noticed it except years ago Crossley had been a company that produced virtual vid games, the

kinds that every station brat hoarded credits to play in the arcade. They were popular when  I
was  a  teenager;  they  lost  the  market  when  holo-hybrid  sims  came  out.  I  couldn’t  tie  in  that
Crossley with big money underwriting or with corporate idea farms.
I needed more data. I tapped a note to myself to that effect, tagged it to the file.
Then I went back  to Ren’s most recent list of incoming.  There  was  a  sequence  I’d  missed
earlier. Not surprising. And not just because it was near end of shift for me.
Sometimes those overfilled mental duro-hards make it tough to keep things straight.
The  sequence  contained  division  numericals  coded  to  requisitions.  Who,  besides  the
receiving  division,  would  need  a  list  of  incomings?  It  might  relate  to  requisitions  and
authorizations, if these were shipments, and not repair. But  it  also  might  be  another  office  in
Marker that needed, for  some  mystical  reason  of  its  own,  to  know  who  was  coming  in,  and
when.
Five of the first eight tandem codes were the same. I dropped them out of the sequence and
was entering them into my note-to-myself when I realized I knew them. And knew them well.
God, I was mediumly wretched not to recognize them.
Reports of these incoming were all sent in tandem to  the  office  of  Commander  Thaddeus
Lars Bergren. My beloved older brother.
 
“You’re off duty. I’ll take over.”
“Hmm?” A nervous quiver fluttered in my chest as I recognized his voice.
Sully waited on my right,  hands  clasped  behind  his  back.  I’d  been  preoccupied  with  the
data on my screen and didn’t hear him come onto the bridge. Didn’t hear him come up to my
chair.
His eyes were still shadowed. “I said I’ll take over. Ren will relieve me.”
“Right.” I knew that. I also knew that I always stayed an extra hour or two, shared tea or a
meal with him. I didn’t mention that now. Neither did he.
I unlatched the harness and swung the armpad back. Then stopped while my hand was still
on it. The fact  that  I  was  sorting  out  my  feelings  about  him  didn’t  negate  that  he  needed  to
know what I’d found in other matters. “I’ve been reexamining the data Ren pulled. There are a
couple  of  things  that  need  deeper  work,  but  they’ll  have  to  wait  until  we  hook  up  with  the
Karn.”
I pushed out of the chair. “I also found  something  that  doesn’t  make  sense.”  Or  maybe  I
didn’t want it to make sense. “Five of the ships that came in for repairs sent a duplicate notice
of their arrival to an office that shouldn’t be concerned with such things. Thad’s office.”
He thought for a moment. “He’s in the hierarchy. There could be a number  of reasons why
a confirmation would be sent there.”
“Absolutely.  But  they’re  not  coded  for  his  division.  They’re  coded  for  his  office.  My

brother’s office. His private trans file.”
“You have any idea why?”
“Not in the slightest. But I will find out.”
“I know,” he said softly. “That why I chose you. You’re the best interfering bitch around.”
“No,  in  the  universe,  Sullivan.  Remember  that.”  I  headed  for  the  corridor.  “The  best
interfering bitch in the universe.”
 
Sleep didn’t come right away. I stared at Sully’s jacket hanging on the wall. I didn’t realize
until I’d flopped down on the bed that part of my mind wondered if it would still be there. If
he’d moved his clothes out, taken another cabin. Gotten out of more than just my mind.
Of course, he may have done just that and forgotten the jacket, left it behind in his haste. I
could get up out of bed, rummage through his closet and the drawers. I could collect my data,
find my answer.
But the answer I sought wouldn’t be found in his closet. I knew that.
So I lay there and stared at his jacket until my eyelids felt too heavy to stay open.
 
I woke an hour before I was to start my shift. The spicy, pungent aroma of  coffee  greeted
me. A hot mug was on my bedside table. Other than that, the cabin was empty.
Someone  had brought me coffee. I didn’t know if it had been Sully or  Ren  until  I  picked
up the mug. An angel of heart-stars card was propped up behind it.
He should’ve been off duty a few hours ago. But the coffee was hot. Maybe he’d moved his
things to another cabin while I slept.
My hand hovered over the latch to his closet then pulled back.  I turned and padded to the
shower. Some  things I can wait to learn. And some things, I realized, maybe  I  didn’t  want  to
know.
The coffee was still warm when I came out. I gulped it down and in between gulps, pulled
on clean clothes.
“Captain’s heading for the bridge.”  I  waited,  wanting  to  hear  that  typical  Sully  rejoinder,
‘Hell’s ass. There goes our card game.’
But all I heard was Ren’s soft: “Acknowledged.”
It wasn’t the same.
 
Sully accepted my thanks for the coffee with a soft, gentle gaze and a slight shrug. I didn’t
mention the card.
He didn’t bring up our argument. But he and Ren had been playing cards. He only stayed

on the bridge long enough to lose another two thousand credits, then left. He was keeping his
distance from me. I didn’t know if it was because he thought that’s what I wanted. Or if it was
because that’s what he wanted.
I didn’t know why he’d left the heart-stars card. Maybe I should’ve mentioned it. Maybe I
should be putting different colors into my rainbow.
Maybe, if I got up the courage, I’d ask Ren.
We  were  about  two  shifts  from  meet-point.  I  went  back  to  working  the  data  but  found
nothing new. Ren went over it as well. We played with some theories about the confirmations
sent to Thad’s office, but Ren didn’t have Sully’s knowledge of Marker.  He did, however, have
some knowledge of Sully.
“He’s stopped reading you. He’s afraid to know what you feel.”
I leaned wearily on the armrest. “He should have told me he’s a telepath.”
“He’s been trying to. It’s not easy for him.”
I knew  he’d  been  showing  me  things  in  small  ways.  I  thought  of  how  he’d  echoed  my
thoughts when  we  were  on  Moabar;  his  comment  about  boot  camp,  his  taunt  about  sibling
rivalry with Thad. His ability to know when I was thinking of that night in Port Chalo.
But  there  were  other  times  when  he’d  seemed  unaware  of  what  I  was  thinking  at  all.
Selectivity, Ren had told me in his quarters on Moabar Station.
“Peeking,” I said to Ren. “He’s been peeking into my thoughts off and on.”
“And mine, as long as I’ve known him. But it’s not something I fear as you do.”
I’d picked up on the way Ren gave answers before Sully voiced questions. I’d ignored that,
or  rather  didn’t  want  to  face  what  that  might  mean.  It  didn’t  fit  easily  into  one  of  my
databoxes. “I’m not afraid—”
His  slight  tilt  of  his  head  stopped  me.  Empath.  Who  could  sense  emotions  but  not  their
reasons.
“Okay. I have fears. But I’m not afraid of him. I don’t view him as some sort of soul-stealing
demon.” Like the painting in Drogue’s monastery.
“Then what are your fears, Chasidah?”
“Ignorance.  What  I  don’t  understand.  Mistakes  I  can  make  because  of  that.  Like  I’ve
already  made.  Because  I  can’t  ask  questions,  find  out  what  he’s  thinking,  feeling.  That’s  the
advantage he has with me, that I don’t with him.” That’s how he knew I was attracted to him,
wanted to comfort him after we’d learned Captain Milo had been killed. That’s how he knew
when I was ready to make love to him the first time. “All I can do is guess. He ought to try it
sometime. Feel what it’s like to be unsure of why someone’s with you.”
“He  knows  that  now.  He’s  stopped  reading  your  resonances  since  the  incident  with  the
Morgan Loviti. He’s cut himself off from that part of himself, as much as he can. I’ve told him I
don’t agree. But he said that’s the only way you won’t be afraid of him, of what he can do. But
it’s also teaching him, I think, what uncertainty feels like. It’s a lesson he needs to learn.” Ren

flipped  off  his  straps.  “Just  don’t  make  it  too  harsh  a  lesson  for  him,  Chasidah.  Because  he
learned, long ago, what it feels like to be hurt.”
Ren went off duty with a promise to come back before my shift ended.
Then it was just me and my ship and the starfield in front of me. No more  bogies.  Thank
you, Philip. I picked up the usual traffic  in  the  freighter  lanes  on  the  scanners,  ran  the  usual
systems checks. And I wondered what Thad was doing watching certain incomings at Marker.
That was a grunt’s job. Not second in command in the shipyards.
I wondered what Thad would  say  if  he  knew  I  was  sleeping  with  a  mind-fucker,  human
variety. Yet another disgrace Chaz has brought to the Bergren name, probably.
Marrying Philip was the only correct decision I’d ever made, according to Thad. Divorcing
Philip was proof that I was just like my mother.
She’d divorced my father when I was two. Thad was four. The court split us. Lars got Thad,
put him into a crèche on Baris Seven. Amaris got me, put me in a playpen in the corner of her
office on Marker.
Amaris was career Fleet, but had always been nontraditional. She  would’ve liked Ren. She
definitely would’ve liked Sully. She wasn’t a woman who scared easily.
I hoped Philip and Thad were right. I hoped I was just like my mother.
 
Intraship trilled. Ren’s voice. “I am heading for the bridge. Can I bring you tea, coffee?”
“You’re early. I have two hours to go yet.”
“I’m awake. Tired of soaking. And I enjoy doing my meditations on the quiet of the bridge,
where I can feel the stars.”
“All right, all right. I know when I’m not wanted. Come take watch. And thanks,  but  no.
No tea or coffee. I had dinner an hour ago.”
Ren and a mug of tea arrived a  few  minutes  later.  I  vacated  my  chair  and  watched  as  he
settled  in  it.  That  was  something  else  that  would  make  Thad’s  lip  curl.  A  Stolorth  raised  by
Takas in the command sling of an Imperial P40.
Ren set his tea down, angled his head, reading me. “You are more  peaceful,  happier  now,
Chasidah.”
My rainbows were improving. “I was just thinking about how much  you don’t remind me
of my brother.”
“I would imagine I’m very different from Thaddeus.”
“Praise  the  stars  for  that,  Ren.”  I  patted  his  shoulder,  let  my  hand  rest  long  enough  to
absorb a much-needed warmth, and left the bridge.
 
My cabin was empty, the lights dimmed as I’d left them.  The bed was neatly made,  quite

possibly just as I’d left it. I didn’t know if Sully had been in, napped or moved out altogether. I
was  about  to  open  his  closet,  find  an  answer  maybe  it  was  time  I  faced  when  I  noticed  the
message light flashing on my deskscreen.
I sat and fingered a new angel of heart-stars card propped against it while I read.
Chasidah.  Angel.  Gabriel  has  lost  his  words.  They  have  all  fled,  shamed  to  be  in  his
company. He’s left now with only a few, simple ones. They are inadequate. They cannot
begin to convey all that he feels. But they are all he has.
Chasidah. Angel. Gabriel is sorry. Gabriel is sorry. Gabriel is sorry.
Chasidah. Angel. The  grievous  wrong  isn’t  as  much  in  the  questions  Chasidah  couldn’t
ask. But in the only real truth that Gabriel could tell, and did not.
Chasidah. Angel. Gabriel loves you beyond all measure. That is the only real truth.
I stared at  the  screen,  elbows  on  my  desk,  my  hands  cupped  over  my  mouth.  My  heart
hammered, ached.
He was right. He’d never told me he loved me. In the past two weeks  he’d  told  me  I  was
wicked, I was beautiful, I was wild, I was delightful.  I  was  his  obsession,  his  fantasy,  his  best
interfering bitch.
His angel.
He’d caressed me, coddled me and held me. He’d  made  me  warm,  hot,  crazy,  passionate
and delirious. He’d made me feel safe, respected, honored.
He made me his lover. He made me his friend.
And he’d tried to tell me, if only I’d been listening, that he was more than an empath. But I
didn’t want to know.
Just  as  Philip  knew,  when  he  married  me,  I  was  career  Fleet.  He  knew  I  abhorred  the
crèches. But he’d rejected that, when it became inconvenient. Rejected me, hurt me.
Sully  hadn’t  hurt  me.  He’d  shared  his  anger  and  pain  and  fear  with  me  in  a  fashion  far
more intimate than I was used to. Perhaps even inappropriately. But he hadn’t hurt me, hadn’t
stripped my mind, altered it.
He could have. He also possibly could have taken command  of the Meritorious away from
me before I  opened  the  vidlink  to  Philip.  With  a  touch.  With  a  thought.  I’d  heard  stories  of
things like that happening during the war.
But he hadn’t. Angry and afraid, he’d waited, trusting that I’d do nothing to hurt him.
I sat and thought about that. I picked up the card again.
A dangerous man, Gabriel Ross Sullivan. An undeniably handsome bastard. But I couldn’t
imagine life without that wicked, wicked Sully-grin. Risks and all.
 
I found him in the small ready-room, sitting in semi-darkness. A mug of tea was in front of
him, still full, but no steam rose. No fragrance wafted in the air.

I moved the mug when I sat on the edge of the table. It was cold. So  was his hand when he
took mine. No warmth, no spirals, not even a flutter danced up my arm. It was as if everything
that Gabriel was, was gone.
Except  for  the  dark,  haunted  look  in  his  eyes.  Which  was  something  we  had  to  discuss,
something I had to face, before we could go any farther.
“You’re a telepath. Like a Ragkiril.”
“Yes.”
“This is what you didn’t want me to know.”
He nodded. “I don’t want you to be afraid of what I am.”
“Then you should’ve told me, not just gone ripping apart my memories—”
“I lost control. That’s never  happened  to  me  before.”  His  voice  was  rough.  His  shoulders
hunched tiredly. “At least, not in a very long time. But I was… reading such anger, such fear in
you. I  knew  there  wasn’t  time  for  questions.  I  reacted  stupidly.  Didn’t  even  realize  what  I’d
done until I was there. I’m sorry. It won’t happen again.”
“You’ve apologized. I accept that.”
He sat up a little straighter, hopeful. His fingers curled more tightly into mine.
“I also know you could’ve done more than just view my mental scrapbook. But you didn’t.
I appreciate your trust in me, that I had a workable plan. Even if it made you angry.”
“I  didn’t  like  your  plan  because  I  found  out  Guthrie  was  your  husband.  That  you  loved
him. I stopped there. I  thought  then  that  you  wanted  to  go  with  him,  on  the  Loviti.  I  never
knew you were divorced until you told me, later.” His mouth  tightened. “I’m still not sure the
divorce was something you wanted.”
“I wanted Philip’s options less.” I offered my other hand, squeezed his fingers reassuringly.
No way to send warm tingles now. “Remember Port Chalo?”
A small smile played across his mouth then faded. “I waited for you to come back.  I scared
you away then, too.”
“I scared me away. The transmit waiting for me back  on board was the finalization  of  my
divorce. Believe me, I wanted nothing more than to go back  to that bar and have you kiss me
senseless.  But  I  also  didn’t  want  to  wake  in  the  morning  and  find  out  I’d  been  just  another
drunken fling. That you wouldn’t even have remembered my name. I couldn’t have faced that.
Or myself. Or you.”
“I wasn’t drunk. You should’ve come back.”
I slid to my feet, tugged on his hands. “I’m here, now.”
He drew me against him as he stood. “I’d still like to try kissing you senseless.”
“My cabin or yours?”
He hesitated. “I hope mine is still yours.”

“It is.”
He started unbuttoning my shirt in the corridor, tossed his own on the couch as the cabin
door closed behind us. I kicked off my boots and climbed into the middle of the bed.
He pulled me down next to him.  His  arms  closed  tightly,  almost  desperately,  around  my
back,  over my hair that I’d unbound.  I  splayed  my  hand  against  his  spine,  my  nose  nuzzled
against in his chest. I could feel his heart pounding.
But nothing more. Just the weight of his arms, the pressure of his mouth  against my face as
he brushed my  cheek,  my  lips,  my  chin  with  gently  fervent  kisses.  And  I  felt  my  own  very
deep  ache.  But  nothing  more.  He  was  staying  out  of  my  mind,  out  of  my  senses.  Totally.
Because of my fears, and his.
Because I’d ordered him to. A good captain knows when to rescind an order. I placed  my
lips almost against his. “Sully. It’s okay. Chasidah loves Gabriel, too.” There was a small intake
of  breath,  then  a  question  as  he  let  the  breath  out  again.  “You’re  sure?”  “Yes.”  Warmth
cascaded, surging. Warmth, cresting into heat. Warmth, cleansing, curing, healing.
Melting  pain,  melting  aches.  Spreading,  flowing,  gentling,  caressing,  lifting,  cradling.
Needing.  Kneading.  Stroking,  skin,  lips,  fingers.  Touch.  Clothes.  Come.  Off.  Heat,  skin
slicking,  soft,  hard,  wanting,  giving,  claiming.  Ecstasy.  Warmth.  Surrounding.  Cradling.
Gentling. Holding. Hands clasping. Mine. Mine. Love.
 
Chapter Eighteen
« ^ » 
Boru Karn
She  had been built for opulence. Sully had stripped her and  outfitted  her  for  war,  for  speed.
For stealth.
The Boru Karn found us ten hours into meet-point. She  slipped past  my  long-range,  then
tickled my short-range sensors only because, I knew, she was convinced she was safe. She  sent
a four-person tender out to pick up Ren and our meager belongings first. Sully and I  secured
the Meritorious, prepped her for tow.
An  Imperial  P40,  towed  by  a  luxury  yacht.  Unthinkable.  Sully  laughed  at  my  silent
bristling, tugging at my braid. “Snob,”  he challenged as we waited in  the  loading  bay  for  the
tender to return.
I turned, retort ready. He sucked it out of my mouth with a long kiss.
The  bay  sealed  behind  the  tender,  force-field  lights  dancing  in  a  bright  blue  circle.  Our
boots echoed on the hard floor as we strode out to meet it. The airlock uncycled, slid sideways.
The small ship had no ramp, just a short step folding down. A man waited in the airlock, arms
crossed  over  his  chest,  a  clear  expression  of  curiosity  on  his  face  that  was  the  same  color  as
Brother Clement’s. The color of deep Imperial ale.

I knew the face. Marsh Ganton. About my age, maybe younger, maybe older. It was hard
to tell with a nose that looked like it had been broken  a few times, and a scar that raked across
his  left  eyebrow.  His  dark  curly  hair  was  clipped  short.  The  arms  crossing  his  chest  were
decidedly muscular. He offered his hand and I shook it as I mounted the stair.
“Captain Bergren.”
“Hello, Marsh.”
He nodded to Sully and I was surprised to see how much  shorter Marsh was. He’d looked
bigger on the Meritorious’s vidscreen, probably because of his build.
“We’re set,” Sully said, resting one hand  on  Marsh’s  shoulder.  The  other  held  my  elbow.
“Strap in, Chazzy-girl.”
It  was  a  short  trip  back  to  the  Karn,  who  waited,  undoubtedly,  with  her  weapons  hot,
sensors at max. She wasn’t a ship to take chances.
She was already moving, sublights thrumming,  when we exited into the tender bay. There
was a loud hum then a slight jolt. I recognized it as the tow-field, locking onto my P40.
Unthinkable, four years ago.
Salvation, now.
Ren met us just aft of the bridge, visibly relaxed. His mouth  curved into an easy grin. “This
is finally a good day.”
Sully arched an eyebrow. “Thought we’d never make it, did you?”
“I had some small concerns from time to time.”
“Salved your worries with my losses, however.”
“That helped.”
God, how much did Sully owe him now? I’d lost count. But I knew Ren hadn’t.
The  sublights  steadied.  Marsh  stepped  by  me  and  shot  me  a  quick  glance.  “They’re  still
playing cards?”
“Incessantly.”
His gaze switched from Sully to Ren and back to me.
“Don’t ask,” I told him. “Last I remember it was over four million.”
“Four million, seven thousand, five hundred twenty five,” Ren said. “Not that I am keeping
track.”
Sully hustled me forward. “To the bridge, please. To the bridge.”
The  Karn’s  bridge  was  set  up  just  like  the  Meritorious’s.  Captain’s  command  sling  and
helm were in the center. Communications on the left, weapons, engineering on the right.  My
brief  perusal  took  in  the  familiar  configurations,  technical  superiority.  And  another  face  I
recognized.

Gregor.
I  didn’t  know  his  last  name.  Fleet  intelligence  could  never  come  up  with  one.  But  I
remembered  the face, the lanky form. Sully’s pilot, always in the shadows, waiting for Sully’s
orders.  He  vacated  the  captain’s  chair  as  we  came  up  behind  him  and  greeted  Sully  with  a
brisk handshake, a nod. “About time, you son-of-a-bitch.”
“We  ran  into  a  few  delays.”  Sully  clasped  Gregor’s  shoulder.  They  were  almost  of  equal
height.  But  Gregor  was  at  least  ten  years  older,  wiry.  His  hair  and  eyes  were  a  light  muddy
brown.
“Hope you fucked ‘em good,” Gregor said. His gaze fell on me as Sully withdrew his hand.
“Well, well. Chaz Bergren. Pride of the Sixth Fleet.” He said it with a smile. A cold smile.
“Gregor.” I offered my hand, pretended I didn’t see the hardness in his eyes. His resistance
to my presence wasn’t unexpected. But I had no intention of acknowledging it. I could conduct
myself like an officer, even if he couldn’t.
He  shook  it  quickly,  released  it.  “Looks  like  we  did  what  we  came  here  to  do.  So  far.”
Another narrow eyed glance focused briefly on me. Then he turned back to Sully. “Want me to
get Verno up on the bridge? Marsh can show Bergren her quarters. Then you and me—”
“Chaz stays with me. My quarters.” Sully’s voice was calm but held a tone that brooked no
argument.
A slow,  knowing  smile  from  Gregor.  Oily.  “Sure,  Sully.  You’re  the  boss.  Whatever  you
say.”
Obsidian eyes narrowed slightly. “Fifteen minutes. I want to unpack some things, find that
datapad we’ve been working on. Chaz and I will meet you, Ren and Marsh,” he added with a
nod to the shorter man waiting, and watching, by the comm  station, “in the ready room.  Get
Verno to sit helm. Fifteen minutes.”
 
“I don’t want to be  an  issue  between  you  and  Gregor.”  I  waited  until  the  door  to  Sully’s
quarters closed behind  me  before  I  spoke  what  was  on  my  mind.  I  could  still  hear  Gregor’s
sneering, “Well, well.”
Sully picked up my duffle—pilfered from a locker on the Meritorious—and hoisted it next
to his on the bed. It was a wide bed, in  the  middle  of  a  bedroom  larger  than  we  had  on  my
ship. Behind us, a salon in pale grays and blues, with a long couch, two soft  chairs  and  a  low
table.  Commissary  panels  were  set  behind  a  high  counter  with  two  padded  stools.  This  had
once been an opulent ship.
“You’re not. You won’t be.” He opened the duffle, pulled out the datapad, put it on the bed
as I came up behind him. He turned and placed his fingers under my chin. His eyes were dark,
infinite. “Hear me well. One  word.  Mine.  Gabriel  gives  no  quarter  in  that.  Gregor’s  opinions
will change, or be silenced.”
Gregor had no idea what such a threat might mean. But I did  and  even  after  nearly  three
weeks, still wasn’t comfortable with the power behind the threat. The very dark side of Gabriel
Ross Sullivan. A side that made me uneasy the few times I’d seen it.

“I can fight my own fights very well, thank you very much.”  I let some arrogance resound
in my words.  “I  just  don’t  want  it  to  come  to  that.  We  have  an  unwritten  rule  in  Fleet:  you
don’t have to like someone to work with them. That’s all I’m asking for here.”
The fingers that held my chin folded. He brushed his knuckles slowly up my jaw. “Gregor
despises  Fleet  and  all  its  rules.  He  understands  none  of  them,  my  angel.  But  if  you  wish  to
make your point,” he hesitated, eyes glinting, “make sure he sees this in your hand.”
He raised my arm so that the Grizni bracelet was between us. “He understands this.”
“Last option,” I told him. “Better plan is to remember we’re all on the same side here.”
His  fingers  slid  into  mine  and  he  pulled  me  against  him,  bringing  my  hand  to  his  lips.
“Taming the beast?” he asked softly.
No. Just a ghost.
 
It was a good, working ready room, well laid out, with a round table in the center meant to
diffuse any power struggles. Its location was just aft of the bridge, but with direct access to it.
The room held the spicy smell of coffee. Marsh and Ren waited, mugs in the recessed holders
in front of them. Marsh stood, offered me a cup when I came in, but I waved him away, with
thanks. I got my own, and one for Sully. And knew a second statement had been made.
Marsh was on my side, for  the  moment.  Or  rather,  Marsh  was  acknowledging  he  hadn’t
forgotten that Sully was in command. He’d watched very carefully the exchange between Sully
and Gregor on the bridge.
Sully put the datapad in front of him, linked it to the Karn’s system, brought up  the  data
on  a  holo-grid  suspended  over  the  middle  of  the  table.  Twice  during  these  movements  he
glanced toward the door. Gregor was late.
His next glance was to Ren, across the table from us. It was a casual one, but I knew what it
was. Ren had been listening to Marsh explaining  the  data  on  the  grid  but  his  slight  nod  was
meant for Sully.
We waited.
Sully  reached  for  intraship  just  as  the  door  to  the  corridor  slid  open.  Gregor,  whistling,
strolled in. “Hey, don’t start the party without me.”
He  spun  one  of  the  chairs  as  he  strode  by,  then  sat  down  on  the  other  side  of  Sully,
grinning.
We started the party, played with the data for over two hours as Sully  led  us  through  the
list,  integrating  new  information  the  Karn  had  brought-ships  incoming  to  Marker.  More
manifests.
Something was going on. Someone  was building an elaborate medical facility on a ship, or
using a ship to do so. That was  clear  from  everything  I  saw,  though  nothing  could  definitely
indicate it was a gen-lab. It could’ve just as easily been an auxiliary hospital ship, if we were at
war. But we weren’t. Yet.

I keyed all the manifest codes I knew into the Karn’s computers from memory.  Even some
older  ones,  because  Thad  would  know  them.  More  confirmations  had  been  sent  to  Thad’s
office.
Gregor latched onto that bit of information right away. “One hell of a family, the Bergrens,
wouldn’t you say? Fleet goes way back in their blood. Hard to believe you could just shrug that
off.”  He  pointed  his  lightpen  at  me.  “  ‘Course,  being  sent  to  Moabar  would  make  anyone
believe you could. Found her right quick, didn’t you, Sully? Convenient, don’t you think?”
I already had my hand firmly on Sully’s arm. Heat pulsed, simmered. He knew I could feel
it and no doubt kept it tamped down. It wasn’t aimed at me.
Let  me  handle  this,  I  wanted  to  tell  him.  But  the  only  link  he  shared  with  me  was  his
empathic one. The anger, his intrusion into my mind when we’d face the Loviti had never been
repeated.  But  at  times  like  this  it  would  be  convenient  to  be  a  telepath.  I  squeezed  his  arm,
instead. I didn’t get to be a patrol captain by not knowing how to handle an ego, or  a  pissing
contest.
I took my hand away and leaned on the table. I wanted to make sure Gregor knew I spoke
for myself, by myself. Not as a part of Sully. Sully owned the Karn, owned the allegiances, and
lives, of Gregor and Marsh. And the rest of his crew I’d yet to meet. But I’d always fought my
own battles.
“You’re raising valid points, Gregor. I might do the same, if I were in your position. A Fleet
officer who used to burn your tail with regularity suddenly sitting on the Karn. The ghost ship
no one could find, not even me.”
I smiled, let my mixed compliment  settle in. “You may  well  have  reasons  to  question  my
motives. I have no problem with that. I’ve faced it before, no  doubt  will  again.  So  let  me  tell
you how this is going to be handled. You have a problem with me, you tell me. Upfront, out in
the open. And I’ll answer, upfront. Out in the open. Agreed?”
He held up both hands, a startled expression on his face. “Hey, whoa, Captain Bergren. You
touchy,  or  something?  I  don’t  mean  anything  by  what  I  say.  We  all  know  that,  right?”  He
reached over, slapped Marsh on the shoulder. “I’m just talking, thinking out loud. I think it’s
just wonderful that Fleet’s finest is here, helping us.” He gave me a wide, innocent grin.
“I’m  delighted  to  hear  that,  Gregor.”  I  reached  as  if  to  clasp  my  hands  together,  but
touched  my  bracelet  instead.  The  Grizni  sprang  into  my  outstretched  hand.  I  folded  it  back
around my wrist against as if nothing had happened.
His gaze locked on it, then rose to my face.
I  nodded  slightly,  gave  him  a  small  half-smile.  “But  if  you  ever  should  have  any
questions…” I let my words drift off. My point, in more ways than one, had been made.
Discussion  picked  up  again.  Gregor  slipped  into  the  mode  of  everyone’s  friend.  Marsh
seemed not to notice. Sully relaxed. I had the feeling  it  was  the  role  Gregor  normally  played.
Only the appearance of Captain Chaz Bergren had made him slip out of it, for a moment.
I understood why he saw me as a threat. I was a Fleet officer, trained as a  pilot,  a  captain.
But I wasn’t about to take  over  his  position,  or  this  ship.  Logic  should  have  told  him  such  a

move on my part would be foolish. I was outnumbered here on the Karn. There were others on
board besides the five of us in the ready  room;  I’d  heard  voices  and  footsteps  when  I  was  in
Sully’s cabin. And someone named Verno, from Gregor’s earlier comment, sat on the bridge.
Did he think Sully would prefer my advice over his own? He had to know Sully as well, if
not  better,  than  I  did.  Sully  was  Sully  long  before  he’d  taken  on  Gregor  as  pilot  and
accomplice. He issued orders, Gregor and the others were there to follow them.  Advice  could
be offered but it could also be as easily dismissed.
Clearly, Sully had ignored Gregor’s advice and gone to Moabar looking for me. But so had
Ren. If Gregor felt anyone was going to usurp whatever position he held with Sully, it  should
be Ren.
I decided to stop trying to figure out Gregor. I had no time. Sully kept me more than busy
in that regard.
Assignments were made informally. My  area  was  Marker,  and  incoming  manifests.  Sully
assigned Ren, Marsh, and Gregor other trails to  follow.  Our  research  would  overlap,  in  some
areas duplicate. But we’d see each other daily, if not hourly. Corrections could be made.
Ren left, to soak. Marsh drifted out. Only Gregor remained as Sully tabbed off the hologrid
and I put the coffee mugs in the small sani-rack.
The door to the corridor slid open. A short, squat, dark-haired woman bustled in, her wide
face  almost  split  with  a  grin.  She  looked  as  if  she  could  be  Marsh’s  older  sister.  Or  aunt.
“Sully!”
Sully turned, stepping toward her. “Dorsie, you sexy wench. Give me a hug.”
She was already doing so, patting him on the backside as well, I noticed. She  had on dark
spacer fatigues like I did and a wide over-blouse. A  laser  pistol  in  a  holster  peeked  out  when
she raised her arms and grabbed for Sully’s shoulders.  She  shook  him  affectionately.  “You’re
late. You had me worried.”
“For  a  good  cause,  I  assure  you.”  He  reached  toward  me.  I  took  his  hand.  “Chaz,  this  is
Dorsie,  the  best  goddamned  ship’s  cook  in  the  Empire.  Dorsie,  this  is  Chaz.  Captain  Chaz
Bergren. The most beautiful goddamned interfering bitch,” he winked at me, “in the universe.”
I shook Dorsie’s hand and returned her infectious grin.
“Yeah,  I  know  you,  Captain  Bergren.  Went  on  many  a  raid  with  Sully  here,  years  back.
Same  ones as you,  except  on  the  other  side.”  She  laughed.  “Told  him  we  just  ought  to  start
inviting you to dinner. You were there every time we turned around, anyhow.”
“Dorsie.” Sully regarded her in mock sternness.
“Yeah,  yeah,  I  know.  I  blabber.  Shut  up,  Dorsie,  he  says.  You’re  breaking  my
concentration. I can’t play cards when you—” She  tilted her face up to him. “What d’you owe
him now?”
Sully shrugged. “Not that much, really.”
She snorted. “Liar. I’ll go find Ren. He’ll tell me.”

“He’s soaking,” Sully said as she turned for the door. “Probably naked.”
Dorsie stopped, winked. “Better hurry then. That’s a sight worth seeing. Dinner’s up in an
hour,” she called  over  her  shoulder  as  she  strode  through  the  doorway.  “Good  to  meet  you,
Chaz.”
I smiled at Sully as the door closed. “She’s a gem.”
“Yeah,  she’s  a  charmer,  isn’t  she?”  Gregor  came  around  the  other  side  of  the  table  but
stopped by the door. “And just think, Chaz. There were at least a half dozen  times  you  came
close to killing her.”
He stepped through the door quickly, disappeared into the corridor.
I hung onto Sully’s arm as he lunged for the door. “Sully, wait! Let him go. Let him get it
out of his system. That’s all it is.”
He stopped so abruptly I stumbled against him. He was  breathing  hard.  Heat  pulsed  into
me from where my hand grasped his arm.
The door, sensing us, started to open. He slapped at the override. It closed. He stared hard
at the gray metal of the door. He didn’t like this; probably never had to deal with it before.
Life  as  a  mercenary,  a  pirate  was  different  than  in  the  military.  His  leadership  was  clear,
unequivocal and of his own making. I knew what it was like  to  fight  an  enemy  climbing  the
ranks from within.
“I’m not here to win any popularity contests,” I told him. “I’m here to find out what’s going
on at Marker.  To stop the breeding of the jukors. As long as he has the same goal in  mind,  it
doesn’t matter to me what he thinks of me.”
His breathing slowed, but his jaw was still tense. “He’s not  here  to  think.  He’s  here  to  fly
my ship.”
“But doesn’t he also act as one of your advisors? The ones  you  told  me  were  against  your
going to Moabar?” I needed him to start seeing the human factors involved, the jealousies, the
jockeying for position that was part of everyday life in Fleet.
“We discussed options, risks. Just as we did now. But my say is final. Absolute. Always has
been.” He shook his head. The hard, dangerous glitter in his eyes faded. Anger was dissipating,
at least for a moment. “Gregor knows you know Marker like none of us ever could.”
“Maybe he resents that, maybe he wanted to be the one to save the universe.  Maybe,  like
you told me, he just hates anything to do with Fleet.
“You  have  to  realize,”  I  continued,  “that  what  he  said  is  true.  You  and  I  came  close  to
blowing each other out of the space lanes a couple of times.”
“Never,” he said. “You may have thought  so,  but  in  actuality,  never.  Now  Guthrie…”  He
stared at the door for a moment,  as if he could see Philip’s face there. “I had him in my sights
more than once. If I’d known he was your husband, your ex-husband,” he stressed, looking at
me again, “I would have. Gladly.”
“You might have done me a favor, then. But not in the way you think. The court would’ve

had a lot harder time convicting the widow of the legendary Captain Guthrie.” That had been
the basis of Philip’s offer: the power, the reputation behind his name.
He  leaned  against  the  door  jamb,  clasped  my  hand  in  his.  “Then  I’d  have  to  track  you
down,  where?  In  a  posh  club  on  Baris  Prime?  Or  the  casinos  in  Garno?  A  ghost  from  Hell
trying to seduce the young, beautiful widow.”
I laughed. “I’d still be on the bridge of the Meritorious. The clubs and casinos were Philip’s
life, not mine. And as for seduction,” I gave him a haughty look. “Is that what you were trying
to  do,  dragging  me  to  a  monastery,  ferrying  me  to  station  in  an  old  lugger,  damn  near
destroying my ship in a cold jump?  Oh, and that incense. Let’s not forget that. I thought  you
were going to suffocate me.”
He  grinned  his  wicked  Sully-grin.  “That’s  because  I  am  unique,  my  angel.  Never  forget
that. No one else in the universe will ever love you quite the way I do.”
He  palmed  the  door  back  to  auto.  “But  you  forgot,”  he  said  as  it  opened.  “The  jukor.
Amazing the lengths a man will go to in order to get a woman to run into his arms.”
“I didn’t run. You pushed me.”
“A minor point. No, this way. Ren’s cabin’s down here. I feel a run of luck coming on.”
“Stars have mercy.”
 
Chapter Nineteen
« ^ » 
Ren’s  quarters  were  a  smaller  version  of  Sully’s,  again  reminding  me  this  had  once  been  a
luxury yacht. There was a salon and dining area, and a separate bedroom off to the left. Blues
and pale greens predominated. A deck  of  cards  sat  in  the  middle  of  the  square  dining  table,
waiting.
“One game.” Sully eased into the chair opposite Ren. “That’s all I have time for.  I’ve  been
playing with a theory. I think I know what I’m doing wrong.”
The viewport in the dining alcove had a bench  seat. I sat, bemused, glad to be  away  from
Gregor’s presence. I’d been on board six hours. Despite Ren’s proclamation, I wasn’t sure if this
had been finally, a good day.
One hand was dealt, played. Two. Sully lost the first but won the second. He was positively
gleeful. Third hand. Sully lost. A dismissive flick of his fingers. “Lapse in concentration.”
Fourth hand. Ren’s cabin door chimed. He tilted his head, sensing. “Enter.”
I sat up straight as a Taka ducked through the doorway. “Ren, I wanted to—” His gravelly
voice  stopped  abruptly,  as  his  gaze  fell  on  Sully,  then  me.  “Pardon.  Pardon.  Didn’t  know.
Sully-sir, glad you’re safe. Back.”

I looked at Sully. Ren. The Taka. Sully waved him in. “Come in, Verno. Ren, you want to
do the introductions? It’ll give me time to plot my next move.”
Verno.  A  Taka.  Suddenly  I  remembered  where  I’d  heard  the  name  before:  Drogue,  on
Chalford’s Lucky Seven.
“This is Captain Chasidah Bergren, Verno. Chasidah, this is Verno, my brother.”
Brother Verno  the  brother?  No.  Verno.  Ren’s  Takan  brother.  Verno  ambled  over  behind
Ren’s chair, extending his hand as I stood. Takan fur was soft and coarse at the same time. His
large hand enveloped mine. “Good to meet you, captain. Blessings of the hour.”
“Blessings,” I replied back  automatically, still somewhat in shock. “Verno… I’m sorry. Ren
never  said  he  had  a  brother.”  But  he  had  repeatedly  talked  of  his  Takan  mother,  his  Takan
family.
Verno’s laugh was a crackling rumble. If I’d been down in engineering I’d be looking for a
sudden fracture in the sublight thruster grid. “Little brother. Little brother the Brother. This is
the best joke, no?”
“Then you are a  monk—?”  First  a  Stolorth  Brother  and  now  a  Takan  one.  The  Englarian
church  was experiencing some changes. I wondered if anyone in Non-Human Cultures  knew
about that.
“Took full vows two years ago. I am the big little brother Brother to Ren’s little big brother
Brother.” He laughed again.
“Damn fine  navigator,  too.  The  church’s  gain  was  almost  my  loss,”  Sully  added,  peering
uneasily at his cards.
I never would have called Ren little, but compared to Verno, he was. “You’re not assigned
to a monastery?”
The  furred  face  tilted  in  an  almost  exact  mirror-image  of  Ren’s.  “Assigned  to  a  mission,
Captain  Chasidah.  Assigned  to  a  mission.”  A  mission  to  right  the  wrongs  being  done  to  his
people.  I  understood.  He  patted  Ren’s  shoulder.  “I  wanted  to  tell  you  Dorsie’s  making
srorfralak pie.” “A Takan vegetable  pie,  very  thick,”  Ren  explained,  fanning  his  cards  on  the
tabletop. “Hell’s ass.” “Very delicious,” Verno added over Sully’s outburst as he stepped for the
door. “Letting Ren win again? Kind of you, Sully-sir. Blessings all. Blessings. Captain?” He gave
me a nod as he ducked under the open doorway.
I  sat  back  down  on  the  bench  seat  and  stared  at  the  door  as  it  slid  closed.  A  Taka.  A
Stolorth. A human cook who packed a laser pistol under her apron and baked  srorfralak  pie.
Sully had one hell of a crew.
“Damn it all!”
“Tomorrow’s always another game, Sully. Shall we escort Chasidah to dinner?” Sully held
out his hand to me. “That must be my problem. Lack of adequate nutrition.” I took his hand,
felt him slip something into my palm. I pulled my  fingers  away  as  we  followed  Ren  through
the doorway. A card. Angel of heart-stars. Grinning, I tucked it into my pants pocket.
 

We were two days into transit to the Baris-Calth border when the lights in the ready room
flickered,  died  and  came  on  again,  at  half  power.  I  stood,  Sully  rising  beside  me.  An  alarm
whooped discordantly in  the  corridor.  He  bolted  through  the  doorway  connecting  the  ready
room to the bridge. I was right on his heels.
“Verno!”  The  Taka  sat  on  duty  in  the  command  sling,  long  fingers  working  the  console
rapidly. “Main computer failure, Sully-sir. Auxiliary generators online. Tow’s holding.  Shields
down—” “Shit!” Sully  lunged  for  the  engineering  station,  brought  up  his  screens.  Raked  his
straps over his chest. “—power’s out to weapons, long range. Enviro secure. Engines dropping
at one-quarter sublight.”
I  took  the  helm  in  front  of  Verno,  strapped  in,  verified  course  heading,  speed.
Automatically put manual on standby, in case we lost auto-guidance. Which only kept us going
where  we  were  going.  It  didn’t  do  one  damn  thing  to  help  us  get  there,  safely.  Without
scanners, weapons, shields we were as vulnerable as a newborn birdling fallen unseen from the
nest.
And as blind.
I heard  boot  steps  thumping  in  the  corridor  behind  the  bridge.  “What  the  fuck’s  going
on?”
Gregor.
“System’s  cascade  failure,”  Sully  barked  back.  “I  see  it  but  I  can’t  halt  it,  yet.”  Hands
grabbed my shoulder, roughly. I jerked backward. “Move, Bergren!”
Gregor.
I  flicked  off  my  straps  and  vacated  the  seat,  but  only  because  we  were  in  trouble,  big
trouble.  Gregor  slid  in,  swearing,  hands  moving  over  the  screens.  “Helm  secure,”  he
announced.
I’d secured helm before he got there. I let it go, slid into the seat next to Sully, strapped in
again. Damn. Primaries were collapsing, function codes unraveling. Sully was a half a breadth
behind  the  decline,  throwing  everything  to  manual.  I  took  the  verifications  away  from  him
smoothly  at  his  nod  and  freed  him  up  to  continue  the  chase.  I’d  do  the  cleanup  recoding
behind him.
Behind me, Verno and Gregor switched places. Gregor was first  pilot.  He  belonged  in  the
command sling. Belatedly I realized he should have headed there when he came on the bridge.
But he’d headed for helm, probably because that’s where I’d been.
More footsteps thudded, then Ren’s soft voice came from the comm  station behind me. He
had  his  headset  on  and  worked  intraship,  coordinating  with  Dorsie  and  Marsh.  And  a  man
named Aubry I’d met only briefly; a maintenance tech who worked the shift  opposite  Sully’s
and mine.
Everyone was awake. Everyone was at a station, a console, doing something.
And the Boru Karn, defenseless, streaked through the big wide darkness.
Everything  was  out  there.  Fleet  cruisers,  patrol  ships.  Commercial  freighters.  Transport

yachts.  Barges.  Beacons.  We  were  deep  in  Calth  between  Port  January,  Starport  10  and  the
Walker Colonies. Without sensors, without shields, we could collide with debris or an Imperial
destroyer. The only difference being how quickly the hull ruptured.
“Get Dorsie on visual bogey-check.” Sully was thinking the same thing I was.
“Sublight’s still not responding,” Gregor said.
A yellow light in front of me blinked rapidly, turned to red. “Who’s opening the shuttle bay
doors?”
Sully glanced quickly at my console then back to his. “Damn it! Systems are self-activating.
Overrides aren’t holding.”
They weren’t. It was as if half the ship had no power and the other half had twice as much.
I tabbed to another screen. “We’ve got power spikes in the secondary grid.”
“Rekeying damper fields,” Sully said. “Standby.”
I heard Gregor grunt out an acknowledgment, then, “Tractor-field’s engaged!”
Shit! The Meritorious. No longer held at a safe, static distance but being yanked toward us,
reeled in by a tow field turned tractor. A Lancer-class P40 coming hard, right up our tail.
“Override and disengage!” Sully ordered.
“Keying manual override, Sully-sir! Attempting to disengage.”
Attempting wasn’t going to do it. We needed that field link broken  now.  And  we  needed
engines, fast.
“Evasive action!” Sully opened intraship. “Aubry,  get  me  those  sublights—move  us!”  The
Boru Karn heeled to starboard, slowly. I could hear, feel aux thrusters misfiring.
“Ten minutes to impact, closing.” Gregor’s voice was terse.
Sublights shimmied, grabbed for power the auxes couldn’t feed them in time.
“Eight minutes.”
We were still in her path. At least, most of us, as Sully had once taunted me. But most of us
would be plenty enough for a hull breach on impact.
“Seven minutes. Closing.”
We couldn’t even fire lasers, shove her off course, push her away from us. My  sweet  little
P40.
But we could destroy her. I could destroy her.
My sweet little P40.
I half-swiveled. “Ren! I need a hot trans link to the Meritorious, now!”
I caught Sully’s desperate glance as I turned back.  “Auto destruct.  I  can  remotely  activate
her auto destruct.”

“Do it.” No hesitation.
I picked up the link from Ren on my screen and opened a transmit line. At the same time, I
talked to Sully. “Shields. Forget sublights. We’re going to need shields.”
A P40 under auto destruct just might take her with us. But she was going to ram us, either
way.
“Working on it.”
“Working on it, too, Sully-sir,” Verno echoed. Only Gregor was quiet.
I worked on it, woke up my ship’s slumbering systems,  thrown  into  hibernation  for  tow.
But a Fleet ship never truly slumbered. Even though the Boundary Wars had ended years ago,
all Fleet vessels carried the same fail-safes. If boarded, abandon ship to the pods. Then blow the
invaders out of the spacelanes via a code-secure hot link.
My link went hot. The Meritorious answered, queried. Who are you?
I responded, fed her authorizations, verifications.
Then the link fluttered. So did overhead lights.
Sully jerked around. “Damn it, Gregor, sit on those generators!”
“Recalibrating now.”
My link fluttered back on.
Meritorious. Bergren, Chasidah. AuthCode 71995-RQ. VeriCode R1 Q5 3789 X4X4.
Verified. Acknowledged.
Initiate Auto-Destruct. Initiate Auto-Destruct. Delete reconfirmation. VeriCode R1 Q5 3789
X4X4.
“Shields?” I asked Sully. It was decision time. “A Level 2 destruct is partial. A Level 1, total.
A 2 may skew her into us. Or away from us. A 1 may damage us, without shields.” Or destroy
us.
Words, clipped and harsh, flew back and forth between Gregor and Verno, behind me.
“Level 2. I can’t guarantee shields.” His tone was grim. His dark gaze was steady, but bleak.
“Brace!” he called out to the bridge.
I heard Ren repeat it on intraship.
“Wise choice,” I said softly, completing my code. Sending it. Sealing our fates.
“Chasidah.  Angel.”  The  words  hung  softly  in  the  air  as  warmth,  a  sad,  sweet,  aching
warmth, flowed over me.
Then I was jerked, hard, against my straps, the air sucked out of my lungs.
 

Chapter Twenty
« ^ » 
Chasidah.
I stopped floating and hovered. It felt as if I were hanging,  limply,  in  a  tingly  space.  Gray
fuzzy soft. It felt familiar. Solid. My feet touched down. Gray fuzzy soft. But solid.
Chasidah. Angel.
Sully? I heard, no felt, no sensed his voice. Behind me. Must turn around.
No. Stay still. Don’t… don’t turn.
Gray fuzzy soft. Warm.
Something touched my shoulders.
Heat. Air!
I sucked in a gulping breath, my eyes opening wide. Sucked  in another. Sully grasped my
shoulders,  steadying  me.  Sully  in  the  darkness.  What  happened  to  gray  fuzzy  soft?  Light,
red-tinged. Red-tinged.
I know this, my brain told me.
Red-tinged. Emergency lighting.
“Sully!  Status.”  I  gasped  out  the  words,  grabbed  his  arm.  His  face  was  a  mixture  of
shadows. At a long dark streak cut down one side. I touched it. Wet. Sticky. “You’re bleeding.”
“It’s nothing.” He knelt in  front  of  my  seat.  I  was  still  at  engineering,  but  my  straps  had
unhooked. “Breathe once more for me, Chaz. That’s right. Deep breath. Once more.”
I sucked in air that was bitter, stale. Let it out. “Status,” I croaked again.
“Minor hull damage, no breach. We’re in emergency shutdown but  we  should  be  able  to
get things on line.”
I nodded  and  tried  to  pull  away  from  him,  my  thoughts  now  on  the  ship,  making  her
secure, getting us moving.
I stood, wobbling. He was none too steady either. He leaned  on  the  back  of  his  chair  as  I
turned.  The  bridge  was  quiet.  Shadows  were  red-black.  A  large  shadow…  I  moved.  Past
Gregor, hanging loosely against his harness, but still breathing. Past  Verno,  slumped,  but  still
breathing.  To  Ren.  Not  at  communications  but  crumpled  against  the  rear  bulkhead  of  the
bridge.
Sully’s hand on my arm held me back. He knelt down. I crouched beside him then sprang
up again. I knew what I had to find. Med-kit. Med-kit and a handbeam, somewhere. I  found
the panel, popped the latch. Flipped on the handbeam, crouched down again, med-kit open at
my feet. I plucked out the medi-stat. Its screen blinked on, the unit humming softly.

Sully, beside me, ran his hands over Ren’s body. His breath rasped.
Ren’s didn’t.
I shoved the medi-stat toward him. “Here use—”
“No. No.” He pushed it away. His hands framed Ren’s face, moved down to the neck  and
gill slits. “Fluid shock.”
Data scrolled across the screen as the medi-stat reset for  Stolorth  physiology.  Fluid  shock.
Lungs stopped. Heart stopped. Life signs flat.
God.
I felt cold all over. The medi-stat slid to the floor. My mind grabbed another word from my
emergency med training. Hypospray. I reached for the kit. Have to find a stim, generic. Then a
hydrating solution. Get him down to sickbay, hook him up.
I found the stim, primed it. “Sully, here—”
“Hush. Chasidah, hush.” His voice  was  hoarse,  distant.  His  hands  still  framed  Ren’s  face.
Something flickered over his skin and Ren’s skin. Light, silver blue, shading to green, shading
to silver.
My  hand  lowered,  hypospray  still  between  my  fingers  as  I  stared  at  the  light,
uncomprehending.
The  light  turned  silver  again  and  I  recognized  it.  Gray  fuzzy  soft.  It  moved  up  Sully’s
arms… No. It moved from Sully’s shoulders and  arms.  From  his  face,  his  chest,  then  flowed
over Ren.
Gill slits lifted.
Gray fuzzy soft rippled over Ren’s chest, hips and his legs that jutted awkwardly.
I sat very, very still.
Sully put one hand on Ren’s mouth, one on his chest. Sully breathed. Ren’s chest lifted.
A pulse  blipped  across  the  medi-stat  screen  on  the  decking  by  my  knees.  Blipped  again.
Heartbeat. Blip. Heartbeat. Blip. Life.
Gray fuzzy soft pulsed, hazing.
I  moved  my  eyes  toward  Sully.  Only  my  eyes,  as  I  was  afraid  to  move  anything  else.
Something  was  happening—had  happened.  I  didn’t  know  what  it  was,  only  that  I  had  no
means of understanding it, no nice neat databoxes where it would fit. So I watched.
A shimmering dark form, some kind of energy rippled over Sully’s back  like  a  protective
cloak. His obsidian eyes were open, staring at Ren. His fingers touched Ren’s eyelids, lightly.
Ren’s eyes were silver. Open. Clear, unclouded. He looked at Sully.
The air moved. It was thick,  heavy with lights like stars, thousands, millions, flowing from
Sully to Ren from Ren to Sully. Then just as suddenly, they were gone.

Gray fuzzy soft remained, wisping.
Ren breathed.
Sully breathed.
I breathed and my heart pounded, hard.
Gray fuzzy soft disappeared. The suppleness was back  in  Ren’s  skin.  His  fingers  twitched
slightly then relaxed. I could see his pulse, strong and regular, in his throat.
Another breath. Two.
Sully sat slowly back  on  his  heels,  his  palms  braced  against  his  thighs.  He  was  breathing
hard, his shoulders stiff as if with pain. His obsidian gaze no  longer  focused  on  Ren,  but  at  a
distant, infinite point that existed far beyond the  bulkhead  before  him.  Then  he  dropped  his
gaze, back  rounded and seemed to stare at his hands planted against his legs. His eyes closed.
His breath rasped, shuddering.
I was afraid to touch him. No. I wanted to touch him,  but  didn’t  know  if  I  should.  I  was
afraid I’d do something wrong. Whatever had happened was because of Sully. If he needed to
be alone. If he needed… One hand, palm up, was held out toward me.
I grasped it. His fingers closed tightly around mine, squeezing, holding on.  Small  warmth
now, soft flutters. They curled up my arm, through my body. “Breathe. Chasidah. Breathe.” A
barely audible plea. I took a deep breath, let it out. Another. He clung to my hand. The warmth
traveled  back  and  forth  between  us.  Into  me,  out  of  me.  In  through  me.  Out  through  me.
Softer. Softer. He angled his face toward me in the red-tinged darkness. Blood  dripped  down
the  side  of  his  forehead.  But  there  was  a  strength  in  him  again.  His  fingers  relaxed  around
mine.  Slowly  he  straightened  in  his  crouch.  My  gaze  darted  to  Ren,  lying  peacefully  on  the
floor,  eyes  closed,  chest  rising  and  falling  naturally.  “He’ll  be  okay?”  My  voice  wavered.  He
nodded. “You?” Another nod. “Sully—” “Gabriel.” He rasped his name out. “Gabriel needs. To
hold. Chasidah.” I reached for him. He clasped my hands, drew me against him, surrounding
me with his body as if I needed comforting, not him. He held my hands against his chest, his
face  against  my  forehead,  his  breathing  still  deep  and  labored.  A  thousand  questions  raced
through my mind. But now was not the time. Something  ruffled  through  the  air,  like  enviro
shifting  to  a  second  cycle.  Then  there  was  a  loud  groan  behind  us.  A  cough.  Gregor.  Sully
pulled  away,  fumbled  for  the  medi-stat  and  pushed  it  into  my  hand.  “Go.  Keep  him  busy.
Need  a  minute,  yet.”  I  remembered  my  question  to  Ren.  Who  knows?  Who  knows  about
Sully, about Gabriel. Not Gregor. Not Marsh. I rose quickly and headed for Gregor, medi-stat
open, keyed for human readings. It showed internal bruising in his chest area. But that was all.
“Gregor. Sit still.” I ran the unit across his body one more time. Muddy brown eyes met mine.
“Bitch,” he said, softly. Very softly. A venomous sound. “You’ve got some pretty good bruises
there.  Probably  does  hurt  like  a  bitch.”  I  deliberately  misunderstood.  I  went  back  for  the
med-kit I’d left on the floor. Sully lifted Verno upright. The Taka coughed. I handed  him  the
medi-stat when I returned to Gregor’s side. As I primed another stim I thought for a moment
how pleasant a double dose of trank might make my life for awhile. And kept it at just that. An
amusing thought. “This’ll help.” Gregor’s hand shot to my wrist, squeezed. “No fucking  way.
Not from—” A hand came down hard against Gregor’s shoulder, shoving him back  against the
seat. It pinned Gregor there, fingers digging into the pilot’s collarbone while he sucked for air,
sucked  down  pain,  his  eyes  wide  and  frantic.  Gregor’s  hand  fluttered  from  my  wrist,

trembling, jerking spasmodically.
“I can, and will, break this.” Sully’s voice was flat, dark. Final. “Your choice.”
Gregor’s  eyes  blinked.  Once.  Twice.  Sully  plucked  the  hypospray  from  my  fingers  and
shoved it against Gregor’s arm. It released its contents with a barely perceptible hiss.
Sully took his hand away as if he’d touched something loathsome.
Gregor’s eyes fluttered open, his mouth slightly slack. He stared at Sully but wouldn’t look
at me.
“I hear very well in the dark,” Sully told him.
Gregor closed his eyes again and let his head fall back against the padding.
Verno  wobbled  upright  behind  me,  his  legs  still  shaky.  “Ren?”  He  peered  toward  the
corner.
I grabbed Verno’s long arm. “Lean on me. I’ll walk you over there.”
I felt like a child next to a giant. If he fell he’d take us both down in a heap, a furry  heap,
but what support  I  gave  him  seemed  to  be  enough.  He  lowered  himself  to  the  floor  next  to
Ren, then took the webbed, six-fingered hand in his large one and patted it.
Ren’s  eyelids  fluttered,  his  eyes  clouded  again.  “Brother.  Blessings.”  His  voice  was  misty
rain, pattering on warm stones.
“Brother. Blessings. I feel the need to pray.”
“So do I.”
 
The  bridge  became  a  flurry  of  activity.  Dorsie,  Aubry  and  Marsh  were  in  better  shape.
Deeper in the ship, they’d  been  less  exposed  than  we  were  on  the  bridge.  Plus,  main  enviro
had stayed on. Only the bridge had gone, momentarily, airless.
It was supposed  to  happen  the  other  way  around.  Bridge  enviro  was  supposed  to  be  the
most secure, sealing itself under red alert conditions. Bridge enviro  had  its  own  generator.  Its
own filters. It was supposed to be infallible.
Supposed to be.
I stood at helm, watched as each monitor, each screen came back  on. They would stay  on
now.  We  ran  through  a  final  systems  check.  I  touched  databoxes,  initializing  systems,
programs, functions. Sublights hummed at idle.
Sully  was  in  the  command  sling,  mirroring  my  movements,  mirroring  Verno’s  at
engineering. Ren was in sickbay, soaking.
Gregor was in his quarters.
“He has some things to think about,” Sully had said.
Sulk over, more likely. Or seethe.

I  understood  what  Sully  did,  why  he  did  it.  Physical  force  was  the  only  thing  Gregor
understood.  Gregor’s  insidious  challenges  to  me  challenged  Sully.  A  man  like  Gabriel  Ross
Sullivan wouldn’t tolerate that for long.
He’d  heard  Gregor  call  me  a  bitch.  What  he’d  felt  emanating  from  Gregor  I  could  only
imagine. We hadn’t had time, or the privacy, to discuss it.
Or to discuss what he’d done to Ren. For Ren.
Ren  was  dead,  had  been  dead  for  several  minutes  when  I’d  flicked  on  the  medi-stat.  I’d
been in Fleet too long not to know what the unit told me. Ren was dead.
Ren was alive.
Sully had touched him, breathed for him. Sully had touched him, beat  his  heart  for  him.
Sully had touched him, healed him.
Not Sully. Gabriel.
I had a thousand questions to add to the other thousand I already had from three weeks of
Gabriel Ross Sullivan in my life. They grew like his losses in his card games with Ren. Double
or nothing. I kept getting doubles. I stuffed them  all into another one of my mental duro-hard
containers and shoved them away, for now. There might be a time I’d want to bring them  out,
lay them before him. Ask.
But not now. Stars have mercy, I loved him. And questions hurt him.  Answers  hurt  him.
I’d felt his anguish, his fear, when one would pop into my mind, unbidden. I’d turn, forgetting
the one thing that was very, very hard for Sullivan to face. And that was Gabriel.
I remembered the feel of his voice in my mind, No. Stay still. Don’t… don’t turn.
Fear. He’d been behind me, somewhere in gray  fuzzy  soft.  Don’t  turn.  Don’t  look.  Don’t
look at me.
What would I have seen if I had?
Right now, I looked through the large viewports. They framed something large, something
once beautiful in her own efficient, functional way. Something  that  had  kept  me  alive,  saved
my  life  countless  times.  Something  that  had  bestowed  a  title,  a  purpose  to  the  name  of
Chasidah  Bergren.  And  had  continued  on  bravely,  forever  holding  a  piece  of  me  in  her
memory when the court had stripped that same title and purpose away.
As long as she worked the lanes,  as  long  as  she  streamed  through  the  neverwhen,  so  did
Captain Chaz Bergren. I always felt that even if I died, my codes, my programs would live on
in her.
I never thought she’d be the one to die, first. And in such ugliness.
The  shattered  hull  of  the  Meritorious  hung  lopsided  against  the  starfield.  The  Level  2
auto-destruct had gutted most of her starboard side, peeled back her hull plating. Her Imperial
insignia was blackened. Her bridge, shattered. All that was left of her name were the first four
letters: MERI.
Meri.

Good-bye Meri, my sweet little P40. I’m so sorry. Chasidah is so very, very sorry.
“Weapons on line.” Verno’s voice was gravelly, sounding normal again.
“Targeting. Locked.” Sully shifted in the sling behind me. Then, softly, “Chaz?”
I didn’t turn, just shook my head and raised my hand to push away his offer. I knew what
had to be done. Why it had to be done. Nothing for the Empire to trace. Nothing for them  to
question. I just couldn’t be the one to do it.
Fifteen. Fifteen lives. And now Meri’s.
She was only a ship. My first and only command.
My sweet, sweet little P40.
A short, harsh sigh came from Sully. Then a word. “Fire.”
Lasers  streaked  out  from  the  Boru  Karn.  The  Meritorious  exploded,  disintegrated  into  a
thousand wheeling stars. Then she faded away.
Sixteen.
 
We were about ten hours from the B-C Border. Baris-Calth.  But  we  were  twenty-six  from
an  inexplicable  systems  failure.  And  a  total  recovery.  Providential,  Ren  had  said.  Everything
had come back on, flawlessly. As if it had never happened.
Sublights  thrummed  at  max,  Sully-style.  That  meant  max  plus  twenty,  to  the  rest  of
civilized space.
We’d all slept, exhausted, aching,  then  reconvened  in  the  ready  room  with  lots  of  coffee.
Ten hours to the B-C Border. Problems behind us. Troubles forgotten.
Gregor  sat  across  from  me,  cheerful  and  jubilant.  And  noticeably  apologetic.  “Was  real
furred, wasn’t I? Really got my head parts knocked  for a loop on that bridge. Went babbling a
few nasty words. Sure you know I didn’t mean them.  Sure you, being a Fleetie  and  all,  must
have heard them  a  hundred  times  over.”  He  offered  a  wide  grin  and  slapped  the  side  of  his
head with his hand, skewing his thinning brown hair. “Still rattling around in there. Can’t you
hear it?”
Verno’s  laugh  rattled  a  few  viewports  in  the  next  quadrant.  Ren’s  gaze  brushed  over
Sully’s, then  mine.  Marsh  was  on  the  bridge,  listening  on  intraship.  Dorsie  and  Aubry  were
sleeping, off duty.
“Chest healing better?” I was the picture of concern.
“Still some tightness, soreness.” Gregor stretched, winced.
God, get me a theater. Any stage will do.
“Dorsie’s got a cure for that,” Verno said. “Her special tea.”
With honeylace. I already knew about it. She’d brewed a mug for Sully  and  Ren.  I  didn’t

need it. I had Gabriel’s bedtime stories.
Sully keyed a touchpad. The hologrid rose. Not  with  Marker  manifests,  ship  movements.
But  with  the  system  primaries  for  the  Boru  Karn.  He’d  captured  them  in  the  midst  of
disintegration, had the forethought to save the file. Study it.
We  studied  it  now.  It  was  a  horrific  mess  and  it  seemed  to  hold  no  answers.  No  clues.
Except one.
Sabotage.
“You brought her in for regular maintenance when I left for Moabar.” Sully jerked his chin
toward Gregor. “Who worked on her?”
“Me. Aubry.  The  tech  crew  at  Dock  Five.  Our  usuals.  No  one  touched  her  unless  me  or
Aubry was there.”
Sully watched him. If Gregor were lying, he was dead.
“I saw the repair logs.” Sully picked up his lightpen, tabbed down the side of the panel. A
second grid flashed up. “Nothing here,” he pointed to the logs, “explains this.” He  pointed  to
the crazed primaries.
There was a long moment of studious silence.
“Does not, that’s true, Sully-sir.”
“How about a worm?” Marsh’s voice came over intraship. He had a smaller version of both
grids on his bridge monitors.
“Basically impossible,” Sully said, “on my ship.”
Sully was no pilot. But he was one damn fine engineer, one damn better systems tech.
“Impossible from outside.” Gregor leaned back in his chair. “But how about right here?”
Verno was startled. “Here? Gregor, you are saying one of  us  did  this?”  He  pointed  a  long
finger to the grid.
Gregor  shrugged.  “I’m  saying  Sully’s  right.  He’s  got  this  ship  rigged  tighter  than  a
whore’s… pardon, Captain Bergren. He’s got this ship locked down  tight,  where  our  systems
are concerned. It’d have to be someone who could get in from inside. Like, I don’t know, the
terminal  in  Sully’s  quarters.”  His  gaze  swept  over  me,  quickly,  then  moved  on.  “Or  on  the
bridge or maybe in here…”
“That’s traceable,” Sully snapped. “I already checked for it. Nothing showed up.”
“Someone was real good, it might not.” Gregor spun his lightpen on the tabletop but didn’t
look at Sully.
But Sully stared at him, hard, for a long, time. “We’ll keep working on it,” he said finally.
He moved  his  lightpen.  The  grid  changed.  “This  is  the  latest  we’ve  been  able  to  snag  on
Marker. We’ve got four days left ‘til we hit the A-B. I want to move on the shipyards no  later
then ten days after that.”

“We’ll be ready, Sully-sir. We’ll be ready.”
 
Chapter Twenty-One
« ^ » 
An hour, maybe less, to the A-B.
Sully sat at the dining table, elbows bent,  mouth  resting on his folded hands. He stared at
the mug of hot tea before him as if he could find answers in the curls of rising steam.
At  least,  that’s  what  it  looked  like  to  me.  I  let  the  door  slide  closed  behind  me  and
unhooked the holster from around my waist. I tossed it, and the laser pistol snugged into it, on
the couch as I walked by. We were on the  Boru  Karn  but  I  went  armed,  everywhere,  on  the
ship now. We all did.
Sabotage. It hung heavy in the air in the ready room, on the bridge, in the corridors. Even
Dorsie’s fragrant galley seemed a bit less for it.
Sabotage. Sully had just come from a private  talk  with  Gregor.  A  private  confrontation.  I
wondered, but didn’t ask, if Gregor had met Gabriel yet. Somehow I didn’t think so.
Intraship trilled on his deskcomp. He didn’t turn. I answered it. “Bergren.”
“Captain Chasidah. We’ve just crossed the border into Baris. Tell Sully-sir, if you will.”
“Acknowledged. Thanks, Verno.” I clicked it off.
He was looking at me when I turned away from the desk. “Sit.” Please was implied. I could
hear it. I could also hear the tiredness in his voice.
I sat next to him and took a sip of his tea. One of us might as well.
“It’s not him,” he said.
Gregor  wasn’t  responsible  for  the  near-destruction  of  the  Karn’s  primaries.  The  near
destruction of the Boru Karn itself.
“I didn’t think so,” I told him. “The  man  may  be  annoying,  but  not  stupid.  Or  suicidal.”
Gregor would have died if we had.
“He wants very much for me to believe you’re responsible.”
“At least he’s consistent.” I became Gregor’s nemesis the moment  I’d set my boots  on  the
Karn’s decking.
“He maintains the worm, the destructive program, had to have been  entered  by  someone
on this ship.” He  stared  past  me,  past  the  tea  I  nudged  back  in  front  of  him.  “He  asked  if  I
checked your datapad from the Meritorious.”
“It’s in the ready room. Want me to—”

“It’s here. Now. I checked it.” His tone went flat.
I was  suddenly  aware  of  my  heart  beating  a  bit  harder  in  my  chest  than  I  wanted  it  to.
“And?”
He nodded, slowly. “I found it.”
A chill ran through me. “A worm program?”
“Traces  of  it.  They  usually  don’t  leave  a  trail,  you  know.  But  there  are  always  residues,
skews, gaps. I found those.”
“Who put it there?” I thought of Kingswell. It was his datapad but I’d  cleared  it,  dumped
everything  except  the  Fleet-issue  essentials  we  needed  to  know  about  Fleet  itself,  and  about
Marker.  Could  I  have  missed  something?  Something  coded  to  create,  send  and  replicate  a
worm if the pad were used  without  authorization?  “Couldn’t  have  been  Kingswell.  The  man
didn’t have that kind of knowledge.”
“Gregor and I discussed that. He maintains, and correctly so, that you do.”
I  sat  back  against  my  chair,  sharply.  Closed  my  eyes.  For  a  minute  I  was  back  in  the
courtroom,  in  full  dress  uniform,  and  about  to  be  stripped  of  my  rank  and  command.  I’d
listened to everything, all the testimony, all the proof. And saw  truth  in  none  of  it.  Only  lies,
intricately, beautifully, professionally crafted. But I could disprove none of them.
“Captain Bergren is the only one who had the ability to override that command.”
Correctly so.
I opened my eyes. “I didn’t create a worm. I didn’t load it into this ship.”
“I know.” He offered me his hand. I took it, warmth cascading through me as  I  did.  “But
neither did Gregor. Neither did I. We’re the only three who’d know how.”
He  squeezed  my  fingers,  gave  me  a  brief,  troubled  smile.  “I  keep  thinking  about  Milo.
Someone  told the stripers about the Diligent Keeper.  Leaked  that  information.  Or  sold  it.  Or
traded it. Milo’s crew didn’t know why he was on Moabar Station. Ren and I booked passage
through the church.  It was all legitimate. Only Milo knew why I was there. And, like  Gregor,
he’s not, he wasn’t suicidal.”
I  knew  all  this.  We’d  discussed  it  and  noted  the  warnings.  But  maybe  we  hadn’t  paid
enough attention to what we saw. “Who on the Karn knew you were using the Diligent?”
“Everyone. Marsh, Gregor, Dorsie, Aubry, Verno. Milo met us at Dock Five, in the rafts.”
I knew about Dock Five. It was an abandoned mining raft converted to a way station at the
A-B. Barely legal, but as long as its dockmaster regularly paid the Empire its share of the  port
charges, Fleet had no reason to shut it down.
“Drogue?” The round-faced monk  had been  nothing  but  helpful.  But  I  had  to  ask.  I  was
gathering data now. Facts.
Sully nodded. “He knew we came in on Milo’s ship. He knew I came to retrieve you. But I
worked  too  closely  with  him.  Ren  did,  even  more  so.  If  he  were  lying,  setting  us  up,  we

would’ve known.” He hesitated. “Sensed something.”
Just as Sully knew that Gregor was telling the truth. And that I was. Unless… I curled my
fingers tighter through his, tried to send rainbows along with my question. Because I knew he
hated  these  kinds  of  questions.  “Is  there  anyone  you  couldn’t…  sense?  Anyone  who  could
block the truth from you, or Ren, if you were deliberately reading them?”
I  knew  from  my  conversations  with  Ren  that  reading  an  emotional  resonance  didn’t
necessarily  reveal  the  reason  behind  the  emotion.  I  didn’t  know  if  Sully  had  read  his  crew
telepathically, going into their minds the way he had mine when we faced the Loviti.
His gaze went back  to his tea. Cold now, steam no longer rose and curled, like gray  fuzzy
soft.
“On this ship? No,” he said after a moment.  “But elsewhere? Most are on Stol. But I, we’d
know that. See the block.”
Like a ‘Do Not Enter’ sign?  “But  what  if  you  didn’t  see  a  block?  What  if  you  saw  a  false
memory of innocence?”
His hand angled out toward me, fingers splayed. His expression was thoughtful. “Memories
are linked. Intertwined. False ones, or lies, float. Or have very weak foundations. I don’t know
how to explain this—”
“You’re doing fine.”
“Then  understand  that  Ren  might  not  see  one,  but  I  would.  I  have,  many  times  before.
There’s always the accompanying fear. Even if it’s small. It’s distinctive.”
“What if the memory weren’t false, or blocked, but erased?” Like Kingswell and Tessa.
A long sigh. “Same thing. A gap, where it shouldn’t be.”
“But what if that mind assumed  the  gap  belonged?”  I  thought  of  Dock  Five.  Seedy  bars,
nighthouses, honeylace dens. “A conversation over a couple of beers, shots of honeylace on the
side. Maybe a pipe of rafthkra. Or two. One hell of a hangover in the morning.  One  hell  of  a
gap in the mind.”
Obsidian eyes darkened, deeply troubled.
“Sully, we’re not talking about a hauler full of synth-emeralds here. Or a smuggler’s load of
rafthkra  or  Trelarian  brandy.  We’re  talking  about  gen-labs.  And  jukors.  We’re  talking  about
something that could only be done with the backing of someone very powerful in the Empire.
Someone  powerful  enough  to  keep  it  a  secret.  Prew  maybe  be  a  pompous  dandy  of  an
Emperor, but he’s not corrupt. Evil. This is evil. There’s a very real power behind it.”
“You’re saying I’m facing another Ragkiril.” His voice was quiet. “One who may have had
access to someone on this ship.”
Ragkiril. Another Ragkiril. Besides the one staring uncomfortably at me.
He’d never admitted that before. Only telepath, and then no further explanations on that.
“I imagine Stol has a few cities full of them. The Empire’s used them before.”

“You’re  wrong.”  He  clasped  his  hands  against  his  mouth.  Then  pressed  them,  briefly,
against his lowered forehead. His shoulders were stiff and tense, as if a weight lay against them.
He  turned  back  to  me.  “Ragkir,”  he  said.  “A  minor  distinction,  and  one  the  Empire  seems
unwilling to comprehend.  All Stolorths, and a few humans, have empathic  abilities,  from  the
basic ability to read emotional resonances to the deeper Ragkir mind talents. But Ragkiril, well,
there aren’t  cities  full.  The  Stolorths  would  like  us  to  think  so.  The  Empire  obliges  them  by
thinking  so,  because  it  helps  them  fuel  their  prejudices.  But  since  you’re  probing  for  facts,
Chaz, I’ll hand you one. There aren’t cities full of Ragkiril. Those that I’ve  met  in  my  lifetime
could fit in this cabin. Those I’ve read of, studied, could fit in this ship. And we’d all still have
plenty of room.”
I sat, stunned, fascinated. And a little frightened. But not so much  as to halt my questions.
My need to understand him was stronger. “And this minor distinction?”
“Basically,  a  Ragkir  can  do  a  zral.  Erase  memories.  Affect  what  a  mind  knows,  sees.  A
Ragkiril  can  do  not  only  a  zral,  but  a  zragkor.  He  can  kill  the  mind  and  under  certain
conditions, kill the body. And, depending on the level of talents, he also can heal.”
Ren. Gray fuzzy soft pouring over him. Sully, breathing for him. This was my explanation.
But  they  could  also  kill,  he’d  said.  And  not  just  the  mind,  but  the  body  as  well.  His
confirmation was chilling. I’d heard rumors of that. That was why the Empire hated Ragkirils,
banning and damning any mind talents save for the most benign. And  even  known  empaths
were closely monitored.
“Still think it was wise to come after me?” He tried to smile, failed.
“Yes.”
He let out a breath I didn’t realize he’d been holding.
“Sully—”
He raised his hand. “No. I can only do so much confessing in one day. Bear with me. This is
more than I ever intended for you to know. If it weren’t for what’s happened, it would still be
something we wouldn’t discuss until later. Like, ten years from now.”
“Glad to know you intend to keep me around for awhile.”
Finally, he offered me a smile back. “A few lifetimes, at least.”
It would probably take me at least that long to figure him out, to finally  get  all  the  facts  I
needed  about  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan.  It  seemed  with  every  bit  of  information  I  learned,
additional questions would surface. Like Ragkir and Ragkiril. And  how  the  son  of  one  of  the
wealthiest men in the Empire had come to learn his mind could heal, and probably, kill. There
was so much I didn’t know about Sully, and what I did I realized I barely understood. I pushed
my uneasiness aside. I knew he’d sense it.
“Let’s deal with the trouble in this lifetime. I think we may have made the serious mistake
of  underestimating  the  enemy.  Someone  told  the  stripers  about  Milo.  Someone  used  my
datapad to put a worm into your ship’s systems. Almost killed us. And someone,  in  case  you
forgot,” I added, resting my hand on his arm, letting his warmth tumble into me, “sent a jukor
to try to stop us from ever reaching the monastery. Someone  knows who we are, where we’ve

been, what we’re doing.”
“And where we’re going,” he  added  quietly,  his  brief  smile  now  gone.  “Someone  will  be
waiting for us at Marker.”
 
Sully  left  to  talk  to  Ren.  I  imagined  that  the  discussion,  while  serious,  would  no  doubt
include  a  few  hands  of  cards.  It  was  his  way  of  dealing  with  tension,  or  maybe  his  way  of
blocking out the emotions swirling around the ship that he didn’t want to feel.
I made myself a fresh mug of tea, flipped open my datapad on the desk—my own way of
dealing with tension. Sully’s admission had raised questions I wasn’t ready to dwell on. Other
problems were easier.
Sully had told me where he’d found the traces of the worm program. I wanted  to  look  at
them myself, in case, as I told him, the program was a parting gift from the Imperial Fleet. Just
because  Kingswell  couldn’t  create  such  a  program  didn’t  mean  his  crew  had  been  equally
untalented.
I felt I was better trained to recognize Fleet worms than Sully was.
But I didn’t recognize these. At least, not the small residues, aborted snips of code that were
all that was  left.  The  program  not  only  tried  to  destroy  the  Karn’s  systems,  it  had  destroyed
itself, eradicating its identity.
Like a zral. Or a zragkor.
No wonder Sully understood these programs so well.
Only  a  few  Ragkiril,  he’d  said.  And  by  oblique  admission,  placed  himself  in  their  ranks.
One of the few human ones. And the possibility, with the situation on Marker,  we would face
another.
Questions, a thousand questions. Again, my mind reminded me that with every one Sully
answered for me, another ten popped up.
Let’s deal with Marker,  my brain said. At least there, shipping manifests  leave  nice,  linear
trails that can be plugged into grids.
I pulled up my work data, paged through to  where  I’d  left  off  before  we’d  transferred  to
the Karn. I started reading, trying to pick up my train of thought. My note-mark flashed.
Right. The stuff on Crossley. I’d never transferred my personal notes to Sully’s hologrid in
the ready room. We’d gone over everything that day, but not my questions on Crossley.
I opened the note, reread the data stored in there. Crossley Burke. Not the vid game people.
At least, not anymore. Unless they were breeding jukors to add a touch of realism to their sims.
Unprofitable. Wouldn’t get a lot of repeat customers if they were.
I was headed for Sully’s deskcomp to see what the Karn held on Crossley Burke when the
cabin door slid open. Sully, looking more relaxed than when he left, but none too happy.
I took a wild guess. “How much?”

He hesitated only a half a second. “Oh. Four million, one hundred thousand. And change.
Or so.”
“You have a lot on your mind. You can’t expect your game to improve right now.” I frankly
didn’t think his game would ever improve but there are times when you have to make certain
encouraging noises.
He looked positively affronted. “I am improving! I  didn’t  lose  half  as  much  as  I  normally
do.”
He stripped off his laser pistol, threw it on the couch  next  to  mine  then  sat,  arms  draped
along the back of the cushions. “Still working?”
I settled into the desk chair, tabbed up the screen. “Ran across some notes I made to myself
a few days ago. Forgot about them.  I’m looking for a reference for anything to do with a firm,
or a name, of Crossley Burke.”
“This has to do with Marker?” He stood suddenly and was at the desk in two long strides.
“Marker? This has—”
“Give me a chance to answer. Yes, this has to do with Marker.  Either funding, or a concept
group that—”
“Crossley Burke. You’re sure it’s Crossley?” He leaned his palms on the desk and stared at
me.
“It’s not Crossley. They used to make vid games.”
“Show me the reference.”
I knew he didn’t mean the vid games. He followed me to the dining room table, a tension
in his shoulders, his hands fisted. I pulled up the data and pointed to it.
He sat and stared at my small screen. “Hell’s ass. God damn son-of-a-bitch.”
“Sully—”
“Goddamned bastard. I should’ve known.”
“Sully.”
He ran a hand over his face. “Crossley Burke. Hayden Crossley Burke.”
That sounded like a person. “Who’s Hayden Crossley Burke?”
His eyes narrowed. “Someone I should’ve killed long ago, when I had the chance. Hayden
Crossley Burke’s my cousin.”
 
Chapter Twenty-Two
« ^ » 

I could see the resemblance. Hayden Crossley Burke, cousin of Gabriel Ross Sullivan, who was
the son of Winthrop Burke Sullivan. They were men of similar height and build, and looked to
be about the same age.
The news vidclip playing on the ready room’s hologrid, and on Marsh’s bridge screen, had
been  shot  last  year  at  a  charity  ball  on  Garno.  Hayden  moved  easily  through  the  crowd,
everyone around him in formal attire, gems glittering. The vidcam wasn’t focused on him, but
on the parade of last year’s vid stars silhouetted against  the  ever-familiar  forms  of  old  money
and  power,  like  Darius  Tage,  Lady  Moira  Chevlinska  or  one  of  the  Bell-Javieros.  We’d  see
Hayden in the background, shaking hands, chatting, then lose him. Another few minutes, the
camera  would  swing  around  to  highlight  another  long-legged  beauty  revealing  an  amazing
amount of cleavage, and there was Hayden. Shaking hands, chatting. Smiling.
“He’s older,” Sully said. “Four, five years.”
Similar jaw line, straight nose, dark hair. But Cousin Hayden’s eyes were light.  And  while
Sully’s smile was often playful, Hayden’s was polished. Professional.
“Looks like he shits money,” Gregor said.
For once, he and I were in total agreement.
Sully tabbed off the vid, perched on the edge of the round table and crossed his arms. His
expression  was  one  of  a  man  contemplating  something  unpleasant.  I  didn’t  know  if  it  were
Hayden himself or what Hayden funded. Or the very real fact that Hayden was in a position to
do these things because Sully had refused to be a Sullivan. Hayden was the heir not only to the
Crossley Burke fortune, but the Sullivan moneys as well.
Sully outlined the wealth Hayden had at his disposal, and the contacts that came with that
wealth, with no mention that it could have been his. He confirmed my suspicion that Crossley
Burke,  the  mega  corporation,  had  grown  from  the  small  vid-game  firm  I  remembered.
Diversified.  Acquired.  But  most  often  in  the  background,  quietly.  Hayden  and  his  father,
Morley  Burke,  had  negotiated  a  number  of  lucrative  government  contracts  over  the  years.
Sully admitted he hadn’t paid much  attention to them.  Finding out what those contracts were
was now a priority.
“You ever meet the guy?” Gregor was across from me, next to Aubry. He flicked the end of
his lightpen at the blank hologrid as if Hayden’s image was still there. “At Marker,” he added.
“Ever see him there?”
Gregor had avoided me since Sully’s talk with  him.  Though  he  no  longer  challenged  me,
directly. But that tone of dislike, of distrust, still hung under his words when he spoke.
I shook  my  head.  “Not  that  I  remember.”  And  I  would  have.  Hayden  was  an  attractive
man.
“Not even talking to your brother?” Gregor persisted.
Ren exchanged glances, and I could only imagine what else, with Sully.
“I don’t remember  Thad ever mentioning his name,  either.  But  we  didn’t  talk  a  lot,  even
before  the  trial.  If  we  did,  it  was  usually  about  Willym.”  Argued  about  Willym.  I’d  almost
convinced Suzette to take him out of the crèche. Then I’d been arrested.

“Willym?”
“My brother. Half-brother.”
Gregor’s eyes narrowed. “Where’s he work on Marker?”
“Nowhere. He’s nine years old.”
Gregor snorted. “You’re father must be—”
“You have a point with all this?” Sully’s voice was hard.
Gregor shrugged and toyed with his lightpen. “Sure would be more useful if she could say,
yeah, I saw Burke at Marker. On this date or that date. Or yeah, my brother told me about this
party he went to with Burke.”
“Thad’s not the party type. And they’re not even remotely in the  same  social  circles.”  But
Philip was. Shame  I couldn’t ask what he knew about Hayden. “The only  reason  he’d  talk  to
Hayden Burke at all would be for shipyard business. And we don’t have any proof  right  now
that Thad has.”
Ren  leaned  toward  me,  silencing  any  further  comment  from  Gregor.  “Verno  and  I  were
discussing  the  reasons  your  brother’s  office  might  receive  confirmation  of  incoming  ships,
privately. He asked that I mention it.” Verno was off-duty, sleeping at Sully’s orders after one
too many long shifts. “It could be that he suspects someone is misusing the shipyards. He may
not know about the labs we suspect are being created, but be as suspicious as we are.”
I’d  thought  of  that.  That  would  be  very  like  Thad.  Fleet  first.  Always  by  the  book.  Even
more than me. His mother had worn army boots, too.
“If he is, he might help us.” Aubry had a high, thin voice for a man of his bulk.  He  spent
his off-duty time working out in the ship’s small gym with Marsh.
“I wouldn’t trust him,” Sully said. “At this point.”
“I agree.” But I would, oddly, trust Philip. I just didn’t know how Sully would react to that
if I suggested it.
 
We passed another beacon shortly after Verno came on  duty,  three  hours  later.  The  Karn
efficiently and secretively grabbed the newsbanks, traffic, and in-system advisories.
The Farosians had staged a protest outside the government center on Aldan Prime. There’d
been  a  major  depot  fire  in  Port  January,  losses  in  the  millions.  Two  women,  raped,  brutally
murdered in Crescent City in the Walker Colonies. Odd, engraved disks found at  both  crime
scenes… While jukors were born and Takas died.
And other Takas killed.
 
Sully sat behind me on the edge of our bed and  brushed  out  my  hair.  I  was  wearing  my
worry-colors, he told me.

“I should learn not to watch the news before bed.” I wished I could read his  moods  as  he
did mine. Wished I could tell when he was open, willing to talk. “What color is worry?”
His hands stilled, then lifted my hair. He ran the  brush  underneath.  “Muddy  colors.  Like
dirty water in a stream.”
“Anger?”
“Reddish.”
“Fear?”
“Yellow. The correlations are fairly common sense.”
“And silver, a silvery haze? When Ren was injured, on the bridge, you had this silvery—”
“That’s different.” This time the brush did stop. I heard it clatter against the nightstand. It
was a sharp sound, like the tone in Sully’s voice. Then his arms wrapped around my waist, his
face against my neck. Warmth fluttered, trickled.
“That’s different,” he repeated, softer this time. “But it’s nothing that would ever hurt you.
I’d never hurt you.”
I covered his arms with my own. “I know. I know.” With a twinge of reluctance, I opened
my mental cold storage, shoved that question back inside. I didn’t want to hurt him, either.
 
Sully and I’d discussed course changes before, but this was the  first  time  he  ever  had  me
initiate one. That had usually been Gregor’s prerogative. I had no desire to step on toes in that
regard.
“Dock Five. You’re  sure?”  I  leaned  on  the  armpad  in  the  pilot’s  chair.  Marsh  and  Aubry
were due  to  come  on  in  an  hour.  It  was  just  Sully,  Ren  and  myself  on  the  bridge.  Just  as  it
would be only Sully, Ren and myself going on to Marker.
He’d said that, too, just before he told me he wanted to head for Dock Five.
“We have to refuel, pick up supplies,” he said.
I could name ten other depots that would do that just as well and told him so.
“But the Karn didn’t stop at any of those before I left for Moabar. It was at Dock  Five. We
have to look around there, before we proceed further.” He motioned to Ren sitting at helm in
front of me, his back  to the console. “I told Ren about your theory. That another,” he glanced
quickly at the closed bridge hatchway, “Ragkiril may be involved. That might explain how the
information about Milo was obtained.”
“My only difficulty with that possibility,” Ren said, “is that I cannot see one of my people,
or anyone with Ragkiril talents, encouraging the breeding of jukors.”
“I’ll name reasons why someone might.” I raised one hand, held up a finger with each item.
“Greed, money, blackmail, power. Need more?”
Ren shook his head. “Of course, we’re not immune  to that. But not with jukors as a goal.”

He glanced at Sully. “You didn’t explain this to her?”
My explanations, I wanted to tell Ren, were still coming in very small doses.
Sully took a deep breath, let it out slowly. “Not… completely.”
I didn’t like that tone. Part of me said, ‘What now?’ And part of me said, ‘Oh, shit.’ I didn’t
know whether to laugh, or brace myself.
I must have braced myself because Sully and Ren spoke out almost simultaneously.
“No, it’s nothing—”
“Not to worry—”
“Explain. Please.”
“To  put  it  briefly,”  Sully  said,  after  a  short  staring  contest  with  Ren,  “jukors  can’t  be
controlled,  or  affected,  by  mind  talents.  It  becomes,  then,  strictly  a  physical  battle.  And  few
things are physically a match for a jukor.”
“A modified Norlack did pretty damn well,” I reminded him.
“The jukor’s only vulnerable area is that small  spot  of  its  throat.  You  have  one  coming  at
you, you might take it down. You have ten, you have no chance. One of them will get you.”
“So? Humans face the same type of threat from them. Why would that preclude a Stolorth,
a Ragkiril, from working for a jukor-breeding project?”
“Because it takes away the advantage a Ragkiril has. That’s why jukors were bred after the
Boundary Wars. Not for security purposes,  as  the  government  proclaimed.  But  to  make  sure
Stolorths, or anyone with Ragkiril talents, wouldn’t challenge the Empire.”
“They were bred specifically as a threat to my people,” Ren’s voice held a note of  sadness.
“Unnecessary. We have no interest in acquiring more worlds, more systems,  like  the  Empire.
Our very passivity makes the Empire distrust us. That and, of course, the Empire’s experience
with our Ragkirils when we did try to assist in the war. When our founders realized that, they
thought it best if the Empire not understand the different levels  and  degrees  of  mind  talents.
That, it seems, was even a worse thing to do. Now we are all viewed as a latent threat.”
Ren  was  right.  I’d  grown  up  with  everything  he  told  me.  The  fears,  the  prejudice,  the
condemnation of telepaths. The Empire, greedy and bloated, categorizing all others in the same
way, assigning others their own motives.
I also saw why a Ragkiril might not work on a project to breed jukors. But I didn’t discount
it totally. “So we go back to Dock Five.”
Sully nodded. “Pick up the trail, if  there  is  one.  See  who’s  been  watching  us.  And  who’s
paying them to watch us.”
“Crossley Burke.”
A wry  smile.  “That  would  be  ironic,  wouldn’t  it?  If  Cousin  Hayden  does  prove  I’m  still
alive, he stands a good chance of losing his inheritance. All that Sullivan money.”

“I thought your father disowned you?”
“Oh,  he  did.  But  Hayden’s  not  legal  heir.  He’s  assisting  by  right  of  next  of  kin,  as  I’m
theoretically dead. But since my body was never recovered, you know the regs; it hasn’t been
seven years. If he proves I’m alive, then he’s also proved he has no right to the money.”
I looked at Ren. “I’d start keeping real good records of those card games if I were you.”
Ren smiled.
 
Sully didn’t come back  to the cabin right away when our shift ended. Had some thoughts
he wanted to play with on the holo-grid in the ready-room, he said.
I left  him  there.  I  had  some  thought  of  my  own,  circling,  hovering,  unwanted.  No,  not
unwanted. Just unanswered. Tea, not coffee, sounded soothing. I was on my second cup when
Sully came back to the cabin.
“Find anything more?” I’d kicked off my boots and was reclining on the couch.
He shook his head. “Bits and pieces. A little here. A little  there.  I  need  to  see  more  of  the
picture. It’s frustrating.” He spread his arms in a helpless gesture.
“I fully sympathize.” My bits and pieces had hovered through two cups of tea. I scooted my
feet over on the cushions so he could sit.
He plopped down, covering his mouth  with his hand for  a  moment.  Then  he  splayed  his
fingers toward me. “I know. I also know my saying you have nothing to be afraid of sometimes
isn’t sufficient.”
“I’m not afraid of you, Sully.” I’d been raised with the same prejudices against Ragkirils as
most anyone else in the Empire. But it wasn’t fear I felt most often when confronted with what
Sully could do. It was frustration over lack of facts to work with. “I’m only afraid of saying or
doing  something  wrong.  Because  I  don’t  understand  what  it  means  to  be  a  Ragkiril.  What
responsibilities this places on you. Why you were chosen, or if it’s something you chose—”
He flashed me an anguished look, his back  stiffening. “Believe me, I’d  never  choose  this.”
His voice was bitter.
“So it chose you?”
“It?”
I  couldn’t  tell  if  he  were  angry  or  amused.  “I  don’t  understand.  You’re  human,  not
Stolorth.” I knew  every  inch  of  him.  He  was  definitely  human.  Not  a  gill  slit.  Not  a  web.  “I
thought,  maybe,  this  was  some  kind  of  symbiotic  relationship.  Because  of  the  way  you  talk
about Gabriel as if he weren’t you.”
He leaned his elbows on his knees, hands clasped between them. Struggled. I could see it in
the lines around his  eyes,  the  tension  in  his  mouth.  I  was  about  to  tell  him  forget  it,  I  don’t
want to know, I can’t bear to see you suffer like this when he answered.
“It’s nothing symbiotic. More like a rare genetic mutation. It can happen about every four

or  five  generations  in  humans,  though  there’s  no  exact  pattern.”  He  paused.  “I  am  Gabriel.
Always have been.”
“Then why do you act as if he’s someone you’re not?”
He shrugged wistfully. “It’s easier. It’s a way of dealing with what I sometimes have to do,
which I don’t like. With what I’ve done. It’s a habit I started a long time ago.”
I didn’t  think  he  was  unique  in  feeling  distanced  from  some  aspect  of  himself.  I  didn’t
know of anyone who hadn’t felt that way at some point. I gave him a small smile. “My mother
always called me Chaz. Except when I did something wrong. Then it was Chasidah. Sometimes
that made me feel like I was two people.”
He didn’t return the smile. “That was her naming a behavior, not something you can never
change  about  yourself.  Something  you  never  asked  for.  Never  wanted.  Didn’t  know  why  it
happened.” His voice was harsh. “All you know is you woke up one morning and looked in the
mirror, and you were terrified, because you saw—”
He stopped abruptly and stared at his clenched hands. Not at me. He hadn’t looked at me
for several minutes. He closed his eyes, took a deep breath. “Because you saw,” he continued,
his voice forcibly calm, “what you are.”
I remembered Ren’s explanation of what I termed rainbows. There was nothing scary about
rainbows.  “Is  being  able  to  see  your  own  resonance,  these  colors  around  your  body  so
frightening?”
He said nothing for a very long minute. “It can be.”
If you weren’t expecting it, I supposed.  If  you  were—“You  were  a  child,”  I  guessed.  That
might very well be terrifying to see colors dancing all over your body.
He nodded.
“Then your parents knew?”
“They never found out.”
“How old were you?” I asked softly. I thought I was beginning to understand a little more
about Gabriel, a child alone with a secret. And Gabriel’s need to be held.
“Twelve.”
Not  that  young,  but  at  the  precarious  point  between  child  and  teenager.  Puberty?  Did
puberty trigger the change from limited human mind to Ragkiril? “Is that usually when it—”
He shoved himself to his feet, headed for the door to the corridor. My heart plummeted. I
wanted to call back all my questions, apologize, tell him it didn’t matter.
He stopped, shoulders hunched, hands jammed in his pockets. Then he turned and walked
back  to  the  couch,  but  sat  instead  on  the  low  table  in  front  of  me.  I  swung  my  legs  off  the
cushions. He  took  my  hands  in  his.  “Sorry.  For  a  moment  I  was  that  twelve  year  old  again,
looking in the mirror.”
That explained something I’d not paid much  attention to before. There were no mirrors in

Sully’s cabin. Only a small  one  over  the  sink  in  the  bathroom.  Where  there  usually  was  one
between closets, he’d hung an old star chart, framed.
He brought my fingers to his mouth. “Can we talk about something else?”
I smiled. “Sure. How much do you owe Ren, now?
 
Chapter Twenty-Three
« ^ » 
Dock Five
I hadn’t been to Dock  Five in almost three years. The place hadn’t changed. Except maybe  to
get a little more seedy, a little more raucous, a little more peppered with divergent humans and
humanoids. Freighter crew, tanker crew and barge workers all mixed in with miners in transit.
There were men  and women of all shapes, sizes and ages, but very few children. Just the  odd
pickpocket,  or  some  rafter’s  brat  running  loose  while  his  parental  unit  slumbered,  deep  in
hangover heaven.
Dock Five was an ugly structure, long, somewhat cylindrical. Six levels at its narrowest, ten
at its widest. Gravity only worked at its core. In the outlying areas, beyond the core, it was all
free-float, zero-g boots required.
Sixty bays total, thirty a side, most around the center core. That’s where the shops were, the
bars, the nighthouses, the rafthkra dens. Tool shops, ships’ supplies hugged the outer core.
So  did  the  Boru  Karn.  We  waited  an  hour  for  the  berth  to  clear.  Center  core  was  more
heavily  trafficked,  making  an  unscheduled  emergency  departure  more  hazardous.  The  Karn
was always prepared for one of those.
We  were  listed  in  Dock  manifests  as  the  Lofty  Echo.  Sully  had  a  random  list  of  names,
words,  and  threw  them  together  on  a  whim.  This  week,  the  Lofty  Echo.  Next  month,  the
Lambent Beacon. It didn’t matter. He had clearances and docs for them all.
We traipsed toward the core in plain spacer fatigues, myself in dark blue, Sully in his usual
black.  No  ship  patches.  Weapons  discreetly  under  jackets.  My  Grizni,  as  always,  wrapped
securely around my wrist.
Verno  and  Dorsie  followed  us  down  Blue  Level  4.  Dorsie  had  a  list  of  supplies.  She  and
Verno broke off as we came to Blue Corridor 6. There was a warehouse on B.C. 6 she dealt with
regularly and trusted their prices. We’d meet up later in a pub on B.C. 12.
Gregor, Aubry and Ren stayed on board, but only Gregor and Ren were  on  duty.  Gregor,
because he was first pilot. Ren because there were sighted Stolorths on Dock Five. Being caught
on an open dock was something he couldn’t risk.
The  office  for  the  repair  techs  Sully  used  was  on  B.L.  3,  one  level  down.  The  lifts  were
crowded. We took the non-working escalator  stairs.  I  didn’t  know  if  they’d  broken  again,  or
hadn’t been fixed since I was last there.

“Never fixed,”  Sully  told  me,  then  added  a  questioning  glance.  “This  isn’t  in  your  patrol
sector. Plus, Fleet doesn’t dock here.”
“I was on vacation.”
“Here?”
“With a friend.” I gave him a bland look and tried to throw ‘it’s old business and not worth
bringing up’ into my rainbow.
He caught it, but it didn’t stop him. “Not another husband.”
I punched his arm. “One’s more than enough, thank you.”
“A friend in the freighter business?”
“Yes. Now what’s the name of that office we’re looking for?”
He  chuckled.  It’d  been  awhile  since  I  heard  his  deep,  rumbling  laugh.  It  sounded
wonderful.
A young woman raised her gaze from her screen as we entered. She  was pretty-faced, with
bright gold hair clipped back  with a colorful assortment of pins. She  sat behind a low counter
that divided the room. Two men in coveralls were in the other corner of the office, studying an
enlarged schematic on a hologrid. They turned.
Sully raised his hand. “Pops. When you get a minute, we need to talk to you.”
The taller, bald-headed man nodded, splayed his hand in the air. “Five minutes?”
“Sure.”
“I’ll keep him busy, Pops.” The woman rounded the counter, walked toward  us.  She  was
tall and slender, with tight leggings under a thin, clingy tunic.
“Well,  hello,  Ross.  I  didn’t  know  you  were  on  dock.”  She  glanced  at  me,  smiled,  then
returned her focus to Sully. Or Ross, the name he told me he used here.
“Business is good, Ilsa?”
“Can’t complain. No,  wait.  Maybe  I  will.  It’s  been  more  than  six  months  since  you  even
stopped  in  to  say  hello  to  me.”  She  pouted  prettily.  “Doesn’t  Gregor  ever  give  you  my
messages?”
“He has.”
I felt Sully’s hand at the small of my back. Ilsa’s gaze flicked to the movement of his arm.
Ah.  Ex-girlfriend  meets  current  girlfriend.  I  didn’t  enjoy  these  kinds  of  meetings.
Eventually it led to the almost subliminal stare-down, the message: you’ve got him now. I’ll get
him back.
Ilsa didn’t waste time. She appraised me thoroughly. I could almost hear her thinking: cute,
but not beautiful. “Known Ross long?” she asked me.
“Since the wedding,” Sully put in before I could answer.

I almost choked.
Ilsa did. “Wedding?” She recovered. “You met at a wedding recently?”
“No,” I said.
“Of  course  not,”  Sully  said  right  after  that.  “Chaz  and  I  got  married  recently.  But  I’ve
known you how long, my angel?” He brushed  a  stray  tendril  of  hair  from  my  face,  his  dark
eyes twinkling but smoky with desire. “Almost six years?”
My God, why were all the handsome ones always such bastards? But I was  grinning.  This
was so Sully. This was so much the Sully I hadn’t seen since the problem with Kingswell. Since
the problems with the Karn.
Six years was about right. I just couldn’t remember  if it were synth-emeralds or silacksian
crystals that had brought us together.
I was  saved  from  answering  by  the  appearance  of  the  bald  man.  Ilsa’s  father,  I  guessed,
from the resemblance around the eyes and mouth.
“You’re looking well, Ross.”
“You,  too,  Pops.”  Sully  took  the  offered  hand,  then  motioned  to  me.  “This  is  my  wife,
Chaz.”
Pops exhibited none of Ilsa’s surprise. “ ‘Bout damn time. And a lovely one you are. Chaz?
Good to meet you.” His large hand enveloped mine. “You in the business?”
I thought of all the things I knew Sully, as Sully, had done. I wondered what business Pops
thought I was in. “She’s a pilot. Damned fine one,” Sully said. “Good thing, too. We had a bit
of the problem with my ship.” Pops frowned. “Something my people  worked  on?  I’d  have  a
hard time believing that.” “So would I. Can we go somewhere and talk?” Ilsa managed a rather
frigid  ‘congratulations’  before  we  followed  Pops  to  a  back  office,  and  sat  in  spindly  chairs
permanently locked to the decking. Sully outlined the systems failure.
Pops  rubbed  his  bald  head  while  he  listened,  then  brought  up  Sully’s  repair  records.
“Aubry or Gregor okayed everything. Just like  normal.  I  can’t  see…  Ross,  I  can’t  understand
what happened.” The news disturbed him, deeply.
But if he was lying, only Sully could tell. I knew that’s why we were here.  He  knew  what
those records showed, he’d listened to Gregor and Aubry’s recounting. But  he  needed  to  talk
to, to read, Pops. And read the three techs who’d worked on the Karn.
We had coffee while Pops called them  in off  their  current  jobs  on  the  docks.  Sully  spoke
briefly to them all. It was all he needed to clear them.  We left without saying good-bye to Ilsa.
“Trying to make me jealous?” I teased as we climbed  the  uneven  escalator  stairs.  “Was  I  that
obvious?” He paused a second. “Did it work?” “I don’t know. Depends if she and I are on the
same list.” It took him a moment to place my comment. His list of confused women. The one I
didn’t want to be a part of. “There is no list,”  he  said  as  we  reached  the  top  of  the  stairs.  He
grabbed  my  arm,  pulled  me  against  him,  kissed  me.  I  reveled  in  his  warmth  as  it  fluttered
invisibly  over  my  skin.  “Shit!”  A  burly  man  in  mining  company  coveralls  behind  us  almost
knocked us down. “Go rent a room, will ya?” I leaned against Sully’s chest, chuckling, and let
him drag me out of the way. We were back  on Blue Level. Pops and his techs had read clean.

Just like Gregor and Aubry.
“Who  else  had  access  to  the  ship?”  I  asked  quietly  as  we  walked  past  dingy  storefronts,
garish pubs.
“No one, officially. And if the boys were lonely, they’d go to one of the nighthouses. If they
did bring a prosti back  on board, they wouldn’t let her out of their sight. That much  I  know.
Besides, I asked Gregor that question.”
“And Marsh, Aubry?”
He nodded.
“Dorsie?”
Another nod.
We stepped aside as a stout woman, her arms laden with boxes, walked unsteadily past us.
“Verno?”
“The  Englarians  have  a  small  mission  here.  It  was  just  before  Peyhar’s,  you  know.”  That
brought  it  back  down  to  someone  on  board.  I  was  the  only  new  figure  in  the  equation.
“Kingswell’s  datapad  had  to  have  had  some  kind  of  delayed  destruct  program.  Something  I
didn’t see when I emptied it. I usually don’t miss that kind of thing. Especially when it’s Fleet.”
“Unless  someone  put  it  there  after  you  cleaned  it.”  I  was  surprised.  “But  you  asked,  you
read…” I  let  my  sentence  trail  off.  I  wasn’t  about  to  elaborate  on  his  Ragkiril  abilities  in  the
middle of Blue Level.
“I  did.  But  only  resonances,  looking  for  fear,  evasiveness.  I  may  have  to  ask  again,  more
deeply this time. And I’ll need Ren there, though they’re not going to like it. I’ve never had to
question my crew in any way that they were aware they were being probed, read.”
“Do they trust Ren?” I noticed Marsh’s  attitude  was  friendly,  but  that  Gregor  and  Aubry
rarely talked to him. Dorsie, however, was clearly fond of Ren.
“They tolerate him. Except for Dorsie, of course, who vacillates between wanting  to  adopt
him and wanting to mate with him. Gregor and Aubry went flying out of their chairs like you
did, when I first brought Ren on board. I’m  so  used  to  having  him  around  that  I  sometimes
forget the effect he has on people.”
A shop  door  slid  open  and  two  people  exited  into  our  path.  We  stopped,  let  them  pass.
“How long have you known Ren?”
“Long time. Almost twenty years.”
“You met him when he was ten?”
“Excellent math skills. And cute, too. What  a  wife.  I’m  such  a  lucky  guy.”  He  gave  me  a
Sully-smirk.  Then  showed  off  his  quick  reflexes  as  he  danced  out  of  the  way  of  my  playful
punch  to  his  arm.  “I  thought  Ren  lived  with  the  Englarians.  And  his  Takan  family  in  the
compound.” “He was.” “What were you doing there?” He glanced down at me, a half smile on
his lips. “Studying to be a monk.”  My God. He  almost  was  Brother  Sudral.  “Whatever  made
you want to become  an Englarian monk?”  “It seemed appropriate. Shall  we  say,  I  stared  at  a

painting of the revered Abbot Eng one day, and it spoke to me.” “And what did  the  painting
tell you?” He stopped and gazed upward at a blinking sign. “Trouble’s Brewing. We serve only
the finest Imperial Ales.” This time my fist did connect with his arm. He laughed. “Come  on.
Let’s see if Dorsie left any money  in  my  account.”  The  pub  was  crowded.  “Where’s  Verno?”
Sully asked as we sat. Dorsie must have grabbed one of the last available tables. Her ale arrived
just as we deck-locked our chairs. We ordered a pitcher. “That is,” Sully said as the droid server
wheeled away, “if I have any money left.” “The way you play cards with  Ren,  you’re  worried
about me?” I knew Sully wasn’t. Dorsie was an  excellent  supplies  manager  and  a  sharp-eyed
guardian  of  her  budget.  I  also  wasn’t  far  off  in  my  initial  appraisal  of  her.  She  was  Marsh’s
aunt. “Verno ran into a friend. He’ll  be  here,”  Dorsie  said.  “How’s  Pops?”  “Not  growing  any
new hair.” “He have answers?” “Nothing we didn’t know.” She  nodded, looked at me. “Meet
Ilsa?” I nodded back.  “Lovely young woman.”  “Not  sure  what  that  means,  Chaz.  Did  she  or
didn’t she try to scratch your eyes out?” I shot a glance to Sully. “No list, huh?” “Honest. None.
Not a one.” He held his hands up. “List?” Dorsie asked as the droid returned with the pitcher
and two tall glasses.
“List  of  women.  It  was,  um,  a  point  of  discussion  between  Ross,”  I  said,  stressing  his
current name, “and myself.”
“Oh, Ilsa wanted to be on that list, real bad,” Dorsie said. She  took another sip of ale. “Bet
meeting Chaz here stopped that ambition.”
“Meeting my wife here stopped that ambition,” Sully said.
Dorsie’s lips hovered for a moment  over the rim of her glass.  “Hell’s  fat  ass.  For  a  second
there I thought you were serious. I thought you went and done it.”
Sully  grinned.  “Ilsa  thinks  I  did.  But  don’t  worry,  Dorsie.  You’ll  get  one  of  the  first
invitations to the wedding when they go out.”
Dorsie’s look switched to me.
I shook my head, turned my hands outward. “I have no idea what he’s talking about.”
Sully placed his fingers under my chin. “Did I forget to  ask  you,  my  angel?”  He  brushed
my mouth with a kiss just as Dorsie raised her hand in the air.
“Verno! Over here.”
I pulled back  from him and saw the tall Taka ducking  under  the  low  hanging  lights,  saw
heads turn. Saw a woman following behind him, in Englarian sand-gray robes, her face almost
covered by her hood.
“Sully-sir! Sorry to be late.” He put his hand on the woman’s arm,  guided  her  in  front  of
him. “Sister Berri’s been praying for you, since you left. Knew you wouldn’t mind if she came
to see how the Abbot has answered her prayers.”
The woman’s lips turned up slightly in a sweet smile that would make a saint jealous. “It’s
good to see you again. Truly, it is the blessings and providence of beloved Eng the Merciful that
you are all safe.” She  bowed her head slightly, then raised  her  eyes  to  me.  “You  must  be  the
brave Captain Chasidah I have heard so much about. Blessings of the hour, my sister, blessings
of the hour.”

Sister  Berri  Solaria.  The  inimitable  Berri  Solaria  who  Drogue  had  spoken  so  highly  of,
teacher of orphans whose  life  I’d  worn  for  two  days  on  Moabar  Station.  She  was,  I  realized,
everything I’d always thought an Englarian nun would be. Just a lot younger.
Her voice was gentle, melodic, sweet. Her face was thin, but delicate. She accepted the chair
Verno held out for her, sat as if a cloud  lowered  her  into  it.  She  pushed  her  hood  back.  Her
hair was a medium light brown, wound into a bun  at the nape of  her  neck.  Two  wispy  curls
had escaped, trailed down the sides of her face.
She looked freshly scrubbed, innocent. Angelic, lacking only halo. I doubted she’d crossed
her thirtieth birthday yet.
Sully rested his arm around the back of my chair, his fingers on my shoulder. “Sister Berri
Solaria. Blessings of the hour. I didn’t know you were so concerned about us.”
“There’s  not  a  moment  you  have  left  my  thoughts  and  prayers  these  past  few  weeks,  I
assure you, Mister Sullivan. Not one moment.”
I felt Sully flinch and knew why: Sullivan. That was the name of a dead man, a ghost and
not to be used, even in places like Dock Five.
“Sister,” he said but she’d leaned forward, her voice rising as she did so.
“I know that your appearance here again is truly a sign from the beloved Abbot.” She  fixed
Sully with an imploring gaze. “You must  permit  me  to  assist  you,  in  this  time  of  great  peril.
You must take me with you, to Marker!”
 
Chapter Twenty-Four
« ^ » 
Sister Solaria. Please. This is not the place to  discuss  things  like  that.”  Sully’s  voice  was  firm,
but kind. I relaxed because he did.
Verno angled his tall form into  the  seat  next  to  Berri,  put  his  large  hand  on  her  arm.  He
leaned toward her, his whispered words gravelly.
A pale pink rose on her cheeks. “Forgive me. Of course. In my fervor, I’m being indiscreet.
I humbly ask your pardon.”
“We’ll discuss this later.” Sully reached for the pitcher. “Grab the droid and get us another
glass if you can, Dorsie.”
Berri raised her index finger. “Oh, please, don’t go to any trouble. Brother Verno and I will
share.”
Verno  smiled.  A  Taka’s  smile  was  thin  lipped  and  showed  lots  of  teeth,  almost  feral.
Verno’s was clearly the besotted version of that.
I realized how much I didn’t know about Englarians. I based their use of ‘monk’  or ‘sister’

on  the  rather  nebulous  Celestialism  most  of  the  Empire  followed.  I  vaguely  thought  that
Englarian  monks,  like  Celestial  monks,  were  celibate.  That  was  why  Sully’s  admission  he’d
studied  to  take  the  cloth  so  surprised  me.  Celibacy  and  Sully  didn’t  belong  in  the  same
sentence. But then, he’d only studied Englarian theology. Not actually become a monk.
And Ren, well, Ren was a Stolorth. I didn’t know if they followed the same rules as human
monks.  I  knew  very  little  of  their  culture,  their  rituals,  other  than  what  the  Empire  fed  us.
Which was, it appeared, mostly erroneous.
But Ren, celibate? I thought of the body outlined by the tight shirt and slim fatigue pants.
What a waste if he was.
Sully’s voice was low in my ear. “That better be me you’re thinking about.”
Oh shit. Rainbows. I jabbed him with my elbow. “I’m a married woman. Behave.”
Dorsie asked Berri about Peyhar’s.
“We do have a small celebration here on Dock,  for our brothers  and  sisters.”  She  glanced
up  at  Verno.  “I’d  hoped,  well,  I’d  thought  Brother  Verno  was  staying  for  that.  Then  next  I
heard, your ship had left. I, that is, we missed you, Brother.”
Verno finally drew his gaze from Berri’s. “I felt guided to accompany my ship. I hope you
didn’t mind, Sully-sir.”
Sully-sir. Berri must have learned Sully’s  identity  from  Verno.  Drogue  had  also  known,  I
remembered. Evidently it wasn’t a secret in the Englarian community.
“It’s always a help to have you on board,” Sully said.
Verno was almost tireless, like most Takas. Double shifts were his usual mode. I could have
used him on the Meritorious. But Takas weren’t permitted to serve in the Imperial Fleet, other
than as security guards on starports. And  there  was  no  Meritorious  for  me  to  command  any
longer. I pushed away that small heartache.
We finished the pitcher, ordered  another.  Talked  about  life  on  the  rim,  about  ore-miners
and jump-jockeys,  the main populace of  Dock  Five.  About  pubs  that  had  been  here  forever,
about pubs that lasted a week, and closed. About a barge that had had a systems foul-up and
rammed  the  Dock  instead  of  pulling  away  two  weeks  ago.  For  a  moment  that  peaked  my
interest. But it turned out the pilot was more fouled-up than the systems. Honeylace.
We finished the second pitcher and stood. Dorsie needed to head back,  with  supplies  due
in. Sister Berri touched my arm. “I would be honored to show you our small temple.”
I caught Sully’s slight nod. “I’d like that. Thank you.”
“Drogue sends his blessings,” Sully added as we emerged into the corridor.
“Guardian Drogue. A hardworking man, dedicated to the church. He’s out at Moabar now,
I hear. I didn’t realize you knew him.”
“I met him, many years ago, at Cal’fedar.”
“Cal’fedar. Ah, yes, he ran the Purity Project. Did you work on a supply ship in Dafir?”

“I trained under Drogue, as a novitiate.”
“You aspired to take the robe?” Berri regarded him  in  undisguised  surprise  that  mirrored
my own, earlier.
“Yes.”
We  were  still  walking  along  B.L.  4,  heading  toward  the  Tower,  the  taller  portion  of  the
Dock.  Sully’s admission had clearly startled Berri. She  stopped walking, seemed to realize she
shouldn’t have, and quickened her steps. “Well. Praise the stars. Do you ever regret not taking
the robe?”
“There have been times I regret renouncing it. Though not lately,” he added.
This time I was shocked. I’d assumed by what he said earlier he’d studied, but never taken
his vows. Never become a real pray-every-day member of the clergy.
“Close your mouth, Chaz.” He grabbed my neck in an affectionate headlock, kissed the top
of my head.
Berri  appeared  equally  as  flustered,  saying  nothing  until  we  stopped  at  the  next  bank  of
lifts. As usual, the lines were long. “Verno never told me you took the robe. Would you mind if
I ask what name you took?”
“Sudral.”
Berri’s  eyes  brightened.  “The  name  of  the  Immaculate  Cloak.  That  which  bound  the
winged demons, nullified their vile energies. Excellent choice. That shall be the  subject  of  my
meditation tonight. Thank you, Brother.”
We stepped into the lift with Berri blessing everyone left and right.
 
The Temple was about the size of the one on  Moabar,  but  round,  rather  than  square.  No
services were underway. A few Takans, and several humans, I noted with surprise, sat silently,
in  meditation.  Cloying  incense  that  I  remembered  well  drifted  from  two  burners  dangling
from the ceiling.
The raised platform was curved, with the same back-lit arch-and-stave on the wall  behind
it. A series of small paintings ran down the left wall. I followed Berri.
She  stopped  at  the  first  painting,  touched  my  elbow,  whispered.  “Here,  of  course,  is  the
beloved  Abbot,  in  meditation  to  the  stars.  And  this  next  one  shows  his  first  battle  with  a
soul-stealer, in the sacred Valley of the Tunnels.” A few more steps and a painting similar to the
one  in  Moabar.  The  winged  demon  with  the  stave  impaled  in  his  back.  This  one’s  face  was
upturned, though, and had an uncanny resemblance to a screaming jukor.
“This last shows the purity process.”
Another soul-stealer, kneeling, back  arched, wings drooping, and the Abbot’s shimmering
silver cloak partially draped over his form. The long sword in the Abbot’s grip was just about
to connect with the demon’s neck.

“That looks like beheading, not purity.”
“Of course.” Berri’s gaze was serene. “The only way to purify the  vileness  is  to  disconnect
the creatures’ filthy minds from their bodies while they are in their true form. The cloak, you
see,  constrains  their  shape-shifting  powers.  The  holy  sword,  the  boru  karn,  completes  the
process.”
Sully was talking to Verno at the entrance to the Temple. So  he didn’t hear Berri’s  words,
didn’t see me hesitate, lose my step, almost as she had earlier.
Boru karn. The Abbot’s holy sword of purity. Sudral. The Abbot’s holy cloak of purity.
And a poet mercenary pirate smuggler lover monk. Who was also a Ragkiril.
I didn’t need any more questions  right  now.  But  they  hovered  again,  beating  their  wings
like little frenzied demons in my brain.
 
It  wasn’t  the  fifteen  minutes  of  Berri’s  impassioned  pleadings  in  the  Temple  office  that
swayed Sully into agreeing she could come with  us  to  Marker.  It  was  the  fact  she  was  going
there, anyway. Legitimately. Englarians were opening a Temple in Marker to service the Takan
shipyard workers.
“Providential,” Verno said, grinning.
We could toss our plans for a surreptitious infiltration of the Fleet yards. We could walk in,
unchallenged, bearing the arch-and-stave.
“I’m surprised Drogue didn’t mention the new Temple,” Sully commented to her.
“Not surprising at all. The Marker Temple has been my project now for almost two years.
But it’s in-system, under Guardian Lon. Moabar operates under our out-system venue.”
“Sister Berri’s done much fundraising, has been very dedicated,” Verno added. “I’d always
heard  of  the  wonderful  Sister  Berri  Solaria.  But  until  we  met,  six  months  ago,  I  didn’t
understand how very hard she’s worked for this.”
“The Abbot guides me in his mercy, in all that I do,” she said sedately. But she blushed.
Verno  stayed  behind  to  help  Berri  finish  her  duties.  Sully  wanted  to  spend  a  few  more
hours on Dock, then head out. He never spent more than ten hours, he told me as we headed
for the lifts, in any one stationary location, unless his ship was in for repairs. We’d already been
on Dock for six.
“Escalator?” he asked, seeing the lines.
I  nodded,  walked  silently  for  a  few  steps,  waiting  for  the  crowd  around  us  to  pass.
Pedestrian traffic on Dock seemed to come and go in groups.
A cluster of female techs passed us by, but not without a few blatantly appreciative stares at
Sully.
He grinned when I looked back at him. He’d seen the women, and me watching them.  No
doubt he as well saw, and felt, my frown.

“Sully…”
“Umm?”
“How long were you a monk?”
A few more steps, and he was still grinning. “This surprises you, doesn’t it?”
He knew damn well it did. He just wanted to hear me admit it. “I know you. Intimately. So
yes.” I paused. “How long?”
“Eight  years,  three  months.  Do  you  want  weeks,  days?”  He  asked  the  question  over  his
shoulder, turning, because I’d stopped in the middle of the corridor.
“Eight years.”
“Eight years, three months.” He thought for a moment.  “Two weeks, four days? Or was it
three weeks, four days?”
“If you’re lying to me about this—”
“I never lie.”
No. He just told me bits and pieces. “Why didn’t you tell me before this?”
He stepped closer. “I’m not exactly comfortable with much  of my past. I think  you  know
that,” he said softly. “Plus, I didn’t think it was important.”
“It’s not.” We started walking again. “It’s just that I sometimes wonder if I’m ever going to
figure you out.”
“I  hope  not,”  he  said  with  a  wicked  Sully-grin.  He  took  my  hand  and  sent  spirals  of
warmth up my arm.
We went to a pub on B.L. 2. A long, narrow bar with, I was surprised to see, a Stolorth male
behind  it.  He  had  bright,  clear,  silver  eyes.  In  spite  of  everything  I  knew  about  Ren,  about
Ragkirils, a shudder went up my spine.
Sully  motioned  me  to  a  barstool  then  took  the  one  next  to  mine,  unlatching  it  from  the
deck lock. He pulled his close, draping his arm over my shoulder.
“Two brown ales, Trel.” He nodded to the bartender.
Like Ren, Trel’s bluish hair was long, braided. But it was thin, his hairline receded back.  His
lean features lacked Ren’s elegance, and so appeared harsh.
“Ross Winthrop,” Trel answered. “Didn’t expect to see you so soon.”
“Didn’t expect to see me so soon, or didn’t expect to see me alive?”
Trel  glanced  at  me.  Reading  me,  that  much  I  was  sure.  I  was  in  Fleet-Captain  mode,
keeping my emotions flat. If  he  were  a  Ragkir  or  a  Ragkiril  I  couldn’t  tell.  Sully,  I  was  sure,
could.  The  fact  that  Trel  called  him  “Ross  Winthrop”  told  me  it  was  likely  he  was  a  basic
empath, or at best, a Ragkir. Or else he’d know Sully lied about his identity.
The Stolorth shrugged at Sully’s question and glanced at me again.

“My wife, Trel. Talk to her as you’d talk to me.”
Trel raised one eyebrow. “Newly married.”
“Very.”
Trel  relaxed  a  bit,  his  mouth  curving  into  a  half-smile.  “She’s  still  fighting  that  leash,
Winthrop. You may not know that, but you know I can tell.”
Sully’s eyes widened in innocent distress. “Chaz. You told me you wanted to get married.”
Trel had picked up on my inadvertent flinch when Sully had called me his wife. I knew he
was kidding, using it as a cover for a reason. But it still made me feel funny inside. “I did. I do.
It’s just that—”
“Bad first marriage.” Sully gave Trel a knowing look. “At least, I hope that’s what it is.”
“I can find out for you.” He held out his webbed hand toward me. I jerked backward.
Trel  seemed  pleased.  Not  like  Ren,  who  didn’t  want  to  hurt,  didn’t  want  to  cause
discomfort. Trel seemed to like the fact I was afraid of him. “So why are you surprised  to  see
me, old friend?” Sully moved back to the original conversation. “Who did I so piss off last time
I was here that they threatened to come after me?” “Besides Junior and the twelve thousand he
lost to you in cards?” Before I could stop them, the words were out of my mouth.  “You won at
cards?” I was rewarded with another affronted look. “Don’t know your new husband too well,
do you?” Trel set a tall ale in front  of  me,  and  one  in  front  of  Sully.  “Took  Junior  for  twelve
thousand last time he was in. Took Junior and Eduardo for twenty a few  months  before  that.
And  those  are  only  the  big  games  that  I  know  about.”  “Amazing,”  I  said.  “Thank  you,  my
angel.” His finger traced small circles on my shoulder. “So Junior said he was going to hunt me
down?” “Not that I heard.” “Then who’s asking questions about me?” Trel ran his wide hand
over his head. “Running a little low on  supplies  these  days.”  Sully  pulled  out  his  thin  comm
pad  from  the  front  pocket  of  his  jacket,  tapped  it  on.  “Your  man  signed  for  a  playbox  two
hours ago. You might want to check your back room. We’ll wait. Ale’s cold.” Trel straightened,
nodded and left. Playbox. Smuggler’s term for a couple of containers of honeylace. “He knows
Newlin?” I asked quietly but with obvious sarcasm. I’d just participated in an illegal drug sale
with my new husband. “No. But I’m sure they could be good friends.” I leaned toward him as
if seeking a kiss. “Ragkir?” I breathed the word against his lips. He kissed me, shaking his head
in a small negative movement, then pulled back slightly.
“Base level empath. Not to worry. I’ve got you covered.” He tickled my  shoulder  with  his
fingers again.
Trel came back,  looking satisfied. Then his smile  faded.  He  leaned  his  elbows  on  the  bar,
brought his face close to Sully’s. There were only two other patrons, one passed  out  cold  at  a
table near the door, and one very close to it at the far end of the  bar.  I  doubted  either  would
hear Trel if he shouted.
“Someone’s been asking about you. Not by  name.  Description.  And  not  in  here.  But  I’ve
heard.”  “Describe  him.”  “Human.  Shorter  than  you.  Light  hair,  eyes.  Beard.  Looks  like  a
hundred other jump-jockeys on Dock except he tries to act quiet, stupid. And he’s not. He’s a
fighter. Wears his shirts extra big, to cover the muscles. He can move real fast when he wants
to. I watched him, for awhile. He was talking to Ilsa.”

“Who else did he talk to?”
“Junior told him nothing. Don’t know who else.”
“How long ago?”
Trel thought. “I didn’t notice him until Junior said  something,  and  that  was  the  day  after
your ship left last time. But when I saw him, that’s when I remembered  seeing him with  Ilsa.
And you were still here because that’s the night you took Junior for the twelve thousand.”
“He was here while I was? While my ship was still in dock?”
Trel nodded. “At Pops you were, right?”
“He stayed, two, three days, after the Echo left?”
But Sully and Ren, I knew, left on Milo’s ship. While the man  hunting  Sully  watched  the
Boru Karn. While Pops’s daughter, Ilsa, who wanted to be on Sully’s list of women, had access
to the Boru Karn, as one of Pops’s employees. Would Marsh or Gregor question her appearance
at the docks? Would they stop her if she tried to get onboard, perhaps even offer her a tour of
the ship, of their cabins? Or had she been a guest in Sully’s  cabin  before,  and  knew  her  way
around?
Did she have the skills to initiate a worm program? Or did she even need to get onboard?
She had access to any parts going into the Karn. She  had access to the ship’s schematics in her
father’s databases.
Sully’s  firm  grip  on  my  arm  halted  my  thoughts.  Shit.  Trel  was  an  empath.  I’d
momentarily  forgotten  that.  I  tamped  down  my  speculations  and  sipped  my  ale.  Sully
wrapped up the  conversation.  I  accepted  Trel’s  congratulations  like  the  blushing  bride  I  was
supposed to be and walked out, still snugged against him.
“Sorry,” I said softly. “Sorry. Sorry.” I was a Fleet officer. I knew better. But there were no
regs against speculating in Fleet. “Once I grabbed what he was saying, I couldn’t stop analyzing
it.”
He stepped out of the flow of traffic to wrap his arms around me. “Your mind is like a little
whirlwind,  do  you  know  that?  Everything  gets  sucked  in,  sorted,  flung  around,  resorted,
categorized.”
“Sorry.”
“Don’t be. It was… fascinating.” He paused. “You’re not angry with me?”
Why  would  I—?  Because  he’d  been  in  my  mind.  Watching  it.  Reading  my  thoughts.
Watching me sort them,  fling  them  around.  Doing  what  I’d  told  him  not  to.  But  then  I  had
rescinded that order. “No. You had to do that, because of Trel, is that right?”
“You don’t know how to block your thoughts, your emotions. Trel’s abilities, as long as he’s
not touching you, are about on the level of Ren’s. I had to put up a temporary wall.”
I looked up at his infinitely dark eyes. “I didn’t even know.”
“Couldn’t tell?”

“No.”
“Neither could Tessa.”
A worry, one I still held onto. Young Tessa. Her mind in shreds, Philip had said.
Philip had lied. Or else, someone had lied to Philip.
I closed my eyes, releasing the worry from my mental duro-hard, let it go. Then wondered
again why I thought Sully had told me  nothing  about  himself.  He  was,  he’d  been  telling  me
volumes. I just didn’t know how to listen. “Thank you,” I said softly.
“You’re welcome, angel. Now, let’s get moving. I’ve got to talk to Gregor and Marsh, again.
Ask them some rather direct questions about Ilsa. Then we’ve got to talk to Ren. Tell him Lazlo
was on Dock, asking questions.”
“Lazlo?”
“Lazlo. A quiet but not stupid man  with  a  beard.  And  a  muscular  build  he  doesn’t  want
anyone to notice. My cousin Hayden’s personal bodyguard.”
 
Chapter Twenty-Five
« ^ » 
I  met  Ren  in  the  corridor  as  he  left  the  ready-room,  his  usual  peaceful  demeanor  clearly
troubled. He looked rumpled, his braid unraveling as if he’d been running his fingers through
his hair. He’d been in there with Sully and Marsh, then Aubry and then Gregor, for almost two
hours.
I’d  been  in  the  bridge  hatchway  a  half  hour  earlier  when  Gregor  had  barged  out  of  the
room  and  strode  angrily  down  the  corridor,  his  “goddamned  filthy  mind  fucker”  litany
echoing as he headed for his cabin.
His comment, I knew, had been aimed at Ren. No one knew Sully was the one really doing
the probing.
I touched Ren’s arm. “Want me to get you a mug of hot tea?”
“Please. It would be much appreciated.”
I brought it to his cabin. He was in one of the padded chairs next to the couch, elbows on
his knees, hands clasped. I put the tea on the low table in front of him and went in search of his
comb.
He sipped it as I perched on the arm of  his  chair,  untied  his  braid  and  began  combing  it
out. Slowly, his shoulders relaxed, his breathing became less shallow, constricted.
“Since everyone left the room still alive, I gather none of them  helped Ilsa, or this Lazlo, set
a worm into the Karn.”

Ren  sighed.  “Both  Gregor  and  Aubry  knew  Ilsa  came  on  board.  Neither  remembered
seeing Lazlo with her. Neither say Ilsa was left alone long enough to do any harm, but she was
on the bridge. She did bring some grid boards. And as she’d been on this ship before…”
My hands hesitated only slightly, but he caught it.
“Not that way, Chasidah. She has never been Sully’s lover, though not for lack of effort on
her part. But she knows Marsh from when he worked on another ship.”
“Thanks.” I gave him a grin he couldn’t  see  and  tugged  on  his  braid  the  way  Sully  often
tugged on mine.
“Anyway, as she’s Pops’s daughter, her intentions, her allegiances were never in question.”
“Until now.”
“Until now.”
“Did she program a worm?”
“I  don’t  know.  Sully  doesn’t  know.  The  grid  board  she  brought  was  heavily  damaged
during the systems failure.”
“Is Sully going  to  talk  to  her?”  The  thought  of  Sully  probing  Ilsa’s  mind,  even  with  Ren
there, didn’t sit well with me. Jealous? Me? Hell, yes. I knew exactly the kind of thoughts she’d
be sending him, draped in the most intimate, seductive colors she could muster.
“Lazlo’s  appearance  interests  him  more.  Whatever  Ilsa  did,  if  anything,  was  more  than
likely at Lazlo’s instigation. It’s Lazlo,  or  really  Burke,  we  must  be  concerned  about.  Ilsa  was
simply  a  means,  a  method.  It’s  also  quite  possible  she’s  not  even  aware  she  did  anything
wrong.”
I knew that. Someone, posing as a parts supplier, could have presented her with a new and
improved grid. Or optic-feed. Or sensor-link. And she’d put it on the Karn. At that point, she
was still trying to get into Sully’s bed. Not be a mourner at his funeral.
I finished his braid, retied the thin, leather band at the bottom. “Better?”
He reached back, ran his hand down its smooth length. “Much.”
“And you? I think you’re wearing your worry colors.”
He  leaned  back  against  the  cushion  and  looked  up  at  me  with  his  clouded  silver  eyes.  I
didn’t  think  Gregor  had  been  the  only  one  emitting  anger,  perhaps  even  hatred,  at  being
probed empathically. Ren had felt it, taken it all, directed at himself. For Sully’s sake.
“Things  will  be  a  bit  tense  for  awhile.  They  all  felt  safe,  thought  my  blindness  protected
them. Now, that has changed. They feel their privacy is compromised.” He hesitated. “Gregor
is threatening to leave, to stay on Dock Five.”
“Leave?”  Gregor  knew  that  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan  was  alive,  posing  as  Ross  Winthrop.
Gregor  knew  that  Chaz  Bergren  was  no  longer  on  Moabar.  And  that  we  were  headed  for
Marker, with the intention of destroying the Imperial Fleet shipyards.
Gregor definitely knew too much.

“Wasn’t  there  any  way  you  could  have  accomplished  the  same  results,  reading  them,
without their knowledge?” I hadn’t felt Sully  slip  into  my  mind,  my  thoughts  at  all  in  Trel’s
bar.
“He’d  already  done  that,  the  first  time  he  talked  to  them.  But  for  a  deep  mind  probe,
physical contact is sometimes necessary. More so because Sully couldn’t touch them,  without
giving away what he is. The contact had to come through me, my hand on their arm. For that
reason, too, it was still an inaccurate link.”
“No one caught the fact that you were touching Sully, too?” I would have. I saw it in Sully’s
cabin back at the Moabar Temple. I just didn’t know I was seeing them link at that time.
“I wasn’t touching Sully. Ours was purely a mind link.”
“You  just  said  a  deeper  probe  needs  physical  contact.  How  could  Sully  read  without
touching someone?”
Ren hesitated. “Sully is a very high  level  Ragkiril.  He  can  work  through  another’s  link,  if
necessary. Physical contact clarifies and enhances the link.”
I knew  there  were  Ragkir  and  Ragkiril.  And  thought  that  was  all  there  was.  “There  are
additional levels of Ragkiril?”
“In both Ragkir and Ragkiril, yes. Sully told me he explained the differences to you.”
“It’s  not  sinking  in,  I  guess.  It’s  not  something  I’m  used  to  comprehending.  I  do  know
some Ragkirils can heal.”
“For which I am forever grateful.”  Ren  smiled  wistfully.  “I  have  yet  so  much  to  learn,  so
much  to  experience.  I  wasn’t  ready  to  leave  this  existence  yet.”  He  tilted  his  face.  His  voice
became softer, rain trickling over maiisar blossoms, ruffled by the breezes. “I would miss Sully.
And I would miss you, Chasidah. You have become very precious to me.”
I kissed him lightly on the forehead. “If Dorsie doesn’t adopt you, I will.”
He  smiled,  almost  shyly,  flustered.  Very  un-Ren.  “So,  to  continue  with  your  lesson,  yes,
there  are  different  levels.  Both  with  Ragkir  and  Ragkiril.  You  met  Trel,  I  know.  His  Ragkir
abilities  are  weak.  He  must  be  physically  close  to  someone,  or  touching  them  to  read
empathically. Sully is a high level Ragkiril. Physical contact and proximity enhance his abilities,
yes. But he can work outside of those parameters.”
I thought for a moment. And that thought contained a five angel of heart-stars cards. “Can
a high level Ragkiril manipulate matter?”
“What has he said when you’ve asked him this question?”
“I haven’t asked. It just occurred to me.” It also occurred to me that Ren’s question was, in
itself,  an  affirmative.  Or  else  he  would’ve  simply  said  ‘no.’  Almost  mind-boggling.  Matter
manipulation. That would explain his wins in cards on Dock  Five. And his losses to Ren, who
would catch such ‘tricks.’ “You know how he feels about questions, Ren. There are times he’s
willing to talk. There are times, I think, it’s just too painful.”
“The pain comes from a fear of rejection. I think you know this.”

“Mistakes can be made through ignorance, lack of information,” I countered.
“He knows this, too. I can’t find that balance for you. That’s something you and Sully must
find for yourselves.”
I crossed my arms over my chest. “How can I adopt you, act like your mother, when most
of the time you sound so much wiser than I do?”
“I am more than honored just to be considered your  friend.  Besides,  it  would  pain  me  to
know that you and Dorsie would be fighting over me.”
A grin. A half-smirk. I recognized it. Ren had his own Sully-grin.
I punched him playfully on the shoulder. “You’ve been hanging around Sullivan too much,
you know that?”
 
Sully wasn’t in our cabin or the ready-room. When I asked Marsh, on duty on the bridge,
where Sully was, he only shrugged. His eyes wouldn’t meet mine.
“Did he go back on Dock?”
Marsh  glanced  at  the  console.  The  Karn  was  running  through  the  usual  pre-departure
systems checks, with two hours to go. “He didn’t key out at the airlock, no.”
I started to turn, hesitated. “Marsh, Ren’s okay. Don’t judge him like that.”
Something hard flitted across Marsh’s features. “Sure.”
“I’ve been through it, too, a mind scan. You know Sully wouldn’t have asked him to do it if
it weren’t absolutely necessary.”
“It wasn’t necessary. Not with me. Dorsie and I’ve been with him  for  too  long.  That’s  the
only reason I’m still sitting here. For Sully. Not for that mind-fucker.”
I remembered that prejudice. I used to have it. It seemed like another lifetime ago.
I went down a deck. Aubry was in engineering, alone.  The  gym  was  empty.  Crew  cabins
came  after  that,  but  I  didn’t  bother  checking  them.  I  could  hear  voices-loud,  angry-coming
from Dorsie’s mess hall and galley.
“It was none of his fucking business. I told you. You want to know something, you ask. You
don’t like my answer, you tell me to hit the docks. That’s the only way I’ve ever worked.”
“You know it was necessary.”
“I know you suddenly changed the rules. And I don’t like these new ones.”
I hesitated in the doorway. Gregor straddled a chair, his wide hands gripping the back.  He
was  in  profile  to  me  and  didn’t  see  me.  But  Dorsie,  next  to  him,  did,  though  she  didn’t
acknowledge my presence.  She  sat,  arms  across  her  chest,  her  face  sullen.  Her  gaze  traveled
disinterestedly over me.
Sully stood on the other side of the table, hands shoved into his pockets. His mouth  was a

tight line. “I told you. No one walks off this ship right now. I can’t risk it.”
“And I can’t risk having my brains fried by some mind-fucker  who thinks maybe I’m not
telling the truth. Maybe he doesn’t like the way I answer a question. Maybe he doesn’t like the
way I scratch my ass.” Gregor jabbed a finger at Sully. “I saw these fuckers during  the  war.  I
worked interrogation security. I know what they do!”
Gregor suddenly turned, saw me. “You didn’t turn him loose on her, did you?”
“He did.” I stepped into the mess hall, spoke before Sully could.
Gregor’s  eyes  glittered  with  anger.  “I  didn’t  see  you  get  called  into  the  ready  room  for  a
little private chat with our favorite Stolorth.”
“Chaz went through a mind scan right after  it  happened.”  Sully  took  a  step  closer  to  the
table. “That’s how I knew she didn’t program a worm into the datapad.”
“You found one there!” Gregor challenged.
“I  found  traces  of  what  a  worm  could  do.  Which  could  be  the  residue  of  the  program
causing  the  sabotage.  Or  it  could  be  the  pad  taking  the  same  damage  we  did  since  it  was
hooked into the hologrid when the Karn’s systems went down.”
I hadn’t thought of that. The damage could’ve come from an upload or a download.
“Further—” Sully leaned  his  palms  flat  against  the  table,  “—Chaz  wasn’t  on  board  when
this ship was at Pops’s  for  repair.  Chaz  didn’t  know  Ilsa.  And  she  sure  as  hell  doesn’t  know
Lazlo.”
Gregor’s eyes narrowed. “Some mind-fucker tell you that?”
Sully nodded  slowly.  “Some  mind-fucker  told  me  that.”  He  straightened  and  shoved  his
hands back into his pockets.
I headed for the table on Sully’s left while he argued with  Gregor.  There  was  undisguised
loathing on Gregor’s face. Gregor hated Ren. And didn’t realize that, by doing so, he also hated,
and condemned, Sully.
“This is what it comes down to,” Gregor said heatedly. “You said you want me to stay. Fine.
But only if that mind-fucker leaves.”
“Ren stays. You stay. There are no options here.”
Gregor  studied  Sully  as  if  measuring  him  up.  Perhaps  remembering  the  hand  that  had
pinned him to the pilot’s chair. “Then I want him locked in the brig. Aubry agrees with me. So
does Marsh.”
“Unacceptable.”
I recognized that word, that tone. Sully was losing patience.
“Then I walk. We all walk.”
His mouth tight, Sully asked, “Dorsie?”

I couldn’t  believe  Dorsie  would  back  Gregor.  She  was  friends  with  Ren,  teased  him.  But
she’d  been  silent  since  I  arrived.  I  hadn’t  heard  her  voice  in  the  corridor.  And  she  hadn’t
seemed pleased to see me when I’d walked in.
If Dorsie left, Ren would be hurt. Terribly hurt.
“You told us he couldn’t do those things.” Her voice was strained.
“The  fact  that  he  can,  this  is  more  important  than  everything  else  he  is?”  Sully’s  voice
softened.  I  knew  he  wasn’t  only  asking  about  Ren.  “Because  of  something  he  can’t  change
about himself, something he was born to be, you condemn him?”
Dorsie knotted her hands together, her gaze on the movement of her fingers.
“Dorsie,” I said. “Sully asked Ren for his help in this. It  wasn’t  as  if  Ren  just  decided  one
day to go rummaging around in your thoughts. Or Gregor’s. Or mine.”
“But he could have,” Gregor put in, bitterly. “He could have. Anytime in the past. Anytime
he wants to. That’s what he is, a mind-fucker.  You’re Fleet, Bergren. You know what they can
do.”
The  Grizni  flashed  into  my  hand.  I  angled  it  at  Gregor.  “I  could  also  have  killed  you,
anytime in the past few weeks. Anytime in the past few hours. That’s part of what I am. But it’s
not the only thing I am.”
I slapped  the  Grizni  back  around  my  wrist  and  looked  at  Dorsie  again.  “Is  anyone  here
ready to let go of their childish fears and think about the larger issues? The Empire is breeding
jukors again. And someone is trying to kill us all because we want to stop that. That scares me
one hell of a lot more than a blind empath.”
“It’s going to take some getting used to,” Dorsie said uncertainly, after a moment.  “But I’m
willing to try.”
Gregor slammed his hand on the back  of his chair, shoved himself to his feet. “Fools, all of
you.” He glared at Dorsie, at me, then finally at Sully. “You don’t know what they can do. I do.
Destroying minds is nothing. They can melt your skin right off your body.  Without  touching
you. They can take this, this chair.” He wrenched it  from  the  decklock.  “Make  it  into  a  laser
rifle.  Kill  you  with  it.  Or  worse.  Into  a  nightmare,  some  image  they  pull  from  your  mind.
Torture you with it.”
He pushed it aside,  roughly.  It  fell  sideways,  clanged  against  the  decking.  “And  they  can
also,” he said, as silence descended, “change what they look like. I’ve seen what they really look
like.” This last he aimed at Dorsie, then spun on his heels, stalked for the door.
He stopped just short of the corridor and turned. “You know those jukors you’re so anxious
to kill? Ugly things, aren’t they?” He threw one more hard look at Dorsie. “Not at all like your
blue-haired pretty boy.” He paused. “Or are they?”
He strode down the corridor, his boot steps as hard and jarring as his words.
Dorsie’s  brow  furrowed.  Troubled.  Worried.  Frightened.  I  wanted  to  tell  her  that  Gregor
had  exaggerated,  misusing  the  old  legends  about  soul-stealers,  mythical  shape-shifters,  but
Sully spoke first.

“Ren’s not a shape-shifter.” Sully’s voice was kind yet firm. “He can’t—”
Intraship trilled, echoing in the corridor. The sound halted Sully’s words.
Dorsie stood, reached for the comm panel on the counter behind her. “Galley. Dorsie.” Her
voice was flat, lacking its usual buoyancy.
“He’s there?” It was Marsh, looking for Sully.
“Yes.”
“Tell him Verno’s on board. With that Sister woman.”
“Acknowledged,” Sully said, loud enough for Marsh to hear him.
“We’ve got clearance coming through, fifteen minutes. Any changes?”
I knew he meant more than just departure instructions. He wanted to know if anyone was
leaving the crew. Or being confined to the brig.
“Confirm our slot, Marsh. Fifteen minutes. I’ll be on the bridge in five.”
 
Chapter Twenty-Six
« ^ » 
Sully. Worried and troubled, anger simmering just below the surface. Sully. Afraid.
I don’t  have  a  grain  of  empathic  ability  in  my  body.  But  I  knew  Sully,  knew  the  dark,
haunted look in his eyes as he glanced at me, then headed for the door.
I hesitated only long enough to  reach  for  Dorsie,  squeeze  the  hand  she  held  out  to  me.  I
wished I knew how to send those warm, comforting spirals Ren could. Sully could.
I sprinted for the corridor and caught up with him at the stairs. When I  slipped  my  hand
into his, his skin was cold.
“Hold up for a few minutes. Marsh knows the routine. Verno will be there.”
He  took  his  foot  off  the  stair  tread  and  leaned  wearily  against  the  stairwell  wall.  He  was
distant,  nothing  coming  through  his  touch  but  a  deep  chill.  A  defensive  mechanism.  I
recognized it. He was shutting himself off from all the emotions churning through the ship.
He didn’t pull me into his arms as he had a few hours ago. But he didn’t let go, didn’t push
me away either.
“They’re staying,” I told him. “Forget about anything else that was said.”
“I can’t.”
“You have to. Gregor’s always going to find something—”
“Not Gregor. Dorsie. She was ready to walk out.”

“She was afraid.”
“Of Ren. She was the only one who would even talk to him, when I brought him on board
two years ago. She  was the only one who’d sit at a table with him. Share a meal, a drink with
him. Laugh with him. Be his friend.” He shoved himself away from the wall. “I just destroyed
that. He doesn’t know, yet, but he’ll sense it. Her rejection is going to scar him, deeply.”
“I’m sure he’s faced that before,” I said softly.
His eyes were hard, infinite. “She’s not rejecting him because of what he is. She’s rejecting
him, because of me. Because of what I am.” His voice suddenly rasped. “How can I call myself
his friend, and permit that?”
Intraship trilled again in the corridors. “Ten minutes to push-back, Sully-sir.”
“Fuck.” Sully yanked his hand from mine and pounded up the stairs.
 
Aux thrusters fired, angling us away. The Boru Karn  slid  away  from  Dock  Five,  sublights
on idle but ready, bridge crew at stations but quiet, thinking,  fearing,  wishing,  hoping…  Not
Ren. Ren was in his quarters until things calmed down. Not Gregor, even though he was first
pilot. Marsh sat his shift, for now. Sully sat nowhere, not at engineering, not at any one  place
on the bridge but walked, pacing, making small, meaningless adjustments on the boards.
Verno sat at helm, grinning, singing an Englarian  hymn  in  his  gravelly  voice,  off  key.  All
was well with his world. Sister Berri Solaria was on board, ensconced in the other bedroom in
Dorsie’s suite.
I sat at communications, flirted with departure control as if nothing were wrong, as if Sully
weren’t mired in his own personal Hell, a ghost who  suddenly  realized  his  very  transparency
placed those who stood behind him at risk.
We  hit  outer  beacon,  downloaded  the  newsbanks,  the  advisories,  the  gossip.  Everything
that had happened in the past thirty minutes since we’d left Dock Five.
Verno keyed in the course change and headed for the inner lanes. For Marker.
Three  days.  Three  days  until  we  could  save  the  universe  from  the  virulent  infection  of
jukors. Three days to try to work some healing miracles on board.
Sully. Ren. Nothing was dearer to me right now. Not even my own life.
 
Sully left the bridge when we hit the lanes. Work to do, he announced, on the hologrid in
the ready room. I tried to catch his glance. His gaze swept over me then turned away. I knew
he needed some time alone. I gave it to him.
Aubry  wandered  in  early.  I  let  him  take  communications  and  went  down  to  the  galley
again. I didn’t know what to say to Dorsie, no. I knew a hundred things I could say to Dorsie
though it wasn’t my place to do so. But I wanted to tell her I’d been afraid  of  Ren,  once,  too.
That I’d learned to see beyond that.

She was stacking supplies in a back room and straightened when I came in.
“Got a minute?” I motioned to the tables back in the mess hall.
Her  fists  clenched,  not  in  anger,  I  could  tell,  but  indecision.  She  didn’t  know  if  she  was
ready to talk about this. Yet.
“It’ll make you feel better,” I told her.
I told her more as we sat over tea we never drank. How I’d bolted  out  of  my  chair  at  the
monastery, uncoiled my dagger when I saw Ren. How I’d watched him  on  the  Lucky  Seven.
How he’d diverted the M.O.C. officer’s attention on station. How he’d gone to the dock to find
out what happened to Milo. And how his calm presence pervaded it all.
I told her I’d slept in a cot in Ren’s cabin, knowing he was an empath,  knowing  he  could
read me. And that he’d read my sadness, early in the morning. Tried to ease my pain. Tried to
assuage my fears. And tenderly, gently, ever-so-cautiously touched my face because he wanted
to see a human woman.
When I’d fought with Sully, Ren had brought me tea, not questions or recriminations.
When I’d rejected Sully—though I didn’t tell her why—Ren made me understand the pain
my rejection had caused.
And Ren had sent me rainbows. That I did explain. His touch could send rainbows. Warm
ones, loving ones, accepting ones.
She opened her hands to stare at her palms. “Once or twice, maybe. I remember  that. But I
didn’t understand what it was.”
“He has a gift. Gregor may call it a curse, but he  doesn’t  know  what  he’s  talking  about.  I
know Ren. It’s a gift. He cares very much for your friendship, Dorsie.”
“Gregor said he, they look like jukors. They can change what they look like.”
“I’ve  spent  most  of  my  life  in  Fleet  and  have  never  seen  anything  proving  shape-shifters
exist. If they did, believe me, someone  in  Fleet  would  know.  And  we’d  have  been  trained  to
deal with that.”
She sat, shaking her head, then finally took a sip of her tea. “Thank you. You’ve given me
something to think about.” She stood. “I’ve got to finish inventory.”
 
Sister Berri was just coming through her cabin doorway when I passed by. Dorsie’s suite, as
well Verno’s, and the one Marsh and Aubry shared, were on this deck. Sully’s cabin, Ren’s and
Gregor’s, as first pilot, were one deck up, behind the bridge.
Berri looked flushed, excited.
“All settled in?” I asked her.
“Praise the stars, yes. Such luxury. My own bathroom. I shall feel quite spoiled.”
“If you need anything, let me or Dorsie know. Have  you  met  Dorsie?”  I  realized,  with  all

the turmoil and Berri’s late entry, she might not have.
She  shook her head, confirming my supposition. “Verno told me many  nice  things  about
her.”
“She’s  in  the  galley,  working  inventory.”  I  pointed  down  the  corridor.  “She  might  like
some help.”
“That’s  what  I’m  here  for.”  Berri  thrust  her  small  chin  higher.  “Then  perhaps  later,  she
might like to join me in prayer.”
Some quiet, peaceful contemplation might do Dorsie a great deal of good.
 
I couldn’t find Sully anywhere. Not in the ready room, not in our cabin. Not on the bridge.
I called Ren on intraship.
“I’ve not seen him, Chasidah. Have you tried the gym?”
Not there, either. Not in the galley, where I  could  hear  Berri’s  melodic  voice  and  Dorsie’s
sultry tones mixing.
I checked the tender bay, storage holds, engineering twice. Finally I went back to our cabin;
worried, but not overly so. He’d been pacing earlier. He might well still be doing that now, and
we were simply like two planets on opposite orbits.
We’d  been  off  shift  for  several  hours.  I  waited,  not  wanting  to  go  to  bed  without  him.  I
fought the  desire  to  call  for  him  on  open  intraship.  It  wasn’t  anyone  else’s  business  that  the
infallible  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan  needed  some  time,  alone.  I  just  didn’t  understand  why  he
needed that time away from me.
That finally worried me enough to call Ren again. “Did I wake you?”
“Not at all. Just finishing meditations.”
“Sorry.” I paused. I’d hoped to hear he was finishing up a card game instead. “Sully’s  not
here, Ren. I haven’t seen him in a couple hours.”
“A moment.” I heard Ren sigh and remembered  what he’d said. He could link with Sully,
or rather, Sully, being stronger, could link with him. I waited.
“He’s blocking me.”
Because  he  didn’t  want  Ren  to  know  what  Gregor  had  said.  What  Dorsie  felt.  “Do  you
know where he is?”
“No. Only that his pattern is strong. He may be working some things through.”
“It’s just that… well, never mind. Thanks.”
“Blessings, Chasidah.”
I clicked off intraship then  headed  for  the  bedroom.  I  had  to  be  on  duty  in  five  hours.  I
threw on my nightshirt and crawled into bed, leaving the light on the desk in the main room

glowing  on  half-power.  I  couldn’t  sleep.  I  stared  at  the  red  numbers  on  the  clock  in  the
dimmed cabin lighting.
The cabin door slid open, spearing the dim room with a shaft of bright light. Sully  leaned
against the doorjamb  then  slowly  walked  in.  He  stopped  at  the  chair,  one  hand  on  its  back,
steadying himself. Then stepped toward the couch. He collapsed onto it just as my feet hit the
floor.
“Sully!”
He was angled into the corner, his legs splayed wide. He dragged one leg up, dropped  his
foot onto the low table with a thud as I kneeled next to him on the cushions.
“Chazzy-girl.” He reached for me, his arm landing heavily on my shoulder.
I  leaned  forward,  kissed  him.  And  tasted  the  cloying  sweetness  of  honeylace.  “You’re
furred, Sully.”
“Oh, very. Very, very.”
I let out a sigh and touched his face. Chilled. Like his hand on my shoulder. “You okay?”
“Me? Sure.”
I took his other hand and tried to rub some warmth into his skin. He felt clammy. His face
was very pale.
“You’re going to feel like shit when you wake up, you know.”
He arched an eyebrow. “Never do.”
I remembered him sitting in the common room of the Temple, the morning after Peyhar’s.
His disheveled appearance then could dispute that.
“Where’ve you been? I was worried.”
“Looking in a mirror.”
I didn’t know if he meant that literally, or figuratively, though I knew he disliked mirrors.
“Watching yourself get furred?”
“Something like that.” His fingers touched my face. Cold. His touch was still very cold.
“I think you need a hot shower. Then some sleep.”
“Later.”
“Sully, you’re like ice.” I framed his face. Ice cold and sweating. This was more than just an
emotional shut down. Was he having a reaction to the honeylace?
Did someone put something in the honeylace? Poison?
There was a med-kit in the bathroom. I rose but his hand caught my wrist, pulled me back
down. “It’ll pass. It’s… nothing.”
“I disagree. You’re cold, sweating—”

“Respiration shallow, heartbeat erratic. It will pass.” He was still half-leaning, half-sprawling
on the couch, but his grip on my wrist was strong and firm.
He seemed to realize that. His fingers loosened. “Get some sleep, my angel.”
“Not without you.”
“I won’t be very good company. I’m certainly not a very good friend.”
“Sully, don’t do this.”
He watched me through half-closed eyes. “I can’t change what I am, Chasidah.”
“I know,” I said softly. “I don’t want you to.”
“Foolish child.” His voice suddenly rasped. He pulled me onto his chest, wrapping his arms
around my back. His mouth pressed against my forehead.
But it was a long while before I felt any warmth coming from his body.
 
When I woke, I was in bed, alone. I sat up quickly. Sully was  gone.  I  had  an  hour  before
duty shift. I showered, dressed and plaited my hair in a sloppy braid.
I took  a  cup  of  coffee  with  me  when  I  went  down  one  deck  to  the  galley.  Dorsie  was
making a fruit salad. I nibbled, then asked if she’d seen Sully.
“Had some tea with Verno, earlier,” she said.
“You doing okay with Sister Berri?”
“Sweet kid. No problem.”
“Talked to Ren yet?”
Dorsie took her gaze from me to inspect a brightapple. “I’ll probably run into him later, if
he comes in for tea.”
I nodded, left. Didn’t want to push it. Some things have to come about in their own time.
Verno was exiting the ready room when I walked up. “Will do,  Sully-sir.  Oh,  blessings  of
the hour, Captain Chasidah.”
I stepped in behind him. The hologrid was  up,  Sully  seated  in  front  of  it.  I  could  see  the
data  on  Crossley  Burke  and  a  list  of  shipping  manifests.  Sully  watched  me  enter,  but  said
nothing.
I sat on the edge of the table in front of him. He was clean shaven, his dark eyes clear. Not a
whisper of a hangover. “Headache?”
“Never. I told you.”
“That’s disgusting. Everyone should have to suffer  a  little.”  As  soon  as  I  said  it,  I  knew  it
was the wrong choice of words.
His smile was thin. “I suffer in other ways.”

“I talked to Dorsie  yesterday.  Just  about  Ren.  Explained  how  I’d  reacted.  And  how  I  feel
now. I think things may be okay in that regard.”
“Aubry’s refusing to work with him.”
“So let Gregor and Aubry work the same shift.”
“I thought of that. I also don’t know if I trust them  in control of this ship while the rest of
us  are  off-duty,  or  sleeping.”  He  picked  up  a  lightpen  from  the  table,  held  it  between  his
fingers.
“You’re saying they don’t care what’s happening at Marker?” Aubry had been very vocal in
his hatred of the jukors.
“I think my mishandling of the interviews recently has eclipsed that.”
“You did what had to be done.”
“That’s Fleet talking. Interrogations are Fleet methods. Not mine. Gregor was  right.  In  the
past, if I didn’t like what someone said or did, they hit the docks.”
“The situation here’s a  bit  more  serious  than  a  disagreement  over  how  to  hijack  cargo  of
synth-emeralds.”
“All the more reason  I  know  I’ve  made  an  error.  I  now  have  a  crew  who  may  choose  to
ignore my orders. Marsh is undecided, but Aubry’s been working on him. They want Ren off
this ship, or in the brig. I can’t do that. I won’t do that.”
“You’re talking three of them against five of us, six if you count Berri.”
“You’re assuming Dorsie will side with us, with Ren.”
“I am.”
“That still only gives us three who can actually run this ship: you, me and, to some extent,
Verno. Ren’s capabilities are limited. Verno’s job is navigation and only that. He doesn’t know
the systems, isn’t certified as a pilot. Dorsie can cook but wouldn’t know a hyperdrive if it bit
her. I imagine the same’s true of Berri. She can pray and bless us, but she can’t work a shift.”
“You sound like you’re thinking of returning to Dock Five, letting Gregor go.”
“I won’t put Ren in the brig. That would damn him in Dorsie’s eyes, Marsh’s too. It would
give credence to what Gregor’s been saying.” His voice rose, became hard. “I won’t  have  him
persecuted for something he isn’t.”
“Then make it clear to them.  Ren is not a danger. If you have to, admit the Empire’s been
ignoring  the  distinction  between  a  Ragkir  and  a  Ragkiril  all  along.  The  mind  talents  Gregor
heard about during the war were Ragkiril talents, isn’t that right?”
He hesitated for a moment, then nodded.
“People like facts. If you don’t give them  the facts, they’ll start looking for them  elsewhere.
And they’ll make mistakes, like believing what Gregor says is also the truth about Ren. That’s
not Fleet methodology. It’s just common sense.”

He leaned back  in the chair, lightpen twirling absently between his  fingers.  He  glanced  at
the closed  door.  “I  can’t  prove  to  them  that  Ren’s  not  a  Ragkiril  without  proving  that  I  am.
Ren, alone, couldn’t have pulled the information from their minds.”
“If they can accept Ren, why can’t they accept you?” I asked softly.
He slanted me a glance, as if he couldn’t believe I’d asked that question.
“I did,” I persisted.
“A  fact  that  continually  amazes  me,  my  angel.  But  things  are  tense  enough  on  board
because of what we’ll face at Marker.  Knowing there’s not only an empath,  but  a  Ragkiril  on
this ship may well be more than any of them, Dorsie included, wants to deal with.”
“This is what happens when you withhold information from people, Sully.”
“Reminding me of that doesn’t solve the problem.”
The door to the ready room  slid  open.  Berri  Solaria  stood,  almost  frozen  in  the  doorway,
her eyes wide, her hood sitting awkwardly on her head.
Then she charged in, fists clenched against her chest until she came within inches of Sully
and myself. “Filthy, venomous soul-stealer! Accursed demon!” She pointed at Sully accusingly.
“Mister Sullivan, you have a hideous Stolorth on board this ship!”
 
Chapter Twenty-Seven
« ^ » 
I was on my feet immediately. I grabbed the irate woman by the shoulders, forcing her into a
chair. “Calm down, Sister, calm down!”
She  wrenched  in  my  grasp.  “I  saw  him!  In  the  dining  hall,  about  to  attack  Dorsie.  I
screamed  prayers  of  exorcism,  blessings  to  protect  her  purity.  He  fled!  Vile  monster.”  She
turned to Sully ignoring my hand, hard, on her shoulder. “Brother Sudral. You must assist me.
We can hunt him down.”
Sully stood next to me, unmoving. I didn’t remember  him getting  up.  He  stared  at  Berri,
reading her, I guessed. Feeling her hatred for Ren. For himself.
Vile monster.
“Ren’s part of my crew,” he said after a moment. “There’s nothing to be afraid of.”
“Brother, your name is that of the holy robe used to restrain these creatures. Your ship, the
Boru Karn, the sword of purity. You know the dark evil that exists inside of them—”
“Ren has none of it.” Sully’s voice was flat. “He’s blind.”
She straightened. “Blind? You’re sure?”

“He was raised on Cal’fedar.”
“In the Purity Project?”
“He was a student of mine for several years.”
Some  of her  fervor  dissipated.  “He’s  been  cleansed,  then.  I  see.”  She  knotted  her  fingers
together.  “I  was  not  aware.  That  is  tolerable.  Providing,  of  course,  he  conducts  himself
properly.”
Something in Berri’s tone, in the arrogant tilt of her chin made me want to slap her. More
than  once.  This  was  Ren  she  was  talking  about.  An  Englarian,  like  herself.  The  man  Verno
called his brother.
Obviously, Sully wasn’t the only one with  a  tendency  to  omit  the  facts.  Verno  had  never
told her about Ren, either.
“You have nothing to fear from Ren,” Sully said.
“I have no fear of their evil. As Abbot Eng dispersed the dark ghosts of Hell, so can I. Just as
you have, since you’ve subjugated him.”
I waited for Sully to say something, to explain Ren was his friend. But his silence said more,
his mouth taut, a muscle pulsing in his jaw.
Finally he spoke, in a voice as deathly quiet as footsteps on a grave. “Have you  performed
your  meditations  yet,  Sister?  If  not,  permit  me  to  suggest  two  for  you.  The  Four  Tiers  of
Tolerance. And the Seven Steps to Holy Humility.
“Now if you’ll excuse us, Captain Bergren and I have important matters to discuss.”
He turned his back on her and stared at the data on the hologrid.
Berri rose slowly. “Do not consort with demons,” she said tightly as she stepped toward the
door. “Or their very foulness will become yours.”
I leaned against the table after the door closed behind her, feeling drained, yet angry. Sully
stared at the hologrid. It was a few minutes before he turned around. “We have a problem.”
I nodded. “Verno never told her about Ren.”
“You’re not going to add that I taught him well?”
“As you said earlier,  that  isn’t  the  solution.  But  you  know  more  than  I  do.  How  big  of  a
problem is she?” When he frowned slightly, I continued. “You were reading her, weren’t you?”
“I don’t normally do that. With her, it’s difficult enough just to deal with her emotions, her
resonances. They—,” he ran his hand through his hair in an exasperated  motion,  “—they  can
sound, feel as loud as screams. Louder.” He let out a harsh sigh. “She’s very intense. And she’s
also very devout.”
“So’s Drogue and Ren’s his friend.”
“Drogue’s a different sect. Now. He once was a part  of  the  original  Englarians,  like  I  was.
They’re  sometimes  called  the  Purity  Englarians.  Guardian  Lon  heads  that.  Most  of  the

inner-system churches follow Lon’s interpretations.
“Drogue’s  part  of  the  Reformed  Englarian  movement.  There’s  more  tolerance  of
non-humans, more acceptance. A push for unity, not for domination.”
“But the Englarians have always cared for the Takas.”
“Listen to what you said. They cared for them.  As if the Takas were incapable of caring for
themselves.  Drogue  doesn’t  see  it  that  way.  Lon  does.  Both  sects  still  build  schools,  clinics,
temples. But the reasons they do so are slightly different.”
“Ren was raised by these people. How could they save his life, and hate him?”
“They saved his life because he’s blind. He’s been purified, by their way of thinking, of the
mind talents they feel are demonic in origin.”
“This is what Berri believes?”
“She’s a Purity Englarian. I didn’t realize they’d taken over the temple on Dock  Five. That
was  a  Reformed  Temple,  last  I  knew.  But  I  honestly  haven’t  been  paying  much  attention  to
church politics lately.”
“Will she still help us get access to Marker?”
A smile twisted on his lips. “Not if she finds out what I am, she won’t.”
I couldn’t see the horrible demon Berri was so sure he was. So  wrongly thought  Ren  was.
She’d screamed prayers of exorcism at him. “Maybe you ought to go check on Ren.”
“You  must  be  a  mind  reader.”  He  stopped  just  long  enough  to  stroke  my  face  with  his
finger, then strode for the door.
I called Verno off the bridge. He’d heard none of Berri’s encounter with Ren. And realized
now he never told her the brother he often talked about was a Stolorth.
He  and  his  family  had  left  Cal’fedar  when  Guardian  Drogue  had.  He  didn’t  know  the
temple of Dock Five was Purity Englarian.
“I’ve only been there a few times. Sister Berri performed many of the ritual blessing of the
ships, would invite crew to services. Sometimes  we had tea after. She’d distribute prayer vids,
or hymns for meditations. That’s how I know her.”
He was upset, chastened. “I must speak to Ren. And Sully-sir.”
“Sully went to talk to Ren. Plus, you’re still on duty. But anything you can say to help Berri
see Ren is a valued, wonderful person would be a big help.”
“Oh, praise the stars! Of course.” He  went  back  to  the  bridge,  quietly.  And  there  was  no
more singing of off-key Englarian hymns.
Dorsie was my next destination. She was at her desk in the small office off the galley. “She
showed me pictures on her bookpad last night. I remember  those stories about  shape-shifters
from  when  I  was  small,  told  her  how  they  used  to  scare  me.  I  know  you  said  they’re  just
myths,  but  she  says  they’re  true.  Then  this  morning,  those  names  she  called  him.  I
remembered those, too. Soul-stealer. Winged Hellspawn.”

“Ren  doesn’t  have  wings.”  I  gave  her  a  soft  smile.  “He  couldn’t  hide  them  under  that
thermal shirt he wears.”
“You can’t always see them, that’s what Sister Berri told me. She says they’re shape-shifters.
Like Gregor said.”
I leaned  my  palms  on  her  desk.  “Dorsie.  Ren  is  harmless.  He  reads  empathic  emotional
resonances. It’s like seeing a rainbow around your body. That’s all. That’s the only thing he can
do. I swear to you.”
“I want to believe that, Chaz. But if there are shape-shifters, and if they look like jukors—”
“I wouldn’t ask you to be friends with a shape-shifter. If Ren  were  a  shape-shifting  jukor,
I’d  help  Berri  kill  him.”  I  didn’t  know  how  to  make  myself  any  plainer.  I  couldn’t  believe
Dorsie thought those old scare-tales were true.
“Ren  couldn’t  be  a  shape-shifter  if  he  wanted  to,”  said  a  voice  tiredly  behind  me.  Sully
leaned against Dorsie’s office doorway. “He’s not going to sprout wings. But he’s also not going
to demand you be his friend. That’s something you’re going to have to offer, yourself.”
Dorsie  nodded  then  straightened  a  stack  of  datatabs  on  her  desk,  not  meeting  my  gaze.
“Thanks.”
I followed Sully out. “How’s Ren?”
He  shoved  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  seemed  to  struggle  with  something.  I  knew  the
animosity  directed  at  Ren  disturbed  him  deeply.  Finally,  he  let  out  a  short,  frustrated  sigh.
“Upset  but  trying  to  be  his  usual  placid  self.  He’d  heard,  like  we  all  had,  only  good  things
about Sister Berri Solaria. No one warned us she was a religious fanatic.”
“She isn’t, to her own people.”
“Agreed.” He headed for engineering. Aubry’s desk was empty. “I had Verno call  him  up
to the bridge to recalibrate something minor,” he said when I glanced toward Aubry’s station.
“I have to recalibrate something major.”
Primary codes. Sully was changing the Karn’s primaries.
“What happened?”
He glanced up from the console. “I saw Gregor talking to Berri Solaria.”
 
There were three ways to access the Karn’s  primaries.  From  the  bridge,  from  engineering
and from the console in Sully’s cabin. He wasn’t taking any chances. He’d already been to the
bridge.
We went back to his cabin, brought up the codes then recoded them  for the third and final
time.  Sully  and  I  now  were  the  only  ones  who  could  initiate  a  course  change,  send  any
outgoing transmits, take the ship through a jumpgate. Gregor was no doubt going  to  react  to
the latter. But as we had only one jumpgate between here and Marker,  it wasn’t an argument
we’d have to repeat.

“Verno told me he didn’t know Berri long enough, or well enough, to talk  about  families.
He met her at services, ship blessings. They talked mostly religious history. And he’s only been
to Dock Five a few times.”
Sully keyed in a request for a mug of tea, then paced in front of  the  couch.  “It  was  Ren’s
idea to use Verno to help get answers from the Taka, who wouldn’t always talk to either of us.
Drogue  approved.  But  Verno’s  a  monk.  He’s  not  trained,  he’s  not  used  to  how  I  work.  He
wasn’t even supposed to be here this run.”
I remembered  Berri saying she’d expected Verno to be at Peyhar’s with her. “Maybe once
he talks to her, she’ll calm down.”
He sipped his tea. “She just has to get us through the shipyard main terminal. That’s all I’m
asking. After that, she can go perform purity  rites  on  every  damn  dock  in  the  yards  for  all  I
care.”
“We’ve only got six more hours to jump.  And  thirty-six  after  that  to  Marker.  We’ll  make
it.”
 
I took the Karn into jump. The ship, as expected, performed beautifully. Her crew, less so.
Gregor was off the bridge. Sully admitted the only reason  he  was  even  still  on  board  was
because once Sully, Ren and myself went into the shipyards, someone still had to pilot the ship,
come back and get us at meet-point. It was too risky to leave the Karn at Marker Terminal.
Which  meant  codes  would  have  to  be  amended,  again.  Which  meant  we  had  to  trust
Gregor to come back and get us.
To avoid further incidents, Ren voluntarily confined himself to his cabin.
I had yet to notice Dorsie visit him. I avoided Berri. Her sweetness now seemed simpering.
Her  innocence,  arrogant.  But  Gregor  and  Aubry  didn’t  seem  to  feel  that.  She  flirted  quite
openly with them, I noted with surprise. In a sweet and innocent way, of course.
She also had very little to do with Verno. He was tainted, probably, by his friendship with
Ren.
Her attitude toward Sully vacillated. She  persisted in calling him  Brother  Sudral,  as  if  she
needed to remind him what he’d once been. She seemed to want him to ally himself with her.
Renounce his worldly ways. She said her meditations clearly showed her that she was on a holy
mission. And that Sully, and the jukors at Marker, were a part of that.
But she was also dismissive of him. He was, after all, no longer one of her lofty peers.
We came out of jump, no happier than when we went in. Except for Berri Solaria, handing
out blessings.
Thirty-two hours to Marker.
 
“Are Englarian clergy celibate?”

Sully knelt behind me in the middle of the bed, brushing out my hair.  The  brush  slowed
and I heard something that was  a  cross  between  a  sigh  and  a  wry  chuckle  of  laughter.  “Still
thinking about that?”
“Don’t you know?”
“I only peek when necessary and when I have your permission.”
“Then maybe I’m not asking about you. Berri’s been getting rather friendly with Gregor.”
“Jealous?”
I flailed my arm behind me and somehow managed to cuff him on the shoulder.
“Settle  down,  you  wicked  woman.  I  think  she’s  looking  to  convert  him.  Bedding  him
would mean breaking her vows.”
“Then celibacy is a part of the vows?”
A few long strokes of the brush preceded his answer. “Yes.”
Surprise rippled through me and I knew he felt it. I wanted to make sure he felt it. Little by
little, I tried to use  more  nonverbal  means  to  communicate  with  him.  Let  him  know,  in  my
own  way,  that  I  was  comfortable  with  the  Gabriel  part  of  Sully.  Hoping  maybe  if  I  was,  he
would be.
“And yes, they were part of mine, too,” he added, to my unasked question.
“Why?” Sully was a naturally sensual person. A touch person, always  with  a  hand  on  my
arm  or  at  my  waist.  Celibacy  seemed  totally  uncharacteristic.  “Don’t  tell  me  it  was  because
some painting told you to be.”
“Okay. I won’t.” He ran his fingers through my hair.
“Sully…”
“My parents have an estate in Sylvadae.”
As did a handful of other exorbitantly wealthy people, like the Emperor. “So?”
“It was staffed by Takas.”
“Englarians?”
“They’d take me to services.”
“Your parents didn’t mind?”
“My parents weren’t around.” There was a derisive note in his voice.
I’d seen holovids of some of the mansions in Sylvadae.  And  pictured,  for  the  first  time,  a
young boy,  all  alone.  Going  to  Englarian  services,  hearing  about  demonic  mind  talents.  And
waking up one morning to find rainbows coursing over his body.
I  clasped  the  hand  that  absently  toyed  with  my  hair  and  held  it  tightly.  I  sent  love,
approval. Not pity. “Did you join the church as a gesture to the Takas who looked after you?”

“Partly. I think I felt that since they cared about  me,  their  beliefs  must  be  the  right  ones.
Even though they didn’t know what I was.”
“A Ragkiril.” He hated the word. I felt something go cold in him whenever I said it. It was
that  which  damned  Gabriel.  What  Berri  called  the  darkness  inside  him.  I  still  couldn’t
understand why.
“I took it as a sign. A cure. If  I  were  devout  enough,  the  Abbot  would  remove  this  curse
from me.”
I brought  his  arm  around  my  waist  and  leaned  against  him.  “Then  where  would  I  be?
Unhappily  married  to  Philip?  Dying,  on  Moabar?  Horrified  with  myself,  because  I’d  killed
Kingswell  and  Tessa  Paxton?  And  maybe  worst  of  all,  I  would’ve  watched  Ren  die  of  fluid
shock and been unable to do anything.”
He  rested  his  face  against  the  top  of  my  head  but  said  nothing.  Then  suddenly  he  sent
something through me I’d never felt from him before. A growing, out-flowing sense of respite,
a thawing, a cleansing. Like starlight, bursting through a clouded night sky.
“Should I list more?” I asked softly.
Yes. For the first time since the Loviti incident, his voice was in my mind. Gentle. Shamed.
Needy.  But  strong,  full  of  a  sincerity  and  pride.  A  pride  that  needed  the  knowledge  that  he
could, he had done the right thing. Especially after all the hatred he’d felt aimed  at  Ren.  And
because of Ren, at himself.
“Where  would  I  be  without  you  to  love  me?  To  make  me  crazy  because  you  send  these
fireworks through me with your thoughts? Other women must have told you—”
“Just you. No one else.”
“You never…?”
“Not sharing my emotions, touching yours, no.” He hesitated. You have  all  of  me. All  that  I
am, is yours.
His  voice  in  my  mind  was  as  clear  as  if  he’d  spoken  out  loud.  It  didn’t  frighten  me.  I
understood what he told me, and why he was telling me this way. Not  just  Sully’s  body,  but
Gabriel’s mind. More than that. Gabriel’s trust. And my trust, in that I didn’t fear what he was.
That I loved him, with all that he was.
That he loved me enough to trust me, with all that he is.
Like a ship sliding toward the edge of  a  jumpgate,  we’d  cautiously  approached  this  point
where love and trust and faith merged. We could only pass through  it  together.  That  was  his
offer. All of him. For all of me.
“You can have all of me, too. Every last whirlwind in there, if you want it.”
He pushed my hair to one  side,  nuzzled  his  face  into  my  shoulder.  Breathed.  Sent  warm
rushes in and over me. Tingles. Heat. But still he held back something.
I want. Desperately I want this with you, Chasidah. Angel. But this is a very deep link. You must
be sure.

“I am.”
We have time. Just knowing you’re willing is enough for me.
“But not for me. I want all of you.”
He  groaned  softly.  His  hands  stroked,  caressed,  explored  me  outwardly  while  warmth
began to build, pulse. I pushed him down on the bed and stroked him  in  return.  My  mouth
caressed a fire on his body.
His mind sent me his passion, mixed it with my own. Blended it, hard fire with sweet fire. I
felt something stronger than the warmth that always flowed through my veins at his touch.
It  felt  molten.  Yet  it  was  incredibly  delicate,  like  the  whisper  of  a  flame.  It  traced  and
retraced every inch of my body as if he knew me, yet didn’t.
Because he didn’t. This wasn’t just Sully. This  was  Gabriel,  touching  with  gentle  fervency
the  edges  of  my  mind  with  his  own  as  we  made  love.  Then  slowly,  going  deeper,  claiming
everything I was as his own. It  was  as  if  his  breath  were  mine,  the  beating  of  his  heart  were
mine.
I relaxed into his strength, his power. And I invited him in.
Not yet, Chasidah-angel.
He rolled on top of me, all hard male, heated skin. That made me shift my focus outward,
to the physical. I could smell the soap from his shower, clean and slightly salty, like the taste of
him.
I wrapped my legs around him, took  his  mouth  as  he  entered  me,  but  it  was  slow.  Very
slow. Long, hard and deliriously slow.
I arched against him. Waves of heat built, threatened to crash. He held me, poised, almost
breathless…  Then  body  sensations  and  mind  sensations  merged,  collided  with  a  rush  of
incredible  pleasure.  I  was  soaring.  Felt  him  soaring,  rising.  Felt  as  if  a  thousand  wings  beat
against my skin, inside my skin, inside my heart.
I felt his passion crest, as if it were my own. It was my own, flowing into his. Flowing from
him. For a moment I glimpsed my own face as if through his eyes, my hair drifting like a cloud
around me, down my arms, over his. Behind us and around us, gray fuzzy soft everywhere.
And then gray fuzzy soft exploded  into  bright  silver  stars,  a  thousand,  a  million.  I  closed
my eyes and still they danced through my lids, sparkling. We plunged through them,  clinging
to each other. Spiraling upwards.
The  spiraling  slowed.  A  warm  wind  rushed  over  me,  past  me,  around  me.  Gentling  me.
Caressing me. I’d felt that wind before, but couldn’t quite remember where.
I heard a sound, a soft hush, softer than our breathing. I’d heard that soft hush before, but
couldn’t quite remember when.
The wind caressed me, again. Flowed down across my body. Moved up.
I had to know. My eyelids fluttered open. The darkness of Sully’s infinite eyes was all I saw.

“Hush, Chasidah.” He kissed my eyelids closed. “Don’t… don’t look. Just let me love you.”
Warmth, again. Caressing me. Surrounding me. Floating with me, rocking me gently. I felt
safe. Loved. Incredibly complete. Both of us.
All that I am, is yours.
I woke with Sully, warm, behind me. I turned, curled my fists into his chest, and nuzzled
my head under his chin.
“Coffee?” he asked.
“Is it that time already?”
“You saw the clock when you turned over.” He laughed, quietly.
“Damn.” I sighed theatrically, aware of his gentle presence in my mind. And that he’d seen
the clock through my eyes. “Yeah. Coffee.”
 
Sully and I met Dorsie in the corridor between Gregor’s cabin and Ren’s. She  had a pot of
coffee in her hand. I hoped it was a good sign.
“How’s Ren?”
“I don’t know. Marsh asked me to bring this to the bridge.” She  flashed a tight smile and
moved past us.
I turned  to  watch  her  go.  Sully’s  hand  on  my  shoulder  sent  warmth  seeping  through  in
small waves. “You tried. I did, too. There’s not much more we can do.”
The anguish in his eyes mirrored my own.
Eighteen hours.
 
Chapter Twenty-Eight
« ^ » 
Marker Shipyards - Outer Terminal
Marker Shipyards were actually five starports of varying sizes on the fringe of the  Aldanthian
Drifts, a rich asteroid field that was the source for both metals and fuels. It was surrounded by
security beacons and backed up by Fleet  security  patrols.  The  beacons  would  scan  you,  then
warn you.
The security patrols would target you and if you were lucky, just shoot your engines out so
you could live to be interrogated.
Marker  One  was  the  largest  starport;  a  cylindrical  core  out  from  which  jutted  the  larger
repair hangars and new ship bays like thick, ungainly branches on a tree.

Marker Two was a smaller administrative and residential facility, a short shuttle  hop  from
M-1.  Commander  Thad Bergren lived and  worked  in  M-2.  So  did  more  than  three  hundred
other people, both military and civilian.
Marker Three and Four were secondary residential and repair facilities for smaller ships and
less prestigious workers. Techs, dock workers and Takas were usually housed in M-3.
M-5, also called Marker Outer Terminal, hung on the edge. Not dissimilar to Dock  Five, it
was long, like a mining raft. Three beacons guided us in. They were friendlier than the beacons
surrounding the rest of the shipyards.
But then, we also squawked the right entry codes. Winthrop’s Gallant  Explorer,  in  service
to the Englarian Church.
I watched the newsvids we’d snagged from the latest beacon while we waited for dockspace
to clear. The Karn, now the Explorer, was a small ship compared to the commercial liners and
freighters also queuing for space. We were also, therefore, low priority.
 
Welcome to Imperial NewsWatch. Top stories for in-system viewers.
Another mysterious rape and murder in a starport in Baris. And another mysterious disk left
on the woman’s body.
 
I flipped off  the  vid,  glanced  at  the  Englarian  robes  draped  over  the  bed.  Brother  Sudral
and Sister Chadra would  accompany  Sister  Berri  through  security.  Sully  was  in  engineering,
making sure this time my forged medical files were up to date.
I brought up the schematics on Marker Two. I knew the place by heart; I’d grown up there.
But there had been  some  changes  in  the  past  few  years.  Changes  I  didn’t  know  about,  even
when I’d visited Thad. Changes that had built private research labs with Crossley Burke money
in a section of M-2 that used to be nothing but storage holds.
It had taken  us  two  weeks  of  sifting  every  bit  of  data  we  could  get,  but  that’s  where  we
believed the primary jukor labs were.
We didn’t even want to think about the secondary one yet; the one  we  believed  was  on  a
ship, moveable, but not yet completed.
We had to start with what we did know. If we were lucky, we’d find evidence filling in the
gaps about what we didn’t know.
I reviewed the files Sully had tagged. There might not be another chance after this. My first
selection was the vidclip of Hayden Burke at the party. Lazlo was there, in one frame,  briefly.
Sully had tagged it but I wanted to look for the man on my own, make sure I  could  pick  his
face out of a crowd.
I slowed  the  vid  down,  scanned  it.  It  was  easy  to  pick  out  Hayden,  even  with  his  back
turned. I searched for Lazlo, not seeing him at first. Then I did.
But something else caught my eye, just before that.

Something  that flitted through my mind with the briefest recognition,  the  kind  you  can’t
directly  identify,  but  only  feel.  Not  so  much  the  recognition  of  a  face,  but  of  a  stance,  an
arrogant tilt of a chin.
A woman talking to Hayden, leaning on his arm, her face upturned. Seduction was all but
written on her forehead. She  was beautiful, her features highlighted by elaborate makeup, her
long honey blonde hair curling at her shoulders. Her slender figure draped in a dress of a rich,
shimmery blue fabric.
I was wrong. She didn’t look familiar at all. Maybe it was because her hair color reminded
me of Ilsa. But that was the only thing that did.
I went back, picked up Lazlo in the vid and studied him. The vid shifted and I lost him in
the crowd, then picked him up again a few minutes later.
This time, the blonde in the rich blue dress was just stepping past him, her hand briefly on
his shoulder. Her back was to the camera; I couldn’t see her face but I recognized the dress as
well as the elegance of her movements.
A friend of Hayden’s  or  a  friend  of  Lazlo’s?  Or  neither,  just  another  female  trolling  for  a
good time that night.
I dismissed her. I’d located Lazlo again, on my own. That’s all that mattered.
 
Sully came in, followed by Ren. Ren’s  hair  was  still  wet—a  final  soak  that  would  have  to
hold him until Gregor came back  in.  Both  men  were  in  black.  I  wore  a  black  shirt  but  dark
green pants. Spacer issue, all. But no holsters, no weapons. We couldn’t get those through the
gate scanner. They were hidden in our luggage, shielded in a special compartment.
“Everything set with Gregor and Marsh?”
Sully nodded. “He’s cooled off a bit, probably because he’s in command  again and has the
codes.”
“And because neither Ren nor I will be on board.”
Sully tugged on my braid as he walked by, his gaze on the screen. I had the news running
again.
“Another?” he asked. Then before I could answer, “Verno’s leaving to go with Sister Berri.”
I glanced at Ren then back at Sully. “Why?”
“He belongs back  in the monastery,” Ren said. “It’s where he feels most comfortable. Plus
he wants to work with his people, teach them that murder isn’t the answer. He’ll still be a good
contact for us, if there are any other reports of gen-labs using Takas.”
“You’ll miss him.” With Verno gone, and Dorsie distancing herself from him, Ren now had
only Sully and myself.
“I never expected him to stay. This is not his path, as it is mine.”
Gentle acceptance and understanding. Just like my brother, Thad. Hah!

Sully clicked off the screen. “We’ll be docking in fifteen minutes. Go put on your robes, my
friends, and try like hell to look pious.”
 
Sister Berri Solaria reached up and adjusted my hood before  I  could  back  away  from  her
touch.  “There,  that’s  better.  We  must  at  all  times  be  aware  that  our  outward  appearance
mirrors  our  humbleness  and  our  mission  to  serve  selflessly.”  She  yanked  on  my  robe.  “It
would help if you’d at least try, Captain Bergren.”
Supercilious bitch. I heard Sully’s voice clearly in my mind as he brushed by  me,  his  hand
briefly clasping my shoulder. I had to bite my lip to keep from laughing. I caught his half-smile
when he stopped by the airlock with Ren  and  Verno.  He  felt  my  laughter  just  as  clearly  as  I
heard  his  words.  Could  hear  them,  ever  since  we’d  made  love  and  I  willingly  granted  him
entry into my most intimate part, my thoughts. My mind.
It  still  startled  me  slightly  when  his  thoughts  accompanied  his  touch.  Though  the  few
thoughts  he’d  sent  to  me  since  then,  like  the  one  just  now,  were  all  light  in  tone.  Gentle.
Teasing. Still testing. I could feel that. Still cautious. Still making sure, as he’d asked me outside
Trel’s bar, that I wasn’t angry. Afraid.
I wasn’t. I knew him. No gill slits, no webbings and, as I’d told Dorsie, no wings.  Terribly
human,  terribly  male,  wonderfully—The  Karn  jerked.  Marker  Terminal’s  gateway  impacted
against us, locking onto our hull.
I took a deep breath, patted my ID secured at the belt at my waist and when I  caught  his
dark gaze, nodded to Sully.
Showtime.
 
Verno  handed  his  ID  to  the  Taka  guard  at  the  bottom  of  the  gateway.  “Blessings  of  the
hour, brother.”
“Blessings to you. Brother Verno?” Their conversation  was  a  gravelly,  growly  exchange  of
voices.
I still had trouble reading nuances of tone when Takas spoke. They always sounded angry,
annoyed.  But  then,  Ren  and  Sully  were  probably  scanning,  reading.  If  there  were  troubles
brewing, I’d know.
Verno extended his hand  toward  Berri.  “Sister  Berri  Solaria.  We’re  here  to  open  the  new
temple.”
“Missed Peyhar’s. Would have liked that.” The guard took Berri’s  ID,  scanned  it  through.
Took mine, Sully’s, Ren’s. Studied Ren for a few seconds more than I liked. But he let us pass.
“Next Peyhar’s!” he called after us. “Good celebration then!”
“Praise the stars!” Verno waved back.
We walked into Marker Terminal’s main corridor. My heart started beating again.

 
Fleet  personnel  were  everywhere.  I  kept  my  head  tilted  down.  The  chance  I’d  run  into
someone from Thad’s  office  was  slim,  but  it  existed.  I  had  to  count  on  the  fact  I  was  out  of
uniform—people have a tendency to lump face and uniform together—and that I was believed
to be on Moabar. I was also in an Englarian nun’s robe. Right face, maybe, but definitely wrong
uniform.
We  followed  Berri  and  Verno  to  the  luggage  and  cargo  ramps.  Berri  moved  confidently
through the corridors and cross-corridors, heading for a bank of lifts. She’d been here before.
We threaded the crowds down one level to cargo. I worked on calming myself. They’d  let
us  through.  Our  luggage  was  tagged  as  church  property.  No  reason  to  expect  it  contained
weapons. Explosives. Poison gas.
Everything  was  shielded  in  special  compartments.  Sully  knew  what  he  was  doing.  He
couldn’t have worked as a smuggler for all those years, if he didn’t.
We passed through a second set of security gates before we entered the luggage ramp area.
About a half dozen people milled about, all human,  except for two tall forms I was startled to
realize  were  Stolorths.  The  only  Stolorths  I  remembered  seeing  on  Marker  belonged  to  a
diplomatic  delegation.  They’d  been  well-guarded,  and  I’d  seen  them  only  from  a  distance.
These  wore  freighter  uniforms,  their  ship’s  patch  unfamiliar  to  me.  They  were  deep  in
conversation,  didn’t  look  our  way,  didn’t  seem  to  notice  the  humans  staring  nervously,
purposely giving them a wide berth. Ren had turned and kept his back to them.  Berri glared at
them openly, her lips pursed, but said nothing.
The Stolorths wandered off with an anti-grav pallet wobbling behind them.
I took a deep breath.
Berri became cheerful again, blessing everyone left  and  right  as  she  headed  for  a  stack  of
boxes and duffle-cases. The small electronic sign underneath read GLNT EXPLR.
Verno  grabbed  a  pallet,  activated  it,  and  began  to  load  the  boxes  stenciled  with  the
arch-and-stave on all sides. Obviously, just supplies for the new temple. Sully loaded a second
pallet, smaller, with our duffels, arch-and-stave tags dangling.
A Takan guard glanced at our IDs again, waved us through.
Praise the stars.
 
A shuttle  would  take  us  to  M-2,  Berri  and  Verno  to  M-3.  There’d  be  no  further  security
checks. We were cleared, as safe as if we’d been through Berri’s purity process. She  and Verno
stepped into line for the M-3 shuttle. I realized maybe I didn’t dislike her as much as I thought.
She  was, if nothing else, true to what she believed. Even  Sully  said  he  sensed  no  duplicity  in
her. She  was deeply fervent—perhaps misguidedly so  in  my  opinion—and  committed  to  her
work with the Takas. Maybe someday she’d revise her opinions on Stolorths and Ragkirils. She
and the rest of the Empire.
I extended my hand to her. “Blessings of the hour, Sister Berri. And thank you.” I meant it.

Her smile was angel-soft. “I see the holy sword of the Abbot behind you as you  proceed.”
She nodded to Sully.
Verno hugged Ren, one of the odder sights I’d ever seen. A eight foot tall Taka embracing a
six and a half foot tall Stolorth.
Praise the stars.
 
We  passed  a  newsbank  holovid  on  our  way  to  the  M-2  shuttle.  The  ‘caster’s
bronzed-skinned face turned, as if following us, as we walked by. “And in sports news, zero-g
racquetball competitions heated up in Port January yesterday when…”
“I’ll take the pallet to the cargo ramp,” Sully said as the gate came into view. “You stay with
Ren. Watch for unfriendlies.”
That  meant  anything  from  other  Stolorths  to  Marker  stripers  to  Lazlo.  I  requested  three
tickets from the droid attendant. Next shuttle was due in fifteen minutes, a second five minutes
after that. M-2  was a popular destination. If we didn’t  make  the  first  shuttle,  we’d  be  first  in
line for the next.
Sully came back and we retreated into a quiet corner not far from the gate, blessing anyone
who looked our way but not deliberately making eye contact.  Most  didn’t.  This  was  Marker.
Everyone was in too much of a hurry, with projects and duty schedules on their minds.
I leaned back against the wall. Eleven minutes. Sully snugged his hand against the small of
my back.  His fingers made small circles, sent warmth. He  and  Ren  talked  zero-g  racquetball.
Port January had a good team, but there was no way they could beat out Garno’s.
“Would you be willing to place a wager on that?” Ren asked softly.
I fought an urge to roll my eyes and focused instead on two young  men  and  a  woman  in
Fleet  dress  uniforms  taking  shuttle  tickets  from  the  droid  attendant.  They  were  laughing,
relaxed. Just back  from liberty, I guessed. The man ruffled the woman’s curls and she  turned
around.
My heart stopped, my breath caught in my throat. I recognized her.
Tessa. Looking straight at me. Twenty, maybe twenty-five feet separated us. I could see her
clearly and knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that she could see me. Her laughter faded to be
replaced by a soft, knowing smile.
Shit.
Chasidah. Nothing to fear.
Nothing to fear? She  and one of the men  walked toward us, toward me. I fought the urge
to run, knowing that would only make things worse.
Sully pulled his hand away from me and bowed slightly as she approached. “How may we
assist you?”
“I don’t mean to trouble you, Brothers. Sister.” She  nodded to me and didn’t appear to be

the least bit disturbed by my heart hammering loudly in my chest. “But Dylan and  I  just  got
married. Would you mind blessing our rings?”
She  and  her  husband  held  out  their  hands,  their  matching  rings  glistening  in  the  bright
overhead lights.
Sully took their hands in his. “Guardian of love, Guardian of wisdom and mercy, hear now
my plea…”
I bowed my head, trembling, listened to the deep, soothing tones of his voice. The absolute
sincerity in his voice. He meant every word. He asked for blessings upon the love, and  peace,
Tessa had found.  And  because  she  had,  so,  finally,  could  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan.  Poet,  monk,
mercenary, Ragkiril.
I prayed a prayer of my own, one that had no words. And realized that maybe, sometimes,
miracles do happen.
“…for the love that resides now in your hearts, forever. Praise the stars.”
“Praise the stars,” Tessa repeated softly. Sully raised his head, smiled.
“Blessings, thank you,” Dylan said as he hooked his arm through Tessa’s. He led her back
to their friend waiting near the gate.
Sully met my gaze, still smiling.
“Thank  you,”  I  whispered.  The  words  caught  in  my  throat.  Tears  prickled  gently  at  the
back of my eyes.
Chasidah. My angel. Nothing to fear.
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine
« ^ » 
Marker Two
It was a half-hour to M-2  on a  crowded  shuttle,  though  Tessa  and  her  new  husband  weren’t
with us. We exited quickly upon docking and retrieved our pallet five minutes later. I walked
purposefully, knowing exactly where I was going.
This  was  Marker  Two.  I’d  lived  here  with  my  mother  for  fifteen  years,  until  she’d  died.
Then stayed three years after that, until I’d entered the academy.
I knew exactly where I was going.
M-2,  like  M-1,  was  a  cylinder,  but  more  squat,  with  three  wide  access  rings  splitting  it
irregularly, and two series of smaller gate rings on Level 2 and Level  8.  Access  rings  and  gate
rings served as landing pads for small shuttles and cargo tenders.
Fleet offices filled Levels 1 through 11. We’d docked on 13, in the middle of the commercial

levels. Shops, pubs, private offices flanked both sides of the curved corridor.
I found the bank  of lifts I wanted, crowded the three of us and the  pallet  into  the  narrow
lift. No room for anyone else. We headed down.
Below  the  commercial  levels  was  residential,  both  Fleet  and  private,  through  private  was
kept separate in a small section of Level 17.
We descended past that, heading for Level 27. Storage, auxiliary offices, maintenance. And,
if we were correct, one level from a fully operating gen-lab.
But  we  couldn’t  head  there,  yet.  Not  dressed  as  Englarians,  in  full  view  of  everyone
scurrying  through  M-2’s  corridors.  No  one  must  be  able  to  connect  the  destruction  of  the
genlabs with the church.  Not simply out of any  concerns  for  Englarians,  but  because  we  still
needed our identities in order to get back to the Karn, unquestioned and alive.
Our  request,  under  a  fictitious  company  name,  for  rental  of  storage  space  on  M-2  had
provided us with knowledge of bays and offices that were empty. We chose  one  down  a  side
corridor  that  on  the  schematics  would  be  out  of  the  way  of  most  pedestrian  traffic.  I
remembered it being so, as well.
There hadn’t been much  else to do when you’re sixteen, an orphan—unless you count the
father you  never  see—and  the  only  respite  you  get  from  the  overbearing  guardian  the  court
appointed to watch over you is a game of hide and seek. I’d easily slip the lock on my mother’s
apartment after Proctor Fernanda would  leave.  Dinner  and,  as  far  as  she  was  concerned,  her
duties  for  the  day  were  concluded.  Then  I’d  just  as  easily  slip  into  the  throngs  of  stationers
going somewhere, going anywhere, for the night.
There were others like me, but not many. Six of us the year I turned seventeen. We’d steal
bottles of ale from unsuspecting droid waiters’ carts and head downlevel, savoring our freedom
as we sipped our ale. Sooner or later someone would break  out  a  deck  of  cards.  We’d  drink,
laugh and gamble. Sometimes, there was even a little kiss and grope.
And sometimes there was a flask of honeylace, a pipe of rafthkra. Not for me. Amaris was
dead but  she  wasn’t  gone.  She’d  made  me  promise  her—always  have  fun  in  life.  But  never,
ever be stupid. Only fools have no fears or refuse to see the danger in front of them.
I had a friend die from an overdose of rafthkra. And I’d heard stories of people who drank
too  much  honeylace  and  thought  they’d  grown  wings,  like  soul-stealing  shape-shifters,  and
tried to fly.
I had fears, well-grounded fears. I was no fool.
I walked  down  Level  27’s  corridor  with  Sully,  Ren  and  all  these  memories  by  my  side.
Knowing exactly when the groups of stationers would thin, as they did. Knowing exactly when
more offices were closed, or vacant, which they were. I saw the signs of decay, of neglect. And
now and then, an empty ale bottle, tucked between the hand  railing  and  the  corridor’s  inner
wall.
If the neck pointed up, tonight’s party was on. Down, party was off.
“Really?”  Sully  seemed  impressed  when  I  pointed  it  out.  Ren  laughed  softly,  a  bubbling
stream, as frothy as ale.

Green 8. A short corridor, dead-ending at station core. A core that was a large maintenance
shaft, holding lifts  and  pipes  and  clusters  of  cables.  Crisscrossed  with  scaffolding,  thin  metal
ladders. Emergency exits. Narrow tool bays.
I knew all that, too. Another world, when you’re seventeen. Behind the scenes, behind the
walls and bulkheadings. Private, dark, mysterious, dangerous.
I knew the moment I stepped into it, two words would sound in my mind: welcome home.
 
Ren and I stood together in a meditative stance, heads bowed, our bodies shielding Sully as
he  played  with  the  lockpad  by  the  door.  Our  pallet  was  skewed,  one  end  resting  on  the
decking, the other wobbling  in  midair.  To  anyone  passing  by,  we  were  two  luckless  monks,
praying while waiting for a repair tech.
Three people did. We nodded, smiled, blessed them.  Yes, unfortunate how no one made a
reliable pallet anymore. Blessings of the hour.
“Got it!” A hushed, gleeful exclamation sounded behind us.
We stepped quickly into the dark, windowless room. The door slid closed, relocking with a
muted click. The next click was the lights. One overhead. The others were burned out.
“They  wanted  three-hundred  twenty  five  credits  a  month  for  this  dump?”  Sully  put  his
hands on his hips, surveyed the room.
“Sinful,” Ren agreed.
“Bathroom works. Shower, no tub,” I announced.
Ren nodded. “That’s sufficient, if we’re delayed.”
I hoped  we  wouldn’t  be.  We  had  eight  hours  until  our  first  meet-point  with  the  Karn,
arriving  as  the  Lambent  Beacon,  back  at  Marker  Terminal.  If  we  weren’t  there,  Gregor  had
instructions to return at the twelve-hour mark,  under another ship name. Our third and  final
meet-point at the Terminal was at twenty-four from when we disembarked.
There was no fourth meet-point. After that, we’d be on our own. Or dead.
We  pulled  off  the  robes  and  folded  them.  Opened  the  duffels,  pulled  out  weapons  and
explosives. I sat on the floor and began assembling the small charges laced with poison gases.
“Let that wait.” Sully knelt next to me, a dark  and  powerful  figure  in  black  fatigue  pants
and  black  high-necked  thermal  shirt.  Black  holster  straps  hugged  his  shoulders;  the  Carver
snugged against his left side. “Our first priority’s to confirm location.”
He found the small datapad, flipped it  on  and  brought  up  M-2’s  schematics.  We  were  in
Green 8, Level 27.  The gen-labs were on Level 28,  M-2’s lowest level, with a small  access  ring
running  around  its  perimeter.  The  labs  were  either  in  a  converted  storage  area  on  Level
28-Blue, directly across from Green. Or Level 28-Yellow, between Green and Blue.
Sully snatched his jacket from where he’d dropped it on the floor. “I want to find that lab. I
want to make that first meet-point and get the hell out of here.”

I put down the casing and arched an eyebrow. “Late for a hot date?”
“No. A wedding.” He winked then pulled me to my feet. “What’s  your  guess,  Ren?  Level
28 Blue or Yellow?”
“Blue,” Ren said, without hesitation.
“Fine. I’ll take Yellow. Double or nothing?”
“Agreed. Double or nothing.”
“You’re witness to this, Chaz.”
“I’m witness to this, Sully.”
I looked at Ren. “How much does he… No. Forget it. I don’t want to know.”
Sully slapped me affectionately on my rump.  He handed me my dark green jacket.  “Let’s
go.”
He unlocked  the  door  to  the  corridor.  We  stepped  through,  listening  but  heard  nothing.
There  was  an  access  panel  a  few  feet  away  at  the  corridor’s  end.  I  had  it  unlatched,  sliding
sideways in a matter of seconds, feeling sixteen years old again. Slightly giddy. And more than
a bit frightened.
I squatted down, squeezed through  with  Sully  immediately  behind  me,  sliding  the  panel
closed.
Abrupt  darkness  closed  around  me.  I  crouched,  unmoving,  aware  of  the  open  grating
under my boots, aware of the low railing at my back.  Aware  of  the  open  core  behind  that,  a
drop of hundreds of  feet  to  the  bottom  filled  with  the  hard,  jutting  forms  of  generators  and
recycs and other machinery that kept M-2 alive.
Aware  of  Sully  next  to  me,  our  shoulders  and  thighs  touching.  I  waited  for  my  eyes  to
adjust to the red-tinged dimness.
Shadows sharpened and became less muddy. Everything was painted in shades of gray and
black  and  dark  red.  A  constant  clanking  of  lift  mechanisms  far  to  our  right  and  left  echoed
hollowly. Thin stripes of light showed the location of lift corridor doors. And there were other
noises. Water rushing through pipes, the occasional squeal of metal stressing.
I turned, still hunkered down, put my back  against the wall and took a deep breath of the
cold,  sharp  air.  Sully  moved  as  I  did.  We  did  nothing,  said  nothing  for  a  moment.  Just  so  I
could hear it clearly.
Welcome home.
I felt, more than saw, his wicked Sully-grin. “Downlevel?” he whispered.
“Downlevel.”
We soft-footed, carefully, quickly. It was always possible to run into a maintenance tech or
worse, a crew. But, as I’d told Sully and Ren while we  were  on  the  Karn,  they  were  typically
loud, noisy. They had a right to be in the core. Stealth was unnecessary for them.

The double red light on the wall ahead signaled a ladder. I headed for it, stopped just short
of it and touched Sully’s arm. “The double lights,” I whispered. “Down or up, they—”
His hand clamped over my mouth  just as a noisy clang sounded followed by several short
clanks.  A  light  flashed  above  us  as  an  accessway  opened.  We  flattened  ourselves  against  the
walls.
A woman’s  voice  sounded  harsh,  tired.  “Goddamned  breaker  feeds.  Think  they’d  invent
one that’d last more than two goddamned weeks.”
Another voice, unintelligible but male, filtered in from the corridor.
“Yeah, yeah, budget. Well, screw budget,” she answered. There was more clanking, then a
hissing sound and a loud clank.
Then darkness.
I let out my breath in a long rush. “Sully—”
“Hush, Chasidah.” Fingers against my lips. Listen.
I listened.
Let  me  link  with  you.  There  is  safety  in  this.  No  sounds  from  us  as  we  move,  but  no  lapse  in
information either.
I started to open my mouth to speak but caught my action. You can do this, without touching
me?  I  was  used  to  the  occasional  mental  comments  that  accompanied  his  touch,  but  didn’t
know he could keep a constant link with me especially when we were single file on  a  narrow
walkway.  I  wasn’t  a  Stolorth,  or  Ragkir.  Then  I  remembered  his  angry  probe  spearing  my
thoughts when we’d encountered the Morgan Loviti.
I can, yes. He hesitated for a moment and I damned the uncertainty he no doubt had sensed
in my mind. Will you be comfortable with this?
Yes. No problems. After all, he’d also been in my mind when we made love.
Okay. I felt his smile, his warmth. Got it.
I reached for the ladder. Stopped and put my fingers instead on his arm. Sully?
Yes, Chasidah.
All  my thoughts? When we made love, I was focused on him. But I belatedly realized  now
that our current situation might lend itself to some rather undiplomatic  thoughts  on  my  part
from time to time. I’d be in the captain-mode, not lover-mode. I didn’t want him hurt by the
kind of things he’d uncovered when we’d met up with Philip’s ship.
Except for emergencies, your touch or mine is the signal.
I climbed down first, Sully following. Reached Level 28’s grated, narrow platform. Swung
off the ladder, grabbed the handholds, scooted sideways.
Touch. Blue’s across the way, I told him. Yellow’s closer.

Double or nothing?
Oh, shut up.
It took us five minutes to go a quarter of the way around the core, almost to the single bank
of lifts between Yellow and Blue. There were no more interruptions,  no  more  flashes  of  light.
Only the clank and clatter and hiss of a station at work.
I  stopped  at  the  third  access  panel,  its  handle  painted  yellow  as  the  one  we’d  entered
through  was  painted  green.  It  was  difficult  to  see  in  the  dim  lighting  but  then  maintenance
techs all had handbeams. We did too, but not to use right now. Not unless we had to.
Touch.  Mid-point  here,  I  told  him.  We  had  to  exit  the  access,  unseen,  and  cross  the  corridor.
Blend into any stationers passing by, our jackets covering our weapons.
He fingered the access lock. Ready?
I nodded. He pulled it back  an inch. I listened, held up one hand when  I  heard  footsteps,
forgetting I could send my thoughts. The footsteps faded.
Touch. I remembered this time. Okay.
He slid the access hatch sideways. We slipped through, straightening quickly  as  if  we  just
stepped from an office, not the core.
The corridor was quiet, though I could hear voices far behind us. Sully draped on arm over
my  shoulder,  pinning  my  braid  down.  I  reached  back  and  flipped  it  out.  He  snugged  me
closer. Just two freighter crew or techs on break, catching a little body-heat time.
Windowless  metal  doors  studded  the  bulkhead  on  our  left.  Some  had  names.  In-system
Datatronics. Alexander Sound and Vid. Storage Locker 6-Yellow.
We were looking for Storage Bay 10-Yellow.
A man in a blue lab coat walked quickly by, head down, eyes on the datapad in his hand. I
turned casually as he passed to read the letters on the back of his coat. In-system Datatronics.
What did I expect, Jukor Gen-Labs?
Probably won’t say Crossley Burke, either.
Quit peeking!
Gentle laughter filtered through his link with me. Sorry.
Sorry, my ass.
We can discuss that as well, if you like. But later.
I elbowed him. So much for a subtle touch signaling my thoughts.
But I knew what he was doing. My heart pounded. I’d crossed nervous when we’d left our
appropriated  office  on  Level  27.  I  was  into  scared  that  could  head  easily  into  panic,  Fleet
training or no. He was trying to keep me relaxed, trying to keep me from focusing on the fact
that I had to face a jukor again.

Only  fools,  as  Amaris  had  taught  me,  had  no  fears.  And  jukors,  winged  hellspawned
demons that were immune even to the mind talents of a Ragkiril, ranked right up there on the
top of my list.
Storage Bay 9.
We slowed. I could see a wide set of doors about ten feet ahead of us on the left. I sniffed.
Nothing.  We  came  closer.  I  sniffed  again.  Jukors  had  a  rank,  rotting  smell.  Though  how
someone  wouldn’t  notice,  and  inquire,  had  probably  already  been  considered  by  Cousin
Hayden and friends. They’d have to have put powerful air recyclers in place.
Storage Bay 10.  Doors were locked, in need of painting.  But  the  dust  on  the  decking  was
mottled, unlike the undisturbed coating of dust in front of Storage Bay 9.
Someone had walked through those doors, recently.
Sully slowed, stopping a few feet past. Touch. Wait. One hand rested on my shoulder, the
other in his pocket. He pulled out a handful of lightpens and dropped them  on the floor. Then
bent down to pick them up.
Innocent and not uncommon situation.
I stooped to help.
His eyes were infinite, dark. He stared over my shoulder  as  I  picked  up  the  pens,  one  by
one. Something  hazed, flickered over his face, briefly, very briefly. If I hadn’t seen it before,  I
wouldn’t have noticed it.
Gray fuzzy soft.
Then it was gone. He pulled me to my feet and pushed us onward.
Touch. No.
No? Disappointment mixed with relief. That means 17-Blue.
Great. There goes my shot at double or nothing.
The arm draped over my shoulder seemed to weigh a little heavier this time.
We crossed into Blue. Our target was another storage bay. This one was numbered 17.
More offices, more repair shops. Many more doors with no names. Several storage lockers
and bays. We almost collided with two stripers exiting from one, a pallet between them  loaded
with boxes labeled ‘toilet paper.’
I scooted sideways as soon as I saw the uniforms. Shit!
Prophetic, that.
Oh, shut up.
Yes, my angel.
The stripers didn’t even look twice at us. Marker Shipyards had always prided itself on its
security. If you were on M-2, then you’d been cleared and belonged here.

Storage Bay 15. 16. Then 17, only a few steps away. I was prepared for the routine this time:
pens  scattering  to  the  floor  and  both  of  us  bending  down.  Sully  turned.  His  eyes  seemed
incredibly dark, incredibly distant. I caught the faint shimmer of something silvery.  But  for  a
few seconds longer this time.
I tried  sniffing  but  smelled  only  dust  this  close  to  the  decking.  But  here  too,  the  dust  in
front of 17 was blotchy.
Sully  straightened,  slowly,  took  the  pens  I  offered,  pocketing  them  absently.  His  arm
clasped tightly around my shoulders, moving me on. We walked.
Sully?
No answer. His eyes were still dark, no difference between pupil and  iris  but  all  obsidian.
Hard.
We kept walking.
Sully?
A minute.
My heart started pounding, hard. I waited and felt as if my throat wanted to close up.
He pulled me into a side corridor and pushed my back  against the wall, his body covering
mine. I could feel him breathing hard, almost rasping now. I raised my hands to his shoulders.
To anyone passing by, we were lovers, catching that serious body-heat time.
He closed his eyes, his lips resting against my forehead. Then his finger touched my mouth.
 Chasidah?
I nodded, waited, listened. Heard one word.
Yes.
 
Chapter Thirty
« ^ » 
A shudder spasmed through me.
Yes. Jukors. Not twenty feet from where we stood. Jukors.
Up until that moment, part of me still felt we might be wrong, prayed we were wrong. The
holo of the mangled body of the Taka woman had been faked. Or the result of something else.
But it wasn’t.  Sully’s  hard  ‘yes’  was  final.  Through  that  one  word,  I  could  feel  he  was  as
shaken as I was.
He didn’t want to believe it, either.
We stood for a few seconds longer then  quickly  broke  apart.  We  knew  where  they  were.

We needed to get back to the schematics, find a way to get in there. We headed for the closest
core access, slipped  in.  Now,  it  was  best  to  be  seen  as  little  as  possible  in  the  corridors.  Best
someone not recognize us, having seen us before.
We found the first ladder, went uplevel. We were still in Blue when we reached Level 27.
Touch. This way. I took him through Red, looping around the main  lift  shafts  jutting  out,
with  narrow  walkways  between  the  three  banks.  No  walls  here  on  the  backside  of  the  lifts,
though, just a high railing on one side, a lower railing on the other. It opened to a wide chasm
of darkness below.
I had a reason. Touch. Emergency shut off for the main lifts, here. If we’re spotted, if stripers are
called,  shut down the lifts. Won’t stop them,  but will  slow them  down. They  never  think  to  use  the
core.
A lift whizzed by us, wind whipping our clothing, my hair, momentarily blocking the thin
stripe of light from the corridor. I grabbed the railing but Sully stood still, perfectly balanced as
if the forced rush of air bothered him not at all. He nodded.
We moved on.
Green. I counted access panels and found ours.  We  knelt  down.  Sully  touched  the  access
lock, touched me. Ready?
An inch of light cracked into our darkness. I listened, then nodded. Clear.
We  moved  quickly,  the  access  panel  sliding  closed  just  as  the  office  door  opened,  Ren
ushered us in.
Coincidence? Then I remembered. Sully had a link with Ren, too.
I stood in the middle of the room and wrapped my arms around my chest. Small explosive
charges were in a neat stack, like ten tiny party favors, at my feet. Hell of a surprise party.
All were keyed for remote activation. All were short range and shouldn’t pierce the station’s
hull. But should, very effectively,  dismantle  anything  inside  a  closed  storage  bay.  The  poison
gas released before that would kill any  living  creature  within  twenty-five  feet  in  seconds.  We
had to get into the lab, plant the charges and seal enviro to keep the gas from leaking out. And
we had to leave, alive.
I stood, hugging myself, listening to Sully confirm to Ren that Hell indeed lived on Level 28
Blue of Marker Two.
“Two breeding  pair.”  Sully  positioned  himself  as  if  he  faced  the  lab,  showing  me,  telling
Ren.  “Here,  on  the  right.  Narrow,  deep  cages.  A  trough  of  some  kind,  fluid  or  liquid,  not
water.” He etched a line in the air with his hand.
“Takas?” Ren asked.
“One female. She’s… she’s in the advanced stages of pregnancy.” He wiped one hand over
his face, visibly distressed.  “The  infant  has  already  started  to  consume  her.  She’s  in  constant
agony. She’s—” He glanced at me, his gaze almost pleading. “I’ll need time  to  put  her  down.
Peacefully.”

I nodded. “You’ll have it.” As if I had any control of what  would  happen  when  we  got  in
there. But I knew he needed my permission to do what he had to do. To be what he was. What
he couldn’t change. Ragkirils could heal. But they could also kill.
I glanced at my watch. Six hours. We had  six  hours  to  meet-point.  No,  five.  We  couldn’t
assume we’d catch the first shuttle. We had to allow a half-hour, an hour to get back  to Marker
Terminal.
And pray no one followed us or tried to stop us.
I uncrossed  my  arms  and  lowered  myself  onto  the  floor  next  to  the  datapad.  It  clicked
softly as I flipped it open. “Storage Bay 17-Blue, Level 28. Outer location means we can’t access
it through the core. But it’s a bay. That means higher ceilings and a larger clearance area above
that  for  overhead  access  to  equipment.  And  if  it  was  ever  used  for  ship  repair…”  I  tabbed
through the schematics, brought up Level 28 only. “Shit. No maintenance pits underneath. We
have  to  find  an  enviro  hatch,  come  in  through  the  overhead.  Trickier.  Weight  will  be  a
problem. It will be crawling all the way. That’s going to slow us down.”
“Only going in,” Sully said wryly. He sat on the floor next to me. Ren was next to him.
Going in really was our only problem. Going out we’d use the main bay doors. Quickly.
“Guards? Med-techs?” Ren asked.
“One lab tech, human,  male,” Sully answered. “Right now. In a private office,  on  the  left.
I’ll take him out, get the Taka. You two handle the charges.”
I paged through the schematics while he spoke, hoping to find  some  easier  way  in,  like  a
tandem bay. Some  of them  were built that way, with false walls, moveable for expansion. But
not Storage Bay 17-Blue.
“We’ll need the files in that office, too. Whatever you can grab.”
“Agreed.” Sully peered over my shoulder. “Did you find an enviro hatch?”
“Closest one’s at the 24  mark.  We’ll  have  to  backtrack.”  I  kept  paging.  It  looked  like  the
only way. I took my fingers off the touchpad and rested them  on my knees. Asked what I had
to know but didn’t want to know. “When?”
“My first instinct is to go back there, now. But I don’t think that’s the best plan. It’s better if
we do it as close as we can to meet-point. The gas we’ll release as soon as we clear the lab doors
and they seal. That  should  take  care  of  the  jukors.  The  explosives  I’ll  key  when  we’re  in  the
shuttle. I don’t want to wait too long in the terminal. Once those charges blow, they’re going to
be looking for us. I guarantee the lab’s wired for alarms. We have to realize we could get caught
at the terminal. They might not let Gregor bring the Karn in.”
“Eventually, they have to.” I just hoped it was before Ren’s forty-eight hours were up. “So,
when?”
“We’re  five  hours  from  meet-point,  given  transit  time.  I  say  at  the  two  hour  mark,  we
move. Agreed?” Sully’s gaze switched from me to Ren. We both nodded.
“Okay.” He brushed my hair back from my face, then ran his hand down my braid. “Now,

no worries until then. We go in with clear minds.”
“And empty pockets?” I asked as his hand snuck inside his jacket.
He brought out his deck of cards with a wicked, wicked Sully-grin on his lips. “I’ve got to
recoup that double or nothing. Besides, I have a new theory.”
I turned back to the datapad. Sully and his card theories could be painful to watch.
“Shall I deal?” Ren asked.
“Only if you keep your hands in sight at all times. And pull up those sleeves.”
“Certainly. Glad to oblige.”
God.  We  were  sitting  in  Marker  Two  with  enough  explosives  to  take  out  a  gen-lab—a
genlab breeding jukors—and the most pressing issue was a game of cards.
But I couldn’t help myself. I watched the first two hands. I counted the angel of heart-stars
cards, holding every one in memory  as a good omen. We needed all the  good  omens,  and  all
the good blessings, we could get.
What  was  it  Berri  Solaria  said  as  she  left  us?  Something  about  the  Abbot’s  holy  sword
guiding our way.  Appropriate  image.  The  sword  often  stuck  out  of  the  winged  backs  of  the
demons in the Englarian paintings. But all I had was my little dagger. Not jukor-proof, that.
I paged  through  the  datapad  and  picked  up  the  data  on  Crossley  Burke  again.  The  firm
maintained a small office here on Two, uplevel, where the real estate got expensive. Shame  we
couldn’t get into that  as  well.  I  was  in  the  mood  to  find  out  just  what  kind  of  contributions
Burke made to charity. I could still picture him in his finery, oozing through that party… The
image of the sultry woman in blue flashed through my mind again. Superimposed, this time,
with another image.
My hands hovered over the touchpad.
It couldn’t be. I had to be wrong.
I pulled up the vid, much smaller now on the datapad screen. Hit enlarge, enlarge, enlarge.
Refocused.  Brought  her  in,  brought  her  face  in,  the  arrogant  tilt  of  a  chin,  the  thin  delicate
features.  I  wasn’t  distracted  by  the  elaborate  makeup  highlighting  her  features  this  time.  I
recognized a smile as pure as an angel’s. Or as wicked as a devil from Hell.
Berri Solaria. With her  hair  down  around  her  shoulders,  not  back  in  a  bun  as  I’d  always
seen  it.  And  it  was  several  shades  lighter.  Her  makeup  was  skillfully  applied.  I  stared  at  the
entrancingly beautiful Sister Berri Solaria. Leaning on Hayden Burke’s arm.
“Sully!”  I  barked  out  his  name.  My  hands  shook.  I  pointed  to  the  screen.  “It’s  her.  She
knows him. She knows Hayden and Lazlo.”
“Who,  Chaz?  What—?”  He  leaned  toward  me,  the  smile  dying  from  his  face.  Cards
fluttered through his fingers. His eyes snapped to infinite black. I felt something move through
the room, like a hot, angry wind.
“Bitch!” He knelt in front of the pad and grabbed for Ren. Webbed  fingers clasped his and

the blind Stolorth saw.
“By the stars. No.” Agony laced Ren’s words.
“Look.” I segued quickly to the image of her with Lazlo. Her back  was to the camera, but
her hand was clearly on his shoulder. It was the same glossy honey colored hair and rich blue
dress.
Sully  shot  to  his  feet.  Cards  scattered,  fluttering.  “We  move.  We  move  now.  The  bitch
works for Hayden. She knows we’re here. What we’re doing. Which means, so does he.”
I felt the holy sword of Abbot Eng pierce right through the middle of my back.
I grabbed his arm. “They’ll have guards—”
“They  didn’t  an  hour  ago.”  He  checked  the  Carver,  adjusted  the  straps  of  his  shoulder
holster quickly. “She may not have reached him yet. Or she may not know our schedule.”
“What does she know?” Ren was calm, the voice of reason.
“Whatever Verno’s told her,” Sully shot back. He was angry, sparing no one.
“Verno didn’t know we knew the location of the lab,” I said, pulling on  my  jacket.  “Slow
down. Five minutes isn’t going to make a difference now.”
Sully hesitated, his mouth a thin line. But he listened.
“Verno  didn’t  know  we  had  the  labs  located  on  Level  28.  Berri  only  knows  we  took  the
shuttle to M-2.”
“No,” Ren said. “She left first, for M-3. And none of us mentioned M-2 around her.”
“But Verno knew we were headed for M-2,”  Sully argued. “She knows we’re here to  take
out the labs.”
“Then it’s a 50-50  split,” I said. “She knows we’re in Marker Two, looking for the lab. She
doesn’t know we know where they are.”
“She  said  she  wanted  the  labs  destroyed  as  well,”  Ren  said.  “Or  was  she  lying?  I  never
sensed a falseness.”
“I never heard her say she wanted the lab destroyed.” Sully’s voice  was  flat.  “All  she  ever
said was she wanted in on our mission. She called it her ‘holy mission.’ We all just assumed…”
He clenched his fist, took a deep breath. “We  assumed  too  goddamned  much.  I  should  have
seen, I should have known her coming to us was too easy. Too much  coincidence. But, God! I
wanted the easy way in, after all we’d been through. After losing Milo.”
“Is it possible,”  Ren  asked,  “her  concern,  and  Hayden’s,  is  not  the  lab  but  control  of  the
Sullivan fortune?”
I  remembered  Sully’s  comment  about  his  being  the  real  heir.  Not  Hayden.  It  was  an
enormous  amount  of  money  to  have  at  one’s  control.  I  could  understand  why  a  man  like
Hayden Burke would kill for it.
“Hayden knows you’re alive,” I told Sully. “That’s not an assumption. That’s a fact.”

Sully nodded. “All the more reason we move and move now. Should have moved,” he said,
shoving the charges into the inside pockets of his jacket, “when we confirmed the lab.”
“They’ll watch for us at the terminal.” Ren had a handful of charges. “She’s knows the Boru
Karn.”
The holy sword of purity.
Sully nodded. “We may need another way out of the shipyards. I only hope Gregor’s smart
enough not to let himself get taken.”
I only hoped we’d live long enough to find out if he was.
I put the rest of the charges in my pocket, packed up the  datapad,  scooped  up  the  cards.
Sully handed me the robes. I shoved them in the duffle.
“We bring the  bag  into  the  core,  leave  it  near  an  access  panel.  One  we  think  we  can  get
back to. If we can get back to it, fine. If not,” he held up a charge. “This will be inside. It’ll blow
when the labs do. I don’t give a damn who it takes with it, either.”
He picked up the duffle and slung it over his shoulder. “Let’s go.”
We  moved  though  dim,  red-tinged  darkness,  through  the  clank  and  clang,  through  the
hiss, through the high-whine of some unknown mechanism  far below.  Ren,  between  us,  was
the least hampered by the darkness. He lived in darkness, followed thermals.
We  downleveled  and  hit  28  Green.  Ten  minutes  to  walk  halfway  around  the  core.  We
couldn’t hurry. The walkway was narrow. Hurrying could kill you.
Exiting  at  Blue,  we  left  the  duffle  behind  just  inside  the  access  hatch.  Ren’s  silvery-blue
braid  swung  as  he  walked.  No  hiding  he  was  Stolorth  at  this  point.  Fortunately,  there  were
others in the shipyards. But he would, if we were seen, be remembered.
Past  Bay  17.  Sully  shuddered  slightly,  sensing  the  jukors,  sensing  the  dying  Taka,  the
winged beast in her belly clawing, tearing its way out. There may not be time to put her down
peacefully. Quickly might be all we could give her.
One  shot,  center  mass.  And  a  prayer.  There  were  people  in  the  corridor.  Instinctively  I
noticed  them,  categorized  them,  but  only  as  threat  or  non-threat.  No  stripers  and  none  that
had uniforms like private security guards. There were a few  techs  in  lab  coats,  maybe  one  in
overalls. I couldn’t tell if they were male. Or female. I didn’t care.
A single doorway loomed. Enviro 24.  That held an accessway to the air-handlers and recyc
filters,  as  well  as  whatever  else  maintenance  and  station  designers  wanted  to  stuff  in  the
overheads.
I noticed someone coming, a woman, a pallet trailing behind her. We slowed, as if stopping
for  conversation  but  no  words  came.  None  of  us  could  think  of  anything  to  say.  But  we
couldn’t  just  stand  awkwardly  in  front  of  the  doorway,  mute.  And  we  didn’t  have  time  to
waste by moving on, backtracking.
I looked at Ren, trying to force words out of my brain when Sully grabbed me and kissed
me  hard.  I  could  hear  Ren  laugh,  softly,  hear  the  woman’s  footsteps,  the  low  hum  of  the

anti-grav  pallet  getting  louder.  And  I  could  feel  Sully.  Heat  cascaded  through  me,  swirling,
cresting. I wrapped my arms around his neck,  thrust my fingers into his short, thick hair just
as my tongue thrust into his mouth.  It met his own as we tasted, no, devoured each other. An
hour from now we could be dead. I might never kiss  him  again.  No! The  word  shot  into  my
mind, sweet, pleading and aching. Gabriel will not lose you. I heard a woman’s light chuckle.  “I
think this means she said yes,” Ren told her. I leaned my face against Sully’s chest, breathless.
“Tell ‘em the honeymoon comes after the wedding.” Her footsteps faded quickly, more quickly
than  she  came.  I  forgot.  She  was  talking  to  a  Stolorth.  Don’t  be  impolite.  But  don’t  tarry.  I
looked up at Sully. “Good thinking.” He answered with  a  sad  smile,  but  no  words.  The  poet
had run out of words, again. “Any  more?”  he  asked  Ren.  “No.”  Sully  pulled  out  a  thin  tool,
touched the lock on the door and watched the lights dance.
Click. It slid open. “Go.”
We  surged  into  a  small  room  cramped  with  duct  ways  and  squat  filters.  Cables  snaked
overhead, disappearing  through  a  large  hole  in  the  ceiling.  Metal  bars  hung  down  from  one
side.
Sully reached up and pulled down a telescoping ladder.
I went up first.
It was hands and knees crawling on a narrow  rampway  that  creaked  under  our  weight.  I
found that placing my hands, and knees, on the outer edges kept sound to a minimum.  When
the creaking stopped behind me, I knew Sully and Ren had done the same.
It wasn’t as dark as the core. Light filtered in from the overheads in the corridor on our left,
blocked  only  by  the  thick  bulkheads  that  spanned  to  the  outer  hull  of  the  station.  Narrow
passageways  had  been  cut  into  each  one,  with  recessed  hatches  that  sealed  in  case  of  a  hull
breech. We had to pass through seven to reach the gen-lab.
I counted down in my mind. Six. Five. Four. Three. Two.
I stopped, waiting until Sully and Ren were closer behind  me.  When  I  glanced  back  over
my shoulder, I caught Sully’s nod, answered it.
His  voice  sounded,  clearly,  unexpectedly  in  my  mind.  It  wasn’t  preceded  by  a  touch.
Chasidah. We link. You. Me. Ren.
I borrowed his favorite phrase. Got it.
Got it, too. Ren was now in my mind, through the link with Sully.
I went forward, slowly, barely breathing. I could smell  the  fetid  odor  of  the  jukors.  Huge
enviro boosters were off to my left, blocking much  of the light from the corridor. But it didn’t
matter. Because the light from the lab filtered up through the breaks in the ceiling panels.
I moved another few inches, listening.
Then I heard it. A wheezing. Something crackling. Like the sound tissue paper would make
if it were made of glass.
I crept  forward  on  my  knees  in  my  odd,  wide  gait,  looking  for  a  break  in  the  ceiling,

looking for a way we could get down, into the labs, as quickly as possible.
Some  ductwork had tilted, leaving a hole as big around  as  my  fist.  It  wasn’t  far  from  the
rampway. I leaned to my left, held my breath. The stench was stronger. I looked down.
The long, grotesque face of a jukor stared back.  Mucus dripped from its snout. And its red
eyes gleamed back at me like the fires of the damned in the depths of Hell.
 
Chapter Thirty-One
« ^ » 
I  jerked  back.  Sully’s  arm  on  my  shoulder  was  the  only  thing  that  kept  my  head  from
slamming  into  the  hard  metal  ceiling.  He  pulled  me  sideways,  against  him.  I  was  breathing
hard, bile rising in my throat.
Easy, Chasidah. Calm. Ren’s presence floated through me.
I  tried  to  focus  on  Sully,  my  eyes  blinking  rapidly.  God.  God.  But  what  I  saw  looked
nothing like  anything  any  God  had  ever  made.  Ever  could’ve  made.  I’d  never  seen  one  that
close, that clearly before. The ones in the transport ship  had  been  caged,  crated.  I’d  only  run
escort, and had been on board the transport ship only briefly.
The one on Moabar had attacked at night. The forest had been shadowed. Its hideousness,
less distinct.
I  heard  the  crackling  noise  again.  Wings  moved  below  me.  That  was  followed  by  a
wheezing, snuffling sound. The jukor was scenting, for me.
It  knows  we’re  here,  Sully.  A  sick  feeling  rolled  through  me  again.  Then  immediately
something cool, like clear water. Ren.
It senses something, Sully answered. It doesn’t know what.  That’s okay.  It senses people  passing
in the corridor all the time.
A parade out there might be a nice distraction. Know any way we could rig one?
Another gentle nudge from Ren.
My breathing slowed.
Our greatest threat, Sully said, is from the lab  tech. Still just one. Male.  In the office.  He’s most
likely armed. One of us needs to crawl out there, take him out from above.
Sully pointed toward the far corner. Out there meant  no rampway.  Out there meant  using the
ductways themselves, and the narrow cross beams they rested on.
Out  there  meant  the  lightest  of  us  all.  Me.  One  more  kill  to  add  to  Captain  Chasidah
Bergren’s list of the dead.
This was the first one I knew I wouldn’t mind.

I sat back  on my heels, checked  my functional, reliable Stinger, reholstered it.  Sully’s  and
Ren’s voices flitted through my mind. There was an airlock on the exterior wall. Evidently the
lab used it, and the access ring beyond it. That was why  no  one  else  in  Marker  had  reported
any  knowledge  of  the  lab.  All  they  had  to  do  was  clear  the  beacons—which  for  someone  of
Hayden Burke’s wealth and power, wasn’t difficult to do—and then gain entry to Marker Two
from their own private loading bay.
That bay also had two ladders flanking the wall. They led to the manual overrides here, in
the overhead. I considered suggesting opening the airlock, disabling the force field, letting the
lab, jukors and solitary tech get sucked out into the blackness of space.
Nice thought,  but we might  not get behind  the airtights in  time.  Plus,  we  need  the  files  in  that
office. That’s one of the reasons why we’re here, Sully said, being practical. You’re okay with this?
Yes. It wasn’t as if I’d never killed another sentient being before.
I kneeled  on  the  rampway,  then  pushed  myself  onto  the  ductwork.  It  creaked,  buckled
slightly.  Shit.  I  adjusted  my  weight,  using  my  palms  to  test  each  section  as  I  moved,  slid,
crawled.
Below me, jukors crackled, hissed, wheezed. I could also hear a low, keening cry. The Taka,
in intense pain and dying. It tore at me.
I crossed over the main section of the  lab,  a  wide  area.  Through  infrequent  breaks  in  the
ceiling  I  could  see  monitors,  a  bed  with  restraints,  and  other  equipment  I  had  no  way  to
identify other than lumping it as medical in function. I was aware of Sully and  Ren,  felt  their
presence, heard their voices. Both distinctly different.
I was almost to the lab’s office. I placed my hands on the next section of ductwork and felt
it  give,  rapidly.  I  pulled  back,  hunching  over.  The  ductwork  rested  on  a  narrow  platform.  I
could fit one boot, but not two. But I had no choice. I stepped down, my back  cramping, my
knees  hurting,  my  heels  hanging  over  the  edge.  If  I  fell  backwards,  I’d  crash  through  the
ceiling into the lab. If the tech were armed, I’d probably be dead before I hit the floor.
I held my breath, worked on calming my heart thumping against my ribs. Then I moved.
Slowly.
A crossbeam. Finally. The edge of the office. Then  another  large  air  booster  and  filter,  for
the office alone. The med tech would spend most of his time in  there  because,  even  with  the
boosters filtering the main lab, the stench was nauseating. I sidled over to the booster. The duct
was snug, no gaps. It took  me  five  minutes  to  peel  back  the  tape,  to  open  a  hole  to  where  I
could see into the office below.
Sounds drifted up. The trill of an intercom. I heard the tech answer, his name garbled. The
caller, on speaker, was clearer.
“H.Q.  just  notified  us  of  a  possible  intruder.  Code  Red  status  immediately.  Secure  all
doors.”
Berri had finally reached Hayden.
I felt Sully’s agreement with my assessment. There was no time left now.

I lay the short barrel of the Stinger against the small opening, targeted the top of the  med
tech’s head. Fired.
He slumped backward in his chair, his head lolling to one side.
Go! I told Sully. Go!
I ripped the rest of the duct away, put my boot through the ceiling tile, once, then again. It
buckled, resisted, then finally collapsed, falling onto the desk below.
I grabbed the support beam under the unit, swung myself down. My boots dangled a good
fifteen feet from the desk—more than that from the floor.
I let go and tried to remember  to bend  my  knees  as  I  hit  the  desk.  For  all  my  training,  I
skidded sideways, flailing, and ended up tumbling against the tech’s lifeless body.
Sully  pulled  me  upright.  “Good  work.  I  activated  the  airtight  seals.  I  need  to  break  into
these files, grab what I can. Go help Ren.”
I charged through the office door.
The  stench  hit  me  immediately.  That  and  the  frenzied  flapping  of  the  jukors—four  of
them—in  their  cages.  Ren  had  one  hand  on  a  long  table  near  the  center,  placing  charges
underneath. He was feeling his way. Tables had no thermals.
I reached into my jacket and grabbed two explosives, then placed them on either side of the
door. Two more I put near the  Taka’s  cage.  Her  eyes  were  wide  with  fear.  She  tried  to  prop
herself up on  her  cot,  her  large  belly  protruding  grotesquely  through  the  thin  shift  covering
her. It was filthy, stained. It occurred to  me  then  I  had  no  idea  how  large  jukors  were  when
they were born. But I doubted even a Taka child would make her look so.
I reached through the bars and offered my hand. She  fell to her knees, pulled herself over
to clasp it, tears rolling down her face. I could see her body spasm. “It will all be over soon.” I
couldn’t think what else to tell her. She drew her hand back, lay her long, furred fingers on her
belly.  “Kill  this.  Kill  me.  Please.”  Dark  gold  blood  trickled  from  her  mouth  as  she  spoke.  I
nodded,  choking  back  my  tears.  I  had  to  turn  away.  Something  trilled  behind  me.  The
lab-tech’s intercom and someone demanding he respond. I felt Sully’s frustration, anguish. No
more time. We have to get out of here. The Taka—Chasidah,  there’s no time. I’m sorry. Sully! A
moment’s hesitation  was  laced  with  despair.  Fuck.  He  strode  quickly  from  the  office,  Carver
aimed at the lock on her cage. It disintegrated as he moved. She  tried to stand. He waved her
down.  “No,  sister.  It’s  better  if  you…  just  stay  there.”  He  knelt  beside  her,  taking  her  large
hand in  his.  The  Taka’s  face  twisted  in  fear  for  a  moment,  but  then  Sully’s  voice  seemed  to
make that fade. “Guardian of light, Guardian of wisdom, of love… sister, you don’t know me,
but you do. Sleep will come now, peace will come. But you must trust me. You must listen to
me.” She nodded. “You will feel me in your mind—” She  jerked her hand, but Sully hung on.
“Sister,  it  will  not  hurt.  The  pain  will  be  gone  in  a  moment.”  She  laid  her  hand  against  her
belly. “Kill this.” He nodded. “I will.” She closed her eyes. “Do it. Blessings be with you.” “And
with  you,  sister.  Listen  to  me,  listen  to  my  voice…”  Gray  fuzzy  soft.  It  flowed  over  Sully,
flowed over the Taka. Then a dark energy rippled suddenly over Sully’s body, moving, rising.
Ren’s hand on my shoulder startled me. “We need to wait by the door. They’ve probably sent a
security team.”

I  turned  for  the  wide  doors  and  didn’t  look  at  the  jukors,  flapping  wildly,  slamming
themselves against the cage. I didn’t look at Sully behind me, silent now. I drew out my laser
pistol, checked the charge, held it up. Ren did the same by touch. We flanked the doors.
“Anyone out there?” Ren tilted his head, sensing, listening. Suddenly the jukors screamed,
a high, shrill piercing noise. Instinctively  I  turned  but  Ren  grabbed  my  shoulder.  “Chasidah!
Wait. Don’t turn.” I remembered Sully’s voice. No, don’t turn… don’t turn. “Ren?”
“The jukor infant.” He said the words hurriedly. “The Taka’s passing expelled it. Let Sully
do what he has to.”
I closed  my  eyes,  felt  my  stomach  clench.  There  was  another  piercing  scream,  a  frantic
beating of wings. The air seemed alive, stinking. Then Ren’s grip eased.
“It’s over.”
I saw pain etched on his face and heard heavy footsteps behind me. Sully.
“Get the doors.” His voice rasped. “Let’s get the hell out of here.”
I hit the palm pad. The doors irised open. Sully was  at  my  back,  Carver  out.  I  wanted  to
turn, to look at his face, to touch him but to do that would mean to see the bodies of the Taka
and the jukor infant. I didn’t want to remember that. I knew if I saw it, I’d never forget it.
I stepped into the doorway, braced my back against the jamb  and checked  the corridor for
movement. Ren did the same, seeing without seeing.
“Clear,” I said.
“Clear,” he said.
We  moved  out,  our  pistols  tucked  just  out  of  sight  under  our  arms.  The  corridor  was
empty, for now. H.Q. had sent a Code Red to the lab. I could only guess what else was on  its
way.
“I’ll  release  the  gas  when  we  hit  the  core.”  Sully  had  the  transmitter  in  his  pocket.  We
walked  quickly  back  toward  the  accessway,  toward  the  duffle  and  the  robes  which  would
grant us innocuous identities again.
Suddenly, I heard noises. Footsteps, running, thudding.
How many? Ren asked.
We slowed, our pistols coming out.
Seven.  Eight.  Sully  stopped.  His  left  hand  snaked  to  his  pocket  and  pulled  out  the
transmitter. There was a barely noticeable flick  of  his  thumb.  I  heard  muted  thumps  behind
me in rapid succession. “They’re at our access point.”
“Blow it,” I told him, meaning our duffle, with the charge. It might distract them,  give  us
time to find another way out.
Another flick, a breath and then a muffled explosion.
“This way.” He grabbed my arm.

We turned and ran past  the  lab,  silent  now,  past  the  short  corridor  on  our  right  with  no
core access panel. The next was farther down,  around  the  corridor’s  curve,  past  more  locked
doors, vacant storerooms. We were still in Blue.
“Option.” I huffed as we ran. “Secondary lift bank in Yellow. We could—”
Four men,  armed, appeared around the curve  in  the  corridor  in  front  of  us.  Not  stripers.
They were private security, with unknown emblems on their shirts. And pistols in their hands,
drawn, targeting.
“Down!” Sully shoved me against the corridor wall.
Laser fire spit through the air.
I landed  on  my  backside,  swung  my  arm,  fired.  Sully  was  behind  me.  Ren  was  in  the
middle of the corridor, prone, laser pistol in his hand, answering with fire of his own.
The men  jumped sideways, hugged  the  interior  edges  of  the  corridor  as  we  did,  utilizing
the curve.
Ren! Now! Sully leaned out, sprayed  the  corridor  with  fire,  covering  Ren  as  he  scrambled
toward us. He slammed against the wall in front of me.
“You okay?” I asked him.
Yes. Praise the stars.
Laser  fire  erupted  behind  us.  Sully  swung  around,  the  Carver’s  high-pitched  whine  like
staccato.
Shit.  Where  in  hell  were  the  stripers?  These  weren’t—Burke’s.  Sully  answered  in  my  mind,
following my thoughts as he fired. Star-over-X emblem. Crossley Burke.
So where in hell are the stripers?
Probably putting out a fire somewhere. Diversionary tactics. It’s what I’d have done.
The four to my right popped out again, fired. Shit. I swung around, targeted, missed.
The others were coming closer. Eight of them, Sully had said.
We were trapped. There was no doorway behind us, no short corridor. Across was a vacant
storage locker, but that would go nowhere. Even if we could decode the lock in time, it would
simply serve as a coffin. Only the gradual curve of the corridor kept us alive.
“Sullivan!” A woman’s voice called out. I identified it as Sully did. Berri Solaria.
I wanted her to step into view around the corridor’s curve. Badly.
“Sullivan!” she called again.
“Blessings of the hour, Sister.” A wicked smile flitted across his mouth.  “How may I assist
you?”
“Step out. Drop your weapons. You won’t be harmed.”

I couldn’t see her, but at least the four behind us stopped firing.
“Please tell Cousin Hayden I regret I can’t do that.”
“Fool!  If  your  life  means  nothing  to  you,  then  how  about  the  woman?  And  your
demon-spawned friend?”
“Bargaining with me, Berri?”
“Those of us who know our holy mission are always prepared to show mercy.”
“A holy mission that breeds jukors?” Sully glanced up and down the corridor as he spoke,
assessing, planning. I knew  he  was  reading  her,  reading  those  in  her  group.  Whatever  link  I
had with him and Ren had gone quiet. He was buying time, talking to her, but I had no  idea
why.
“A holy mission to cleanse the Empire of  the  filth  of  soul-stealers.  Surely  you  understand
that!”
“Some of my best friends are soul-stealers,” he yelled back to her.
“Bastard!” she shouted. “Infidel!”
Ren touched my arm. Chasidah.
I glanced at him. Glanced past him, past the four men  flattened against the corridor walls.
And  I  saw  something  move,  something  large  and  shadowy,  behind  them.  I  saw  the  distinct
outline of a Norlack, pointing.
Verno. With a rifle that most eight foot tall Takas normally didn’t need.
Praise the stars.
Four short bursts and Sully was suddenly, pushing, shoving. “Go! Go!”
I ran backward, firing, spraying cover. Sully did the same.
Berri’s people fired back, but there were four less now, and we had an open passageway.
I  could  hear  Berri  screaming  behind  us.  Something  about  Lazlo.  Call
 Lazlo.
Reinforcements. More of their people, more weapons.
“Here!” Sully darted down the inner corridor with core access. Lifts. Cut them off.
Reinforcements would be slow in coming without the lifts.
He  slid  the  panel  back.  We  tumbled  through  into  the  darkness.  I  grasped  Verno’s  arm.
“How—?”
“I knew. When she hated Ren, I knew.”
That was all we had time to say. Voices, loud and angry,  trumpeted  in  from  the  corridor.
“Red’s that way!” Lights flickered as the main lifts moved  up  and  down.  I  pushed  past  Sully
and  skittered  down  the  rampway  just  as  the  access  panel  slid  open  again.  Berri’s  people,
following us. Sully turned and fired. “Split up!” Ren and  Verno  were  on  the  other  side.  “Lift
controls. Shut them down!” They headed toward Yellow. We pounded toward Red.

 
Chapter Thirty-Two
« ^ » 
I moved by memory, by touch, not by sight, other than what was illuminated by the flickering
glimmer of lights that signaled the main lift bank.  Three lifts jutted out  into  the  core,  narrow
rampways  between  them.  The  emergency  control  panel  was  set  in  the  middle.  Shut  them
down. Had to shut them down. Then it was only us against Berri and her seven followers.
And I knew the core.
Up. We could go up. The darkness and the latticework of ramps and ladders offered many
more possibilities than the open corridors. We could exit, hit the corridors, then enter the core
again. Move up.
Somehow  I felt if we got to the commercial sector we’d make  it.  That’s  where  the  shuttle
bays were, back to the terminal. That’s where the shops were on the Promenade. More people.
Someone would help.
I heard  Sully  breathing  hard  behind  me,  felt  his  light  contact  with  Ren.  Ren  was  at  an
advantage,  but  a  disadvantage.  The  darkness  didn’t  hamper  him.  The  narrowness  of  the
rampways, and the fact he couldn’t sense them, did.
Watch  Verno, watch  Verno. Sully sent caution  wrapped  in  encouragement.  He  sent  to  Ren
what the  panel  would  look  like,  what  to  do  to  disable  the  secondary  lift  bank.  Only  one  lift
there. Not the three we had.
The station rumbled slightly, jarring me sideways. A small tremor, but I knew what it was.
Sully had set off the explosives in the lab. A final parting gesture. A worthy one.
We crossed into Red,  Berri’s  people  grunting,  careening  behind  us.  They  weren’t  used  to
the core, as I was. They fired occasionally, but off the mark.
We didn’t return fire. It would only give away our location.
The core groaned, clanked, pinged as if to protect us. Machinery squealed on, whined off. I
ignored the sounds, well used to them. I doubted Berri and her people were.
“Sullivan!” Berri’s voice echoed. “You can’t get out. Your ship’s marked. We’ll take her.”
I hoped Gregor was smarter than that. I may not like the man, but I never thought he was
stupid.  At  least  not  stupid  enough  to  let  the  Karn  be  taken.  Dorsie  was  onboard.  I  still  had
hopes for her and Ren.
We got to the main lifts before Verno and Ren reached the secondary. They had to proceed
more slowly, Ren able to see Verno’s thermals and various energy from core panels, but not the
walkway rails and floor.
A lift whizzed by, buffeting us with a sharp wind, plunging us into darkness. Then we were
in the light leaking in from the corridor, silhouetted. Laser fire burst through the air. I ducked

down as Sully did, his hand on my arm.
Chasidah!
I’m okay. I’m trained for this, remember? And I was. I was back in Fleet mode again. Moving.
Focused. Singular.
He squeezed my arm. I’m going to try for the panel. Cover me.
I swung the Stinger out in a two-handed grip, locked on where I’d last heard Berri’s voice,
moved  up  from  that.  Fired.  A  harsh  groan,  a  half  scream.  Not  a  kill.  But  it  gave  them
something to think about. And, I knew, it also gave them a need to search for a med-kit.
I saw and heard more movement. Berri’s people had split up, too. Some  followed us. Some
followed Verno and Ren.
Shit. I should’ve gone with Verno, and Sully with Ren. But things had happened too fast. It
didn’t break  that  way.  Just  like  cards  when  dealt.  Only  this  time,  they  were  more  in  Sully’s
favor than Ren’s.
The lifts behind me shuddered and groaned just as Sully’s Got it! echoed  in  my  thoughts.
Nothing behind us but endless thin stripes of light. Nothing in front of us but the gaping maw
of the core.
And Verno and Ren just now reaching the secondary lifts, with Berri’s people closer, firing
again. As unfamiliar with the core as they were, they could move faster  than  Verno  and  Ren.
The closest exit into the corridor was still ten, twenty feet farther in front of them. They’d never
make  it.  They’d—The  light  of  the  lift  behind  them  approached,  slowly.  Their  silhouettes
disappeared.
I threw images and words, and prayed Ren would understand. On the lift. Top. It’s stopping.
Handholds. Clear space. Ride up!
I felt Sully grab my thoughts. His hand clamped hard on my shoulder as he rose halfway.
His  other  lifted  the  Carver,  laying  down  cover  fire,  drawing  attention  to  us.  Not  Verno  and
Ren.
Two  tall  figures  scrambled  onto  the  stopped  car  that  was  innocently,  conveniently
disgorging its passengers from the other side into the corridor. Passengers who  had  no  idea  a
life and death struggle waged behind them.
Kneel! Handholds on the floor! Grab them! I’d ridden lift cars hundreds of time as a teenager.
A game of betcha-can’t. Betcha-I-can.
The lift moved, surging upward, two forms hunched at its top. I felt Ren’s slight trickle of
amazement. Water moving upstream.
Berri’s people fired but Ren and Verno rose, moving too quickly. Safe. Gone.
That left only Sully and myself.
Berri and her armed associates knew that, too. Sully was who she and Hayden Burke were
really after. Lots of money rested behind that wicked, wicked Sully-smile.

I wondered if Berri realized how expendable she was as well. Hayden Crossley Burke didn’t
strike me as someone willing to share, his charitable works notwithstanding.
My thoughts exactly, angel.
Sully!
Where to? This is your backyard.
Up. I sent images of the crowded corridors on Levels 12 to 15. Shops, bars, hotels. We could
play  a  serious game  of  hide and  seek. Sully’s ability to link with Ren  guaranteed  we’d  find  him
again.
Up it is. We broke in a low run toward Green. Boot steps resounded toward us and behind
us, hoping to converge on us before we hit a ladder.
They  didn’t.  We  did,  upleveling  to  27,  then  26.  I  was  sucking  air,  my  lungs  burning.
Twenty-six dead-ended. We had to go left to pick up the next ladder, our pursuers close on our
heels.
I searched for the double red light, saw it, lunged for it, my hands hitting the cold metal of
the ladder. Pulled, pulled, pulled, hearing Sully breathing hard behind me.
Laser fire burned around us. I zagged, zigged on instinct. Through it all, I blessed my boot
camp instructor, Maguire. Regretted the day I’d ever called her an ignorant slut. She’d taught
me well.
Twenty-five, twenty-four. We hit another dead end, the uplevel ladder far to our right this
time. We had to cross over the now-dead main  lift  banks  in  Red.  We’d  be  open,  exposed  on
both sides, with angry, armed religious fanatics on a holy mission right behind us.
I jogged to the right, stumbling on an uneven section of rampway. Sully caught me under
the armpits and pushed me on. His brief touch was warm, reassuring but contained a flare of
need, desperation, encouragement.
“We’ll make it,” I gasped.
Don’t talk. Save your air. Think.
Got it.
Then  suddenly  there  was  more  movement  on  the  rampways,  more  boot-sounds,  more
shouts. I’d caught a flash of light moments  before,  but  hadn’t  put  it  together.  An  access  had
opened. Berri’s reinforcements had arrived on Level 24.
Three. Only three.
But it was three too many, too  close  to  Sully  and  myself,  momentarily  stopped  at  the  lift
banks, with stripes of light from the closed corridor doors glowing dimly behind us. Laser fire
arced again. I spun, crouching, and fired.
I wasn’t so lucky this time. No groans responded, no med-kit seemed to be required.
Sully fired in the other direction. Berri’s people were between us and any  ladders  uplevel.

We’d killed the lifts. We couldn’t hop on them,  like Ren  and  Verno.  We’d  be  too  exposed  in
the time it would take to reactivate them.  Plus, there was no guarantee one would stop, so we
could climb on.
I  stayed  in  my  crouch,  watching  our  three  new  players  approach.  They  were  our  best
chance. Only three. Still six on the other side, gaining  rapidly.  We  had  to  get  by  those  three.
Had to get to the next ladder—Chasidah.
What?
Two things. Hear me well. First, trust me. Second, under no circumstances, scream.
What?
Sully rose up quickly beside me, pulling me with him.
Arms around my neck, now.
What?
Do it!
He yanked me against him. My arms coiled automatically over his shoulders. Instinctively,
I tightened  my  grip  on  my  gun.  He  raised  his  boot  to  the  railing.  I  didn’t  like  this  position.
There  was  nowhere  to  go  but  down.  And  down,  in  the  middle  of  the  core,  was  a  deadly
location.
“Sully—”
“Sullivan!” Berri was close. The rampway vibrated as feet pounded in approach.
He  grasped  me,  tight,  hard,  locking  my  body  against  his  as  he  pushed  off  from  the
rampway, pushed away from the rampway. We dropped backward into the center of the core,
where there was nothing but darkness, but emptiness, but falling—Don’t scream.
My God. He was committing suicide and taking me with him.
I buried my face against his  shoulder,  but  didn’t  scream.  It  didn’t  matter.  Terror  washed
through  me.  Terror  and  wind  rushing,  gravity  grabbing,  bodies  plummeting…  Sully’s  body
thrusting, moving, surging. Up.
We were going up.
Wind rushed against my face as I raised it, wet with tears.
Wind, against my arms, which were locked around his neck.
Wind, pushing. And a hushed sound.
I knew the sound.
Not wind.
Wings.
I could  see  their  outlines  in  the  smudgy  faint  light  of  the  core.  They  moved  below  my

hands,  below  the  Stinger  I  clutched  tightly,  just  over  Sully’s  shoulders.  Dark,  wide  and
powerful.  Two  curved  arches,  beating,  drawing  power  from  the  cold  air  of  the  core.  From
Sully’s body.
Wings. Like jukors had wings. Strong wings. Grabbing the air, pushing it.
His wings rose, brushed against the  backs  of  my  hands.  I  held  still,  not  breathing,  trying
like hell not to think, not to know… Wings. Sully had wings.
Shape-shifter. I heard Gregor’s voice, hard and ugly. Not like your pretty boy. Or are they?
Wings. Oh God, Sully had wings. Shape-shifter. Hellspawn.
Gregor’s voice again: Not like your pretty boy. Or are they?
I couldn’t see Sully’s face. I didn’t know  what  I  clung  to  as  we  rose,  thrusting,  surging.  I
didn’t want to look, didn’t want to see the burning red eyes. The snout,  crusted  with  mucus.
The fangs.
The elongated face in the painting in the temple  on  Dock  Five  snapped  into  my  mind.  A
jukor’s face. On a man’s muscled, winged body.
Oh. God.
There was a rapid flutter. My body  angled  suddenly  with  his.  I  felt  a  jolt  as  his  boots  hit
something solid. My boots found purchase on the rampway. I snatched my arms away, feeling
soiled, filthy. Terrified. More terrified than when I thought we were going to die.
That would be preferable, to knowing what I did now.
Sully. Gabriel Ross Sullivan. A shape-shifter. Soul-stealer. Wings like a jukor.
I  lurched  backward,  slamming  against  the  wall.  My  knees  were  suddenly  rubbery  and
refusing  to  cooperate.  My  breath  came  in  long,  hard  gasps.  My  stomach  heaved,  twisted.
Unwillingly, my eyes focused on the dark form standing before me.
Wings.  Fluttering,  settling  behind  his  shoulders.  Like  a  long  cape.  A  dark  surge  of
energy—I’d seen it before. On the bridge of the Karn, when Sully had bent over Ren. There’d
been  a  darkness  rippling  over  his  back.  Wings  yet  not  wings.  And  in  front  of  the  pregnant
Taka. Darkness, moving over his back. Ren had turned me away. Don’t look.
Ren knew. Don’t look, he’d said.
Don’t look. Sully’s voice had said those  words  in  gray  fuzzy  soft.  Sully’s  hands,  touching
me, caressing me. Sully, making love to me. But don’t look. Don’t look at what’s touching you.
At what’s making love to you.
My knees gave way. I collapsed onto the gridded rampway with a thud. My gun slid under
my bent legs.
Chasidah.
I cringed and sucked in a sob. He was in my mind. He’d been in my body. Oh, God.
He  knelt  down  slowly,  a  rustle  of  fabric  and…  wings  splaying  behind  him.  My  fingers

coiled through the  latticed  gridwork,  hard.  Painful.  I  hung  on  to  the  flooring  for  no  rational
reason, other than I could.
“Chasidah.” He said my name out loud this time. It was Sully’s voice. But in the dark, his
face was in dim outline. I didn’t know if it was Sully’s form. “We have to find Ren. Verno.”
You go find them. I’ll stay here. It’s nice. Quiet. Dark.
I can’t do that. Warmth flowed, trying to reach me, trying to tell me things words could not.
 Angel, it’s not what it seems.
My gaze flashed to his face,  even  though  I  didn’t  want  it  to.  And  I  saw  Sully.  Just  Sully,
now that he was close. But wings still framed his body. I  didn’t  know  what  he’d  looked  like,
minutes before.
“What are you?” My voice broke, hoarse.
“Someone  who  loves  you.”  He  sounded  almost  as  hoarse,  but  his  words  were  soft.
“Someone  who  can’t  change  what  he  is.  Someone  who  doesn’t  want  to  believe  those  two
things are incompatible.”
I stared  at  him,  part  of  me  intensely  aware  that  we  had  to  find  Ren.  Verno.  Berri  and
Hayden’s people still pursued us. We had to get off Marker alive. But all I could feel was a pain
lacing through me, searing me. Pain of my own doing. I  recognized  it.  I’d  felt  it  before,  with
every step I’d taken with Gabriel Ross Sullivan.
Mercenary. No, not just mercenary. Empath, no, not just empath. Ragkiril. Memory-wipes.
Mind-deaths. Then Gabriel, in my mind. Harsh. Intrusive. Unwanted.
Loving, reaching, caressing. Becoming part of me.
All the while, ask no questions.
Because the answer was one I’d never believe: shape-shifter.
I remembered  his  question  to  me:  Can  Chasidah  accept  Gabriel  as  he  is,  now,  on  faith?
With what she knows, and nothing more?
Explain  faith  to  me.  Explain  goddamned  faith.  Explain  why  I’m  the  one  scared,  hurting,
alone. Ignorant. Every goddamned time.
Explain that to me, damn you!
I waited for an answer, but heard nothing. At least, not from him.
But  another  voice,  one  I  knew  as  Chasidah’s  but  for  a  moment  sounded  almost  like
Amaris’s, spoke to me. And it told me I was still alive. It told me that I was still alive because of
the man, the Ragkiril and shape-shifter, kneeling before me.
There’d been no other way off that rampway. We were surrounded. It was either death, or
up.
I was the one who’d chosen up. And he’d complied, hurtling us  to  safety  up  through  the
core’s deep shadows, where Berri’s people would never think to look for us. If they’d  seen  us
jump, if they’d looked anywhere, it would have been down.

Who  would  have  thought  to  look  up,  for  a  winged  shape-shifter?  Shape-shifters  were
mythical. Imaginary.
I struggled to my feet and tried to focus. I  grabbed  my  Fleet-issue  personality  out  of  cold
storage, slammed it on. “Where are we?” My voice shook but sounded definitely stronger.
Sully rose with me, his wings fading. I shuddered, disbelieving my own eyes.
“Level 13. You felt it would be safer with the shops, people.”
“Did I? What the fuck do I know.” I pushed away from the wall,  remembering  to  holster
my Stinger, and stumbled toward the closest exit I could find.
I kept my distance from the man walking alongside of me as we threaded our way through
stationers  coming  and  going,  eating,  drinking  and  laughing  on  Level  13’s  Red-Sector
Promenade.
What the hell did they know?
We passed a news kiosk, the ‘casters bland  face  following  us.  There  were  still  no  answers
concerning the mysterious disks left at the scene of a recent rape and murder.
Something  flitted  through  the  edge  of  my  mind.  Ren’s  voice,  through  Sully’s  link  with
both of us. I sensed him questioning, reassuring, then a series of thought-pictures skittered by:
Berri giving Verno a  disk  of  hymns  after  a  service.  Verno,  innocently,  loading  them  into  the
entertainment system on the Karn while Sully and Ren headed to Moabar.
Verno, explaining to Ren. Ren, sending to  Sully.  Sully’s  analysis,  back  to  Ren.  The  worm
program had been on those disks, and coded to activate once Sully was back on board.
“Where are they?”
“Two levels up in Yellow.” He scanned the crowd as we walked. I could feel an edginess, a
wariness in him. Just as I knew he felt mine. It wasn’t only because of Berri and Lazlo. I had no
doubt I was wearing fear and anger like a heavy coat around me.
“We meeting with them?” We’d have to backtrack  to the main lift bank  and  then  hope  it
was operative.
“I  need  to  get  to  a  secure  terminal  first.”  He  tapped  at  his  jacket  pocket.  “This  goes  to
Drogue. He knows what to do with it.”
Berri knew we’d try to  return  to  the  Boru  Karn.  Which  meant  we  couldn’t  leave  Marker
that way. Which meant the data had to be sent, now. Before Berri found us again.
“Up,” I said, even though the last time I’d said that, my entire life had shattered. “We need
to go up. Level 2. Do you want to get Ren and Verno first?”
“They’re safe where they are. It helps if they’re watching the corridors.”
Main lifts were functional again. I knew they would be. I hadn’t been looking to stop Berri.
Only  delay  her.  The  lifts  were  easy  to  shut  down.  Equally  as  easy  to  start  up,  if  no  one’s
shooting at you.
I glanced  at  an  M-2  clock  as  we  waited.  An  hour  past  the  end  of  the  business  day.  That

meant less people to see us, ask questions. That was good.
We squeezed into a lift already crowded with a maintenance tech and a large cleaning unit
on a pallet. I hit the button for Level 2 and  stepped  back  into  the  only  available  space  in  the
corner. Sully’s hands closed on my arms, hesitantly.
Chasidah. Heat and ice flowed through  me,  alternating.  I  shivered,  crossed  my  arms  over
my chest and tried to dislodge his touch. Tried to keep my  mental  duro-hards  from  bursting
open, flinging questions, fears, anger. All were more than I wanted to face at the moment.
Level numbers pinged by. Eight. Six. Five. The maintenance tech nodded disinterestedly at
us as he exited, guiding his pallet into the corridor. No one else got on. The doors slid closed. I
stepped out of Sully’s grasp.
But  not  out  of  his  emotional  range.  Pain.  Pleading.  Hope.  He  sent  those  to  me.  Shame
followed. Chasi—“Stop it.” Speaking out loud kept my focus outside of my feelings, and what
he was making me feel. “I can’t deal with that, with you, right now.”
Three.  Two.  The  doors  opened  to  an  empty  corridor.  Admin  offices  had  been  closed  for
over  an  hour.  I  headed  straight  for  the  checkpoint,  manned  by  a  security  droid.  It  scanned
entry badges. I had none, only the emergency access code created over twenty years ago for use
by the Admirals High Council on Marker. My mother had been part of the tech team, and had
violated every rule and regulation in making me memorize it. In case anyone ever tries to harm
you, she’d said. In case I’m not around to protect you. Go uplevel, get to the people you know
will.
I put the code in again and held my breath. The force field hazed, dropped. Praise Amaris.
Praise the stars.
And pray like hell Berri or Lazlo didn’t have the same code I did.
 
Chapter Thirty-Three
« ^ » 
We moved quickly down a long hallway, then turned left. I passed three doors before I came to
the  one  I  was  looking  for.  A  name  was  clearly  emblazoned  on  the  door:  Commander  T.
Bergren. I touched the palm pad with another code  I  knew  by  heart,  stepped  in,  locking  the
door as Sully followed. An unexpected sense of relief washed over me. For the first time since
we’d left the Karn, I felt safe.
The  outer  office  was  dimly  lit.  There  was  a  long  desk  to  the  left  and  three  chairs  on  the
right.  Everything  was  tidied  for  the  night:  neat,  orderly,  deskscreen  dark.  No  sharp-eyed
assistant to ask questions. No fellow officers dropping by for a chat who just  might  recognize
Thad’s little sister Chaz. And ask more questions. Our timing was almost too good.
Straight ahead were the wide double doors to Thad’s inner office. My code opened those as
well.

Sully said nothing, sent nothing that I was aware of. I knew he had to be telling Ren where
we were. He had to be formulating plans. It shouldn’t take any more than ten, fifteen minutes
to encode and send the data Sully had taken from the labs.
The  illuminated  display  cabinet  on  Thad’s  back  wall  cast  a  wide  shaft  of  light  across  the
carpet. The cabinet was crowded with Fleet plaques, award statues, mementos. I headed past it,
past the elegant dark blue couch and plush chairs to my right, past the round conference table
and hologrid on my left.
I  slid  into  Thad’s  high  backed  chair  and  half  swiveled  it  around.  I  tabbed  up  the
deskscreen. The light over the desk automatically came on.
Sully handed the datatabs to me.
“Everything goes?” My voice was calm, flat. Captain Bergren in command.
He nodded, saying nothing, sending nothing. Like another time I remembered.  Stay out of
my goddamned mind, I’d said. He had. He was.
I slotted  in  the  thin  tabs  and  tried  to  ignore  the  small  tendrils  of  pain  and  fear  weaving
around my heart. Instead, I concentrated on appending the data to a transit file. Then I realized
I had no idea of the exact receipt address. “What’s Drogue’s—”
A series of numbers flashed through my mind, staying there as if it were my memory.  Not
his. So the link wasn’t broken. Just silent, until I needed something.
I keyed in the address. “You want to add a message?” It would take at least five minutes for
the three tabs to encode and append.
He  nodded.  I  vacated  the  chair  and  headed  for  a  low  cabinet  by  the  conference  table,
knowing it usually held spare power clips which would work in my Stinger. At least, it always
had in the past. I might feel safer in my brother’s office, but I knew it was at best temporary.
We still had to get off station, out of Marker. Alive.
I put a fresh clip in my  laser  pistol,  shoved  another  in  my  jacket  pocket.  Fleet  didn’t  use
Carvers  but  they  did  have  a  similar,  high-power  laser  pistol.  Thad  had  one  clip  that  might
work.
It will.
I turned  from  where  I  knelt  in  front  of  the  cabinet.  Was  he  reading  resonances  or  my
thoughts at random? I wasn’t sure I wanted the latter.
It’s safer if we keep contact.
Obviously true, when we’d infiltrated the jukor lab, when we were running from Berri and
Lazlo. When answers, decisions, information had to be quickly shared.
But at the moment we sat in my brother’s office behind two sets of locked doors. I wanted
to listen  to  my  own  thoughts,  to  feel  my  own  reactions.  Without  Sully’s  comments,  and  his
pain, wearing at me.
Without him gathering information on me. While I’d never  been  permitted  to  gather  any
about him. Though now I knew why.

I handed him the spare clip. Anger slipped out before I could stop it. “You should have told
me. Warned me.”
“Ren agrees with you. If it’s any consolation.”
“Did you think I wouldn’t notice?”
“I hoped, given enough time, it wouldn’t matter.” His voice was soft.
“Lies are lies, whether they’re said now, or ten years from now.”
The computer beeped softly in the silence, segueing data into transmittable code.
“I never lied,” he said finally.
That  was  true,  only  because  he’d  never  permitted  questions.  I  turned  away,  hugged  my
arms over my chest and went to  stare  at  Thad’s  trophies.  I  tamped  down  my  anger.  But  the
pain, and the fear, refused to go away.
Why were all the handsome ones always such lying bastards?
The  click  and  tap  behind  me  told  me  Sully  worked  on  his  message.  Not  through  a
vidlink—too easily intercepted. What Drogue would receive would topple lives. Powerful lives.
Then maybe no more jukors would breed. And no more Takas would die.
And maybe Chaz Bergren would find herself a stellar helm somewhere, on a freighter that
worked  the  rim,  whose  owner  asked  few  questions  and  cared  less  about  documentation.
There’d be the peace of jumpspace again. And the ever-present game of hide and seek with rim
pirates. Like Sullivan. Pirate. Poet. Smuggler. Mercenary. Monk. Shape-shifter.
I broke the silence with a question. If he didn’t want to answer, fine. But no one was going
to  stop  me  from  asking  them  anymore.  “Does  Drogue  know  about  the  hijackings,  the  raids
you’ve pulled over the years?”
Sully took his fingers from the keypads. “He’s knows about the results. In a way, it was his
idea.”
“Drogue?”
“It was the Englarians who showed me how little the Empire did for those who weren’t in
their favor. Takas. Stolorths. A variety of colonies on the  rim,  where  people  routinely  died  of
diseases cured a hundred years ago. It felt wrong for me to wear the robe, knowing what I am.
But  it  wasn’t  wrong  to  continue  to  help  the  forgotten,  the  outcasts.  Clinics  and  orphanages
need funds to survive.”
Ren had said the reasons behind Sully’s piracy would surprise me. In spite of my anger at
Sully’s deception, he was right.
“Your family’s money couldn’t have accomplished the same goals, legally?”
“I had no reason to think my father would be charitable.”
The deskscreen flashed. Data encoded and ready to transmit.

“Will you go back to doing that, when this is finished?”
“When this is finished, Hayden won’t be in control of  the  Sullivan  moneys.  I  may  not  be
the preferred heir, but I am the legal one.”
I leaned  against  the  cabinet  as  the  ramifications  sunk  in.  This  was  more  than  Takas  and
jukors.  This  was  a  wealth  of  almost  unimaginable  proportions.  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan  would
shortly become a very sought after, very influential man.
Unless those seeking his influence learned he was a Ragkiril, a shape-shifter. That was more
than sufficient reason to hide behind lies. To have a Stolorth friend to take the blame, or credit,
for what he did. Or maybe it wasn’t just friendship. Maybe Ren saw the numbers, too.
He tapped the deskscreen, sent the data. “You may have good reason to be angry with me,
but you’ve no right to dishonor Ren.”
I straightened abruptly at his retort to my unspoken comments. “Damn you! Stop—”
Sully lunged to his feet, his hand grasping under his jacket for his laser pistol. Fear clamped
my  heart.  For  a  few  tense  seconds  I  thought  I’d  finally  pushed  him  too  far.  Then  the  wide
double doors on my right slid sideways. I swiveled, grabbed my Stinger.
“What in hell are  you—?”  Commander  Thaddeus  Bergren  took  a  half  step  into  his  office
and stared at the man standing behind his desk. “Sullivan? You’re dead.”
I lowered my laser pistol. “Hello, Thad.”
He jerked his head toward me, his pale blue eyes widening. “My God. Chaz!”
“Sit down.” I motioned toward the conference table and four chairs. And shot  a  glance  at
Sully who still had his Carver trained on my brother.
He lowered it. He’s genuinely glad to see you.
I hoped so. We needed him. I reholstered my laser pistol as I took the chair next to Thad’s. My
brother was out of uniform, dressed casually, evidently not returning to his office on business. I
recognized  the  light  blue  sweater  he  wore.  It  matched  his  eyes.  I’d  given  it  to  him  for  his
birthday two  years  before.  “Listen  to  me.  A  firm  called  Crossley  Burke  is  running  a  gen  lab
here on M-2. They’re breeding jukors. We’re not sure why—”
“I know.”
A sick  feeling  grabbed  my  stomach.  Thad  knew.  Was  there  nothing  left  of  my  life  that
wasn’t  twisted,  full  of  lies?  I  looked  at  my  perpetually  virtuous  older  brother  with  disgust.
“How could you get involved with that?”
He knotted his  fingers  together  and  stared  at  me  for  a  moment.  I  was  surprised  by  how
much he resembled our father. Same angular face, pale eyes, sandy-red hair, now with glints of
silver. But Lars’s face had never showed the kind of turmoil on Thad’s now.
“I got involved with that,” he said quietly, “to keep you alive.”
It took me a few heartbeats to process what he said. “Explain.”
“I found out Burke was doing something with jukors. I began pulling manifests, incomings,

thinking it was just some rich man’s whim to increase his  personal  security  force.  Stupidly,  I
confronted him. He warned me that if I acted on it, you’d be the one to suffer. I didn’t believe
him. It sounded too implausible. Why would he take such a risk, just because he wanted some
guard-beasts for his estates?”
Thad shook his head, as if remembering something unpleasant. “Next I know, you’re up on
murder charges. Dereliction of duty. I never connected Burke with what happened until I got
into  a  lift  and  Burke  was  there,  with  a  bodyguard.  A  bearded  guy  with  a  laser  pistol.  He
stopped the lift, told me  you’d  get  the  death  sentence.  But  if  I  kept  quiet,  he’d  see  to  it  you
were sent to Moabar. I knew it was Hell there. But  at  least,  you’d  be  alive.  Maybe,  in  time,  I
could find a way to get you pardoned.”
I don’t  remember  breathing.  I  don’t  remember  not  breathing.  I  stared  at  him.  “But  you
could’ve gone to the Admirals Council. Hell, you could’ve gone to Darius Tage, have him talk
to Prew!” If there was a name synonymous in the Empire with unflinching honor and ethics, it
was First Barrister Darius Tage.
“Burke owns people high up in the Empire. I don’t know who they are. This project of his
isn’t  about  guard-beasts.  It’s  much  bigger,  political.  I  have  no  proof,  but  my  guess  is  he’s
looking to fund some kind of inter-quadrant war. I knew if I talked to the wrong person, Burke
would come after you. Kill you.”
I barely recognized my strong, always in control, authoritative brother. Hayden Burke had
him by the one thing I never suspected mattered to Thad. Me.
My  brother  actually  loved  me.  Pieces  of  my  shattered  life  started  to  flow  back  together.
“We  need  to  get  out  of  Marker.  We  took  out  the  gen-lab  on  Level  28  an  hour  ago.  We  lost
Burke’s people in the core, but—”
“The fire alarm? That was you?”
“We used low-impact charges to destroy the lab.”
“Not  all  of  it.”  Sully  sat  on  the  desk.  He  picked  up  the  datatabs.  “That  proof  you  didn’t
have might be in here. It’s on its way to people in Dafir, and on Moabar Station, who can use
it. They can’t be bought out, or threatened. It may take time, but they will be believed.”
Sully  slipped  the  datatabs  back  into  his  jacket.  “We  need  a  ship,  commander.  The
information is safe. We’re not.”
“I can get a maintenance tug to get you back to the terminal.”
I shook  my  head.  “Burke’s  people  know  about  the  ship  that  brought  us  here.  They’ll  be
watching for it, and us.”
“You have any freighters heading out-system?” Sully asked.
“Not that I have immediate access to. Fleet ships are always  going  in  and  out,  but  I  don’t
know who I can trust.” Thad’s mouth  tightened into an angry line. Angry at the situation but
probably angry at himself as well. ‘I don’t know’ was never one of his favorite expressions.
“Except…” Thad threw me a hesitant glance. “The Morgan Loviti came in a few hours ago.”

The name shot through me with a jolt. “Philip’s here?”
“I’m meeting  him  for  a  drink  in…”  He  pulled  up  his  sleeve,  uncovering  his  watch.  “I’m
late. Ten minutes ago. I stopped to pick up a new  ship  design  I  wanted  to  show  him.  Didn’t
know I’d find you.” His gaze flicked to Sully then back to me.
Sully holstered his Carver. “What makes you think he’d help us?”
“The  Guthries  have  considerable  power,  are  well-respected.  Philip  Guthrie  is  one  of  the
most ethical people I know. His family publicly denounced the jukor project twenty years ago.
I have no reason to believe he’s changed either his mind or his morals.”
“You’re willing to risk Chasidah’s life on that?”
“You probably don’t know she was married to him. He still cares for her, very much.”
I  touched  Thad’s  arm.  “We  ran  into  Philip  about  a  month  ago,  in  Calth.  He  could’ve
impounded the ship, sent me back to Moabar.” I looked past him, at Sully. “He let us go.”
“I’ll meet him in the bar, talk to him.”
“You  can’t  guarantee  what  his  intentions  will  be  when  he  learns  Chasidah’s  here.  What
we’ve done.”
“Of course not, but—”
“I can. Bring him here.”
Sully’s unexpected offer surprised me.
My brother’s eyes narrowed. “A man like Philip Guthrie doesn’t respond well to questions
at gun point, if that’s your plan.”
“If he’s lying, if he’s working for Burke, or if he has any intentions of returning Chasidah to
Moabar, I’ll know when I see him.”
Thad frowned. “How—?”
Sully shoved himself off the desktop. “I’m a Ragkiril.”
“Ridiculous. You’re not a Stolorth. You’re human.”
Sully looked tired. “Ragkir mind talents exist in many species. Even humans.”
“He can read Philip, scan him,” I told Thad when my brother’s startled blue  gaze  focused
on me.
Thad rose slowly. “And if he is working with Burke?”
“Then I can make him forget he ever saw us.”
A  clear  expression  of  distaste  crossed  Thad’s  features.  But  he  made  no  comment.  He
stopped at the doorway to the outer office. “I’ll be back in ten minutes.”
Sully remained standing, quietly, after the doors closed behind my brother. I felt him link
with Ren, saw the flash of thought-pictures. Not  Berri  or  Lazlo,  but  there  were  people  in  the

corridors,  looking.  Ren  sensed  their  searching.  But  he  had  no  visual  link  with  Verno  and
couldn’t provide detailed descriptions, other than male humans, discreetly armed.
I leaned my elbows on the table, resting my face in my hands. I was exhausted, emotionally
and physically. I wasn’t sure of how I felt about Philip’s involvement, but knew what Thad had
said was true. Philip was ethical. To the point, perhaps, of being  stodgy.  His  family  had  been
vehement in their objections to the jukors bred during the war. And they’d never support  an
insurrection in the Empire, not one funded by Burke and carried out through the use of jukors.
The issue, of course, would be how he’d react to Sully. Pirate. Ghost. Ragkiril.
The chair next to me squeaked. Sully folded his hands on the tabletop.
I propped my chin on my fist. “He could refuse to help us on a matter of principle. Nothing
to do with Burke.”
“And miss the chance to play hero?”
I ignored his  sarcasm  and  voiced  a  disturbing  thought  that  had  been  hovering.  One  that
touched on things Gregor had said. “Could you force him to help us?”
Sully took a deep breath. “If I say no, I’d be lying. If I tell you the truth, then I’ve added to
your fears about me.”
“If you can do things like that, why didn’t you know Thad was coming into the office until
he was at this door?”
“Strictly a priority error. I was focused on you. And keeping a light link with Ren. It’s like
picking a conversation out of a crowded room, but not being able to hear all of them.”
I leaned back, nodded. “But you could force Philip to help us?”
“I could make him believe that’s what he wanted to do. But if we ran into three, four of his
officers who dissented, there’d be problems.”
“I heard Gregor tell Aubry he saw a Ragkiril strip  the  minds  of  four  prisoners  during  the
war.”
“A Ragkiril can’t. A Kyi-Ragkiril could.”
“Explain.”
Sully hesitated only a moment, out of habit, perhaps. Or perhaps listening to Ren tell him it
was time to start answering my questions. “A Kyi-Ragkiril is one  whose  true  existence  is  in  a
dimension called the Kyi, who draws additional energies from that. Those energies can be used,
manipulated, shifted. The Kyi’s not that different from jumpspace. A neverwhen of sorts. You
called it ‘gray fuzzy soft’ when you saw it.”
Surprise jolted me. I’d not only seen it, I’d experienced it. When the Meritorious slammed
through  the  cold  jump;  and  when  she  exploded,  and  almost  took  the  Karn  with  her.  When
Sully had healed Ren.
And when Sully made love to me.
“You’re a Kyi-Ragkiril.”

“Yes.” No hesitation this time.
“But you said you can’t—”
“I didn’t say I couldn’t. I said if I had to control a number  of people, there’d be problems.
I’d have to shift to my true form, like I did in the core.”
Shape-shifter.  So  Kyi-Ragkirils  were  shape-shifters.  “When  Ren  was  hurt,  on  the  bridge,
you didn’t… shift forms.” Energy had rippled, sparkled. But he’d never shifted form.
There was a long, hard silence. His shoulders were stiff under his black jacket. “I did.”
“I was right next to you.” Touching you, holding you. “I would’ve seen…”
“I changed what you saw. I had to. It was wrong. But there was too much at risk.”
Ren had been dying. The Karn, in shambles. The Meritorious almost totally destroyed. And
Sully had been in my mind, just like in Trel’s bar. But this time, not shielding the  emotions  I
was sending. But altering what I saw, altering his own form. And I hadn’t even known.
Part of me understood he had valid reasons for what he’d done. But another part of me, a
part that was far too crowded with unwanted mental duro-hards, recoiled. Shocked.  Angered.
“You had no right!”
“None at all. I also had no choice.”
“Next time, try honesty. It—”
Sully held his hand up, stopping my words. “Thad’s back. With Guthrie.”
 
Chapter Thirty-Four
« ^ » 
Philip’s resonant voice filled the outer office. “How about telling me what’s so damn important
you couldn’t—”
He  stopped  in  the  open  doorway.  He  was  in  his  gray  working-dress  uniform,  but  still
impeccable. Dignified. Handsome. I watched  emotions  flicker  through  Philip’s  blue  eyes  as  I
worked on reorienting my own.
“Chaz!” He stepped toward me, hand out, then hesitated. “This is  what  the  security  stops
are for. I should’ve known.”
He raised his chin, his gaze on Sully who wasn’t safely in the recesses of my  ship’s  bridge
this time. As with Thad, recognition took a few moments. “I gather Hell was full.”
“Still room for you, Guthrie.”
Damn it, don’t start. We need his help. I was angry, but forced myself to bank my emotion. It
was useless right now. I took a deep breath, offered my ex-husband a bland smile. “Why don’t

you sit on the couch. We’ll tell you what’s going on.”
Philip moved easily as if meetings like this, as if my showing up unexpectedly again, in the
company of a dead smuggler, were part of his everyday schedule. He leaned back  against  the
cushions, propped one leg on his knee. Thad sat at his desk.
“That was the Meritorious,” Philip said to me.
“I had reasons not to tell you.”
I could see his mind opening and inspecting those mental Fleet-issue databoxes. He nodded
to Sully. “I gather you helped my wife escape?”
“She’s not your wife.”
I shot a warning look to Sully. “They’ve got checkpoints out. They will find us, unless you
can get us out of Marker, on the Loviti. Will you?”
Philip studied me for a moment  before his gaze flashed to Sully. “I only  want  what’s  best
for you, Chaz.”
“That could mean a lot of things.” Sully  said,  rising.  His  voice  was  soft,  but  there  was  an
underlying forcefulness.
Philip met Sully’s obsidian gaze squarely. “What’s your interest here?”
“At the moment, you. Your intentions. Your allegiances.”
“You question me?”
“We have to question.” I put my  captain’s  command  voice  behind  my  words.  “We  don’t
know if we can trust you.”
“Why? What did you do?”
I chose my words carefully. “We destroyed a jukor lab.”
“Impossible.”
“That we destroyed the lab?” Sully asked.
Philip  responded  with  a  dismissive  glance.  He  turned  back  to  me.  “Breeding  jukors  was
banned years ago. The labs were destroyed. All embryos, genetics, everything.”
“A jukor attacked us on Moabar,” I told  him  quietly.  “The  lab  we  destroyed  a  few  hours
ago had two pair, Philip. Two breeding pair. And a Taka female, serving as surrogate.”
He stared at me, hard. “Who’s doing this?”
“My  cousin,  Hayden  Burke.”  Sully’s  voice  was  cold.  “And,  according  to  Commander
Bergren, a number of very powerful people close to Prew. Are you one of them, Guthrie?”
Philip  shot  to  his  feet,  anger  twisting  his  face,  his  clenched  fist  moving.  Sully  caught  his
arm, held  it  firmly  for  a  moment.  Philip  jerked  his  wrist  out  of  Sully’s  grip.  Anger  vibrated
across his face, radiated from his body. But he didn’t move.

Sully’s eyes were already infinite, dark. And locked on Philip’s. He  held  his  hand  open  at
chest level, his fingers splayed slightly, but not touching Philip.  Dark  energy  rippled  over  his
shoulders, down his arms. It flowed toward Philip, as if going through him and around him at
the same time.
I held my breath.
Thad swore softly.
Then it was over. Philip blinked as if he had suddenly, and unexpectedly, awakened.
Sully turned to me as if nothing unusual had happened. “Son  of  a  bitch  hates  Hayden  as
much as I do. We can trust him.”
Philip’s lips thinned, his expression hardening. “Mind-fucker!” His fist caught Sully on the
side of the jaw, throwing him back against Thad’s desk. I was already on my feet.
Sully lunged, pinning Philip onto the couch. I grabbed Sully’s shoulders. “Stop it!”
Sully anticipated Philip’s next swing, jerking away before the blow could connect.
My fingers dug into Sully’s shoulder. I grabbed Philip’s arm with my other hand, tugging
and pushing at the same time. My feet tangled with Philip’s legs. I lost my balance and fell onto
the low sofa table.
Thad shoved by me, grabbing for Sully’s arm. I blocked him, catching him in the stomach
with my elbow. “I said, stop it! All of you!”
I plowed in between Sully and Philip, braced one arm against the back  of the couch. Thad
sank down on the low table, clutching his midsection, breathing hard.
Philip glared up at me. Behind me, Sully’s breath rasped.
“We  had  to  know,”  I  told  Philip.  Another  no  choice  situation.  Like  on  the  bridge  of  the
Karn. I pushed myself upright and faced Sully.
His arms were clenched at his sides. His chest heaved. A reddish bruise had blossomed on
his jaw.
“Power down. Both of you,” I said.
Philip sat up, raked his hands through his hair.
Thad was back on his feet. “She needs your help, Philip. I’m not any happier about dealing
with…  him  than  you  are.”  He  slanted  a  glance  at  Sully.  “But  Burke  threatened  to  kill  her
before. He will now. Unless they stop him, first.”
Philip took a deep breath as if to center himself. “Tell the whole story, from the beginning.”
I did. I told him how jukors were breeding and Takas were  dying.  And  other  Takas  were
taking revenge, raping and killing human females. How Berri Solaria was working with Lazlo,
and had uncovered Sully’s plans through her friendship with the Takan monk,  Brother Verno.
Who had risked his life to save us, and a Stolorth, Brother Ren Ackravaro.
Sully  spoke  tersely,  gave  Philip  facts,  figures,  what  names  he  knew.  He  showed  him  the

datatabs, their information now on the way to Guardian Drogue.
“I’ll need a copy of that sent to the Loviti,” Philip said.
Sully hesitated. “I’m not sure I trust official Imperial channels right now.”
“For good reason.” Philip’s expression looked suddenly pinched. I had a feeling what he’d
heard  didn’t  surprise  him  as  much  as  I  thought  it  would.  “And  I’ll  make  sure  those  official
Imperial channels don’t see it. But there are people, people I know, who need to.”
He did know something. “Philip?”
He slanted a glance at me. “Later. I’ll explain later. Thad?”
My brother sat behind his desk, stared at his hands and told how Burke had threatened my
life when he’d confronted him with the jukor data. He admitted that my ship’s logs had been
falsified, my trial, manipulated. My sentence on Moabar was a warning to Thad to cooperate.
Philip exploded in anger. “Damn it, Thaddeus! Why didn’t you tell me?”
“Burke owns people—”
“A Guthrie? Me?”
“My first priority was keeping her alive. I didn’t have time to find out who I could trust.”
“So you hired him?” Philip pointed dismissively at Sully, leaning against the edge of Thad’s
desk.
“Nobody hired anybody,” Sully said, tiredly.
Thad leaned back in his chair. “I thought he was dead. Like you did.”
Philip regarded Sully as if he were some sort of specimen. “Ragkiril. And a human one. A
genetic rarity. But immortality isn’t one of their attributes. Even if he is a Kyi.”
Sully straightened slightly.
“Didn’t think I’d know that, did you?” Philip appeared clearly satisfied with the impact of
his  words.  “I  know  what  you  are,  what  your  kind  can  do.  My  family  researched  Ragkirils
during the war. Ragkirils and jukors. It sounds as if your cousin wants to make sure you  stay
dead this time.”
“Few  people  know  what  I  am.  Hayden’s  not  one  of  them.  And  yes,”  Sully  continued  as
Philip started to speak again, “Chasidah knows.”
“Only  a  Kyi-Ragkiril  can  read  without  touching  a  subject,”  Philip  told  me,  as  if  to  make
sure  I  knew  what  Sully  was.  “Watch  his  eyes,  the  way  they  seem  to  go  totally  black.  He’s
monitoring  my  thoughts,  probably  yours  and  your  brother’s  as  well.  So  don’t  think  for  a
minute he doesn’t know we’re all afraid of him. We have good  reason  to  be.  He  can  do  a  lot
more than just see what we’re thinking.”
“She knows,” Sully repeated, tightly.
“That she’s working for a shape-shifter?”

A  sharp  silence  followed  his  words.  I’d  told  Dorsie  that  if  there  were  shape-shifters,
someone  in  Fleet  would  know.  Someone  had.  The  Guthries.  But  only  them?  I  shook  off
questions we didn’t have time for and stepped forward. “We need off Marker. Will you help?”
“If it were just him, I’d tell him to find his own  damn  way  off.  But  there  are  other  issues
here, issues you don’t know about. So, yes, Chaz, I’ll help.” He motioned to Thad. “I’ll need to
use your deskscreen.”
My  brother  vacated  his  chair  and  exchanged  a  brief,  startled  glance  with  Philip.
“Shapeshifter?”
“Ever  seen  the  paintings  in  an  Englarian  temple?”  Philip  asked  as  Sully  shoved  himself
away from the desk.
I didn’t bother to watch for my brother’s affirmative nod. I felt Sully’s annoyance, felt him
keep his reactions in check. Philip’s knowledge, and confidence, clearly bothered him. He took
a seat at the conference table and swiveled away from Thad and Philip.
I  was  glad  for  once  I  couldn’t  read  rainbows.  A  distinct  edginess  hung  in  the  air.
Considering what we faced, it was counterproductive. I decided to lead by example, a tried and
true Fleet method.
I sat next to him. “What’s Ren’s status?”
“There’s  a  worker  bar  on  Fourteen.  Mostly  Takas.  They’ve  been  able  to  stay  there  for
awhile.”
“Any chance of getting back to the Karn?” Sully and Philip on the same ship for any length
of time wasn’t going to be a workable situation. And it would take  the  Loviti  awhile  to  reach
Dock Five, or Dafir.
He angled toward me, his hand opening as if reaching for me then he closed his fingers into
a fist. He stared at them. “Guthrie still thinks of you as his wife.” His voice was quiet.
I glanced at Philip. His concentration was on the desk screen, and the conversation he was
having with his ship.
“We don’t have time for personal issues, not his, not yours, not mine.”
His hand opened again. “You’re not his wife, Chasidah.”
“I know that,” I said. His eyes snapped briefly to infinite darkness.
Mine. Then the harsh tone in my mind softened. Chasidah-angel.  Philip  says to fear  me. Do
you have any idea how afraid I am of him?
“My private shuttle will be at Access Bay Seven Blue in twenty minutes.” Philip tabbed off
the deskscreen and leaned back in Thad’s chair. “We’re going to run into the security stops. Do
you and your friends uplevel have ID?”
Sully  swiveled  slowly  around,  leaving  emptiness,  longing,  and  warmth  in  my  mind.  His
sensations hovered around my confusion.
“Ren and Verno have Englarian clearances on file. Get me any two cards,” he said to Thad,

standing behind Philip. “I’ll get Chasidah and myself through from there.”
Philip scowled openly. But Thad agreed. “I’ll need my desk back.”
Philip grabbed the back  of the chair next to mine, sat. He leaned his elbows on his  knees,
clasped his hands together. He deliberately ignored Sully as he moved by and chose instead to
study me for  a  long  moment.  “I  want  you  to  consider  something.  I  have  no  idea  what  your
plans are  after  we  get  out  of  Marker.  But  with  this  information  on  Burke  I  can  go  to  Tage’s
office,  clear  your  name.  A  captaincy  could  be  yours,  again.  It  will  be,  because  I’m  on  the
Admirals Council now. The Chaz Bergren I’ve known most of  my  life  would  never  turn  that
down. Not even to work as a pilot for a smuggler,  a  Ragkiril,  a  rare  human  one  at  that,  who
might yet end up being one of the wealthiest men in the Empire.”
“I’ve got two cards.” Thad’s voice cut between us.
Philip shoved himself to his feet. “Think about it.”
 
Thad drew me into a very un-Thad-like hug as we got ready to leave his  office.  He  would
stay  behind,  run  interference  through  his  access  into  the  security  system  and  work  on  the
copies of the data Sully had left him. He’d be in touch, through a  private  comm  tran  I  could
access.
I feared for his safety, knowing what we did of Hayden Burke.
My  big  brother  was  more  concerned  for  mine.  “Philip’s  appointment  on  the  Council
should halt most questions.” Unless Burke had people in places higher than a Guthrie could go.
There  weren’t  many.  He  squeezed  my  hands.  “Be  sure…  of  what  you  want  to  do,”  he  said
softly.
Sully was a few feet away, waiting in the outer office.
“Trust Philip,” he added.
I bussed his cheek. “Watch after Willym for me.”
Sully checked his Carver, adjusting his jacket around the weapon. I did the same with my
Stinger. He had both ID cards in his pocket. “Ren and Verno will meet us at the bay at Seven
Blue.” He touched my arm. I need a constant link with you. Agreed. I pushed away my unease at
Philip’s warning about Kyi-Ragkirils. If there were problems,  Sully,  scanning,  reading,  would
know before anyone else.  I  wanted  that  knowledge.  Two  stripers  in  the  corridor  watched  us
approach—Philip and Sully, with me in between.
They  saluted.  “Everything  all  right,  captain?”  “Optimal.”  But  we  were  still  on  Fleet
property. The security checkpoints were in Marker’s public areas.
The stripers there might be less intimidated by the Guthrie reputation. The security droid at
the  checkpoint  we’d  passed  through  earlier  now  had  a  human  companion.  “Lieutenant
Halpert. Do you need to see my ID again?” “No sir, Captain Guthrie. But we had reports of  a
problem. I’ll need to check  the others’ IDs.”  Sully  gave  Philip  a  barely  perceptible  nod  as  he
fished  in  his  jacket  for  the  ID.  “We’re  on  Admirals  Council  business,”  Philip  continued.  “I
don’t want to be delayed through a misidentification. I need clearances sent from here through

to Seven Blue.” “Very good, sir. I still need to log them  in to do that.” Sully held the cards out
to Halpert. “For my wife and myself.” I knew Philip heard, but his only reaction was  to  clasp
his hands behind him, rock slightly back  on his  heels.  A  sign  that  meant  he  was  holding  his
temper.  Halpert  scanned  the  cards,  frowned.  “I’m  sorry,  but—”  Sully’s  hand  grasped  his
shoulder in a casual manner. “A problem, lieutenant? I think the system’s just running a little
slow right now.” “A little slow.” Halpert took a deep breath. “Sometimes this happens.” Sully
removed  the  cards  from  the  slots.  “We’re  clear  to  go.”  “You’re  cleared.”  A  second  barely
perceptible nod. This time from Philip, to Sully. An acknowledgment of  what  he  knew  Sully
could do. Change what someone thought, what someone saw. Just as Gregor had said.
I  toyed  with  questions  while  we  walked.  It  was  early  evening,  station  time.  Less  work
uniforms, more civilian clothing on the clusters of people passing by. But I wasn’t thinking of
Marker 2 at the moment.
Why didn’t  you  do  that  when  we  got  to  Moabar  Station?  I  remembered  how  my  card  had
read out an error in Berri’s medical files. Drogue, Ren, Sully and I had all crowded around the
scanner.
Takas  get suspicious when touched by  humans. I had  to wait  for  the  M.O.C.  officer  to  focus  on
the screen before I could ‘show’ her the file was clear.
He’d brushed against her, I thought. Or touched her. Changed what she saw.
In the core, why didn’t you make me see something else? Or forget?
I felt a small twinge of pain. He was remembering my fear, as I was.
Besides the fact I’d have no explanation of how we’d arrived uplevel?
So it’s not like a zral, or… I didn’t want to say the other word.
It’s more like a distraction. A sleight of hand. It has to be consistent with the situation.
That’s  why  I  saw  energy,  not  wings,  on  the  bridge  of  the  Karn.  I  still  saw  Sully  doing
something. Only how he appeared to me was slightly changed.
I don’t like when I have to do that, Chasidah. It’s a decision I make, it’s something I do only  when
I have no other choice. When lives are threatened. On the Karn,  I was concerned about  the crew. The
mission. If you and  Gregor  and  the rest of  the  crew  found  out  what  I  was  then,  everything  was  in
jeopardy.
A group of people waiting at the lifts talked excitedly. I thought about Sully’s answers as I
watched the group. I had to watch all the stationers  moving  around  us,  toward  us.  Berri  and
Lazlo were out there. But so were others, others I wouldn’t recognize.  We  had  to  get  to  Blue,
halfway around from where we were in Green.
Two stripers on patrol nodded, but said nothing. Sully flashed mind-pictures over his link
to Ren. They were moving cautiously, Verno’s short rifle concealed, wrapped in his jacket.
Philip slowed, his hand rising slightly. “General checkpoint ahead.  You  can  read  if  there’s
problems from this distance, can’t you?”
On the left side of the corridor were a portable scanner and three stripers, two female, one

male. All human. That was a good sign. No Takas who didn’t want to be touched.
Sully’s eyes darkened. Philip watched him. I wondered what his family’s files on Ragkirils,
on Kyi-Ragkirils,  had  told  him.  Enough  that  he’d  known  what  Sully  was  after  he’d  scanned
him. Enough to be angry at the intrusion. Enough to state we all had very good reasons to be
afraid.
“They’re  hungry,”  Sully  said  after  a  moment.  We  picked  up  our  pace.  “Bored.  Nothing
interesting’s happened. If Halpert sent  through  our  clearances  from  the  Fleet  checkpoint,  we
should be fine.”
“If he hasn’t, he’ll find himself sitting a few rather unpleasant duty  shifts.”  Philip  squared
his  shoulders,  held  his  ID  out  to  the  tall  woman  security  officer,  read  the  name  off  her  tag.
“Cortez. We’re on Admirals Council clearances. My ID should suffice.”
Cortez scanned it and briefly studied us. She  was an older woman. Her duty pins showed
twenty-five  years.  I  couldn’t  remember  if  I’d  ever  seen  her  on  Marker  before,  but  it  wasn’t
unlikely.
“Captain  Guthrie.”  She  handed  him  back  his  card.  “Jumptalk  has  it  you’re  up  for  an
admiralty. Congratulations.”
“It  won’t  be  official  until  next  week,  but  thank  you.”  Philip  flashed  her  a  smile,  full  of
Guthrie confidence and magnetism. She smiled back.
Hell,  it’d  worked  on  me  for  years.  He  ranked  right  up  there  on  my  list  of  charming
bastards.
“Your  associates  are  clear.”  She  waved  us  through.  The  male  striper  leaned  over,  said
something in her ear.
Cortez responded with a narrow-eyed glance. “That’s Philip Guthrie, you idiot.” She  caught
Philip’s glance back to her. “Sorry, sir. We’ve been told to watch for some Farosian terrorists.”
“I’m aware of the advisory. Thank you for your cooperation.” He leaned toward me as we
walked.  His  fingers  closed  around  my  elbow  for  a  few  moments.  “The  advisory  might  be
genuine, or something Burke’s put in place, looking for you. He’s evidently trying to drag the
Farosians in this. His contact in Prew’s circle either has a reason to shed suspicions on Blaine’s
people or else his imagination is severely limited. Every time something  happens  lately  in  the
Empire, the Farosians are blamed.”
“That’s because I’m not around anymore,” Sully said, his gaze straight ahead.
“You, however, were at one time responsible for a large number of problems. Including the
one  you’re  in  now.  Mind  telling  me  how  a  Kyi-Ragkiril  didn’t  know  this  Solaria  woman
worked for Burke?”
“Because she believes she’s on a holy mission. That’s all I read from her. The insane believe
their lies to be truth. Her insanity fits nicely into her religious devotion.”
The corridor curved slightly. In  the  center,  a  group  of  young  Fleet  personnel,  all  ensigns,
talked animatedly, laughing. They saw Philip’s captain’s insignia and quieted for a moment.

Philip steered me around them, his hand grasping my arm again. “Do the Englarians know
what you are?” he asked Sully.
“They  know  I’m  doing  everything  I  can  to  stop  the  gen-labs.  Beyond  that,  they  haven’t
asked and I don’t volunteer.”
Valid reasons. I remembered him saying that. But isn’t an omission a lie?
If the truth is so unacceptable, so heinous to them, what have I achieved by revealing  it? And if it
prevents them from working with me, then jukors breed and more Takas die.
I held  my  thoughts  for  several  steps.  Words  like  risk,  fear  and  wisdom  surfaced  after  a
moment,  but they were my own words, not  Sully’s.  I  thought  about  what  had  happened  on
the Karn. Revealing he was a Ragkiril would have jeopardized the mission at that point. Finally
I nodded. But sooner or later, you have to trust someone. Especially if you’re asking her to trust you.
I’ve learned that. And I will change that. Don’t give up on me, angel-mine.
Don’t give me any more half-truths.
None.
Warmth filtered through me, lay softly against those painful tendrils gripping my heart.
We were almost through Yellow, Blue sector not far away. One more checkpoint and then
the shuttle bay. I fell into my little  time  game,  the  one  I’d  played  when  we’d  headed  for  the
Diligent Keeper on Moabar Station. Ten minutes to freedom. Five minutes to freedom. Then I
remembered  it  hadn’t  brought  me  any  luck.  Though  things  this  time  did  seem  to  be  going
better. However, I wasn’t ready to dub it, in Ren’s words, ‘a good day.’
We  crossed  into  Blue.  Three  stripers  waited,  again,  at  the  checkpoint.  One  female,  two
male. Philip went through the routine, turning on his charm to the appropriate gender. Turned
on his authority and Guthrie heritage to the one male striper who took a bit too long with our
ID.
Sully  walked  casually  toward  the  scanner,  smiled  his  own  rakish  smile  at  the  woman.
Reading, scanning, his eyes already darkening. Ready.
But it wasn’t needed. They let us pass.
The  traffic  in  Blue  sector  was  lighter.  Dinnertime  was  over,  people  were  back  in  their
apartments  or  perched  on  a  barstool  somewhere.  The  Loviti  had  a  damn  fine  galley,  as  I
remembered. I didn’t know what I wanted more. Dinner or a long, hot shower.
Or a captaincy again? Philip’s words rolled through my mind.
“Seven Blue’s the next set of double-doors,” Philip said.
Where are Ren and Verno?
On their way.  They opted  for  the freight  lifts.  Slower,  but  more  Takan  workers,  less  chance  of
Lazlo following them.
And Takas would defend their own.

Philip glanced at the pad as he keyed in his access code. “Shuttle’s in  early.  Good.  I’ll  feel
one hell of a lot better once we’re back on board.” The doors slid open and he put his hand on
my shoulder, guiding me through. “We’ll get cleaned up.  You  and  I  should  have  dinner.  We
have  to  talk  about  a  lot  of  things.”  His  mouth  tightened.  “Something’s  happening  in  the
Empire, Chaz. I don’t like it.”
“And Burke’s behind it?” We were back to what he’d alluded to in Thad’s office.
“He has power, but not that much.  That’s why all this doesn’t make sense.  I  may  have  to
talk to Tage,  again.”  He  squeezed  my  shoulder.  “Actually,  Burke’s  move  may  be  the  proof  I
need.”
If Philip had been talking to First Barrister Darius Tage, then this was serious, very serious.
“Later,” he said, again, when I looked up in question. “I’ll explain, later.”
Sully followed us into the small airlock control room, open and unsealed now with a ship in
the  berth.  Through  the  wide  doorway  the  sleek  form  of  an  Imperial  Captain’s  Pinnace
appeared  almost  suspended  in  the  center  of  the  cavernous,  dimly  lit  bay.  Behind  her,  outer
door  guidance  lights  formed  a  half-halo,  casting  eerie  shadows  through  the  ladders  and
maintenance  rampways  on  the  left  and  right.  Boxy  cargo  stages  for  loading  and  unloading
dotted the floor. The ship’s six wide landing struts and short rampway were darkened, telling
me  the  pinnace  had  probably  been  in  longer  than  we  thought.  I  would’ve  preferred  a  hot
shuttle, with engines ready to go. I wanted off Marker, too.
The  corridor  doors  slid  closed  behind  us.  Philip  leaned  over  the  small  ops  panel,  hit  the
intercom, opening the link to the bridge of the pinnace. “Tyler, Guthrie here.”
I let out a short sigh and stared at the pinnace and wide shuttle bay, seeing neither. I might
well drop from exhaustion before we got to the Loviti.
Sully’s arm curved across on my shoulder. His breath ruffled against the top of my head. A
rush of warmth curled through me. Demanding. Giving more.
“Tyler, this is Captain Guthrie.”
I heard Philip’s note of concern but I couldn’t move away from Sully. Or from the warmth,
the now relentless spirals of pleasure. His hand moved to my face, touched the line of my jaw.
He  brushed  his  thumb  across  my  lips.  I  saw  myself,  for  a  moment,  reflected  in  a  mirror.
Wearing an Englarian nun’s  robe,  my  hair  braided  with  a  leather  and  silver  beaded  tie.  And
Sully, eyes smoldering, standing behind me, caressing my face.
Mine. All that I am, is yours.
I never knew he’d said those words to me that night. I knew them  from when we’d offered
them to each other. Not in  the  monastery  now  called  up  in  my  memory.  But  in  that  place  I
called gray fuzzy soft. In the Kyi.
Mine. All that I am, is yours.
Another memory washed over me. Sully’s memory. I saw a bulkhead before me, I felt only
pain, fear, desolation. Then arms  came  around  my  waist,  from  behind  me.  Chasidah’s  arms.
Holding me, sending acceptance, forgiveness. For what I am. For what I had to do to Kingswell,

to Tessa Paxton.
She  didn’t understand, I hope to God she never understands what I do, what I am.  To  be
damned by the darkness that lives inside me.
To be saved by her love.
No more half-truths. No more omissions. Sully was starting to show me all.
The abrupt sound of Philip’s hand slapping against the commlink  jolted me. “Damn unit’s
off-line.”
Sully’s hand slid down my arm, leaving a hazy feeling of warmth, love, trust.
“Problems?” Sully and I asked simultaneously.
“Commlink’s not-functioning, again. I’ll go open the ramp hatch manually.”  Philip  strode
through the wide opening toward the pinnace.
Something clicked three times behind me. Ren? But corridor doors click once on opening.
Three clicks… I spun around. The status lights on the door to the corridor went from green to
red. Locked. Someone had auto-locked the doors.
The red went to red-flash. Airtight lock. Outer bay doors were prepping to open,  to  let  in
the vacuum of space.
Sucking any living thing in the bay, out. Dead. Lifeless.
I  grabbed  Sully.  “Airtight’s  active!  Find  overrides,  shut  it  down!  Don’t  let  those  doors
open!”
I didn’t wait for his response. I tore out of the control room, screaming Philip’s name.
 
Chapter Thirty-Five
« ^ » 
Laser  fire  spit  through  the  air.  Philip  dropped  to  the  ground.  I  dove,  hit  the  decking  hard,
Stinger out.
He flattened himself next to me, swearing. He was unarmed, but his eyesight was excellent.
“There!”
I fired at the telltale red point of light, heard the high-whine of another laser pistol behind
me. Sully, angled against the edge of a door panel in the brightly lit control room.
“Airtight’s  on!”  I  sent  a  few  more  shots  into  the  darkened  bay.  “Get  back  to  the  control
room.”
Philip’s voice was a low rumble. “Room’s not sealed. That won’t help us.”
He was right. The wide door panels, large enough to permit cargo access, were still locked

open. The edges of the doors, the  single  row  of  chairs  and  the  small  ops  desk  provided  little
cover.
“Looks  like  someone  wanted  to  remove  that  option,”  he  added.  The  rapid  discharge  of
Sully’s laser pistol whined behind us. “Can we disable the outer doors?”
“Sully’s headed there.”
Laser fire sizzled a few feet from us. I answered with three shots back at the source. “How’d
they find us?”
“This Lazlo knows Thad. That nun knows you. Probably someone followed us from Thad’s
office.”
Another barrage streaked in our direction. Much too close this time.
“Move!” Philip barked.
I sprang into a crouch then bolted to a low ops console behind us, Philip beside me.
“Been awhile since we had this kind of fun.” He was breathing hard.
I automatically scanned left and right, catching his tense grin. “You  always  were  a  demon
for night training.”
“It kept you close to me.” His hand wrapped around my upper arm. “On three. Break for
that back wall. Lots of cover there.”
He squeezed my arm. “One. Two. Three.”
We ran in a semi-crouch. Laser fire followed but fell short. It stopped when we reached the
side wall.
I saw  outlines  of  the  familiar  ladders,  panels,  more  op-consoles  jutting  out.  Large,  hard
fronted  storage  cages  offered  the  best  protection.  I  sidled  behind  one.  Philip  snugged  up
against me. We were both breathing hard now.
Then suddenly a scream, a woman’s voice, echoing in the bay.
“Sullivan! The unholy shall die!”
Philip’s eyes went wide.
“Berri Solaria,” I told him.  Laser  fire  continued  to  whine  through  the  bay.  “Devout.  And
persistent.”
My eyes adjusted to the dim light. There was  a  wide  rampway  grating  overhead,  ladders,
more op-consoles. More cages. Berri’s people couldn’t cross the center of the bay without being
seen. And they couldn’t run along the outer doors, which were ringed by lights. But they could
cross overhead on the maintenance rampways.
Philip’s gaze followed my own. “We’d hear anyone coming across there. Could get a  clear
shot at them. I don’t think they’re that stupid.”
It had been over five minutes since I’d run after Philip. He was right. Berri and her friends

wanted us together in the center of the bay walking to the ship, easy targets.
Now, we were in two different places. We needed to get back together, find a way out.
I turned. Philip’s mouth came down hard on mine, his arms locking around me. He kissed
me  with  an  intensity  I’d  forgotten,  with  all  our  arguments,  our  anger  and  hurt  feelings.  He
kissed me with an intensity of a man who’d known my body, intimately, for eight years. And
knew exactly how I liked to be kissed.
Laser fire whined again. I jerked back, shaken.
“Chaz. I’m sorry.” His voice rasped.
“Not here. Not now.” I ignored my unsteady emotions, pushed myself quickly to the edge
of the cage and tried to make  out  shapes  in  the  shadows.  My  ears  strained  for  footsteps,  the
rustle of fabric. But except for Philip’s harsh breathing and the pounding of my own  heart,  it
was quiet again.
Too quiet.
Red  target  beams  erupted  into  white  streaks  from  the  patches  of  darkness  under  the
pinnace. I trained the  Stinger  on  the  lights.  The  underside  of  the  ship  flashed  in  more  small
bursts. I hit landing struts, scanner arrays. A cargo stage near the ship’s stern sparked. But not
our attackers. They must have moved under the pinnace when Philip and I had run for the far
wall.
More laser fire came now from my right, from far down the long bay wall, flaring  against
the pinnace’s hull. Sully. I caught a flurry of thought pictures. Ren and Verno pulling back  into
the lifts just as two Crossley Burke security jogged past. Reinforcements. Lazlo was bringing in
reinforcements.
Tell Ren to call Thad’s office. I sent Sully the link number and an emergency code.
He acknowledged, adding, Tell lover-boy to keep his goddamned hands off my wife.
His  label  for  me  since  Dock  Five.  To  dissuade  Ilsa,  tease  Dorsie.  And  now,  no  doubt,  to
irritate Philip.
Sully  fired  off  another  long  burst  toward  the  ship.  Panel’s  trashed.  They’re  not  going  to
open  the  bay  doors.  They  want  those  datatabs  first.  Badly.  We  must  have  stumbled  on
something very important.
Whatever it was, it was on its way to Drogue. Who’s with Berri?
Lazlo. And another male, name’s Talard. Feels like a professional shooter.
Three against three. I liked those odds.
We need a manual emergency hatch. Or we’re going to have to take the pinnace.
I knew the core. Shuttle bays aren’t my specialty.
Another burst of laser fire. An ops panel about fifteen feet in front of me sizzled, sparked.
Sully hadn’t  answered  my  comment  about  shuttle  bays.  I  hoped  he  was  linked  to  Ren,  that

Ren had found  Thad  quickly.  That—Not  yet.  Chasidah.  I  felt  a  pause,  wariness.  We  need  that
manual  exit  hatch.  Guthrie  has  to  know  the  layout.  But  when  he  learns  you’re  linked  to  me,  he’s
going to… react.
I frowned. React?
I love you. I’d never hurt you. Don’t ever forget that.
Sully?
Tell him what we know. How you know it.
I stepped  back  behind  the  cage  edge,  suddenly  afraid,  but  I  didn’t  know  why.  “Philip.
Listen to  me.  Berri’s  out  there  with  Lazlo  and  another  professional  assassin,  Talard.  Ren  and
Verno  know  what’s  going  on.  They’re  trying  to  reach  Thad.  But  Burke  has  people  in  all  the
corridors now. Might even be bringing reinforcements. I don’t know shuttle bays. You do. We
need an manual exit hatch.”
Philip stood very still beside me. “How do you know all this?”
“I have a link with Sully.”
“Telepathic.” It wasn’t a question. And he didn’t give me time to respond. “How long?”
“What in hell does it matter? We have to—”
“How long!” His voice was rough. “Since I intercepted you in Calth?”
“Before that.”
“Damn him.”
“It doesn’t—”
“It does. Goddamned  Ragkiril  filth.  And  he’s  hearing  me,  through  you,  he’s  hearing  me.
He’s probably even telling you not to listen. He doesn’t want you to know the truth.”
“He’s not—”
“He is. He has. I’ll tell you what he’s done. He touches you, constantly.  Overwhelms  your
senses with intense pleasure.  Then  he  makes  you  his  lover.  Has  he  taken  you,  has  he  mated
with you in the Kyi?”
I was dimly aware of laser fire whining in the bay behind me. But I remembered  clearly the
hot passion, and spiraling upward in Sully’s arms through gray fuzzy soft.
Philip took my silence as an implied admission.
“Bastard!” Contempt hardened his words. “He’s made you his ky’sara, his bond-wife, slave.
The  link  is  part  of  the  way  he  controls  you.  When  he  tires  of  you,  he’ll  break  it  through  a
zragkor. Or he’ll kill you. That’s what a Kyi-Ragkiril is. That’s what they do.”
I stared at Philip, aware of my heart beating rapidly in my chest, aware that my breathing
was just as rapid. Aware that there was nothing in my mind but silence. And pain.
I remembered  what I’d  been  taught  in  Non  Human  Cultures  101  about  zragkors.  About

Ragkirils. Intense pleasure. And then you die.
“We need an exit hatch, Philip. Manually operated.” My voice shook.
“Chaz.” He touched my arm.
“If  we  don’t  get  out  of  here,  it  won’t  matter.  None  of  it.  So  tell  me  where  there’s  a
goddamned exit hatch!”
“There are two.” His voice was calm. But his grasp on my arm tightened. He  was  fighting
anger. I was fighting pain. “This Lazlo knew what he was doing, coming at  us  from  the  right
side.  Main  emergency  hatch  is  back  there.  We’d  never  make  it  across  the  bay.  The  other’s
under the pinnace, into the maintenance pits. He’s got that one now, too.”
“Then we have to take the pinnace, or the hatch below it. Sully says we can do it.”
“Agreed. If I were armed, we could take them from three different directions.”
I shoved the Stinger at him. “I’ve got my Grizni. If I can get close enough—”
No! Guthrie takes my Carver.
“Chaz?”
I held up my hand, stilling Philip’s question. Then you’d have nothing.
Hellspawned Ragkiril filth don’t need anything, angel-mine.
Sully, stop it! In spite of my own wrenching emotions, the raw pain in his words tore at me.
A gentling flowed through me, like a wordless apology. I’ll  be  fine.  I  have  a  few  tricks  left.
Give me a  few  minutes to move to  your  position.  Tell  Guthrie  he’s  getting  my  Carver.  But  not  my
wife.
I tried to lower my hand but Philip held onto it. “Give me the Stinger back.  Sully’s giving
you his Carver.”
He hesitated only a second before he handed me the laser pistol. “There are supposed to be
ways to break a ky’saran link. I’ll help you.”
“I need to cover Sully. They might pick up his movements.” I pushed myself to the edge of
the cage again and locked my gaze on the pinnace. Locked my emotions in the biggest mental
duro-hard in the universe. Soldered it shut.
Shadows were hazy in the grayness. Only the outer door ring lights were bright.  But  they
were shielded, angled to shine toward incoming ships. The bay received their residue and their
reflection off the dull metal doors.
I heard a rustle of movement,  but didn’t take my gaze off the pinnace. Sully swept against
me,  hot,  hard  and  sweaty.  He  dragged  me  into  his  arms.  We  stumbled  back  against  the
bulkhead, my face, my Stinger in his chest.
Philip’s hand clamped my shoulder. “Let her go.”
Sully’s  arms  were  locked  tightly  around  my  back.  He  was  breathing  hard,  each  breath

pulsing warmth, tenderness, desire. Just like Philip said.
I splayed  one  hand  on  the  front  of  his  shirt,  angled  back.  His  arms  relaxed.  In  the  dim
lighting, I could see his eyes were infinite, black, endless. And focused behind me.
“You  know  nothing  of  me,  Guthrie.”  His  voice  was  soft  but  his  words  were  clipped  and
hard. He reached between us for the Carver, held it out.
Philip checked the clip for power, blatantly distrustful.
I stepped away from both of them. “Where’s Ren?”
“Going  back  up  to  Thad’s  office.  Burke’s  people  have  this  level  fairly  well  locked  up.  I’ll
know more of what Thad can do when Ren and Verno get there.”
“What do we do, now?”
“The pinnace is my first choice,” Philip said quickly. “We’ve got supplies, weapons. Could
blow through the bay doors, if we have to.”
Sully made a short motion with his hand. “Her ramp’s very exposed. How long to uncycle
her hatch lock?”
“Two minutes, if her codes haven’t been scrambled.”
“And if that won’t work?” I asked. “Where does the exit hatch go?”
“Maintenance tunnel between levels. If I were this Lazlo, or Burke, I’d expect we’d try that.
That might even be how they’re bringing in reinforcements.”
Sully tilted his head. I thought of Ren. “Not yet. Still just the three there.”
“We  have  to  draw  them  out,  split  them  up.  Get  control  of  the  pinnace  before
reinforcements arrive,” Philip said.
“Berri will come  after  me,  once  she  sees  what  I  am.  It’s  her  mission.”  I  remembered  her
charging, wild-eyed, into the Karn’s ready room,  screaming  about  demons.  “She  has  a  rifle.”
“She won’t try to kill me right away. Her type always lectures you, first. You two handle Lazlo
and  Talard.  We’ll  make  it.”  “There  are  two  cargo  stages  between  here  and  the  aft  of  the
pinnace.” Philip touched imaginary points in the air. “It’s a bit of  a  zigzag,  but  it’s  cover.  We
can  probably  make  that.”  “I’ll  head  for  the  bow.  Draw  Berri  out  that  way.”  Philip  frowned.
“They’ll  see  you  before  you’re  halfway  across  the  floor.”  “I  have  no  intention  of  using  the
floor.” “Sully—”
He placed his finger on my lips. “Hush, Chasidah.”
Even  in  the  dim  light  I  could  see  energy  ripple  across  his  shoulders,  like  a  rolling  wave.
Rising, merging. For a hundredth of a  heartbeat  I  saw  a  ghost  shadow  behind  him,  stepping
into him and out of him at the same time.
Then it was Gabriel with his finger on my lips, Gabriel with eyes of obsidian, Gabriel with
wings  cresting  his  shoulders,  framing  his  body.  Not  a  jukor.  Just  Sully,  just  Gabriel  Ross
Sullivan with wings. A Kyi-Ragkiril with infinite eyes. He brushed his thumb  over my mouth.
Chasidah-angel.  Nothing  to  fear.  Philip’s  shoulders  were  rigid.  Gabriel  glanced  at  him.  “Your

research  is  excellent,  but  incomplete.  You’ve  explained  ky’sara.  You  owe  it  to  Chasidah  to
explain ky’sal. Or is that the truth you don’t want her to  know?”  Philip’s  voice  was  harsh.  “I
only know what you’ve done to her. I have no proof of any link—”
“An  equal  link.”  Gabriel  stepped  toward  the  edge  of  the  cage,  listened  for  a  moment  to
things only he could hear in the shuttle bay. “If she is ky’sara to me and I am ky’sal to her, it’s a
link forged of love, not control. And that zragkor you threaten her with would kill me. Or isn’t
that in your family’s research?”
“I don’t know what her link is to you.”
“But  she  does,”  Gabriel  said  softly.  “All  that  I  am,  is  hers.”  He  studied  the  rampway
overhead. “Keep their focus on the ground for a few  minutes,  will  you?”  Gabriel—Nothing  to
fear.
 
Chapter Thirty-Six
« ^ » 
I aimed for one of the starboard struts on the pinnace, pulled off a series of quick  shots. Sparks
arced outward. Behind me, there was a rush of air, wings thrusting.
Philip targeted a console,  hitting  the  monitor.  It  answered  with  a  shattering  sound,  more
sparks. His hand closed around my arm. “The first cargo stage is  about  thirty  feet  in  front  of
me, to the left.”
“I see it.” A box-like structure, low but wide.
“I’ll move first. You follow. We’ll go to the next stage, then the rear strut.”
I listened to Philip’s orders but scanned the dim shadows  in  front  of  me  for  Gabriel.  Ops
panels  and  cargo  stages  dotted  the  perimeter  of  the  bay.  Rampways  lined  the  walls,  crossed
overhead.  But  none  seemed  to  hold  a  shadow  larger  than  usual.  And  none  a  shadow  with
wings.
A  strong  resonance  that  I  recognized  as  Gabriel  told  me  he  was  moving.  Concerned.
Focused. I held onto that in almost the same fashion as Philip held onto my arm. Lightly, but
with a definite possessiveness.
“Chaz. On three.”
I checked the power level on my Stinger. Nodded. Listened to the numbers. Three came.
We ran in a crouch, as  softly  as  possible,  weapons  out.  A  surge  of  fluorescent  green  mist
danced  across  the  bow  of  the  pinnace,  drawing  fire  and  an  unintelligible  curse  from  Berri.
“Energy fields,” Philip whispered when we reached the cargo stage. “Only a Kyi can do that.” I
hunkered down quickly, Philip leaning over me in the small area. We were far from safe.
Their lasers could  reach  us  here.  Our  shadows  were  stark  in  the  lights  from  the  docking
ring.  But  I  could  see  three  forms  more  clearly  under  the  pinnace  as  well.  “Options,”  Philip

whispered in my ear. I shook my head. “I can’t get a clear shot from here.” “Not what I mean.
Options, Chaz. I’ll find a way. You don’t have to stay with him.” “Shut up, Philip.” I crouched
down further, as if I could get away from his words. I kept my eyes on the shadows under the
pinnace. Berri and a large shadow were having an argument.
Laser fire suddenly flared back in my direction. It sizzled against the ops panel we’d hidden
behind earlier. Nothing was there, that I could see. I wouldn’t have answered their fire even if
Philip hadn’t clamped his hand on my arm.
“If he’s got them  shooting at ghosts, he’s close. A Kyi’s range is twenty, twenty-five  feet  if
he’s strong, and this one is.” This one. Philip’s dehumanizing word choice made me flinch. “I
confirmed  that  when  I  had  him  scan  the  stripers  before,”  he  continued.  Something  in  the
shadows  moved  quickly  around  the  bow  strut.  In  the  sudden  dark  movement,  a  hazed
shimmer…
Gabriel,  stepping  softly  out  of  the  shadows,  wings  arced  slightly,  head  high.  Gabriel,
walking toward the pinnace, one hand extended.
My heart leaped to my throat, pounded. I locked my gun on the bow of the pinnace, ready
to fire on the first red glow I saw.
“Sister  Berri.”  Gabriel’s  voice  was  deep,  seductive.  “I  know  you’ve  been  looking  for  me.
Come out and play.”
“Defiler!”  Berri  screamed  at  him.  Either  Lazlo  or  Talard  held  her  arm.  She  tried  to  jerk
away.
“Now!” Philip said.
We’re moving in, I told Gabriel. I ran softly, hunched over, never taking my eyes from Berri,
Lazlo and Talard.
We  reached  the  second  stage,  pressed  on  to  the  rear  strut,  blending  into  the  patches  of
darkness underneath the ship. Berri broke  free. She  pointed her rifle at Gabriel as if  it  were  a
sword. Her holy sword. “Ragkiril-filth!”
Lazlo  appeared  behind  her.  He  clearly  knew  how  to  use  the  Carver  in  his  hand.  It  was
aimed at Gabriel.
“Hands out, Sullivan! No tricks.” Lazlo wasn’t sure what he was seeing. I could hear it in his
voice. A shape-shifter, straight out of childhood scare-tales.
I searched for the third shadow, found it hanging back, watching Gabriel. Not watching for
us, to his right. Talard, probably as surprised as Lazlo was. I could take him out. Not with the
laser pistol. Lazlo and Berri would hear the laser pistol. But my Grizni would be silent.
There  was  another  strut  and  about  fifty  feet  between  Talard  and  myself.  If  I  could  get
behind him, I wouldn’t even need to be that close. I had a damn good throwing arm.
I made my decision. My own. No one  controlling  my  mind  but  Chaz  Bergren.  I  touched
Philip. “Talard’s hanging back. I’m on him.”
He tore his gaze away from Berri and Gabriel. “Chaz—”

“My own decision. My mind. You cover Sully.” I skittered into the shadows.
“Where’s  your  friends,  Sullivan?”  Lazlo  pulled  Berri  back  as  she  stepped  forward,  rifle
raised in one hand.
“There are no others.”
“We saw them—”
“You saw what I wished you to see.”
I made  the  next  strut,  took  my  gaze  off  Talard  for  a  moment  to  stare  at  Gabriel.  With  a
voice and tone like that he could get himself crowned Emperor.
A  gray  mist  swirled  up  by  his  side,  took  vaguely  human  form,  dissolved.  I  was  close
enough to see Talard shift nervously in his stance.
“Then  you  must  have  those  datatabs.  That  makes  it  easy.”  Lazlo’s  arm  jerked  from  the
recoil as his laser pistol fired.
Gabriel surged up, wings forcing downward. Berri swung her rifle, shouting. Lazlo grabbed
for her, dragged her to the floor as Philip’s laser pistol whined. Lazlo rolled and fired overhead.
I couldn’t see Gabriel. But he was alive. I could feel that. I clung to that.
Talard moved but so did I, darting, laser fire sizzling behind me.
Berri struggled against Lazlo, thrashed him with her fists. “He’s mine! The demon’s mine to
kill!”
He hit her with the Carver, hard. Her face twisted in pain. He shoved her away from him.
She sprawled awkwardly on the floor, her rifle skidding back toward the pinnace.
Chasidah! I felt a clear warning note from Gabriel. Burke’s people. Side emergency hatch.
Shit.  Reinforcements.  I  was  too  far  away  to  warn  Philip  without  revealing  my  position.  I
had to take Talard out now.
Talard half-turned to his right, searching for the red glow of Philip’s target-lock. I dropped
to one knee, clasped the Grizni. It vibrated ready, uncoiling with a snap into my palm. My eyes
narrowed, focused. I whipped my arm forward. The blade shot from my fingers. It struck the
middle of his chest.
He  fell  backward.  I  ran,  Stinger  out,  and  reached  him  as  life  flickered  out  of  his  eyes.  I
pulled  the  Grizni  out,  slapped  it,  still  dirty  with  blood,  around  my  wrist.  Time.  We  had  no
time.
I  heard  the  muted  groan  of  an  emergency  hatch  from  the  far  wall.  I  grabbed  Talard’s
Carver, shoved it in the back of my pants.
Gabriel?
Behind you. The sound of boots thudded softly on the floor.
I spun around just as the hatch door clanged back against the bulkhead. Shadows streamed

out. I lunged for Gabriel, shoved Talard’s Carver into his waiting hand.
He pushed me to the floor. “Down! Get  down!”  He  was  trying  to  warn  Philip,  on  the  far
side of the pinnace, heading for Lazlo.
The air above my head screamed, flared. I fired toward the hatch. Out of the corner of my
eye I saw Philip dive to the floor.  And  saw,  as  well,  a  shadow  over  my  back.  Gabriel’s  wing,
covering me.
He swung the Carver to the right, strafed the floor by the hatch.
Forms disappeared behind the cages and op-consoles.
“How many?”
Five. So far.
Where’s Ren?
Dealing with Burke’s people, close by.
Movement  churned  on  my  right.  Philip  rising,  going  after  Lazlo.  Berri  twisting  on  the
decking, half-sobbing, half-screaming.
I shifted onto my elbows, tried to get a clear shot on Lazlo, partially hidden by a wide strut.
I saw  the  profile  of  his  Carver,  saw  the  small  glint  of  red,  then  his  arm  jerked  up.  Philip,
kneeling, firing.
Lazlo’s body arced  backward.  Berri  screamed.  Lasers  streaked  through  the  air.  Flashes  of
light sizzled, burst around Philip, prone on the decking. Gabriel fired, covering him.
Berri turned over onto her stomach. Blood dripped down the side of her face. She  crawled
with a slithering movement, trying to reach the rifle.
Philip angled up. Two forms sprang from behind the cover of the wall cage.
Watch Berri! Gabriel fired. One form fell, the other jumped back.
I didn’t have a clear shot at Berri. But I did at her rifle. I hit it  on  the  stock,  splintering  it,
just as she caught sight of me in the shadows.
“Demon’s whore!” Her hair, matted with blood, fell in disarray about her face.
Three forms surged out of the darkness, firing, using the ops-consoles and cargo-stages for
cover.
Keep them busy.
Gabriel angled up, splayed his hand in a wide sweep along the floor while I lay down cover
fire.  A  mist  arose  from  nowhere,  from  nothing,  gelled  into  a  boiling,  writhing  red  mass.  It
surged toward a low cargo-stage.
Berri’s piercing voice carried clearly. “I curse you, Spawn of Hell! Soulless monster!”
A man jumped back  toward the protection of the cargo  stage.  I  heard  Philip’s  laser  pistol
whine. The man spun, fell.

Then an answering whine, close, too close. I tore my gaze from the boiling mist. Berri was
on her knees, Lazlo’s Carver in her hands. She fired again, laughing.
Philip was on the ground, his body jerking from the laser’s impact.
A harsh cry rose in my throat. I fired, once, twice, again. All three, center mass. The Carver
dropped from her hand and hit the floor a second before her body did.
One more attacker tried to  flee  Gabriel’s  red  mist,  found  the  white  laser  fire  more  lethal.
That  left  two.  Against  two  of  us.  Philip…  Gabriel?  Ren,  dying.  Sully,  breathing  for  him.  I
hurled that image, that plea to the man lying prone next to me.
Her first shot grazed him. But her second got him in the chest. He hesitated. I’ll  try. Cover
me.
I strafed the ops consoles and cargo stages. Gabriel ran under the pinnace toward Philip.
The  two  remaining  attackers  ducked  down.  I  pushed  myself  to  my  feet,  bolted  after
Gabriel. I could cover him best if I were in front of him. They’d have to shoot me first.
I crouched down, using the wide based struts for cover as Lazlo and Berri had when they’d
pinned us against the opposite wall. Burke’s people were now farther to my left. There were a
few blind spots, but they were small. If either moved from behind his cover, I’d get him.
One tried. I sent him scuttling back.
I could  hear  Philip’s  breath  rasping  a  few  feet  behind  me.  I  wanted  to  turn,  I  wanted  to
know  what  was  happening  but  couldn’t  take  my  eyes  off  the  two  who  were  still  alive  and
armed.  Or  the  emergency  hatchway,  which  could  bring  more  of  Burke’s  people.  If  that
happened, we wouldn’t survive.
Suddenly, something washed over me. Something  warm, familiar. I  kept  my  gaze  locked
but let it speak to me, in its wordless way. Recognized it.
Ren. Ren?
An affirmative sensation. Close. So close that—
The corridor door exploded into the control room. I raked the cargo stages with a  barrage
of fire. Forms plunged through the wide opening, firing where I did.  Boots  pounded  into  the
shuttle bay. Thad’s voice shouted my name.
I spun around on my knees, not looking for my brother but  to  protect  Gabriel.  Sully.  He
had to be shielded from the squadrons of stripers pouring into the bay. From the Fleet Admin
personnel at my brother’s side. All those who would  hate  him,  damn  him,  because  he  was  a
Kyi-Ragkiril. A shape-shifter. A winged monster.
He knelt beside Philip’s form, his wings splayed wide. The gray mist, the Kyi, clung to him,
and hovered over Philip. I quickly squatted across from him. Laser fire whined across the bay.
Philip’s gaze flicked briefly to my face. Gabriel had one hand on his chest, covering a large,
bloodstained area. The other rested lightly at the base of this throat.
“Gabriel. Ren, Thad are here. Half of Marker.”

He nodded without looking at me.
“Shift back. I don’t think they’ve seen you yet.”
He shook his head. I can’t, yet. Besides, he’d die.
Fear and anguish surged through me, colliding at my heart. They’ll  see you. Know what  you
are.
Risks, Chasidah. Risks.
He’d said it in the temple on Moabar, just before he’d kissed me. All life’s a risk. Ren had
reminded him of that, just before I’d learned Sully was a Ragkiril. Risks.
He kept taking them. They kept hurting him. But he kept taking them.
“How can I help?” My voice was barely a whisper.
Infinite, obsidian eyes met mine, briefly. He took his hand from Philip’s throat, held it out.
Help me give him life. You can do that. You’re ky’sara to me.
I moved next to him, clasping his hand, putting my fingers at Philip’s throat. I felt the Kyi
flow through me, grow. Philip’s pulse fluttered under my fingers. Gabriel’s wing rested lightly
against my back.
Breathe, Chasidah.
I breathed.
Gabriel breathed.
Philip breathed.
Voices shouted, hard and angry. My brother’s voice was one. “Chaz! What in the hell…?”
I squeezed Gabriel’s hand, raised my gaze. “Get a med-tech, fast. Philip’s been shot.”
Thad  barked  the  order  at  a  uniformed  woman  behind  him.  She  acknowledged.  I  heard
other voices in harsh, hard whispers.
“A jukor! No, it’s human.”
“My God. A soul-stealer’s killed Captain Guthrie. We got to—”
Two  large  forms  stepped  forward.  I  knew  their  identities  without  raising  my  face.  Ren.
Verno. Warmth surrounded me, like a flow of water  from  a  bubbling  spring.  Voices  became
quieter, backed away.
I breathed.
Gabriel breathed.
Philip breathed. His eyes slitted open again, focused on me.
I felt his questions, fear. “Thad’s bringing the med-techs. You’ll be fine.”
Loud boots and the discordant hum of an anti-grav stretcher came closer. Ren backed away

and two new pairs of boots came into my field of vision. “Holy brother of God!” A blue-coated
med-tech  dropped  to  his  knees  across  from  me,  ran  the  medi-stat  over  Philip’s  body.
“Impossible! He’s—”
“Alive.” Gabriel’s voice was raspy. “It’s your job to keep him that way.”
Two  more  blue-coats  knelt  down,  scanning,  probing,  hooking  Philip  to  their  machines.
They lifted him onto the stretcher.
Gabriel sat  back  on  his  heels,  his  shoulders  hunched  wearily,  his  wing  heavy  against  my
back.  Wings that I’d seen on the bridge of the Karn, but  had  forgotten.  I  remembered  them,
now.
I clasped  my  arms  around  his  neck  and  buried  my  face  into  his  shoulder.  He  drew  me
tightly against him, sent  warm  but  slightly  ragged  spirals  through  me.  But  another  emotion,
one that wasn’t his but was aimed at him, hovered on the edges.
Hatred. Fear. Revulsion. Med-techs, security guards, Thad’s officers. Hatred emanated from
them like a thick, acrid smoke.
This was Gabriel’s Hell. This was what he sensed every time he became what he was, what
he  had  no  choice  but  to  be.  “Chaz!”  Thad’s  voice,  harsh.  Thad’s  hand,  yanking  my  arm.
“Newscams, reporters—” Gabriel stood abruptly, jerking me to my feet with him. He grasped
my wrists as my arms fell from around his neck, held them tightly. He was shaking, something
trembling through him like a jump-drive engine far out of synch. Dark energy shifted, moved,
for  the  second  time  in  one  hour.  Wings  faded  but  slowly.  And  judging  from  the  tightness
around  his  eyes,  painfully.  “Get  us  out  of  here,”  Sully  said  roughly.  Bright  white  lights
suddenly  flared  to  my  left,  blocking  our  exit  to  the  corridor.  Vidcam  lenses  glinted.  “The
maintenance hatch, behind you,” Thad said. “Get back to my office.” We ran.
 
Chapter Thirty-Seven
« ^ » 
Morgan Loviti
It took us  twenty  minutes  to  carefully  weave  our  way  back  to  Thad’s  office,  Ren  and  Verno
mirroring  our  moves.  Another  fifteen  before  Thad  joined  us.  Sully  was  drained,  unnaturally
listless. Ren was close to his limit, needing water. Both dismissed my and Verno’s well-meaning
concern, but Ren accepted a wet towel Verno brought out of the office sani-fac, and draped it
around his neck.
It was another two hours, and several more changes of location on Marker,  before we were
transferred to the safety of the Morgan  Loviti.  We  were  greeted  tersely  by  the  ship’s  chief  of
security, an older woman I didn’t know. She  reminded me of Dorsie. I wondered if the jovial
woman were still alive.
“Commander  Bralford’s  in  sickbay  with  the  captain,”  she  said,  ushering  us  into  the
readyroom behind the bridge. “He suggested you might want to listen to this.”

She flicked on the room’s screen and left.
The  public  relations  executive  for  Crossley  Burke  had  issued  a  statement  disavowing  the
corporation’s knowledge of, and involvement with, the ‘unfortunately but obviously  mentally
unstable  Sister  Berri  Solaria,  and  their  recently  terminated  security  officer,  Zabur  Lazlo.’  I
replayed the vidclip twice on the readyroom’s central screen. It was a beautifully crafted piece
of obfuscation.
“His excuses are very believable. We may have underestimated him.” Sully had his back  to
me and stared out the large viewport. His arms were crossed over his chest. I handed Ren one
cup of tea from the replicator then rounded the long table to stand next to  Sully.  Wordlessly,
he accepted the tea I held out to him, even though he’d denied wanting any ten minutes ago.
He was obviously dismayed by Hayden Burke’s aggressive response.
But  I  knew  he  was  also  unsettled  by  the  reaction  to  his  true  form  in  the  shuttle  bay.
Angered,  and  hurt,  by  those  who  saw  him  as  a  despicable  demon,  in  spite  of  the  fact  he’d
saved  Philip’s  life,  pushing  himself,  I  realized,  to  the  very  limits  of  his  human  and  Ragkiril
strength to do so.
I wrapped my fingers around his arm, squeezed.
He sent warmth but no words. Still struggling.
“They’ll  change  their  song  when  the  truth  comes  out,  Sully-sir.”  With  his  long  legs  and
arms, Verno overflowed the high-backed chair. “Captain Guthrie’s position on the council will
see to that.”
Sully didn’t answer but his mouth  tightened at the mention of Philip’s name. Philip knew
far more about Ragkirils and Kyi-Ragkirils than Sully was comfortable with.
“You saved his life,” I said, softly, hoping he’d see that Philip was indebted to him. Surely
my ex-husband would reconsider his prejudices. As Thad had pointed out earlier in his office,
the Guthries were nothing if not a highly moral family.
Dark, infinite eyes turned from the starfield and studied me. “I did so because you asked.”
“So? That—”
“You  risked  your  life,  and  mine,  to  save  him.  If  I  were  him,  I’d  take  that  as  a  very
encouraging sign.”
“He was my C.O..”
“He was also your husband.”
Pain arced through me, but I didn’t know if it was his, or mine. “Sully—”
“Hush.” He laid his finger on my lips. “Sully knows. Gabriel’s confidence waxes and wanes
like Sylvadae’s summer moon. And we’re both extremely tired right now.”
So  was  I.  So  were  we  all.  It  had  been  an  exhausting  progression  of  events,  physically,
mentally and emotionally. Even more so for Sully and Ren. As if on cue, the readyroom  door
slid open, and Jodey Bralford, the Loviti’s first officer, stepped in.

His smile was genuine. Jodey and I had always gotten along. “Brother Ackravaro? We have
a cabin with hydro-spa ready for you. I apologize for the delay.”
It  hadn’t  been  fifteen  minutes  since  we’d  come  on  board—perhaps  ten  since  we’d  been
given clearance to depart Marker. With Philip in sickbay, Jodey was in command  and, until we
left  Marker,  had  more  serious  things  on  his  mind  than  a  cabin  with  a  tub.  Ren’s  weakened
condition wasn’t yet life-threatening.
Still,  Jodey  had  always  been  the  epitome  of  efficiency.  Ten  minutes  was  unacceptable  to
him.
Ren stood, a little unsteadily. Verno held out his hand. “I’ll go with you.”
Jodey was of stocky build, and only a few inches taller than I was. He glanced at the rising
Taka, to the tall Stolorth, no doubt thinking that Verno was in a better position to help, should
Ren collapse. “Excellent idea.”
“We’ll  be  fine  here,”  Sully  said.  The  readyroom  had  a  replicator,  a  sani-fac  and  a
comfortable pair of couches along the far wall. They suddenly looked very comfortable.
Jodey’s  eyes  narrowed  slightly.  I’d  no  doubt  he’d  heard  what  had  happened,  what  Sully
was,  but  was  too  much  the  professional  to  express  it  openly.  I  caught  the  change  in  his
expression only because I’d known him for several years.
“Actually, Captain Bergren, I’ve been asked to bring you to sickbay.”
For a moment  my heart froze but  then  logic  kicked  in.  If  Philip  had  died,  that’s  the  first
thing Jodey would have stated. And his demeanor  wouldn’t  be  so  outwardly  calm.  He  was  a
professional, career military, as I was. But he was also one of Philip’s close friends.
“I’ll finish your tea while you’re gone.” Sully took the mug from my hand. He arched one
eyebrow,  winked  at  me.  But  it  was  a  show,  for  Jodey’s  sake.  I  felt  nothing  from  him,  no
warmth, no teasing caress.
Then: Go see Guthrie. Remind him that he owes me. Remind him… that he doesn’t own you.
I touched his hand, then followed Jodey into the brightly lit corridor.
Philip’s second in command said nothing until the lift doors closed in front of us. “It’s good
to see you safe,  Chaz.”  He  slanted  me  a  glance.  “We’ve  been  worried.  I  know  some  of  what
you’ve been through.”
“Philip’s awake and talking, is he?”
His  affirmative  nod  didn’t  surprise  me.  Sully,  no,  Gabriel  had  restored  much  of  Philip’s
strength. The excellent facilities in the Loviti’s sickbay probably wouldn’t have all that much  to
repair.
“Philip’s very concerned.” All formality was dropped. It was just Jodey and I and a quietly
humming lift. “He thought, we thought you should let Doc Draper run a few tests.”
As if being ky’sara to a Ragkiril was a disease.
“He can help you,” Jodey continued, when I didn’t reply.

“I’ve a few bumps and bruises, but nothing to bother Doc about, Jodey. Thanks, anyway.” I
flashed him a smile.
His  answering  one  was  tinged  with  sadness.  And  that  bothered  me.  I  don’t  know
completely why, but it did. I guess, no, I know it felt as if in allying myself with Sully, I’d lost
Jodey Bralford’s respect.
That was something I didn’t want to happen. He’d  been  one  of  the  few,  besides  my  own
crew,  who’d  voiced  opposition  to  my  arrest,  who’d  been  emotionally  supportive  during  the
trial. He was one of the very few who’d bothered to keep  contact  with  me  afterward,  while  I
was in prison, awaiting transfer to Moabar.
The doors opened. “On a different note,” he said as we  stepped  into  the  corridor,  “I  have
some good news.” His voice was bright, but a shade too bright, as if he  knew  his  opinions  of
Sully affected me. “I’ve been offered a captaincy.”
“Jodey!” I ignored the fact that the corridor outside sickbay was dotted with Loviti crew. I
threw my arms around his broad form and hugged him. “Congratulations!”
I was genuinely pleased for him. It was an honor that was long overdue.
“The  Nowicki  doesn’t  have  the  reputation  the  Loviti  has,  but  she’s  a  good  ship.”  He
motioned for me to precede him through sickbay’s wide double doors, and reassumed his first
officer’s demeanor as three med-techs turned, noting our arrival. “Captain Guthrie’s in trauma
room 3, Captain Bergren. If you’ll come with me?”
Doc Draper briefly clasped my hand as we met up at the door to Philip’s room. “Captain,”
he said.
“Come in, Chaz.” Philip’s voice, even weak, held a tone of command.
A  biomesh  regen  unit  covered  part  of  his  chest.  His  left  arm  was  tattooed  with
medbrooches. He held out his right hand. I clasped it. “Burke’s denying all involvement,” I said
as I took the seat next to his bed.
“I’m glad to see you’re alive, Philip.” His mouth  quirked into a teasing grin as  he  said  the
words I hadn’t.
“I am glad to see you’re alive,” I repeated.
He  squeezed  my  hand.  “I  know  about  Burke.  I  saw  his  delightful  disclaimer.  Not
unexpected, considering who he is. And what he owns.”
“And who he owns?”
“Thad intimated as much, yes. It’s something I’ll have Jodey check into, before he transfers.
He told you, I take it?”
I grinned. “Couldn’t happen to a nicer overly-efficient man.”
“He thinks highly of you. He’s… worried. As I am.”
“The reason you’re worried is the reason you’re still alive. Did you tell Jodey that, too?”
“That’s not the issue here.”

“I think it’s part of it.”
“Good  deeds  don’t  change  what  he  is,  Chaz.  What  he’s  done  to  you.  You  don’t  fully
understand—”
“I do.”
“You don’t. He’s placed a filter around your mind.”
“Well, it’s not working right now because I’m hearing every word you say.”
“Are you?” He shifted his hand, held my fingers more tightly. “Did you hear what I said to
you  in  Thad’s  office?  A  captaincy  could  be  yours.  Jodey’s  leaving.  My  duties  as  admiral
preclude the daily running of this ship. The Loviti, Chaz. I’m offering you the Loviti.”
Captain of an Imperial destroyer. For a moment,  for very brief moment,  I felt the pull, the
thrill of those words.
“Once  I  clear  things  with  Tage,  I’ll  have  the  authority  to  make  that  offer.”  Philip’s  voice
interrupted my reverie.
“I appreciate whatever you can do with Barrister Tage. But your offer… no.”
“Is that your answer, or his?”
“Mine!”
“It’s not. It’s his  answer,  not  your  answer  and  I’ll  tell  you  how  I  know,  Chaz.  Don’t  pull
away.  Listen  to  me.  Listen  to  me  because  your  life  may  depend  on  it.  It’s  his  answer,  his
desires, not yours. The look on your face  when  I  made  you  the  offer  told  me  you  wanted  to
accept, you want to be captain again, to be where you belong. But then you tell me no. Why?
Ask yourself why.” He released my hand.
I sat back  in my chair,  suddenly  angry,  insulted  by  Philip’s  belief  that  I  didn’t  know  my
own mind. Of course I did. “I’m flattered you’d consider me for a captaincy. But that  doesn’t
mean I have to take it.”
“If he weren’t on this ship, you would.”
“Philip, that’s nonsense.”
“Prove it.” He reclaimed my hand, uncurling my fingers from the arm of the chair. “We’ll
meet up with his ship. Let him leave, with just the Stolorth and the Taka. Stay on the Loviti a
week. Spend some time with Doc Draper. If after that, you still want to be with him, I’ll deliver
you personally.”
Something  that  felt  like  fear  trickled  through  my  senses.  It  was  small,  distant,  barely
discernible. But it was there. Sully?
“Chaz!” Philip yanked my arm. I blinked, shook my head. And for a moment,  had no idea
where, or who, I was. Then it came back to me, flooding over me. Moabar, Sully, Ren. Gregor,
Marsh. Berri Solaria.
Gabriel.

“Let me think about it,” I said.
Philip said nothing until I’d almost reached the door. “One  week,  Chasidah  Bergren.  One
week. Prove it. Not to me. To yourself.”
Fear. I felt it more strongly.
Only fools boast they have no fears.
 
Sully turned from the viewport when I walked in. I wondered if he’d been standing there
since I’d left to talk to Philip. It had been over forty minutes.  Fifty,  actually,  because  I  hadn’t
gone straight back to the readyroom from sickbay. I’d stood in a recessed section of the ship’s
corridor for ten minutes, just thinking, and listening to my mind think back.
“He offered me command of the Loviti.” I rested my hand on the high backed chair Verno
had occupied earlier. “But then you know that, don’t you?”
“I felt something upset you.”
“Then you also know he said you filter all thoughts coming into my mind.”
“No.” He looked tired, as tired as I felt. But he didn’t look angry. And I wasn’t sure if I were
or  not.  And  if  I  were,  I  wasn’t  sure  at  whom:  Philip,  for  his  accusations;  Sully,  for  silently
prying; or myself, torn between believing Philip and not caring that Sully pried.
“I felt something upset you,” he repeated, more softly this time. “But I didn’t listen in. And
I don’t, in spite of what Philip says, filter your thoughts. Or form opinions for you.”
I sat in the chair I’d been swiveling. “But you have, in the past.”
He closed his eyes briefly. “On the Karn, when Ren was dying?” he asked when he opened
them.  They were as dark as the darkest parts of the starfield behind him. “Yes. And  on  Dock
Five, to protect you from Trel. Circumstances left me no choice. But I told you on Dock Five, as
soon as I could. To do otherwise would be repulsive to me. And as much  as an insult to myself
as to you.”
I nodded.
“So,” he said, “did you accept his offer?”
The  readyroom  doors  swooshed  open  as  I  started  to  answer.  Jodey  Bralford  strode  in,  a
datapad in his hand, a grim expression on his face.
“This just came in.” He held up  the  datapad.  “Phil—Captain  Guthrie  said  you  should  see
it.” He darted a glance to Sully. It was the first time he’d looked at him since coming into the
room. “Both of you.”
“Trouble?” I swiveled, stood.
“Darius Tage, First Barrister Darius Tage just released a statement.”  He  stressed  the  man’s
title but he didn’t have to. I knew the name. Everyone in the Empire knew the name of Prew’s
venerable senior advisor.  And  a  longtime  family  friend  of  the  Guthries.  The  man  who  could
clear my name. Who might even be able to return to Sully his rightful inheritance.

Jodey  shoved  the  datapad  toward  me.  “Son  of  a  bitch  has  come  out  in  solid  support  of
Hayden Burke.”
 
Chapter Thirty-Eight
« ^ » 
Tage?” I plopped back down in the chair, disbelief and dread churning through me.
“Cousin Hayden’s pulling in favors.” Sully’s voice held a distinct sneer.
“So it seems. You’d better read it.”
Tage’s statement quoted an independent investigation that had confirmed rumors that the
mercenary  outlaw,  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan,  had  faked  his  own  death  two  years  prior.  Sullivan
was  described  as  ‘dangerous  and  delusional,’  and  new  information  now  revealed  he  was  a
‘known  honeylace  addict’  with  violent  tendencies.  Out  of  respect  for  the  family,  this
information had always been kept quiet. But today’s events necessitated its release.
The Sullivan family, this new information stated, had institutionalized their son, Gabriel, in
attempts to cure his honeylace addiction. But after eight years in a clinic run by the benevolent
Englarians, he’d escaped, later resurfacing as a ‘career criminal.’
It was believed he was  behind  the  recent  terrorist  activities  on  Marker,  not  only  assisting
the Farosians, but in a personal vendetta against his cousin, Hayden Burke.
There  was  no  mention  that  Sully  might  also  be  a  Kyi-Ragkiril.  It  was  possible  Tage  and
Burke didn’t know. Lazlo, Berri Solaria and most of the other Crossley Burke operatives  were
dead,  or  in  custody.  There  was  no  one  to  inform  Burke  of  his  cousin’s  true  form  as  a
shapeshifter.
But  Burke  owned  people,  possibly  people  still  on  Marker.  He’d  damn  near  owned  my
brother. It was also possible Burke knew, but was just waiting for the right time to reveal it.
“They’ll be looking for you,” Jodey said.
“Hayden’s  been  looking  for  me  for  two  years.  He’s  found  me  only  because  I  felt  it  was
time.”
“But Tage?” I turned toward Jodey. “Why would Darius Tage ally with Burke?”
“We don’t know.” Jodey sounded distinctly troubled. I knew he was speaking for Philip as
well. “But maybe it’s time to tell you what we do know.” He paused. “Something very ugly is
happening in the Empire. It’s one of the reasons I accepted the command  of the Nowicki. We
need people, we need the right people in command of the Fleet.”
Jodey’s tone disturbed me almost as much  as my frisson of fear had earlier. “What are you
saying?”
He sighed, ran his hand through his short-cropped dark  hair.  “I’m  saying  that  one  of  the

first things Philip told me when I saw him in Marker’s med-station a few hours  ago,  was  ‘it’s
started.’ It’s started.”
“But he didn’t know about Burke. When Thad told him—”
“We  didn’t  know  who.  Or  rather,  we  didn’t  know  which  of  several  ‘whos’  have  been
behind an  undercurrent  we’ve  been  aware  of  for  some  time.  Burke  was  on  the  list,  yes,  but
there were others we felt would make a move, first.”
Sully nodded, clearly understanding more than I did.
“What  kind  of  move?  Why?”  I  thought  of  the  usual  political  power  struggles  that  had
dotted the news vids  over  the  years.  Ego  contests,  in  my  opinion.  Nothing  like  this,  nothing
like Jodey was intimating.
“It goes back  to the Boundary Wars. Promises were made during the peace talks,  some  of
them in secret meetings. Promises about mining rights, trade rights, succession in  power  that
would in effect remove much  of the control from the Councils. Some  of those promises  were
kept. But some weren’t.”
That  I  had  seen—it  was  something  my  mother  often  commented  on.  The  Councils  had
become ineffectual. It was something Sully had noted: the Rim Worlds were disproportionately
rife with suffering.
“Burke’s charged with enforcing those promises?” That didn’t seem possible, not  even  for
Hayden Burke.
“We don’t have all the facts yet. Our sources,” and he grimaced wryly, “keep mysteriously
dying. But Burke’s father was on one of the original committees.” He shot a glance at Sully. “So
was Winthrop Sullivan.”
“I don’t share my father’s political allegiances.”
But Hayden Burke did. And the Sullivan moneys to fund his beliefs. Starting with the jukor
labs.
Which  both  Crossley-Burke’s  and  Tage’s  statements  referred  to  as  ‘illegal  weapons
laboratories’  created  by  Farosian  supporter  Zabur  Lazlo.  No  mention  of  jukors.  No  proof  of
jukors, thanks to Sully’s firebombs.
Only the data on its way to Drogue, a copy of which my brother and Philip also had.
But data could be altered, faked. I knew that  first  hand  from  my  trial.  Odd  that  the  very
people who’d ruined my career would now use the  same  defense  I’d  tried  to.  I  had  a  feeling
they’d be much more successful than I had been.
“This  list  of  yours.”  Sully  pulled  the  datapad  toward  him  but  didn’t  look  at  it.  “I  take  it
Darius Tage wasn’t on it.”
Jodey shook his head slowly. “Not only was he not on it, he knew about it. He knew about
our suspicions. He was one of the people we thought we could trust.”
Silence followed Jodey’s pronouncement.  The readyroom felt suddenly cold, as if wrapped
in sheets of ice.

Sully clenched his right hand into a tight fist. “How much does Tage know?”
“We thought he shared our goals. A more equal distribution of power, more control to the
Councils.”
“What does Tage know?” He leaned toward Jodey.
Jodey’s mouth was a tight line. “Everything.”
 
The only good piece of news came about an hour later. The Boru Karn responded to one of
Sully’s coded hails. At top  speeds,  she  was  less  than  an  hour  from  us.  Sully  spoke  briefly  to
Marsh from on the readyroom’s main screen. Gregor was offshift.
“We were tagged but we lost them.” Two ships of unknown origin, bristling with weapons,
had challenged the Karn but were unable to complete a capture.
I remembered the feeling. Sully’s ghost ship had a well-earned reputation.
We traded coordinates with the Karn, set up a meetpoint.
Jodey’s  broad  face  furrowed  in  worry  as  he  stood  by  the  readyroom  door.  “I’ll  inform
navigation, code the course change myself. I have bridge crew stripped down to  a  minimum.
There’s too much at risk.”
More than just my life, Sully’s,  Ren’s  or  Verno’s.  Everyone  who’d  helped  us,  if  Tage  was
able to convince the Admirals’ Council that Philip Guthrie, and the Morgan Loviti had assisted
Farosian terrorist Gabriel Ross Sullivan.
That  was  the  only  thing  Jodey  felt  fairly  sure  Tage  didn’t  know,  yet.  They’d  intended  to
contact the First Barrister’s office once we came on board, but Philip would have to be the one
to do that, and he was in sickbay. The Loviti’s  departure  had  been  unremarkable,  and,  other
than the fact that her captain had been injured in a ‘shuttlebay explosion,’ without incident.
We  could  only  guess  at  what  Burke  knew  from  his  sources  on  Marker.  Which  meant
Thad’s life, too, was in danger.
“Your  brother’s  a  smart  man,  Captain  Bergren.”  Jodey  stopped  in  the  opening  doorway.
“But you know Captain Guthrie and I will do all we can. There are still people we can trust.”
Then Sully and I were alone for the first time since Jodey had burst in with news of Tage’s
defection. Or perhaps, revelation of which side he’d been on all along.
“Did we accomplish anything?” I asked after the  doors  closed.  “Destroying  the  jukor  lab.
There’s  a  second,  somewhere.  You  believe  that  as  strongly  as  I  do.  So  did  we  accomplish
anything, other than placing more innocent people in harm’s way?”
“Guthrie’s far from innocent. He knows how this game is played. He’s tracked it probably
as long as I have. Just from a different angle.” He shook his head slightly, his mouth  twisting as
if the thought for some reason, amused him. But not pleasantly so.
“But did we accomplish anything?”
His smile softened, turned almost wistful. “Yes, angel-mine, I think we  have.”  He  covered

my  hand  with  his  own.  A  tiny  warmth  trickled  through  our  contact,  fluttered  up  my  arm.
“We’ve put them on notice. They know we know. Granted, the problem is larger than I’d like
it to be.”
I noticed he didn’t say larger than he’d suspected.
“But, in a way, that will only make it more difficult for them to hide,” he continued.
“Do we even know who ‘them’ is, Sully?”
“It might be worthwhile to compare lists with Guthrie.  Though  I  have  a  feeling  he  might
not like what he’d see on my—” He turned, the  sound  of  the  door  sliding  open  stopping  his
words.
I turned, too, expecting Jodey with confirmation of our position relative to the Karn. But it
wasn’t Jodey leaning in the doorway.
“Philip!”
He was in Fleet’s generic brown workout sweats, the soft sweatshirt unzippered revealing a
thin medimesh hugged to his torso. I couldn’t see a trail of med-brooches on his arm covered
by  the  long  sleeve,  but  I  suspected  they  were  there.  His  silver  hair  was  mussed,  his  eyes
shadowed. His mouth was a tight line, reflecting his physical pain.
“You shouldn’t be out of sickbay!” I shoved myself to my feet, pulling my hand  out  from
under Sully’s, and reached for him.
“Doc Draper’s already tried that line. It didn’t work.” But he  accepted  my  hand.  I  helped
him  into  the  chair  next  to  mine.  He  waved  me  back  down  into  my  seat.  “My  first  officer
informs  me  we’re  less  than  forty-five  from  meetpoint  with  your  ship,  Sullivan.  That  doesn’t
give us a lot of time. You know about my error with Tage.”
That was typical Philip. I highly doubted it was solely his error to trust Darius  Tage.  But  I
was surprised when Sully echoed that sentiment as well.
“It’s one anyone would have made. He wasn’t on my list, either.”
“I  think  Thad  Bergen  and  I  have  sufficiently  muddied  the  Marker  incident  that  it  will
reflect  only  what  Burke’s  release  stated:  Farosian  terrorists  and  an  unstable  Englarian  nun
attempted  to  sabotage  Marker’s  core  and  were  killed  when  trying  to  use  a  Fleet  pinnace  to
escape.  There’s  no  record  of  your  visit  to  Commander  Bergren’s  office.  No  record  of  your
transfer to my ship. It will take Tage a lot of work to backup  his statement, to prove you were
on Marker.”
Because Philip had been our escort. There was no record of us passing through the security
checkpoints in the corridor, only people’s memories. We could have easily been any two of the
more than three hundred on board the Loviti, accompanying their captain back to the ship.
But  that  had  never  been  my  worry.  “How  many  people  saw  Sully  in  the  shuttlebay?”
Besides Thad and two of his officers, I could remember  seeing at  least  three  med  techs  and  a
half-dozen or more security. The word ‘soul-stealer’ echoed viciously in my thoughts.
“Enough. But there’ve been rumors of Stolorth support of the Farosians. That’s most likely

how it’ll be remembered.”
“Those  same  people  saw  Ren  there,”  Sully  added.  He  leaned  toward  Philip.  “I  have  a
number of files on the Karn that might interest you. I’ll have copies on the shuttle that comes
for us.”
“I appreciate that. Now we have to talk about what will happen when your ship gets here.”
Sully sat back  slowly.  “I  take  it  you’re  not  interested  in  the  navigational  mechanics  of  its
arrival.”
“Chaz stays with me.”
“Philip—!”
He  held  up  one  hand.  “I’m  asking  you  to  release  her.  I’m  asking  you  because,  first,  the
woman had her own mind and the right to use  it.  But  second,  I’m  asking  because  you  must
know she’s safer with me. Burke knows you’re alive. He may even know what you are by now.
Your family’s wealth aside, that gives him two reasons to kill you.”
“The first has always been sufficient. He’s never managed to accomplish it.”
“You’re willing to risk her life on that?”
“Philip!”
He ignored me. “You can offer her nothing but heartache. You’ll be continually on the run,
fugitives. Welcomed only in places like Dock Five, or the Rim. My family has properties, places
she’ll be guarded, safe. She’ll lack nothing.”
I’d many times visited the Guthrie’s palatial estates. He was right. Every luxury was  there.
But I’d walked away from luxury before. Wealth was a very cold bed partner.
Besides, too much had happened to Chasidah Bergren since Moabar. Hell, since she’d been
in command  of the Meritorious. Even if Sully and  I  had  never  been  more  than  partners  in  a
cause, that cause—jukors breeding and Takas dying and  now,  the  Empire  I’d  committed  my
life to infested with a vile corruption—that cause would make Philip’s silk sheets and expensive
wines a mockery of everything I believed in, everything I was.
Everything I am.
“He  doesn’t  control  me,  Philip.”  My  voice  was  soft  but  I  remembered  that  tone  of
command Fleet had insisted we adopt, and I used it. “I am going back to the Karn.”
Warmth, hope, relief surged through me. Sully wasn’t touching me, but it was as strong as
if  he  were.  I  realized,  suddenly,  that  he’d  been  totally  absent  from  my  thoughts,  from  my
senses, save for that brief spike of fear when I’d talked to Philip in  sickbay.  And  even  then  it
had been withdrawn as quickly as it had appeared.
That’s what had made me suddenly lightheaded. Not that Sully had been in my mind. But
that he wasn’t. I’d become  used to his reassuring presence, and when it hadn’t been there, I’d
felt off balance.
There  was  no  way  I  could  accept  captaincy  of  the  Loviti,  though  I  doubted  Darius  Tage

would approve of that now. There was no way I could accept Philip’s offer of  protection,  and
all the luxuries as well.
Because I’d lack the one thing I knew I could no longer live without. That wicked, wicked
Sully-smile.
And the man, the Kyi-Ragkiril, the shape-shifter it belonged to.
“Chaz, listen to me.” Philip’s voice was strained.
“Listen to me, Philip. The time has passed where any one person’s safety is more important
than what we know has to be done. And you know this is me talking, not anyone else, because
it’s a failing you’ve said I’ve had all along. I will  not  suffer  injustice  quietly.  We’re  faced  with
more than injustice, my friend.” And yes, I felt Philip was my friend, perhaps for the first time
in  a  very  long  time.  “We’re  faced  with  corruption,  with  a  heinous  misuse  of  power,  with
blatant murderers. And they’re running the government we know as the Empire.
“I will not and cannot let that continue. And I won’t be shuttled off to one of your estates,
like some fragile but useless piece of sculpture. There are things I can do. There are things Sully
and I will do. And we will do them  best because  we’re  not  a  part  of  that  government.  We’re
ghosts,  Philip.  They  may  think  they  see  us,  but  they’ll  never  truly  be  sure.  Because  we’re
ghosts.”
Philip stared at me a long time, studying me, seeing again, perhaps, the young recruit he’d
mentored in boot camp, the lieutenant he’d commanded on the Loviti. The woman he’d loved,
married and divorced. The  woman  he’d  watch  go  to  prison,  who’d  never  once  looked  back,
never once flinched.
And had never backed away from what had to be done.
He rose slowly, unsteadily,  the  pain  on  his  face  more  than  physical.  But  when  he  turned
toward Sully, his blue eyes narrowed.
“Anything  happens  to  her,  Sullivan,  and  I  will  tell  Hayden  Burke  all  I  know  about  you.
Hell, let me add this. Anything happens to my wife, and I’ll help your cousin kill you.”
He turned, lurched unsteadily for the door, then plowed doggedly out into the corridor.
 
Chapter Thirty-Nine
« ^ » 
Boru Karn
She  waited  for  us  in  the  big  wide  darkness;  a  sleek  ship,  built  for  opulence.  A  ghost  ship,
stripped for war, for stealth. We would need all  that  and  more  now.  There  was  a  message  in
Tage’s alliance with Hayden Burke, a warning. The first of many, Sully and I knew.
The Karn’s crew, Marsh, Dorsie, Aubry, even Gregor, were subdued through the two hour
briefing in the readyroom, as the Karn streaked an oblique path toward Dock  Five. We needed

supplies, we needed fuel. We  needed  information.  We  needed  to  know  who  our  friends  and
our enemies were.
We had to warn the former, watch the latter.
But we had time—several days, one jump.
Dorsie was first to rise when the briefing ended. “I baked a srorfralak pie.” She  glanced at
Verno, then to Ren. “With that special gravy you like.”
I knew  Ren  couldn’t  see  her  shy  smile.  But  he  could  read  her  rainbows,  gravy-flavored
ones.
Marsh seemed relieved, clasped my hand tightly. “Had me a little worried this time.”
Only Gregor had little to say. But the set of his mouth,  the narrowing of his eyes, said what
he didn’t. I was Fleet. Ren, he believed, was a mind-fucker  and those were two things he  had
no intention of forgetting.
That  was  something  Sully  would  have  to  deal  with,  eventually.  But  right  now  we  both
needed sleep more.
I fell asleep in his arms, barely remembering my head touching the pillow.
I woke, hours later, the pungent smell of coffee like an elixir. An angel  of  heart  stars  card
was propped against the nightstand lamp.
I shoved it in the pocket of my robe and padded to the main room of our cabin.
Sully had pulled on his black pants, but nothing else. I snuggled against his bare chest  on
the couch and sipped my coffee. He ran his hands through my hair.
Then  his  fingers  moved  and  another  angel  card  appeared  in  front  of  my  nose.  I  took  it,
laughing  softly.  “Am  I  to  be  inundated  with  these  because  of  my  choice  on  the  bridge  that
day?” That had been one of the first times I’d seen Gabriel manipulate  matter.  We’d  been  on
the Meritorious, playing games, in more ways than one, I realized.
“The bias is mine.” He hesitated. “Do you know angels used to have wings?”
I didn’t,  nor  did  that  seem  possible.  Not  with  our  culture.  Winged  creatures  had  always
been  demons.  Angels,  like  the  ones  on  the  card,  were  benefic  spirits  recognizable  by  their
halos. But never wings.
“It’s  true.  In  ancient,  very  ancient  myths,  angels  originally  were  winged.  And  loved.
Revered.”
“Sully—”
He  touched  my  mouth.  “Hush,  Chasidah.  Gabriel  needs  to  tell  you  a  story.”  He  paused.
“No. Gabriel needs to answer what you’ve asked, many times. But could never tell.”
I shifted slightly to put my coffee down, then wove my fingers through his.
“I don’t ever remember not being able to read people’s thoughts, their resonances. Though
it took me awhile to understand what I  saw.  What  I  heard.  I  tried  to  explain  it  to  my  Takan

governess, to my parents. But I knew their thoughts immediately. Crazy kid. Wild imagination.
But always, a fleeting fear. What if…?”
His thumb traced a pattern on my hand. “What if he really can? What do we do with him?
Where can we send him, to keep him away from us? So  I  stopped  telling.  But  I  didn’t  know
how to stop listening.
“When I was ten, I found out I could move things just  by  thinking  about  it.  I  knew  then
not to tell anyone. I found out if I looked at a toy, and really thought about it, thought about its
shape and color and what it felt like, I could make another.” He smiled grimly. “I had a lot of
toy starships. Not that anyone noticed.”
And I had a growing collection of angel of heart-stars cards.
“The more I did these things, the easier they were to do. It was as if something were feeding
me  energy,  from  another  room.  But  I  could  never  find  that  other  room.  So  one  day,  I  just
decided to let it find me.”
“The Kyi,” I said.
He nodded. “I was always there. It just took me twelve years to meet myself.”
“In the mirror.”
“It started before that. It felt like a memory,  except I’d be awake, aware that my body felt
different. I just couldn’t see any difference.
“Then  that  morning  instead  of  pushing  that  odd  feeling  away,  I  stepped  into  it.  I  don’t
know how else to  explain  it.  When  I  turned,  I  saw  wings.  On  me.  Part  of  me.  They  moved.
They made me look like the demons in storybooks I’d read, like the ones in the paintings in the
church.”
His voice dropped. “I thought at first  I’d  created  them,  just  as  I’d  made  more  toys.  But  I
couldn’t uncreate them. I couldn’t shift back to what I was.”
“But you can, now.”
“It took me three days to figure that out. They were the three most horrible days of my life.
I went looking for Winthrop’s pistols, but he kept them  locked. I didn’t know how to unlock
things with my mind, then. Or I’d be dead.”
In the mind of a twelve-year-old boy, death was preferable to life as a demon.
I put my arms around his neck and rested my head against his shoulder. His warmth move
through me as his hands pressed against my back. “When did you finally understand you were
a Ragkiril? Stop being afraid?”
“I knew what a Ragkiril was from reading the books from the church,  the ones  the  Takas
always had. It took me years after that to learn what a Kyi-Ragkiril was. But I’ve never stopped
being afraid. And I still don’t like mirrors.”
There were none in our cabin  on  the  Karn,  except  for  the  small  one  over  the  sink  in  the
bathroom.  But  there  had  been  one  in  the  monastery  on  Moabar.  He’d  stood  behind  me,
braided the beaded ribbon through my hair, touched my mouth.

“Unless you’re with me,” he added softly.
He  was  watching  my  memory  instead  of  facing  himself  in  that  mirror.  Gabriel  Ross
Sullivan, age thirty-nine, still afraid  of  what  Gabriel  Ross  Sullivan,  age  twelve,  had  seen.  Still
afraid to let Chasidah Bergen see. I remembered  his voice in my mind: Hush, he’d said, when
he’d made love to me. Don’t look. Don’t open your eyes.
I didn’t want it to be that way anymore. I framed his face with my hands. “Chasidah wants
to make love to Gabriel.”
He knew what I asked, though it took him a moment to push aside the fear, the shame that
hovered  around  him.  He  pulled  me  to  my  feet,  his  eyes  finding  that  infinite  darkness  I
recognized.  A  darkness  rippled  over  him  like  a  cape  charged  with  flashes  of  silver  for  one
breath,  not  even  two,  then  snapped  into  form.  Two  wings,  arcing,  more  silvery  than  I
remembered  from the shuttle bay. He  held  them  straight  down,  their  edges  just  framing  his
muscled  arms  and  shoulder,  his  black  pants.  They  were  smooth;  I  remembered  a  slightly
velvety feeling when they’d brushed against me. Not at all like a  jukor’s  jagged,  thorn  tipped
wings.
His  trepidation  grazed  my  mind.  My  acceptance  brushed  his.  “Just  because  you’re  a
Kyi-Ragkiril doesn’t mean you’re not normal. This is what you are. There’s nothing—”
“Hush.” He touched his lips to the side of my face, lay his  cheek  against  my  temple,  eyes
closed. He drank in my acceptance. His wings lifted slightly as he sighed.
I turned  and  kissed  him.  “Gabriel.  Nothing  to  fear.”  I  ran  my  fingers  through  his  hair,
through the sprinkles of silver that glistened like the silver shimmers in his wings.
I ran my love for him through his mind.
He kissed me back, hard, clasping me against his body.
I slipped one arm around his neck,  reached with my other hand for the  hard-soft  edge  of
one wing. Touched him, felt the muscled softness against my palm as I stroked him.
He sucked in a quick breath. Heat arced through me, spiraled.
Velvet. I was right. I could feel the muscles in his wing tremble under my fingers. I caressed
a part  of  himself  he  thought  was  hateful,  that  I  found  beautiful.  Told  him  so,  with  my  own
rainbows, with my own spirals.
He buried his face against my neck  and moved his wing forward, letting me explore it. He
whispered my name, trailed shivering kisses against my skin.
I ran my hands down both wings as far as I could.
He raised them slightly, responding to my touch, needing it. Aching for it. Aching for me.
He splayed his hands against my waist, his hips arching against me.
I kissed his throat. He groaned, thrust his fingers through my hair at the nape of my neck,
brought his mouth down on mine. Sucked  kisses from me, hungrily. Pleasure spiked through
my senses like a rush of bubbles bursting through the surface.
I slipped my hands under the inside of his wings and found the hollow where they met the

heat  of  his  body.  I  stroked  up  under  their  arch,  pushing  gently.  I  felt  the  strength  of  the
muscles that had lifted me up the core of Marker, to safety. He pressed his wings over my fists,
demanding my touch now.
I stopped being gentle.
A thousand  stars  blazed  through  my  mind,  my  body.  He  clasped  me  hard  against  him,
throbbing,  wings  quivering,  breath  rasping  between  hot,  frenzied  kisses  that  bruised  my
mouth.
“Ky’sara-mine, let me love you.”
He lifted me easily. My legs locked around his hips as his mouth  kissed, sucked, his wings
splayed wide, powerful behind him.
I ran both hands through his hair, then across the wide arc of his wings again, marveling at
the most incredible man I’d ever known.
He raised his face, his obsidian eyes glittering with intense desire. He lowered me, my body
sliding down his with an almost electric friction. He unfastened robe, snagged my underpants
deftly, yanked them  to the floor. He rose from a half-crouch, his tongue trailing up  my  belly.
He lifted my shirt, his mouth on my breasts.
I let the robe slide down my arms. His mouth came down hard on mine before the robe hit
the floor.
I wriggled my fingers under his belt and waistband of his pants, demanding. He complied,
one hand locked in my hair, the other unthreading his belt. Pants fells, shoes were shoved off.
Then  nothing  but  bodies,  hard  and  soft,  hot  and  slick,  touched,  melted  against  each  other.
Mouths  whispered,  sucked,  groaned.  He  unraveled  my  braid.  My  hair  cascaded  down  my
back as heat flared up my spine.
I caressed his wings again, moved my hands down them,  over them,  under  to  their  hard,
sensitive  muscles.  They  rippled  under  my  touch,  and  suddenly  vibrations  of  incredible
pleasure roared through my body.
This is what I feel when you touch me. His voice whispered deep in my mind. He cupped his
hands  under  my  backside,  lifted  me  to  his  waist  again,  over  hot,  throbbing  hardness  that  I
wanted inside me now.
He  knew.  My  rainbows  must  have  challenged  the  color  spectrum,  shifting  to  ecstasy.  In
three strides we were in the bedroom. He kneeled over me in the center of the bed. “Chasidah,
angel—” His fingers brushed my face, but for the first time, made no move to close my eyes.
Then suddenly the cabin disappeared and  we  soared,  climbing  through  gray  fuzzy  soft.  I
wrapped  my  legs  around  his  waist,  looked  at  him,  looked  at  what  moved  just  beyond  his
shoulder. His wings were silvery, glistening and ethereal in their beauty. We soared, our bodies
thrusting  together,  rhythmically,  insistently.  Heat  pulsed  at  my  center  where  he  throbbed
between my legs. I ached, my need and his need for completion almost unbearable.  Then  his
wings  beat  down,  hard,  forceful.  He  plunged  inside  me,  stroking,  filling  me,  claiming  me.
Possessing  me,  thrusting  again,  his  kisses  demanding  all  and  giving  everything  at  the  same
time.

My breath caught in my throat at his raw power, at his incredible passion. I arched against
him, pleasure cresting, peaking, exploding as gray fuzzy soft poured over us. And somewhere
in the galaxy, four suns went nova, comets blazed wildly and stars leaped through the darkness
with uncontrollable joy.
We  clung  to  each  other,  trembling.  The  sweep  of  his  wings  slowed,  but  they  were  still
powerful, holding us aloft in the Kyi. An invisible wind whispered through our kisses, played
with my hair that drifted, fluttering, with each push of his wings. He tasted like starlight. More
stars danced in his eyes when he looked at me.
The darkness inside him was no longer infinite. It ended in an effervescent silvery light.
Time passed, hours folding  into  instants.  Seconds  exploding  into  forever.  Gray  fuzzy  soft
hazed, fading. The cabin focused into view. The coverlet under my  bare  back  was  damp  and
rumpled. The  man  lying  over  me  hot,  skin  slick.  He  stroked  my  face  with  incredibly  gentle
fingers, his wings spread across the bed, holding that heat against us like a soft blanket.
I leaned  up,  caught  his  mouth  in  a  long  kiss.  “This  is  who  Gabriel  really  is,”  I  told  him.
“Someone  I  love.  Someone  I  always  will.”  I  brushed  my  palm  down  the  soft  warmth  of  his
wing.
He watched as I caressed him, his eyes bright, his breath shuddering softly. He lowered his
face, his mouth against my ear.
“Chasidah, angel. I forgot to ask you something.”
“Umm?”
“Will you marry me, ky’sara-mine?”
Ky’sara. And to me, he is ky’sal. An almost unbreakable link. All that I am, is his. All that
he is, is mine. A selfish, hedonistic desire to have in a time that was sure to get more troubled,
more dangerous, more desperate.  A  time  where  jukors  were  born,  and  Takas  were  dying.  A
time to fear.
Only fools boast they have no fears.
No. Only fools underestimate the power of love.
“Yes.”
 
About the Author
« ^ 
Megan Sybil Baker believes in the magic of stories,  the  enchantment  of  words  and  in  the
power  of  fantasy  and  science  fiction  to  let  readers  experience  wondrous  journeys  through
marvelous lands. She  wrote her first  novel  at  the  age  of  four,  self-published  on  her  mother’s
typewriter, and self-illustrated through her trusty box of crayons. She’s been dreaming, writing

and  drawing  ever  since.  A  former  news  journalist  working  in  both  the  electronic  and  print
media,  she  was  nominated  in  1998  for  the  respected  Pushcart  Literary  Award.  Her  fantasy
novel,  Wintertide,  won  the  2001  EPPIE  Award  for  Best  Fantasy,  the  Sime-Gen  Gatemaster’s
Award  and  was  a  finalist  in  the  Dream  Realm  and  PEARL  Awards.  Her  short  stories  in  the
Science Fiction Romance genre have won several Grand Prize and First Place awards.
A member of Romance Writers of America Futuristic, Fantasy and Paranormal chapter, she
resides  in  south  Florida  with  her  husband  and  four  cats,  and  loves  to  hear  from  readers.
Readers can reach her at megansybil@aol.com or visit her in the Time Travel-Futuristic section
on AOL, Keyword: Romance Fiction.

