SILENT RUN
 by Linnea Sinclair
Set in the same universe as my novel, Finders Keepers, this short story introduces
Captain Shandy McAllister, who is about to become embroiled in a mixture of
political intrigue, personal challenges... and learn a little about love in the
process...
 
  I
       “Rinnaker shuttlecraft, you’re cleared for final approach to Bay Six-Fiver Beta.
Acknowledge.”
       “Deneb Approach, this is Rinnaker shuttle Lancer-One. Acknowledged.
Thanks. Switching helm over to Deneb Auto Guidance.”
       “Computer confirms. You’re on the mark, Lancer-One.
        Cut power to one-third.”
       “Acknowledged. One--"
       “Lancer-One, this is Deneb Approach. Increase power. There’s a Tryll off
your stern, mark one-eight-zero-point-three. Repeat. Increase power.”
       “Power up.”
       “Nanjir Tryll, Nanjir Tryll, this is Deneb Approach. Decrease power. Change
course to nine-zero-point-five. Repeat. Decrease power! Change course to
nine-zero-point-five!”
       “Den... Nanj... Unable to...”
       “Nanjir Tryll, change course now! This is Deneb Approach. You’re in the path
of an incoming Rinnaker shuttle. Repeat. Take nine-zero-point-five immediately!
       “Lancer-One, this is Deneb. Abort! Abort!”
       “Negative, Deneb. We’re too tight. We’ll try to outrun thebastard. Clear the--"
       “This is Deneb Approach. All craft hold position. We have an emergency in
Bay Six-Fiver Beta!”
 
II
       “We’re not lovers!” Shandy McAllister winced as the line of faces down the
Port Tyber bar turned abruptly in her direction.
       The man on her right leered at her. “Jump-jockey gossip says different. Says
you’re right cozy with Captain Talvarrin. So how’s ‘bout using some of that
horizontal influence for me?” His hand shook noticeably as he slid his journeyman’s

data-tab towards her. His breath reeked of the sour odor of a rafthkra junkie. “I can
work drive tech, cargo tech, anything Rinnaker needs.”
       “I don’t have any connections with Rinnaker, Hillard.” Nor would she give him
a recommendation if she did. The once respected tech had degenerated into one of
the lowest forms of dock slime she’d ever met. And growing up in the Syar
Colonies, she’d just about met them all.
       Shandy slid off the stool. Hillard’s hand clamped on her arm, halting her.
“There’s peoples who know ‘bout you and him.” His tone was distinctly
threatening.
       She shook him off, headed for the door. The Lucy had a schedule to keep.
       “You look like you’re ready to fire ion cannons at someone. If you had any,
that is.” Donata Caro’s lilting voice drifted over Shandy’s shoulder as headed for the
podway to the spaceport.
       Shandy gave her friend a tight smile. “Hillard thinks I have some pull with
Rinnaker. You know he’s always trying to cadge a favor.” But it was the first time
he’d ever gotten nasty. She didn’t know if that should worry her or not.
       The amber skinned woman raised on eyebrow. “Guess he’s heard the talk
about you and tall, dark and Talvarrin.”
       “Donni!”
       “Oh, that’s right. You and Captain Talvarrin aren’t lovers. He’s just a friend.
Who alters schedules of one of the most powerful merchanter families in the
Conclave so that he can have a few beers, now and then, with an obscure
short-hauler.”
       “The Lucy handled a cargo transfer--”
       “Once. Eight months ago. And the Valiance has been following the Lucent
Echo ever since.”
       “You’re exaggerating,” Shandy said. Donni was a hopeless romantic. The plain
fact was that the Syar Colonies were a popular transfer point. Which made it not
unlikely that she and Captain Cameron Talvarrin might run into each other, share a
few beers. And maybe hash over the usual opinions on the latest improvements in
jumpgate technology, or the rumors of new markets opening in the Deneb sector. Or
discuss the hazards in the space lanes out by the rim colony of Braskar, courtesy of
the Nanjir faction now looking to grab some of the colonies’ wealth.
       Punctuated inevitably by Cam Talvarrin’s pronouncements of how one Captain
Shandy Alexis McAllister should conduct her business, and her life.
       The pod arrived with the usual hiss and rattle.
       “If he’s not in love with you,” Donni asked as they threaded their way through
exiting passengers, “then why’s he following you around?”
       Shandy glanced out the grimy windows as the pod rumbled forward. “Maybe
because the Lucy and I provide a good transport service at a fair price. He
appreciates that.”
       “More likely he appreciates a gorgeous little brunette.”
       “You’re prejudiced. And hallucinating. I haven’t heard from him in a couple
septis. And I doubt if I will.” Especially as she’d told him it would be a cold day in
hell before she’d give up a shot at the newly opened Braskar route because one
Cameron Talvarrin deemed it a waste of her time. “Trust me. I’m really not his

type.”
       “That’s why he kissed you.”
       “Because we’d both had a few more beers than we should have that night. So
forget about it, okay? I have.”
       Liar, a little voice said. She hadn’t forgotten about it. But at least now when
Shandy thought about those mind-numbing kisses it was with the stern reminder
never to get in that situation again. She’d been around spaceport pubs, and spacers,
for almost all of her thirty-two years. She knew what too little sleep, too much
Syarian ale, and one undeniably sexy male with the most incredible blue eyes-- and
enormous ego-- could do: break her heart.
       She wasn’t interested.
       The pod shimmied. “Green Terminal,” a tinny autovoice announced.
       “That’s me.” Donni squeezed Shandy’s hand. “Catch you here in two
months?”
       “We’ll swap transmits before then. Stay out of trouble.”
       “That should be your motto, not mine. And tell Cameron,” Donni said,
stressing the name as she headed for the exit door, “I send my warmest regards.”
III
             Shandy tabbed on the console lights on the Lucy’s small bridge. Her inbox
icon flashed on her screen.
   Two solicits from export agents, one on Q'uivera Station and one in Port Rumor,
recommending she register her ship with them. For a small advance fee, of course.
She cleared the words from the screen.
       Next was a note from Nolan. Cargo Chief Nolan Ennis of the Jero Hagan, the
title officially read. He’d heard she was scheduled for a pickup at Q'uivera, the 
Hagan’s home base. If she had time, the note continued, dinner would be nice.
       “Long as I’m not dessert,” she commented absently, then corrected herself.
“Don’t transmit that, Lucy!”
       “Acknowledged,” came the reply.
       Then came the message she didn’t understand, its Transmitting Terminal
Designation skewed and incomplete. Shandy frowned at the cryptic words on her
screen.
       IMPER..., it read. DALGRA FI... T... ES... S.R... CAM-T/V.
       The easiest part was DALGRA FI. That could only be Dalgra Five, the mining
colony two jumps out from Port Tyber. Recent jump-jockey gossip stated the
reclusive Dalgrans were looking to offer lucrative transport contracts for their mining
production. Shandy knew, even before her conversation with Cam Talvarrin, that
several Conclave merchanter conglomerates were vying to meet on Deneb with
colony representatives.
       There were no such things as trade secrets in Syar.
       She took a stab at the remainder of the message. IMPER. Imperfect?
Impertinent? The latter she’d been called often enough. By the man whose initials
ended the message: CAM-T/V. Cameron Talvarrin of the Valiance.

       That was one more reason why she felt sure those kisses had been prompted by
alcohol rather than affection.
       But what troubled her more than their spirited discussions were two other initials
in the transmit: S.R.. It was an old smuggler’s term, demanding stealth and speed in
an urgent matter. S.R.. Silent Run.
       IMPER could well mean imperative. Urgent.
       She put it all together; hoped she was wrong. It made no sense and only lodged
a tense, sick feeling in her stomach. A blind, muddied request, no; a plea for help.
From a man whose name alone could fund an entire rescue fleet.
       For that very reason she knew it meant something more serious than she dared
consider. And S.R. meant she couldn’t contact him to ask what it was all about.
       She leaned back in the pilot’s chair, plopped her scuffed boots on the edge of
the console. She owed him nothing. He was an arrogant scoundrel who was quite
capable, she was sure, of taking care of himself.
       But he’d challenged her mind with his wit, his intellect. And teased her mouth
with his kisses. And had a habit of calling her “little girl” in such a way that she knew
she was neither little, nor merely a girl, in his eyes. Which were the palest blue she’d
ever seen.
       So if he needed her help, she and Lucy would head for Dalgra, quickly and
quietly. Silent Run.
 
IV
       She cleared Port Tyber’s outer beacon two hours later, but still had no plan to
gain access to the Dalgra Sector, or Deneb Station. Deneb was a Conclave station;
however, entry into the Dalgran sector was restricted to ambassadorial and approved
science vessels. Her small L7-Class freighter qualified as neither.
       But there were ways to get around just about anything labeled ‘restricted’.
Trouble was, Nolan was often her source for that information. He’d ask why, and he
wouldn’t like that her reason was Cam Talvarrin.
       “He’s not for the likes of you,” Nolan had told her.
       Funny. Cam had said the same thing about Nolan.
       Lie, a little voice advised her. Something told her Cam’s life might depend on it.
       She keyed up her commpack, composed a message about an imaginary
shipment of critical med supplies, knowing it could be hours before Nolan answered.
She kept Lucy on a direct heading for the first jumpgate to Dalgra.
       Nolan’s answer came when she was an hour from jump. NO CAN DO.
SORRY. SOMETHING BIG WENT DOWN ON DENEB LAST SEPTI. TWO
SHIPS UNDER IMPOUND: MHISHARAN AND RINNAKER. NO ONE’S
TALKING. NO ONE’S MOVING IN OR OUT EXCEPT CONCLAVE BRASS.
MEET ME AT Q’UIVERA. I’LL KEEP YOU BUSY 'TIL ROUTES CLEAR
AGAIN.
       Damn. A Rinnaker ship under impound and no idea which one. There’d been
nothing on the newsvids. Nothing even in jump-jockey gossip. Nothing. Except a

plea for a silent run.
       She had to be crazy. No. She had to be crazy not to see that Nolan had given
her an answer, even as he denied any ability to help. Shandy locked onto the
coordinates of the jumpgate’s outer beacon while her mind worked. A Mhisharan
ship under impound. The only Mhisharan ships in the Conclave were research
vessels. Cargo bays converted to science labs. Geophysicists and mineralogists
elbow to elbow. It made sense. The Dalgran sector was a miner’s dream. And a
geologist’s one as well.
       She took the Lucy through jump, her mind moving almost as quickly as her
ship.
       When she came out of the second jump, she had her cover story well
formulated. Not flawless, but at least in place.
       She relayed it with feigned boredom to the Conclave officer staring suspiciously
at her over her ship’s vidlink. “I’ve been way the hell over in Gensiira for the past
two months. Didn't know you have my client’s ship on impound. What am I
supposed to do with this shipment?”
       “I suggest you find a depot--”
       “It’s time-dated! Didn’t you read the manifest?” Shandy hoped he hadn’t read it
too closely. She tapped her lightpen on her compscreen, highlighting the same
section on his copy. That was all she wanted him to see. The commodity transport
code and time-date designation. And the fact that her client was a Mhishar science
lab.
       Not the smudging of the pick-up date: last year. It had taken her twenty-five
minutes to scan and reformat the manifest file to blur the date.
       The officer pursed his lips. “Just a minute.”
       Her vidscreen blanked, showing only the Conclave emblem topping the logo of
Deneb Station. She edged the Lucy closer to the security beacons, drummed her
fingers on her arm pad. Her heart pounded in a similar rhythm in her chest.
       Her screen blinked on again. She almost jumped.
       “One of our patrol ships will escort you to Dalgra Five. The research labs use
the Owens Spaceport.”
       Dalgra Five? Shit, no! She didn’t want to be dirtside. She needed access to
Deneb Station, to whatever Rinnaker ship was out on impound orbit. She--
       --nodded. Smiled. Had no choice. Get past security, first. Go to Dalgra, if you
have to. They might be less concerned with you on the way out. “Acknowledged.
I’ll wait for your escort.”
       Shit. What in hell was she going to unload when she got to Owens? The Lucy’s
cargo holds were empty.
 
V
           It didn’t matter. Six armed Owens security cops met her at the base of the 
Lucy’s ramp. Someone must have examined her forged manifest more closely.
       “Don’t try to run,” the tallest one said and shoved her forward, his laser rifle in

her back. She held her hands away from her sides as another yanked her pistol from
her utility belt holster.
       Twilight darkness eradicated the shadows. She marched across the tarmac
towards the cargo hangar office. The evening breeze was dry, dust-filled. That’s
probably what made her throat feel so parched, her chest so tight.
       Shandy hated being dirtside. She hated being surrounded by sec-cops, with the 
Lucy under impound. And a request for a silent run that meant she could trust no
one except the sender of the request, Cameron Talvarrin.
       She knew the threats even before the tall security sergeant made them.
Revocation of her captain’s license. Loss of her ship. A definite jail sentence. A
hefty fine.
       “We want answers, McAllister.”
       “Hell’s patrons want ice water, sergeant.”
       “You want hell? I’d be glad to arrange--”
       “You’ll arrange nothing,” a deep voice said with undeniable authority.
       Shandy swiveled in her chair, as best she could with her hand sonic-cuffed to
the armrest. A small flutter of anticipation trembled around her heart. For a brief
moment she thought she recognized the voice.
       But when she saw the broad-shouldered man standing in the doorway, she knew
she didn’t.
       She also knew why she thought she did.
       He wore a dark blue Rinnaker officer’s uniform. But from the jacket gleamed
not the three stars designating the rank of captain, but five. The rank of commodore
of Rinnaker’s fleet.
       Thick silver hair topped a face that was still handsome, though lined by age.
More lines flanked a pair of blue eyes; startlingly pale blue. Like Cam’s eyes.
       But this wasn’t Cam, glowering at the sec-cop behind the desk.
       This had to be Gareth Talvarrin, head of Rinnaker Port Transit for over thirty
years. Undisputed patriarch of the Talvarrin family. Cameron’s uncle.
       His icy gaze swept over her. She felt suddenly chilled.
       “I’ll handle Captain McAllister.”
       “But, Commodore, I can’t release--”
       “You can. You will.” He made a curt motion with his hand. “Unlock the cuffs.”
       For three heartbeats no one moved. Then the sergeant gave a brief nod. The
sec-cop closest to Shandy tapped in the code.
       She shook out her wrist as she walked towards him, her mind whirling. But his
expression, as he glared down at her, halted any questions.
       And made her consider that perhaps this wasn’t a rescue after all, but rather a
one way ticket to hell. Which, gathering from the Commodore Talvarrin’s frosty
demeanor, was shortly about to freeze over.
VI
       Gareth Talvarrin made no comments as he guided the hovercar through the
spaceport gates then turned right, heading for a distant glow on the horizon.

       Shandy wondered why an aide hadn’t driven him, thought better than to ask.
The glow brightened. A row of entry lights illuminated the emblem of the Conclave
Trade Embassy on the gates, which opened as the car approached.
       They were expected in spite of the late hour.
       She followed the silver-haired man down a long, empty corridor to a set of
double-doors. An office he’d been assigned, or permitted to use, Shandy guessed.
       No, appropriated. Gareth Talvarrin was a man who took what he wanted, and
accepted nothing less. Like someone else she knew. Someone who was constantly
telling her how she should run her business, her life.
       He unlocked the doors then strode into the dark office, flicking on a small lamp
on the corner of his desk with obvious irritation.
       “Sit.” He pointed to a chair. “Please.”
       She detected a clear note of exasperation in his last word. “Thank you,” she
said. And she didn’t mean for the chair.
       He stood behind his high-backed chair, arms folded across his chest. Studying
her. Struggling with something.
       She didn’t know what, unless it was her unexpected appearance. Gareth
Talvarrin didn’t look like a man who enjoyed the unexpected.
       “What are you doing here?” His voice held the tight note of someone at the end
of his patience.
       She knew her answer wasn’t going to help. “I can’t tell you.”
       His eyes widened, briefly, in shock. Shandy guessed not many people refused
to answer Commodore Talvarrin’s questions.
       “Shandy Alexis.” He paused. “McAllister.”
       But for the addition of her last name, that was the way Cam would refer to her
when he was angry. You’re not listening to me, Shandy Alexis.
       She had a feeling Gareth Talvarrin had been forewarned. She couldn’t imagine
what Cam had told his uncle about her. No. She could. “Yes, that’s me. And no, I
can’t tell you.”
       “You damn well better tell me. You just don’t show up in the middle of a war
zone--”
       “War zone?” There’d been no reports of a declaration of war. No reports of
even a skirmish let alone military action.
       He cupped his hand over his mouth as if holding back his words. “Unofficial
war zone,” he said finally. “The Nanjir have taken aggressive action. Problems have
been contained to this sector, for the moment. But your response tells me that’s not
what brought you here.”
       Shandy shook her head. “I really don’t know why I’m here, sir. But,” and she
took a deep breath, watching for his reaction as she said the name, “Captain
Cameron Talvarrin does. He sent me a message yesterday.”
       Only a slight flicker of surprise showed in his eyes. “What makes you think you
received a message from the Valiance?”
       “It didn’t carry the ship’s TTD. Just Cam’s... Cameron Talvarrin’s name.”
       “Based on that, you forced your way into the Dalgra Sector?”
       She heard the disbelief in his voice. Could guess how foolish her actions must
seem to such a disciplined figure as himself. To risk everything because of an

unauthenticated message. “I’ve known Captain Talvarrin for almost a year.”
       “Eight months. What was the content of this message?”
       “I have to talk to Captain Talvarrin before I can tell you that.”
       He clenched his hands. Struggling to control his temper, no doubt. But troubles
of a different kind clouded his gaze when he looked at her. “You can’t talk to him.”
       There was no anger in his voice, only sadness. Something cold clasped
Shandy’s heart, as if it knew she needed numbing to hear his next words.
       “Cameron Talvarrin was killed in a shuttle accident ten days ago.”
VII
       “No.” The iciness inside her exploded into sharp shards of pain. She was
conscious of her fingers digging into the padded armrests of the chair. Of her breath
coming in short gasps and then not seeming to come at all. Her throat tightened. She
sucked in a sob, mentally railed at herself for a thousand stupid things, for wasted
time, lost moments. And for the foolish urge to cry.
       She had no reason to cry. They weren’t lovers. She’d only known him for
about a year.
       Eight months. Even Commodore Talvarrin had known that.
       She let out a shaky breath and was surprised to find him standing next to her,
offering a snifter of a golden liquid.
       She grabbed it, downed half of it, coughed.
       He patted her on the back, his hand slowing to massage circles against her
shoulder.
       She sipped the rest, tried to will herself to stop shaking. Tried to will herself to
forget Gareth Talvarrin’s voice telling her Cam was dead.
       He pulled his hand away, then retreated to the corner of the desk and leaned one
hip on it.
       Shandy turned the snifter around in her hands. “I’m sorry.” Her voice sounded
hoarse. “I’m, I’ll be okay.”
       “This wasn’t meant to hurt you. But you need to understand why I don’t
believe you received a message.”
       “I did!” She raised her face, blinking back unwanted tears of anger. Tears at not
being believed. That’s all they were.
       “But not from Cam Talvarrin.”
       Because Cam was dead. There was no way he could’ve sent a transmit
yesterday if he’d been killed ten days ago. She swiped at her eyes with her hand.
The tears weren’t only from anger.
       “I need to see the original of that message.”
       She nodded. “It’s in a secure file on the Lucy, the Lucent Echo. But it’s pretty
mangled. No TTD. I don’t know if--”
       Doors whooshed open behind her, halting her words. Shandy glanced over her
shoulder. A shaft of light rimmed the tall form of a young man in Rinnaker blues. He
stepped into the office, doors closing behind him.
       “I just heard that--” He stared at Shandy, then jabbed a finger in her direction.

“What’s she doing here?”
       The older man seemed unperturbed by the intruder’s harsh tone and rude
manner. “Captain McAllister, may I present Lieutenant Rory Talvarrin.”
       His son. Cam’s younger cousin. And in appearance, like a reflected shadow of
Cam Talvarrin. Same thick, dark hair. Similar straight nose, strong jaw line.
He even had Cam’s persistence. “Do you have any idea what’s at risk here? Your
life, hers, everything we’ve worked for in the past two weeks?”
       “More than you realize. Take a seat.”
       “I doubt that. Or you wouldn’t have brought her here--”
       “I didn’t.”
       “--when we’re less than two days from the meeting. If the Dalgran realize--”
       “They won’t. Now sit, Rorrick!” The commodore’s eyes held the same steely
hardness as his tone.
       Rory took the chair next to Shandy, leaned his elbows on his knees. “Sorry.
Sir.”
       “Captain McAllister was just telling me about a message she received yesterday.
From Cameron.”
       Rory’s face jerked up. “But you said you--”
       “Lieutenant Talvarrin. You’re not listening to me.” He pushed himself off the
edge of the desk.
       Rory straightened, finally seemed to realize he was being disrespectful not only
to his father, but to the head of the Rinnaker fleet.
       Cam should have been his son, Shandy thought. Rory was more like herself,
impulsive. Impertinent.
       “Sorry, sir,” he said again, sounding as if he meant it this time.
       “Someone sent Captain McAllister a transmit. Drawing her here, under the
pretense the message came from us.” The commodore paced the dim recesses of
the office. “Which makes me now question a number of parameters I’d believed
were secure. Hopefully, when I see this transmit, I’ll be able to tell just how, and
where, we were lax.”
       Rory turned to her. “What’s the TTD?”
       Shandy started from the beginning. No TTD. Message lines corrupted, broken.
The only things she could clearly make out were Dalgra Five, the old smuggler’s
term for a silent run, and Cam’s signum.
       “Not much to work with.” Rory sounded frustrated. He looked at his father
leaning against a bookcase on the far wall. “And it’s late. Sir.”
       The older man nodded. “I’m well aware of that.”
       “At your age--”
       “Thank you for reminding me.” A wry grimace cross his lined features.
“Accompany Captain McAllister back to the Lucy. Get a copy of that transmit.”
       Shandy hesitated in the doorway. “I’d like to stay and help, sir.”
       One gray eyebrow arched. “Did you think I was giving you permission to
depart? Someone went to a great deal of trouble to lure you here. You’re staying,
until I know just who has done this. And why.”
 

VIII
       Shandy spent a restless night in a small guest suite in the embassy. Dreams of a
blue-eyed man haunted her. Rory showed up early the next morning, with two cups
of coffee. And noticeable shadows under his dark eyes.
       “I’ve been told to bring you up to date.”
       She sat on the edge of an overstuffed chair, sipped the fragrant brew. Listened
without interrupting. Cam would’ve been pleased.
       “About two years ago, Mhisharan scientists discovered Dalgran mines held
enough crystal to fuel several fleets for a few hundred years. Or more. The Nanjir
were immediately interested. So were the Conclave and the Z’fharin. However, you
know the Dalgrans, for religious reasons, won’t ally with any government. That kept
the Z’fharin Empire out of it, and our own government as well. But they will trade
with a free merchanter, like us, G.G.A. or Norvind. Or one of the Nanjir traders.
       “After months of secret negotiations, it’s come down to us or the Nanjiran
Kodi. This week, President Fabiar will make her choice.” Rory sipped his coffee.
       “Commodore Talvarrin is here to represent your family.”
       “More than that. Fabiar’s religious edicts demand a Holy Seal of Agreement
must be executed by a family elder who’s held that position for five years. Skure has
been the Jdal of the Kodi merchanters for ten.”
       “Your father’s held his position for more than thirty.”
       Rory nodded slowly. “That's why they attacked his shuttle, believing the
commodore was on board. Lancer-One was outbound from the Valiance on
approach to Deneb Station. A Nanjiran Tryll veered off course, claiming a
malfunction. Both ships were destroyed." Rory looked away, his mouth a tight line.
        A suicide mission. By the Nanjir to guarantee the mining contract with the
Dalgrans. Shandy knew who would have been next in line to command Rinnaker if
the commodore had been on that shuttle. Cameron Talvarrin. But he would’ve held
his rank only days. Not the required five years.
       But the Nanjir hadn't succeeded in killing the commodore, only his successor.
Cameron.
       “We’ve tightened security,” Rory said. “The Nanjir will try again. It may well be
why you’re here.”
       Shandy almost dropped her coffee. “Are you accusing me of--?”
       “Sorry. I’m explaining this badly.” He wiped one hand over his face. “That
transmit you received shows traces of passing through Nanjiran communications
filters. They want you here.”
       “Why?”
       “My guess?” Rory’s tone softened. “They know Cam’s been following you all
over Syar.”
       Echoes of her conversation with Donni replayed in head. And a small pain
closed once more around her heart. “So they lure me here, why? Thinking I’ll come
after them for revenge for--”
       Shandy stopped, listened to her own words. She could almost hear Hillard’s
leering appraisal of her ‘horizontal influence’. Could almost envision the newsvids’

lurid take on the story: the grief stricken lover of a dead Rinnaker captain attacks the
Nanjiran delegate, halting sensitive trade negotiations. Or worse. Disqualifying
Rinnaker Port Transit. The Nanjiran Kodi would win by default. “They want me to
try to kill Jdal Skure. But they’ll be prepared, make sure I don’t succeed. And make
sure the Dalgrans don’t grant you the contract as a result.”
       “That’s also my guess.”
       “But not the commodore’s?”
       He shook his head. “He knows. He just doesn’t like it. I’m supposed to escort
you to the Valiance.”
       Supposed to. Shandy heard the words, heard the clear tone of disagreement in
Rory’s voice. Knew why. “If you do that,” she said slowly, “then the Nanjir will
know we’ve uncovered their ploy. They’ll just make new plans. Plans we don’t
know about.”
       “And can’t defend against.” Rory’s words paralleled her thoughts. “All
delegates are banned from carrying weapons.”
       “When is President Fabiar announcing her decision?”
       “Tomorrow morning.”
       “If I leave, they might try to kill Commodore Talvarrin again.”
       “He seems less concerned about that than your safety.”
       “You don’t agree.”
       A pained expression crossed Rory’s face. “The Nanjir have already destroyed
one life that meant as much to me as my own. I can’t let them do that, again. But I
also can’t ask that you risk yours.”
       “I’m willing to take that risk. Permitting murderers to sit in that meeting, to
proceed unmasked and unpunished, is wrong.” Then Cam’s death would mean
nothing. It would be forever logged as an accident. An ignoble epitaph for a man
who was worth so, so much more.
       She turned away from Rory, waited for the mist to clear from her eyes.
       “He was right about you.”
       She turned back to him with a cautious, questioning look.
       “Cam. He said you were the most unorthodox, brilliant--”
       “Impertinent,” she put in, even though her voice broke.
       “-- feisty woman he’s ever had the misfortune to fall in love with.” Rory
brushed a tear from her cheek. “Silent run, Captain McAllister. Speed and stealth.
We need it all, now.”
      
IX
       “I’m sure you can see,” Jdal Skure smiled thinly at President Fabiar from his
position on the podium, “that the Nanjir are honorable, trustworthy and deserving of
a Holy Agreement with you. We have never violated any of the Dalgran holy trade
edicts.”
       “I can name two violations right now, Skure.” Shandy’s voice rang out clearly
in the small auditorium. Faces jerked toward the main doors.
       “And murder is one of them.” She swiftly made her way down the steps

towards the oval table, her heart pounding. Nanjir brown uniforms ringed the table
on the right. Rinnaker blue filled the seats on he left.
       Shandy met Skure’s intense gaze from the center podium with one that signaled
her own fierce determination. She glanced briefly at Rory. His dark head moved in
an almost imperceptible nod.
       The gray haired man next to Rory rose halfway in his seat. “Shandy Alexis!”
His voice was hoarse.
       Rory’s hand clamped on his forearm. “Don’t.”
       Commodore Talvarrin shot a deadly, cold look at the younger man. “Damn
you, Rorrick! I ought to--”
       “Young lady, this is not a public session.” Skure made a quick motion to one of
his aides. “I request you be removed.”
       “I request justice.” She ignored the aide striding towards her. “The Tryll
accident on Deneb was no accident! An unmanned fighter, Jdal Skure. You used an
unmanned ship, solely for the purpose of murder. You--”
       A man in a brown Nanjiran tunic jumped to his feet, pointing at Shandy. “She’s
got a gun!”
       Laser-pistols emerged from beneath brown tunics. The two Dalgran security
guards behind President Fabiar appeared startled, then quickly moved forward, their
own weapons drawn.
       Skure’s aide lunged, grabbing a handful of Shandy’s jacket as she backed
away, stumbling against a pylon behind her. Laser fire burned overhead.
Instinctively, Shandy dropped to the floor, the aide tumbling down beside her.
       Shouts, screams echoed. Shandy thought she heard her name called as she
wrestled with the Nanjiran. He squeezed her right wrist so tightly her hand felt numb.
But she refused to let him thrust a small object into her fingers.
       She shoved her forearm against his chest, brought her knee up. He twisted
away, her knee slamming into the hard bone of his hip.
       His breath was foul in her face. She tried to yank her hand out of his grasp. He
pinned her shoulder to the floor. The small metal cylinder in his hand dug painfully
into her collarbone.
       She smashed her fist against his elbow. He grunted and bucked forward. Then
suddenly he reared back.
       Commodore Talvarrin had him by both shoulders. He spun the aide around,
plowed his fist into the man’s face. The man flailed backwards.
       Shandy struggled to sit up. Four laser pistols were aimed at her.
       “She tried to kill the Jdal!” A Nanjiran officer crouched down, came up with a
triumphant smile on her face. And a small laser pistol in her hand. “I saw Burak take
this from her.”
       Commodore Talvarrin reached for Shandy. A Nanjiran guard swung his laser
pistol, stopping the gray haired man. Talvarrin shoved him aside. “Get the hell out of
my way!”
       Shandy accepted his outstretched hand, let him pull her to her feet. He yanked
her against him, trapping her against his chest. His voice was a harsh whisper in her
ear. “You damn near got yourself killed! Don’t you ever do that again, do you hear
me, little girl?”

       Shandy had only a moment to stare up at him in wide-eyed confusion before a
Dalgran guard separated them.
       “Commodore!” Talla Fabiar held up her hand. More Dalgran guards flanked the
stately, red-haired woman as she strode into the circle of officers and delegates
around Shandy. “This is unacceptable. Blasphemous.” Her gaze went from
Commodore Talvarrin to the Nanjiran representatives and then to Shandy. “Who are
you?”
       “Shandy Alexis McAllister. Captain of the Independent Freighter, the Lucent
Echo. Ma’am.”
       “We were warned about her.” Skure’s voice held a forceful, gloating note. “She
was Captain Talvarrin’s lover. His death, a complete accident you know, has
obviously unbalanced her. Which they knew,” Skure continued, with a nod to Rory
and Commodore Talvarrin, “but permitted her presence here. Proof that they do not
honor your Holy Edicts.”
       “And your weapons do?” Commodore Talvarrin pointed to the laser pistols
surrounding them.
       “Self defense,” Skure countered. "My aide fortunately spotted her weapon
before she could use it. Fought with her at the risk of his own life." He held his hand
out. The female Nanjiran officer gingerly placed the laser pistol in his palm. "A
Conclave issue weapon, as you can see. I wouldn't be surprised if it turns out to be
registered to Rinnaker.”
       “It probably is.” Rory spoke up from beside Commodore Talvarrin. The older
man stared hard at him. “We had several weapons stolen two months ago. Reported
them--”
       “Because Cameron Talvarrin gave them to her,” Skure said.
       “Then her fingerprints would be on the weapon.”
       “Of course.”
       “Except they’re not.” Rory nodded to Shandy. She raised both hands, palms
out. “President Fabiar, your guards all carry scancorders?”
       “Yes, but--”
       “Set them to detect level 6 thermoluminescence. Scan Captain McAllister’s
hands, then the laser.”
       Fabiar’s nod initiated the task. Shandy’s palms glowed faintly. The laser didn’t.
       “We knew,” Rory told Skure. “We have the forged transmit. Captain McAllister
agreed to cooperate, not to harm the Jdal. But to uncover your plot to murder a
Talvarrin. Again.” He turned to President Fabiar. “If she’d touched that laser pistol,
the coating on her hands would be on it. I think that’s sufficient proof of the
Nanjirans’ intentions. But if you need more, the Commodore and I will be glad to
show it to you.”
       Talla Fabiar examined the assembled group with narrowed eyes. “Jdal Skure.
You and your people will be sequestered, under guard. For our protection, and
yours. Commodore Talvarrin. Lieutenant. I would like to see all proof you have,
relating not only to what has just transpired. But concerning the unfortunate accident
on Deneb Station. My chambers. Five minutes.”

X
       Shandy waited four hours in the embassy library, her legs tucked under her, a
darkened reader-pad on her lap. The high back chair was plush, cushioned. She
could have fallen asleep. Should have. But for a voice and a pair of blue eyes,
haunting her.
       When Commodore Talvarrin had pulled her off the auditorium floor, it was
Cam’s voice she heard growling in her ear. But when she turned, Cam wasn’t there.
Never would be, again.
       Gareth Talvarrin had the misfortune to have a similar tone and timbre to his late
nephew. In the same way that her friend Donni sounded uncannily like her mother.
Many times she’d walked into the Caro apartment and thought it was Donni
answering her hellos. Not her mother, Dominica.
       Until the older woman’s curly gray head would poke around the corner of a
door, usually wide-eyed at the turn the conversation had taken.
       And then they’d laugh.
       Hearing Gareth Talvarrin’s voice only made her want to cry.
       She looked up at the sound of footsteps muffled by the thick library carpeting.
       “It’s settled.” Rory sat in the chair opposite her. “The Nanjir have been
disgraced, may face a criminal investigation by the Dalgrans. We won the contract.”
He reached over and squeezed her hand. “We won.”
       “You paid a high price for your victory.”
       His smile faded. “About a month ago, my father came down very hard on both
Cam and myself for just that reason. He warned, and he was right, that we’d become
a little too full of ourselves. Overconfident. He reminded us that immortality was not
a Talvarrin trait. And that if we weren’t careful...” His voice trailed off. He stared at
his folded hands.
       “We weren’t.” He raised his face. “We assumed the Talvarrin name would
guarantee the best docking berths, top notch security, flawless responses to our
requests. My father warned us: Never stop looking over your shoulder. We had. But
we won’t, anymore.”
       A high price. And a hard lesson learned. Shandy unfolded her legs. “I hope,
well, next time you’re in Port Tyber, I’ll buy you a beer. We can talk about how well
Rinnaker is doing.”
       “This sounds like good-bye.”
       “I have work to do.” Work to lose herself in, to try to forget Cam.
       Rory nodded slightly. “He said you’d say something like that. I’m supposed to
bring you to his office.”
       Supposed to. She’d heard Rory’s ‘supposed to’ before. “So the commodore
can quote me chapter and verse of all the things I did wrong?”
       Rory grinned wryly. “What do you think I’ve been listening to for the past
hour? He threatened to vent me out the Valiance’s exhaust at least a dozen times.”
       Shandy stood, put the reader-pad back on the shelf. “Tell him he’s welcome to
chase me down at Port Tyber with a long list of my faults, if he wants to. I’ll even
agree with most of them. But right now,” she let out a short, tired sigh, “I need some
time by myself. Because you weren’t the only one who felt immortal. Who believed

there’d always be a tomorrow to be with someone she cared about.”
       “I think the commodore needs to hear that.”
       “That he was right about immortality?”
       Rory nodded, rising. “That, too.”
       An unfamiliar Rinnaker officer met her at the wide double doors. “Commodore
Talvarrin’s expecting you, Captain McAllister.”
       Shandy took a deep breath, straightened her shoulders and, head held high,
strode through the doorway.
 
XI
       His desk was empty. It took Shandy a moment to notice the tall figure standing
at the bookcase, his back to her.
       She took a deep breath. “I came to say good bye."
       Commodore Talvarrin turned as the doors hissed closed.
       "And to say I’m sorry," she continued. "You--”
       She stared at the man stepping out of the room’s shadows. The five stars on his
jacket glinted in the soft lights. Five stars denoting the rank of commodore. The
young officer in the corridor had even said that. Commodore Talvarrin.
       But the man standing before her had never seen his sixtieth birthday. Nor his
fiftieth. Maybe his fortieth. And his hair wasn’t gray. It was black.
       Yet the blue eyes that had glared down at her in such anger in the auditorium
were exactly the same.
       She sucked in a shaky breath. “Cameron?”
       He held out his hand.
       Her heart was pounding so hard she couldn’t move. “What happened?”
       “I got tired of being old.”
       “You got--?”
       He seemed to realize his flippancy was ill timed. “I never meant for you to be
hurt by this.”
       Shandy drew in another breath, closed her eyes. Opened them. He was still
there. He was still Cameron. He was alive.
       “I can explain.”
       She didn’t want explanations. She wanted—
       “Oh, Gods. Cam!” She threw her arms around his neck. She needed to feel the
solid warmth of him, breathe in his masculine scent. Somewhere in the midst of
reassuring herself he was real, she realized she was crying.
       “Hush, little girl.” His arms closed tightly across her back, crushing her against
him. His mouth brushed kisses onto her temple, her cheek. “I never meant to hurt
you. But there was too much at risk to tell you the truth until now.”
       “Who was on the shuttle?” she asked softly.
       “Rory’s father. Gareth.”

       Shandy remembered the bitterness in the younger man’s voice as he’d talked
about the accident. About what he’d lost; someone important to him. Someone he’d
not been permitted to truly mourn. She wasn’t the only one who’d been hurt by the
game Rinnaker had been forced to play.
       “He took it very well,” she said.
       “Of course. He’s a Talvarrin.” As if that explained it all.
        She looked up into pale blue eyes and sighed. “You know, once I get over the
fact that I'm very glad you're alive, I'm going to be mad as hell at you.” She touched
his face. “How did you do it?”
       “Do you want the technical explanation? Or will you settle for the fact that, as I
once told you, Rory and I had spent a couple of months when we were kids
traveling with a theater troupe?”
       She should have guessed. Entertainers used temporary cosmetic alterations all
the time. Sonic surgery could alter an appearance drastically for a few hours. A good
method but it wasn't foolproof.
       “But your crew, and others who knew Commodore Talvarrin. Wouldn’t they
have known?”
       “That’s why I stayed on Dalgra with a minimum of personnel, none of whom
had had any dealings with Gareth before. They saw these,” he brought her hand to
rest on top of the gold stars, “and just assumed I was who I said I was. Of course, a
very strong family resemblance helped, too.”
       She traced the edges of the stars with her fingertips. “But you are who you said
you are. Aren’t you.” There was no questioning tone in her voice. She knew the
answer.
       “Somebody has to do it.”
       It had been difficult enough for her to deal with Cameron Talvarrin as a
Rinnaker captain. As commodore, suddenly the distance between them seemed
more than any Indy singlehander could manage. She could almost hear Nolan’s
voice: he’s not for the likes of you.
       “Shandy?”
       She felt a pang of longing for her own small bridge on the Lucy, with its
rehabilitated scanners and rebuilt comp boards. A check-valve on the portside
alpha-thruster was showing signs of wear, and with a little luck, she might be able to
find a slightly used one at a dealer in Port Rumor. Self-consciously, she rubbed the
top of one scuffed boot against the back of her pant leg.
       “I’d best be going.” She stepped back. He reached for her. She hesitated, her
hand coming up towards his, but stopping in midair and withdrawing, suddenly. It
was an awkward movement. She avoided his questioning gaze.
       “Shandy?”
       “I put in for Q'uivera. Flight plan filed and all that. Should really get going.” She
shrugged, offering him a tremulous smile. “I’ve got almost a week’s worth of
downtime to account for. Customers want results, not excuses.”
       “To hell with customers! What’s the matter?”
       She backed away again. “Nothing, Commodore.”
       “What’s this commodore stuff all of a sudden? Five minutes ago it was Cam?
What happened to Cam?”

       She knew the answer, but didn’t know how to explain it. She reached for the
wall-panel.
       “Shandy Alexis, damn it! Don’t you walk out that door!” He crossed the room
swiftly and snatched her hand away.
       She twisted halfheartedly in his grasp. “You’re going to be very busy--”
        “Of course I’ll be busy," he cut in gruffly. "What in the Seven Hells of
Procyon does that have to do with anything?”
       She took a deep breath. “Your work’s more important than before. I have
enough to do just keeping the bill collector’s off my tail and--”
       “And?”
       “And I don’t think anything between you and I is feasible at the moment
because--”
       “Shandy, I--”
       “Because we’re going in two very different directions. Not to mention the fact
that I catch all sorts of hell whenever--”
       “Shandy, I love you.”
       “Whenever people say--” She stopped staring at the scuffed tips of her boots
and looked up at him. Not sure if she’d heard correctly. Not sure what she’d do if
she had.
       “Shandy.” He took her other hand and brought both to his lips. “I love you.
And I don’t want to lose you.”
       “I don’t want to lose me, either, Commodore Talvarrin,” she replied honestly,
startled by her own admission. “I may not have much. Hell, my net worth is
probably less than what it cost Rinnaker to put this office together. But it’s all mine.
The profits and the debts. And McAllister’s Lucent Echo has a schedule to keep.”
       “You’re a stubborn little girl, you know that?” he asked softly.
       “Yes sir.” They stood in silence for a few moments before Shandy reached for
the wall panel. The door slid open.
       “McAllister!”
       Shandy turned.
       “I still love you.”
       She let him pull her into his arms. His kisses spoke of promises, of need, of
love. She wrapped her arms around his neck, fitting her trembling body against his.
       “Just give me some time, Cam.” She placed her hands against his chest, felt the
pounding of his heart beneath his commodore’s stars.
       Reluctantly, he released her. “You know where to find me, little girl.”
       Standing on her tiptoes, she brushed a soft kiss across his mouth. Then
stepped out into the wide corridor of the Conclave embassy.
       The Lucy had a schedule to keep.
XII
       The Lucy scooted gracefully between two lumbering G.G.A. tri-haulers as she
cleared Q'uivera Station’s outer marker, her large holds empty for the first time in
many septis. She had a tendency to be a bit more skittish without the accustomed

weight of cargo, and other star-freighter captains might have taken the move between
the two tri-engined ships more conservatively. But Captain Shandy Alexis McAllister
was a singlehander; she literally ate, lived and breathed her ship. She helmed the 
Lucy as if she choreographed a dance.
       Shandy gave the navcomp the freedom to make the final adjustments and
reached for the steaming cup of coffee before her. Her navcomp acknowledged the 
Lucy’s release from Q'uivera Departure Control. Her inbox icon flashed.
       The agent in Port Rumor still wanted to add the Lucy to her roster, especially
now that the Dalgran situation had been settled and trade was back to normal. She
cleared the transmit from her screen along with several others that were of little
interest, including one from Nolan Ennis.
        And then there was a message from Cam. True to Rory’s observations, he’d
rarely let her out of his sight. At least, she frequently picked up the Valiance on her
scanners. But she hadn’t seen him since their meeting at the embassy; her feelings
for Rinnaker’s new commodore as incomplete, cryptic and frustrating as that broken
transmission she’d received less than two months ago.
       He could be an arrogant scoundrel and was a powerful man in Conclave
merchant trade. And he now had the contract with the mines on Dalgra, adding it to
the growing list of acquisitions for Rinnaker. Even Nolan Ennis had grudgingly
admitted Rinnaker was a far bit better to deal with than the Nanjir.
       Still, Cam was not only the commodore, he was also a Talvarrin. And worried
tongues, loosened by pints of ale in spaceport pubs, wondered just what
Commodore Cameron Talvarrin would attempt to do next.
       What worried Captain Shandy Alexis McAllister was she knew.
       She stared at the transmission on the screen, knowing she owed him an answer.
       It would mean giving up the Lucy for a little while, not that her ship didn’t need
a rest. Her thruster feeds were acting up again. The ship could use a complete
overhaul. And if this deal came off like Cam had told her it would, she could pay for
the overhaul twice over!
       But she was a captain, damn it, an Independent. To ally herself with Rinnaker--
even in an advisory capacity-- was, well, dangerous. Life was so much easier when
all you did was pick up a shipment here and take it there, pick up another shipment
there and...
       She drew a deep breath. That’s exactly what she’d done for the past two
months. She was bored to tears. Cam knew it; he told her he’d known it even before
that day on Dalgra. She was wasting her time hauling freight.
       But take on the Ycsko’s Beffan Syndicate? Hell, since the Z’fharins wiped out
half the ‘Sko fleet last year, no one even knew where they were based. Nor where
they stored their millions in rare gemstones. No one, that is, except Cameron
Talvarrin.
       Yet it wasn’t the gemstones or her boredom that formed her true motivation.
But a blue-eyed man whose kisses she couldn’t forget.
       She keyed in her TTD and signum, then her reply:
       TOP PRIORITY SCRAMBLE CODE 3
       I'LL DO IT. MEET YOU PORT RUMOR SD99503.15. FLYBOY’S BAR.
S.R..

       She hesitated only a moment before adding: I LOVE YOU.
       --SHANDY
       The reply came back before she was even halfway finished with coffee.
       TOP PRIORITY SCRAMBLE CODE 3
       SOUNDS LIKE HELL JUST FROZE OVER. I’VE GOT A DEAL ON SOME
HOT ICE. PACK YOUR GEAR, LITTLE GIRL. I LOVE YOU. FOREVER.
       --CAM
 
 
Copyright@2001 Linnea Sinclair

