
Springer Praxis Books
Space Exploration
TheSpringer-Praxis Space Exploration series covers all aspects of
human and robotic exploration, in Earth orbit and on the Moon and
planets. The books tell behind-the-scenes stories of early and modern
missions, both crewed and uncrewed, and cover all aspects of the space
programs run by both leading and emerging spacefaring nations.
The books in this series are well illustrated with color ϐigures and
photographs. They are written in a style that space enthusiasts and
historians, readers of popular magazines such as Spaceϔlight and
readers of Popular Mechanics and New Scientist will ϐind accessible.

Davide Sivolella
The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle
Program
Unfulϐilled Dreams and Missions that Never
Flew

Davide Sivolella
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
Springer Praxis Books
ISSN 2731-5401
e-ISSN 2731-541X
Space Exploration
ISBN 978-3-031-19652-2
e-ISBN 978-3-031-19653-9
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive
license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned,
speciϐically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microϐilms or in any other
physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval,
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks,
service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the
absence of a speciϐic statement, that such names are exempt from the
relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general
use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the
advice and information in this book are believed to be true and
accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions
that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afϐiliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer
Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham,
Switzerland

About the Author
Davide Sivolella is an aerospace engineer living and working in the UK
in the civil aviation industry. Currently is lives near London with his
Spanish wife, Monica. As a child, Davide developed a fascination with
ϐlying machines, especially those travelling above the atmosphere. In
fact, this passion for astronautics and space exploration led to a
bachelor’s and master’s degrees in Aerospace Engineering from the
Polytechnic of Turin (Italy). Born in July 1981, just a few months after
Columbia’s maiden ϐlight, he developed a fondness for the Space Shuttle
program. Eventually, this resulted in Springer-Praxis publishing in
August 2013 his ϐirst book, “To Orbit and Back Again: How the Space
Shuttle Flew in Space”. The book has been praised for its content on
numerous outlets ever since. As a result, a sequel, entitled “The Space
Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments”, was released in
2017. This book is meant to complement those two previous volumes
to show what the Space Shuttle could have achieved and how the Space
Transportation System could have further matured.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Clive Horwood of Praxis and the wider community at
Springer New York, who, for the fourth time, have entrusted their
reputation to one of my writing proposals. I am also indebted to Dr
David M. Harland, who has turned my raw manuscript into a book for
the fourth time. Your help, friendship and patience in helping me
develop as a writer will always be greatly appreciated. I must also
mention my friend Giuseppe DeChiara, who provided valuable
suggestions while reading the early version of this manuscript. I also
want to mention the ϐive reviewers who made such positive comments
concerning the content of this proposal. As usual, I thank Jim Wilkie for
his eye-catching cover.
As always, my wife Monica has been incredibly patient and
supportive in allowing me to pursue this personal project of mine,
despite the countless hours I had to subtract to quality family time.
Finally, I cannot forget the interest and support of family, friends, work
colleagues and acquaintances, who have all played a role in keeping me
motivated.

ACC
ACS
ADA
AGM
AM
AOA
ASE
ATM
ATO
CFES
CFM
CFME
CFMF
CMG
CNRL
DA
DOD
EOS
ET
ETVP
EVA
FBPF
FCSF
FWC
FSS
GEO
GRO
Acronyms
Aft Cargo Carrier
Attitude Control System
Array Deployment Assembly
Artiϐicial-G Module
Airlock Module
Abort Once Around
Airborne Support Equipment
Apollo Telescope Mount
Abort To Orbit
Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System
Cryogenic Fluid Management
Cryogenic Fluid Management Experiment
Cryogenic Fluid Management Facility
Control Moment Gyros
Communication and Navigation Research Laboratory
Docking Adapter
Department of Defence
Electrophoresis Operations in Space
External Tank
Engineering Technology Veriϐication Platform
Extra Vehicular Activity
Flyback Booster Processing Facility
Flight Crew System Facility
Filament Wound Case
Flight Support System
Geosynchronous Earth Orbit
Gamma Ray Observatory

HMCF
IPS
ISF
IUS
IUS
JSC
KSC
LAC
LCC
LDEF
LEO
LaRC
LeRC
LFBB
LMSC
LRB
LSST
LST
MDA
MEC
MECO
MLI
MLP
MMS
MMU
MPTS
MOL
MSFC
MWS
NASA
Hypergolic Maintenance and Checkout Facility
Instrument Pointing System
Industrial Space Facility
Interial Upper Stage
Interim Upper Stage
Johnson Space Center
Kennedy Space Center
Liquid Acquisition Device
Launch Control Center
Long Duration Exposure Facility
Low-Earth Orbit
Langley Research Center
Lewis Resarch Center
Liquid Fly Back Booster
Lockheed Missile & Space Company
Liquid Rocket Boosters
Large Space System Technology
Large Space Telescope
Multi Docking Adapter
Materials Experiment Carrier
Main Engine Cut Off
Multi Layer Insulation
Mobile Launch Platform
Multimission Modular Spacecraft
Manned Maneuvering Unit
Microwave Power Transmission System
Manned Orbiting Laboratory
Marshall Space Flight Center
Mobile Work Stations
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NEWSTAR
NRO
OAS
OCDA
OMCF
OMS
OMV
OSCRS
OSM
OTV
OWS
PAM
PAF
PBS
PEP
PM
PM
PMD
PPEPL
PRCA
PRSA
PSS
RAM
RCS
RMS
RSM
RTLS
RV
SASP
Nuclear Energy Waste Space Transportation and Removal
National Reconnaissance Ofϐice
Orbit Adjust System
Orbital Construction Demonstration Article
Orbiter Maintenance Checkout Facility
Orbital Maneuvering System
Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle
Orbital Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System
Orbital Service Module
Orbital Transfer Vehicle
Orbital Work Shop
Payload Assist Module
Payload Attach Fitting
Payload Berthing System
Power Extension Package
Power Module
Propulsion Module
Propellant Management Device
Plasma Physics and Environmental Perturbation Laboratory
Power Regulation and Control Assembly
Power Reactant Storage Assembly
Payload Support Structure
Research and Application Module
Reaction Control System
Robotic Maneuvering System
RAM Support Module
Return To Launch Site
Return Vehicle
Science and Application Space Platform

SCE
SCS
SDLV
SFHT
SIRTF
SLC
SOC
SOCB
SRB
SRU
SRV
SSS
SSUS
STS
SV
TACS
TAL
TDRS
THERMO
TRS
TVS
ULA
USAF
VAB
VHMS
VSE
WSF
Shuttle-C Cargo Element
Satellite Control Section
Shuttle Derived Launch Vehicles
Super Fluid Helium Tanker
Space Infrared Telescope Facility
Space Launch Complex
Space Operation Center
Surrogate Orbiter Cargo Bay
Solid Rocket Booster
Space Replacement Unit
Short Range Vehicle
Support System Saddle
Solid Spinning Upper Stage
Space Transportation System
Spacecraft Vehicle
Thruster Attitude Control Subsystem
Transoceanic Abort Landing
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite
Thermo and Hydrodynamic Experiment Research Module
in Orbit
Teleoperator Retrieval System
Thermodynamic Vent System
United Launch Alliance
US Air Force
Vehicle Assembly Building
Vehicle Health Monitoring System
Vision for Space Exploration
Wake Shield Facility

Contents
1 A Remarkable Flying Machine
The Space Plane
Space Shuttle 101
Space Shuttle: What For? 
2 Upgrading the Space Shuttle
Introduction
The Power Extension Package
3 Boosting the Booster
An attempt to make the Space Shuttle safer
The Liquid Rocket Boosters (LRB)
Liquid Fly Back Booster: The Pre-Phase A Study
Liquid Fly Back Booster: The Boeing and Lockheed Martin
Proposals
4 Orbital Hopping
“A tale of two upper stages”
Death Star
The Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle: the space tug returns
NEWSTAR: Nuclear Energy Waste Space Transportation And
Removal
5 Unϐlown On-Orbit Servicing Capabilities
Opening the era of on-orbit satellite servicing
Payload Berthing System, Satellite Workshop, and Robotic Arms
The Space Operation Center
On-Orbit Cryogenic Fluid Management Experiments
The Orbital Spacecraft Consumable Resupply System

The Superϐluid Helium Tanker Study
6 Factories in Space
The Materials Experiment Carrier
A pioneering initiative: the Industrial Space Facility
Ultra-vacuum: the Wake Shield Facility
7 The Unfulϐilled Potential of the External Tank
Introduction
The Very Large Space Telescope
The Large Area Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope
Propellant Scavenging System
Aft Cargo Carrier
8 Shipyards in Orbit
The Large Space Systems Technology Program
Orbital Assembly and Maintenance Study
The Orbital Construction Demonstration Article
The Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment
The Engineering Technology Veriϐication Platform
9 Space Shuttle and Skylab: A Missed Opportunity
Introduction
Saving Skylab: The Lost Mission of STS-3
The Skylab Reuse Study
The Skylab Reuse Study: Shuttle Operations and Continued
Growth
The Solar Scientiϐic Instruments Spacelab/ Orbiter Report
Epilogue
10 Space Shuttle in Uniform

The Lost Polar Mission
The “Big Bird”
The STS-Hexagon Study
11 Lost Science and Technology Missions
The Research and Application Module
The Shuttle Payload Planning Working Group
The Shuttle InfraRed Telescope Facility
The Large Uncooled Infrared Telescope
The Accessible Focal Plane Telescope
The Plasma Physics and Environmental Perturbation
Laboratory
The Communication and Navigation Research Laboratory
Orbital Research Centrifuge
12 Epilogue
Index

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_1
1. A Remarkable Flying Machine
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
The Space Plane
Even before the last Apollo crew left the Moon on December 14, 1972,
the American aerospace industry had begun to assign its design ofϐices
to the next space program. Although it would only travel to Low Earth
Orbit and look less exciting than reaching Earth’s natural satellite, the
new spacecraft promised to be entirely different from its predecessors.
It would be the chance to make a longstanding dream come true. An
idea whose origins hailed even before the Space Age had begun.
By the end of the 18th century, sci-ϐi novels or stories that
attempted to address spaceϐlight relied on unpractical means of
transportation. For instance, in Edgar Allan Poe’s short story “The
Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall”, the main character engages
in a voyage into space using a revolutionary balloon with which, after
ninety days, he reaches the Moon. In Jules Verne’s “From the Earth to
the Moon” three men travel to the Moon on a bullet-like capsule shoot
into space with a gargantuan and powerful cannon. It was with people
such as the Russian Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the American Robert H.
Goddard and the German Werner Von Braun that real physics was
brought into play to determine a plausible and efϐicient propulsion
system for space travel. Within the ϐirst two decades of the 19th
century, they demonstrated, either using theoretical studies or ϐield
experimentation or both, that applying Newton’s third law of motion is
the most viable solution for reaching space and moving within its
emptiness. At the same time, the burgeoning aircraft industry had put

in people’s minds that a ϐlying machine worth its name ought to have
wings. As rocketry was seen as a specialization of aeronautical
engineering and as most of the engineers interested in space travel
were coming from an aeronautical background, it became natural to
marry rockets and wings together. The concept of a spaceplane was
born. As the world came out of World War II, the notion of winged
rockets ϐlying into space was further reinforced by sci-ϐi literature and
the cinema industry. The winged rocket of the 1950 “Destination Moon”
or the Walt Disney animations “Man in Space” and “Man on the Moon”
broadcast in 1955 are clear examples of such tendency. The concept
became so strongly embedded into the aerospace community that
even the brightest minds wholeheartedly embraced it and purposely
neglected its most obvious pitfall: wings. Wings are not required for
space travel as there is no air an aerodynamic surface can react against
to produce lift. Likewise, wings are not needed for the ascent, as the
sooner a rocket can clear the atmosphere, the better to save on
propellant and thus increase the useful payload for the mission. Wings
become active only during atmospheric re-entry to steer the vehicle
towards the designated landing site and possibly reduce stress loading.
Considering that a typical atmospheric re-entry lasts some 30 to 45
minutes, it is easy to discern that wings are nothing but dead weight to
carry along for ninety-nine per cent of the mission. All that mass would
be better spent to improve the hauling performance of the vehicle.
However, landing on a runway rather than in the ocean has its merits.
Therefore, it was only instinctive to look at a spaceplane-based
conϐiguration when the ϐirst plans to send a man into space were
drawn. The ϐirst of such attempts was the Boeing X-20 Dyna-Soar.
Funded by the US Air Force and initiated on October 24, 1957, it aimed
at developing a small single-man spaceplane for military missions
ranging from reconnaissance to bombing from space, even to approach
and disable an enemy satellite! For almost a decade since 1959, NASA
operated the North American rocket-powered aircraft X-15 to test
hypersonic ϐlight and push the envelope up to the lower fringes of
space. One proposed evolution of envisioned an aircraft capable of
orbital ϐlight.
The X-20 and the orbital X-15 suffered never left the drawing board.
Putting aside funding issues, a determining factor in their cancellation

was time. By the end of the 1950s, the Cold War was swiftly
approaching the highest of the high grounds, with the Soviet Union
striking the ϐirst hit when they successfully delivered Sputnik into orbit
on October 4, 1957. The next step would be to send a man into space
and use that capability as a strategic military capability. While
spaceplanes were a beautiful and elegant solution, they presented
various engineering challenges that could be resolved only through
expensive and time-consuming testing and analysis. An alternative was
to lodge the astronauts into a conical-shaped capsule that would be
recovered at sea following a ballistic atmospheric re-entry. Apart from
being easier and simpler, such a conϐiguration required less R&D time
than a spaceplane and thus would allow either side of the Iron Curtain
to beat the other in being the ϐirst to send humans into space.
Throughout the 1960s, NASA’s human space programs used
capsules of increasing size and complexity. With the Apollo moon
landings drawing to a close, it was time for the space agency to set new
goals. Maxim A. Faget, the chief mastermind behind the Mercury
capsule, recalls that at that point, “the space station seemed like an
obvious thing to do, to have a laboratory in space where people could
work, and we could understand microgravity effects both on people as
well as physical processes a lot better with a laboratory than we could
in these tiny capsules. So there was a signiϐicant effort at the beginning
and in the middle of the Apollo Program and increasing as we went
along towards building a rather large laboratory for ϐlight…as we got
deeper and deeper into the Space Station Program, it became obvious
that we needed a better vehicle for servicing the launch vehicle. Gemini
was too small, Apollo was too expensive, and it almost looked like an
overkill. The Saturn launch vehicles were quite expensive”. As aircraft
are inherently built for long service life and are thus associated with
reusability, NASA took the opportunity of advocating for a spaceplane.
Space Shuttle 101
On January 31, 1969, the space agency appointed McDonnell Douglas,
North American Rockwell, Lockheed and General Dynamic for a Phase A
study of an Integrated Launch and Re-entry Vehicle (ILRV), later named
Space Transportation System or Space Shuttle. A few months later, in

April 1969, NASA formed the Space Shuttle Task Group and appointed it
to deϐine the layout and requirements of the new vehicle. In October
1969, Dr George E. Muller, Associated Director Administrator for
Manned Spaceϐlight at NASA, delivered a detailed and lengthy paper to
an IATA1 conference in Amsterdam, Holland, on the future of human
spaceϐlight post-Apollo. After praising the Apollo program for the
successful landing of Apollo 11, he reminded his audience of the
profound impact that spaceϐlight has on everybody’s daily life, such as
telecommunication and weather forecasts. Talking at an aviation
conference, he naturally pointed out the numerous spinoff that
spaceϐlight technology had already brought into the design of new
modern aircraft, such as materials for airframes and engines and
avionics. However, he continued afϐirming that “yet we are only on the
threshold of space exploration. We have yet to reap the beneϐits of the
capability to operate in this new territory humankind has acquired.
Those beneϐits will be great, beyond our ability to imagine”. Examples
of such beneϐits longing for harvest were the exploration of the Solar
System, weather control, monitoring of Earth’s resources and
environment, development of new innovative materials unattainable
on Earth due to gravity, and so on. The key to such development would
be constructing a space station crewed from the beginning with at least
twelve astronauts. The station would be modular in design to allow
expansion as required by new development and research needs.
However, access to space had to become as cheap and ϐlexible as the
operations of an airline. The Space Shuttle, for which the Phase A study
had already begun, was to achieve this goal and inhibit humankind’s
expansion into the cosmos.
Muller’s paper then described the key features of such a space
transportation system. The reusability and low-cost operations
requirements were all over the whole design. The system would
include a booster and an orbital vehicle. Both would be propelled by
liquid hydrogen and oxygen, the most powerful combination for
chemical rockets. Talking about the simplicity of ground operations,
Muller went so far as to forecast that the Shuttle would be fuelled by
trucks as an aircraft. The engines would be so reliable that a handful of
hours would be necessary to check them out before the next ϐlight, and
the time between overhauls would be of the same order of magnitude

as a conventional jet engine. Advances in electronics would allow low-
cost and miniaturized control boxes and computers for ϐlight and
system management. One obvious consequence would be the
simpliϐication of the ϐlight instrumentation available to the pilots, so
much so to resemble the uncluttered ϐlight deck of a modern airliner2.
Sophistication in computer technology and software would create
conditions for ground operations similar to those at an airport. As
every onboard function would be controlled and checked by the
computers, boarding passengers and cargo was all that was left to do as
far as ground operations were concerned. Reusability would be applied
to the thermal protection system by selecting heat-resistant materials
having the dual purpose of heat shield and airframe primary load-
bearing structure. The orbital vehicle would be capable of all-weather
re-entry and landing. It would also have its propulsion system for
powered landings to enhance safety and self-ferry when landing at a
location different from the launch base. Landing visibility would be at
least as good as that provided by a high-performance jet or the SST, and
landing characteristics and handling would not be different from a
conventional airliner. Finally, Muller foresaw that the Shuttle would
enable immense beneϐits, enticing other countries to buy or rent the
Space Shuttle for their space programs. Eventually, it would lead to a
global transportation system, possibly managed at a multi-company
and international level. Like many others penned in the following
decade, this paper emphasized the Space Shuttle as being just a high-
performance aircraft.
In the meantime, Boeing and Lockheed joined forces as they
reckoned that the project was too complex for just one ϐirm. They were
joined by Trans World Airlines (TWA). Adding an airline to the team
was a strategic and wise move. If the Space Shuttle was meant to
operate as an aircraft, only an airline could provide ϐirst-hand expertise
in aircraft maintenance, logistics, crew selection and training. They
would also prove valuable in deϐining launch, recovery and logistics
operations on a scheduled basis. Boeing would lead the design of the
booster vehicle and main engines and Lockheed that of the orbital
vehicle and electronic systems.
Likewise, McDonnell Douglas partnered with Martin Marietta, TRW,
and Pan American World Airways. They, too, offered a two-stage

conϐiguration made of a booster and orbiting vehicle fully recoverable
and reusable. McDonnell would be responsible for the Orbiter’s design,
while Martin Marietta would be for the booster. TRW would work on
avionics. Finally, a third alliance was made by Grumman, General
Electric (electronics integration and thermal protection system),
Northrop (orbiter technology due to experience in lifting body testing
such as the M2 and HL10) and Easter Airliners.
Following the Phase A conϐiguration delivery on November 1, 1969,
NASA announced on May 12, 1970, that McDonnel Douglas and North
American Rockwell had been selected to carry forward their studies
into Phase B. However, the following month, the space agency funded
the losing companies to extend Phase A to review further
conϐigurations. It took several years and design reviews, mostly fuelled
by periodic budget cuttings for R&D, to deϐine the Space Shuttle with
its familiar conϐiguration. Finally, on July 27, 1972, North American
Rockwell was awarded a multi-million dollar contract to design and
develop the orbiter vehicle. Development of the booster stage was
assigned to Morton Thiokol. Every aspect of the Space Transportation
System had radically been altered from what Muller had presented to
IATA just a few years earlier (Figure 1.1).

Figure 1.1 The Space Transportation System, otherwise known as The Space Shuttle.
[Source: Space Shuttle Vehicle Familiarization (pdf), p. 9. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ 
centers/ johnson/ pdf/ 390651main_ shuttle_ crew_ operations_ manual. pdf]
Solid Rocket Boosters
The ϐirst victim was the reusable crewed booster vehicle. Following a
devastating funding cut announced in May 1971 by the Ofϐice of
Management and Budget, NASA was left with sufϐicient ϐinancial
resources to continue the development of the orbiter vehicle only.
Regrettably, the notion of an entirely reusable two-stage system had to
be put aside.
It was felt that an expendable booster could be developed relatively
rapidly and cheaply to get the program running. Then, when funding
becomes available later on, the expendable booster could be replaced
by an entirely reusable one. Boeing proposed a Saturn V’s ϐirst stage (S-
IC) reconϐigured to carry the Orbiter atop. Such a solution was of keen

interest to the company, eager to keep its S-IC production facility open
as the Apollo program drew to a close. Likewise, Martin Marietta
suggested a larger version of the Titan III launcher, named the Titan III-
L. It would use a liquid-fueled core with a diameter of 16 feet and have
as many as six strap-on solid-fuel rockets, ten feet in diameter. A third
proposal was a joint venture between Thiokol, Aerojet, United
Technology, and the Lockheed Propulsion Company, all of which were
solid-rocket motor makers. They proposed a mixed cluster of their
several rockets. Finally, NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center suggested
a pressure-fed expendable booster. It eliminated complex
turbomachinery to feed the engines, saving on developmental costs.
However, the structure had to be thicker to withstand the internal
pressures. The increase in weight and reduction in performance was
deemed a reasonable penalty to minimize development costs and
divert more funding to cutting-edge technology such as the Orbiter
vehicle’s reusable main engines. It was a sensible decision, especially if
the expendable booster was to be only an interim conϐiguration.
At the same time, the concept of external tankage for the Orbiter
vehicle was proposed. Because the staging velocity could be cut to
5,000 (or perhaps even 4,000) feet per second, the space agency did an
about-face and restored the idea of a fully reusable booster. The
booster would be smaller than originally envisaged, and it would not
require extensive thermal protection. Marshall kept proposing its
pressure-fed booster, arguing it could be reusable even without wings.
In addition, its thick walls would afford an airframe sufϐiciently robust
to survive an ocean parachute-assisted landing and the ensuing perils
of the sea. Finally, the thick walls would behave as a heat sink,
relinquishing the mass penalty of a thermal protection system. Due to
its elegance compared to a winged booster, the concept was unofϐicially
called the Big Dumb Booster.
Boeing also stuck to its initial proposal of a converted S-IC stage,
ϐitted with wings, a tail, a nose ϐlight deck, and ten jet engines for an
autonomous return to the launch site. NASA endorsed this
conϐiguration because it represented the agency’s aspiration for a fully
recoverable ϐlyback booster. However, there were some practical
issues, such as pilot escape from the booster in the event of an abort
and the booster’s thermal protection system. An alternative came in

the form of a Thrust Assisted Orbiter Shuttle (TOAS), whereby an
Orbiter vehicle was mounted to an external tank sufϐiciently large to
permit the main engines to operate with “parallel staging” at liftoff.
Two liquid-propellant boosters ϐlanked the tank for additional thrust at
liftoff and then discarded two minutes into the ascent. Boosters with
either solid or liquid propellant were considered. Although the
performances were somewhat similar, a solid booster was judged at
least $1 billion cheaper to develop and hence it was selected as the
winner3.
Called the Solid Rocket Boosters (or SRBs for short), they were the
largest solid rockets rated for human spaceϐlight and the ϐirst to be
speciϐically designed for recovery, refurbishment, and reuse. The two
SRBs provided most of the thrust needed to lift a Shuttle off the pad and
climb to about 150,000 feet or 24 nautical miles. The weight of the
fully-loaded external tank and Orbiter was transmitted through the
structure of the SRBs to the mobile launcher platform. After the thrust
of the three main engines had been veriϐied at liftoff, the SRBs were
ignited. Each booster had a sea-level thrust of approximately 3,300,000
pounds. While they were burning, the pair of boosters provided more
than 70 per cent of the overall thrust.
Each SRB was 149.16 feet long and 12.17 feet in diameter, with an
approximate weight of 1,300,000 pounds at launch, 1,100,000 pounds
of which was the propellant and the remaining structure. Due to their
sheer size, the booster’s casing was divided into four major
subassemblies: the forward casting segment, the center casting
segment (two in each booster), and the aft casting segment. Each of
these was made of a given number of smaller segments, for a total of
eleven. The forward segment had a forward dome segment and two
cylindrical segments; the centre casting segments consisted of a pair of
cylindrical segments each. The aft casting segment consisted of an
attachment segment, two stiffener segments and the aft segment. The
four major subassemblies together formed the part of the booster
responsible for generating the thrust and hence known as the solid
rocket motor (Figure 1.2).4

Figure 1.2 SRB technical view.
[Source: Shuttle Crew Operations Manual (pdf), p. 71. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ 
centers/ johnson/ pdf/ 390651main_ shuttle_ crew_ operations_ manual. pdf]
To Max Faget, such a conϐiguration was a mistake: “I know it was a
mistake, was that we decided that we’d build the solid rockets in Utah,
and that limited the size of the solid rockets. It also meant that they had
to be segmented. But the size limitation was probably more serious
than the segmenting. The diameter of the solid rockets had to be less
than twelve and a half feet in order for the existing rail transportation,
which had to go through a number of tunnels and so forth and so on.
We just simply couldn’t make it any bigger around than that. What was
also a factor in the design of solid rockets was that you can’t make them
but so long. The length-to-diameter ratio is a limiting design factor, and
consequently, we limited the total amount of impulse, thrust times
time. The total amount of propellant in the solid rockets was limited by
that, which meant that the solid rockets would only be able to help
during the ϐirst couple of minutes of ϐlight instead of being attached
longer. We staged those solid rockets at only a little over 4,000 feet a

second, which really meant that the Shuttle and its tank had a big job to
do, and it really limited the performance and inhibited any growth in
the payload capability, which the program has had to suffer from all
this time”.
The solid rocket motor was combined with other elements to
create a complete solid rocket booster. At the top, a nose cone
assembly housed the booster recovery system. This assembly was split
into a nose cap section and a frustum, with the former housing both the
pilot and the drogue parachutes while the latter held the three large
main parachutes, ϐlotation devices and handling hardware for water
recovery. Attached to the external surface of the frustum were four
solid motors employed to separate the booster from the external tank
at the appropriate moment during the ascent. A forward skirt was
positioned below the nose cone assembly and on top of the forward
solid rocket motor segment. It provided the structure to bear the
parachute loads during deployment, descent and towing, the internal
mounting for the electrical and instrumentation subsystem, the rate
gyro assembly and range safety panels. On the aft casting segment at
the bottom of the solid rocket motor was a conical aluminum and steel
structure named aft skirt. It provided aerodynamic and thermal
protection and mountings for the thrust vectoring subsystem and
other electronic subsystem components and four separation motors. It
also included four attachment points to the launch platform.
The simplicity of the design was stained by a reduced safety factor
for the crew. A solid rocket can only be shut off upon propellant
depletion, unlike a liquid rocket engine. In the case of malfunction, all
you can do is press the button for self-destruction. As clearly put by
former NASA Director and Space Shuttle Program Manager Arnold D.
Aldrich “there is no way out: There’s no way to get off. They have to
burn for two minutes. Then at two minutes, they separate after they
stop thrusting, and they fall away. But if you try to separate them, there
was no way to shut them down, and if you try to separate them while
they’re burning, the momentum of the thrust holds them in their
places. They’re connected. So even you blow the bolts to separate them,
they won’t separate because the thrust keeps them where they are. I
was quite alarmed that one failure could cause a catastrophe. There
would be no way to recover from a failure [of an SRB] during the ϐirst

two minutes of ϐlight”. While the Space Shuttle community ended up
just accepting the situation and trust the inherent reliability of solid
rockets, Aldrich and his team spent some time to contrive ways “you
could maybe shut a solid rocket booster down, and you can blow
something off the top, and it will dissipate the thrust. But no system
like that had been developed that was operational, that you could use.
The analysis of it was that it would take some period of time after you
blow it for the thrust to phase down, and it would cause an
[unacceptable thrust] imbalance. In the end, it was thought that that
was probably not something that was really reliable to implement that
would be any safer than just trying to do the rockets right and keep
them like they were”.
External tank
The design of the orbiter vehicle underwent a drastic mutation, too. As
it was meant to be a spaceplane, the initial conϐiguration envisioned
that it had internal tanks to feed the main engines.
Hydrogen and oxygen were the propellants of choice due to their
high performance. Nevertheless, hydrogen has a drawback. As
hydrogen is the lightest element, it has a low density, around one-
fourteenth that of water. Although it would constitute only about one-
seventh of an Orbiter’s propellant mass load, it would occupy nearly
three-fourths of the volume, demanding large tanks with two
signiϐicant consequences. Firstly, despite being made of aluminium, the
tanks would add a substantial mass at the expense of payload and
increase the complexity of the thermal protection system. Secondly,
even supposing that it would have been possible to ϐly such a monster,
the development costs were beyond the funding that even the most
enthusiastic members of Congress were willing to allocate.
It led to partially reusable conϐigurations in which the Orbiter
carried its hydrogen externally in an expendable aluminum shell. As a
result, the Orbiter would have much less volume to enclose within its
structure and less surface area to protect thermally. Also, new studies
showed that it would be possible to reduce the staging velocity at
which the booster was jettisoned with this conϐiguration. This would
ease the development of both vehicles and increase the payload
capacity. The next logical step was to stretch the external tank to carry

liquid oxygen. This would have a two-fold beneϐit. First, it would reduce
the size of the Orbiter and secondly, the spacecraft could achieve a
standard design independent of the tank. The tank could grow to a
particular size to further reduce the staging velocity of the booster.
Consequently, booster size could also be reduced, leading to further
cost-cutting. This reasoning led directly to the familiar conϐiguration of
an Orbiter mounted to an expendable external tank, supporting two
reusable boosters.
Having a length of 153.8 feet, a diameter of 27.6 feet, and a capacity
of 1,385,000 pounds of liquid oxygen and 231,000 pounds of liquid
hydrogen, the external tank (ET) was the largest and heaviest (when
loaded) component of the Shuttle stack. As the central, integrating
structural element, it was subjected to static loads from the Orbiter
when on the pad and thrust loads from the SRBs and the Orbiter’s main
engines in ϐlight. The structural conϐiguration was simple: two tanks,
one for each propellant, joined by a cylindrical structure known as the
intertank, which eliminated the conceptual and operational complexity
of a common bulkhead between the two propellant tanks. Given its
higher density, the liquid oxygen tank was the smallest, and it was
located at the front of the ET for vehicle controllability. Both tanks were
an aluminum monocoque consisting of a fusion-welded assembly of
preformed, chem-milled gores, panels, machined ϐittings and ring
chords. Internally, anti-slosh and anti-vortex provisions minimized
liquid residuals and dumped out destabilizing oscillations of the ϐluid
that otherwise could induce instability in the delivery of ϐluid to the
feed lines to the Orbiter’s main engines (Figure 1.3).

Figure 1.3 External Tank major components.
[Source: Shuttle Crew Operations Manual (pdf), p. 67. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ 
centers/ johnson/ pdf/ 390651main_ shuttle_ crew_ operations_ manual. pdf]
Orbiter: structure
The keyword for the Space Shuttle was reusability leading to a
requirement of 100 ϐlights over ten years. The Orbiter airframe was
designed as a semi-monocoque structure, also known as a reinforced
shell. Recognized very early on as the best for a ϐlying machine, this
kind of structure consists of an external skin (the shell) reinforced with
longitudinal elements called stringers linked together by transversal
elements called frames (for fuselage sections) or ribs (for wings). It is
easy to understand why such structures are conϐigured this way if one
thinks of how easy it is to pierce an egg using a sharp object. Pure shell
structures (like an egg) are excellent at withstanding a load distributed
over an area, such as the hydrostatic pressure inside a vessel, but
cannot resist compression and shear due to concentrated loads. An
aerospace structure is subjected to many loads applied to speciϐic
points, such as the attachment points for the landing gear to the
fuselage or the attachment structure of a spacecraft on top of a rocket.
Stringers, ribs, and frames afford the structure to take and distribute
loads, making it strong, stiff and lightweight. With the Orbiter

developed as a reusable spaceship capable of landing on a runway, its
conϐiguration could not be dissimilar to an airline with a fuselage,
wings, and empennage. The fuselage consists of the forward fuselage,
mid-fuselage, and aft fuselage (Figure 1.4).
Figure 1.4 Orbiter structural elements.
[Source: Shuttle Crew Operations Manual (pdf), p. 52. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ 
centers/ johnson/ pdf/ 390651main_ shuttle_ crew_ operations_ manual. pdf]
Space Shuttle: What For?
In September 1969, a few months after initiating Phase A and the ϐirst
Moon landing, President Nixon established the Space Task Force to
chart NASA’s path for the decades to come. By the century’s end, the
space agency was to repeat the endeavor of Apollo 11 on the surface of
Mars. Though such mandate was not carried out with the same
impetuous that President Kennedy gave when he committed NASA to
reach the Moon, it was nevertheless what the space agency was hoping
for. Plans were being drawn up for a space station orbiting Earth and

assembled with components delivered by Saturn V class launchers.
Orbital space tugs would aid in constructing the outpost and putting
together nuclear space shuttles to reach the Red Planet. They would
also help retrieve crippled satellites needing maintenance. At the same
time, other stations would be built to jumpstart a space-based
manufacturing industry to manufacture high-purity pharmaceutical
drugs or innovative materials impossible to create on Earth due to the
spoiling effect of gravity. It was essential to develop a reusable space
truck to cheaply and regularly haul to and from orbit equipment,
payloads, and astronauts and assist in the orbital construction work
and satellite maintenance.
Such wild dreams were shuttered to pieces less than six months
later when on January 13, 1970, NASA Administrator Dr Thomas Paine
announced at a press conference in Washington that due to funding
cuts, none of the grand plans for expansion in the Solar System would
take place. Only the reusable Space Shuttle would survive to serve the
launching needs of the nation. The decision to build the Space Shuttle
was taken to lower space access costs. However, economic analysis had
shown that such ambition could be met on the condition that EVERY
type of existing expendable launch vehicle is retired and every payload
shifted to the Shuttle. To become a genuinely low-cost transportation
system, the ϐlight rate had to be increased, suppressing the
competition from the expendable launchers in use at that time. This
condition provided the stimulus for the deϐinition of mission
requirements for which the Space Shuttle had to be designed for.
Thirty years and 134 ϐlights5 ϐlown by ϐive Orbiters6 proved that the
Space Shuttle was a remarkable machine capable of accomplishing the
most diverse typology of missions. Satellites, telescopes and probes
were deployed from the payload bay as the ϐirst step towards reaching
their ϐinal destination; in the decades when the Space Station was only
present in artistic renderings and technical drawings, the Space Shuttle
took the role of a space-based research facility; it allowed the
execution of complicated and risky satellite retrievals and
refurbishments on several ϐlights, chief among them the ϐive servicing
missions of the Hubble Space Telescope; when the time was ready, it
made on-orbit construction of the Space Station a reality. It can be
argued that such versatility, despite ϐlaws in the original design forced

1
2
3
4
by an ever-shrinking budget, made the Space Shuttle such a remarkable
ϐlying machine.
Nevertheless, there was so much more that NASA could have
accomplished with the Space Shuttle while setting a ϐirm foundation
for a true space fairing society. In the ensuing chapters, we will
examine some of the most fascinating and complex concepts put
forward by ever-inventive and creative engineers at NASA or
aerospace ϐirms such as Boeing, Convair, General Dynamics, Martin
Marietta, McDonnell Douglas and Rockwell.
REFERENCES
NASA (2008) Shuttle Crew Operations Manual. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ centers/ 
johnson/ pdf/ 390651main_ shuttle_ crew_ operations_ manual. pdf
Sivolella (2013) “To Orbit and Back Again: How the Space Shuttle Flew in Space” – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-1461409823; Paperback: 528 pages.
Sivolella (2017) “The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments” – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
The International Air Transport Association (IATA) is a trade association of most of the world’s
airlines and has the purpose of supporting aviation with global standards for airline safety,
security, efϐiciency and sustainability.
 
In all previous capsules, the astronauts were surrounded by control panels chock full of
switches and dials
 
A solid rocket is simpler than its liquid-fuelled counterpart as it does not require tankage, an
engine propellant feeding system, thermal insulation to maintain the propellants at cryogenic
temperatures, engine turbomachinery just to name a few.
 
For this reason, the four major subassemblies were also called solid rocket motor segments.
 

5
6
The Space Shuttle program tallied 135 ϐlights, however STS-51L never made it to orbit as it
suffered a catastrophic failure some 72 seconds after lift-off destroying the Space Shuttle
Challenger and killing all of seven hands on board.
 
In order of appearance they were called Columbia, Challenger, Discovery, Atlantis, and
Endeavour.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_2
2. Upgrading the Space Shuttle
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
Introduction
Time and power are among the most valuable resources to manage
onboard a spacecraft, so mission planners rarely leave much to spare
for either. Considering the prohibitive costs involved in launching a
mission, even before Columbia’s maiden ϐlight, it became evident that
the Space Shuttle performances had to be extended to pack as many
activities as possible in every ϐlight. In 1979, the NASA Johnson Space
Centre, Huston, Texas, started the Orbital Service Module Systems
Analysis Study. It was an 8-month investigation researching concepts
for providing additional power, thermal and attitude control to the
baseline Orbiter to support a greater variety of mission objectives and
lengthening the time spent in orbit. The starting point was the NASA
STS Mission Model dated October 1977, a document in which trafϐic
projections for the 1981–1984 timeframe were outlined, providing
estimates of orbit, weight, payload and schedule for all those early
missions. The research missions, namely Spacelab ϐlights1, were
already displaying an increasing hunger for time and power.
The three fuel cells powering up the baseline Orbiter could
continuously generate up to 21 kW, two-thirds of which, for its own
functioning. Therefore, only the remaining one third would be available
to the payload. As the European industry had little to no experience in
developing and producing fuel cells for space applications, it was
outlined that the Orbiter should fulϐil Spacelab’s power needs. Up to 4.5
kW were required by Spacelab’s subsystems, leaving a meagre three

kW for the experiments apparatus. The NASA STS Mission Model
foresaw that the Spacelab experiments’ electrical energy requirements
would range between 17 kW and 33 kW, with an average of 29 kW for at
least 80% of the 29 Spacelab missions forecast up to 1984. Of course, it
was considered that as ϐlight experience increased, NASA would better
understand the Orbiter power management to a point where it was
plausible to assume that 29 kW would be sufϐicient for Spacelab
missions. Power requirements past 1984 were harder to predict given
the higher uncertainty in foreseeing a ϐlight manifest in the long term.
However, considering the ambition of conducting a large number of
power-hungry investigations in material processing, it was grossly
estimated that the energy requirements would steadily swell up to 100
kW and even more by the mid-nineties when space processing
facilities would be open for business.
As far as mission duration was concerned, a similar trend was
manifesting, with ϐlights projected to last longer than 45 days after
1984. Cleary the baseline Orbiter would never be able to satisfy such
taxing requirements. In their study, JSC engineers settled on a ϐlexible
evolutional growth path that would gradually augment the power and
duration capabilities of the baseline Orbiter. While initially it was
suggested to add extra cryogen tanks for energy production, the
proposal was soon discarded as it would drastically shrink the payload
capability. For instance, ten extra sets of cryogenic tanks would have
provided a power uplift of 7 kW and a mission duration of 23 days, but
at the expense of a dramatic reduction in payload from 20,000 pounds
to less than 9,000 pounds. Other solutions were needed.
The Power Extension Package
A more satisfying concept was to exploit the free energy coming from
the Sun during the dayside of the orbit by adding a solar power facility
onboard the Orbiter itself. Called the Power Extension Package (PEP), it
consisted of two major elements, the Array Deployment Assembly
(ADA) and the Power Regulation and Control Assembly (PRCA), along
with the necessary interface and display control equipment. They
would be installed at the forward end of the payload bay above the
Spacelab tunnel, providing the crew good visual access from the aft

ϐlight deck windows for operations with the robotic arm. Also, it would
have minimized interferences with the payload in the aft end of the
cargo bay and reduced the length of power cabling. However, based on
the payload envelope, the ADA could be ϐitted anywhere on the cargo
bay, and the system was designed to work well with a Spacelab all-
pallet conϐiguration also (Figs. 2.1 and 2.2).
Figure 2.1 The main components of the Power Extension Package.
[Source: Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP (pdf), p. 9. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790025067]

Figure 2.2 A detailed view of the ADA and PCRA installed within the payload bay.
[Source: Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP (pdf), p. 26. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790025067]
The core structure of the ADA was a box beam, stored transversally,
spanning the full width of the Orbiter’s payload bay and ϐitted to the
sidewalls through standard bridge ϐittings. The box housed two solar
array wings assemblies, each bolted to opposite sides of the beam.
Each assembly included a deployment mast canister and diode
assembly package. On orbit, the robotic arm would grab the ADA at the
so-called slip ring/RMS grappled ϐixture assembly and lift it vertically
out of the payload bay. It would then be translated to the deployment
position to allow the crew to visually monitor the solar arrays’
unfolding. Finally, it would be moved to a position chosen to meet
mission and payload orientation requirements while maximizing
exposure to the Sun. Once in place, the robotic arm’s joint brakes would
be locked, rigidizing the whole structure and removing as much
dynamic loading on the ϐlimsy solar wings (Fig. 2.3).

Figure 2.3 A detailed view of the Array Deployment Assembly.
[Source: Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP (pdf), p. 29. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790025067]
Deployment of the solar arrays would start with the two canisters
rotating 90°, perpendicular to the long axis of the core structure.
Packaging issues demanded that the canister be stored along the
length of the core structure rather than perpendicular to the arrays.
Therefore, a canister support assembly was added to allow each
canister to pivot around one end and place itself along the solar array
wing deployment direction. Each canister would contain the
deployable solar array mast, which consisted of a composite triangular
truss stored helically wound within the canister itself. A redundant
motor driving a two-speed gearbox would regulate mast extension and
retraction. Guidewires would control the unfolding of the array, and
when fully deployed, the 3.48 by 36 m array wing would be kept under
tension by the mast itself through springs assuring the required
ϐlatness. With the arrays deployed, the canister support assembly

would control the dynamic response of the solar wings to Orbiter-
induced loads in the array plane and perpendicular to it. Each array
would consist of 50 hinged panels plastered with two by four centimer
solar cells attached to a ϐlexible substrate (Fig. 2.4).
Figure 2.4 The main design features of the PEP solar array wing.
[Source: Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP (pdf), p. 31. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790025067]
During the sunlit segment of the orbit, power generated by the solar
arrays would be transferred to the Orbiter across the slip ring/RMS
grapple ϐixture2 to a power umbilical connector on the robotic arms
end effector physically mated to the assembly. Power would then ϐlow
along cables attached to the arm and terminating at its shoulder
mounting on the payload bay. Finally, cables would transfer power to
the power and regulation control assembly to be regulated and
distributed to the Orbiter main buses for use by its subsystems and
payloads. The Power and Regulation Control Assembly (PRCA)
consisted of six voltage regulators mounted on three cold plates for
waste heat rejection, three shunt regulators, data bus couplers, and
power cables mounted to a beam support structure. Contrary to the

ADA, the PRCA would remain in the Orbiter payload bay and could only
be installed at its forward end to minimize interference with other
payloads and reduce the length of the cables originating from the
ADA/RMS assembly.
In ϐlight, the orientation of the arrays would be provided by the ADA
avionics equipment, which included sun sensors, signal processors,
and pointing and control electronics assembly. To maximize exposure
to sunlight, the slip ring assembly allowed for 360° alpha angle
rotation, that is to say, a complete revolution about the axis
perpendicular to the plane of the arrays. In addition, a motor on each
canister offered a second degree of freedom for a ± 90° beta angle
rotation about the array deployment axis. Finally, the ADA could be
manoeuvred around the Orbiter at any convenient location, increasing
the system’s ϐlexibility and raising power production (Figs. 2.5 and
2.6).
Figure 2.5 A cross-section detailing the robotic arm gimbal/slip ring/grapple assembly.

[Source: Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP (pdf), p. 33. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790025067]
Figure 2.6 The PEP solar array orientation requirements and capabilities.
[Source: Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP (pdf), p. 39. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790025067]
The fuel cells would be switched off or operated at a controlled
minimum (idle) load in parallel with the solar array during the orbital
daytime. Such paralleling approach resulted in system simplicity,
reliability, voltage regulation and reduced array size. With the PEP
deployed, Orbiter’s attitude would be managed by the reaction control
system’s vernier jet thrusters, given their superiority for propellant
economy and small dynamic reaction loading. The primary jet
thrusters could be used only as a backup due to higher propellant
consumption and the introduction of higher dynamic loading on the
extended and ϐlimsy solar arrays.
Though it looks like a complicated system, the basic performance of
a PEP-Orbiter complex looked promising. For instance, a payload
power requirement of seven kW, equivalent to the baseline Orbiter,
could be supplied for twelve days on a 28.5° orbit (as compared to six

days without the PEP), or for 20 days on a 55° orbit or up to 48 days on
a polar orbit. The higher the orbit, the more continuous sunlight is
available, increasing the time available for power generation and
reducing consumption of the stored cryogenics. Furthermore,
performances looked good if a reduction in the number of cryogenics
tank sets for the Orbiter fuel cells was considered. For instance, with
only two tank sets, the power provided by PEP would allow a ϐlight time
of 6.5 to 12 days, as compared to just ϐive days granted by the baseline
complement of four tank sets.
Furthermore, the higher the inclination, the more pronounced the
gain in mission duration given the increased amount and exposure
time to sunlight. Leaving on the ground two tank sets meant a payload
gain above 3500 pounds. Other conϐigurations were reviewed, and
their performances were carefully quantiϐied and compared. It was
evident that PEP could expand the Orbiter’s ϐlight envelope either by
extending the mission duration to several weeks or by allowing heavier
ϐlights.
The PEP system would negligible impact mission turnaround
compared to the thirty-nine hours necessary to install each single
cryogenic tank set. The PEP hardware could be ϐitted anywhere in the
payload bay using the standard payload attachment points, and the
installation would be easy, quick and ϐlexible based on the payload
scheduled for the ϐlight. It would not come cheap, but the projected
forty-seven million US dollars for research and development would be
rapidly absorbed by future savings in Orbiter maintenance. The power
boost afforded by a PEP system meant the fuel cells would be exposed
to a considerably lower electric load demand, lessening wear and tear,
extending their useful life and shrinking the refurbishment costs. It
would also result in less waste heat dissipated by the Orbiter’s
radiators, improving their life and, once again, reducing the
maintenance burden.
By 1984, the PEP was to evolve and grow in capability as part of a
program denominated Orbital Service Module (OSM) system to serve
the needs of payloads requiring even greater amounts of power for
signiϐicant time. The PEP hardware would grow in size and complexity
to become a free-ϐlying autonomous “orbital solar panel farm” at which
an Orbiter could dock to draw power and drop payloads to be retrieved

by a later mission. Typical payloads that would beneϐit from such a
facility were manufacturing modules to process materials demanding
continuous access to power for periods beyond that afforded by a
Space Shuttle ϐlight. In a typical scenario, such payloads would be
dropped at the free-ϐlying platform and retrieved months later. The
crew could either bring the whole payload back to the ground or
retrieve the output and reload the processing facility with a fresh batch
of raw materials. Earth and solar observations would also effectively
beneϐit from an extended-duration mode.
Furthermore, based on its size and power-generating capability, an
OSM platform could serve multiple typologies of payloads
simultaneously and independently of the Orbiter. It would afford the
space agency’s Shuttle ϐleet to operate more frequently. Such large solar
farms would also procure attitude and control functions for standalone
payloads and a docked Space Shuttle. In this way, the prognosticated
139-million US dollar development cost for the OSM program would be
fully exploited and recovered.
A study undertaken by the astronautics division of McDonnel-
Douglas showed how the PEP development under the OSM program
would occur in increments starting with platforms generating 35 kW of
power up to 100 kW by increasing the number of solar panels and
radiators. Platforms generating more than 100 kW were to be called
Power Modules. The study considered three generic conϐigurations:
symmetric, asymmetric and gravity gradient. Common to all layouts
was a cluster of pallets containing a suite of subsystems for platform
functioning and berthing provisions for the Orbiter and payloads. For
the latter, the berthing ports included gimbals for experiment
orientation and attitude control and lines for receiving power from the
solar arrays and cooling ϐluid from the radiators.
A great deal of consideration was placed on the position and
orientation of the solar array panels and radiators with respect to each
other, the Orbiter and payloads. The main concern was preventing any
accidental contact with the payloads (as they would vary in shape and
size) and the Orbiter between the solar arrays and radiators
themselves, allowing for the greatest range of motion and degrees of
freedom. Equally essential was to assure the least amount of reciprocal
shadowing, which could affect power generation, observation

clearance for optical instruments, and radiator efϐiciency. Finally, the
spatial arrangement of the solar arrays and radiators and separation
from the Orbiter berthing port was to avoid any temporary retraction
to avoid plume impingement during arrival and departure (Fig. 2.7).
Figure 2.7 Conϐiguration alternatives for the growth of the PEP within the OSM program.
[Source: Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical
report (pdf), p. 98. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888]
The symmetric and gravity gradient layouts would tax the platform
attitude and orientation control system. The former allowed for a
centralized distribution of mass, minimizing the fuel to counteract
destabilizing perturbations. The gravity-gradient platform separated
the two main assemblies, solar arrays/radiators and
subsystems/payloads, to provide gravity-gradient-stabilized
orientation with respect to local vertical, primarily to enhance earth
viewing. The asymmetric layout would offer the best ϐield of view for
observing instruments and minimize stray light reϐlections as they
could be placed on the opposite side of the solar arrays/radiators

assembly. However, the asymmetric mass distribution would require
more propellant for attitude control. Any conϐiguration would have
been suitable for unpressurized and pressurized payloads.
Considerable thought was given to the position and distribution of
the radiators. Five options were analyzed as applicable to any
reference conϐiguration: perpendicular to the solar array; parallel to
the solar array; perpendicular to the solar array and with an offset;
perpendicular to the solar array and located on the array supporting
booms; directly on the payload pallets. Selection of the most suitable
option had to consider ease of stowing and folding within the envelope
of the Orbiter’s payload bay, overall radiating area, mass, number of
rotating joints, and drag. For instance, radiators perpendicular to the
solar array are easy to stow and deploy since they lie along with the
arrays and minimize the area and weight requirements. It also allows
for a free range of motion for the Orbiter’s robotic arm when moving
payloads. However, their proximity to the arrays results in incident
heat on the radiators, decreasing their efϐiciency. Radiators parallel to
the solar arrays are simpler to package, but the radiator area is
increased because the top side is exposed to full solar heat during the
orbit day. The stowage and deployment sequence for radiators placed
is complex, but there is negligible incident heat on the radiator. Finally,
locating the radiators on the OSM body could eliminate rotating ϐluid
joints. However, direct solar impingement can still occur for some
orientations.
The perpendicular-on-boom arrangement was selected as the most
promising, as shown in Figure 2.8 below. Having placed the radiators
on the solar array booms required that the cooling ϐluid of the thermal
control system be moved across at least one continuously rotating
gimbal. Since the concept’s success was based on this requirement, an
easily maintainable ϐluid rotating joint was developed. The complexity
of such a joint was compounded by the need to provide at least four
lines (inlet and outlet for redundant loops). The concept offered
pointing capability for multiple payloads, in arbitrary directions along
different coordinates axis. Fixed orientation ports were included. This
would be achieved by attaching a modular gimbal system to the ϐixed
berthing ports. In the provided representation, the earth-viewing
payload is located at the top of the core at the opposite end from the

Orbiter berthing interface structure. The payload uses a gimbal kit
capable of continuous 360-deg rotation for orbit rate adjustments and
a hinge with a ± 90-deg movement for beta angle adjustments. Material
processing and life science payloads could be located at any ϐixed port.
The stellar and solar payloads are in the lower portion of the core, and
each of them uses a gimbal kit that allows ± 180-deg rotation about one
axis and ± 90-deg hinge-type movement in the orthogonal direction. All
modular gimbal systems utilize a payload attachment interface
identical to the integrated ϐixed port on the OSM core. Additionally, the
interface of these gimbal systems that mate with the OSM was identical
to that used on all payloads. Hence, any payload could utilize any
gimbal system or be berthed directly to the OSM core (Figs. 2.9, 2.10
and 2.11).

Figure 2.8 Conϐiguration alternatives for radiator locations [Ch 02 Ref 001] p 21).
[Source: Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 1: Executive
summary (pdf), p. 21. Available: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007887]

Figure 2.9 Most promising OSM initial conϐiguration.
[Source: Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical
report (pdf), p. 154. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888]

Figure 2.10 Conϐiguration for the multi-orientation gimbal orientation.
[Source: Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical
report (pdf), p. 155. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888]

Figure 2.11 The structural conϐiguration of the core section for the OSM reference
conϐiguration.
[Source: Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical
report (pdf), p. 109. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888]
Figure 2.12 shows how the reference conϐiguration would be folded
and arranged in the payload bay. With the forward being to the left, the
module is arranged to place the main body and the installed equipment
towards the aft end of the Orbiter bay, for center of gravity control. The
array of structural boxes is pulled up against the main body without
pivoting. The radiator panels are accordion folded and supported
against each other tent-fashion over the module. As far as deployment
was concerned, it would start by removing the Power Module with the
Orbiter’s robotic arm. Then the Orbiter interface legs would be
unfolded to berth the Power Module over the payload bay forward
retention ϐittings. Next, the Orbiter interface umbilical on one of the
Power Module’s legs is engaged, and the Power Module systems are
checked. Then the radiator and array beam support restraints are
released, and the three-segment standoff booms are extended via a

cable system simultaneously, allowing the array beams to translate
without changing their orientation. Both radiator panels are mounted
on a common pivot trunnion on the same side of the end of the boom.
The outer panel lying along the boom is ϐirst rotated 180 degrees about
an axis parallel to the boom and then pivoted 90 degrees until normal
to the boom on the sun side of the array. It is then unfolded towards the
core body. The remaining radiator panel is pivoted 90 degrees until
normal to the boom and similarly unfolded on the dark side of the
array. The solar array blankets are then extended (Fig. 2.13).
Figure 2.12 Orbiter stowage of the OSM reference conϐiguration.[Source: Orbital service module
systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical report (pdf), p. 119. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888]

Figure 2.13 Orbiter stowage of the OSM reference conϐiguration.
[Source: Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical
report (pdf), p. 120. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888]
EVA-assisted deployment was also considered and could take place
at any time during the unfolding sequence. For instance, steps 1 and 2
were identical in one concept study, except for the equipment module
that would not contain booms, radiators, and array assemblies. The
EVA crewmembers would assist with manual latching operations and
aid the robotic arm operator. After the equipment module is mounted,
the boom segments are moved into place, aligned, and fastened. EVA-
assisted deployment continues with the installation of array boxes and
radiators. Several approaches were considered for deploying the
arrays, including assembling array booms, manual deployment, or
electro-mechanical deployment using a portable battery-powered
electric motor.
The 25 kW Power Module

The issue of swelling the Orbiter ϐlight envelope was also investigated
by the rival Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), in Huntsville,
Alabama, with a solution similar to JSC’s proposal called the 25 kW
Power Module (PM). The concept consisted of an orbital-based vehicle
that would provide 25 kW of electrical power3, attitude control and
heat rejection for the Orbiter and support longer missions. However,
unlike the PEP, the Power Module would be left in orbit. Thus, it could
become a free-ϐlying platform for autonomous payloads between
supporting Space Shuttle ϐlights.
In deϐining the reference design for the 25 kW Power Module, MSFC
drew extensively from the remaining hardware of the deceased Apollo
program, thus achieving low risk and cost. The design concept
comprised ϐive basic subsystems: structures, electrical power, attitude
control, thermal control, and communications and data handling. The
primary structure was based on the Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount
(ATM)4 connected to a tubular forward truss for mounting a single axis
gimballed solar array. It would also have two docking ports to afford
simultaneous coupling with an Orbiter in sortie mode (e.g., Spacelab
ϐlight) and an autonomous payload for free-ϐlying operations.
Umbilicals at each docking port would transfer electrical power,
coolant, commands and data. Docking and payload berthing would be
accomplished with the Orbiter robotic arm. Electric power would be
generated from the single-axis tracking array, pointed to the Sun using
sun sensors. Batteries would power the platform during the orbit night
side and would be recharged when in daylight. Refurbished and
upgraded ATM Control Moment Gyros (CMG) would manage the power
module attitude, aided by the Orbiter reaction control system when
necessary. The onboard computer would also monitor communications
and data handling (C&DH) functions via a data link with the TDRS
satellite constellation during free-ϐlying operations and umbilical when
docked to an Orbiter. Curved radiators similar to the Orbiter would
cater for thermal control needs. The curved proϐile would allow the
radiators to be folded against the module. In this way, they would
snugly ϐit within the Orbiter’s payload bay during launch and would
also reduce the length of the Power Module and preserve cargo bay
space for additional payloads for cost-effective deployment on the
delivery ϐlight of any given Power Module. Freon 21 coolant loops to

provide approximately 11 to 14 kW cooling capacity to payload and
module equipment. Whilst docket, the Orbiter would use its radiators
to dissipate the internally generated heat.
Such reference conϐiguration was to be operative by 1983. It was
designed to accommodate the needs of various payloads being
developed related to disciplines such as material processing in space,
solar terrestrial observatories, Earth observations, large space
structures, and construction platforms (Fig. 2.14).
Figure 2.14 The MSFC reference conϐiguration for the 25 kW Power Module.
[Source: The 25 kW power module evolution study. Part 2: Payload supports system evolution
(pdf), p. 25. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790009717]
However, a power module modelled as the reference concept would
only be useful for a short while. Estimates of payload needs and
capabilities beyond 1986 showed that they would grow more
demanding, requiring power between 36 to 64 kW. By 1990, such

demand would have grown to 200 kW for the levelling to some 400 kW
by the mid-nineties to support very large crewed clustered platforms.
Interestingly, heat rejection capability for the payloads was not
identiϐied as a strong driver for the Power Module, as it was assumed
that the individual payloads would come with their radiators.
Hence, the initial design reference conϐiguration for the 25 kW
Power Module was amended to the so-called recommended
conϐiguration to permit an open-ended modular growth to meet
advanced mission requirements and cost-effective incorporation of
new technology as it became available. Its primary structure was based
on the modular equipment section of the Large Space Telescope5,
resulting in low-cost, enhanced replicability and external EVA access
for maintenance and on-orbit system growth. It would include an
unpressurized berthing assembly with ϐive ports for ϐlexibility and
multiple payloads interface capability, a solar array support structure
with detachable folding solar arrays, and thermal radiators. The control
moment gyros would be housed within the same assembly to provide
easy external access for EVA maintenance and installation. The aft
section would include provisions for growth from three to six CMGs. A
semi-monocoque solar array support section would contain the
thermal subsystem components and room for mounting a forward-
facing solar pointing package (Fig. 2.15).

Figure 2.15 A comparison of the reference and recommended design for the 25 kW Power
Conϐiguration.
[Source: The kW power module evolution study: Executive summary (pdf), p. 31. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790012048]
To augment both payload and STS capabilities, thermal rejection
would be provided by ϐlat thermal radiators as more efϐicient than the
curved ones. The thermal rejection system includes equipment cold
plates, payload heat exchangers, and a dual pump and accumulator
package. In addition, improved meteoroid protection and dual ϐluid
loops increased reliability and extended the service life. Expansion of
the thermal subsystem would occur by additional radiator panels and
associated thermal control components installed in the solar array
support structure (Fig. 2.16).

Figure 2.16 The common modular design concept for growth of the 25 kW Power Module.
[Source: The kW power module evolution study: Executive summary (pdf), p. 33. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790012048]
The modular approach enabled the incorporation of advanced
technology as it became cost-effective and available. Additional solar
array modules (with improved technology) and support structure
extensions would allow growth to at least 100 kW (Fig. 2.17). The
growth capabilities could be added in subsequent or existing vehicles
with bespoke on-orbit modiϐications. In addition, the basic Power
Module design features would facilitate the replacement of internal and
external equipment units. Such features included the location of major
subsystem elements in the core structures for easy accessibility and
handrails and tethered equipment lifts at major access areas to assist
in EVA activities (Figs. 2.18).

Figure 2.17 Power Module EVA maintenance operations.
[Source: The kW power module evolution study: Executive summary (pdf), p. 38. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790012048]

Figure 2.18 The conϐiguration of the 100 kW Power Module.
[Source: The 25 kW power module evolution study. Part 3: Conceptual designs for power
module evolution. Volume 1: Power module evolution (pdf), p. 257. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790009718]
The expansion could also occur by pairing multiple power modules
or alternative conϐigurations. For instance, one concept for a 200/250
kW Power Module had the solar array wings attached to and folded
against support beams fastened by hinges to each end of a centre
beam. Both had a truss design and could be structurally separated
along the longitudinal centre line. Segments of a deployment boom, V
band clamps and a gimballing unit were stowed within the solar array
support booms. The folded panels of the thermal radiator system
would be stowed at the outer ends of the solar array support booms
(Fig. 2.19).

Figure 2.19 The launch conϐiguration for a prospective 200/250 kW Power Module [Source:
The 25 kW power module evolution study. Part 3: Conceptual designs for power module
evolution. Volume 1: Power module evolution (pdf), p. 297. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19790009718]
Once in orbit, the folded Power Module is removed from the
payload bay, and the solar array support booms are unfolded and
locked open. The upper and lower halves of the support booms and the
centre beam are separated, and the gimballing unit is installed between
them. The segments of the deployment boom are unstowed and joined
together by V Band Clamps to make one boom which is then connected
to the gimballing unit. The solar arrays and thermal radiator panels are
extended, and the system is now ready for connection to a payload and
operation (Figs. 2.20 and 2.21).

Figure 2.20 The unfolding sequence of the 200/250 kW Power Module.[Source: The 25 kW
power module evolution study. Part 3: Conceptual designs for power module evolution. Volume 1:
Power module evolution (pdf), p. 299. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790009718]

Figure 2.21 A 200/250 kW Power Module fully unfolded, with the solar arrays and thermal
radiators extended. A typical payload is attached by V Band Clamp to the free end of the
deployment boom and the system is ready for operation.
[Source: The 25 kW power module evolution study. Part 3: Conceptual designs for power
module evolution. Volume 1: Power module evolution (pdf), p. 301. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790009718]
The Science and Application Platform
At the intersection of the 1970s and 1980s, there was a clear
expectation that by the mid-1980s, low-earth orbit would be populated
with free-ϐlying platforms accommodating various science and
application payloads. Free-ϐlying platforms would be distinguished by
low-cost, ϐlexible adaptation to various payloads, optimizing payload
integration, and distributing resources among platform, power system,
payloads, and ground support.
Typical guests would be payloads sharing similar orbit altitude, and
inclination requirements; payloads whose budged would preclude
investments in dedicated free-ϐlyers; payloads requiring a long-

duration ϐlight in a more benign microgravity environment than that
afforded on the Space Shuttle; and payloads requiring periodic return
or on-orbit servicing. A free-ϐlying platform would provide a cost-
effective solution to the payloads community by the centralized
provision of resources; it would act as a “rental” facility for long- or
short-term users and would offer an exclusive orbital address for
Shuttle to support many payloads as opposed to the multiple
rendezvous prospects of separate spacecraft for payload.
Based on the above, in October 1980, the Astronautics Division of
the McDonnell Douglas Corporation published a report for the
conceptual design study for a Science and Application Space Platform
(SASP). Like many studies undertaken at this time, the SASP report was
mostly an account of possible platform conϐigurations based on what
was known about the upcoming Space Shuttle ϐlight manifest. In a
similar fashion to the PEP and 25 kW Power Modules, the SASP offered
modularity to accommodate changes in shape and size as the list of the
prospective payloads was being deϐined while ensuring growth for
future iterations of such apparatus.
The SASP would ϐirst appear in the so-called First Order
conϐiguration characterized by a Power Module, similar to the 25 kW
Power Module, and three appendages for payload berthing (Fig. 2.22).
The arms would be hinged to the Power Module with a joint designed
to rotate the arm along its longitudinal axis and perpendicular to it to
provide for custom pointing. Fine pointing, however, would be tuned by
the experiment’s pointing system. The SASP Second-Order
conϐiguration would include extensions and extra rotary joints to
accommodate larger payloads and improve pointing capabilities. For
both conϐigurations, shape and size were selected to prevent the
possibility of payload-to-payload physical contact and collision with
the solar arrays protruding off the Power Module. Both conϐigurations
were designed to be hauled into orbit in one ϐlight, folded inside the
voluminous Orbiter’s payload bay. Additional ϐlights would be required
to deliver the extension kits to the Second Order platform (Fig. 2.23).

Figure 2.22 The First Order conϐiguration of the McDonnell Douglas SASP. Note how the
payloads are oriented according to their viewing requirement.
[Source: Conceptual design study Science and Application Space Platform SASP. Volume 1:
Executive summary (pdf), p. 4. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810004564]

Figure 2.23 One of the several possible layouts of the Second Order conϐiguration SASP.
Extension kits provided longer arms and other rotary joints to accommodate payloads with
different pointing requirements on the same arm.
[Source: Conceptual design study Science and Application Space Platform SASP. Volume 1:
Executive summary (pdf), p. 4. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810004564]
The last decade of the 20th Century would witness the debut of the
Advanced Science and Application Space Platform, a true mammoth to
house signiϐicantly outsized payloads. This space-station like platform
would consist of a triangular central planar area and three structural
appendages attached to it via rotary joints to aid in positioning the
payloads and solar array wings. Both the central area and the
appendages would be the real estate surface for the assembly and
housing of overgrown apparatus such as the 100-m diameter
Atmospheric Gravity Wave Antenna (AGWA); a 100 meter by 100-
meter Particle Beam Injection Experiment (PBI); a 2-m diameter, 18-m
long Astrometric Telescope (AST/TEL); and a 15-m diameter, 35-m
long Large Ambient Deployable Infrared Telescope (IR/TEL). The

platform would also incorporate a robotic arm to deploy, assemble and
service the payloads and platform subsystems. A propulsion module
would provide station keeping and attitude control functions, and a
service module would support the power and communication needs of
the platform and its guests. A construction module would
accommodate the platform subsystem hardware and support EVA
activities. It would also provide the docking port for the Space Shuttle,
and it would be located as close to the platform’s centre of gravity to
minimize disruptions to attitude control. A minimum of four ϐlights
were manifested for assembling the platform, followed by at least twice
a year visits for payload servicing, changeout and refurbishment of the
propulsion module (Figs. 2.24 and 2.25).
Figure 2.24 The structural conϐiguration of the Advanced SASP.
[Source: Large space systems technology, 1980, volume 1 (pdf), p. 139. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810010637]

Figure 2.25 The Advanced SASP crowed with a few huge experiments and equipment. An
Orbiter is docked to the subsystem/construction module during a routine servicing visit.
[Source: Large space systems technology, 1980, volume 1 (pdf), p. 138. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810010637]
REFERENCES
NASA (1979) Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 1: Executive
summary. Available: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007887
NASA (1979) Orbital service module systems analysis study documentation. Volume 2: Technical
report. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790007888
NASA (1979) Power Extension Package (PEP) system deϐinition extension, orbital service module
systems analysis study. Volume 2: PEP. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790025067
NASA (1979) The 25 kW power module evolution study. Part 2: Payload supports system
evolution. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790009717
NASA (1979) The kW power module evolution study: Executive summary. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790012048

1
2
3
4
5
NASA (1979) The 25 kW power module evolution study. Part 3: Conceptual designs for power
module evolution. Volume 1: Power module evolution. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19790009718
NASA (1981) Conceptual design study Science and Application Space Platform SASP. Volume 1:
Executive summary. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810004564
NASA (1981) Large space systems technology, 1980, volume 1. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19810010637
Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments. – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
Spacelab was pressurized module to be carried within the Orbiter’s payload bay to expand on
the living and working space available to the crew. Platforms carrying external payloads not
requiring crew handling could be added as required. Spacelab was developed by the European
space industry under the supervision of the European Space Agency.
 
A slip ring is an electromechanical device that allows the transmission of power and electrical
signals from a stationary to a rotating structure.
 
Hence the denomination of 25 kW Power Module.
 
Skylab was the ϐirst space station orbited by NASA and it consisted in a Saturn V’s third stage
externally ϐitted with solar panels and radiators and internally with living and working quarters
for a crew of three. The ATM, was a structure derived from the lunar landers and consisted in boxy
structures, oriented at 90° to the longitudinal axis of Skylab, and provided the mounting support
and avionics for four solar telescopes.
 
Subsequently known with the more familiar name of Hubble Space Telescope.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_3
3. Boosting the Booster
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
An attempt to make the Space Shuttle safer
The Space Shuttle is, to date, the only human-rated spacecraft that did
not offer to its crew an escape system that would bring them to safety
in the case of a catastrophic emergency, such as those that doomed the
seven astronauts of Challenger in 1986 and Columbia in 2003. The
Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo capsule were equipped with hardware
dedicated to pulling the spacecraft as far as possible from an
impending disastrous explosion, be it on the launch pad or in ϐlight.
More speciϐically, the astronauts ϐlying on Mercury and Apollo trusted
their lives on solid rockets clustered on a truss on top of the capsule. In
the case of an emergency, they could be ϐired automatically by a
dedicated detection system or manually by the crew. The capsule
would be drawn away from the failing rocket for a safe splashdown in
the ocean. The escape launch tower would be automatically jettisoned
once the rocket had progressed into its ascent to a point where it
would no longer be capable of providing any meaningful assistance
because of altitude, speed, and downrange. Other abort modes were in
place to support the safe insertion into a lower orbit or ballistic reentry
from that moment onwards. The Gemini capsule instead relied on
ejection seats, such as those ϐitted on a military jet ϐighter, although
they could only guarantee the crew’s survival up to a certain altitude.
Once again, abort modes would take care of the crew should a
catastrophic emergency occur before reaching orbit. The venerable
Russian Soyuz capsules are equipped with a launch escape system that

assures crew survival from the launch pad to orbit1. Modern capsules
such as SpaceX’s Dragon v2, Boeing’s Starliner, and Blue Origin’s New
Shepard incorporate an emergency escape system and abort modes
throughout the whole ascent trajectory, from the launch pad to orbit.
Lacking a bespoke emergency escape system, the Space Shuttle
relied on so-called intact and contingency abort modes. The intact
abort modes were activated after SRB separation and consisted of four
possible outcomes, depending on the severity of the failure, altitude,
downrange, and velocity. In order of appearance, they were the Return
to Launch Site (RTLS), the Transoceanic Abort Landing (TAL), the Abort
to Orbit (ATO), and the Abort Once Around (AOA). RTLS was designed
to allow the vehicle to ϐly downrange to dissipate propellant and then
turn around in powered ϐlight to return and land on the runway near
the launch site. TAL would have allowed the vehicle to achieve a
suborbital trajectory to enable the Orbiter to land on a runway in
Europe or Africa, depending on vehicle performance and orbital
inclination2. Declaration of an ATO would park the Orbiter in a
temporary orbit at a lower altitude than scheduled. The crew would
have had enough time to evaluate the anomaly that had prompted the
abort call and choose to return home or continue with the mission by
raising the orbit as much as possible using the engines of the orbiting
manoeuvring system. Finally, the AOA was designed for when it was
impossible to maintain the orbit and use the remaining performance to
make one revolution of the globe and land.
One of the factors taken into consideration in choosing the most
appropriate abort mode was the Orbiter’s so-called “performance
capability”, deϐined as the ability to achieve the desired orbit. If the
performance was better than predicted, then Main Engine Cut Off
(MECO) could be attained with a surplus of propellant. However, if the
vehicle were not performing as well as predicted, it would not attain
the desired velocity at MECO. The most probable cause of a MECO
underspeed was a main engine failure. For underspeeds of several
hundred feet per second, the situation could be recovered by additional
burns of the OMS engines. If the underspeed were too large to
compensate using excess OMS propellant, the Orbiter would not reach
the desired orbit, and thus, either an AOA or ATO was to be called. An

early engine failure in the ascent would end either in RTLS or TAL
abort3 (Figs. 3.1 and 3.2).
RTLS, TAL, ATO, and AOA were called intact abort modes because
their trajectory proϐile ensured Orbiter’s survival enabling the crew to
safely land4. However, they could only be initiated after SRB separation
and on condition that three main engines were working at full
performance as intended up to that point. Engine shutdown(s) or
underperforming engines before SRB separation would have provided
the clue for initiating one of the available contingency abort modes
designed to assure crew survival rather than guaranteeing that the
Orbiter could halt the ascent and land safely. As a result, several
contingency abort procedures were developed to enable the vehicle to
achieve a safe gliding condition due to the number of possible multiple
failures that could occur during ascent. Depending on the failure and
remaining gliding performance, the crew had the option of either
reaching a runway on any designated emergency landing sites on the
US East Coast and Canada or bailing out, leaving the Orbiter to ditch in
the ocean.
It should be noted that while the intact abort mode scenarios were
well deϐined and extensively rehearsed in training, the many unknowns
involved in the contingency abort modes meant that the applicability
of these procedures was debatable. The crews widely believed that the
contingency aborts had been added merely to suggest to the public that
a crew would have a means of saving their skins from even the most
absurd failure scenarios. For many, if not all of the astronauts, a
contingency abort would have been unsurvivable.

Figure 3.1 The aerobatic ϐlight proϐile of the RTLS abort mode.
[Source: Intact Ascent Aborts Workbook (pdf), p. 64. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ 
centers/ johnson/ pdf/ 383447main_ intact_ ascent_ aborts_ workbook_ 21002. pdf]
By their very nature, solid-propellant rockets are conceptually
simple as they consist of a pressure vessel (or casing) holding a large
mass of propellant in solid form. The propellant, also called the grain, is
hollowed with a cross-section that can vary along the booster’s length
to offer some form of self-trust throttling, delivering the maximum
thrust required for lift-off but reducing it subsequently to prevent
overstressing of the vehicle during the period of maximum
aerodynamic pressure. At lift-off, an igniter placed at the top of the
booster spreads a ϐlame over the exposed surface of the grain to
initiate combustion. The resulting hot pressurized gas is passed
through the nozzle to generate thrust. The grain is consumed by a
burning surface that “moves back” at a given regression (combustion)
rate determined by the propellant composition, temperature, pressure
in the chamber and velocity of the gas in the casing. With no valves to
regulate the ϐlow of propellants, a solid rocket cannot terminate
thrusting until the whole propellant has been burned. The Space
Shuttle’s SRBs were required to develop a thrust of 1.9 million pounds
at lift-off, and once the countdown clock had reached zero, they had to

ignite instantaneously and within 0.15 to 0.45 seconds from each other.
In 135 missions, the SRBs never failed to ignite.
Figure 3.2 The ϐlight proϐile of the TAL abort mode.
[Source: Space Shuttle Abort Evolution (pdf), p. 6. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 20110015564]
Regardless of the type and severity of the failure, both the intact
and contingency abort modes could be invoked only after SRB
separation. It had been determined that separation whilst still
thrusting would result in an imbalance of structural loading that would
destroy the Orbiter and External Tank5. Also, there was the distinctive
possibility of the boosters colliding with the External Tank or Orbiter.
Also, if one SRB had failed to ignite, it would have led to the immediate
destruction of the Orbiter. To summarize, had any failure occurred to
the SRBs within the ϐirst two minutes of the ascent, the Orbiter and its
occupants would not have the slightest chance of survival. Indeed, this
happened to Challenger on January 26, 1986, when it disintegrated
some 72 seconds after lift-off.
In the weeks and months that followed the accident, an
investigation board determined that escaping hot gases from one of
the structural joints in the right booster had burned through the

adjacent hydrogen tank triggering a rapid sequence of events that led
to the destruction of the Orbiter. Two and half years passed before
spaceϐlight operation would resume, with Discovery launching the STS-
26 mission on September 29, 1988. The SRBs had undergone a
signiϐicant redesign to prevent any other catastrophic failure ever
again6.
Despite the new design, the SRB remained a liability for the overall
safety of a Space Shuttle crew. No safe abort mode could exist until the
boosters had been jettisoned7. Furthermore, had a booster failed
during launch or ascent, the crew still had no escape. At the heart of the
problem was that a booster could not be shut off on command, like in
the case of a liquid propellant-based rocket. Another drawback is that
solid rocket boosters cannot be tested before launch. By comparison, a
liquid rocket booster allows checking of the main engine(s) prior to
lift-off to detect any anomaly; it can be ϐired post-assembly and a
static-ϐired at the launch pad to ensure nominal performance8.
A liquid propellant-based booster would also remove the so-called
“thrust bucket”, the throttling down of the main engines as the Shuttle
approached Max-q to maintain the aerodynamic loads within the
established structural limits. We must recall that the performance of a
solid rocket motor is speciϐied with reference to a nominal
temperature of the grain, which often is not that of the ambient
temperature at the time of launch. This would cause an increase in
thrust if the ambient temperature is higher than normal (a situation
dubbed “hot”) and a decrease if it is cooler (dubbed “cold”). During
ascent, the ϐirst stage guidance algorithm compared the time at which
a predetermined velocity would be reached in a nominal situation
(neither “hot” nor “cold” SRBs) with the actual time that this velocity
was reached. If it occurred early, then it was a “hot SRB” situation, and
the main engines were commanded to throttle back considerably to
decrease the acceleration rate and prevent exceeding the structural
loads at Max-q. If the reference velocity was achieved late, it was a “cold
SRB” situation, and the main engines would be throttled back less
severely. Depending on the mission constraints, the main engines were
throttled down to a value 65 to 74 per cent of lift-off thrust. Such a
manoeuvre was named “thrust bucket” because of the shape of the line
when the throttle commands were plotted as a function of velocity. Past

Max-q, the main engines were throttled max thrust and would maintain
such setting until a handful of seconds prior to main engine cutoff
(MECO)9. The thrust bucket would not be needed with liquid boosters,
allowing the main engines to operate at a constant thrust level and
removing an engine critical failure mode10.
Another positive feature of the liquid boosters was having an active
Vehicle Health Monitoring (VHM) system to evaluate critical
subsystems and structure conditions from lift-off through separation
and return to the launch site. By assessing any aberration in the
functioning of the booster main engines, the VHM could signal any or
all the booster engines to shut down, providing for a benign propulsion
system degradation reducing the likelihood of a catastrophic
unrecoverable failure. Also, it was envisaged that nominally the
boosters would operate at some 75% of their full thrust capability,
affording a considerable performance margin. Had a booster engine
failed, the remaining engines could be throttled up to 100%, facilitating
an intact abort and possibly even removing the call for an RTLS and TAL
abort, replaced by an ATO or AOA called at a much earlier time. The
same would occur in the case of an Orbiter main engine failure. In other
words, liquid rocket boosters would greatly improve the chance of
recovering the crew and the Orbiter and even enable a successful
mission in the case of a propulsion failure.
From a performance point of view, it was envisioned that the
Orbiter would haul an extra 15,000 pounds of payload to a space
station’s elliptical orbit with liquid boosters. Because each SRB
segment was delivered already ϐilled with propellant, liquid propellant
boosters removed the potential for catastrophic energy release during
segment transportation, handling, and stacking. Furthermore, liquid
boosters would arrive fully constructed, eliminating the time-
consuming task of booster assembly and reducing the overall
processing time for the next mission by some twenty days.
Additionally, low temperatures would not as severely affect a liquid
booster as was the case with the SRBs. Hence, NASA could increase the
ϐlight rate and relax launch window constraints based on ambient
temperature11.
In October 1987, NASA/MSFC awarded Martin Marietta Space
Systems and General Dynamics Space System a contract to study the

feasibility of replacing the SRBs with Liquid Rocket Boosters (LRB).
Three major goals were identiϐied to guide booster design and
operations: 1) increased STS safety and reliability; 2) minimum
modiϐications required to the Orbiter, External Tank and ground
processing facilities; 3) increased STS performance for delivering up to
70,500 lbs. of payload to a 160 nautical mile orbit at 28.5° inclination.
This Phase A concept study ended in January 1989.
It was not the ϐirst time a liquid propellant-based booster was
pitched for the Space Shuttle. The early proposals for the Space
Transportation System called for a fully reusable two-stage
combination of Booster and Orbiter (Figs. 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5). Following
ϐirst-stage separation, the Orbiter would continue to orbit, while the
Booster’s crew would deploy a combination of jet engines to return to
base. Because of the fully-reusability requirement, such early
conϐigurations did not envision an External Tank. Rather both the
Orbiter and Booster would carry their full complement of liquid
hydrogen and oxygen propellant. Any image of a Space Shuttle on the
launch pad offers a straightforward overview of the sheer size of the
External Tank, and thus it becomes almost natural to conclude that if
the early conϐiguration for the Space Shuttle had ever become a reality,
it would have made for a truly gargantuan ϐlying machine. Both the
Orbiter and Booster would have reached the size of a widebody
aircraft, such as the Boeing B747 or Airbus A38012. Furthermore, they
would have been launched vertically on an equally colossal launch pad.
The technical hurdles involving the rocket-powered ϐlight of such as
combination would have resulted in a ludicrous proposition.

Figure 3.3 An early Orbiter conϐiguration proposed by Grumman for a full-reusable Space
Transportation System
[Source: Proposal to Accomplish Phase B Space Shuttle Program (pdf), p. 81. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 20160012503]
Figure 3.4 Two early booster conϐigurations proposed by Grumman for a full-reusable Space
Transportation System.

[Source: Proposal to Accomplish Phase B Space Shuttle Program (pdf), p. 82. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 20160012503]
Figure 3.5 A fully two-stage reusable Space Transportation System as envisioned by Grumman.
The Orbiter and Booster have just separated. The former continues to orbit, the latter returns to
the launch complex
[Source: Proposal to Accomplish Phase B Space Shuttle Program (pdf), p. 7. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 20160012503]
As both Martin Marietta and General Dynamics had to comply with
the same set of requirements and work within the same constraints
imposed by the Orbiter, the External Tank and assembly facilities at the
Kennedy Space Center, it is not surprising that both ϐirms offered
similar conϐigurations, yet different on several key characteristics.
The Liquid Rocket Boosters (LRB)
For instance, both companies studied the feasibility of a pressure-fed
and pump-fed booster. The pump-fed case exploits an appropriate

arrangement of turbopumps and burners13 to pressurize the propellant
before injecting it into the engine’s combustion chamber. The
propellant is stored in tanks whose structure is light as the propellants
are only slightly pressurized to allow a smooth ϐlow through the feed
lines and prevent cavitation of the pumps. Turbopumps can pressurize
the propellants to incredibly high values. For instance, in the case of the
Space Shuttle main engines, the liquid hydrogen and oxygen pressure
were raised over 6,500 psi and 4,300 psi, respectively. The higher the
propellant pressure, the higher the pressure of gas generated in the
combustion chamber and thus the higher the thrust. For this reason,
pump-fed engines are the norm for a high performing and efϐicient
rocket. The downside is the complexity of dealing with
turbomachinery, often operating at the limits of material mechanical
properties, especially with propellants at cryogenic temperatures.
On the other hand, in the pressure-fed case, the tanks are
pressurized so that the propellants can ϐlow to the engine’s combustion
chamber without the assistance of turbopumps. Typically, gaseous
helium is employed as a pressurant. It is an ideal choice. Because it is
chemically inert, it does not react with the propellant, so its chemical
composition is left unaltered. Such a conϐiguration simpliϐies the
engine pipework but has the drawback that the tank’s structure must
be reinforced to cope with pressure levels considerably higher than
that experienced in a pump-fed rocket. A heavier structure translates
into a reduction in performance. Therefore, to prevent an excessive
structural mass penalty, the tanks cannot be pressurized at high values,
and thus pressure-fed engines are considerably inferior if compared to
pump-fed engines. Given their simplicity, pressure-fed boosters are
often dubbed as “big dumb boosters”.
Based on a careful comparison of the two options, both Martin
Marietta e General Dynamics rapidly discarded the pressure-fed
conϐiguration based on two major drawbacks. Firstly, the liquid helium
was stored in large insulated tanks, and then it would be heated and
pressure regulated before being fed to the propellant tanks. It was
estimated that such apparatus would weigh approximately 25–30,000
lbs per booster and require considerable development before being
viable for a ϐlight application. Additionally, a failure of the
pressurization system would cause a total loss of thrust on one booster

and possibly the whole vehicle. The second area of concern was the
fabrication of the propellant tanks. To provide an adequate thrust level,
they would have to be large and heavy, with welds from one to two
inches thick, depending on the material selected for the tank. The
aerospace industry had no experience dealing with such thick welds
and with the veriϐication of the quality process required to prove their
integrity. Hence, both Martin Marietta and General Dynamics elected to
discard any pressure-fed booster and concentrated their efforts on the
pump-fed conϐiguration.
The selection of how many engines each booster should be
equipped with was the subject of a trade-off analysis between
conϐigurations with two, four, and six engines. Two engines would
provide a minimum of redundancy but at the cost of demanding a
larger thrust, throttling capability, and wider gimballing range.
Furthermore, an engine failure would result in a large loss of thrust on
that booster. On the other hand, six engines would afford a much-
reduced loss of thrust in case one engine shut down but at the expense
of a higher probability of failure, the additional complexity in the
propellant plumbing and lengthier ground checks. Therefore, both
ϐirms baselined their booster concepts with four main engines as the
best compromise between reliability, controllability, and throttling
range. In addition, the engines were sized to meet stringent
performance requirements, such as allowing the Orbiter to complete
an ATO abort with one booster out and clear the launch tower in the
case of a booster not igniting at lift-off.
Inevitably, the adoption of liquid propellants implicated that the
new boosters would be larger than their solid counterparts. This was
due to differences in density and chemical energy stored within a
liquid propellant compared to the solid mixture of ammonium
perchlorate, atomized aluminum powder, iron oxide, binder, and epoxy
curing agent ϐilling the SRBs. This is where the two aerospace ϐirms
diverged.
Martin Marietta initially considered monopropellant hydrazine as
fuel and nitrogen tetroxide as an oxidizer. This combination of so-
called storable hypergolic propellants exhibits two noteworthy
properties: being preserved in liquid form at room temperature
(storable) and igniting spontaneously upon contact (hypergolic)14. The

use of hypergolic propellants was a well-understood affair, and in fact,
the Orbiter itself exploited the very same combination for the two
engines of the Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS). Located on shoulder
pods just above the cluster of the three main engines and either side of
the vertical ϐin, the engines were ϐired to perform large changes in
orbital parameters, such as when chasing the International Space
Station or to slow-down the Orbiter and commence reentry. Space
Shuttle aside, NASA and industry already had a multi-decade long
experience in dealing with these propellants, as they brought about a
simpliϐication in the building of the rocket and complexity of its
engines. For instance, being storable at room temperature negates the
need for thermal insulation to prevent boil-off when on the launch pad.
On the other hand, oxygen and hydrogen can only be stored in
liquid form when cooled at a temperature close to absolute zero. Thus,
such tanks require thick insulation to prevent the outside
environment’s warmth from transferring to the propellants15. Removal
of insulation results in a lighter structure, enhancing the rocket’s
payload mass or orbital altitude. Furthermore, as hypergolic
propellants commence combustion spontaneously on contact, they do
not necessitate an ignition system, as is the case for other
combinations of propellants. This translates into a simpler, reliable and
lighter engine.
Furthermore, in the case of the Space Shuttle’s LRB, using
hypergolic propellants would have resulted in boosters only slightly
larger than the existing ones, minimizing possible structural
modiϐications at the attachments with the External Tank. Regrettably,
despite these unquestionable beneϐits, hypergolic are characterized by
several drawbacks, such as extreme toxicity and corrosiveness, that
complicate their handling, requiring expensive safety precautions to be
undertaken by ground staff. In the end, Martin Marietta settled on a
combination of liquid oxygen and Rocket Propellant-1, or RP-116. The
latter is a highly reϐined form of kerosene, similar to jet fuel. RP-1 has a
lower speciϐic impulse than liquid hydrogen but is cheaper, stable at
room temperature, far less explosion hazard, and denser. LOX/RP-1 is a
common propellant combination widely adopted for a rocket’s ϐirst
stage, such as those on the Saturn V and SpaceX’s Falcon 9. It is an
excellent compromise regarding speciϐic impulse, density, safety and

environmental hazards. Martin Marietta’s preference for these
propellants stemmed from an already proven track record within NASA
and the industry for this type of technology. Hence its selection would
appreciably lower the cost and risk associated with the development
and operations of the new boosters.
General Dynamic instead opted for liquid oxygen and hydrogen,
having elected to ease the integration of the new booster within the
existing launch infrastructure and ground operations. As the launch
pad was already rigged for delivering these propellants into the
External Tank, the same pipework could be marginally modiϐied to feed
the LRB. Furthermore, liquid oxygen and hydrogen-fed engines
produce only water vapour as a by-product, thus making this type of
rocket environmentally friendly. The only catch was that such a
combination would force the design of a considerably larger booster
compared to the hypergolics or liquid oxygen/RP-1 counterparts.
General Dynamics conceded the drawback but keenly showed that
using liquid oxygen and hydrogen would result in a lightweight
structure, courtesy of hydrogen being the lighter element of the
periodic table.
When it came to optimizing the booster’s size, crucial restrictions
on length and diameter were imposed due to aerodynamic interactions
with the External Tank and the Orbiter, structural loads, and physical
boundaries of the launch pad. Both aerospace ϐirms already
appreciated that any LRB design would exceed the 12-foot diameter of
the solid rocket boosters. Irrespective of the propellant choice, liquid
propellants are considerably less dense than solid grain. Wind tunnel
testing informed that a diameter between 14 and 16 feet would
prevent unacceptable loads to the Orbiter wing resulting from
aerodynamic interactions with the shock waves of the boosters,
especially when experiencing maximum dynamic pressure17.
Additional testing led to enlarging the boosters to 18 feet, provided
that no protuberance existed on the outer surface. This meant that the
booster’s aft attachment point to the External Tank would need
redesigning. However, smaller diameters were preferred as an 18-foot
diameter booster would bring about reduced ϐlexibility in ascent
trajectory shaping and reduced safety margins. Both conditions would
limit payload and orbital parameters.

Additional restrictions on booster diameter derived from keeping
the engine plumes within the limitation of the launch pad ϐlame trench-
deϐlector system. Generally speaking, the ϐlame trench is a large pit dug
underneath the launch platform that guides the rocket engines’ exhaust
gases away from the pad and prevents them from ricocheting and
damaging the departing rocket and launch pad structure. In the case of
the Space Shuttle launch pads, the ϐlame trench was built with concrete
and refractory bricks. It included an inverted V-shaped steel structure
covered with high-temperature concrete material ϐive inches thick that
extended across the centre of the trench. One side of the “V” received
and deϐlected the ϐlames streaming from the Orbiter’s main engines;
the opposite side deϐlected the ϐlames from the boosters. There were
also two movable deϐlectors at the top of the trench to provide
additional protection to shuttle hardware from the SRB’s ϐlames (Fig.
3.6).
The LRBs having a larger diameter would have produced a wider
plume which still had to be contained within the existing ϐlame trench.
Another restriction to the booster diameter concerned the door
clearance at the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB). When built, the VAB
was the largest building as it was designed to assemble the Saturn V. Up
to four of the mighty rockets could be put together simultaneously,
each on its dedicated bay. Each bay had a large vertical door to allow
the full stack of a Saturn V or Space Shuttle mounted on the mobile
launch platform to exit the building. The door was a collection of
several panels. In sizing the LRBs, the VAB bay doors’ width also had to
be considered to avoid erosion of the minimum distance requirements
between the Space Shuttle stack and the building (Fig. 3.7).
As far as booster length was concerned, aerodynamic and
aerothermal effects allowed a range between 175 and 185 feet.
However, limiting the length to 170 feet was recommended to avoid
interfering with the External Tank gaseous oxygen vent arm18. The
vehicles were divided into six major structural assemblies: nose cone,
forward skirt, liquid oxygen tank, intertank, fuel tank (RP-1 for Martin
Marietta, liquid hydrogen for General Dynamics), and aft skirt/thrust
structure. All assemblies were fabricated in aluminum alloy,
monocoque fashion, and were sized to minimize booster bending
deϐlection while the stack was still held down with the main engine

ϐiring. Because the Orbiter was mounted on the side of the External
Tank, rather than on top like in “more conventional” rocket
conϐiguration, during the main engines’ start-up, the whole stack
acquired a swinging motion (called “twang”). This is easy to identify
when watching footage of a Space Shuttle launch.
Figure 3.6 An overview of the Space Shuttle launch pad ϐlame trench deϐlector system.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-KSC-2011-6088]
The twang resulted from the whole stack being pinned to the launch
platform through four massive bolts common to each booster, while
the main engines began their start-up sequence and rapidly increased
their thrust reaching 100% three seconds before lift-off. The SRBs had
to be stiff enough to limit such bending while allowing the stack to
return to the exact vertical at the precise instant the countdown
marked zero, and the SRB ignited. The LRBs, therefore, were sized and
designed to replicate this same very behaviour. It is interesting to note
how the oxygen tank was located at the forward end of the booster,
hence in proximity to the External Tank’s oxygen tank. In this way,
differences in tank shrinkage during fueling were minimized as both

tanks would be ϐilled with the same propellant at the same
temperature19. Of course, the same would occur during liquid hydrogen
loading on both the ET and the aft tank of the General Dynamic’s LRB.
Figure 3.7 A Space Shuttle leaving the VAB headed to the launch pad. It can be appreciated how
the width of the door imposed a constraint on the allowed diameter for the LRBs.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-01pp0179]
Although the early concepts for the Space Transportation System
involved a fully reusable two-stage vehicle, NASA had not imposed such
a requirement, and thus Martin Marietta and General Dynamics were at
liberty to propose either a reusable or expendable booster. Both ϐirms
conducted their reviews, which showed a possible cost advantage for
the recoverable case. However, such analyses depended on the
assumptions used and the cost sensitivity to such parameters as water
impact damage, ϐlight rate, engine cost, and saltwater compatibility. In
addition, other considerations were made, such as how many times the
main booster engines could be reused; the assumed recovery
reliability; the additional complexity of designing and manufacturing a
component for extended man-rated life vs one ϐlight; the cost of losing

a booster when there was still operational life left in its engines; the
cost of refurbishing an item (booster and/or engines); and the cost of
recovering the boosters at sea.
Both companies reached the same conclusion: there were too many
uncertainties in computing the real cost advantage (if any) that a
reusable conϐiguration would exhibit to support such an option
wholeheartedly. It was also assumed that by increasing the ϐlight rate
and possibly adopting the same LRBs on future Space Shuttle
replacements, manufacturing the booster main engines and booster
itself would drop, negating any cost-saving beneϐit arising with a
reusable conϐiguration. Bottom line, both ϐirms baselined an
expendable booster (Fig. 3.8). However, they conceded that technology
advancements might allow a revisit of the reusable alternative, and in
their ϐinal report, they proposed possible ways to recover a booster.
One of these was a so-called propulsion/avionics recoverable module.
It consisted of a module holding the booster’s engines and avionics
that would detach and parachute in the ocean. The module would
provide a lift-to-drag ratio adequate for aerodynamic trim and static
stability for safe reentry and splashdown at approximately 25
feet/second (Figs. 3.9 and 3.10).

Figure 3.8 The structural conϐiguration of the Martin Marietta’s pump-fed LRB.
[Source: Giuseppe DeChiara]
Figure 3.9 The structural conϐiguration of the General Dynamics pump-fed LRB.
[Source: Liquid rocket booster study. Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 26. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19900000821]

Figure 3.10 A possible conϐiguration for a recoverable propulsion/avionics module studied by
Martin Marietta. Martin Marietta baselined ϐive Space Shuttle Main Engines for a booster pump-fed
with liquid oxygen and hydrogen.

[Source: Liquid Rocket Booster (LRB) for the Space Transportation System (STS) systems
study. Volume 2: Addendum 1 (pdf), p. 52. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19910013053]
Liquid Fly Back Booster: The Pre-Phase A Study
The concept of a liquid rocket booster to replace the SRBs received a
fresh dose of attention in 1993 when the US Congress mandated as part
of the NASA appropriation bill that “in view of budged difϐiculties,
present and future…the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration shall…recommend improvements in space
transportation”. In response, NASA undertook the so-called “Access to
Space” study. The study was to identify the best vehicles and
transportation architectures to introduce major reductions in the cost
of space transportation (at least 50 per cent) while at the same time
increasing safety for ϐlight crews by at least an order of magnitude. In
addition, vehicle reliability was to exceed 0.98 per cent, and pad time,
turnaround time, and other aspects of operability were to be vastly
improved.
This study examined three optional architectures: (1) retain and
upgrade the Space Shuttle and expendable launch vehicles, (2) develop
new expendable vehicles using conventional technologies and
transition from current vehicles beginning in 2005, and (3) develop
new reusable vehicles using advanced technology, and transition from
current vehicles beginning in 2008. The mission model utilized for the
study was based upon projections of civil, defence, and commercial
mission payload requirements. As part of the conclusions advanced for
the “retain and upgrade” architectural option, the development of
reusable liquid ϐlyback boosters (LFBB) was proposed. The study
indicated that the concepts appeared attractive, such as having a
signiϐicantly lower theoretical minimum cost per ϐlight than the SRBs,
engine shutdown capability, synergy with Orbiter systems, and
enhanced performances. However, it admitted that the concept
deϐinition was insufϐicient to evaluate its merits properly and that
additional work beyond the Access to Space study was required.
It became the subject of a bespoke two-volume “Liquid Fly Back
Booster Pre-Phase A Study Assessment” engineering investigation
undertaken jointly by the Johnson Space Center (JSC), the Kennedy

Space Center (KSC), and the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). JSC
was responsible for study direction, requirements, initial booster
sizing, integrated vehicle ascent performance, entry and landing
system design and performance, and costing. KSC was responsible for
the maintainability and operability of the vehicle concept, ground
operations processing timelines, modiϐications and integration to the
vehicle assembly building (VAB), mobile launch platform (MLP), launch
pad, and facilities. KSC was also responsible for determining the
timeline to transition to the LFBBs. MSFC supplied analyses and
expertise on main engine selection, engine performance
characteristics, detailed propulsion system design, and potential
modiϐications to the ET. They also played an active role in determining
the test and veriϐication requirements required in LFBB development.
Based on the aerodynamic testing that MSFC had carried out for the
Liquid Rocket Booster studies, a design geometry of 16 feet in
diameter and 150 feet in length was selected as the reference LRBB. As
the booster was meant to ϐly back to the launch site autonomously, a
key conϐiguration decision concerned the location and orientation of a
wing system based on a combination of physical constraints (ground
facilities and Shuttle integration) and performance factors. Four wing
conϐigurations were proposed: ϐixed-wing, swing-wing, ϐlexibly
deployable wing, and rigid deployable wing. Because of its structural
simplicity, every possible effort was made to develop a feasible ϐixed-
wing (Fig. 3.11).

Figure 3.11 LFBB wing options.
[Source: Liquid Flyback Booster Pre-Phase A Study Assessment (pdf), p. 53 Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19960054312]
The most suitable ϐixed-wing conϐiguration called for the wings to
be located at the aft end of the booster and oriented perpendicular to
the Orbiter’s wings. It was soon realized that the presence of the
Orbiter and the surrounding structure of the launch pad would impose
severe constraints on wind chord, span, and axial location. For
instance, when the booster wing would pass under the Orbiter wings,
the chord was limited to approximately 20 feet to prevent hitting the
Orbiter’s wing elevons and the mobile launch platform deck. The wing
position was rotated around the longitudinal axis of the booster, but in
doing so, launch tower clearances came into play which forced a
reduction in wing length. A reduction in wingspan increased the wing
chord; otherwise, the wing would not produce the required lift. Again,

lengthening the wing chord increased the expected interference effects
with the Orbiter wing. Positioning the wing parallel to the Orbiter’s
wing proved not feasible as the wingspan would be severely limited by
the proximity of the launch tower structure, by the centerline distance
between the two boosters (approximately 46 feet) and the External
Tank, which would constrain the wing dihedral. It resulted in a low-
aspect-ratio wing with a large root chord that would raise aerodynamic
interference concerns with the External Tank during ascent. Finally,
because the wings must be located at the extreme aft end of the
booster, large canard stabilizers at the forward end would be required
for pitching moment control, even with an aft centre of gravity
conϐiguration.
The swing design was considered a viable alternative as it could
operate effectively both in the supersonic and subsonic regimes, and it
was a known conϐiguration already adopted, for the same reasons, on
aircraft such as the Boeing B-1 and Grumman F-14 Tomcat. However, it
was soon discarded as early estimates placed the booster centre of
gravity at 70% to 75% of body length, hence far too aft for an effective
swing-wing design. Flexible, deployable wings, such as parafoils and
parawings, offered superior packaging ϐlexibility and improved Shuttle
ascent aerodynamics relative to rigid wing concepts. However, this
option was also eliminated due to the complex control system for
steering and the high technical risk that such an unproven system
would bring for the soft landing of a massive aerospace vehicle.
Next, deployable wing conϐigurations were examined. A deployable
wing has several advantages over a ϐixed-wing for a recoverable
booster. For instance, stowing the wing along the booster fuselage
allows for a clean ascent mold line, which greatly simpliϐies the launch
vehicle’s integrated ascent aerodynamics and reduces the loads that
would otherwise be generated from the exposed wings during ascent.
This was particularly convenient as there were concerns that excessive
loads might be transferred from the LFBB to the External Tank due to
wind gusts and non-symmetric airϐlow over the wings during ascent.
Hence, LFBB with deployable wings would offer a much-improved
launch probability and greater performance margins (e.g., higher
allowable maximum dynamic pressure) than a comparable ϐixed-wing
booster. Finally, a deployable wing would afford to package efϐiciently

and ϐlexibly, reducing the resources required to adapt existing ground
processing and launch infrastructures to the LFBB.
Deployable wings concepts considered for the LFBB included folded
wings, ring wings, oblique wings and scissors wings. Folded wings have
a hinge line along the wing chord to enable the wing to unfold from a
stowed to a deployed position. Ring wings are a subset of the folded
wing concept in which the wing is wrapped around the vehicle fuselage
in the stowed conϐiguration. Ring wings offer the best packaging
characteristics of the rigid deployable wing class but are not
appropriate for high-lift, high angle-of-attack applications. The oblique
wing concept, a one-piece wing that pivots about a central axis normal
to the wing planform, would enable alignment with the LFBB fuselage
during ascent to minimize aerodynamic interference. However, it was
found not applicable to the baselined LFBB as the aft centre-of-gravity
location of the vehicle severely limited the allowable wingspan. The
eventual choice was that of a scissor wing concept, a version of the
oblique wing concept in which the wing is split into two sections, both
pivoted forward when stowed. It offered the same beneϐit of an oblique
wing in which it provided for a clean aerodynamic launch
conϐiguration, with a small penalty in terms of complexity and weight
(Fig. 3.12).
The desire for a moderate LFBB landing speed added a canard or
tail for pitch control. In fact, to lower the landing speed, an aircraft
must increase the angle of attack, that is, the angle between the airϐlow
and the wing chord. The higher the angle of attack, the lower the
landing speed making it a safer landing20. Because of the aft LFBB
center-of-gravity location during ϐlyback and landing, canards were
strongly favored as opposed to an aft horizontal stabilizer. In fact,
because the size of a control aerosurface is inversely related to the
distance to the center of gravity, a horizontal stabilizer located at the
forward end (canard conϐiguration) would result in a smaller
aerosurface compared to an aft horizontal stabilizer closer to the
center of gravity. Furthermore, a large horizontal tail would have
interfered with the existing Shuttle vehicle geometry, the launch
platform, and the tower. To avoid detrimental effects to the ascent
aerodynamics caused by protrusions ahead of the Orbiter, the canards

would be stowed on top of the booster fuselage and then deployed at
low supersonic speeds to minimize the effects of reentry heating.
An expendable fairing would protect the folded wings and canards
during ascent. Even though it would add mass, it was considered an
acceptable alternative to increasing the wing structure mass to provide
sufϐicient stiffness during ascent, put on extra thermal protection to
handle the different heating environments, and cope with possible
adverse effects on the ascent aerodynamics of the Shuttle.
Roll control was provided by ailerons located at the wing’s
outboard trailing edge, and a vertical ϐin with a controllable rudder
located on top of the booster provided lateral stability and yaw control.
As the ϐin was to be located below the Orbiter, it would not severely
impact the ascent aerodynamic loads on the Orbiter. The propellant of
choice would be liquid oxygen and RP-1, with the former stored in a
tank at the aft end of the booster.
Several factors favored an aft location for the oxygen tank. Firstly, it
would shorten the cryogenic oxygen feed line’s length and reduce the
feedline diameter for the RP-1 propellant due to the oxidizer mass ϐlow
rate being higher than the fuel mass ϐlow rate. Secondly, ice formation
would be less of a safety threat to the Orbiter compared to a forward
position. Third, because the booster aft end heating environment
would be more benign than on the nose, an aft oxygen tank would be
subjected to a lower temperature differential across its skin. In this
way, a high-temperature structural material incompatible with
cryogenic liquid oxygen, such as titanium, could be adopted for the
booster forward fuselage reducing the need for an external thermal
protection system. Finally, the intertank could be placed further
forward in a location suitable to stow the nose landing gear. During
ϐlyback, the pressure inside both tanks would have to be properly
managed to preserve the structural integrity. Too high a pressure and
either tank could experience failure resulting in yielding or explosion.
Too low a pressure and either tank could implode.

Figure 3.12 LFBB landing conϐiguration and dimensions. The deployed scissor wings and
canards are evident.
[Source: Liquid Flyback Booster Pre-Phase A Study Assessment (pdf), p. 56 Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19960054312]
The booster aft end would house the reaction control system
propulsion components, including twenty thrusters, three cylindrical
gaseous oxygen tanks, one spherical RP-1 fuel tank, and one spherical
helium tank. The thrusters would provide attitude control in roll, pitch
and yaw until the wings would be aerodynamically effective. In
addition, by locating the thrusters around the aft portion of the
booster, ϐiring would have less effect on the vehicle’s aerodynamics
during reentry than if they were located further forward (Fig. 3.13).

Figure 3.13 An exploded view of the LFBB.
[Source: Liquid Flyback Booster Pre-Phase A Study Assessment (pdf), p. 58 Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19960054312]
The Russian-built RD-180 was selected as the main booster engine
due to its near-term availability and excellent performance. A cluster of
four engines was baselined to provide an adequate engine-out abort
capability. The booster would be propelled by a turbofan jet engine,
based on existing models employed on commercial aircraft, to ϐly back
to the launch site. It is worth noting that an aircraft engine is designed
with special performances in mind, such as take-off thrust, take-off
distance and climb rates for an engine-out condition, which inϐlate the
thrust requirements. In cruise, the thrust required by an aircraft
powerplant is typically 60–70% that of take-off. Hence, the LFBB
airbreathing engine would not be needed for lift-off and could only be
optimized for cruise ϐlight. A thrust of 42,500 pounds was adequate as
a compromise between thrust, range, speed, and engine mass. An inlet
fairing would protect the engine during ascent and from the reentry
aerothermal environments. The inlet fairing would be discarded upon

reaching subsonic speed, exposing the engine to the free stream ϐlow.
The spin-up torque induced by the windmill effect of the airϐlow
rushing through the engine would be augmented by a starter as the
thrust rapidly ramped up to cruise levels21.
Several mounting options were considered. Typically, aircraft
engines are mounted either in a buried or podded conϐiguration. The
former is commonly used for military ϐighter jets to reduce the
aircraft’s cross-section and has the engine mounted internally to the
fuselage or integrated with the fuselage and/or wing. Podded engines
can be mounted on pylons attached to the fuselage or wing, integrated
into the vertical tail, or mounted on the wingtips. A third engine option
suitable to a rocket application such as the LFBB is the deployable
conϐiguration in which the engine is stored inside the fuselage and
pivoted into the freestream after reentry, providing a podded engine
conϐiguration for cruise ϐlight. The deployed engine concept avoids
needing an ascent engine inlet fairing but adds a deployment
mechanism and requires signiϐicant internal volume.
The mounting options for the LFBB airbreathing engine were
limited by Shuttle integration factors and by the LFBB operations
concept. Midbody and forebody LFBB protuberances, particularly on
the side of the booster fuselage closest to the Orbiter, were to be
avoided because of aerodynamic interference concerns. Multiengine
podded options, such as symmetric side-mounted engines, were
constrained by the relative orientation and proximity of the External
Tank and LFBBs. Wing-mounted conϐigurations were eliminated
because of the LFBB wings being stowed during ascent. Potentially
favorable mounting options included several buried engine
conϐigurations (aft skirt, intertank, or nose) and a podded vertical tail
conϐiguration. The aft skirt location was not pursued because the main
landing gear and ascent propulsion system ϐilled most of the available
useful volume. The nose and intertank engine locations were not
pursued because both options would require a stretch in the length of
the LFBB, which would alter the axial location of the nosecone relative
to the exiting launch pad infrastructure.
Hence, a single-engine integrated into the vertical tail was selected.
This conϐiguration had several drawbacks, including a requirement for
an expendable engine inlet fairing for ascent and reentry and the

potential for inlet airϐlow distortion from the LFBB fuselage at higher
angles of attack. However, none of the other conϐigurations would have
been suitable for this application.
Because of the large volume of fuel required, a tank integral to the
vertical ϐin was discarded as it would not provide enough room.
Instead, storage inside the wings was considered, as is the case for
most aircraft types. However, it was soon discarded as it would require
a complex system to acquire the fuel and route it to the turbofan
engine. Hence, the fuel was stored in an 11.6-ft diameter spherical tank
inside the booster’s RP-1 tank. This location allowed a large volume of
engine fuel storage without signiϐicantly affecting the booster outer
mold line. It also provided the possibility of using the RP-1 from the
same tank for the main booster engines and the turbofan engine.
While the ϐirst-stage booster of the early Space Shuttle concepts
was to return to base ϐlown by its crew, the LFBB would land
autonomously on the runway at the Kennedy Space Center. As the
LFBBs were to operate within the same Shuttle procedures and
operational constraints, they would not introduce additional launch
window requirements, launch hold requirements, or launch weather
restriction constraints. The LFBB would ignite at T-0 seconds and
commanded by the Orbiter onboard computers until separation. Each
booster would downlink its data stream throughout the ascent and
subsequent ϐly back to provide the status of critical systems as
gathered by the onboard Vehicle Health Management system.
Communications between the individual boosters and a dedicated
control room in the Launch Control Center (LCC) at the Kennedy Space
Center would be maintained when the boosters were airborne until
landing. However, the ϐlight crew or ϐlight controllers would not have
any capabilities to intervene in the LFBB operations during integrated
ϐlight. During this time, the crew would just be made aware of any
changes in booster system status and conϐiguration.
Just before separation, the Orbiter would provide the state vector
and ϐlight attitude data to the boosters’ guidance software to
determine their position from the launch site and determine the return
trajectory and issue the appropriate commands. At separation, control
of the LFBB is passed to the ϐlight controllers at the Kennedy Space
Center, while the Orbiter remains under the supervision of Mission

Control in Huston. To minimize the possibility of re-contact following
separation, one booster is banked right and the other left. The ϐirst leg
of their return journey would be akin to that of a suborbital ϐlight
reentry. To dissipate as quickly as possible excess energy, the booster
would be commanded to maintain an angle of attack as high as 50
degrees. This would reduce the height reached before reentry and limit
the peak heat rate that the thermal protection system would have to
absorb during reentry. Additionally, it prevented the boosters from
gaining distance from the landing site, cutting ϐlyback time and fuel
required by the airbreathing engine. As the booster continued to
ascend, pulled by its inertia, guidance would maintain a ϐixed 20-
degree bank angle to turn the vehicle towards the landing site and
reduce the ϐlyback range.
As the reentry phase begins, aerodynamic loads build up, and
booster guidance initiates a load relief maneuvering whereby the angle
of attack is gradually lowered. This results in a re-distribution of the
aerodynamic loads along the vehicle’s longitudinal axis and reduces
structural stress perpendicular to the direction of ϐlight. When a
minimum angle of attack is reached, booster guidance triggers the so-
called linear energy event consisting in achieving load relief by varying
the bank angle rather than by modulating the angle of attack. As the
booster descends into a thicker and thicker atmosphere, the booster is
subjected to increasing drag, raising the structural and aerodynamic
loads. Increasing the angle of attack allows for the wings to generate
more lift and reduce the sink rate. However, doing so instigates long
period altitude oscillations called phugoid. By modulating the bank
angle, a phugoid is not triggered. In this way, the vehicle remains in a
stable attitude22.
At an altitude of 25,000 feet, the reentry phase has concluded, and
the booster enters the cruise mode, which begins with the ejection of
the engine inlet cover, engine ignition and achievement of a stable
cruise altitude. Altitude is then reduced to 8000 feet and is maintained
until a predetermined range from the runway. Next, the engine is
throttled down, and the vehicle descends on a glide path to the 5000
feet altitude loiter decision point some 25 miles from the runway. At
this point, all booster systems and ϐlight dynamics command and
control functions are exclusively onboard functions that do not require

intervention from the ϐlight controllers. However, at the loiter decision
time, the boosters will require permission to transition to the landing
mode; if permission is not granted, the booster enters a predeϐined
holding pattern for 30 minutes. The holding pattern is deϐined by a
180-degree right bank maneuver at 3-deg/sec, followed by a 1.5-
minute leg and then another 180-degree right bank maneuver. Another
1.5-minute leg completes the holding pattern. The duration of the
entire maneuver is ϐive minutes. The holding pattern is maintained
until ground control issues a command to initiate the landing phase or
abort. For example, if within 30 minutes no commands are received,
the booster would automatically initiate an abort mode to ditch into
the ocean (Fig. 3.14).
Figure 3.14 LFBB ϐlight mode and command logic.
[Source: Liquid ϐlyback booster pre-phase: A study assessment (pdf), p. 26. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19950005521]

This would ensure that no booster approached the landing area
unless ground control approved the vehicle systems’ status and
veriϐied that the selected runway was clear. The landing mode begins
with the vehicle descending on a glide slope to 15 miles from the
runway threshold. A bank for runway alignment is then executed,
followed by a ϐinal approach to the runway. The ϐirst vehicle would
ϐlare, land, rollout, and taxi to a safe position to allow the second
booster to land. The second booster will then be commanded to exit
the loiter mode, enter the landing mode, and land on the same runway.
Landing teams will proceed to each booster and proceed with saϐing
the range safety system, purging and drying the booster oxygen tank,
and ensuring all systems are shut down and safe for movement to the
Flyback Booster Processing Facility (FBPF). Once saϐing operations are
completed, each LFBB is towed on their landing gear to the processing
facility. The ϐlyback timeline provides a total mission elapsed time from
lift-off to touchdown of 1 hour, 17 minutes, 41 seconds for the left
booster and 15 minutes more for the right one.
In the FBPF, each booster undergoes an array of inspections and
maintenance tasks akin to an airliner when it is grounded for
scheduled routine checkout inspections. Post-ϐlight inspections are
performed on the booster’s main engines, such as draining of fuel
residuals, veriϐication of electrical and pneumatic systems and several
functioning checks. It was foreseen that the booster engines would
need replacing every ten ϐlights. In parallel with the above tasks, the
booster structure is inspected for damage, control surfaces are tested,
and wings stowed for launch. A protective shroud is installed over the
folded wings and secured for ϐlight. Tires, brakes, and bearings are
inspected, removed, and replaced as required. Landing struts are
inspected, leak checks and landing gear functions are performed. A
standalone launch processing system test set, in conjunction with the
VHMS, veriϐies that all avionics systems are functional and ready for
ϐlight. A last ϐlight readiness system test is performed to certify that the
booster is ready for ϐlight. Before leaving the processing facility, the
forward and aft booster separation motors to push the booster away
from the External Tank, are installed. The booster is then moved to a
test area close to the VAB to perform a start and run test of the
airbreathing engine. After that, the booster is moved into the VAB for

mating to the launch platform. Mechanical and electrical interfaces, and
alignment on the platform are checked prior to mating with the
External Tank. On the launch pad, unique operations introduced by the
LFBB would include loading the RP-1 and JP-4 for the booster’s main
engines and airbreathing turbofan, respectively. This is accomplished
prior to the start of the launch countdown. The liquid oxygen will be
loaded during countdown but after External Tank loading to minimize
icing and gaseous overboard dumping.
Along with introducing the FBPF and test stand of the airbreathing
engine, the NASA report provided a comprehensive list of
modiϐications to existing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center
required to support operations with the new type of boosters. The
launch pads and mobile launch platforms would need a new servicing
system for loading the liquid oxygen, RP-1 and JP-4. They would also
require ancillary equipment such as ϐill-and-drain lines, mechanical
and electrical control panels, and booster purge systems. The existing
weather protection system on the rotating service structure of the
launch pad was to be modiϐied to eliminate interfaces with the
boosters. The main ϐlame deϐlector and the side ϐlame deϐlector
adjacent to the ϐlame trench would require extensive modiϐications to
accommodate the engine exhaust nozzles on the booster and allow for
change out of the booster’s main engines at the launch pad. In the VAB,
one bay would be modiϐied to receive and handle the boosters. In the
bay assigned to stacking the boosters, External Tank and Orbiter, work
platforms would have to be modiϐied to accommodate the larger
booster diameter and the wing shroud.
Liquid Fly Back Booster: The Boeing and
Lockheed Martin Proposals
A follow-up to Pre-Phase A Assessment study effort was postponed
primarily because of the high development costs that were perceived
as an issue. However, in 1997 NASA issued one last proposal to the
industry for a further feasibility study of the LFBB concept. Boeing and
Lockheed Martin were awarded funding for this last effort to make the
Space Shuttle safer and more performing. Their efforts were under the

supervision of the NASA Johnson Space Center, Kennedy Space Center
and Marshal Space Flight Center
Capitalizing on the results available from the previous studies, both
aerospace ϐirms proposed the usual dual conϐiguration with two
individual boosters ϐlanking the External Tank. In addition, Boeing also
offered the so-called catamaran conϐiguration in which dual-like
boosters are joined in parallel (Fig. 3.15).
Figure 3.15 Representative LFBB concepts from Boeing and Lockheed Martin.
[Source: Upgrading the Space Shuttle (pdf), p .63. Available at: https:// nap. nationalacademie s. 
org/ catalog/ 6384/ upgrading-the-space-shuttle]
The main engine boosters would be fed with liquid oxygen and
kerosene-bases propellants in either case. Initial screening
assessments were performed on a wide variety of candidates23,
shortlisted then to three options: the Aerojet AJ-800, Pratt&Whitney
RD-180, and Rockedyne RS-76. They all had in common an adequate
capability to accommodate a booster main engine failure event by
throttling up to compensate for the sibling while maintaining a balance
in the thrust produced by the remaining functioning engines. In
nominal conditions, the engines would be required to produce 75% of

their full thrust capability, providing that much-needed ascent margin
performance to account for an engine shutdown and allow for an
immediate safe return of the Orbiter or continuation of the mission.
Another common feature of these engines was their reliance on a
staged combustion cycle with oxygen-rich preburners instead of a
simpler gas generator cycle. To understand the difference, it is
necessary to remember that any rocket engine requires the
combustion of propellants at high pressures. In the case of a high-
performance engine, the pressure can be several thousand psi. To avoid
building incredibly robust and heavy tanks, propellants are stored at
pressures far lower than those necessary for combustion and
turbopumps are used to increase the pressures to the required level.
However, a big problem arises concerning how the turbopumps are
driven for rocket applications. As the name implies, they have to be run
by turbines. This requires a working ϐluid that can be created in several
ways. One way is to burn a small proportion of the propellants in a gas
generator, use the exhaust to drive the turbine and then vent the gas
overboard. Known as the gas generator cycle, this approach was used
for the F-l and 1-2 engines that powered the mighty Saturn V rocket. It
is still used by modern launchers such as the Delta IV, Ariane V, and
Atlas V. A gas generator cycle has the far from negligible drawback that
not all of the propellants carried on board are used to produce thrust
since the proportion used to drive the turbopumps is lost by being
vented.
Additionally, when using kerosene in a gas generator cycle engine, a
large quantity of oily soot accumulates within the engines. This soot is
a by-product of the kerosene long polymers being exposed to the
engine’s high temperatures, which promotes the mingling and fusing of
the polymers clogging the fuel lines and turbopumps. For an LFBB
application where the booster was meant to be reusable, this soot
must be cleaned out before an engine can be reused. Such cleaning is
labour-intensive and requires environmentally dangerous chemicals to
complete effectively. A staged combustion cycle retains the gas
generator, but instead of being vented overboard, the exhaust is “made
to work” by being fed into the engine and burned in the main
combustion chamber. Soot deposition is minimized if an oxygen-rich
mixture is fed to the preburners.

Both aerospace ϐirms elected to replace the airbreathing turbofan
engine by installing a minimum of four low-bypass ratio military jet
engines. In this way, in the case of an engine failure, the booster would
not be lost. Several layouts were produced for the nose, midbody, and
under the fuselage. The engines could be mounted in nacelles for the
dual booster conϐiguration, with acceptable conϐigurations in pairs on
each fuselage side or four side-by-side under the fuselage. Their exact
location on the booster, however, was to be decided based on physical
constraints imposed by proximity to the External Tank, the width of
the VAB door through which the Shuttle stack would exit to move to the
launch pad, and the effects of shock/expansion waves produced by the
boosters during ascent which might unduly apply extra bending to the
Orbiter wings.
REFERENCES
NASA (1970) Proposal to Accomplish Phase B Space Shuttle Program. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 20160012503
NASA (1990) Liquid rocket booster study. Volume 1: Executive summary. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19900000821
NASA (1990) Liquid Rocket Booster (LRB) for the Space Transportation System (STS) systems
study, volume 2. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19900019284
NASA (1990) Liquid Rocket Booster (LRB) for the Space Transportation System (STS) systems
study. Volume 2: Addendum 1. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19910013053
NASA (1991) Liquid Rocket Booster Integration Study. Volume 2: Study synopsis. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19910020941
NASA (1995) Liquid ϐlyback booster pre-phase: A study assessment. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19950005521
NASA (1996) Liquid Flyback Booster Pre-Phase A Study Assessment. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19960054312
NASA (1999) Propulsion system advances that enable a reusable Liquid Fly Back Booster (LFBB).
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19990007761
NASA (2006) Intact Ascent Aborts Workbook. Available at: https:// www. nasa. gov/ centers/ 
johnson/ pdf/ 383447main_ intact_ ascent_ aborts_ workbook_ 21002. pdf
NASA (2011) Space Shuttle Abort Evolution. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
20110015564

1
2
3
4
5
National Research Council. 1999. Upgrading the Space Shuttle. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. Available at: https:// nap. nationalacademie s. org/ catalog/ 6384/ upgrading-the-
space-shuttle
Sivolella (2013) “To Orbit and Back Again: How the Space Shuttle Flew in Space” – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-1461409823; Paperback: 528 pages.
Sivolella (2017) “The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments” – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
To date, such system proved essential in two occasions. The ϐirst on September 26, 1983 when
the rocket meant to launch the Soyuz T-10 mission caught ϐire on the pad. The second occurred on
October 11, 2018 shortly after lift-off when during separation of the ϐirst stage boosters, one of
them collided with the second stage. Within seconds, the crew of Soyuz MS-10 had already been
vigorously pulled away from the ailing rocket.
 
Early in the program, the African sites were dismissed as the logistics of returning an Orbiter
from such sites was considered too burdensome, especially considering the rather politically
unstable climate of that continent. For the majority of the program, a TAL abort could be
performed to reach either one of three European sites located in Istress (France), Moron, and
Zaragozza (both in Spain).
 
Challenger is the only Space Shuttle that can claim to have performed an ascent abort. On July
29, 1985 she launched to carry out the STS-51F mission. Some ϐive minutes into the ascent, the
center main engine shut down and an ATO abort was declared. Albeit on a lower orbit, the mission
took place.
 
Considering that the RTLS mode has a rather “aerobatic” proϐile, it was the least trusted by the
astronauts. Despite the extensive effort devoted to it in training, no one expected to return alive
from such an abort.
 
It must be noted the SRBs were jettisoned as soon as the internal pressure had lowered to 50 psi.
Although at this point a small fraction of the propellant still remained and was being burned, the
thrust generated was so small that for all intentions and purposes, the SRBs could be considered
incapable of providing any useful propulsion contribution. Hence, they had to be jettisoned,
because the main engines would not be able to ϐly the desired trajectory while carrying what was
now dead mass.
 

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
In fact, from that ϐirst return to ϐlight mission until the last ϐlight in July 2011, a total of 110
ϐlights, the SRB performed ϐlawlessly.
 
It is worth clarifying that contingency abort modes could be invoked before booster separation.
For instance, had one or more main engine failed during the ϐirst two minutes of ascent, the crew
would have initiated the appropriate contingency abort procedure. However, they still had to wait
for booster separation before commencing to steer the Orbiter towards an emergency landing site
or towards a point in the ocean where they could bail out.
 
As a matter of fact, the ϐirst stage of SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rockets is ignited for a few seconds a few
days ahead of the launch to ascertain the cluster of nine Merlin engines are ϐit for the launch. In
addition, each engine is ϐired and tested at SpaceX’s McGregor testing facility in Texas before being
shipped for ϐinal assembly on the ϐirst stage.
 
As the External Tank was being depleted, it becomes lighter and lighter. Maintaining the same
thrust settings resulted in an increase in the acceleration. Some ten seconds prior to MECO, the
main engines were throttled down to 67% to prevent the acceleration rate to exceed the Orbiter
airfrafme’s structural limit.
 
In fact, in the case one or all main engines had gotten stuck in the thrust bucket and could not
throttled up, procedures called for an RTLS abort soon after SRB separation.
 
The extremely unusual cold temperature on the day of launch was one of the several factors
that doomed Challenger. The cold temperatures had frozen one O-ring sealing the joint between
two segments on the right SRB, allowing for the hot exhaust to impinge on the adjacent External
Tank, like a blow torch. This lead the booster aft end to slam against the base of the External Tank
initiating a chain reaction of events the lead to a rapid explosive disassembly.
 
It is helpful to remember that the large size of the External Tank, and of the Orbiter/Booster
vehicles devised in the early studies, was dictated by hydrogen being the lightest element in the
periodic table, thus the least dense. Therefore, even in liquid form, hydrogen requires large tanks
for storage.
 
Typically, these burners or gas generators burn a small quantity of propellant to generate a
stream of hot pressurized gases. Flowing though the turbine side of the turbopump, the spin the
pump side increasing the pressure of the propellants being delivered to the engine’s combustion
chamber.

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
 
Often, such combination of propellants is simply termed “hypergolics”.
 
Certainly, the most notable example of thermal insulation was that of the Space Shuttle
External Tank whose whole exposed surface was covered with a sprayed-on foam insulation layer
that gave it its distinguished orange appearance.
 
An alternative designation is Reϐined Petroleum-1.
 
In technical parlance this is referred to as “Max-q” and indicate a precise moment during the
ascent, when the combination of speed and air density work together to produce the maximum
possible aerodynamic loading that the rocket will experience during powered ϐlight in the
atmosphere. Beyond this point, even if the rocket is accelerating, the expeditious reduction in the
atmospheric density means that aerodynamic loads precipitate to nothing leaving the structure of
the rocket to deal with inertial loads. Typically, Max-q occurs when the rocket has reached
supersonic speed. The formation of a conically shaped cloud of water vapour with the apex
centred on the rocket’s nose provides a visible clue to when the rocket is experiencing Max-q. This
is a consequence of the shock waves produced by the rocket nose which by compressing the air
ahead causes the water vapour to condense.
 
Designated in technical parlance as the ET GOX vent arm, it positioned a sort of suction cap on
top of the External Tank to provide an escape path for gaseous oxygen built up within the tank
below. In fact, despite the protective insulating foam and the cryogenic temperature inside the
tank, some of the liquid would still boil off. This was not necessarily a bad thing as it kept the
propellant slightly pressurized to prevent cavitation of the main engines’ turbopumps. However,
to prevent tank rupture it had to be vented safely away from the External Tank. This is why,
propellant loading continued up to two minutes before lift-off.
 
Note that this shrinkage results from loading the ET-LRB attachment structure, while the LRB
are still bolted to the launch pad and support the entire stack.
 
This holds true up to the value of maximum angle of attack. Should the aircraft attitude move
the wing chord beyond this value, the wing will stall producing a sudden loss in lift with the
aircraft rapidly falling out. While recovering from a stall at high altitude is perfectly feasible and
practised in training, stalling during landing close to the ground is as dangerous as it sounds, as
there is not be enough time to recover from the fall and bring the wings to generate lift again
before crashing.

21
22
23
 
This strategy is known as “assisted airstart”.
 
The way bank angle works is that it changes the vertical component of the lift produced by the
wing so that the imbalance with the weight causes the vehicle to sink at a rate determined by the
bank angle, generating the desired drag and maintaining aerodynamic and structural loads within
the desired limits.
 
Among them there was even the F-1 engine that powered the ϐirst stage of the Saturn V Apollo
program!
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_4
4. Orbital Hopping
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
“A tale of two upper stages”
In the minds of its designers and advocates, the Space Shuttle was to be
the ϐirst tile of a large puzzle extending from Low Earth Orbit up to the
Martian surface. The Space Shuttle would be nothing more than a truck
for special deliveries. A truck with such a voluminous cargo bay would
be capable of hauling payloads such as the components of modular
space stations, geosynchronous satellites, modules for the Moon and
Martian outposts and everything else the American aerospace industry
felt like bringing in space. Unfortunately, as remarkable and innovative
as advertised, the Space Shuttle fell short in altitude performance. Just
300 miles, while most of the payloads it was supposed to haul had to
operate at higher altitudes, such as geostationary orbit at 22,236 miles.
Some of these payloads were to be robotic probes to explore the
uncharted territories of the Solar System; that is to say, destinations
well far and beyond Space Shuttle’s reach.
A sensible solution was to add a second vehicle to complete the
delivery to the appropriate destination. Welcome, the space tug. The
idea was straightforward and elegant. Upon reaching orbit, the Shuttle
would be approached by the space tug, and it would transfer its load
into the payload compartment of the tug. Under its propulsion power,
the tug would then haul the cargo to the intended operative orbit. The
beauty of the concept, however, did not end here. A space tug would be
used multiple times during different Space Shuttle missions. The tug
would routinely commute from the Shuttle in low Earth orbit to higher

orbits, back and forth. It would also fetch satellites that a Shuttle’s crew
would repair and then return to their operative orbit to begin a new
service period. The tug could also transfer astronauts from the Space
Shuttle to the space station and vice versa.
In the last decade of Space Shuttle operations, we grew accustomed
to seeing Orbiters placidly docking with the space station. However,
since the Space Shuttle was initially envisioned as a delivery truck for
goods and people, its designers did not include docking capability with
a space station. Even if the Space Shuttle were the main means for
assembling the space station, the space tug would move everything to
the space station, people included. The space tug would be assembled
in orbit out of components carried by the Space Shuttle. Its modular
design would afford ϐlexibility and a variety of mission roles. In fact,
upon establishing an orbital or surface lunar outpost, space tugs would
deliver hardware and astronauts to and fro. Satellites could be repaired
in their orbital parking slot rather than dragged down to the Space
Shuttle. In this case, the space tug would be complemented with a crew
module and a cargo compartment for tools and materials for servicing
activities.
Conceptual studies started as early as 1970, in time to have a space
tug up and run by the time the Space Shuttle had entered service.
However, NASA’s grand plans were very quickly slashed down. Even
before the last moon landing, both the Moon and Martian missions
were postponed indeϐinitely and the Earth-orbiting space station sunk
quickly to the bottom end of the list of priorities of a space agency
plagued by budget cuts from a US Congress short-sighted toward the
beneϐits of space exploration. As a result, the American space program
was becoming a program of Earth orbital exploration. Inevitably,
doubts about the need for an orbital tug began to surface. Given the
limited funding, the space agency struggled to maintain the Space
Shuttle program alive. Eventually, they persuaded the US Congress that
the new space transportation system would satisfy the nation’s civilian
and military space programs pushing aside any other competing
launch system. The space tug was postponed to the mid-1980s to
construct a modular space station. Still, NASA tried to maintain the
concept alive since they felt that sooner or later, operators and space
hardware users would require to retrieve and refurbish their orbital

assets sooner or later. Such optimism was short-lived. Motivated by
economic interests, users felt that refurbishing a satellite would
increase operational costs and prevent new and improved technology
from being implemented on new spacecraft. Furthermore, it would
remove signiϐicant revenue originating from building and replacing
satellites.
Eventually, NASA sold the Space Shuttle as the only launcher the
country should rely on. Nevertheless, the space agency still had to ϐind
a way to overcome the Orbiter’s altitude limitations. Thus, as early as
1974, NASA initiated talks with the Department of Defence (DoD)
seeking ϐinancial backing for developing an Interim Upper Stage (IUS).
The IUS would not retrieve satellites and would be expendable. Despite
lesser capable than a fully-ϐledged space tug, the IUS would be a
practical solution while waiting for a mature time to develop the
beloved space tug. The DoD expressed its interest in conjunction with
the USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO). They
began analyzing existing upper stages employed by other launchers as
a possible IUS, provided that a few upgrades were implemented to
make it compatible with the Space Shuttle. Safety and economic
considerations dictated that a Shuttle-based IUS would use solid
propellant.
In December 1975, the DoD opened an industrial competition to
receive proposals for an IUS. In August 1976, Boeing was awarded a 50
million dollar contract to develop the new upper stage and began mass
production by 1978. Boeing projections forecast a whopping 300 upper
stages for the incoming decade. The DoD, however, was not easily
fooled by NASA’s propaganda that the Space Shuttle should become the
country’s only means to access space. They insisted on maintaining a
second launching system active. Therefore they requested that the IUS
be compatible with the Titan III launcher. When it became evident that
the space station would not be built any time soon and that the space
tug might not be needed for another decade, the adjective “Interim”
was replaced by “Inertial” as an allusion to its inertial navigation
system. It was not just a semantic change, as it signalled that the IUS
was to become a permanent solution kicking out the space tug once
and for all.

The IUS would haul payloads up to 5,000 pounds in geosynchronous
orbit. Nevertheless, it was soon recognized that to be truly
competitive, the Space Shuttle/upper stage combination should also be
economically viable in serving the market for smaller payloads. Even
more so, in the face of the relatively inexpensive services provided by
the European Ariane family rocket. “George Low indicated some
concerns when he was Deputy Administrator about whether the
Shuttle could compete with the Delta launch vehicle or not”. Hubert P.
Davis, who worked on the space tug concept, recalls: “So he said, “let’s
see what we can do with a Delta class of payloads, and how would you
propose that””. Therefore, Davis pursued a study dubbed the “Delta
Killer”. Despite the catching name, for evident professional correctness,
the Delta killer application turned into a NASA request to develop a
Solid Spinning Upper Stage (SSUS)1. Though smaller than the IUS, it
would be capable of economically delivering a payload up to 2380
pounds in geosynchronous orbit. It was that same hauling capability of
a Delta rocket. To be on the safe side, NASA also requested studies for
an SSUS capable of hauling 4,300 pounds, forcing out of the door also
the Atlas-Centaur launcher, which offered the same payload capability.
Having caught wind that the Space Shuttle was about to write off all
of America’s launcher catalogue, McDonnell Douglas’s Space Division
proposed a design that NASA approved by the end of 1976. However,
the giant aerospace corporation was not going to receive even a dime
for developing and building SUSSs. At least not yet. Cash ϐlows would
derive from the purchase orders placed by NASA and possibly other
users once the Space Shuttle had started regular service. In exchange,
NASA assured McDonnell Douglas that they would be the only supplier
for Delta-class upper stages. The McDonnell Douglas proposal was
based on the Payload Assist Module (PAM), an upper stage employed
on the Delta rockets. The upgraded version would become the PAM-D,
where D indicated a payload lifting capability identical to the Delta
rocket. To make every ϐlight highly proϐitable, the PAM-D was sized so
that up to four units at a time could be installed within the Orbiter’s
payload bay.
Launching satellites and spacecraft from the Space Shuttle bore
operational advantages that opened a new approach to planning and
executing space launches. For instance, spacecraft design would

beneϐit from the more benign launch environment afforded by the
Space Shuttle, allowing lighter and relatively more fragile structures. In
the case of a launch abort, the payload would not be lost but returned
with the Orbiter and, following reconditioning, could be scheduled on
the next available ϐlight2. Before deployment, the satellite could be
checked out, and if damage or a failure had occurred during launch, the
release could be scrubbed, and the payload safely returned home for
repairs. In this case, the loss of a valuable spacecraft and its operational
capability would be prevented.
From a conceptual point of view, IUS and PAM-D were nearly
identical. Both used a reusable aluminum support structure called the
Airborne Support Equipment (ASE). It held the upper stage and
payload during ascent. The ASE would serve as a structural support
infrastructure to react to the ascent loads exchanged between the
Orbiter structure and the upper stage. It also doubled as an orbital
launch pad. The ASE provided vital services to the upper stage and
satellite combo such as control, protection, saϐing, electronics, cabling,
power distribution and control, and communication. Both ASE types
were designed to be as much self-contained and autonomous as
possible, requiring minimal care from the crew. Similarities between
the two upper stages were also shared in how they would operate.
As the Shuttle maneuvered into the orbit and attitude for satellite
deployment, the astronauts would run a pre-deployment checklist to
verify that the launch environment had not harmed the upper stage
and satellite and prepare them for the upcoming deployment. Next, the
ASE would be readied to bring the upper stage into the appropriate
launch conϐiguration. Last-minute updates on the Shuttle’s orbital
parameters and position would still be possible for upload on the
upper stage’s navigation software to reϐine the precision of the
upcoming journey to geosynchronous orbit. If the astronauts were
satisϐied and all checkouts were given the green light, the upper stage
would ϐinally be released, departing the ASE. The ϐiring of the upper
stage would be accomplished some forty-ϐive minutes later, giving the
crew time to withdraw at a safe distance. The Orbiter was to be
maneuvered with the belly facing the upper stage, maximizing the
protection from the upper stage’s engine exhaust. In fact, despite
having left the Orbiter with a little translational velocity, the upper

stage would still travel in the same orbit as the Space Shuttle. If the
crew had stayed nearby, at engine ignition, the Orbiter would have
been blasted by the rocket’s exhaust with easy-to-imagine
consequences, in particular for the delicate cockpit windows.
Withdrawing from the upper stage would have left enough room
between the two spacecraft so that the impetuous exhaust would
dissipate through space before reaching the Orbiter. Orienting the
Orbiter’s belly towards the upper stage would have offered further
protection if some exhaust did make it to the Orbiter3. Exposing
thousands of delicate tiles to something that could have caused
substantial damage to the Orbiter’s vital thermal protection system
stinks of insanity. What if some of the exhausts had reached the Orbiter
and played havoc with several tiles? Considering that there was no
capability of inspecting the condition of the thermal protection system,
let alone techniques to repair any damage4, how would the crew have
known of the damage and safely come home? We will never know
because, luckily, such a scenario never occurred.
The grand debut of the Space Shuttle/upper stage duo occurred
with STS-5 on November 11, 1982, when Columbia hauled two
commercial communication satellites. It was the ϐirst operational and
commercial ϐlight of the Space Shuttle program. Both satellites were
tucked inside the protective cocoon of the PAM-D’s ASE. For the PAM-D
upper stage, the ASE was an open truss cradle made of machined
aluminum frame sections and chrome-plated steel longeron and keel
trunnions. The cradle served as a platform to support a spin table and
associated drive system. It acted as the mounting platform for the
vertical installation of the upper stage/satellite combination. The
nominal envelope for the vertical installation was constrained to a
cylindrical volume of 8.4 feet in height on the centreline and 7.16 feet in
diameter. The envelope size was chosen to maintain commonality with
the Delta launch vehicle. The payload could have been launched on a
Delta rocket if the Space Shuttle had not been available. Once
conϐidence in the Space Shuttle had grown to retire the expendable
Delta for good, the extra volume within the Orbiter’s payload bay could
be exploited, affording an extended nominal envelope of nine feet
diameter inside and ten feet above the cradle. The external surface was
covered with multi-layered insulating thermal blankets to protect the

cradle and the upper stage from the ϐluctuating temperatures of space.
A tubular frame supporting a lightweight Mylar sunshield was installed
on the top. The sunshield panels were ϐixed and stationary on the sides,
while the portion covering the spacecraft’s top had a clamshell-like
structure. Once in orbit, it was closed to protect against thermal
excursion when the payload bay doors were open (Figs. 4.1 and 4.2).
Figure 4.1 Space Shuttle PAM-D system hardware.
[Source: Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments, p.
28]
The upper stage itself, sitting underneath the satellite, was simple.
Propulsion was provided by a Thiokol Star-48 solid-fuelled motor,
capable of holding up to 4,273 pounds of propellant. The Payload
Attach Fitting (PAF) on top of the solid motor played the mechanical
interface with the satellite. It incorporated a spring-loaded apparatus

to generate the impetus for separation from the cradle and retractable
ϐittings to react spacecraft-to-cradle lateral loading during ascent. It
also housed the electrical interface connectors between the solid
motor and the spacecraft, the redundant safe-and-arm device for
motor ignition, telemetry components, and S-band transmitters (Fig.
4.1). Within eight hours of lift-off, the STS-5’s crew was ready to make
Columbia the ϐirst orbiting human-tended launch pad. The ϐirst guest of
such an exclusive infrastructure was SBS-3, a privately owned satellite
for communication5.
In preparation for the deployment, the crew went through checks
and payload conϐiguration procedures. In the meantime, Columbia was
being maneuvered into the deployment attitude with the open cargo
bay facing the direction desired for ϐiring the PAM motor. The spin table
was brought to life and begun to spin the upper stage/satellite
combination. “The concept of the satellite in itself is simple. They are
meant to be deployed by spinning”, STS-5’s mission specialist Joe Allen
explains. “And the way you do it is just put the satellite on a table what
will spin, like you put a record on a record player. You put it down and
then you cause it to spin. In the case of the communication satellite, it’s
mounted on the table prior to launch, then you go to orbit…once there
you cause the table to spin and you point the Shuttle in exactly the right
direction and then at precisely the right part of the orbit, you just
release hold down arms that are holding the satellite to the table top.
When you release the arms, springs on which the satellite sits expand
and just give it a very gentle push out, spinning very beautifully”. As the
PAM-D and SBS-3 leisurely drifted out the payload bay at three feet per
second, spinning at 50 rpm, the STS-5’s crew could get some much-
deserved rest.
Proceeding with the ϐlight plan, Commander Vance DeVoe Brand
and pilot Robert F. Overmyer performed a series of burns to move
Columbia out the way as far as possible to avoid the blast from the
PAM’s rocket engine. The upper stage’s internal clock began thrusting
its payload to geosynchronous orbit some forty-ϐive minutes later.
Unfortunately, as Columbia was offering her belly to the upper stage,
the crew did not have the opportunity of witnessing the event. The
following day, November 12, 1982, the same show was repeated with

the Canadian Anik C-3 communication satellite playing as the main
character.
The successful launches of SBS-3 and Anik C-3 were evidence that
the Space Shuttle/PAM-D combo was a winning team. However, would
the same prove true for the IUS upper stage? In the early afternoon of
April 4, 1983, the STS-6’s crew set sails to answer the question. With a
length of 17 feet, a diameter of 9.5 feet and a mass of 32,500 pounds,
the cylindrical upper stage was a genuinely impressive sight. The awe
grows even more when the massive payload it was tasked to push to
geosynchronous orbit, the TDRS-A satellite, is considered. The PAM-D
dwarfs in comparison.
The IUS consisted of an aft skirt, aft (ϐirst) stage, an interstage, a
forward (second) stage and an equipment support section. Both stages
employed solid propellant and movable nozzles for thrust vector
control. Redundant electromechanical actuators permitted up to four
degrees of steering on the large ϐirst stage motor and seven on the
smaller second stage motor. A hydrazine monopropellant reaction
control system allowed attitude control during coast and thrusting
periods and delta velocity impulses for accurate orbit injection. Most of
the avionics and control subsystems were housed in the equipment
support section, which included a 9.84-foot diameter interface
mounting ring and an electrical interface connector segment for
mating and integrating the spacecraft to the upper stage.

Figure 4.2 Deployment of SBS-3. In the background, the sunshield doors are closed before
deploying the Anik C-3 satellite later in the mission.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-s82-39793]
Access doors allowed for replacing components even with the
spacecraft already mated to the upper stage (Fig. 4.3). Several
advanced features distinguished the IUS from other upper stages. For
instance, it embodied the ϐirst completely redundant avionics system
ever developed for an uncrewed space vehicle, which enabled it to
correct in-ϐlight features within milliseconds. In addition, it included a

redundant computer system in which the second could take over
functions from the primary computer. Finally, a carbon composite
nozzle throat allowed to withstand high-temperature, long-duration
ϐirings of the stage motors (Fig. 4.4).
Figure 4.3 An exploded view of the Inertial Upper Stage.
[Source: Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments, p.
32]

The airborne support equipment was split into an aft and forward
frame to give it adequate structural strength to support the heavy
combination of IUS/spacecraft extending for almost the full length of
the payload bay. The aft end of the IUS was inserted through the ring
structure of the ASE aft frame, located at the rear end of the payload
bay. Likewise, the semi-circular ASE forward frame restrained the IUS
forward end. Dampers were installed on the attachment points of the
aft and forward frames to the cargo bay to reduce the ascent loads
discharged on the IUS and protect its aluminum skin-stringer
construction. The ASE offered housing for the batteries, electronics,
cabling and communication services to support the IUS and payload
(Fig. 4.5).

Figure 4.4 An Inertial Upper Stage during ground processing. The large size is evident when
compared to the people around it.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-S95-08961]
Figure 4.5 The Inertial Upper Stage Airborne Support Equipment hardware.

A screenplay similar to that performed on STS-5 was set in motion
upon reaching orbit. Upon payload bay door opening, pre-deployment
checkout began, followed by positioning the Orbiter in the right
attitude for the IUS release. Once again, departure required ϐlipping just
a few switches. However, deployment mechanics called for a different
sequence of actions as the IUS was designed to carry out payloads
much larger than those hauled by the smaller PAM-D. STS-6 was tasked
with deploying TDRS-A, the ϐirst member of a constellation of satellites
for a new communication system to support the Space Shuttle and
scientiϐic missions better. The size of TDRS-A was such that, combined
with the IUS, it took up almost three-quarters of the length of
Challenger’s payload bay6.
Therefore, how would you take such a long payload out of the cargo
bay? The robotic arm could not be used because the IUS had not been
designed to be handled by it. Rather it would exploit the airborne
support equipment itself. The aft frame had provisions to tilt upwards,
moving the forward end of its payload above the Orbiter crew cabin.
Upon completing all pre-deployment checks, the retention latches on
the forward frame were commanded in the released position. Then, an
electromechanical tilt actuator tilted the aft frame and the attached
IUS/TDRS-A combination to a 29-degree angle. The TDRS-A was now
just above the payload bay and ready for telemetry ground check out.
Had a problem developed prompting a deployment abort, the whole
IUS/satellite complex could be restowed in its ascent conϐiguration.
Upon the satisfactory outcome of all checks, the crew raised the aft
frame to 58 degrees in the so-called deployment position. The Orbiter
control attitude was inhibited, and separation was initiated. Within ten
hours from lift-off, the STS-6 crew saw the massive complex placidly
passing over their heads and leaving the Shuttle at a turtle pace of 0.4
feet per second. The usual evasive maneuver to walk away from the
launch site took place, and some 45 minutes later, the IUS ϐirst stage
ϐired.
Between 1982 and the beginning of 1986, the Space Shuttle
routinely delivered commercial satellites, logging twenty successful
deployments via PAM-D and two via IUS7. The Challenger accident had
signiϐicant repercussions on how NASA would continue to operate the
Space Shuttle. One of them was that it would no longer be available to

commercial customers. It was not worth gambling the astronauts’ lives
for deploying satellites that could be equally effectively launched by a
conventional expandable vehicle. However, there were exceptions. For
instance, the deployment of the Syncom IV on STS-32, the delivery of
ϐive TDRS satellites and a few other spacecraft for the Department of
Defence. The last mission to manifest an upper stage occurred in July
1999 when Columbia’s STS-93 deployed the massive Chandra X-Ray
Observatory with an IUS.
Death Star
Even before the IUS entered service, both the USAF and NASA knew
that it would not be too long before they would need to develop a more
powerful upper stage. While spacecraft mass was not expected to
exceed the IUS’s 5,000-pound lifting capability to geosynchronous
orbit until the mid-eighties, both institutions’ projections showed that
satellites were bound to grow steadily in mass by the end of the
decade. For instance, the Department of Defence was approving
projects that by 1987 would weigh up to 5,500 pounds, growing to
6,200 pounds in 1988 and reaching the 8,000 – 10,000-pound range
decade’s end. Likewise, the commercial communication satellite
industry, which NASA was desperately trying to court to establish a
vital lifeline of cash inϐlow, was forecasting that its orbital assets would
quickly reach a 12,000-pound mass by the mid-1990s.
There are several advantages to increasing the mass of a spacecraft.
First, a larger satellite can carry a greater load of propellant that affords
an extended orbital life as it can maintain its position and control
attitude for longer. Consequently, fewer replacements are needed,
bringing signiϐicant cost savings to its customers or owners. A bigger
spacecraft affords more room for payload hardware installation8 and
increases the services or capabilities that it can provide to mission
planners or customers. Though counterintuitive, it can also be cheaper.
When mass is a constraint, spacecraft designers must rely on
expensive miniaturized avionics and system hardware.
Consequently, they need to spend considerable time devising the
most optimized way to cram systems and payloads into the available
volume. Interference between components of the same or different

subsystems is also worsened by close physical proximity, requiring
additional expensive ground testing, which delays spacecraft
production and launch. However, bigger spacecraft development
cannot occur if a matching lifting capability is not provided.
This was the situation the American satellite industry, both civilian
and military, was being forced to face in the mid-seventies. As
retirement plans were being drawn for the existing expendable
launchers in anticipation of the entry into service of the Space Shuttle,
satellite builders and customers became reticent to develop and
demand bigger spacecraft as they were aware of the lifting capability
limitation of the Space Shuttle/IUS combination. Unless a more
powerful upper stage with signiϐicantly enhanced performances were
approved for development, then it would not have been practical to
plan for spacecraft that could not leave their clean rooms in the ϐirst
place. The risk was that they might turn to the competition and require
launch services onboard the ϐledgling European launcher Ariane, with a
resulting severe loss of revenue for NASA. Besides, a more powerful
upper stage would have also assisted NASA’s planetary exploration
program for ϐlagship missions such as the Galileo probe bound for
Jupiter and the International Solar Polar Mission (ISPM)9 directed for
an up-close exploration of our parent star.
Generally speaking, establishing the requirements for this type of
missions is an iterative process in which the launch lifting limitations
can be accommodated in several ways. For instance, low-energy
trajectories, possibly assisted by planetary ϐly-bys and based on
speciϐic launch opportunities, can be used despite the longer journey
time, costly en-route maintenance and the increased probability of a
malfunction occurring before reaching the destination. An alternative
consists in splitting the original probe into two or three smaller
spacecraft delivered separately. This is akin to diminishing the
mission’s objectives, simplifying and making the spacecraft lighter but
at the expense of the scientiϐic return and value of the program. Often
two or more alternatives are combined. As a case in point, for the
Galileo mission, which was composed of an Orbiter spacecraft to
revolve around Jupiter and a probe to descent and explore the upper
layers of the giant planet’s atmosphere, NASA was already pondering
the possibility of dispatching the Orbiter and lander on two separate

Shuttle/IUS launches. Along with Galileo and the ISPM programs, other
planetary exploration projects were in the pipeline, such as a Saturn
Orbiter with Atmospheric and Titan probes, Atmospheric Probes of
Uranus and Neptune and an Asteroid Multi-Rendezvous mission.
In 1982 Congress directed both NASA and the USAF to collaborate
in developing a Space Shuttle derivative of the upper stage Atlas
Centaur upper stage. This was not what NASA and the USAF had hoped
for. Instead, both institutions aimed to develop an ad-hoc booster with
inbuilt potential for future growth, such as becoming a space-based tug
or an orbital transfer vehicle, either crewed or automatic. However, the
project would have commanded funding of at least one billion dollars.
Compared to the estimated $250 million bill for a Shuttle-based
Centaur, it is understandable why the US Congress directed NASA and
USAF to cooperate. Using Centaur would have also bolstered the know-
out of the American aerospace industry in cryogenic rocket engine
technology and competing with the European Ariane launcher.
The chief difference between the Shuttle Centaur and IUS was
propellant selection. One way to improve a booster’s performance is by
increasing tank size. The extra propellant allows for longer burns. The
type of engines is also a factor, as distinct propulsion units can yield
substantially different thrust levels. Size also matters as it is
constrained by the launched fairing’s volume and shape. In the case of
the Space Shuttle, payload manifest planners would need to work with
a 15 by 60 feet cylindrical volume. A long upper stage would have
considerably reduced the volume available for the payload it was
meant to propel, substantially size and mission objectives. Mass was
another factor imposing a limit on upper stage size. The Orbiter and
payload/upper stage combination could not exceed 65,000 pounds.
Hence, the heavier the booster, the smaller the mass quota that could
be allocated to the payload. Therefore, both payload bay size and mass
limitations could seriously threaten the mass payload growth being
forecast by NASA and the USAF. This was the driving reason for IUS
replacement in the ϐirst place.
The only available strategy to work within those constraints was to
switch to an upper stage fuelled with liquid hydrogen and oxygen. This
is the combination that offers the highest energy density and thrust.
The Atlas-Centaur was just that type of booster. However, although a

Shuttle-Centaur upper stage would serve NASA and USAF’s needs, it
was soon realized that a one-size-ϐits-all approach would not be
satisfactory. Civilian and military missions had radically different
requirements that resulted in two Shuttle Centaur versions. The Air
Force conϐiguration, named Centaur G, would place a 40-ft long, 10,000-
pound payload into geosynchronous orbit. It would be roughly 19.5 feet
long and 14.2 feet in diameter, a somewhat shorter but fatter version of
the existing 30-foot long and 10-foot wide Atlas-Centaur. The NASA
version, called Centaur G1 (G-prime), was 29.1 feet long and 14.2 feet
wide to dispatch payloads to longer distances, up to interplanetary
destinations. Both versions would be mounted in the payload bay and,
similarly to the IUS, tilted to the proper angle before deployment and
ejection by a Centaur Integrated Support System mechanism (Figs. 4.6
and 4.7).
Figure 4.6 Space Shuttle Centaur conϐigurations.
[Source: A high energy stage for the National Space Transporation System, (pdf), p. 10
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19840024341

As NASA had already conducted feasibility studies into developing a
Shuttle version of the Atlas-Centaur, overall management
responsibility for both upper stage versions was entrusted to the space
agency. At the same time, their development would be supervised by a
combined NASA/Air Force Joint Program Ofϐice. Furthermore, as
General Dynamics was the designer and manufacturer of the Atlas-
Centaur, it was reasonable to select them as the prime contractor for
both versions of the Shuttle Centaur. Another sensible choice was to
assign engine development to Pratt&Whitney, as the Shuttle Centaur
would be propelled by the same dual RL-10 engine conϐiguration
already successfully adopted by the Atlas version. In addition, they
would improve their performance. Finally, Honeywell and Teledyne
were tasked with developing sophisticated avionics for safe and
accurate navigation and control.
Figure 4.7 Shuttle Centaur G-prime conϐiguration and major structural interfaces.
[Source: The effect of nonlinearities on the dynamic response of a large shuttle payload, (pdf)
p. 9. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19870008679]
By 1985, the Shuttle Centaur program struggled to negotiate a
steeply uphill path. Expenditure quickly rose due to higher-than-
anticipated costs due to multiple work shifts and quality control
problems10. Additional delays were caused by NASA easing the

redundancy requirements on complex systems, which called for their
redesign. Integration with the Orbiter was proving arduous as the
support structure within the payload bay had to be changed to ensure
it could accommodate the heavy upper stage and payload safely. When
a pressure test of the hydrogen tank sprang a leak from one of the
welds in a test article unit, a four-month delay ensued to strengthen the
damaged structure and implement the modiϐication on the ϐlight unit.
Avionics qualiϐication was another hurdle that brought about delays
and cost overruns. The ϐirst spaceworthy unity of the Centaur-G prime
was delivered to NASA on September 27, 1985. The development of the
USAF Centaur-G was further exacerbated by the requirement of
compatibility with the Shuttle and expendable launchers, such as the
Titan 34D11. While the upper stage would be supported at the front and
aft end within the Orbiter’s payload bay, the Titan-compatible version
could be secured only to the aft end. Such a difference substantially
impacted the size and position of elements of primary importance. As a
result, a “bolt-on kit” was proposed. The Centaur-G would be
compatible with the Titan, and when required to ride in the Shuttle, the
“bolt-on kit” would provide for the structural interface at the forward
end.
Furthermore, it was expected that the Centaur-G would
compensate for the lower-than-advertised performance of the Titan
34D. In hindsight, the USAF would have been better off designing two
subversions of the Centaur-G. In April 1985, General Dynamics
proposed that the Air Force breaks out of the Titan-based Centaur-G
because its alterations would add risk and complexity and might not be
entirely feasible. A less-than-ideal relationship with NASA and
concerns with their quality control system were additional factors
plaguing the design of the upper stage. Soon, however, all these issues
would dissipate. In fact, following the Challenger accident on January
28, 1986, the Shuttle Centaur program was terminated by the end of
the year.
Rarely there is satisfaction in the cancellation of a space program,
but in the case of the Shuttle Centaur, its dissolution received a warm
welcome, particularly from the astronaut community. STS-61F was to
be the ϐirst Shuttle Centaur ϐlight, tasked to deliver the solar probe
Ulysses. On the next mission, STS-61-G, another Centaur, would have

launched the Galileo probe towards Jupiter. Chief Astronaut John Young
routinely dubbed both ϐlights as the “Death Star” missions as a darkly
humorous reference to a few peculiarities in the Centaur’s design that
bore the extraordinary potential of killing astronauts in charge of its
deployment. One crucial issue concerned safety during an ascent abort.
As STS-61F’s Commander Frederick H. Hack explains, “if you’ve got a
return-to-launch-site abort or a transatlantic abort and you’ve got to
land, and you’ve got a rocket ϐilled with liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen
in the cargo bay, you’ve got to get rid of the liquid oxygen and liquid
hydrogen, so that means you’ve got to dump it while you’re ϐlying
through this contingency abort. And to make sure that it can dump
safely, you need to have redundant parallel dump valves, helium
systems that control the dump valves, software that makes sure that
contingencies can be taken care of. And then when you land, here
you’re sitting with the Shuttle Centaur in the cargo bay that you haven’t
been able to dump all of it, so you’re venting gaseous hydrogen out this
side, gaseous oxygen out that side, and this is just not a good idea”.
The whole design was also ϐlawed because it was never meant to be
human-rated, and the human rating process was carried out in the face
of continuous cost savings. “The whole concept of taking something
that was never designed to be part of the human spaceϐlight mission,
that had his many potential failure modes, was not a good idea,
because you’re always saying, “Well, I don’t want to solve the problems
too exhaustively; I’d like to solve them just enough so that I’ve solved
them.” Well, what does that mean? You don’t want to spend any more
money than you have to, to solve the problem, so you’re always trying
to ϐigure out, “Am I compromising too much or not?” And the net result
is you’re always compromising”.
To save on structural mass, the Centaur’s tanks, both in the Atlas
and Shuttle versions, were formed by thin skin panels of aluminum
alloy. Lacking internal stiffening elements, the hydrogen and oxygen
tanks were pressurized to maintain their shape. As Hauck recalls, “if it’s
not pressurized, it’s going to collapse by its own weight. If it were not
pressurized, but suspended and you pushed on it with your ϐinger, the
tank walls would give and you’d see that you’re ϐlexing the metal”.
Another weight-saving solution consisted of a common bulkhead
between the two propellant tanks, similar to the conϐiguration adopted

for Saturn V’s second stage. As Gary W. Johnson, who at that time was
Deputy Director of the Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance
(SR&QA) Directorate, explains, “the big concern we had was… it would
take very little delta pressure across that to cause it to break and really
cause a real problem12. Instead of having a direct delta P alarm system
in there, that if you were getting close to that pressure it would shut
down the pressurization system or try to safe systems, they had a
computer program that tended to try to manage the pressure in the
oxygen tank and manage the pressure in the hydrogen tank, and
between these two pressures that you’re managing, then try to make
sure you met the requirements for the delta P. But there wasn’t a direct
measurement and that was the real concern we had… The Safety Panel
was insisting we needed to have something separate on that”.
Due to the volatile nature of liquid hydrogen and oxygen, Centaur
would be fuelled on the launch pad just hours before lift-off. Johnson
and his team had further worries concerning the propellant loading
system:” loading was being done through plumbing through the Shuttle
and then had to go into the Centaur. The plumbing lines had so little
margin in them that if we suddenly had to stop propellant loading when
you’re loading the External Tank, the hammer-type pressure you get,
pulse from suddenly shutting that off—the analysis showed you had a
very good chance you may rupture lines in the Orbiter, which would
cause the loss of the Shuttle and the Orbiter on the pad. That was a big
safety concern, that we didn’t have sufϐicient margin in those lines”.
Extremely worrisome was how the ϐlight hardware was being
approved for spaceϐlight despite not having passed ground testing.
This was an issue that profoundly struck Gary Johnson: “I was
reviewing, going through some of the paperwork, and I noticed on
some of the critical relay boxes that send the commands from the
computer that they’d had a bunch of failures in testing in vibration. I
didn’t see in the paperwork, any real closeout that said that that
hardware ought to be certiϐied yet. Yet we had papers that had been
signed off by the people involved saying things were certiϐied and all
ready to go, when it looked like to me we still had some open problems
that they had to ϐix. I called the engineer in that was responsible for
that system, and I was quizzing him about we’ve gone through
everything and you had these problems. I said, “What’s the rationale for

signing that this is ready to go?” I could see [he]—this was a young
engineer—was fairly visibly shaken, and he conϐided that he was forced
to sign it by his management”.
Another safety concern that Huck remembers bringing up at a
meeting pertained to the redundancy in the helium system to
pressurize the tanks and force-feed the propellants into the engines’
combustion chamber. In the case of a launch abort, it would have
provided for propellant expulsion to bring the Orbiter weight down to a
manageable level for a safe landing. “In early to mid-January 1986, we
were working an issue having to do with redundancy in the helium
actuation system for the liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen dump valves,
and it was clear that the program was willing to compromise on the
margins in the propulsive force being provided by the pressurized
helium. We were very concerned about it…we went to a board to argue
why this was not a good idea to compromise on this feature, and the
board turned down the request”. That meeting was quite revealing, so
much so that soon afterwards, Hauck called his crew, expressed his
concern about how NASA was willing to sacriϐice the safety of this
mission and reassured them that if anybody wanted to be taken off the
mission, he would support their decision. The crew stayed together.
If you wonder why these smart people were willing to risk their
lives, fully knowing how dangerous ϐlying with the Centaur would be,
you need to understand the historical context. As STS-61F’s mission
specialist John M. Lounge admits, “We assumed we could solve all these
problems. We were still basically bulletproof. Until Challenger, we just
thought we were bulletproof and the things would always work, some
details to work out”. Hauck echoed the same feelings: “we’d never killed
anybody in spaceϐlight up to that point. I mean, there was a certain
amount of sense that it wouldn’t happen”. Besides, an astronaut would
take any chance to ϐly in space, particularly for high-proϐile missions.
“It was a challenging mission, it was a privilege to be assigned to it,
important mission, I thought, so, we just had to work it out, was our
attitude”, Lounge recalls. If then the astronaut happens to be a Navy
aviator like Frederic Hauck, then pride provides a not so negligible
contribution: “You know, I probably had an ego tied up with it so much
that, you know, “I can do this. Heck, I’ve ϐlown off of aircraft carriers and
I’ve ϐlown in combat, and I’ve put myself at risk in more ways than this,

and I’m willing to do it.” So I didn’t ever think of saying, “Well, I’m not
going to ϐly this mission.”
As the Challenger investigation was in progress and as more details
emerged on the bad safety culture within NASA, the Shuttle Centaur
program was still kept alive despite the numerous safety issues
surrounding its development. However, Centaur was living on
borrowed time. Before the end of the year, NASA Administrator and
former astronaut Dick Truly decided to close the program. The Shuttle
Centaur never ϐlew in space, and all missions requiring spacecraft
deployment employed the much more reliable, though less performing,
Inertial Upper Stage (Fig. 4.8).
Figure 4.8 As of May 2016, the sole surviving test article for the Centaur G-prime is on display at
the NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.
[Source: https:// www. nasa. gov/ sites/ default/ ϐiles/ thumbnails/ image/ centaur_ dedicate. jpg]
The concept of cryogenics upper stage for use on the Space Shuttle
was resumed for a brief period in the early years of the new
millennium. Boeing’s Advanced Shuttle Upper Stage (ASUS) concept
was tested in 2000 at the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The basic

idea was that the upper stage would be launched empty and refuelled
during ascent by drawing liquid hydrogen and oxygen from the
External Tank. The propellant transfer concept employed a pressure-
fed rapid chill and ϐill system that consisted of a spray bar located in
the center of each tank and running through its full length.
At the beginning of the ϐilling operations, the propellant would have
chilled down the tank wall while the vaporized propellant would have
safely exited through a vent system. Once the wall had been cooled to
an acceptable level, the vent valve would be closed, and ϐilling would
have begun and was expected to last ϐive minutes. It was a smart
concept as it would tap into the available reserve of hydrogen and
oxygen that was typically left in the External Tank after separation
from the Orbiter and that would have otherwise been wasted. In this
way, there would not be a reduction in the lifting performances of the
Space Shuttle. Also, as the chill and no-vent ϐill process was considered
for in-orbit propellant transfer, it was reasoned that the data and
lessons learned by using the ASUS would assist in the development of
reduced gravity cryogenic propellant transfer technology.
Unfortunately, although testing proved that the concept would work, it
never got a chance to prove itself on a space mission following the
Columbia accident.
In the second semester of 2002, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
undertook a six-month evaluation study of a High-Energy Upper Stage
(HEUS) concept. Proposed by Northrop Grumman, it once again
consisted of a liquid-fueled upper stage. Contrary to the Centaur or
ASUS, it would use hypergolic storable propellants, such as
monomethyl hydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide, which are inherently
safer than the liquid hydrogen and oxygen combination. Two
categories of the upper stage were considered: one using liquid
propellants, the other a storable gel propellant. Stage subsystems other
than propulsion were based largely on heritage hardware to minimize
cost, risk, and development schedule. The study did not progress past
the conceptual stage. If it had reached the development phase and the
assembly workshop, the HEUS would have been ideal for delivering the
Hubble Space Telescope’s successor James Webb Space Telescope
(JWST) and the exoplanet hunter Space Interferometry Mission (SIM).

The Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle: the space tug
returns
Despite the successful development and deployment of the IUS and
PAM-D upper stages until the mid-1980s, NASA did not lose hope for
supporting the entry into service of the much-coveted space tug.
Conceptual studies continued for several years, bringing a plethora of
designs characterized by ϐlexibility and modularity to accommodate
the widest range of activities with one spacecraft type. While the IUS
and PAM-D served only as upper stages to deliver satellites to high
orbits, the space tug offered a wide range of satellite servicing
capabilities to complement the Space Shuttle program and support
future space stations.
Redenominated as the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), this
spacecraft consisted of a modular Short Range Vehicle (SRV)
incorporating a separable bi-propellant Propulsion Module (PM) (Fig.
4.9). The SRV would contain avionics, batteries, solar arrays, and four
hydrazine-fed reaction control system modules for attitude control and
minor velocity changes. Close-in precise maneuvering around
contamination-sensitive payloads would be performed with an
additional reaction control system fed with nitrogen gas. The
Propulsion Module would use four variable (13 to 130 lb) thrust
engines to give 90% of the total velocity change capability of the OMV.
However, the Short Range Vehicle by itself place, rendezvous, retrieve,
and berth payloads.

Figure 4.9 An exploded view of the OMV showing its two main elements
[Source: Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle Support To The Space Station (pdf), p. 4 Available at
https:// commons. erau. edu/ space-congress-proceedings/ proceedings-1988-25th/ session-10/ ]
The spacecraft would be approximately 15 feet in diameter and 56
inches in length, excluding protuberances such as sensors, antennas
and mechanical connections to the Shuttle’s payload bay. When fully
loaded for the most demanding missions, it would weigh
approximately 18,000 pounds, inclusive of 9000 pounds of hydrazine
and nitrogen tetroxide for the propulsion module’s four engines, 1180
pounds of hydrazine for the monopropellant reaction control system,
and 165 pounds of nitrogen for the cold gas reaction control system.
The OMV included an extendable/retractable probe and a radar
system supported by navigational sensors for target acquisition by the

redundant onboard computer system to support docking with a
payload. In addition, a standard set of aircraft-type running lights
(amber, red and green) and TV cameras would support Orbiter and
Space Station’s crews in visually acquiring the OMV during proximity
operations, retrieval and berthing operations (Fig. 4.10).
Figure 4.10 A detailed view the OMV.
[Source: Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle Support To The Space Station (pdf), p. 4 Available at
https:// commons. erau. edu/ space-congress-proceedings/ proceedings-1988-25th/ session-10/ ]
Such apparently uncomplicated spacecraft would be capable of a
multitude of tasks. First, it could be useful as a propulsion module to
augment the performance of planned and future high energy upper
stages for delivering payloads to altitudes up to and beyond GEO.
Secondly, it could accommodate mission sharing by delivering multiple
payloads to different orbital altitudes and inclinations. Third, it could
be used for planned retrievals of spacecraft after they had completed

their useful mission life or for period servicing/updates. Finally, it
could provide an efϐicient means for reboosting large observatory-
class payloads (which have no propulsion of their own) to compensate
for orbital decay.
Operating with both primary and verniers thrusters, the OMV could
be a free-ϐlying subsatellite, moving attached science payloads or
sensors to large separation distances from the Orbiter, followed by
later return for retrieval. Such missions would vary from days to weeks
to months, with extended orbital operational times provided by an
OMV power augmentation kit. Lastly, it could be readily adaptable to
basic space station activities by transferring and maneuvering
modules and logistic equipment.
The OMV could operate in a so-called “ground-based” and “orbit-
stored” mode. Operating out of the Shuttle, in a “ground-based” mode,
the OMV would perform its mission and then be retrieved by the same
Orbiter. Back on the ground, it would be serviced, refuelled and reused
on the next available ϐlight. In the “orbit-stored” mode, the OMV would
be left in orbit for extended periods to conduct multiple missions until
the depletion of fuel supplies. At this point, it would be retrieved and
returned for refurbishment, or it would be serviced and refuelled in
orbit. Finally, operating in a “space station-based mode”, the OMV
would remain based at the space station from where it would support
logistics/payload exchange or servicing missions between the space
station, the Space Shuttle, free-ϐlying satellites, and uncrewed space
platforms.
The basic OMV was conϐigured to easily receive modular add-on
kits to enhance capabilities or complete speciϐic mission tasks. Once
such kit was the Integrated Orbital Servicing System (IOSS) module
changeout for satellite servicing and refuelling. Such a module had two
major components: a servicer mechanism and a storage rack to
transport repair parts (Fig. 4.11).

Figure 4.11 Conϐiguration of the Integrated Orbital Servicing System.
[Source: Servicer System Demonstration Plan and Capability Development, p. 89. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880006513]
The storage rack incorporated a cruciform structural arrangement.
Analysis showed it as the most weight-efϐicient as it would provide an
ample mounting surface for repair parts and signiϐicant ϐlexibility in
their distribution. In addition, with an effective reach of 11.2 feet, the
servicer arm would be used for satellite servicing functions, such as
removal of defective parts and replacement with the new units from
the storage rack.
Refuelling could also occur by using one or more servicer arms
dedicated to ϐluid transfer. A module would be mounted on the storage
rack for each type of ϐluid and pressurant (when applicable). It would
contain the tanks, support structure, plumbing, valves, monitoring
instrumentation and controls, ϐlexible lines, cables and their
management system, thermal protection and refuelling/resupply
interface unit. In the stowed position, the module was to be ϐlush with
the stowage rack’s front face, allowing free movement of the servicer

arm. During launch, the ϐluid line/cable management system would be
secured with latches. It could consist of either a commercially available
metal ϐlexible conduit or a folding mechanism with straight support
bars and joints to attach the ϐluid lines and cables and control their
minimum bend radius (Figs. 4.12 and 4.13).
The interface between the refuelling/resupply module and the
servicer was a simple, mechanical fastening system with electrical
connections for control and monitoring functions. The module(s) could
be integrated with the servicer at the space station, in the Orbiter
cargo bay or on the ground, allowing operational ϐlexibility. The
servicer arm could deploy the refuelling/resupply interface unit and
attach it to the disconnects on the spacecraft, anywhere within its
reach envelope. Multiple ϐluid transfers could occur simultaneously by
connecting additional modules to refuelling/resupplying interface
units. In addition, the servicer arm could be used for other tasks during
the ϐluid transfer operations, such as equipment module changeout,
and inspection.
Figure 4.12 The proposed refuelling module on the IOSS stowage rack.
[Source: Spacecraft Servicing Demonstration Plan (pdf), p. 125. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19840023188 ]

Figure 4.13 Refueling with the IOSS using a dedicated servicer arm.
[Source: Spacecraft Servicing Demonstration Plan (pdf), p. 130. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19840023188]
NEWSTAR: Nuclear Energy Waste Space
Transportation And Removal
Telecommunication satellites, interplanetary probes, space station
components, space-borne telescope were to be some of the customers
entrusted to the loving care of a space tug. However, NASA is a place
where ideas ϐlow freely and even when they might sound “wild” they
are afforded a careful feasibility look. For instance, given a growing
concern with the disposal of nuclear waste derived from the operations
of tens of atomic reactors dispersed through the country, in the mid-
seventies NASA considered if they could lend and helping hand in the
management of such nasty byproducts of our industrialized society.

The result was the “Nuclear Energy Waste-Space Transportation And
Removal”, or NEWSTAR report.
The atomic nucleus is a well known source of power. Heavy
elements such as thorium, uranium and plutonium have properties
such that if bombarded with neutrons of sufϐicient energy, their
nucleus will break apart (or ϐission) into two parts (typically of unequal
mass). The results of a ϐission can produce virtually any element in the
periodic table, but some elements are so rare as to be negligible. The
normal “ϐission produced spectrum” is a double humped curve with
peaks at zirconium and cerium. Thus, ϐissioning a nucleus produces
unequal quantities of various elements which range throughout the
periodic table. The result becomes more complicated from several
“real world” situations. First of all, the type fuel used in a reactor
(thorium, uranium, or plutonium) will change the ϐission produced
spectrum. Additionally, the number of available neutrons in the reactor,
the time that the fuel is used, and numerous other factors will change
the characteristics of the ϐission product spectrum to some degree.
In some cases, the neutron which enters the nucleus does not
produce a ϐission. The neutron is simply accepted into the nucleus, and
a new isotope is formed. This isotope is radioactive and, since it is now
neutron-rich, tends to decay by negative beta radiation and moves up
the periodic table. Successive neutron captures move the nucleus up
the periodic table and exotic elements, such as neptunium, plutonium,
americium, curium are obtained. As a general rule, approximately 2 to
5 percent of the total wastes will consist of these exotic (or
superheavy) elements. They are termed “actinides” because all of them
fall into a chemical family whose ϐirst element is actinium.
The elimination of all these wastes is important because they are
highly radioactive and biologically toxic. The properties of actinides
and ϐission fragments vary from each other. The ϐission fragments tend
to isotopes that emit gamma and beta radiation while the actinides are
usually alpha emitters. Although alpha particles are easily shielded,
they are more biologically toxic than the penetrating gamma radiation.
Another important difference in the ϐission fragments and the
actinides is that ϐission fragments tend to have much shorter decay
times than do the actinides. If ϐission products could be isolated from
the enviroument for periods on the order of 1000 years, they would be

rather harmless. In the case of actinides, the required isolation is on
the order of 250 000 years.
With this premises in mind, the space agency considered ϐirst
where such wastes could be safely dispatched. A number of
destinations were considered, such as direct shipping to the
enourmouns burning furnace on the sky, the Sun. While an all time
favourite by sci-ϐi aϐicionados and general population alike, the never
forgiving laws of orbital mechanics command a velocity change of
some 30 km/s. The punishing dosage of propellant imposed by such a
signiϐicant delta-v makes it reaching the Sun a nightmare for mission
analysts and design engineers alike13. Solar orbit and Earth orbit
destinations were reviewed but quickly discarded because the stability
of these orbits cannot be guaranteed for the time periods required to
isolate actinides (hundreds of thousands of years). Dispatch towards a
planet was also judged unacceptable for several reasons: (1) ϐirst of all,
targeting these bodies would require sophisticated guidance, (2)
secondly, launch opportunities are quite limited due to planetary
motion, and (3) ϐinally, natural evolution on most of the planets would
make isolation of the waste virtually impossible after impact, and the
resultant contamination could hinder future exploration of these
bodies. Therefore, the only remaining and sensible alternative was an
escape route from the Solar System14.
Within the NEWSTAR spacecraft, the radioactive waste would be
packaged in 19 circular canisters arrayed into an hexagon15 which is
enclosed within a multi-layered shield designed to block escaping
gamma radiation, neutrons, and heat. Once in orbit, the gamma and
neutron shields would be removed as their purpose was to assure the
astronauts would not prematurely die of radiation poisoning. While the
thermal shield would remain with the spacecraft, the gamma and
neutron shields would be recovered for reuse. A heat pipe was to run
through the center of each canister to remove and displace the
radioisotopes decaying heat to a circular radiator. In the meantime,
thermionic diodes surrounding the heat pipes convert heat to
electricity. Power conditioning units mounted on a large barrel behind
the radiator would converter the original high amperage, low voltage
output of the diodes to low amperage, high voltage current used by the
spacecraft propulsion apparatus. The barrel would also act as low

temperature radiator to maintain the avionics and control units within
their working temperature. A cruciform array of ion thrusters would
propel the spacecraft on its interstellar journey using metallic mercury
as working ϐluid. Stored in a dedicated tank next to the circular
radiator, the very dense metal would also double as radiation shielding
for the avionics over much of the ϐlight (Fig. 4.14).
While the NEWSTAR propulsion module could be started in LEO,
concerns about a spacecraft hauling a radioactive payload lingering for
a long time close to Earth while waiting for the electric thrusters to
build enough momentum to reach escape velocity16, lead NASA
mission planners to request the services of a space tug. Hence a typical
NEWSTAR delivery would consist of two Shuttle launches. The ϐirst
would carried a liquid oxygen-hydrogen tug, conceivably a Centaur
upper stage, to Earth orbit; the second Shuttle would haul NEWSTAR
and rendezvous with the tug. Following mating of the two spacecraft,
and systems checkout, the gamma and neutron shields are removed.
The tug is ignited and places NEWSTAR into an orbit that is free of the
Earth. Once Earth escape is achieved, NEWSTAR thrusters are started
and the vehicle is powered to solar system escape. The gamma and
neutron shields are retrieved by the second Shuttle and returned to
Earth for reuse17.

Figure 4.14 An overview of the NEWSTAR vehicle concept.
[Source: Nuclear Energy Waste-Space Transportation and Removal (pdf), p. 16. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19760009085]
One signiϐicant safety aspect to consider was how the radioisotopic
heat could be released when not exploited to power the propulsion
unit. In particular, this would be the case during ascent. Calculations
indicated that a prelaunch chilldown was inadequate to handle the
thermal load, so an active cooling system was investigated. The
solution consisted of a losed-loop organic ϐluid circulating directly
through the holes between the hexagonl cylindrical cannisters. This
ϐluid then transfers its heat to water stored in a tank placed at the
forward end of the Shuttle’s payload bay, and the resultant steam is
vented overboard (Fig. 4.15).
The design of the waste disposal vehicle was made with emphasis
on ϐlight safety and keeping in consideration the available intact abort
modes available during ascent. In the case of an impending loss of
vehicle a purpose built ejection mechanism would slam the payload
bay door open and expel the spacecraft off the breaking Orbiter. To
provide for environmental protection, the radioactive package was to

be enclosed in a cocoon so that in the case of a catastrophic abort, the
cocoon with its package could sever itself from the rest of the
NEWSTAR spacecraft and parachute at sea awaiting recovery and
relaunch.
In the case of failure in LEO and before departure, the crew could
attempt to effect on-the-spot repairs or return the spacecraft to Earth
for renovation and relaunch. In the case of space tug failure, the best
recovery mode would be to start the electric engines and allow
NEWSTAR power itself to Earth escape, targeting the most stable solar
orbit that can be achieved.
Figure 4.15 NEWSTAR in the Shuttle payload bay.
[Source: Nuclear Energy Waste-Space Transportation and Removal (pdf), p. 23. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19760009085]

1
2
3
4
REFERENCES
NASA (1975) Nuclear Energy Waste-Space Transportation and Removal. Available at:
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19760009085
NASA (1984a) A high energy stage for the National Space Transporation System. Available at:
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19840024341
NASA (1984b) Spacecraft Servicing Demonstration Plan. Available at:
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19840023188
NASA (1987) Servicer System Demonstration Plan and Capability Development. Available at:
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19880006513
NASA (1987) The effect of nonlinearities on the dynamic response of a large shuttle payload.
Available at: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19870008679
Space Congress Embry-Riddle (1988). Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle Support To The Space Station.
Available at https://commons.erau.edu/space-congress-proceedings/proceedings-1988-
25th/session-10/
Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments. – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
The adjective “spinning” refers to the common practice of spinning a spacecraft along its long
axis during orbital manoeuvring to maintain directional stability. It is an effective method to
stabilize the spacecraft trajectory resulting in substantial attitude control system fuel savings.
 
During the ascent four so-called intact abort modes could be invoked based on altitude, velocity
and severity of the emergency. For each abort mode the Orbiter was expected to safely landing
either at the Kennedy Space Center or at selected airstrips in Europe or Africa. Other abort modes
were possible for even more serious conditions such as loss of all three main engines. These were
called contingency modes and they entailed the crew attemting to reach an emergency landing
strip on the US East Coast or a safe altitude for bailing out. For a contingency abort mode the
chance of survival of the Orbiter and its payload were much reduced if compared to an intact
abort mode.
 
This is akin to place your arms and hands in front of your face to shield it by a nearby explosion.
 
In fact, both capabilities would be added many years later following the Columbia accident.

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
 
Hughes Aircraft Company had built the spacecraft for Satellite Business System, a private
communication company owned by subsidiaries of Aetna Life and Casualty, COMSAT General
Corporation and IBM.
 
This would be typical for any Shuttle-based IUS deployment.
 
This include the deployment of the Magnum satellite for electronic signals intelligent (ELINT)
on STS-51C, the ϐirst Space Shuttle mission ϐlown for the DoD.
 
While a spacecraft is considered as the payload for a launcher, the payload of a spacecraft is the
complement of equipment designed to perform the desired mission. The remaining mass is taken
up by propellant and hardware to operate the spacecraft and payload.
 
Later renamed Ulysses.
 
Historically, the space industry does not apply shift working to the manufacturing process of
spaceworthy hardware. It enhances the risks of degrading the quality of the assembly due to
human factor errors, such as incomplete handovers, typically arising when maintaining
production across shifts.
 
The USAF was meant to rely only and exclusively on the Space Shuttle but uncertainty on how
well it would perform, led to the agreement that an expendable vehicle capability had to be
retained. At least until when the Space Shuttle had proved its worth. The USAF was difϐident in
putting all of their eggs in one basket so much so that they strongly opposed the policy of having
to depend on one launcher type only.
 
When liquid hydrogen and oxygen are mixed together, the result is explosive indeed!
 
The NASA Parker Solar Probe and the ESA Solar Orbiter are, to date, the closest spacecraft
ever sent towards the Sun, with the NASA’s explorer scheduled to reach within 9.86 radiii (6.9
million km or 4.3 milion miles) from the center of the Sun. Both spacecraft employed multiple
planetary gravity assists manevouers at Venus to contain the overall propellant mass within
reasonable value and leave sufϐicient mass for the scientiϐic instruments.

14
15
16
17
 
Of course, in such a scenario it would be prudent to ensure that the escape trajectory would
not intercept any planet in neighbouring solar systems, just in case they were inhabited. Surely we
would not want to be known as the ϐly-tippers of this part of the galaxy who cannot get rid of the
nasty habit of indiscriminately dumping waste whenever we see ϐit!
 
The number 19 was dictated by geometric considerations.
 
Electric thrusters can be operated for a long time. However, they cannot offer the same thrust
of a chemical rocket. It is by operating continuously for a long time that they build up enough
delta-v. Despite the longer time, they do so by consuming a much smaller quantity of propellant
compared to a chemical rocket tasked with achieving the same velocity change.
 
This recovery is necessary due to cost as well as tile fact that their uncontrolled reentry would
pose a hazard.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_5
5. Unϐlown On-Orbit Servicing
Capabilities
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
Opening the era of on-orbit satellite servicing
Any means of transportation is designed for reusability. Given the
effort placed in designing and building a vehicle, purchasing the raw
materials, labor, and manufacturing facilities, no one would seriously
contemplate discarding one’s means of transportation after a single
voyage. Nevertheless, the space industry has worked in this manner for
the last six decades, launching expensive throw-away rockets without
recovering and reusing them. This is a lasting legacy of the Cold War
that obliged the USA and the USSR to create intercontinental ballistic
missiles for nuclear warheads and rockets to launch satellites for
reconnaissance, early warning and communications. With time and
money at a premium, rocket development was directed towards
expendable launchers because that was the faster option. If you
consider that a rocket engine is essentially a device designed to tame
the energy of a powerful explosion, then it is easy to appreciate how
rocket design is indeed rocket science! Making them reusable, while
not unfeasible, would have required an expenditure of resources that
were not available when the superpowers were trying to outdo each
other at an accelerating pace. One signiϐicant outcome of expendability
is that it prevents substantial reductions in the cost of access to space.
The material and ϐinancial resources invested in manufacturing such a
vehicle must be fully absorbed in a single mission. Thus it translates

into a lofty price tag because it must account for the overall cost of
manufacturing the rocket (remember, a brand new rocket is built every
time, from scratch) plus the earnings the company seeks to achieve.
Because such a formula continues today1, it has had far-reaching
implications for spacecraft design. In fact, because of the price tag,
rocket launches are infrequent and need to be planned years in
advance. It also means that typically the customer has only one chance
to ϐly their payloads. As a result, all hardware destined for space is
designed and built to operate perfectly. Nevertheless, failures do occur.
They range from a component becoming inoperative due to wear and
tear to random failures to electronic components caused by the
electromagnetic bombardment from the Sun to expendables depletion.
So why not repair or service them in space? With few launches
available per year and at such a high cost, there is simply no proϐitable
market for a spacecraft capable of servicing and maintaining orbital
assets by, for instance, refuelling or conducting hardware repairs. If a
satellite fails, the lack of an orbital breakdown recovery service means
the asset is lost, even though the fault would have been repairable. This
translates into costly and time-consuming development and testing to
ensure the spacecraft will operate ϐlawlessly throughout its planned
orbital life. In the world of spacecraft development, there is no such
thing as a prototype. The spacecraft that is built is the prototype and
the real deal.
The arrival of the Space Shuttle promised to overturn the inefϐicient
way of accessing space and lower the cost of launching payloads
dramatically. It also pushed the space industry to adopt a reusability
attitude related to the design and operation of satellites and other
space hardware. In the early 1970s, NASA Deputy Administrator
George Low instructed the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to ϐind
ways to improve the reliability and durability of space hardware and
reduce the number and frequency of failures and satellite losses. Frank
Cepollina, a mechanical engineer, was tasked to tackle the problem.
Cepollina and his team came up with a logical and elegant solution
based on modularity. They recognized that reliability could be
drastically improved if a spacecraft were designed with all of its
subsystems’ components built into modules that could be plugged into
the spacecraft’s structure and connected through a common set of

standard interfaces. “The modules were rectangular, and they went
around the entire spacecraft system. Smaller modules were also used
for electronics, sensors, and instruments…there is signiϐicantly less
design iteration between spacecraft and the science instruments if
they are modular, since scientists don’t have to become spacecraft
experts and engineers don’t have to become would-be scientists.”,
Cepollina explains. It is a concept that applies to any spacecraft, from
space-based observatories to communication satellites. The notion
was dubbed the Multimission Modular Spacecraft (MMS) and spread
quickly through the engineering community and into new projects,
such as the Solar Max sun observatory and the Large Space Telescope
(LST)2.
Interestingly, Cepollina and his team had indeed developed the
Multimission Modular Spacecraft with the Space Shuttle in mind. When
George Low directed Goddard to improve on spacecraft reliability,
Cepollina recalls that he also added: “oh by the way, this thing called
Apollo is coming to an end, and we’re going to have another vehicle
coming along that could possibly provide astronauts to ϐix things for
you”. The modular components of the MMS were EVA-rated by
developing power tools that did not require an astronaut to grab hold
of a handrail to stay in place when attempting to unscrew a box3. The
MMS speciϐications also included an external grapple ϐixture to permit
capture with the Shuttle robotic arm. All in all, rating an MMS for on-
orbit crew-tended servicing increased complexity only negligibly.
The ϐirst spacecraft to fully adopt the MMS ethos was Solar Max,
manufactured by Fairchild Industries. She was the ϐirst solar
observatory dedicated to studying solar ϐlares, violent eruptions
regularly occurring on the Sun’s surface. The spacecraft was launched
on February 14th 1980, to survey the solar ϐlare phenomena during the
solar maxim period of the Sun’s 11-year cycles4, when they occur most
frequently. Its ϐindings would be integrated with those of sounding
rockets and other ground-based observatories for what was expected
to be a memorable International Solar Maximum Year. Unfortunately,
the 77-million-dollar spacecraft was suddenly crippled ten months
later by three blown fuses, hermetically sealed within the attitude
control system. As a result, the Sun observer had lost its capability to
remain precisely and ϐirmly pointed at our star and began spinning and

wobbling. Of the seven scientiϐic instruments, only three could keep
gathering valuable data as they did not suffer from the coarse pointing
regime that the spacecraft could now only provide by exploiting the
interaction of torque bars with the Earth’s magnetic ϐield. The loss for
the scientiϐic community was great, but the foresight of Cepollina and
his team meant that an alternative plan, though ambitious, could be
now put in place. That plan was called STS-41C.
On April 6th, 1986, the ϐive crew of Space Shuttle Challenger set sail
to space and began their STS-41C mission. The centerpiece of the ϐlight
was the recovery and in-situ repair of Solar Max. It took just one
spacewalk to give a new lease on life to the crippled observatory.
Thanks to those repairs, it continued to observe our parent star until it
succumbed to the atmospheric drag and re-entered on December 2nd,
1989. More life-saving missions would follow. In November 1984, the
crew of STS-51A recovered two disabled communication satellites
stuck in Low-Earth Orbit. After refurbishment, they were relaunched a
few years later. The following year, the crew of STS-51D rendezvoused
with Syncom-IV-3, a large communication satellite, and repaired a vital
piece of electronic equipment whose failure prevented the satellite
from igniting its engine and reaching its reach geosynchronous orbit.
In March 1990, the crew of STS-49 not only put through its paces the
newest ship in the Space Shuttle ϐleet, Endeavour, but also reached the
massive Intelsat 603 telecommunication satellite. Through spacewalk
carried out by three astronauts5, the satellite was given a new rocket
engine to push it to its operational orbit. Finally, ϐive missions serviced
and upgraded the world-famed Hubble Space Telescopes.
What is the value of satellite servicing? First of all, it expands the
options for mission design, providing a path for more sophisticated
and capable systems. In fact, by being designed for servicing, old
components can be replaced with newer, better ones without
rebuilding and relaunching the whole spacecraft. This is particularly
valuable in the case of scientiϐic spacecraft such as space-based
telescopes. Using the Hubble Space Telescope as a representative case,
every servicing mission resulted in a brand new telescope with state-
of-the-art instruments and systems. In other words, the Hubble
telescope orbiting now is a completely changed machine than that
designed and built in the 70s. Would have NASA built ϐive Hubble

telescopes in place of those servicing ϐlights? The answer is no. A
ϐlagship spacecraft such as Hubble is built once, and when a critical
malfunction hits them, as it happened multiple times to Hubble, they
become among the most expensive pieces of space junk. Hence,
satellite servicing offers a cost-effective way to upgrade a space asset
by extending its useful lifetime and installing more technologically
advanced hardware in an already orbiting spacecraft. Hence, a
spacecraft mission is no longer limited by its programmatic and
technical constraints in its original design. Rather, mission robustness
is improved, and success is extended beyond the initial expectations.
When Atlantis’s wheels stopped on runway 22 at Edwards Air Force
base on May 24th, 2009, it marked the end of the highly successful and
spectacular STS-125 mission and the era of on-orbit satellite servicing.
It was the last Hubble servicing mission. All subsequent ϐlights were
directed to the International Space Station to complete its assembly
and prepare the outpost for the post-Shuttle era. Throughout its life,
the Space Shuttle had demonstrated the feasibility and practicality of
satellite on-orbit servicing, even for spacecraft that were not originally
intended to be repaired or recovered in space. However, NASA had
barely scratched the surface of what they could have accomplished
with the Space Shuttle in the ϐield of on-orbit satellite repair and
servicing. In the paragraphs that follow, we will peek at some
fascinating concepts that, if realized, would have laid the road for a
busy on-orbit satellite servicing industry.
Payload Berthing System, Satellite Workshop,
and Robotic Arms
North American Rockwell proposed a so-called Payload Berthing
System (PBS) as a lightweight docking system for maintenance/repair,
checkout/veriϐication or temporary berthing of satellites. At the heart
of the PBS was a berthing ring, fabricated from a 6-inch diameter
aluminium tube and formed into a 98-inch diameter ring, which
allowed a variety of payload attaching mechanisms. For instance, it
could use the same three motor-actuated berthing latches of the
heavier and more cumbersome ϐlight support system (FSS) and
umbilical connectors next to each latch to supply power and data

connections to the berthed payload. For payloads not designed to use
the FSS’s mechanisms, the PBS’s ring would be ϐitted with an adapter
plate with three trunnions latching into the ring’s retention latches.
The adapter plate could then be ϐitted with payload-unique berthing
latches, grapple ϐixtures or tie-downs, such as a standard Orbiter keel
latch or a rotating adapter to use in conjunction with the keel latch to
allow an EVA crewmember to rotate the payload manually. The
berthing ring was attached to the Orbiter through a tubular support
structure hinged on one of the payload bay longerons. It provided a
routing path and support for the electrical cabling between the Orbiter
and the ring retention mechanisms. The pivoting arm would also
accommodate spare parts or tools for the servicing tasks and was
designed to conform to the payload’s bay curved shape to minimize
intrusion into the payload envelope. A hinge/latch mechanism would
allow the PBS to swing out of the payload bay to its operational
position, and it incorporated provisions to jettison the whole system
should a failure prevent its full retraction. The PBS offered several
advantages. It was a lightweight support for satellites/payloads
weighing up to 25,000 lb, replacing the heavier and cumbersome ϐlight
support system, and it was also suitable for payloads not compatible
with the FSS. In addition, it would be capable of being mounted
anywhere on the payload bay depending on cargo complement or
mission operational requirements, expanding the assortment of
objectives to perform on a given ϐlight (Figure 5.1).

Figure 5.1 The Rockwell’s Payload Berthing System is deployed, ready to receive a satellite.
[Source: Satellite Services Workshop II Volume 2 (pdf), p. 9. Available at: https:// nexis. gsfc. nasa. 
gov/ documents/ 4_ Satellite_ Services_ Workshop_ II_ Vol_ 2_ Nov_ 85. pdf]
An equally interesting concept, once again proposed by Rockwell,
was the satellite workshop, an expandable tent-like structure to offer a
sheltered environment to spacewalkers during servicing missions.
Once in orbit, installed within the payload bay, it would expand into a
cube of approximately 26 feet on the side, increasing ϐlexibility and
mobility during EVAs. In addition, the satellite workshop would offer
several beneϐits: the enclosure would provide constant lighting
avoiding the annoying periods of the orbital night; tools and
equipment storage would be easy to reach without having to move
across the cargo bay to fetch or return a tool wasting valuable time; it
would provide a stable thermal environment for the astronauts
without worrying about cold situations such as those initially foreseen

for the Hubble servicing missions; ϐinally, it would improve EVA safety
by increasing protection from micrometeoroid impacts (Figure 5.2).

Figure 5.2 The Rockwell’s Satellite Workshop in the stowed (top) and deployed (bottom)
conϐiguration.
[Source: Satellite Services System Servicing Equipment Catalog (pdf), p. 149. Available at:
https:// nexis. gsfc. nasa. gov/ library. html]
On the aft ϐlight deck station of the Orbiter’s upper deck there is a
small rectangular panel called Panel A8L. It contains several toggle
switches to command the deployment/retrieval of the robotic arm.
One of these switches is called RMS SELECT and has three positions:
OFF PORT and STBD (starboard). Throughout the entire Space Shuttle
program the switch was never set to STBD. In fact the Orbiter’s Payload
Deployment and Retrieval System and the Orbiter’s structure were
designed to accommodate a second robotic arm installed on the
starboard longeron.
This capability was never implemented, although it offered several
advantages. Only one arm would be operated at a time, with the other
remaining powered off and its joint brakes automatically turned on.
One robotic arm could grapple and support a satellite whilst its
companion would conduct servicing operations. For example, the free
arm could be engaged in automatic module exchange without EVAs; it
could carry modules to and from the spacecraft or move astronauts
around the payload bay and satellite. Upon servicing, the spacecraft
would be redeployed by the arm used as the support platform. The
symmetrical arrangement of the robotic arms with respect to the
Orbiter longitudinal plane meant that the reach envelope of either arm
was a mirror image of the other. Therefore by symmetry, the regions
inside and outside the payload bay that the port arm could not reach
would be within the maneuvering envelope of the starboard arm and
vice versa. From an operations viewpoint, two robotic arms would
make handling tasks simpler and similar to the experience that all of us
have in our day-to-day lives, making the Orbiter an anthropomorphous
system. Two arms would also provide a fail-operational capability if
one arm did not work. Despite the possibility of operating it in backup
mode, it was certainly more desirable to work with a fully operational
arm.
Such a capability would have been greatly appreciated by the crew
of STS-51I when they had to grapple a heavy tumbling satellite with the
robotic arm working in backup mode. Positioning payloads near an

Orbiter, such as during Solar Max or Hubble repairs, required great care
in avoiding damaging collisions or contact. This negated the full
maneuverability of the serviced satellite within the payload bay. One
arm could allow the servicing to take place outside the payload bay,
away from the Orbiter’s structure, while at the same time increasing
the freedom of repositioning or reorienting the satellite and easing the
maintenance tasks and inspections.
A second arm would have added less than 900 pounds, a negligible
mass increase compared with the payloads typically housed by the
Orbiters. As each Orbiter was already designed with wiring and
structural provisions for a second robotic arm, the addition would have
been straightforward. As dual-arm mode operations closely resembled
the human experience of handling objects and tasks with two arms,
astronaut training to learn to operate in this manner was deemed a
relatively minor effort. Numerical simulations were also required to
investigate better the dynamics of the structural chain formed by the
two arms and the Orbiter. The ϐlexibility of the passive arm and the
longeron it would be attached to meant the loads on the active arm
would be transferred into the Orbiter structure and hence into the
passive arm. Likewise, loads applied to the passive arm when carrying
out satellite servicing would be fed back into the Orbiter’s structure
and the active arm. Also, Orbiter maneuvering, either to change
attitude or orbital parameters, would have induced an additional load
transfer between the two arms. Analysis had to be carried out to
determine an envelope of arm conϐigurations to provide enough
stiffness to oppose the ϐlexing elastic motion and prevent the loads on
the arms from exceeding the joint brake limits and consequent loss of
arm conϐiguration (Figure 5.3).

Figure 5.3 A representative sequence for satellite servicing employing two robotic arms.[Source:
Satellite Services Workshop II Volume 1 (pdf), p. 235. Available at: https:// nexis. gsfc. nasa. gov/ 
documents/ 3_ Satellite_ Services_ Workshop_ II_ Vol_ 1_ Nov_ 85. pdf]
The Space Operation Center
When the ϐirst studies for the Space Transportation System were
initiated between the ϐinal and ϐirst years of the 1960s and 1970s, the
expectation was that it would be part of an extensive orbital
infrastructure dominated by sizeable space stations, zero-g factories,
shipyards for the assembly of Moon and Mars-bound spacecraft, and
more. Unfortunately, funding deϐicits and a lack of substantial interest
from the general public resulted in President Nixon axing everything
but the Space Shuttle, whose development was approved in June 1972.
However, by the end of the 1970s, as the future ϐlight manifest that the
Space Shuttle would be called upon to fulϐil was taking shape, so was
the appreciation that several of those missions would involve activities

unrelated to scientiϐic experimentation. There was ample scope for
engaging in satellite servicing and refuelling, space construction of
large spacecraft, and development and testing of new technologies and
hardware needed for a permanent human presence in space with
reduced dependence on Earth for control and resupply.
Such a need for activities connected to space applications proved
the catalyst for the Space Operation Center (SOC) study. Initiated in
1979 by the NASA Johnson Space Center, it was concluded in December
1981. The main mission objectives concerned the fabrication or
assembly of large spacecraft, checkout and transfer to operational
orbit. It would also cater for the on-orbit assembly, launch, recovery,
and servicing of crewed and free-ϐlyer spacecraft6; storage area for
payloads to be mated to an in-situ assembled upper stage, and as a
propellant depot to refuel upper stages and satellites (Figure 5.4).
Several conϐigurations were proposed based on modularity to
reduce peak funding for system development and allow growth in
capabilities and the number of occupants. Each component would be
delivered by the Space Shuttle. The pressurized shirt-sleeve habitable
volume would comprise habitat modules, service modules, tunnels and
airlocks connected in a closed path. This would assure two escape
routes from any module, preventing the crew from being trapped in a
module in the case of an emergency. The downside was that growth
would be limited to adding a small number of modules7. Nevertheless,
it was an acceptable compromise. It was envisioned that assembling
multiple SOC-like outposts specialized in providing a particular service
would be more effective than creating one large facility.
Within the most advanced proposed conϐiguration, a crew of up to
twelve astronauts would serve 90-day long tours of duty, working six
days a week (if required) on twelve-hour shifts. Throughout the
technical reports released by the space agency, there is a noticeable
emphasis on the role of astronauts in undertaking most of the
activities intended for the outpost. In a time when artiϐicial intelligence
was mainly conϐined to science ϐiction, human ingenuity was still
valued as the essential ingredient to the fulϐilment of the tasks
intended for the SOC. While automation is ideally suited for executing
routine and repetitive tasks, NASA stressed that it would not be
sufϐicient to tackle the many unexpected events that characterize

activities such as satellite servicing and upper stage preparations8.
Furthermore, it was also considered a lower-cost option compared to
an automated apparatus that could mimic a human astronaut’s
performance.

Figure 5.4 A possible SOC conϐiguration capable of handling satellite and upper stage servicing.
[Source: Space Operations Center system analysis. Volume 3, book 2: SOC system deϐinition report,
revision A (pdf), p. 95. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19820012328]
Prominent features of a SOC station were hangars, a propellant
storage and delivery system, a track network, and an unpressurized
storage platform. To allow for unhindered movement of components
and spacecraft, they would be located at opposite ends of a central
pressurized habitat and sized to accommodate payloads of various
diameters. The hangars would offer an unpressurized protective
enclosure to house an Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) and the crew
module for the crewed version of the OTV (at least one hangar for each
OTV type) and satellites and other spacecraft requiring some shielding
from orbital debris9. A pressurized tunnel/airlock combination would
give direct access to the crewed OTV crew module for cabin
refurbishment without leaving the short-sleeve comfort of the
habitation modules. In addition, each hangar would be equipped with
maintenance access scaffolding, spare parts storage, propellant loading
provisions, umbilical systems to interface the SOC utilities with the
spacecraft, lightning and door opening/closing mechanism (Figure
5.5).

Figure 5.5 An hangar equipped for OTV turnaround operations[Source: Space Operations Center
system analysis. Volume 3, book 2: SOC system deϐinition report, revision A (pdf), p. 96. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19820012328]
Facing the hangars at the opposite end of SOC, an unpressurized
storage facility would act as a warehouse to stow payload delivered by
the Space Shuttle for servicing and space constructions missions and
additional hardware and modules for the SOC itself. The platform
would utilize the same ϐittings already adopted on the Space Shuttle
cargo bay to hold payloads in place. In addition, a lighting system
would ensure adequate illumination at all storage locations. The SOC
crew would remotely operate both the lightning system and retention
ϐitting (Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.6 A possible conϐiguration for the storage facility on SOC[Source: Space Operations
Center system analysis. Volume 3, book 2: SOC system deϐinition report, revision A (pdf), p. 72.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19820012328]
Translation of payloads, equipment and spacecraft from one area to
another would be accomplished using articulated robotic arms
mounted on carriages running on a network of tracks common to the
truss structure spanning the whole length and width of the outpost.
Compared to employing one or more ϐixed-location cranes, a track and
carriage system offered greater freedom of movement, allowing
shorter-reach manipulators for simpler spacecraft and construction
assembly sequences. The robotic arms could also be engaged in the
deployment and capture of spacecraft. Finally, it being rather
inexpensive, it lent itself to future growth. The track network would
allow the movement of dollies designed to translate the OTVs in and
out of the hangars. A turn/tilt table system was also added to ease SOC
assembly and satellite servicing operations. In this way, payloads could
be made more accessible to the robotic manipulators and during EVA
activities. The table would also provide dynamic reorienting, a feature
useful for testing and checking out spacecraft articles required to track

a target (a star, a ground station, another satellite) for an extended
period. Eventually, plans for SOC were shelved, and the concept
survives only in four-decade-old technical reports. One last
opportunity at offering an orbiting infrastructure dedicated, at least
partially, to satellite servicing during the Space Shuttle era appeared a
few years later.
On January 25th, 1984, President Ronald W. Reagan stood before a
joint session of the US Congress and delivered a State of the Union
speech in which he reported upon the condition of the country and
traced out his agenda and priorities for the year. Halfway through the
43-minute speech, Reagan reminded his audience of America’s next
frontier: Space. He was emphatic, “Nowhere do we so effectively
demonstrate our technological leadership and ability to make life
better on Earth,” He added, “America has always been greatest when we
dared to be great. We can reach for greatness again. We can follow our
dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful,
economic and scientiϐic gain.” Everyone in attendance in the House of
Representatives chamber of the United States Capitol was now primed
to receive the next big announcement. “Tonight, I am directing NASA to
develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a
decade.”
He was meant to evoke a memory of when, on May 25th, 1961,
President John F. Kennedy challenged the nation to place a man on the
Moon before the end of the decade. Reagan mandated NASA to pursue a
dream that had been on the agenda even before Apollo astronauts left
bootprints on the lunar surface. Reagan’s proclamation shared another
attribute with Kennedy’s, as it was as vague as the moonshot
announcement on the technical details. NASA and its contractors had
been engaged in deϐining requirements and options, but none of the
proposed studies had gone beyond the preliminary concept phase.
Questions such as how large it would be, how it would be equipped,
crew size, and many other vital parameters were still hotly debated.
One of the early proposed conϐigurations was the so-called “power
tower”. It consisted of a 120-meter long latticework “keel” oriented
with its longitudinal axis pointed towards the center of the Earth with
a host of pressurized modules where the crew would live and work. The
station’s attitude would exploit the so-called “gravity gradient” effect.

As the station orbited the Earth, it would maintain its “heavier” end
with the pressurized modules always pointed towards the planet’s
centre, making it an ideal platform for installing Earth-looking
instruments. At the opposite end, skyward looking telescopes would
ϐind an ideal housing. Solar panel wings were placed close to this side,
at either end of a second truss section perpendicular to the station’s
keel. With this layout, the outpost would allow terrestrial observations,
astronomical studies, and microgravity research to occur
simultaneously. To fully exploit the real estate offered by the keel, a
small shipyard was proposed for the servicing and repairing of
satellites, orbital tugs, and externally mounted experiments. It would
consist of a servicing bay, satellite storage bay, refuelling bay, and
storage areas for the orbital tugs and tools. They would be arranged
along the keel, in the unused section between either end of the station
(Figure 5.7).
Figure 5.7 The referenced conϐiguration of the space station servicing facility[Source: Satellite
Services Workshop II Volume 2 (pdf), p. 187. Available at: https:// nexis. gsfc. nasa. gov/ documents/ 
4_ Satellite_ Services_ Workshop_ II_ Vol_ 2_ Nov_ 85. pdf]
The servicing, storage and refuelling bays would be identical in
external conϐiguration and access to facilitate and standardize

operational procedures, especially those involving robotic
manipulators and orbital tugs. Each bay was cylindrical with a
segmented retractable cover to allow partial to full opening for access.
They would measure approximately 9 meters in diameter and 21
meters in length, allowing for berthing of a 4.5-meter diameter by 18-
meter long satellite, with enough clearance for the movement of EVA
crew and placement of workstations. A thermal control system,
interfaced with the station’s own active thermal control system, would
regulate the bay’s internal temperature and its content.
There would be ϐixtures within the servicing bay to hold satellites
and payloads in a ϐixed position and allow 90-deg tilt and +/- 180-deg
rotation. The storage bay provided a haven for long-term storage of
satellites while repair procedures, equipment, or replacement unit
were being prepared on the ground for transfer to the space station
(Figure 5.8). The refuelling bay would contain equipment to refuel a
satellite’s propulsion system and replenish instrument’s cryogen
systems. Pressurants and ϐluids, such as liquid nitrogen, could also be
supplied in this bay. The bay was located closer to the station’s nadir
end to prevent any contamination of the servicing and storage bays
during the refuelling process. Like the SOC, also the concept of a
satellite servicing facility at the space station did not leave the pages of
technical reports. The troubled process the space station program
went through resulted in today’s International Space Station, which,
despite being the largest structure ever assembled in space, remains a
minimized version of the early grandiose space station plans. As a
result, the International Space Station is not equipped for satellite
servicing activities.

Figure 5.8 Possible interior arrangement of the servicing bay
[Source: Deϐinition of technology development missions for early Space Station satellite
servicing. Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 71. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19850004614]
On-Orbit Cryogenic Fluid Management
Experiments
The Space Operations Center and the early space station concepts
included provisions for the on-orbit refuelling of satellites, orbital
transfer vehicles, and station-based experiments. In fact, at that time, it
was common in the deϐinition of a new orbital outpost conϐiguration to
comprise on-orbit refuelling capabilities. With the enthusiasm of the
Apollo program still glowing and the conviction that anything would be
possible with the upcoming Space Shuttle, the ϐinest minds within the
US space industry set about deϐining missions and space applications
that would rival in complexity and prestige with the moon landings.
Large space stations lodging tens of astronauts would be required for
long-term microgravity research whose results would jump-start a

space-based manufacturing industry on dedicated orbital factories.
Orbital transfer vehicles, or space tugs, would assist in moving large
satellites and telescopes to an outpost such as the SOC for much-
needed servicing and refuelling. They would also play a vital role in
supporting the assembly of large infrastructures such as those
envisaged for Space-Based Solar Power Satellites and the construction
of interplanetary spacecraft to reach the much-coveted Red Planet. One
attribute common was storing and transferring substantial quantities
of cryogenic propellant. This led to the development and
implementation of so-called Cryogenic Fluid Management (CFM)
technology.
The problem of on-orbit storage and transfer of a liquid (whether
cryogenic or not) is far from trivial. In the Earth’s gravity ϐield, the
separation between the liquid and vapor phase of a ϐluid within a tank
is such that the heavier liquid settles to the bottom and the lighter
vapor rises to the top. Consequently, the placement of the tank outlet is
straightforward: it is at the bottom of the tank within the liquid
phase10. However, surface tension becomes the controlling mechanism
for the liquid/vapor phase separation in microgravity because the
liquid tends to wet the walls, leaving a gaseous core in the center. As a
result, the liquid does not stay at the “bottom”, and its location within
the tank is uncertain. This is bad news for any application requiring a
rocket engine ϐiring in orbit, as there is a genuine danger that the tank
outlet might be covered by a mixture of liquid and gas phases. At best, a
mixture of gas and liquid would cause combustion instabilities; at
worse, complete engine failure. For this reason, to meet vapor-free
transfer requirements, applicable both for in-space engine ϐirings and
propellant transfers, so-called Propellant Management Devices (PMD)
or Liquid Acquisition Devices (LAD) are required inside a spacecraft’s
tank (Figure 5.9).
The purpose of a PMD is to separate the liquid and gas phases and
transfer vapor-free propellant from a storage tank to a transfer line en
route to an engine or receiver tank (depot application). A PMD must be
able to operate in any gravitational or thermal environment. They are
designed to ensure there is always communication between the PMD
and liquid anywhere within the tank, and that the outlet is covered with
liquid anytime11. The simplest PMDs are so-called expulsion devices,

which include pistons, diaphragms, and bladders. Positive expulsion
devices form an impenetrable barrier between the liquid and the
pressurants employed to push the liquid out of the tank.
Figure 5.9 Liquid and gas behavior in a spacecraft tank during different phases of ϐlight. Note
how the bottom of the tank will be naturally covered with liquid while on the ground and during
ascent.[Source: A Detailed Historical Review of Propellant Management Devices for Low Gravity
Propellant Acquisition (pdf), p. 2. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 20170000667]
For instance, the bladder PMD resembles a balloon, where the
propellant is inside the membrane with a narrow opening leading to
the tank outlet. The diaphragm is composed of a ϐlexible membrane to
separate pressurants gas and liquid propellant. While employed for
small tanks, positive expulsion-based PMD is not suitable for
transferring large liquid masses as their weight would rapidly rival the
tank itself. Furthermore, because they are usually made of elastomeric
materials, they are inadequate for cryogenic applications as exposure
to the near-zero absolute temperature would rapidly degrade the
device. Finally, they are not well-suited for long-life missions.

It is now common practice to use PMDs that exploit and enhance
the surface tension of a liquid to create a barrier as effective as a Teϐlon
membrane. One such device is conϐigured as a group of channels
covered with a ϐinely woven stainless steel mesh or screen strategically
located on the tank’s inner wall and connected to the outlet manifold.
When liquid wets the screen, it starts to ϐill the channels by capillary
action. Since all the channels are connected to the outlet manifold, the
result is to ϐill that with liquid. As the surface tension over the screen is
ampliϐied, the pressurant gas is prevented from penetrating the
channels. Therefore, the surface tension on the screen creates a natural
barrier for the pressurant gas to act upon and force only liquid into the
channels. The strength of the liquid barrier is ϐinite, and the pressure
differential at which gas can be forced through the wetted screen is
known as the “bubble point”. When this is exceeded, the screen “breaks
down” and allows gas to penetrate the propellant lines. So long as the
differential is smaller than the bubble point, only liquid is drawn into
the channels. Capillary-based PMDs are employed for cryogenic and
storable propellants.
The in-space transfer of cryogenic propellants is another signiϐicant
headache affecting a refuelling system. The main complication lies in
the temperature difference between the propellant’s near-zero
absolute temperature and the warm walls of the receiver tank and
transfer lines. Without pre-conditioning in the transfer lines and
receiver tank, the cryogenic propellant would immediately ϐlash to gas,
with the sudden increase in pressure leading to catastrophic failure of
the system. For this reason, complete propellant transfer from a
storage tank to the customer is divided into four stages: transfer line
cooldown; receiver tank pre-chill; receiver tank chill; and receiver tank
ϐill.
Transfer line cooldown typically begins with propellant in the
gaseous phase being vented off the storage tank and inserted into the
feed line. Following this initial pre-cooling, the liquid is admitted into
the transfer line. This two-stage cooling process is required to prevent
pressure surges within the transfer line. For example, if cold liquid
propellant were supplied to the warmer transfer line, part of the ϐluid
would ϐlash to the gaseous phase, producing pressure waves that can

trigger resonances into the transfer lines, their attachment and the
tank itself with probable structural damage.
The receiver tank prechill is required whenever the initial tank
temperature exceeds a predetermined target temperature. Above this
temperature, excess pressure during the chill and ϐill operation would
build up in the tank. Therefore, the prechill target temperature is
deϐined as that temperature at which the chill and ϐill process can be
completed without further venting or exceeding the receiver tank’s
maximum operating pressure. The prechill operation involves a
charge, hold and vent cycle, which is repeated until the tank wall
temperature reaches the target temperature. The prechill charge is
accomplished by initially injecting vapor (during transfer line
cooldown) and then liquid into the tank at a velocity that provides
good heat exchange between the high-temperature walls and the
cooling ϐluid. Next, the tank is charged until a predetermined pressure
has been reached. At this point, the tank enters a hold period where the
walls transfer energy to the ϐluid in the tank. The holding period lasts
until one of two conditions is met: the tank maximum operating
pressure is reached, or the average ϐluid and tank wall temperatures
are within approximately 5% of each other. Then the tank is vented to
sufϐiciently low pressure for the next prechill cycle. In summary,
receiver tank prechill is performed to reduce tank temperatures so that
tank ϐilling can be accomplished without venting gas overboard. In
other words, without prechill, the cold propellant would boil due to the
warmer environment of the tank, requiring venting the vapor to avoid
tank structural rupture.
Following prechill, the receiver tank vent is closed, and liquid ϐlow
to the receiver tank is initiated. However, ϐilm boiling still occurs as the
liquid strikes the warm surface of the tank, and the resulting
evaporation increases the tank pressure. However, because now the
tank is at or below the prechill target temperature, the pressure
increase will not exceed the maximum tank operating pressure. The
chill process continues until the wall temperature reaches saturated
liquid temperature, at which point the propellant will no longer enter a
gaseous phase.
At this point, with the receiver tank thermally conditioned, the ϐill
phase can initiate. The single requirement for tank ϐill is to maintain an

acceptably low pressure during the process by creating conditions
conducive to attaining near-thermal equilibrium. These conditions
may be achieved by introducing liquid into the tank through spray
nozzles; the resulting spray creates a large liquid/vapor surface area.
The large surface area and ϐluid turbulence will provide the high heat-
transfer rates needed to attain near-thermal-equilibrium conditions.
The complexity of in-space refuelling was quickly put on the
priority list by NASA for theoretical analysis and practical research
already in the early 1960s. In particular, the Lewis Research Center
(LeRC) concentrated on understanding the underlying physics of ϐluid
behavior through a series of basic experiments. For example, low-
gravity testing was performed using a large drop facility (essentially a
long vacuum chamber sunk 500 ft into the ground, which provided a
zero-gravity environment for 5 sec), parabolic ϐlights (up to 20 sec of
zero-g) and sounding rockets (3 to 5 minutes of weightlessness with
payloads weighing several hundreds of pounds). In parallel, the
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) solved speciϐic engineering
problems with direct application to existing or future systems. In
particular, they focused on propellant orientation and heat transfer
problems.
Several launch vehicle development experiments were performed
on early test ϐlights of cryogen-fueled rockets to validate the
theoretical studies and the results obtained in the short time allowed
by drop towers and parabolic ϐlights. For instance, the Atlas-Centaur
vehicle’s fourth and eighth launch were used to study cryogenic ϐluid
management during coast for engine restart. In July 1966, MSFS used a
Saturn 1B development mission to investigate liquid hydrogen
management in the vehicle’s second stage. Television cameras inside
the tank veriϐied that the liquid was properly settled.
The next month, a study with McDonnell Douglas was initiated by
MSFC to design a cryogenic ϐluid research laboratory to orbit with a
Saturn launch vehicle with astronaut participation for the ϐirst seven
days of a 14-day mission. This study was known as Project THERMO
(Thermo and Hydrodynamic Experiment Research Module in Orbit). It
was an orbital research laboratory that would investigate CFM as a
follow-on to the lunar landing program using Apollo hardware.
THERMO would consist of a lunar excursion module attached to an

enclosed experiment structure containing several modular
experiments. The program’s objective was to resolve CFM technology
gaps for crewed Mars missions by 1971. The effort got as far as a
preliminary design before it was downsized in March 1967 to ϐit on an
uncrewed launch vehicle, such as an Atlas. MSFC attempted to sell the
project to the NASA headquarters, but diminishing budged and low
priorities resulted in a rejection of the proposal. It marked the end of
the era of actual space experiments and the beginning of decades of
paper studies.
In June 1976, LeRC had McDonnell Douglas perform a conceptual
design of a dedicated Spacelab ϐlight experiment. The experiment
would investigate tank pressure control, thermal venting performance,
liquid outϐlow, and LAD performance. LeRC held a competitive
procurement for a Cryogenic Fluid Management Experiment (CFME)
and awarded a contract to Martin Marietta in November 1978 for
$1.8M to design, build, and integrate the CFME on a Spacelab pallet. The
experiment would consist of a single tank that dumped its liquid
hydrogen overboard at the end of the mission.
In December 1979, it changed to a Cryogenic Fluid Management
Facility (CFMF). The amendment was not a matter of semantics as it
resulted in a substantial upgrade of the initial experiment. The facility
would now consist of a supply tank and receiver tank that could be
reϐlown several times with changes to their conϐiguration. The facility
would be launched with the supply tank ϐilled with liquid hydrogen12
and the receiver tank empty. In orbit, a battery of experiments would
evaluate liquid expulsion, mass gauging, liquid transfer, receiver tank
cooldown and ϐill, and PMD performance. A two-phase approach was
planned to maximize the technical beneϐits gained and provide a cost-
effective hardware development program.
Phase I would consist of one mission focused on evaluating the
supply tank’s liquid acquisition device capability to provide a vapor-
free liquid outϐlow, demonstrating the on-orbit quantity gauging
system for the supply tank, and evaluating the transfer line and
receiver tank cooldown processes. The facility hardware for this phase
would have consisted of the supply tank, the transfer line, a bare
receiver tank and instrumentation gauge tank quantity and
quality/density ϐlow measurements.

Phase II would involve two missions to deal primarily with the
receiver tank technology associated with the cooldown and ϐill
processes. The ϐirst mission would demonstrate a receiver tank ϐill and
reϐill along with outboard venting. There would also be an evaluation of
the so-called thermodynamic vent system (TVS), an open-loop
refrigerator system designed to remove thermal energy from the tank.
In conjunction with internal fans, it would deter the cryogenic liquid
from stratifying and producing vapor bubbles at hot spots in the tank.
The second mission was to demonstrate a no-vent liquid ϐill of a fully
conϐigured receiver tank, start basket ϐill, outϐlow and reϐill
performance (Figure 5.10).
Figure 5.10 The Cryogenic Fluid Management Facility pallet. The conϐiguration shown refers to
Phase II.[Source: Conceptual Design of an In-Space Cryogenic Fluid Management Facility (pdf), p.
56. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810012684]
At the same time, the NASA LeRC had contracted General Dynamics
Convair Division to propose a conceptual design for an orbital large-
scale propellant transfer experiment that would help NASA design a

refuelling system to support orbital transfer vehicle operations. More
than twenty experiment arrangements were considered. For instance,
one consisted of an experiment tank module, a liquid hydrogen supply
tank, and interconnecting plumbing. In another layout (Layout #5), the
experiment tank module was incorporated in a rotating cage that
would swivel 90-deg from the stowed position out of the payload bay.
The truss cage also featured an external disconnect panel and a latch
system attaching to a truss yoke in the 90-deg position. The transfer
lines between the supply and experiment tank would be positioned by
the Shuttle’s robotic arm. A variant of this latter layout (Layout #6) had
the experiment module truss cage equipped with a docking adapter.
Before propellant transfer, the experiment would be attached to the
Shuttle docking module using the robotic arm. The arm would also
position the transfer line disconnect valve to the experiment
disconnect panel. Compared to Layout #5, this arrangement more
closely represented the actual conditions encountered with a full-scale
orbital transfer vehicle docked to the Shuttle (Figures 5.11 and 5.12).
Figure 5.11 The General Dynamics Layout #5 (articulating receiver tank installation)
conϐiguration for a large-scale orbital propellant transfer experiment[Source: Conceptual design

of an orbital propellant transfer experiment. Volume 2: Study results (pdf), P. 84. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800022917]
Figure 5.12 The General Dynamics Layout #6 (receiver tank/docking adapter) conϐiguration for
a large-scale orbital propellant transfer experiment[Source: Conceptual design of an orbital
propellant transfer experiment. Volume 2: Study results (pdf), P. 85. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19800022917]
Eventually, General Dynamics settled on a conϐiguration consisting
of a support structure, a supply tank, two receiver tanks, a power
supply unit, a remote acquisition interface unit, pneumatic control
unit, three helium storage bottles, interconnecting plumbing, an
instrumented system, and wiring. The experiment module assembly
contained systems and interfaces to conduct, monitor and record data
for propellant transfer. There were provisions for structural, ϐluid, and
electrical interfacing with the Shuttle and systems for status
monitoring during ascent and descent (Figure 5.13).

Figure 5.13 General Dynamics’s large-scale orbital propellant transfer experiment ϐinal assembly
conϐiguration[Source: Conceptual design of an orbital propellant transfer experiment. Volume 2:
Study results (pdf), P. 170. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800022917]
The supply and receiver tanks would be fabricated in aluminium
with spin-formed and chem-milled bulkheads welded to the center
cylindrical section. The receiver tank would be equipped with
accessories for on-orbit ϐilling and venting, ϐill, drain and vent for
ground testing and an acquisition system. The transfer lines were
routed over the top side of the supply tank support structure. For
example, the transfer line started at the supply tank aft bulkhead and
was routed forward over the purge enclosure bulkhead and the
cylindrical support structure. The line branched out into two manifolds
attaching to the receiver tanks at the forward end. This transfer line
incorporated axially restrained ϐlex joints to absorb dimensional
changes and was enveloped with a multilayer insulation system. A
helium storage system with three pressure vessels provided for supply
tank pressurization. At the Shuttle installation level, a plumbing kit
would connect the supply tank and the helium bottles to the ground
launch facility through the disconnect panels located on the Shuttle’s

aft fuselage. Such connections would allow for ground ϐill of hydrogen
and helium, purging, venting during ϐlight, and abort dump in the case
of an emergency.
Neither the Martin Marietta nor the General Dynamic experiments
took ever to the sky for good reasons. Had ever ϐlown, the missions
hosting them would have rightly earned the nickname of “Death Star”.
Like the “Death Star” mission of the Centaur upper stage we described
in Chapter 4, the safety issues centered around carrying liquid
hydrogen within the payload bay and venting in the vicinity of the
Shuttle. Hydrogen is ϐlammable in concentrations of 4 to 74% in air by
volume. Both experiments had to be designed so that no two failures
would cause the inadvertent release of hydrogen, and it was to be safe
in all abort situations. This required special interfaces and
modiϐications, such as a cryogenic vent, that limited the manifesting of
the payload to certain locations. Experiment requirements for
lightweight tankage also conϐlicted with safety requirements for large
structural safety margins. LeRC and JSC spent years negotiating Shuttle
manifesting and accommodations (such as ϐill/drain and vent lines,
cooling loops, and ϐlight deck switches). Although supercritical
hydrogen was ϐlown on every Orbiter in the so-called power reactant
storage assembly (PRSA) tanks13, both experiments were to satisfy
more stringent safety requirements than a PRSA tank and could not use
PRSA vent provisions. The reason was that the PRSA was part of an
Orbiter system while the experiments would be subject to payload
rules. Following the Challenger disaster, it was obvious, at the
engineering level, that a hydrogen experiment on a crewed vehicle did
not make sense in an era where low risk was paramount and low cost
was a general guideline.
The Orbital Spacecraft Consumable Resupply
System
Between May and November 1985, NASA disseminated a questionnaire
to gauge interest in an orbital consumable resupply system’s services
to the broader aerospace community. It is not infrequent that an
otherwise perfectly functioning satellite is mothballed due to depletion

of its consumables such as propellant for station keeping, attitude
control or orbit maneuvering. Consumables are scarce resources
onboard a spacecraft, and it is not surprising that a great deal of effort
goes into optimizing their usage. A typical case in point is that of
communication satellites, whose life is severely hampered by the size
of their propellant tanks. Therefore, NASA’s proposal for an orbital
resupply system was rooted in a genuine need.
The positive outcome of the survey encouraged the space agency to
pursue such a concept further and contracted the Space Transportation
System division of Rockwell International for a feasibility study. As a
result, in March 1987, the ϐive-volume Orbital Spacecraft Consumables
Resupply System (OSCRS) report was presented to the space agency. It
included a detailed engineering plan and cost analysis for developing
and constructing a tanker module to be hauled inside a Space Shuttle to
resupply storable ϐluids on spacecraft in need of such services. With
such an apparatus, the Space Shuttle would become a fully-ϐledged
tanker, not dissimilar to an aircraft equipped for air refuelling. Rockwell
identiϐied potential users such as the space station, DoD orbital assets,
and commercial satellites. However, at that time, the only program that
was genuinely committed to employing the OSCRS was the Gamma Ray
Observatory (GRO), a space-based observatory for collecting X-rays
and gamma rays to peer inside some of the most energetic phenomena
of the universe. The observatory was launched on the Space Shuttle
Atlantis in April 1991 and operated until it deorbited on June 4th, 2000.
Five months after deployment, it was renamed the Compton Gamma
Ray Observatory in honor of Arthur Holly Compton, who in 1927 won a
Nobel Prize for demonstrating the particle-wave duality of radiation, a
cornerstone of quantum mechanics (Figure 5.14).

Figure 5.14 A global view showing the CGRO just being released from Atlantis. (ref https:// 
www. nasa. gov/ sites/ default/ ϐiles/ 0003356. jpg).
The resupply requirement for GRO was some 2450 pounds of
hydrazine, the propellant employed by the observatory for attitude
maneuvering and minor orbital adjustments. An initial concept for an
OSCRS dedicated to GRO was soon revised in favor of a so-called hybrid
conϐiguration capable of accommodating up to 7000 lbs of propellant.
Projections had estimated that such a capacity would satisfy all the
prospective and more demanding customers. Besides, the hybrid
conϐiguration would be just 87 lbs heavier than the dedicated-GRO
counterpart, development cost would be negligibly higher, and it would

have allowed further growth, such as the delivery of two different
propellants. Hence, the hybrid conϐiguration was signiϐicantly
advantageous in the long run, both from a structural and ϐinancial point
of view.
The OSCRS was to have an aluminum alloy integrally machined
open truss structure shaped to form a 12-sided regular polyhedron
around a central hexagon cavity. Such geometry resulted in six square
compartments, each housing a storage tank the same size as GRO’s
tanks, thus allowing for the transport of up to 7000 lbs of hydrazine.
However, only two tanks would have sufϐiced to satisfy GRO’s resupply
needs. Additional six smaller triangular compartments allowed
additional propellant tanks or other consumables storage tanks. In
alternative, they could accommodate mission-speciϐic equipment. A
berthing mechanism on the top side would provide anchorage for the
spacecraft to resupply. Such interface would be modular so that its
structural, electrical, and ϐluid connections could be adjusted to suit the
speciϐic spacecraft to refuel (Figure 5.15).
Figure 5.15 OSCRS structural layout showing tank arrangement for a GRO resupply mission
(middle schematics) and delivery of 7000 lbs of propellant using six tanks (left schematics)
[Source: Orbital Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 2: Study results
(pdf), p. 15. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880002305]
Ten Multi Layer Insulation (MLI) with an outer beta fabric
protection would shield against the wild temperature swings
experienced in the recurrent passage between the orbit’s day and

night. Internal temperatures would be maintained within limits using
electrical heaters plastering inner shear webs each connected to two
independent circuits. In addition MLI wrapped around the tanker
propellant lines would prevent the propellant from freezing when
ϐlowing to the receiving spacecraft.
Like those already used on the Space Shuttle, a passive outer
radiator served the dual purpose of offering a mounting wall for most
of the tanker’s avionics modules and rejection into outer space of their
heat. Components operating intermittently or at low power were
placed on internal shear panels and would not need a dedicated
radiator (Figure 5.16).
Figure 5.16 Detailed overview of the OSCRS’ structure and thermal protection[Source: Orbital
Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 2: Study results (pdf), p. 89. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880002305]
Within the Gamma Ray Observatory, the propellant was stored in
positive expulsion tanks and the propulsion system operated in the so-

called blowdown mode. What it means is that the tank’s volume is split
into two cavities, separated by a diaphragm. While one cavity is ϐilled
with propellant, the other is loaded with an inert gas (typically helium)
at high pressure, which pushes against the diaphragm forcing the
propellant out when the tank outlet valve is opened. As propellant is
expelled from the tank, the expanding volume of the gas-ϐilled cavity14
increases, causing a reduction in the pressure being imposed on the
diaphragm. Hence in a blowdown-based propulsion system, the
propellant ϐlowrate decreases with use, and this has to be accounted
for in sizing the system for the minimum required performances.
Because the baseline OSCRS conϐiguration was designed with the
primary intent of resupplying the Gamma Ray Observatory, the ϐluid
system would support refuelling by ullage recompression transfer
aided by lightweight gear-type pumps (Figure 5.17).
Figure 5.17 Schematics for the ullage recompression resupply method[Source: Orbital
Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 2: Study results (pdf), p. 33. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880002305]
Ullage recompression is the simplest and generally most efϐicient
method of resupplying satellites while in orbit. First, the propellant
transfer coupling is mated to the satellite, and the installation leak
checks are performed. A ϐlow restriction oriϐice controls initial
propellant ϐlow into the evacuated line until it is ϐilled to equalized
pressure. The coupling is then opened, and propellant transfer is

initiated using the excess pressure in the supply tank. During this time,
the pumps are bypassed, and the ϐlow rate is controlled by a ϐlow
restricting oriϐice. Once the pressures are equalized (or fairly close),
the pumps are started, and the ϐlow is continued.
Due to “adiabatic” compressive heating, the receiver spacecraft’s
propellant tank ullage gas temperature increases during the transfer.
Therefore, a variable ϐlowrate pump is used to control the maximum
ullage temperature within certain bounds as this occurs. Before the
maximum allowable temperature is reached, the ϐlow rate is decreased
accordingly. The ϐlow rate at this point is established such that the heat
generated by compression is equal to the heat absorbed into the
receiver propellant tank by radiation and conduction. This permits the
fastest possible transfer while maintaining adequate compression
ignition safety margins. Once the desired quantity of hydrazine has
been transferred, the pumps are stopped, and the coupling closed,
purged, leak checked and disconnected.
To execute the refuelling sequence just described, the OSCRS ϐluid
system would consist of supply propellant tanks interconnected in
parallel, with parallel-redundant valves at each tank outlet. Two
parallel-redundant propellant transfer pump assemblies would move
the precious propellant from the OSCRS to the spacecraft. Each
assembly included a ϐluid pump, a relief circuit to protect the receiving
satellite’s propulsion system from overpressurization and a pump
bypass circuit to exploit the positive pressure differential between the
OSCRS and receive spacecraft’s propellant tankage. In addition, a check
valve would prevent ϐluid backϐlow.
Modularity was at the core of the OSCRS’s ϐluid subsystem. It would
support rapid changeout for maintenance or mission-speciϐic
requirements. Each module, such as tanks, ϐluid lines, and pump
assemblies, could be removed by disconnecting mechanical ϐittings
and lifted with appropriate ground support equipment. In this way,
other refuelling schemes could be enacted depending on the
conϐiguration of the propulsion system of the receiver spacecraft. For
instance, a variant of the blowdown-based propulsion system had a
separate pressurant tank in communication with the gas-ϐilled cavity
of the propellant tank. The advantage was that the system would
become pressure regulated, offering an improved control on the

amount of propellant ϐlow rate exiting the tank. For such a system, the
OSCRS could be conϐigured for an ullage exchange resupply method
(Figure 5.18).
Figure 5.18 Schematics for the ullage exchange resupply method[Source: Orbital Spacecraft
Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 2: Study results (pdf), p. 33. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880002305]
Three transfer couplings are required in the ullage exchange mode;
one for the propellant, one for the pressurant, and one to transfer the
ullage. The receiver satellite’s pressurant tank is ϐirst isolated from the
propellant tank ullage using ullage exchange. Then, as ϐluid enters the
receiver propellant tank, ullage gas is displaced out through the ullage
return line, which is then transferred into the OSCRS propellant tank.
The pumping energy required would be small because of minimal delta
pressure and essentially no heating of the receiver propellant tank. The
pressurant would also be transferred to the spacecraft in parallel with
the propellant loading.
The crew would manage refuelling operations using a dedicated
control panel in the aft ϐlight deck and two portable computers offering
a graphic representation of the OSCRS’ ϐluid system status and
additional data required for a friendly human-machine interface. Space
Shuttle and tanker would also interface in relation to electric power,
distribution of telemetry to ground control, and Caution and Warning
capability to alert the crew of serious out-of-limit conditions.

A refuelling mission would occur in a fashion not dissimilar to air
refuelling. First, the receiving satellite would be temporarily
deactivated to prevent any inadvertent ϐiring of its attitude control
thruster or orbit control engine. Once cleared for a safe approach, the
Space Shuttle would rendezvous with the spacecraft and, using the
robotic arm, would berth it to the OSCRS. Two astronauts would then
be dispatched to the payload bay for a short extravehicular activity.
First, they would conϐirm that the mechanical connection between the
OSCRS module and spacecraft had been completed. The robotic arm
would then be released from the satellite. Then they would connect an
electrical umbilical between the spacecraft and the tanker, followed by
the coupling of the ϐluid transfer lines. Having ascertained a leak-free
connection, they would retreat inside the Space Shuttle. Now transfer
could be initiated and completed under close monitoring and control of
the crew15. A second spacewalk would take place to disconnect and
stow the ϐluid coupling and electrical connectors. Finally, the robotic
arm would be maneuvered to release the now refuelled spacecraft.
Upon conϐirmation that the OSCRS module had been deactivated and
secured, the EVA crew would return to the airlock.
Contingency situations had been duly appraised. For instance, to
account for an emergency occurring when the satellite was still mated
to the tanker, pyro-actuated frangible bolts would severe the berthing
mechanisms from its mounting bracket on the tanker structure,
allowing for a quick release. At the same time, pyrotechnic valves
would cut the ϐluid lines while assuring a leak-free event. For a less
time-sensitive contingency, the berthing mechanism included features
for manual actuation in the case of motor or linkage assembly failure in
automatically unberthing the spacecraft from the tanker (Figure 5.19).

Figure 5.19 A mission that never happened: the Space Shuttle refuelling GRO.[Source: Orbital
Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 37.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880003986]
Although the primary case study of Rockwell’s report concerned
refuelling a spacecraft with a monopropellant propulsive system, it
also emphasized that the built-in modularity of the OSCRS apparatus
could be easily modiϐied to become a bipropellant tanker. Fuel and
oxidizer would be stored in three storage tanks, and each propellant
would have its own dedicated independent ϐluid system. In addition, an
automated umbilical assembly for ϐluid and electrical connections with
the receiving spacecraft was recommended (Figure 5.20). If executed
manually via EVA, it would have required too much valuable time and
exposed the spacewalking crew to an even greater danger of
contamination in the case of a propellant leak. For this reason, the
automated umbilical assemblies were to be ϐitted with features that

allowed an emergency separation without EVA intervention and thus
dispensing with pyrotechnic separation devices. However, such an
apparatus would still be necessary for an emergency mechanical
disconnection between the tanker and satellite.
Figure 5.20 System conϐiguration for the bipropellant OSCRS.[Source: Orbital Spacecraft
Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 59. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880003986]
The Superϐluid Helium Tanker Study
Any observatory or satellite sensor that relies on capturing infrared
light must be maintained to a temperature as close as possible to zero
absolute to prevent such sensitive devices from picking up the heat
signature emitted by the surrounding hardware as well as the external
environment (e.g., radiation emitted by the Sun and heat irradiated by
the Earth). In this way, they can detect the feeble infrared radiation that
permeates the universe and observe phenomena such as star and
planet formation even when concealed from view by interstellar clouds

of gas and dust. As helium can only survive in a liquid state if cooled to
-269°C, it is the best coolant that physics can offer to a payload
engineer tasked with designing such a heat-sensitive apparatus.
Although a mix of active and passive thermal control systems allows
for tight temperature control, blockage of heat conduction from the
external environment is impossible, and thus over time, the liquid
warms up and boils off, evaporating away. As a result, the infrared
sensors can no longer function when the helium reservoir is depleted
or becomes too warm, and the spacecraft mission is terminated.
Indeed, this has been the fate of several infrared astronomical
observatories that succumbed to thermodynamics and heat transport
laws, even though their hardware was still functional and or had
enough propellant for station keeping and maneuvering. Their mission
could have continued with their helium tanks replenished with a fresh
batch of cold ϐluid.
This rationale offered the Martin Marietta Astronautics Group the
motivation for one last attempt at purposing the Space Shuttle as an
orbital refueller. In September 1988, the aerospace ϐirm published the
“Superϔluid Helium Tanker Study” report offering a preliminary design
for a so-called Superϐluid Helium Tanker (SFHT) apparatus. As the
name implies, the aim was to provide a means to extend the on-orbit
service life of observatories, satellite instruments, sensors and
laboratories not by replenishing their propellant tanks but rather by
reϐilling their supply of liquid helium.
For a preliminary deϐinition of sizing and performance
speciϐication, Martin Marietta considered several observatories under
development at that time, such as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility
(SIRTF), the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics telescope (AXAF)16, and the
space station-mounted Critical Point Phenomena Facility (CPPF). With
SIRTF being the most demanding user of the precious ϐluid, the SFHT
was sized to transport 6000 liters of helium. Such storage capacity
would cover the 4000-liter requirement for SIRTF and support the
refuelling of smaller users needing more frequent top-ups. Additionally,
it would ensure that the need of future users could be catered for.
According to Martin Marietta, if the identiϐied users were developed, by
2004, the yearly requirement for helium would peak at approximately

12000 liters. Indeed, with such an optimistic view of the future, it made
sense to develop the SFHT (Figure 5.21).
Figure 5.21 An isometric view of the Superϐluid Helium Tanker showing its main features.
[Source: Superϐluid Helium Tanker (SFHT) study (pdf), p. 14. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19890010811]
The superϐluid helium was stored in a Dewar vacuum jacket
structure weighing approximately 1290 pounds, although the report
conceded that roughly 150 pounds could be saved if a chem-milled skin
structure was used. However, such savings would have to be weighed
against the additional cost incurred in developing the chem-milled
process. The Dewar would consist of two hemispheric ends connected
by a short cylindrical barrel section to absorb axial loads utilizing
longitudinal stringers. Its design consisted of an outer jacket and an
inner vessel separated by non-metallic composite support sized to
account for thermal contraction of the vessel during ϐluid loading while
being stiff enough to maintain high natural frequencies to survive the
launch environment17. In addition, the non-metallic composite
material would ensure low thermal conductivity to minimize heat
transfer into the inner vessel and thus helium boil-off rate. Orbital

storage of cryogenic ϐluid requires a design that incorporates efϐicient
multilayer insulation, a low heat leak support system, and the design
and placement of pipes and other penetrations to reduce their heat
leak contribution. Furthermore, the external surface of the Dewar and
its supporting structure would be painted white to limit temperature
excursions in the orbital environment.
The SFHT would be compatible with the Space Shuttle and the
Orbiting Maneuvering Vehicle and expendable launchers such as Delta,
Atlas, and Titan to allow for the greatest ϐlexibility of use. For this
reason, the forward Dewar support structure would include a
dedicated adapter for interfacing with the OMV. The interface would
consist of six struts holding a machined triangular frame carrying
latches for berthing to the OMV and grapple ϐixtures for the Space
Shuttle robot arm. The aft Dewar support structure would instead
support a 328-pound adapter to allow installation of the SFHT into the
spacecraft adapter of any of the selected expendable vehicles. For
transportation with the Space Shuttle, the SFHT was retained by a
dedicated cradle anchored to ϐive attached points in the payload bay
(two along each side of the bay and one keel ϐitting at the bottom).
Refuelling of the SIRTF was used as the baseline to propose the
typical timeline for an SFHT mission. On the ϐirst day of the ϐlight, upon
arrival in a 500-km high orbit, the Shuttle crew would deploy the OMV
to retrieve the SIRTS in its 900-km orbit. By the beginning of ϐlight day
two, the OMV would be in proximity of the Space Shuttle allowing the
crew to grapple the telescope and berthing it to a dedicated cradle.
According to the report, telescope orientation in the cargo bay would
not be critical. However, it did emphasize that it would be desirable to
keep the telescope opening pointing away from the direction of ϐlight
to minimize contamination. It also suggested that it could be rotated
down into the cargo bay using a dedicated feature of the support cradle
to minimize the distance from the SFHT and thus the length of transfer
lines18. Retrieval and storage of the OMV would then follow (Figure
5.22).
Two astronauts would perform an EVA to unstow and mate the ϐluid
and electrical couplers between the telescope and tanker on the
following day. The helium couplers would then be leak checked to
ensure a proper connection. The remainder of the EVA would be

dedicated to the SIRTF servicing task. Helium transfer operations
would be initiated by the ϐlight crew the following day, giving the EVA
crew time to relax from the previous day’s work. On completion of the
refuelling, the transfer lines would be vented to space to remove any
residual helium in preparation for umbilical separation and stowage
the following day. On ϐlight day ϐive, the EVA crew would perform
another spacewalk to disconnect the telescope and SFHT and prepare
the spacecraft for deberthing from the support cradle. On completion
of the EVA, the crew would deploy the OMV and, with the robotic arm,
attach the telescope to the space tug to begin the journey back to its
original orbit. While the crew waits for the empty OMV to return, the
SFHT would be safed for storage and descent using a dedicated control
panel on the aft ϐlight deck. Saϐing would consist in allowing the Dewar
to warm up and vent any residual helium. In this way, post-landing
operations would be relatively simpler as it would only involve
removing an empty tank from the cargo bay and routing it to the
processing facility.
Furthermore, it avoided creating a situation where the burst disks
needed to rupture to relieve any pressure build-up that would have
inevitably resulted from leaving helium within the tank. In fact, despite
the Orbiter’s external thermal protection system, the heat of re-entry
still raised the temperature inside the payload bay. Hence, during re-
entry, a non-empty SFHT would be exposed to a thermal load inducing
the remaining helium to warm up and increase its pressure. To prevent
a structural failure, burs disks would allow for pressure relief. Apart
from the potential hazards resulting from such a vent, extended
maintenance operations would be necessary to replace the burst disks
as some would be located inside the vacuum jacket of the SFHT Dewar.

Figure 5.22 Conϐiguration for manual (EVA) resupply of SIRTF in the cargo bay[Source:
Superϐluid Helium Tanker (SFHT) study (pdf), p. 105. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19890010811]
An automated alternative to the manual (EVA) resupply scenario
was also considered to eliminate the long transfer lines and associated
ϐlow losses and heat leaks (Figure 5.23). In such an instance, the SHFT
would be rotated out of the payload bay so that the forward interface of
the tanker, which would house the automated umbilicals, could
interface with the corresponding umbilical connectors and couplings
on the telescope. Once docking is complete, the active half of the
automated coupler mating mechanism would mate the ϐluid and
electrical couplers. Thus, two electrical connectors and two ϐluid
couplers would satisfy mission success requirements. Power,
command and data handling would be provided to the user via the
SFHT, with monitoring and control of the SFHT accomplished from the
Orbiter aft ϐlight deck or the ground. However, the EVA capability would
remain available as a backup for servicing in the case of failure of the
automated mechanisms.
A second automated option would see the SFHT brought to the user
by the OMV. This scenario would incorporate structural and utility
connections for attaching the OMV and the user spacecraft. The SFHT
would require an automatic coupler mating mechanism to attach the
ϐluid and electrical couplers. A television camera and light system on

the SFHT would also be needed to perform the docking procedure.
Power, command and data handling would be provided to the user
spacecraft from the OMV via the SFHT, with the resupply process
monitored and controlled, if necessary, from the ground. Upon
completion of the replenishment operations, the SFHT would be
detached from the user spacecraft and returned to the Space Station or
the STS (Figure 5.24).
Figure 5.23 Conϐiguration for automatic resupply of SIRTF in the cargo bay[Source: Superϐluid
Helium Tanker (SFHT) study (pdf), p. 107. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19890010811]

Figure 5.24 A representation of the in-situ automatic resupply scenario[Source: Superϐluid
Helium Tanker (SFHT) study (pdf), p. 23. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19890010811]
A fourth scenario considered the replenishment of superϐluid at the
space station for several planned attached payloads and experiments
located inside the US Laboratory Module. Additionally, servicing of
large observatories such as AXAF and SIRTF could also be performed.
However, such a scenario introduced a signiϐicant drawback due to the
impossibility of recovering the continuous boil-off of helium without
signiϐicant additional hardware. Hence, in this scenario, the
minimization of boil-off would become a key driver in the design of the
tanker. As the most frequent resupply operations (at 30 to 90-day
intervals) would involve experiments inside the US laboratory module,
the SFHT was to be located as close to the module to minimize transfer
line length and tanker movement. Ideally, the tanker would be attached
to the nearest truss assembly section with a transfer line running to an
interface inside the pressurized module. For servicing larger users,

1
such as AXAF and SIRTF, the tanker would be moved into a truss
assembly that provided sufϐicient room for mooring of the user or into
a dedicated servicing facility.
REFERENCES
NASA (1980) Conceptual design of an orbital propellant transfer experiment. Volume 2: Study
results. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800022917
NASA (1981) Conceptual Design of an In-Space Cryogenic Fluid Management Facility. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19810012684
NASA (1982) Space Operations Center system analysis. Volume 3, book 2: SOC system deϔinition
report, revision A. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19820012328
NASA (1984) Deϔinition of technology development missions for early Space Station satellite
servicing. Volume 1: Executive summary. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19850004614
NASA (1985) Satellite Services Workshop II Volume 1. Available at: https:// nexis. gsfc. nasa. gov/ 
documents/ 3_ Satellite_ Services_ Workshop_ II_ Vol_ 1_ Nov_ 85. pdf
NASA (1985) Satellite Services Workshop II Volume 2. Available at: https:// nexis. gsfc. nasa. gov/ 
documents/ 4_ Satellite_ Services_ Workshop_ II_ Vol_ 2_ Nov_ 85. pdf
NASA (1988) Orbital Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 1: Executive
summary. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880003986
NASA (1988) Orbital Spacecraft Consumables Resupply System (OSCRS). Volume 2: Study results.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19880002305
NASA (1988) Satellite Services System Servicing Equipment Catalog. Available at: https:// nexis. 
gsfc. nasa. gov/ library. html
NASA (1988) Superϔluid Helium Tanker (SFHT) study. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19890010811
NASA (2017) A Detailed Historical Review of Propellant Management Devices for Low Gravity
Propellant Acquisition. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 20170000667
Footnotes
However, California-headquartered SpaceX is preponderantly and successfully challenging such
as sorry state of affair. The Falcon 9 and Falcon 9 Heavy rockets are designed with a reusable ϐirst
stage that upon staging returns to either a barge in the ocean or on a landing pad close to launch
site. To date, tens of launches have seen the successful recovery of the ϐirst stage and reuse on
subsequence ϐlights. Their Dragon and Dragon 2 capsules used for transporting, respectively,

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
supplies and astronauts to the ISS, are reusable and have already been reϐlown multiple times.
Finally, the Starship rocket, the SpaceX is relentlessly developing, promises to be the ϐirst ever
fully reusable heavy lifter and to slash launch cost to a few hundred dollars per kilogram.
 
Several years later it would become known as the Hubble Space Telescope.
 
In the frictionless environment of space, Newton’s third law of motion is visibly predominant in
even the simplest of tasks. Fastening a screw results in the astronaut rotating in the opposite
direction unless he has a way of retaining himself and counteract the rotation.
 
Hence the observatory was called Solar Max (maximum).
 
To date, it remains the only such an EVA sortie ever performed.
 
Free-ϐlyers are a class of spacecraft that can best accomplish their mission without the
disturbance of human presence. At the same time, they do require periodic servicing and repair
that can be better managed by a human crew. A typical example of free-ϐlyer would be a material
processing facility, which requires extended periods of extremely low acceleration but regular
visits to replenish consumables and raw materials as well as return of the ϐinished products.
 
You can compare the SOC layout with that of the International Space Station in a so-called
branched conϐiguration, that offers unrestricted growth, as new branches can always be added.
 
If one recalls the dramatic events that characterized every single satellite servicing mission
accomplished by the Space Shuttle, it is easy to appreciate how the presence of astronauts was
paramount to the success of those ϐlights. Even today, despite advancements in robotics, the
International Space Station would have become inoperative without a crew handling breakdowns.
 
It was feared that the various construction activities undertaken by the SOC would raise the
likelihood of debris generation. Hence, hangars would protect the most vulnerable of the
apparatus being serviced or stored.
 
This is essential for all those applications where the user can only function properly if fed
exclusively with ϐluid in the liquid phase. A typical example is that of a jet engine.

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
 
If it is desirable to vent the vapor phase in a low-acceleration environment without venting
liquid, PMD can be conϐigured to hold the liquid away from the vent.
 
Liquid hydrogen was selected for the following reasons: receiver tank chilldown and ϐill is
more difϐicult to accomplish with hydrogen than with liquid oxygen; because of its lower surface
tension, low-g liquid acquisition is more difϐicult; and there are fewer safety problems associated
with hydrogen than with oxygen.
 
These were the tanks holding the liquid hydrogen and oxygen to be burned in the fuel cells to
produce electricity and water.
 
This cavity is typically referred to as “ullage” and its contents is likewise denominated.
Furthermore, any element of the ϐluid system that is connect to such cavity and allow the transfer
of the pressurant are identiϐied with the additional adjective “ullage” (e.g.: ullage return lines,
ullage tank).
 
The usual propellants employed for spacecraft attitude control are hydrazine and tetroxide.
Apart from being toxic to human health, resupply operations with this type of ϐluids is inherently
difϐicult and dangerous. It is not surprising then, that refuelling would occur with the astronauts
safely inside the Space Shuttle’s crew cabin. For this reason, Rockwell stressed the need to develop
as many automated connections as possible to limit to the essential extra vehicular activities.
 
In 1996, NASA renamed it the Chandra-X Ray Observatory in honour of Nobel-prize winner
astrophysicist Subrahmanyam Chandrasekhar, known for its ground-breaking work in
understanding neutron stars and black holes.
 
Dynamic loads such as that of a rocket launch will trigger an oscillatory movement into the
body they are applied to. Each body has an inϐinite number of so-called natural frequencies and
natural modes of oscillation. If the launch environment produces a dynamic loading with a
frequency close to that of a natural frequency of the payload, a so-called resonance can be
triggered which will cause the payload to oscillate feeding in a positive feedback loop on the load
being applied. As a result, the payload enters into a resonance in which the amplitude of the
oscillation will rapidly increase causing a catastrophic failure. Hence, it is responsibility of the
payload designer to produce a structure that is it stiff enough so that the ϐirst natural frequency is
at a value well above the frequency of the launch environment.

18 
In fact, an evaluation of the transfer line length variations performed to determine the range of
possible lengths, showed that the length could vary from 5 feet to as much as 30 feet depending on
the relative location of the tanker and telescope.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_6
6. Factories in Space
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
“The prospect of doing something useful for humanity”
It is almost a standard question in a job interview to ask prospective
employees their expectations if they were hired. During his interview
with the McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company in St. Louis,
Missouri, 29-year-old aerospace engineer Charles D. Walker had a
crystal clear view of the type of career he was seeking. His answer was
simple, “Technical work, design development for a few years,
opportunity to move into management and oh, by the way, along the
way, if anything I’m working on has the opportunity to ϐly into space, I
would like the opportunity to approach NASA to go ϐly with it.” Walker
had graduated in 1971 from Purdue University, Indiana, with a degree
in aeronautical and astronautical engineering. Since then, he had
endeavoured to work not merely in the space industry but for those
projects that would offer a commercial aspect.
In 1971, while the crew of Apollo 17 was collecting the last moon
samples, NASA and the space industry was gearing up for the upcoming
Space Shuttle program. Unlike Apollo, which focused only on short trips
to the Moon’s surface, the Space Shuttle was meant to become all sorts
of things. Among them was the opportunity of becoming a platform for
the commercial exploitation of the peculiar characteristics of space,
such as the apparent lack of gravity. It was felt that new materials and
substances could be produced using processes impossible to exploit or
even reproduce on Earth due to the ever-present spoiling effect of

gravity. At the same time, chances were that space would be no longer
visited by a privileged elite of professional astronauts but by scientists
and engineers conducting their experiments and research.
McDonnell Douglas was one of those companies willing to
investigate how to transform the space industry from one exclusively
dedicated to exploration to one that would offer proϐitable returns to
commercial enterprises. “They knew the prospect of utilizing space
and the unique environment of space, and the company wanted to ϐind
a way to...ϐind interesting and fruitful ways of invest private capital to
produce a proϐit for the stockholders...they thought they could do that
by looking at what could be done in the low gravity of orbital space
through the very near-term ϐlight and operations of Space Shuttle”,
Walker explains.
Less than a year later, Walker moved into the Material Processing
Group, where he joined a small group of engineers that, using limited
company funding, was researching technologies for producing
pharmaceutical drugs in the low-gravity environment of space. The
interest in this particular market stemmed from a collaboration
between McDonnel Douglas Astronautics and the NASA Marshall Space
Flight Centre in 1975. The partnership aimed to recognize what
industrial processes or materials could be exploited or manufactured
for practical commercial and proϐitable products to sell back on Earth.
It was soon realized that pharmaceutical puriϐication would yield a
signiϐicant ϐinancial return for one of the world’s most proϐitable and
richest industries. “If you can purify medical materials like hormones
and enzymes, which make up the basic components of treatment for a
variety of diseases, you can purify material to become the therapeutic
treatment for diseases, and you can do that puriϐication to a degree
that it’s impossible here on Earth”, Walker explains.
In addition, drug constituents of higher purity result in more
efϐicient medicines, reducing the dosage and letting a pharmaceutical
company earn more for the production batch of a given drug. On Earth,
gravity interferes with any chemical separation process placing an
upper limit to the degree of puriϐication that is achievable. The
weightlessness of orbital space completely removes this obstacle
allowing chemical separation processes to reach a superior level of
reϐinement. At the time of the McDonnell Douglas’ studies, a four to

ϐivefold increase in product puriϐication was predicted. It was
recognized that operating in low Earth orbit would yield up to ϐive
hundred times the amount of product attainable at the same time on
the ground. Combining the higher production rate with the superior
grade drug constituents, the pharmaceutical industry would have had a
vigorous way to supply more effective drugs while amplifying their
proϐit.
When considering the several chemical separation processes
adopted for drug ingredient preparation, the McDonnell Douglas team
concluded that an electrokinetic phenomenon called electrophoresis
would be ideally suitable for space-based applications. Electrophoresis
is the motion of dispersed particles in a ϐluid relative to the ϐluid itself
under a spatially uniform electric ϐield. It was ϐirst observed in 1807 by
Ferdinand Frederic Reuss of the Moscow State University when he
noticed that clay particles dispersed in water would migrate under the
inϐluence of a constant electric ϐield. The phenomenon’s cause has to do
with a charged interface between the particle and the surrounding
ϐluid.
The applications for biochemistry are noteworthy. For example,
“blood is a complex mixture of proteins and cells, and every protein
molecule of a particular kind has a resident charge, electrical charge to
it; very small, but it’s different from every other chemical type of
protein or a cellular body within that mixture. Within an electric ϐield,
they will all move as a group toward the attracting electrical pole, and
they’ll move at different rates, and so if you expose that sample to an
electric ϐield for a period of time, when you shut the ϐield off, you’ll have
groups of compounds all separated from one another. So whereas you
had an original mixture, at the end of that process you have puriϐied
into individually obtainable groups each component of that original
mixture. That’s the nature of electrophoresis”, Walker explains. So
McDonnell Douglas had to ϐind a partner to initiate a proϐitable joint
venture. The market survey resulted in an agreement between the
giant aerospace company and the Ortho Pharmaceutical Company of
the Johnson & Johnson Companies Group. As Walker remembers,
“Johnson & Johnson agreed to invest their own monies, private monies,
in product development, one particular or maybe two hormones that
they thought had a market in the commercial marketplace, and that

hormone could be applied to this process and would beneϐit from space
processing”. The agreement was signed in 1977 and entailed
McDonnell Douglas developing a prototype for ground-based
equipment to reϐine knowledge and understanding of the ϐluid-
mechanical equations governing electrophoresis. The aim was to
assemble a spaceworthy unit operating a continuous ϐlow
electrophoresis process for pharmaceutical puriϐication. Ortho would
ϐinancially support the developmental work. As revealed a few years
later, they were after the production of highly puriϐied erythropoietin.
This is a hormone released by the adrenal gland sitting on top of the
kidneys, whose effect is to stimulate the bone marrow to produce red
blood cells. Lack or shortage of erythropoietin generates a condition
known as anaemia, in which the yield of red blood cells is not adequate
to sustain a healthy level of oxygen in the body tissues. Anaemia is also
recognized as a side effect of some forms of blood cancer. Production of
erythropoietin was already taking place but in limited quantities and
with a moderate level of puriϐication. Therefore, its effectiveness on
the patients was restricted. As a substantial portion of the population
in the United States was being affected by anaemia, it was evident that
the cheap mass production of highly puriϐied erythropoietin would
entail a signiϐicant economic potential for the Ortho Pharmaceutical
Company.
An initial interest in acquiring an experimental unit for continuous
ϐlow electrophoresis operating in Europe was soon cast aside. It was
too expensive, and its small size was inadequate for the study.
Therefore, Walker and his team elected to design from scratch their
experimental apparatus. To further complicate the already challenging
task, there was the need for aerospace engineers to leap over the newly
emerging ϐield of biochemistry. “The word biotechnology was really of
not very general use even then, but just coming into use in the technical
community in the late 1970s, early 1980s”, Walker remembers. “So,
plenty of challenges in terms of materials, in terms of the
electrochemical substances, the biology of keeping cells—when we
were using living cells as either the tissue-culture source for the
biochemical materials or the enzymes and hormones that were
produced by the living cells in culture in the laboratory—keeping the

hormones and enzymes viable in electrochemical separation process
for long periods of time”.
One hurdle to overcome was the negative impact that the length of
a typical Shuttle ϐlight would have had on the experiment results. As
Walker continues, “biological substances require very delicate
chemical balances in the ϐluids in which they’re immersed…they have
to have a very balanced temperature and pH to maintain those
[chemical balances] in the isolated and resource-constrained
environment…of a Space Shuttle cabin”.
By the end of the seventies, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics
Division had already got underway informal discussions with the NASA
Marshall Space Flight Centre on the possibility of adopting the Shuttle
to serve the commercial interests of a private company. The Astronaut
Ofϐice assigned astronaut Don L. Lind as a mentor for Walker and his
team. Lind assisted them in developing a spaceworthy device suitable
for being operated in orbit by astronauts. “He very quickly came up to
St. Louis, to our laboratory and facility in St. Louis, and he began
working with us there, and we would exchange information, brieϐings,
as well as we’d show him designs and prototypes of equipment, and
he’d help us understand the basics of, you know, this is the way the
astronaut will want to see procedures described for both training
processes as well as for in-ϐlight. So we began to learn directly from
Don what kind of switch designations, what kind of instrumentation,
what kind of procedures and processes was mandated, basically, by the
Astronaut Ofϐice, in terms of controls to the device, the design of the
instruments, as well as the design of the procedures for operation of
the device”.
In January 1980, those informal discussions bore a joint endeavour
agreement entitling McDonnell Douglas to ϐly a proof-of-concept
electrophoresis experiment on six Shuttle ϐlights. Keeping in line with
the NASA acronym-philia custom, the electrophoresis machine was
given the ofϐicial designation of CFES or Continuous Flow
Electrophoresis System. As Walker explains, “it was basically, as the
attorneys say, a quid pro quo arrangement...the one side provides these
resources, the other side provided these other resources, in order to
accomplish an overall objective, and there’s not exchange of funds”.
Simply put, NASA would provide transportation without asking for

compensation. McDonnell Douglas, in turn, would develop and build the
CFES with their own money. The agreement, however, allowed NASA to
exploit the CFES for their own research needs. “We had been working
with the Marshall Materials Processing Lab folks for a period of years.
They were interested in continuing to do research and especially to do
electrophoretic separation research, and their interest was, from an
academic standpoint, to do this research in space. So they would like to
use the electrophoresis device to do research in low Earth orbit in the
microgravity environment, and the agreement embodied just that
opportunity” Walker remembers.
“So about one-third of the time of the electrophoresis device
operation in orbit for those tests and proof-of-development ϐlights,
those six ϐlights, there were going to be NASA samples on board that
we would inject into the apparatus and would be separated and
collected and photographed, because the device had a clear acrylic
front to it so you could actually see the separation process when there
was a coloration or a dye in the speciϐic sample stream being
separated. So NASA, in the body of the Marshall Space Flight Centre
Materials Lab folks, had the opportunity to do, at no expense to them
other than the preparation of samples and then the collection and the
analysis of it later in their own laboratories upon return home, to use a
device produced at the expense of the private sector for private-sector
research, but, again, allowing NASA the right to use it for up to a third of
the time in orbit in exchange for the opportunity to have it there in
orbit aboard Shuttle”.
Due to its considerable size, the agreement allowed the CFES to be
ϐlown inside the roomy Spacelab. “We were talking about pretty good-
size equipment here. I mean, even in concept form, this thing was going
to weigh several hundred pounds. It was going to be the size of a ϐile
cabinet, a four- or ϐive-drawer ϐile cabinet, or bigger, and it would
probably have to have another module or two for electronic control
and storage of the biologic materials. So we knew it was going to be big,
and Spacelab, again, was the obvious place for this kind of thing,
mounted in a rack”.

Figure 6.1 The main components of the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System.
[Source: Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments, P.
219]
Glynn Lunney of the Space Transportation System Group at JCS
came up with the idea of ϐlying the apparatus in the crew cabin
middeck. “He knew the design of the systems and areas within the
Space Shuttle Orbiter very well, and his thinking was, there’s a galley on
the port side in the middeck of the crew compartment of the Orbiter.
That thing is about the same size as these electrophoresis program
folks are telling me they’re going to need to ϐly. Why don’t we on a few
ϐlights—we’re not talking about many ϐlights here—take the galley out,
put in this electrophoresis materials processing device”, Walker
remembers (Figures 6.1 and 6.2).

Figure 6.2 View of the CFES ϐitted in place of the galley in the Orbiter’s crew cabin.
[Source: Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments, P.
220]
On June 28, 1982, the CFES came to life in the weightlessness of
space as a guest of Columbia’s STS-4 ϐlight. To save on development
costs and time, the device did not include any telemetry capability. This
meant that Walker and his colleagues in the support back rooms at
mission control could only rely on the crew reporting back the strange
but meaningful readouts released by the apparatus computer plus any
interesting observation they might have on the working of the device.
This was easier said than done, given that NASA could rely only on brief
periods of communication when ground stations were in direct view of

Columbia. During those periods, up to three people in the back rooms at
mission control would carefully listen to the verbal dialogues, writing
down any piece of information on the experiment regardless of how
brief it could be.
“Sometimes the pass was so short, and there were so many things
going on otherwise, with the vehicle or with other primary payloads,
that the crew would just give a quick verbal burst of information”,
Walker remembers. To ensure that nothing would go missing, they
requested and obtained a copy of the audiotapes for review after each
pass. Walker and his group could generate new instructions for the
crew to carry out settings and conϐiguration changes. As he continues,
“there was the opportunity to make...some physical change, changing
valves, changing ϐlow rates, but there was also the opportunity in the
computer to change pump speeds and electric ϐield and that kind of
thing”. For the McDonnell Douglas engineers, however, communicating
with the crew was not straightforward at all. “We could not talk to the
crew directly ourselves from our back-room console; that was CapCom
that did that. So we had to go through the payloads ofϐicer in the front
room, who then took it to the Flight Director, who then okayed for the
CapCom to ask such-and-such a question of the crew on board”.
First and foremost, they demonstrated that the CFES could indeed
work in space as advertised by their mathematical models. This was no
mere achievement at all. “This was a ϐluid process. These were pumps
pushing gallons of ϐluid through a very thin chamber—I mean, literally
3 millimetres thick and 16 centimetres wide and 120 centimetres in
length—and had to do so without bubbles forming, because bubbles
would literally block the process. So it had to be bubble-free. It had to
be ultraclean because of the biological nature of it” Walker
enthusiastically explains.
In fact, for the whole duration of the mission, the device
successfully operated without bubbles with temperature and electric
ϐield entirely controllable. At the same time, ground handling
procedures were also validated, conϐirming that the device, if already
ϐitted on the Orbiter on the launch pad, could be sterilized, serviced
with the electrochemically conductive buffering compound kept
biologically clean and bubble-free for several days before the mission
could begin. Such readiness capability must not be underestimated

since the last few days preceding the lift-off are always very frantic and
hectic, with plenty of ϐinal checks and activities to perform for any
rocket.
Having the experiment ready to go gave NASA and the astronauts
one less worry about and helped increase the conϐidence in the
McDonnell Douglas engineers’ work and professionalism. Only a
simulant was used to validate the process and the overall working of
the apparatus for its maiden ϐlight. “We used small styrene beads, as a
matter of fact, which was a simulant that was proposed by the
Materials Processing Lab folks at Marshall. These micro-size styrene
beads were dyed with different colors. They were mixed together, and
in the chamber they would separate into the different color streams,
and so on STS-4 Hank1 could readily see and photograph the results of
the separation, and then collect those, also, for return to the ground”,
Walker explains. The simulant conϐirmed that the device could operate
as a machine correctly and validated its capability to act as a chemical
laboratory able to separate the wanted compounds from the undesired
ones. “We wanted to know, for the practical purpose of being able to
collect pure enzyme x with an inherent electric charge of z volts,
predict what tube—and we’re talking about little exit tubes out of that
array of 198 exit tubes that are maybe one half of a millimetre in
diameter—predict which one of those tubes it comes out so that you
can collect that in pure form, compound x in pure form, versus all the
other compounds or all the other liquids which you didn’t want, were of
no use to the pharmaceutical company. So you wanted to be able to
predict where it was going to come out, so we were very practically
oriented in terms of our objectives...We had proven that we could
predict adequately for production processing what we needed to
know”, Walker continues.
Shortly after the mission, Walker and his manager Jim Rose walked
into Glynn Lunney’s ofϐice to brief him on the results and possibly
discuss future developments of the joint agreement. Glynn was indeed
very pleased with the CFEF’s ϐirst ϐlight results, particularly on the
effective way in which McDonnell Douglas was honoring the
agreement. Rose saw that this was the right moment to propose an
amendment to the initial agreement. He explained that despite the
good job Hartsϐield had done in operating the device, he could dedicate

only a short amount of time to it due to other primary and more
important duties. For all the future CFES ϐlights, the situation would be
the same. A mission specialist would attend the experiment
sporadically, while the device would need constant care to return the
best results possible. McDonnell Douglas needed a person who would
be only and exclusively focused on the apparatus. Said in other words,
they needed a payload specialist. “As I remember it, Glynn chewed on
his cigar a little bit...and said something like “Well, we’ve been wanting
to move into this payloads specialist thing, so if you’ve got somebody
that is qualiϐied, can meet all the astronaut selection criteria, put in the
application. Let’s do it...do you have somebody in mind?”” At this point,
Rose turned to Walker, looked at him and he said “you’re looking at
him!”. Paperwork was sent to NASA headquarters for review, and when
approval was granted, Walker became the ϐirst private Space Shuttle
payload specialist. Up to that point, all payload specialists already
scheduled to ϐly belonged to the academic or research industry, and
they would participate in Spacelab missions. Walker was not an
academic, he did not belong to the research environment, and he was
not a scientist interested in performing research in space. He was a
private industry employee concerned and tasked with creating
commercial opportunities for space manufacturing. It was hoped he
would be the forefather of a new generation of spacefarers devoted to
using the Space Shuttle for business activities.
Assigned to STS-41D, Discovery’s maiden ϐlight, Walker began
indoctrination into the complex world of Space Shuttle training. It was
a world already familiar to Walker, thanks to his previous coaching
activities to prepare the STS-4’s crew to operate the CFES apparatus.
However, his status as a private payload specialist meant he would
follow a basic training syllabus focused on Space Shuttle onboard
systems familiarization and a decent number of simulations with his
crewmates. Of course, along with Space Shuttle training, Walker took
also care of his training in St. Louise. He also supported the other CFES
ϐlights taking place on STS-6, STS-7, and STS-8.
On August 30, 1984, Walker’s dream of being an astronaut ϐinally
became real. At 12:50 GMT, at main engine cut-off he felt immediately
that gravity was not pulling on him anymore. Walker set himself about
to start CFES operations on the following day, turning it off on the

second to last ϐlight day. Walker’s tender loving care of the apparatus
went so far as even to sleep next to it at night. As naively as it might
seem, Walker had a point: “I arranged it that way, since it was supposed
to operate twenty-four hours a day during three or four days of the
ϐlight, and the electronics had a beeper. The beeper was disabled at
night; disabled when I would plug in an earphone, a headset, which
would alert me through my ear. So I had to be real close by so I’d get
alerted, and if I had to get up, then I wouldn’t disturb anybody else,
hopefully; take my little ϐlashlight and try to ϐix whatever the problem
might be, if that were the case. But I had to be real close by the
electrophoresis device”.
During the day, he would consistently work next to the machine to
ensure it would run smoothly. In the case of glitches, he would ϐix it
either by himself or in consultation with the ground. With only one
TDRS satellite in orbit, communication opportunities were limited.
Anytime it wanted to talk with the ground, he had to ask permission
from the crew to include some room for questions he ought to ask his
support team in mission control.
From a technical point of view, the mission was successful as it
further validated CFES procedures and operations. However, from a
productivity perspective, it had been a failure. The samples could not
be used for the animal trial, which was a necessary step to conϐirm that
drugs could work on humans leading the way for Ortho Pharmaceutical
to approve their production on an industrial scale. “Now, remembering
again that we were reϐining, purifying pharmaceutical-grade materials
for pharmaceutical research, and that our partner in the research in the
commercial—soon we hoped it would be a commercial project—was
Johnson & Johnson [Corporation], Ortho Pharmaceutical [Division],
and they intended to use some of these samples for ϐirst-level animal
testing—it would have been many tens of months later that they ϐirst
could have gotten [United States] Food and Drug Administration
approval, after much more testing, to use this materials for a
pharmaceutical product”.
Another important lesson learned was that the apparatus needed
much care and direct personal attention to keep it under control and
within the design conditions to produce pure samples. Combining
these two valuable lessons brought McDonnell Douglas management to

ask for ϐlying a payload specialist on the next available opportunity for
the CFES. “We expressed that to NASA management, and the
management apparently said, “Well, if we do that, we’ll train another
one of your engineers, go through that process. Or, Walker seems to
have made it back okay, and none of the crew really got ticked off at him
on this ϐlight, so maybe he can ϐly again, if you want to do that.””.
Six months after STS-41D, on April 12, 1985, Walker got strapped in
his chair in Discovery’s middeck bounded to space for the second time
and with a newly improved CFES apparatus to tinker with. “I was going
to be operating some relatively new equipment, a change to our
electrophoresis apparatus in terms of some of the electromechanical
subsystems within it and some of the processes. We had changed a
number of processes just to improve the sterility, the biological
sterility of it, to avoid the problem we had and some other anticipated
possible problems that we had discerned over the previous few
months of experience and work with it on the ground”.
Among the problems hinted at by Walker was an annoying tendency
of the buffer liquid2 to bubble, hampering the puriϐication process.
Talking about his second experience in space as a member of the STS-
51D ϐlight, Walker remembers that “it went pretty well. There was the
usual little snags here and there, of some software that had a glitch and
I had to reprogram the controlling software; the adjustment of
temperature or ϐlow rate and electrical power settings, as I was
monitoring the progress of the device. Just kind of manually, semi-
manually ϐlying it, so to speak, through its processes, adjusting it, ϐine-
tuning its processes”. The only signiϐicant issue was again the bubble
formation, which was deemed to be generated by the apparatus
subsystems rather than the electrophoresis process.
After STS-51D, one ϐlight opportunity remained for the CFES as per
the joint agreement between McDonnell Douglas and NASA. McDonnell
Douglas, however, was already looking ahead to an extension of the
original agreement or to a new deal that would permit additional
ϐlights to move to phase two. Phase two would gather the know-out
earned by the six CFES ϐlights and develop an automated system to be
tested in the Orbiter’s cargo bay at least twice. Successful completion
of such runs would open the gates of Space Shuttle revenue ϐlights in
which the facility would operate in an automatic mode except being

turned on and off at the beginning and end of the mission. Those
missions would produce pharmaceutical-grade materials that
McDonnell would sell to its partners. Parts of the proϐit would be given
to NASA as reimbursement, offering the space agency an opportunity
for ϐinancial gain.
As of mid-1985, the design work for the production apparatus,
named Electrophoresis Operations in Space (EOS)-1, was completed,
and McDonnell Douglas had already started building it. Walker
describes it as a “5,000-pound across-the-cargo-bay system. It was
[equal to] twenty-four chambers, electrophoresis chambers; I think
there were six of them. They were twenty-four times the capability of
an individual electrophoresis chamber that I was ϐlying in the middeck,
and advanced electronics, advanced monitoring and control systems,
as well as all the necessary support structure, insulation, and
volumetric capacity for the ϐluids and the liquids, so that it could run
out in the open cargo bay and run for a seven-day mission almost
continuously, producing large quantities of puriϐied pharmaceutical-
grade material”.
Activities on the middeck would not cease with the EOS-1 since
McDonnell Douglas was interested in applying the electrophoresis
process to other materials. In this way, they would extend their
portfolio of clients and assure a constant revenue of proϐit. Such
thinking proved to be wise since, in September 1985, Ortho
Pharmaceutical withdrew its ϐinancial and commercial backing.
Advances in genetics had brought about a breakthrough in the mass
production of drugs or their components. Their purity, however,
remained lower than what could be achievable in space. Mass
production was traded with purity. This wind change was a bump on
the road, but McDonnell Douglas also had other aces up in their sleeves.
They got contracts with 3M Riker, a competitor of Ortho
Pharmaceutical and initiated talks with other pharmaceutical
companies in Europe and Japan. The pharmaceutical industry was not
the only target of McDonnell Douglas.
“The electrophoresis process is the electrophoresis process, and
you can separate one of tens of thousands of types of hormones or
enzymes, proteins of all kinds, in solution. You can separate dozens if
not hundreds of types of living cellular bodies in suspension in the

device” Walker explains very persuasively. “We were actually even at
the time doing our own internal research at McDonnell Douglas and
consulting with some other companies about wild things like even
doing solid suspended materials like ore separations, rocky ore
separations, with this device, things that could never be done with this
process here on Earth because sedimentation would make it
completely just laughable to even talk about it. But when there wasn’t
any such thing as sedimentation in a place where gravity is not a
concern, then it becomes possible to use the electrical charge
characteristics of any small, microscopic or even very tiny particle
suspended in a ϐluid to separate it from any other type of material, and
so you could separate any kind of thing. So we were talking to others
about kind of wild projects, nothing that ever even got into the
laboratory test phase on Earth”. McDonnell Douglas was seeing a bright
future for the commercial space industry and wanted to have a front-
row seat in it, spreading their electrophoresis in space to a broad
audience, from pharmaceutical industries to oil companies.
In line with the company’s near-future plans, for the last ϐlight of the
original NASA agreement to be accomplished during STS-61B, the CFES
device had been upgraded to the preproduction test level. In this way, it
could be used to qualify the production processes, settings and
software subsystems that would be ϐlown on the EOS-1. Once again,
Walker would be on board to take care of the device. Walker ϐlew three
times in just one year and a half. No other astronaut has ever ϐlown so
often in such a short period. Walker was becoming a real career
payload specialist, and with the McDonnell Douglas’ ambition bar set
very high, he would not be the last one. STS-61 B’s crew had to get to
know Walker and his backup, Robert Wood, one of the computer gurus
in the project. With many ϐlights to come and the prospect of having an
EOS-1 like facility on the future space station, McDonnell Douglas and
Walker himself were dreaming of a cadre of commercial astronauts
that would periodically go into space and serve the needs of their
company. For Wood, the ϐirst ϐlight would be on STS-61M, the EOS-1
ϐlight. For the moment, he just had to shadow Walker and learn as much
as possible from him and be ready to step in should something happen
to Walker3.

STS-61B left launch pad 39A at the KSC on November 27, 1985. As
the primary objective, Walker spent some 175 hours purifying one
large sample of 1.1 litres of the impure hormone. This would represent
the vast quantities of material that the upcoming EOS-1 ϐlight would be
processing and help validate such activities. As secondary objectives,
he spent the rest of the ϐlight tinkering with the device to learn more
about its operating limits. He tested the apparatus with different
combinations of sample and buffer ϐluid concentrations to characterize
the maximum levels of material that the process would be able to work
with.
Due to the mechanical complexity of the device, Walker also had
spare pumps and gear in case of mechanical failure. Among them was a
de-aeration pump in case the bubble issue would appear again. Sure
enough, shortly into the mission, bubbles started to form. For short
ϐlights, this would not threaten the mission objectives, but the CFES
was about to start operations on a bigger scale, and as Walker explains,
“that could really become a major problem in the long term, many tens
of hours of continuous operations. When you tried to have a stable
electrophoresis process operating, bubbles could cause instabilities”.
Promptly Walker decided to install the pump. This was not an easy task
since it involved getting direct access to the inside of the apparatus: “I
literally took the side panel off the ϐlow chamber apparatus...this panel
is probably four foot in height and a foot and a half wide and bolted
onto the side of the ϐlow apparatus with...a good two dozen or thirty
quick-release bolts. And there was a seal to prevent any liquid that
might be leaking inside from getting out into the cabin. But I needed to
get in there to interconnect this de-aeration apparatus”. Upon
successful installation of the pump, the device operated bubble-free for
the remainder of the ϐlight. At the end of the mission, Walker reversed
the assembly process to remove the pump and rebuild the side panel
he had previously removed to make room for the pump.
STS-61B was unquestionably the most successful ϐlight of the CFES
project. In St. Louis, laboratory tests conϐirmed that the device had
separated and puriϐied the material as advertised. Everything was
looking good for phase two. Unfortunately, the tragic loss of Challenger
and her crew on January 26, 1986, had a profound impact on the
commercial future of the Space Shuttle program. After almost three

years of forced grounding, the ϐleet ϐlared up into the Floridian skies
with the return-to-ϐlight mission STS-26. The Shuttle had changed not
only as a machine but also in its mandate. Flights would be exclusively
dedicated to scientiϐic research, assembling the space station, putting
in orbit big telescopes, and so on. There would not be room for
commercial activities. Despite the great enthusiasm McDonnell
Douglas had put into the electrophoresis project, the lack of a means of
transportation into space meant that the project could not go forward.
By the end of the 80s, the project had been cancelled.
Reϐlecting on those long-gone days when he and his colleagues
were developing the CFES, Walker remembers: “we were just all
enamoured with the prospect of ready access to space for all interests
in this nation, both government, civil, commercial, and the prospects
that we all believed were going to ϐlow from that were just going to be
enormous. So it was a period of time in which there was a lot of
enthusiasm for opportunity in exploiting and applying technology and
commercial opportunities in low Earth orbit via the Space Shuttle...all
of us had, in the back of our minds, at least, the prospect of doing
something useful for humanity, for the nation and all of humanity, in the
medical arena...all of us had in mind that the objective here, the ϐinal
objective, was to provide useful product for the medical research
community and treatments for diseases”.
McDonnell Douglas was a visionary company. They had understood
that space is not only a playground for science but also a fertile soil for
a new economy based on products developed directly in space. They
were far ahead of their time.
The Materials Experiment Carrier
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, NASA and the private industry saw a
bright future and potential for space-based manufacturing. Thus there
was a clear need for an orbiting platform that would enable a
systematic research program on the effects of weightlessness on
technologically important processes ranging from metallurgy to
biology. It was understood that research investigations would typically
require high-power, long-duration experiments. In addition, multiple
experiment runs would be required to fully isolate, characterize and

exploit the effects of weightlessness on the investigated processes.
Such experiments would support the early commercial applications in
which material samples would be handled in batch processes to
demonstrate the feasibility of automated production.
In December 1981, on behalf of the NASA MSFC, the Ohio-based
TRW company produced a concept study for a so-called Materials
Experiment Carrier (MEC). As described in the three-volume report
issued to the space agency, the MEC was a self-contained general-
purpose, versatile, and reusable carrier capable of accommodating a
wide range of multi-disciplinary R&D and commercial experiments
devoted to material processing in space. Two versions were proposed,
the initial MEC, which would then evolve into the so-called all-up MEC
(Figure 6.3). Both would be hosted on the Space Platform4 and
delivered via Space Shuttle. For either platform, TRW stressed the need
for total autonomy. Payloads riding on the MEC would have to carry
their power conditioning, control electronics, data acquisition and
management capability, sample handling and storage. Experiments
whose processing chamber demanded a sequence of pressurization
and depressurization cycles would require their dedicated container
for gas storage and post-processing disposal. The requisite of
autonomous payloads also drove the speciϐication of standard
interfaces between the experiment canisters and the MEC platform,
resulting in greater ϐlexibility to accommodate assorted payload
compositions. Effectively the payload functions and operations of the
MEC would be structured in a hierarchy analogous to the MEC being a
payload for the Space Platform. The Space Platform would perform
executive control over MEC operations without getting involved in its
operating procedures, command and data ϐlow, time schedules, and
processing sequences. MEC would operate largely in autonomous
mode, subject to resource monitoring and control by the Space
Platform. Analogously, MEC would allocate and distribute resources
from the Space Platform to the various payloads according to a
predetermined protocol. Although the MEC would exercise executive
control over payload operations, it would not get involved in the details
of a given payload processing functions and sequences.

Figure 6.3 The initial MEC conϐiguration is shown attached to the space platform. Note how the
MEC is also supporting EOS operations.
[Source: Materials experiment carrier concepts deϐinition study. Volume 1: Executive
summary, part 2 (pdf), p. 25. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002884]
The initial MEC was devised as a 14-ft diameter and 2.5-ft wide
disk5 housing seven truncated pie-shaped peripheral compartments.
One side would house the berthing adapter to the space platform, while
the opposing bulkhead would carry up to six axially mounted payload
canisters as cantilevered loads. The seventh compartment would
quarter the MEC subsystems and interface with the Space Platform. An
electrical power distribution subsystem would distribute the electric
current generated by the Space Platform while optimizing and
controlling its delivery to the various payloads preventing overloads.
Rechargeable batteries would allow the payloads and MEC subsystems
to stay alive during the orbit’s night side. A command and data
management subsystem would oversee the acquisition and
management of MEC’s health and payload data for transmission to

ground control. It would also allow ground-issued commands to be
routed to the individual payloads and MEC subsystems. Future
evolution of the subsystem would add fault detection capabilities and
diagnostics and fault correction functions. MEC and payload waste heat
would be collected and transferred to the Space Platform via the
thermal control system. It would consist of parallel coolant ϐlows
running through the payloads to accommodate various temperature
ranges and ϐlow rates. An additional insulation layer between payloads
would help provide the appropriate temperature control based on the
individual payload’s characteristics. The subsystem compartment
would also sport an adapter for the berthing of an EOS module. Much
more capable than the Space Shuttle-based version, a MEC-based EOS
would allow for tremendous production.
A signiϐicant increase in payload-carrying capability would be
achieved by inserting an add-on module in the all-up MEC
conϐiguration. Dubbed the growth module, it would consist of a four-
payload drum-shaped side-loaded compartment placed between the
Space Platform and the core module. With this arrangement, the initial
MEC module would still be housing all the subsystems, effectively
becoming the “core” module of the all-up MEC. One additional
trapezoidal compartment would be dedicated to expanding the
subsystem apparatus and house support equipment for the payloads of
the growth modules (Figures 6.4 and 6.5).

Figure 6.4 The all-up MEC conϐiguration with payloads.
[Source: Materials experiment carrier concepts deϐinition study. Volume 1: Executive
summary, part 2 (pdf), p. 26. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002884]

Figure 6.5 A detailed view of the all-up MEC conϐiguration. Note how one of the four
compartment doors is open and the payload canister extended on guide rails for servicing or
removal.
[Source: Design of the materials experiment carrier for on-orbit servicing (pdf), p. 12.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002919]
Additional provisions of the all-up MEC were a utility tunnel in the
center of the growth module cross-section to connect power cables,
coolant lines and signals wires from the space platform berthing
adapter to the MEC subsystems in the core module and vice versa.
Another design feature was the installation of a hinge at the EOS
berthing adapter to swing it out of the way and allow for on-orbit
changeout of the core module payload. In fact, on-orbit payload
servicing and changeout, for both core and growth modules, was a key
attribute of the all-up MEC. Despite the additional cost of providing the
MEC with serviceability features and the complexity of a
servicing/changeout mission, TRW highlighted four signiϐicant
beneϐits: extension of mission duration and thus increase in mission
output (e.g., number of samples processed for the time MEC would
spend in orbit); reduction in MEC launches and retrievals in any given
year, thereby greatly reducing transportation and ground

refurbishment costs; more effective MEC utilization through
replacement of payload units that have completed their mission
objectives ahead of others; and ϐinally, a timely return to Earth of end
products, such as those manufactured in the EOS.
Given the additional payload capability of the all-up MEC,
provisions were included for an auxiliary radiator to alleviate the
burden of heat rejection imposed on the Space Platform. It would
consist of ϐive hinged panels for a total surface of 120 square feet. It
would be wrapped around one side of the growth module for launch
and re-entry. Deployment would occur by spring action controlled by
two actuator-released restrain cables. It would not restrict payload
access for servicing and change out when deployed (Figure 6.6).
Figure 6.6 The deployable MEC auxiliary radiator.
[Source: Materials experiment carrier concepts deϐinition study. Volume 1: Executive
summary, part 2 (pdf), p. 39. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002884]
TRW envisioned that the initial MEC would ϐirst ϐly no later than
1987 or early 1988. Once delivered to the space platform, it would be
retrieved within six months and returned to the ground for

refurbishment, reϐitted with a new payload complement and prepared
for a relaunch. Two launches per year were envisioned, depending on
mission durations and turn-around time (projected between six and
eight months). By 1990, the all-MEC would make its debut, allowing
orbital stays for at least 12 months and periodic visits for payload
changeout every six months.
A pioneering initiative: the Industrial Space
Facility
Maxime Allen “Max” Faget is and will always be ϐirmly penned into the
NASA history books. He earned a degree in Mechanical Engineering
from Louisiana State University in 1943. Then, after three years spent
underwater as a submariner in the U.S. Navy, Faget turned his
extraordinary mind toward the sky above. He ϐirst started working on
the experimental X-15 hypersonic rocket plane, and then he moved into
the ϐledgling NASA as one of the 35 engineers composing the Space
Task Group and designed nothing less than the Mercury capsule,
becoming its indisputable father. He then made outstanding
contributions to the next Gemini and Apollo programs and continued
into the Space Shuttle program. As one of the chief architects of the
early American space program, nobody could have expected that he
would pose a formidable threat to that same agency that he helped so
much to get off the ground and win the space race.
It started in 1981 when three Huston University academics
brainstormed and dreamt of commercial space activities while
enjoying their meals at one of the university’s delies. James Calaway,
who had just returned to Huston after graduating from Oxford
University, and space architecture professor Guillermo Trotti and Larry
Bell spent hours conjecturing on a commercial orbiting space station to
produce goods largely needed back on Earth and of superior grade. The
perennial free fall of orbital motion is a formidable shield against the
spoiling effects of gravity on the most exquisite and fragile industrial
processes such as pharmaceutical drugs and computer
microprocessors. While the space agency had carried out studies on
the potentiality of space as a playground for manufacturing at the
industrial level and exploitation of lunar and asteroidal resources, any

real work undertaken by NASA in this respect was nothing short of
petty. In fact, except for the Skylab missions and experiments carried
out in material science, NASA’s primary concern had been reaching the
Moon and winning an unofϐicially declared competition against its
Soviet nemesis.
While nowadays we are accustomed to space operations run by
private companies or visionary billionaire entrepreneurs, such a
prospect was far-fetched and outrageous back in the eighties. As the
group of Huston academics soon learned, the main hurdle lay in getting
the project funded. Around the same time, Max Faget retired from
NASA. Bell, therefore, though he could contact him with the hope of
gaining his endorsement and backing. If a highly respected engineer
such as Faget supported such a plan, surely it would mean that the
three academics had done their homework and that the project was
indeed feasible and rooted in sound engineering. Faget agreed to meet
the group, and he got hooked immediately. He did not lose time in
converting a concept into engineering. After some innovative thinking,
he recalls having the proverbial eureka moment: “The basic idea was
that we built something that could be launched on the Shuttle that had
a pretty good amount of volume. Nothing had to be added to it. Bring it
up to orbit, turn it loose, and it would work for 30 to 90 days or maybe
120 days, you go up and rebuilt it, resupply it, leave it up in orbit, and
the thing would work. So it was a man-tended facility”. He then
continues: “It had an internal volume that was kept pressurized. Man
can enter it. They would live off the life support system on the Shuttle
simply by transferring air between it and the Shuttle, so we didn’t have
to put a lot of life support system in there, and when you wanted to
make it bigger, you just add another unit to it. We took the viewpoint
that [if] you want to go into space, it’s sort of like forming a beachhead
anyplace. You don’t go in there with the idea of building high, multi-
story buildings, ϐirst-class buildings. You go in there with putting down
enough to support a landing, a beachhead, and then you build from
there. Well, it’s the way we explored the frontier here. We had small
cabins and we built up from there. So after two or three launches of this
thing, you’d get out onto it, and each one would be independent of the
other, which had a pretty nice effect, you know. The thing about putting
men in there permanently, if one of them failed, you just move into one

that didn’t fail, because they were independent and self-sufϐicient, but
you could equip one with a life support system in it that would clean air
for all the others and so forth and so on, and you could get up to maybe
about six or eight of these things all attached together, and you’d have
the equivalent to a Space Station. You would do it where, after the ϐirst
launch, you’re being productive, so you would grow at the same time
you would produce it.”
It was a simple but terriϐic concept, aptly named the Industrial
Space Facility or ISF. To make it into orbit, the Space Industries Inc.
company was instituted, and it was not before long that private funding
began to emerge. Thanks to investors such as oilman and future U.S.
ambassador to Austria, Roy M. Hufϐington, James Elking, co-founder of
the Vinson & Elkins law ϐirm and developer Walter Mischer. New
partners also joined the venture, such as NASA astronaut Joe Allen and
the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
Taking advantage of his contacts at NASA, Faget was able to secure
an agreement through which the space agency would provide three
free Space Shuttle rides for $750 million. This would have allowed to
launch and get operative two ISFs. Subsequently, once Space Industries
had begun proϐit by selling the manufactured products, they would
have had money to pay NASA to service the production plants. Such
tender would greatly reward both parties. The cash saved by the three
launches could be committed to the research and development effort
for the design of the ISF. In addition, Space Industries would have extra
time to establish and mature commercial relationships to generate
revenue. On the other hand, NASA would have an assured supplemental
ϐlow of income.
As it had to ϐit within the Orbiter’s cargo bay, the ISF took the shape
of a Spacelab-type cylinder, 35 feet long and 14.5 feet in diameter. This
would form the so-called facility module where microgravity materials
processing, research, and other projects would occur. Such ϐlexibility
was an attribute of paramount importance to assure the very
survivability of the whole endeavour. Faget and his team were well
conscious of what McDonnell Douglas had learned from their
experience with the electrophoresis facility. Joe Walker had shaken
down and proved that the CFES facility could operate and yield the
expected products in the microgravity of orbital ϐlight. However, when

it was time to begin full-scale drug production, the only supporter
retreated as technological advances in bioengineering made it
superϐluous to do it in space. McDonnell Douglas had struggled and
failed in rising interest in the CFES facility for other applications, and
the project was sadly discontinued. Faget knew that its conϐiguration
had to afford amenities to accommodate any customer’s need to spare
the ISF from such an ignominious epilogue.
For this reason, the internal module would be outϐitted with at least
seven identical experimental Space Station-type racks. Also, there
would be room for additional six modular containers, each ϐilled with
four Shuttle middeck locker trays. Environmental life support system
equipment was added to restore habitable short-sleeve conditions
during a Shuttle crew visit. An outer shell would house micrometeoroid
and thermal protection. Two 105-foot long solar arrays would generate
power, each containing 30,000 silicon solar cells covering an area of
3,000 square feet for a total output of 28 kW, twenty of which routed to
the production hardware. Development of the ISF’s power plant had
already started by a contract adjudged to Lockheed Martin, who had
earned invaluable know-out with the OAST-1 solar array ϐlown on STS-
41D.
The facility was also being planned with a view to the future to
ward off a CFES-like disgraceful end. Four berthing ports, one at both
ends and two on each side, would allow expandability by connecting
additional modules. One of the two end ports would connect a 5.9-foot
long and 14.5-foot diameter auxiliary or support module. It would be a
system module containing additional experiments and provisions for
the manufacturing activities. It also included a water vapour-based
orbital maneuvering system that the ISF could autonomously operate
to reach a higher orbit following a Shuttle stopover or return to a lower
altitude to greet the next Shuttle stay-in. Though water is not among
the most powerful rocket propellants, its choice was clever as it
exploited the water surplus produced by the Shuttle’s fuel cell. The
module would also have a 100-foot long retractable boom with a 193-
pound mass at its end to instigate a gravity gradient attitude
dismissing the need for a microgravity-disrupting control attitude
system (Figure 6.7). If necessary, the module could be changed for a
new one during a Shuttle visit. Apart from a dedicated ϐlight to bring

the facility into orbit, any subsequent visit could be scheduled within
the ϐlight plan of other missions, such as those for delivering
commercial satellites. In this way, Space Industries Inc. would have to
pay a lower price to NASA for its services.
Regardless of the enthusiasm generated by the press and industry,
the time was not mature yet to accept and develop a privately funded
commercial space facility. In fact, by the mid-eighties, there were not
still an adequate number of private ϐirms willing to book and pay for
payload space on the ISF. Space Industries Inc., therefore, put in place a
different strategy. At that time, Courtney A. Stadd was the Director of
the Ofϐice of Commercial Space Transportation within the Ofϐice of the
Secretary of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DoT), and by
virtue of his position, he was following the situation closely. He
remembers that what Faget proposed was “that the government act as
an anchor tenant. In sum, what that entailed was NASA’s agreement,
upfront, to purchase a share, if you will, or agree to procure a part of
this facility much the same way that when a real estate ϐirm is
establishing a shopping mall, they look for a name department store to
be the ϐirst tenant, the obvious hope being that that tenant becomes a
magnet for other tenants, and the result is, hopefully, a viable facility”.

Figure 6.7 An artist’s depiction of the Industrial Space Facility (http:// www. astronautix. com/ i/ 
industrialspacef acility. html)
Although NASA had been willing to give a free ride to the ISF,
putting now real money on a venture that had an uncertain assurance
of proϐit return was something completely different. NASA worried that
might not be sufϐicient funding to feed the ISF and build the so much
longed Space Station. The ISF was now becoming a threat to NASA, and
the menace was growing fast. As Stand continues, “during the Reagan
era, with its focus on market-led initiatives, commercialization, this
[the ISF] was an initiative that was quite favourably received by the
Reagan White House, very well received by those of us who were
working in the commercial space policy arena at the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Transportation. And there was a lot of
sympathy for this concept at the Ofϐice of Management and Budget,
particularly since it promised to save the taxpayer some monies in
terms of developing a research facility in orbit… We, our allies at
Commerce, people within the White House, and OMB [Ofϐice of
Management and Budget], were successful in having the President
speciϐically call out support for the ISF in an executive order, which,

when you think about it, is rather extraordinary, for a President to
speciϐically note a speciϐic initiative in such detail”.
As a result, NASA was ordered to make an immediate commitment
to lease 70% of the ISF with an annual investment of $140 million over
ϐive years. Now the ISF was morphing into a new and potentially more
threatening danger. It did not escape NASA’s attention that the ISF was
built with growth in mind, much like a space station! Of course, this
detail could not pass unnoticed by the detractors of the space station
either. As Faget says, “if this thing ever got up there and we started
adding onto it, people would say “Why do we need the Space Station?
Why don’t we just keep going this way?””. Not to mention that the
simplicity of the design promised spaceworthy hardware ready for
delivery in a short time, much earlier than the Space Station, for which
Congress had barely approved for a Phase A study. NASA was also well
aware that several high places in Washington DC were sceptical about
the agency’s capability of delivering the station within the proposed
timeline and budget. Those doubts were easy to grasp, looking at how
long and how much it took NASA to deliver and deploy the Space
Shuttle. As Stadd puts it, “the agency was probably feeling—indeed,
was feeling exposed in terms of getting solid support for the Station”.
So, as a frightened animal ϐights for its survival, NASA started its war
against the ISF predator.
As Stadd continues, “the agency really went out of its way to oppose
the ISF, and they even went to the extent of going to the Academy of
Sciences in trying to get a report that would suggest that the facility, as
structured, was not as viable as Mr. Faget and others were suggesting.
The House Science Committee had been sufϐiciently exercised by NASA
and its allies, the contractors, that they were also very concerned that
the ISF was driven more by ideology, more by free-market Reagan
Republican ideology, than by practicality, and concerned that perhaps
this was a misuse of taxpayer money and an unnecessary diversion
from the efforts to support the NASA-proposed Space Station”.
Compared to NASA, Space Industries Inc. was a small ϐish. Yet, by the
end of 1989, the NASA juggernaut had succeeded in derailing Max
Faget’s latest creation. As Stadd concludes, “I feel very strongly that if it
had been supported, we would have had this facility in place years ago,
and, frankly, I think it would have generated a robust research

community that would have been eager for the larger capabilities of
the International Space Station that we currently have in orbit. So I
think it was a most unfortunate turn of events”.
Ultra-vacuum: the Wake Shield Facility
Despite the unhappy demise of the ISF, the beneϐits of exploiting the
harsh but unique environment of space remained a forceful lure to
keep conducting experimental work on in-space manufacturing. Along
with microgravity, orbital space offers another peculiar condition
impossible to reproduce satisfactorily on the ground: extremely low
atmospheric pressure or hard vacuum. On Earth, several industrial
processes must be run within an as pure as possible vacuum
environment to yield products of the highest quality. Among them is
manufacturing silicon wafers, microchips, and micro
electromechanical systems (or MEMS). Microchips and MEMS devices
sport features in the micron, almost nanometer size, and require
sophisticated techniques to deposit materials on a silicon substrate
(the wafer) to build an exquisitely precise piece of hardware, such as a
computer chip or an accelerometer and gyroscope to allow to play
video games on your smartphone. One such method is molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE), also known as epitaxial thin ϐilm growth. MBE is a
powerful tool for synthesizing new materials with prescribed
characteristics and fabricating novel microelectronics devices.
In simple terms, it shines one or more beams of atoms or
molecules, such as arsenic and gallium, onto a prepared pre-heated
substrate which forms an atomic template, or pattern, upon which the
atoms or molecules are deposited to produce a thin ϐilm or layer that
follows the existing crystal pattern. Multiple layers can be grown by a
single process, all with a perfect interface to the surrounding strata.
This is such a delicate process that it can only work under ultra-
vacuum conditions in which the presence of contaminants that can
spoil the ϐilm is almost negligible. There are limits to the level of
vacuum that can be attained by Earth-based facilities because the
deeper the vacuum that is desired, the more difϐicult and more
expensive it becomes to achieve and maintain.

It is a straightforward task to ‘harden’ the already excellent vacuum
of the space environment because its vacuum capacity is inϐinite and
perpetual. Thus, there is no need for large pumping power-hungry
systems for its retention. A notable demonstration of such potential
was undertaken with the Space Shuttle ϐlying an apparatus called the
Wake Shield Facility (WSF). It consisted of a 4-meter-diameter free-
ϐlying disk made of welded stainless steel. It was outϐitted to function
as a spacecraft on its own. On being released by the Shuttle’s robotic
arm, the WSF orientated itself with its disk perpendicular to the
direction of travel to create an ultra-vacuum in its wake (Figures 6.8
and 6.9). In the center of the wake-side was a cylindrical canister called
the carousel that could rotate about the axis parallel to the plane of the
disk. It held seven gallium arsenide substrates, each of which had its
heater. Although silicon is the most widely used semiconductor for
microelectronics, other materials have higher predicted power
consumption and working speed performances. Gallium arsenide is
one such high-performance material.
Only one substrate at a time was exposed to the vacuum to undergo
the MBE process. Each thin-ϐilm-growth run started by rotating the
carousel to expose the desired substrate to space. In that position, the
substrate was directly facing the source cell assembly. This was the
heart of the MBE apparatus and consisted of a cluster of eight canted
molecular beam source cells held in position by a structure with eight
struts that aligned the centerline of the assembly with the center of the
sample in the carousel. In processing, heating from one of the source
cells generated a molecular beam ϐlux deposited on the exposed
substrate, growing a thin ϐilm layer by layer. The carousel and cell
assembly enabled experiments using different substrate and cell
materials combinations. For instance, cells containing gallium, arsenic,
silicon, and triethylgallium were used to grow gallium arsenide and
silicon-doped gallium arsenide membranes. Flux levels and growth
rates were controlled using data output by a mass spectrometer and
total pressure gauges. In addition, a high-energy electron diffraction
system was used to monitor the quality and uniformity of the ϐilms.

Figure 6.8 The main components of the Wake Shield Facility free-ϐlying platform.
[Source: Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments, P.
218]
In the early 1990s, the WSF ϐlew on three Space Shuttle missions
and successfully demonstrated that microchip manufacturing in space
was feasible. It was seen as the ϐirst step on the road to industrial and
commercial applications in space. The plan called for four annual test
ϐlights to validate space-based thin ϐilm growth and commercially
signiϐicant product volumes. It was hoped that following a successful
test program, the industry would fully exploit this technology. Next, the
plan was to ϐly an upgraded WSF-2 by 1995 to process a greater
number and a wider range of thin ϐilms. It was to be commanded by a
dedicated commercial payload facility on Earth. The following year,
WSF-3 was to have an even greater production capacity by sporting
solar panels, additional central processing power, and even a robotic
substrate sample manipulation system for extended orbital
operations. Finally, in 1997, WSF-4 was expected to grow up to 300
thin-ϐilm wafers, which was considered representative of a production
batch for a signiϐicant and proϐitable industrial operation that would
open the gates for the much-sought commercial phase called Mark-II. In
this case, a Shuttle would periodically visit the free-ϐlyer platform to

retrieve a ϐinished production run of about 300 wafers and replenish
the raw materials for the next batch. Of course, there would be several
platforms in orbit. Perhaps a Shuttle mission would have been able to
service all of them on a single ϐlight.
Figure 6.9 Demonstration of the WSF MBE concept.
[Source: Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments, P.
245]
Each Mark-II WSF platform was expected to have a 5-year operating
life. Sadly, none of the above ever took place. Instead, WSF went into
space three times and ϐlew on its own only twice. Once again, as had
happened to the CFES and ISF, NASA and the industry, in general, lacked
the necessary visionary thinking that would have led to use space for
commercially signiϐicant exploitation of its resources and
environment.
REFERENCES

1
2
3
4
5
Astronautix.com. Industrial Space Facility. Available at: http:// www. astronautix. com/ i/ 
industrialspacef acility. html
NASA (1983) Materials experiment carrier concepts deϔinition study. Volume 1: Executive
summary, part 2. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002884
NASA (1983) Materials experiment carrier concepts deϔinition study. Volume II: Technical Report,
part 2. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002885
NASA (1983) Design of the materials experiment carrier for on-orbit servicing. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830002919
Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments. – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
Henry “Hank” Warren Hartsϐield Jr, was STS-4’s pilot.
 
The buffer liquid is the carrier of the substances to be separated via electrophoresis.
 
Since the ϐirst US manned ϐlight in space up to those early years of Space Shuttle program, it was
habitual to have backup crews to guarantee that a given ϐlight would take place if one of the
astronauts of the primary crew could not be present. NASA convinced McDonnell Douglas that
they too should have a backup for Walker otherwise it might be difϐicult for a mission specialist to
work on the CFES in the case Walker was unable to participate.
 
See Chapter 2 for details.
 
A prismatic hull was initially considered as it would provide some savings in manufacturing
costs. However, such shape would also result in an 8% of compartment volume reduction and in a
16% reduction in the diameter of the payload canister. The shape and size of the initial MEC, made
for a product that would ϐit nicely inside the Orbiter’s payload bay.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_7
7. The Unfulϐilled Potential of the
External Tank
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
Introduction
The story of the Space Shuttle development shows that the Orbiter’s
design underwent severe alterations. As it was meant to be a
spaceplane, nobody objected to carrying all the liquid oxygen and
hydrogen required to feed the main engines for the initial
conϐiguration. Hydrogen and oxygen were the propellants of choice due
to their high performance for rocket propulsion, even though hydrogen
has a crucial drawback. It is the lightest element in the universe, and
although it would constitute only about one-seventh of an Orbiter’s
propellant load in terms of weight, it would occupy nearly three-
fourths of the Orbiters volume! Hence, it demanded large tanks with
two notable consequences. Firstly, they would add substantial weight
at the expense of payload capacity and complexity of the thermal
protection system. Secondly, the development costs would be beyond
the funding the US Congress was willing to allocate.
This led to considering partially reusable conϐigurations in which
the Orbiter carried the liquid hydrogen and oxygen externally in an
expendable aluminium shell. Such a layout afforded two beneϐits.
Firstly, it reduced the size of the Orbiter to that required to perform its
intended mission, that is to say, orbital ϐlight. Secondly, the Orbiter
could achieve a standard design independent of the tank. This
reasoning led to the familiar conϐiguration of an Orbiter on the launch

pad attached to its enormous expendable External Tank (ET), to which
were connected the two reusable Solid Rocket Boosters (SRB).
Having a length of 47 meters, a diameter of 8 meters and a capacity
of some 628 tons of liquid oxygen and about 104 tons of liquid
hydrogen, the External Tank was the largest and heaviest (when
loaded) component of the Space Shuttle stack. As the central,
integrating structural element, it had to withstand the static and thrust
loads from the Orbiter and boosters. For this reason, the structural
conϐiguration chosen for this colossal piece of hardware was simple:
one tank for each propellant, joined by a strong cylindrical structure
known as the intertank. In this way, the conceptual and operational
complexity of a common bulkhead between the two propellant tanks
were elegantly removed.
The External Tank was a remarkable piece of engineering, but its
life expectancy was short. Less than ten minutes followed by a ϐiery
plunge into the atmosphere. However, it was easy to recognize how the
substantial volume of an empty External Tank could offer additional
possibilities suited for increasing the presence of large structures in
low-Earth orbit. This is why, through the three decades of the Space
Shuttle program, several captivating alternative uses for the External
Tank were proposed.
The Very Large Space Telescope
Proposed by NASA in October 1980, it would have consisted of a two-
mirror optical-UV telescope assembled by a Space Shuttle crew using
preassembled segmented optical components carried inside a
modiϐied interstage of the External Tank along with additional
components transported in the Orbiter payload bay. The concept was
to shorten the hydrogen tank and expand the interstage volume to
carry the secondary mirror, support structure for the mirrors and
instruments, and an 8-m preassembled primary mirror. Under these
conditions, the Orbiter’s total payload capability was approximately 50
per cent above the telescope launch weight of 24,874 lb. Figure 7.1
depicts the assembly sequence for this proposed very large space
telescope which would have taken place over two missions.

Figure 7.1 The assembly sequence of a very large space telescope.
[Source: A Very Large Space Telescope For Optical/UV Astronomy (pdf), p. 9. Available at:
https:// www. spiedigitallibra ry. org/ # ]
Upon reaching an orbital altitude of about 425 km, the External
Tank would be vented of all residual propellants. The Shuttle then docks
at a berthing port on the interstage (step 2). Using the remote
manipulator with a work platform, astronauts enter the interstage
through the docking adaptor and disconnect the oxygen tank main
interstage, forward shroud, and the hydrogen tank from the modiϐied
interstage section. Once the interstage containing the telescope
mirrors has been disassembled from the tanks, it becomes the
telescope spacecraft structure. Next, power and stabilization modules
are extracted from their launch location on the Orbiter’s cargo bay
pallets and are mounted externally to the interstage spacecraft
structure. Next, metering rods are installed to mating rod sections
mounted to the primary mirror support structure. Finally, the
secondary mirror spider frame with its mirror is extended out from the

launch location in the interstage (step 4). After securing and
reinforcing the secondary mirror spider and metering structure and
activating the power and stabilization module, the as-yet incomplete
telescope is “parked” in orbit, and the Shuttle returns home. During the
next visit, the Space Shuttle carries into orbit another External Tank,
the hydrogen tank of which has been modiϐied so that it can be
removed from the External Tank structure so that its forward and aft
bulkheads can be cut. Thus the entire cylindrical section is added to the
telescope spacecraft structure as a light shield (step 4). Further
construction and assembly are then resumed by installing the conical
light bafϐles at the primary and secondary mirrors and installing
checkout instrument modules and laser interferometers for telescope
alignment, leading to preparing the telescope for initial checkout and
commissioning (Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.2 A cutaway view of the assembled very large space telescope.
[Source: A Very Large Space Telescope For Optical/UV Astronomy (pdf), p. 12. Available at:
https:// www. spiedigitallibra ry. org/ # ]

The Large Area Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope
On February 11, 1988, the Ofϐice of the Press Secretary at the White
House released a presidential directive concerning the National Space
Policy. It addressed practical uses for the Space Shuttle’s External Tank,
stating that the Administration would be making “available for ϔive
years the expendable External Tanks of the Shuttle ϔleet at no cost to all
feasible US commercial and nonproϔit endeavours, for uses such as
research, storage, or manufacturing in space”. The following month, the
human spaceϐlight division of Martin Marietta released a report
advocating for an External Tank-based gamma-ray imaging telescope.
Such apparatus would have enabled unpreceded probing into neutron
stars, pulsars, black holes, quasars, supernovae and any other powerful
astrophysical process that generates gamma rays.
The proposal was simple and elegant requiring minimal hardware
changes to the conϐiguration of the External Tank and an on-orbit
assembly period of just four days. Detection of the energetic radiation
would rely on the imaging of Cherenkov light1 collected by an optical
mirror inside the hydrogen tank. To understand the design and
working of such a telescope let us refer to the schematics of Figures 7.3
and 7.4 where we can trace the sequence of events required to identify
a gamma-ray2.

Figure 7.3 The large-area gamma-ray imaging telescope shown before Orbiter separation. A
cutaway view of the hydrogen tank shows the main components and their position.
[Source: A large-area gamma-ray imaging telescope system (pdf), p. 10. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19840012536]
Figure 7.4 A detailed schematics of the telescope’s main components and main sequence of
events for detecting a gamma-ray. Note how the timescale of each event is measured in the order
of nanoseconds.

[Source: A large-area gamma-ray imaging telescope system (pdf), p. 18. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19840012536]
At the bottom end (at STA 20583) of the hydrogen tank, there is a
so-called trigger module composed of a sheet of lead 0.2 mm
(converter) sandwiched between a so-called veto scintillator (S1) and
a trigger scintillator (S2). This assembly ϐilters out the gamma rays
from the incoming cosmic radiation and converts the gamma rays
frequency to lower energy photons. First, the veto scintillator emits a
very fast pulse of light, on the order of 5 nanoseconds in duration,
anytime a charged particle passes through it. Then, the particle
continues through the converter and reaches the trigger scintillator,
emitting another light pulse. Both pulses are recorded by
photomultiplier tubes within the trigger module, recording the passage
of a cosmic ray. Because gamma-rays are electrically neutral, they do
not interact with the veto scintillator. However, they interact with the
converter, where they are changed into an electron-positron pair. As
both particles have an electric charge, they will interact with the trigger
scintillator emitting a pulse of light whose amplitude is indicative of
the passage of two particles. In this case, the photomultipliers will have
recorded only one light pulse. Therefore, the event is recorded as a
gamma-ray passage and the telescope electronics is prepped for the
next events that will occur within the telescope.
The electron-positron pair continues through the CO2 gas-ϐilled4
hydrogen tank emitting Cherenkov light. This is collected by an optical
mirror located at the forward end of the tank (at STA 1377) and
reϐlected backwards in the form of two rings of light onto an array of
photomultipliers installed at the focal plane (STA 1777). Data from the
reϐlected light rings are used to reconstruct the energy and direction of
the gamma-ray. In the meantime, the electron-positron pair continues
through the mirror and passes through the time-of-ϐlight (TOF)
scintillator. Another pulse of light is produced and observed by
photomultiplier tubes. The scintillator electronics records the event
and provides an additional time of ϐlight measurement to correlate
with that registered at the trigger scintillator. It also reduces the
chance of a coincident event caused by backwards-going particles5.

It was a detection technique originally conceived by Professor
Kenneth Greisen in 1996 at Cornell University. In the early 1970s, in
collaboration with the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Greisen
developed and ϐlew multiple times a prototype telescope on a high-
altitude balloon proving the concept. Such a detection technique
offered simplicity and excellent background noise rejection. Therefore,
engineers were given a chance to develop a telescope with a very large
active collection area to detect weak gamma-ray ϐluxes without
signiϐicantly increasing the complexity of the instrument.
The ET’s liquid hydrogen tank had several features that made it the
ideal vessel for such a telescope. First, it provided a sizeable working
volume to house every telescope component. Second, it afforded
assembly crews ample room to comfortably maneuver inside its
innards, even when wearing unwieldy space suits. Third, the light shell
structure of the tank was designed to withstand up to 40 psi of
pressure, well within the few psi required to pressurize the gas for
Cherenkov light production. Finally, its walls were thin enough to
minimize the likelihood of gamma-ray absorption or emission of
secondary gamma rays produced by interactions with cosmic rays.
Access would be provided by an existing 36-in diameter manhole
located at the aft dome of the tank (Figure 7.5). Tests carried out in the
swimming pool of the Neutral Buoyancy Lab at the Johnson Space
Center, proved that an astronaut donning a spacesuit could fairly
comfortably enter the tank and complete the retroϐit. Finally, the
energy required to put into orbit such a structure had already been
spent by having delivered the Orbiter into space. Hence, it would not
require a dedicated launcher. Essentially, the telescope would
piggyback a ride to space. To make it economically viable, it was
suggested to piggyback it on an existing paying mission such as one
dedicated to satellite deployment. As emphatically stated in the study
report, “if the External Tank did not exist, one would have to be designed
in order to construct the telescope”.

Figure 7.5 The manhole (highlighted) on the liquid hydrogen aft dome. It was part of the tank
structure, and during manufacturing, it allowed workers to access the tank interior. It is worth
noting that the initial design of the hydrogen tank included a second manhole. However, only one
access was left when a lighter version was implemented, as seen in this picture.
[https:// images-assets. nasa. gov/ image/ KSC-2011-8141/ KSC-2011-8141~orig. jpg].
A single element and a segmented multi-element design were
considered for the mirror construction. A single element mirror would
have been incorporated within the tank as part of the manufacturing
process. Although it would have simpliϐied the on-orbit assembling of
the telescope three stumbling blocks were identiϐied:
1.
There was no vendor capable of producing a single mirror of the
required size, approximately 10-m in diameter.
 
2.
The effects on liquid and gaseous hydrogen ϐlow within the tank
during launch would have probably been unacceptable6. How the
mirror would have reacted to the hot gaseous hydrogen entering
the top of the tank while cold liquid hydrogen was being siphoned
from the bottom was unknown and difϐicult to predict.
 

3. It was unknown if the quality of the mirror would be satisfactory
due to thermal stresses during manufacturing or degradation of its
front surface during handling.
 
Hence, the multi-element design was pursued. It consisted of an array
of 85 hexagonal mirror elements, smaller than 36-inch in diameter, to
permit transportation through the access panel at the bottom of the
tank. Each element comprised an aluminum honeycomb sandwiched
between a ϐlat backplate and a coated front plate. The honeycomb
provided stiffness, the front plate was appropriately machined and
polished to form the reϐlecting surface of the optical mirror, and the
backplate closed the assembly protecting the honeycomb from damage
during ground and on-orbit handling.
The array of mirror elements was supported by a lattice framework
made of a welded thin-walled aluminum tubing installed during tank
assembly. Martin Marietta had shown that it would not impact the
qualiϐication of the External Tank. The lattice design ensured that no
stresses would be induced to the mirror segments. The strength of the
structure was dictated by the launch loads and stiffness requirement
for handling and alignment on the ground. The lattice would be
mounted to the External Tank with a three-point mount having six
degrees of freedom to account for the tank assuming an elliptical cross-
section when laid on its side during manufacturing, transport, and
because of the thermal expansion underwent during cryogenic
propellant loading on the launch pad, ascent and orbital ϐlight.
A similar layout was adopted for the trigger module and the time-
of-ϐlight scintillator, as both involved an array of hexagonal modules. In
the time-of-ϐlight scintillator, an individual module consisted of a single
scintillator, honeycomb, and electronic module. Instead, a trigger
module element incorporated a honeycomb sandwiched between the
veto and trigger scintillators. A small electronic module completed the
element. The individual detection elements of both the trigger module
and time-of-ϐlight scintillator were to be attached with Velcro or push-
in pins to fabric stretching the diameter of the tank. This “trampoline”
had wiring sewn in it and would be rolled up to ϐit through the aft
manhole access. Compared to the mirror and focal plane element,
alignment was not critical.

If you refer to Figure 7.4, you can appreciate the astonishingly short
time scale of gamma-ray event detection. For example, only 92
nanoseconds would have elapsed from the moment of electron-
positron pair spawning to detect the emitted Cherenkov light on the
focal plane. In other words, the whole event would last 92 billionths of a
second! Hence, the detector elements of the focal plane had to have a
reaction time of just a few nanoseconds. Any longer a sampling time
and the gamma-ray event would have been lost
Furthermore, they would need to be extraordinarily sensitive to the
feeble Cherenkov light, down to the individual photon. The technology
of the photomultiplier tubes was deemed to satisfy such stringent fast
time and amplitude resolution speciϐications. Hence, the STA 1777
focal plane comprised 127 photomultiplier tubes7. Such a large number
would yield an adequate spatial resolution to capture photons
bouncing off any point of the optical mirror. The array would be
brought in as an assembled unit and held in place by a tripod connected
to the mirror, aligning the detectors to the mirror’s optical axis.
The External Tank destined for the telescope conversion would be
encased in a meteoroid shield to prevent punctures and consequent
loss of gas, without which the telescope would not work. A double wall
system was suggested. The principle was that any incoming meteoroid
would be shattered into smaller and smaller fragments as it progressed
through one wall to the next. They would not have enough kinetic
energy to penetrate the tank on exiting the inner wall. Additional
alterations consisted in modifying the access manhole to ease ingress,
adding small adapters and ϐlanges inside the tank to aid the astronauts
in their work, and in strengthening the intertank SRB crossbeam8 to
house ϐive bottles of pressurized CO2, connected to a commandable
valve and ϐitting common to a modiϐied manhole on the hydrogen tank
forward dome.
The last section of the Martin Marietta report highlighted how the
telescope design was based on the premise that redesign or
requaliϐication of the External Tank was not required. The addition of
the mirror lattice frame inside the hydrogen tank and of the external
meteoroid shield was not considered to have a detrimental effect on
the structural behavior of the External Tank, and thus no
requaliϐication was deemed necessary.

The telescope would require inertial pointing9 but with the relaxed
requirement of keeping the gamma-ray source within about one
degree of the ϐive-degree ϐield of view. In fact, this telescope could
account for image motion during the reconstruction of each event.
Although Martin Marietta had not performed a deϐinite study of the
best attitude control system, several options were considered: reaction
wheels, thrusters, gravity gradient, magnetic torqueing and spinning.
However, this last possibility was dismissed as it would complicate
rendezvous, power, and telemetry and require a symmetrically
balanced mass.
According to Martin Marietta, nine back-to-back spacewalks by
three pairs of astronauts across ϐive days would be enough to complete
the orbital retroϐit and commission the External Tank to a new life in
the service of science. The outlined mission scenario begins with the
External Tank remaining joined to the Space Shuttle following Main
Engine Cut Off (MECO)10. The tank is then vented to remove any
propellant residue. In the meantime, the crew starts converting the
Orbiter from a launcher into a spaceship and releases any commercial
satellite or other payloads carried into the payload bay. A good night of
rest is followed by Crew #1 and #2 beginning their prebreathing
activities, the ϐirst step in preparation for the spacewalks of the day11.
In the meantime, the remaining three crew members activate the
robotic arm and grapple the Support System Saddle (SSS). This was a
purpose-built apparatus holding the solar arrays to power the
telescope, and momentum exchange devices and star trackers for
attitude control. Next, the crew checks the SSS via umbilical
transmitted telemetry and then moves it over the Orbiter nose in the
proximity of the intertank section.
In the meantime, Crew #1 egresses into the cargo bay, don their
Manned Maneuvering Units (MMU)12 and assist in the ϐinal placement
of the components of the SSS. First, they perform a physical connection
by placing one pin through each forward SRB thrust ϐitting. Next, an
electrical and data bus umbilical is mated to a preϐlight-installed
connector common to a purpose-built intertank access cover,
connecting to a modiϐied manhole on the hydrogen tank forward dome.
Self-deployment of the foldup solar arrays is followed by installing
reaction wheels and star trackers13. Crew #1 then relocates to the

bottom of the External Tank and proceeds to ϐit receptor ϐlanges
handrails, and portable foot restrains around the aft manhole. Next, the
rail and foot restraints are installed by inserting pins into preϐlight
installed receptor ϐlanges. The last activity for Crew #1 is removing the
aft manhole cover. They begin by cutting away the insulating foam
surrounding the aperture and then removing the 92 bolts holding the
cover in place. The cover is brought to the cargo bay and stored in a
receptacle. Crew #1 is now ready to return to the Orbiter. Some two
hours and a half into Crew #1 spacewalk, Crew #2 spacewalks begin.
This team is tasked with deploying and assembling the aft rail system.
Connecting the cargo bay to the tank aft manhole, such a system will be
used for astronaut and telescope components movement for the rest of
the assembling activities14.
The following day would have Crew #3 and Crew #1 working inside
the tank. Crew#3 is tasked with removing the liquid hydrogen feedline
syphon and anti-vortex bafϐles from the tank aft dome (Figure 7.6).
This is the lowest point on the tank and from which the propellent is
syphoned out and delivered to the Orbiter’s main engines. The bafϐles
acted as anti-slosh barriers to spoil ϐluid vorteces that could otherwise
induce instability in ϐluid delivery to the propellant feedline. Their
removal was prescribed to minimize further the probability of gamma
rays interacting with the External Tank’s structure, thus not being
detected. Indeed, one of the advantages of the External Tank lied in its
thin walls, which exhibited a low probability of absorbing gamma rays
and trigger secondary gamma rays due to interaction with high energy
cosmic rays.

Figure 7.6 The liquid hydrogen tank syphon and bafϐles assembly
[Source: A large-area gamma-ray imaging telescope system (pdf), p. 76. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19840012536]
With reference to Figure 7.7, the disassembly sequence begins with
removing the syphon assembly support bracket (Item A). The feedline
is unbolted at point B using an extension bar and socket. Bolts
retaining the 16 vortex bafϐle support rods (not shown) at points C and
D are now removed. The support rods are removed and stowed. The
four vortex bafϐles are unbolted (at points E and F), removed and
stowed. At this point the astronauts proceed to install a pulley system
stretching from the tank aft dome to the forward dome, passing
through the optical mirror frame. The feedline siphon assembly is
attached to the pulley chord, and the siphon support is unbolted (at
point G) from the ET aft dome. The feedline assembly is now free to be
removed and transported through the mirror frame to the forward

dome, where it is stowed and removed from the pulley system. This
concludes Crew #3 EVA activities for the day. The pulley system is left
in place to aid in later personnel and cargo transport activities.
Figure 7.7 The disassembly sequence for the syphon and bafϐles assemblies.
[Source: A large-area gamma-ray imaging telescope system (pdf), p. 82. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19840012536]
Crew #1 activities begin by installing several extendible poles to be
used as mobile workstations (MWS) inside the telescope. Each end of
the pole has a rubber-like “foot” for gripping between stringers. The
MWSs are installed just aft of the STA 1130 ring frame. Crew #1 returns
to the cargo bay to retrieve the time-of-ϐlight scintillator mounting
trampoline and transports it to its designated location at STA 1130
using the pulley system. One end of the pulley system is temporarily
disconnected. One trampoline edge is connected to the ring frame via
special receptors mounted preϐlight. The astronauts then transverse
the diameter of the hydrogen tank (along the MWS poles) to attach the
opposite end of the trampoline. The trampoline has wiring and

connectors already installed and ready to receive the scintillator
segments. The MWS poles are moved as required to complete
trampoline installation. The pulley system is reinstalled passing
through the mirror frame and trampoline.
The crew then returns to the Orbiter to fetch the wiring harness
from the Orbiter cargo bay. The harness is transported to the STA 1130
trampoline, where its installation begins. The harness is secured to the
trampoline using Velcro (or other appropriate means) and is plugged
into its mating connector. Another mating connector to the harness is
in a protective container and is wired through the electrical feed-
through ϐitting of the hydrogen tank forward manhole cover. The
harness is secured to the interior of the aft dome and the sidewalls. The
harness has a second branch that leads to the STA 2058 trigger module
trampoline (at the very aft end of the tank). A third branch leads to the
focal-plane array, which is installed later. After harness installation,
Crew #1 begins transporting the scintillator segments. These are
packaged in shipping crates designed to absorb the launch loads and
protect the scintillator segments. Each segment has an electrical
connection to an umbilical leading to the aft ϐlight deck allowing
scientists on the ground to monitor their health via downloaded
telemetry from the time of arrival on orbit. Enough spares are included
to permit the installation of a fully operational complement of modules.
Each scintillator is attached to the trampoline using push-in pins and is
also plugged to a mating connector on the trampoline. Completion of
the scintillator assembly marks the end of today’s Crew #1 spacewalk.
On the following day, Crew #2 begins by transporting some safety
equipment into the tank and, if necessary, completing the installation
of the time-of-ϐlight scintillator. Their main task, however, is the
assembly of the optical mirror. The individual segments are
transported inside the tank, and by referring to a unique identifying
number, they are placed at the required position and orientation on the
mirror frame. Each segment is installed from the aft side of the frame
utilizing springs and hooks. A point light source installed in the tank is
used to verify the individual segments’ proper alignment. In the
meantime, Crew #3 work is focused on erecting the focal plane tripod
mount and installing the detector array. A wiring umbilical running

along one tripod leg is connected to the main wiring harness laid the
previous day.
Crew #1 is back in the tank on the ϐifth ϐlight day to install the
trigger module trampoline at STA 2058 and associated wiring. The last
two hours are dedicated to installing two MMU bracket assemblies and
handrails to the exterior of the hydrogen tank. This will allow future
crew members to approach the telescope and park their MMU before
entering the tank. Following trampoline deployment, Crew #2 moves in
to install the scintillator segments and wiring. Crew #2 is now available
for three hours to perform any unscheduled or leftover tasks. After
equipment stowage in the tank, the aft manhole is closed, and the aft
rail system is returned to the payload bay, completing the spacewalk.
On the last full day on-orbit, the Shuttle separates from the
telescope and remains in its vicinity. The Crew #3 astronauts perform
one last spacewalk to install covers on the 17-inch feedline and the
recirculation line projecting out of the hydrogen tank (refer to Figure
7.7). While station-keeping at a safe distance, pressurization of the
tank is commanded, followed soon after by ground activation and
checking of the telescope. Should any problem arise, the two
spacewalkers would be at the ready to provide on-site assistance. The
next day would be the last in orbit, with the crew returning safely
home.
Without a doubt, it would have been one of the most challenging
and fascinating assembly operations ever undertaken in space. A
mission that would have stirred the interest of a large portion of the
public and would have been keenly followed as days unfolded one after
the other. However, Martin Marietta appears rather optimistic in
allocating just four days, each characterized by two sets of spacewalks
lasting at least six hours. The Hubble Space Telescope servicing
missions were the most onerous in terms of spacewalks activities,
requiring up to ϐive back-to-back spacewalks over ϐive days. Those
missions were a tour-de-force, placing a heavy burden on the crew
regarding physical and mental endurance. Performing two spacewalks
daily for four days in a row would have set the bar for stamina to a
much higher level.
Furthermore, most of the work would have occurred outside of the
direct line of view of the crew in the Orbiter, something that NASA has

always tried to avoid enhancing the safety of the spacecraft and crew.
Surely though, it would have been spectacular following the astronauts
in their work inside the cavernous External Tank. Another aspect that
places serious doubts on the assembly timeline concerns the intricacy
of installing the various components. Spacewalks require signiϐicant
movement coordination, awareness of your surroundings, and
appreciable limitation to dexterity. As a result, even the simplest of
tasks demands time.
To prove the feasibility of such a mission, a mockup of the hydrogen
tank was assembled15 in the swimming pool of the Neutral Buoyancy
Laboratory at the Johnson Space Center and used to test some key
assembly procedures. For instance, they proved that it was feasible for
a fully spacesuited astronaut to enter the tank through the aft
manhole.16 They proved the siphon and bafϐle assembly removal.
Various ways to remove the foam surrounding the aft manhole and
unbolting of the cover were demonstrated. Installation of foot restrains
platform and assembly of the optical mirror were validated.
To further simplify the construction work, it was proposed to
modify one of the side panels of the hydrogen tank to permit the
installation of a docking adapter/airlock in orbit. This new side access
panel would be large enough to bring the various components into the
External Tank in quantity. Once in orbit, the Orbiter robotic arm would
remove the “shipping” crates from the payload bay and insert them
through the new cutout into the ET. An EVA crew would then
permanently stow them around the wall behind the STA 2058 ring and
the mirror, where they would be out of the ϐield of view. The RMS and
an EVA crew would then install the docking adapter/airlock on the side
of the External Tank. After completing these tasks and returning the
EVA crew, the Orbiter separates from the ET and performs proximity
maneuvers to dock with the ET.
At this point, pressurization of the tank can take place, bringing the
pressure to ten psi to provide a shirtsleeve environment for the
astronauts to work inside the tank. Such a solution would dispense the
astronauts from wearing cumbersome spacesuits to avoid the manual
dexterity limitation typically imposed by a pressurized spacesuit. As a
result, telescope assembly could occur in a more accurate manner and
in less time especially considering that 24-hour-per-day assembly

operations might be possible. Furthermore, the docking
adapter/airlock sidewall on the hydrogen tank could be considerably
larger than the 36-inch diameter manholes at the bottom of the tank,
allowing to employ larger and fewer pieces for the mirror, the
scintillators, and electronics modules. Fewer components would also
enhance reliability reducing the chance of component failure. Finally,
the capability to add a docking adapter to the hydrogen tank could be
quite useful in other projects where on-orbit crewed entry into the
hydrogen tank was anticipated. For example, an empty ET could be
docked to a Space Station to increase the internal volume of the
station.
The report highlighted the many spin-offs that would result from
constructing such a telescope. For instance, it would constitute a
perfect demonstration of practical and realistic applications for the
External Tank. Attitude control, telemetry and power systems needed
for this telescope could form the basis for using the External Tank as an
autonomous platform or crewed when considering the presence of a
docking adapter, gas pressurization system and meteoroid protection
shield. The assembly work would be a demonstration of how
astronauts could perform complex in-orbit assemblies of a large
structures such as the space station; it would also show that by
packing, shipping, and performing ϐinal assembly on-orbit, it will be
possible to deploy systems that could not be launched otherwise;
ϐinally it pioneered a new era with less rugged components that would
be packed rather than integrally strengthened to survive launch.
Propellant Scavenging System
Regardless of the payload mass and mission orbital requirements, the
External Tank was always ϐilled to maximum capacity. This meant that
at MECO, up to 5,800 pounds of propellant remained, never to be used.
In fact, before re-entering the atmosphere, the External Tank had to
expel as much residual propellant as possible to prevent an explosion
whose shrapnels could create a space-debris hazard.
In January 1985, the Space Transportation System Division of
Rockwell International published a report titled “Space Transportation
System (STS) Propellant Scavenging System Study”, which made a case

for recovering such residual propellant, including anything left within
the Orbiter feedlines and engines.
Three options were proposed. One possibility involved dedicated
tanks in the payload bay. They would be charged with liquid oxygen and
hydrogen just before lift-off. The propellant load would vary from
mission to mission as it would depend on the remaining payload mass
lifting capability still available for the ϐlight. The objective was to haul
the maximum amount of payload (in terms of mass) the Orbiter had
been designed for. In this scenario, propellant scavenging would occur
by virtue of completely exploiting the External Tank, leaving only a
small quantity of unusable propellant in the feedlines and at the
bottom of the tanks17. Essentially, the unused propellant was recovered
by transporting an almost identical quantity in the payload bay, and
only the bare minimum would be left in the External Tank. An
alternative was to transfer post-MECO as much propellant remaining in
the External Tank and Orbiter’s feedlines and engines into tanks in the
payload bay.
The third option proposed to draw the cryogens during powered
ascent. This solution was quickly discarded as it demanded an accurate
real-time knowledge of the vehicle performance to monitor the
propellant transfer and ensure that a premature propellant depletion
would not occur, forcing an abort. Instead, a mix of the payload bay
propellant tanks ϐilled prior to launch and with whatever could be
scavenged after main engine shut down was brought forward. Also,
loading the propellants on the ground would provide a better
environment for accurately controlling the loaded quantity. After
MECO, whatever was left in the External Tank could be transferred
through small lines by exploiting the tank ullage pressure.
Three basic payload bay propellant tank arrangements were
developed for the proposal. The ϐirst concept consisted of conventional
cylindrical tanks with ellipsoidal ends. The second arrangement was a
conventional spherical tank for the liquid hydrogen next to a toroidal
tank for the liquid oxygen. Finally, the third scheme involved a
conventional cylindrical tank for the liquid oxygen surrounded by a
ring-shaped tank for the liquid hydrogen. Although it demanded a
higher dry mass, it became the preferred option as it afforded the
largest quantity of cryogenic propellant to orbit while minimizing the

length and leaving more space for other payloads (Figures 7.8 and
7.9)18.
Figure 7.8 Cryogenic Propellant Payload Bay Tankage Concepts.
[Source: Space Transportation System (STS) propellant scavenging system study. Volume 1:
Technical report (pdf), p. 49. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19850011690]

Figure 7.9 A wireframe 3D view of the ring tank concept.
[Source: Space Transportation System (STS) propellant scavenging system study. Volume 1:
Technical report (pdf), p. 66. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19850011690]
The tanks would be housed on a purpose-built pallet installed at
payload bay’s aft end. The pallet’s aft end was stronger than the
forward one to accommodate ascent loads. Side beams joined the two
portions and connected to the payload bay longeron sill and ϐloor. The
pallet was also designed to accommodate thermal expansion and
contraction imposed by the extremely low temperature of the
cryogens. The ϐill lines would be connected to the Orbiter feedlines at
the interface with the propellant feedlines from the External Tank. Vent
and dump lines would provide a safe way to release any abnormal
buildup of pressure inside the ringtanks and allow for controlled
dumping of propellant overboard19. A helium supply system mounted
under the payload bay would supply and regulate the helium to operate
the scavenging system and pressurize the tanks for propellant transfer

to the user through transfer lines common to a deployable docking
boom mounted to the side of the pallet (Figure 7.10).
Figure 7.10 The plumbing arrangement for the scavenging propellant ring tanks showing the ϐill
lines (red) and the transfer lines (green) to the user.
[Source: Space Transportation System (STS) propellant scavenging system study. Volume 1:
Technical report (pdf), p. 121. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19850011690]
Immediately after main engine cutoff the Orbiter would either
undertake a 2 deg/sec pitch up maneuver or a continuous thrusting
through the mated Orbiter/ET center of gravity for some ten minutes
to generate a centrifugal or linear acceleration. The aim was to induce
either by centrifugal or linear acceleration a gravitational ϐield of 10-4 g
to allow the residual propellant in the External Tank to settle at the
bottom of their respective tank. The internal pressure of
approximately 20 psi in the oxygen tank and 32 psi in the hydrogen
tank would then be exploited to shift the propellants into the waiting
ring tanks in the payload bay. Some ten minutes would be required to
complete the transfer for the maximum available reserve of 5,800
pounds (Figure 7.11)20.

Figure 7.11 Post Main Engine shut down propellant orientation methods.
[Source: Space Transportation System (STS) propellant scavenging system study. Volume 1:
Technical report (pdf), p. 63. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19850011690]
After the on-orbit ϐill is complete, the Orbiter is stabilized, and the
ET is jettisoned. At this point, two scenarios for propellant delivery are
available. Both are aimed at the quickest possible relocation of the
precious cryogens to the end-user to reduce losses by boiling off. In

fact, for the ring tank, only a thin insulation layer of protective
lightweight spray foam along with sunshade and an active heat
exchanger were baselined to keep the propellant in a liquid state for as
long as conceivably possible. The end-users, Space Station or space tug,
would be equipped with better apparatus to preserve the cryogenic
propellants for much longer.
In the ϐirst scenario, rendezvous with the Space Station is
accomplished in just under four hours, followed by one hour of
propellant transfer21. At this point, the Orbiter continues its mission
either at the Space Station or elsewhere. In the second scenario, the
space tug leaves the station and drops to a 160 nautical mile high orbit
where it meets the Orbiter. The propellant transfer is accomplished
within one hour, and the space tug returns to the Space Station
following a two-hour rendezvous proϐile. The Orbiter then continues
with its mission.
To justify the additional complexity of the payload bay cryogenic
tanks, Rockwell considered the projected ϐlight manifest from 1991
through 2000. Out of the 200 missions allocated for the decade, some
96 ϐlights were identiϐied as having scavenging possibilities based on
satisfying some ground rules:
1.
Flight directed to the Space Station or in a 28.5-deg inclination to
allow the fastest and more propellant-economic route for a station-
based space tug.
 
2.
Total payload (including the scavenging propellant tanks) not
exceeding 60 feet in length, including at least 4 feet of clearance in
the payload bay to allow contingency EVA egress or 7 feet for a
docking module in the case of any space station ϐlight. Plus, three
inches (0.5 feet) of separation between payload had to be kept
clear as a dynamic envelope.
 
3.
No more than one major altitude change (5 to 30 nautical miles) to
avoid excessive Orbiter’s maneuvering engine propellant usage.  
4. An upper stage mission is launched from the Orbiter at any
altitude. This allowed the deployment of upper stage payloads from
the Space Station’s altitude and inclination.
 

According to Rockwell’s estimates, such propellant could be delivered
at a cost-effective rate of approximately 100 dollars per pound, in
contrast to a dedicated tank mission’s 2000 dollars per pound cost. The
concept never left the conceptual stage: ϐirstly because the Space
Shuttle never met the expectation for a dense ϐlight manifest; secondly,
as we saw in Chapter 4 for the Centaur upper stage, transporting tanks
full of cryogenic propellants in the payload bay during ascent would
have entailed unnecessary risks.
Aft Cargo Carrier
If the Very Large Space Telescope and the Large Area Gamma Ray
Imaging Telescope would put to good use the generous volume of the
External Tank, the Aft Cargo Carrier (ACC) concept proposed by Martin
Marietta in 1985 would take advantage of it by adding an external
payload housed within an enclosure bolted to the bottom of the
hydrogen tank. It would be an extra cargo volume constructed similar
to the External Tank using the same tooling (Figure 7.12).
Figure 7.12 Aft Cargo Carrier launch conϐiguration.
[Source: Space station needs, attributes and architectural options study. Brieϐing material:
Final review and executive summary (pdf), p. 30. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19840010205]

A typical ACC would consist of three subassemblies: the skirt the
Payload Support Structure (PSS) and the shroud assembly (Figure
7.13). The skirt is bolted directly to the bottom of the hydrogen tank
and provides the structural interface between the Payload Support
Structure and the External Tank. The skirt has a cylindrical shape
consisting of eight aluminum alloy panels stiffened with integrally
machined stringers. Access doors allow servicing the payload
manifested for the mission and connections of feedlines for those
payloads needing refuelling on the launch pad.
The Payload Support Structure is the general payload-carrying
structure containing four interlocking beams capable of
accommodating various payloads. A so-called Surrogate Orbiter Cargo
Bay (SOCB) was proposed to simulate a 20-foot long section of the
Orbiter’s cargo bay. It would suit payloads requiring interfaces similar
to those on the Shuttle’s payload bay. For instance, the SOCB could
include a kit for tilting payloads, such as the Centaur upper stage, to
facilitate their deployment. The PSS also houses a hydrazine-based
attitude control system, four deorbit solid motors, and an avionics
package to deorbit the External Tank upon release of the payload.
Figure 7.13 The structural conϐiguration of the Aft Cargo Carrier.
[Source: General purpose aft cargo carrier study, volume 1 (pdf), p. 141. Available: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19870003154]
The shroud functions as a thermal and acoustical protection cover
for the payload during the launch and ascent. The shroud comprises a

cylindrical barrel assembly, a truncated cone assembly, and an aft
bulkhead assembly. The entire shroud inner surface and the PSS
bulkhead are lined with an acoustical absorption blanket, held in place
with special clips and restraining cables. After booster separation, the
shroud is jettisoned to reduce payload weight penalties. The shroud
comprises a cylindrical barrel assembly, a truncated cone assembly,
and an aft bulkhead assembly. Separation of the shroud to expose the
payload is controlled by guide rails mounted on the shroud itself.
The ACC would provide another cargo volume at a minimal cost and
help remove a signiϐicant payload constraint. In fact, the Orbiter
imposed volume and mass limitations. The latter could never be
changed without a substantial redesign of the Orbiter. However, the
volume constraints could be tackled with the addition of the ACC. With
room for a payload up to 25 feet in diameter and 15 feet in length, the
ACC would have allowed relatively low-mass large-diameter payloads
to be ϐlown without the constraints imposed by the 15-foot diameter
Orbiter payload bay. Thus, it would have allowed overcoming the
typical constraints imposed by a launcher: the volume of its fairing. In
addition, its volume of 9100 cubic feet compared quite well with the
Orbiter cargo bay volume of 10,600 cubic feet.
If Rockwell’s propellant scavenging system aimed to recover
payload capability by ϐlying additional propellants and recovering any
residual left in the External Tank, Martin Marietta’s ACC aimed at the
same goal by adding useful payload. Mission planners would be given
the ϐlexibility of manifesting revenue (e.g., commercial satellites) and
non-revenue (e.g., interplanetary probe, Spacelab, Space Station visits)
payloads. The former could be housed in the ACC and released upon
arrival to orbit. After that, the attitude control system and deorbit
system in the PSS would allow for a controlled deorbiting of the
External Tank and safe disposal over the ocean.
The ACC would give mission planners the capability to recover from
mission delays or cancellations and thus move critical commercial
payloads to the ϐirst available mission that could ϐly an ACC. As a result,
the impact on the cost of the Space Shuttle program would have been
minimal. According to projections, between 150 and 250 million
dollars. In addition, it could be assembled with the same manufacturing

tooling and processes employed for the External Tank, and the
interface between the ET and ACC was straightforward.
The ACC could have also evolved from being a simple container to
an advanced payload. For instance, one attractive possibility was to
adapt it into a pressurized module to construct a fully functioning self-
contained space station module capable of supporting a crew of up to
seven, attaching it to the end of the External Tank, and launching it into
orbit. This ACC habitat module would contain life support, living, and
initial working space. The external tank attached above would afford
gravity gradient stabilization; an average of 15,000 pounds of residual
cryogenic for immediate use or scavenging; the structural strength of a
69000-pound pressure vessel; and additional space of 53500 cubic feet
above the ACC inside the hydrogen tank that could be easily entered
and turned into work areas, living quarters, hangars (pressurized or
unpressurized) or storage facilities with a minimum effort. Additional
equipment for station setup, such as tools, solar panels, and radiator
arrays, could be carried in the Orbiter’s payload bay. Hence, in one
single ϐlight, a whole space station could be orbited. The consequent
cost reduction would have opened the possibility of selling such a
space station to private commercial entities or other government
space agencies. More generally, the ACC could be turned into a
pressurized and unpressurized module with which to assemble a space
station (Figures 7.14, 7.15, and 7.16).

Figure 7.14 A large reϐlector structure is assembled in orbit using the ACC to store segments of
the primary mirror. The other portions of the system are stored in the payload bay.
[Source: Large Space Antenna Systems Technology, 1984 (pdf), p. 153. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19850015502]

Figure 7.15 The ACC Habitat concept.
[Source: Ronquillo, Leon and Monitor, Dean, “Paper Session I-C - Manned Industrial Space
Soonest” (1989). The Space Congress® Proceedings. 20. Available at: https:// commons. erau. edu/ 
space-congress-proceedings/ proceedings-1989-26th/ april-25-1989/ 20]

Figure 7.16 ACC-based modules clustered to build a space station.
[Source: Space station needs, attributes and architectural options study. Brieϐing material:
Final review and executive summary (pdf), p. 35. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19840010205]
REFERENCES
NASA (1983) A large-area gamma-ray imaging telescope system. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19840012536
NASA (1983) Space station needs, attributes and architectural options study. Brieϔing material:
Final review and executive summary. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19840010205
NASA (1984) Large Space Antenna Systems Technology, 1984. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19850015502
NASA (1985) General purpose aft cargo carrier study, volume 1. Available: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19870003154
NASA (1985) Space Transportation System (STS) propellant scavenging system study. Volume 1:
Technical report. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19850011690
Max E. Nein, John W. Warner, “A Very Large Space Telescope For Optical/UV Astronomy,” Proc.
SPIE 0228, Active Optical Devices and Applications, (August 15 1980); https:// doi. org/ 10. 1117/ 
12. 958776
Space Studies Institute (1985) Report on Space Shuttle External Tank Applications. Available at:
https:// ssi. org/ reading/ ssi-report-on-tank-applications/ 

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Footnotes
Cherenkov light is emitted anytime a charged particle passes through a medium at a velocity
greater than the speed of light in that medium. Properties such as the angle of emission and the
number of emitted photons are related to the index of refraction of the medium.
 
The reader is invited to repeatedly refer to Figure 7.3 and 7.4 as we further into understanding
the inner working of the telescope and the orbital assembly sequence.
 
This is in reference to the longitudinal body axis of the External Tank. The origin of such axis
was positioned at the very tip of the tank, so that longitudinal body station numbers progressively
increased towards the bottom of the tank. Distances are measured in inches.
 
While gaseous hydrogen was ideal for instrument operations, gaseous carbon dioxide was
preferred due to lower leakage rate and compact storage.
 
In other words, particles that have entered at the forward end of the telescope (backwards
respect to the direction of ϐlight).
 
During ascent, a small quantity of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen was extracted from the
engines’ propellant feeding lines and diverted back to their respective source tank to keep them
slightly pressurized, and thus avoid cavitation of the engines’ turbopumps.
 
It is not surprising that also the trigger module and the time-of-ϐlight scintillator incorporated
photomultiplier tubes in their layout.
 
The crossbeam spanned the width of the intertank section (the space between the oxygen and
hydrogen tanks) and provided the forward attaching thrust ϐitting for the solid rocket boosters.
 
An inertial attitude involves maintaining one or more axes of the spacecraft in a ϐixed
orientation with respect to a speciϐic target either on the orbited body or in the sky.
 

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
On a regular mission MECO marked the shutdown of the three main engines, followed, a few
seconds later, by jettisoning of the External Tank and the Orbiter increasing the separation rate to
avoid an accidental collision. The External Tank was the only element of the Space Shuttle system
that was not recovered. In fact, at MECO the Space Shuttle was placed into an orbit whose perigee
(the orbit’s lowest altitude point) laying inside the atmosphere. This allowed for safe disposal of
the ET. Some half an hour late it would enter the atmosphere somewhere above the Paciϐic Ocean,
burning to ashes well before reaching the water. In the meantime, after ET separation, the Orbiter
raised its orbit, otherwise it would have followed the ET in plunging back into the atmosphere.
 
For the rest of the mission account, the three pairs of spacewalkers will be labelled Crew #1 to
Crew #3.
 
The MMU was a sort of large armchair in which a fully spacesuited astronauts could sit and
become an autonomous spacecraft. Thanks to a gaseous nitrogen propulsion system, the astronaut
could move far from the Orbiter for operations such as manual satellite retrieval.
 
At this point, if the ET has to be jettisoned in an emergency, it could operate as an autonomous
spacecraft with its own attitude control and power system and thus allow for a later rendezvous
to complete the telescope installation.
 
In case of an emergency, the rail system could be jettisoned.
 
The mockup was a short version of the tank, but accurately reproduced the bottom section of
the tank.
 
Obviously the MMUs would have been parked outside of the tank.
 
The main engine shut down sequence relied on a paced reduction of propellant ϐlow,
turbopumps slowing down and valves closing. Sucking the External Tank completely dry would
have produced an abrupt interruption of the propellant ϐlow endangering the safe shut down of
the engines.
 
This was especially the case for the hydrogen propellant, which has the lowest density and
therefore requires a signiϐicant storage volume.

19
20
21
 
Dumping and venting could not occur inside the payload bay.
 
A ten-minute duration for the propellant scavenging was selected on the basis that the ϐill lines
could be kept to a diameter of 2 inches. Any shorter time would have required greater
acceleration and larger diameter (and heavier) ϐill lines to accommodate the higher ϐlow rate.
 
Such a fast rendezvous could be accomplished on a once-per-day basis when the Station
would be in a rendezvous-compatible orbit. It also relied on a narrow, if not instantaneous, launch
window for the Shuttle to follow the most direct ascent trajectory and rendezvous with the
Station in the shortest time possible.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_8
8. Shipyards in Orbit
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
The Large Space Systems Technology Program
One role the Space Shuttle program would fulϐil entailed assembling
large space structures for a host of applications such as antennas for
mobile communications, radio astronomy, orbiting very large
interferometers, orbiting deep space relay stations, and Earth-looking
radiometry; satellite solar-power systems to convert sunlight into
microwave energy beamed to the ground; and multipurpose platforms
such factories for assembling deep-space probes and missions to Mars.
In the mid-1970s, the NASA Ofϐice of Aeronautics and Space
Technology (OAST) established the Large Space Systems Technology
(LSST) program. Managed by the NASA Langley Research Center
(LaRC), the basic objective of this multi-center program was to support
the development and evolution of cost-effective large-area structures
to be automatically deployed, assembled or fabricated in orbit from
1985 to 2000 time period. At the same time, a near-term objective was
to exploit the Space Shuttle as a construction platform to test and
advance packaging, transportation, fabrication, assembly and
integration activities at the core of any large structure orbital
construction.
To understand some of the problems involved in the orbital
assembly of large structures, let us consider what it takes to erect a
large ediϐice, such as a skyscraper. These structures are a collection of
prefabricated members transported to the building site and
temporarily stored. With the support of surveying equipment, each

prefabricated member is accurately aligned, installed, and joined to the
surrounding structure. Then, the process is repeated ϐloor by ϐloor until
the top is reached. Given the height that such a structure can reach, the
construction site of such marvels of civil engineering is dominated by
tall, slender cranes, some extending from the ground, others based on
the building itself shifting vertically as new ϐloors are added.
However this procedure is translated into an orbital structural
assembly, an orbiting structure must compare structurally in many
ways with an Earth structure regardless of the means used to
accomplish the end product. It must be assembled rigidly at each joint,
so the whole structure does not exhibit looseness when completed, and
alignment must be maintained within some predetermined tolerance
throughout the assembly period. There are many shapes and types of
structural concepts that may be considered for orbital structures, but
these two requirements must be satisϐied in any case. For Earth
assembled structures, alignment and rigidity entail a small part of the
task at hand. Many people are available to install fasteners properly,
operate cranes, check structural alignment, and make corrections. On
orbital structures as large as those proposed for an orbiting power
station, supporting such a large number of workers for long periods in
the space environment would not be practical. Because the vast
majority of the actual assembly tasks are rather repetitive, they can be
assigned to automated constructions apparatus or remotely controlled
from the ground. In fact, assembly by extravehicular activity is time-
consuming and relatively inefϐicient. Therefore astronaut intervention
would be limited to speciϐic operations, such as component alignment
during the initial assembly phase, repairs during the inevitable failures
of assembly equipment, and maintenance during the operational
phase.
Due to these structures’ proposed size, all aspects of beam design,
join design, and assembly methods must be of the simplest form. In
fact, large systems in space will require an ability to determine and
statically control surface contours precisely. In addition, new
capabilities, such as active ϐigure control, may be required to provide
accurate surface contours and vibration suppression to ensure long-
term structural integrity.

An erectable antenna or platform could require hundreds or
thousands of similar structural elements in its construction. There is a
need to deϐine a set of standardized elements to construct a variety of
structural conϐigurations for a range of mission applications and
requirements. In addition to being structurally efϐicient, the elements
must lend themselves to fast, minimum-effort joining techniques and
high-density packaging for transport within the selected launcher.
Large erectable structures would involve assembling hundreds or
thousands of structural elements and system components. Therefore,
there is a need to determine the most economic balance between
manual and automated assembly modes. The requirements derived
from this analysis could affect the structural and joint design and
support equipment. The efϐicient joining of structural elements and
assemblies in space poses one of the most challenging technology
problems. Joint design and operations affect the time and energy
needed for assembly, the structural weight, the electrical power
transmission requirements and the need for surface contour control.
Studies and tests are required to evaluate these alternatives and the
issues of fused versus mechanical joints and pinned versus rigid joints.
The size and special characteristics of large space structures
dictate that the ϐirst time such an assembly assumes its operational
conϐiguration, it will occur in orbit. The design needs a completely new
set of criteria for determining loads, design margins, fatigue life,
thermal distortion, and so on. Large space structures will withstand
only those loads imposed by the space environment and system
operations at their full-scale dimensions. To minimize weight and cost,
it is necessary to limit the design loads to very light forces of the space
environment. Compared with the 1-g Earth environment, these space
forces are much lower in magnitude. Loads associated with gravity-
gradient torques and pressure asymmetries must also be reacted.
Under the most severe conditions, the worst of these loads would be an
order of magnitude less than experienced in the ground environment.
To design such structures for a ground environment would be
prohibitive in terms of materials and launch costs. Furthermore,
ground testing the full-scale structure in a simulated space
environment would not be practical. Therefore, it is necessary to
develop predictive modelling techniques and scaling algorithms so that

design margins and the associated structural weight may be held to
acceptable limits. Analysis has shown that these future structural
systems can react dynamically to the control system’s performance
capability and potentially result in unstable control/structure
interactions. Advanced control concepts tolerant of model errors with
the capability to handle many interactive degrees of freedom must be
developed to permit these large systems to satisfy performance
requirements. Potential control problems associated with large space
structures result from model inadequacies, including parameter
uncertainty and variability, unmodeled nonlinearities, unmodeled
disturbances, model truncation, and interactions between the
structure and the control system. A large structure might have a
dynamic mode that is nearly resonant with the pointing control
frequency, leading to costly control system complexities. Therefore,
there is a need to seek an overall structural stiffness that balances
control complexity and weight.
Thermal ϐlexing may create fatigue problems over the orbital life of
the structure. Therefore, there is a need to develop structural design
concepts with low thermal expansion, long life, and good fatigue
resistance. Composite materials appear promising for large space
structures.
On-orbit construction activities require devices to translate
structural elements and orient them at the assembly point. Long,
articulated booms may be used for this application. These devices
could also have post-construction applications for positioning
auxiliary system elements such as antennas in non-occulted regions of
the conϐiguration. These requirements pose the need to develop
lightweight articulating booms, highly damped and capable of
positioning relatively large masses at distances of 100s of meters from
the driven base. Clearly, each application and conϐiguration has its own
peculiar set of requirements. All, however, share the need to be
lightweight, sufϐiciently stiff, retain an acceptable contour accuracy,
and, most importantly, be erectable in the space environment with a
minimum of support systems and construction energy.
From this brief examination of what in-space assembly entails, it is
obvious that any similarity to Earth-based assembly of a large
structure is essentially limited to a similarity of terms. In practice, in-

space assembly could not be any different and more complex than an
equivalent Earth-based process.
With the LSST program, the space agency poised itself to develop
and evaluate efϐicient packaging and assembly techniques, ranging
from manual to fully automated. The program also included analysis
and simulations to deϐine the characteristics and limitations of various
assembling techniques. Particular emphasis was given to modelling
and simulation techniques to allow a translation of ground-test data
obtained in a simulated zero-g environment to the space operational
environment. Such an effort would lay the foundation for selecting and
developing cost-effective assembly techniques. Early space tests would
concentrate on joining and assembly operations, astronaut
participation, and competitive structural elements. Subsequent space
experiments, supported by comprehensive ground simulation tests,
would extend the database to the performance of structural
assemblies, the adequacies of modelling and simulation techniques,
and associated subsystems (e.g., active contour control). By the mid-
80s, space tests would have demonstrated the performance of
prototype operational structures such as deployable and erectable
antennas. The ϐinal objective of this series would be secured by space
tests of a prototype space manufacturing and assembly facility.
Although initiated by NASA, the LSST program was to rely on the
creativity and engineering acumen of some of the most proliϐic minds
at the top aerospace companies the country had to offer. Given the
broad range of topics to be investigated, ideas on how to approach in-
space assembly of large structures utilizing the services of the Space
Shuttle were not in short supply.
Orbital Assembly and Maintenance Study
A practical approach for the in-space assembly of vastly extensive
structures in space was proposed by Martin Marietta and summarized
in the Orbital Assembly and Maintenance report. The topic of the 400-
page long exposition was the so-called Microwave Power Transmission
System (MPTS), a 1-km diameter grid truss-like structure at the core of
a geostationary solar power satellite (Figure 8.1). The MPTS would
support two gargantuan 5-km long wings plastered with solar cell

blankets to convert sunlight into electricity. Equipment installed on the
MPTS would transform it into microwaves beamed by an antenna to
ground receivers, where it would be converted back into electric
current and injected into the grid for domestic use. The microwave
antenna rotates on the main structure mast to maintain Earth pointing
as the solar panels point to the Sun. Power is transferred to the antenna
through a rotating joint. Given its size, the MPTS was an ideal candidate
to accustom the Colorado-based aerospace corporation to the
requirements, conceptual design, tradeoffs, procedures, and
techniques to construct large structures in orbit in the upcoming Space
Shuttle transportation system era.
Figure 8.1 A schematics of the baseline Satellite Solar Power Station showing the one-km
diameter MPTS as its core constituent.
[Source: Orbital assembly and maintenance study (pdf), p. 23. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19750024071]
The MPTS would be an impressive agglomerate of 2709 identical
60-ft cubes, each comprising triangularly shaped upper and lower
trusses constructed from tubular members tied together with square-
shaped columns at the four corners. Telescoping cross-bracing tubular

tension elements completed the cube to stabilize the structure in all
planes (Figure 8.2). Except for a core cube erected throughout two
Space Shuttle ϐlights and through EVAs, the study concluded that the
MPTS assembly would be best accomplished with on-site machines
under either manual or automated preprogrammed control modes that
could precisely and repeatedly move, position, align and make
tolerance buildup adjustments of 1000s of beams. As highlighted by
numerous reports and demonstrated by actual ϐlight experience,
handling heavy objects by a spacewalking astronaut is a demanding
task, especially when installation precision falls within tight tolerances.
The burden becomes even more arduous when considering the
extraordinary daily amount of consumables, such as oxygen and
batteries, to resupply the astronaut spacesuits.
Figure 8.2 A typical 60-ft cube MPTS building block with labels highlighting its three main
structural components.
[Source: Orbital assembly and maintenance study (pdf), p. 43. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19750024071]

An initial free-ϐlying beam-handling teleoperated platform was
quickly rejected due to the ongoing replenishment of consumables and
the predicament associated with the remote control of a dynamic free-
ϐlying vehicle in and around the existing structure. A so-called mobile
assembler replaced it. Remotely controlled from the ground and
powered by solar arrays installed on the MPTS, its prime components
were a manipulator and a mobile carriage.
Similar to the Space Shuttle’s robotic arm, the manipulator was 72-
foot long, afforded seven degrees of freedom for maximum dexterity
and range of movement within a 70-foot radius, and allowed
manipulation of the truss elements employing a grasp-type end-
effector designed to enclose triangular and square beams thereby
eliminating single normal point grasping problems. The opposite end
would ϐit within a manipulator base providing for structural,
mechanical, power and data interface with the mobile carriage. The
latter would afford unrestrained access across the building site as the
assembly progressed, allowing the transportation of beams over long
distances, precision alignment and installation by welding to the
adjacent structure (Figure 8.3

Figure 8.3 A two-cube section of the MPTS showing the mobile assemblers at work and the
beam pallet storing the cube structural components.
[Source: Orbital assembly and maintenance study (pdf), p. 45. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19750024071]
).
Because only three types of components (triangular upper and
lower beams square-shaped columns and cross-bracing tubular
tension members) were baselined as the structural constituents of the
MPTS the concept resulted in an abundantly repetitious assembly
procedure. According to the Martin Marietta report the 1000-m
diameter MPTS could be completed in nine months with two mobile
assemblers1 working around the clock every day.
The Orbiter cargo bay dimensions strongly inϐluenced the length of
the cube. In fact a ground rule of this study speciϐied the Space Shuttle
as the transportation vehicle given the lack of well-deϐined future
launch vehicle concepts. Consequently to maximize the available
payload some form of efϐicient packaging of the structural members

during transport would be called for. Therefore three basic approaches
were studied: transport of fabricated rigid beams deployed on-site;
collapsible structural folded down on themselves during transit; and
the fabrication of structural members in an orbiting factory from raw
material transported by the Shuttle.
While the latter approach would make full use of the Orbiter’s
payload capabilities (payload capability no longer volume limited) and
eliminated the need for rendering the beams collapsible, it was
discarded as it would require the design and building of an orbiting
factory whose technology was still barely laying within the technical
literature. The deployable structural concept was attractive as major
subassemblies can be completely fabricated and functionally checked
out on the ground. It is also attractive because it minimizes the time
required for on-orbit construction and check out. However, deployable
structures have a low packaging efϐiciency compared to other concepts,
requiring optimum folding concepts to be developed. Furthermore, the
degree of joint rigidization following deployment can strongly affect
the structural dynamic behaviour. Finally, the system’s overall
reliability depends on the development of reliable deployment
concepts and mechanisms. Therefore, the ϐirst approach quickly
appeared unsuited for the task.
The geometry of the structural members would create an extremely
volume-limited payload condition requiring a prohibitive number of
ϐlights to transport 1000s of beams to orbit. The collapsible-beam
approach was deemed the best available strategy. Due to the packaging
and dispensing requirements a specialized pallet was developed as
storage and dispensing unit for the mobile assembler. The cylindrical
volume of the pallet was divided into four quadrants where the
collapsed beams could be stowed and packaged in the required
sequence for assembly.
The MPTS was to be constructed in two phases. In the ϐirst, a core
structure is built over two Shuttle ϐlights and involves extensive
exercising of the Orbiter’s robotic arm and EVA activities. The ϐirst
ϐlight brings the basic core structure with folding alignment and
support members, twelve members with X braces, and two sets of
mobile assemblers and beam holders. Assembly activities would
consist of ϐive steps. The ϐirst is to extract the centre core module and

position it on the docking module. The 8-foot diameter central core
cylinder acts as an alignment ϐixture to provide a stable “ground” for
positioning the structural beams of the very ϐirst cube. The core
module also includes a rotary docking interface to rotate the assembly
and allow the robotic arm to reach any area of the core structure.
During Step 2, alignment beams are unfolded from beside the core
structure, and the tension rods are positioned. Each beam is checked,
and vernier adjustments are made for precise alignment. Step 3
consists of extracting the beams from the cargo bay and placing the
lower triangular beams onto the alignment beams and welding them in
place, one at a time. Step 4 consists of placing and welding the vertical
beams and placing a set of assembler equipment. The vertical beams
used for this core segment are tubular members containing two
adjustable tension tubes hinged from the top. Each vertical beam is
placed on its adjoining corner receptacle and is welded. The tension
tube is extended in its plane and welded on the unattached end. The
beam is then aligned in that plane with pyrotechnics: pins are ϐired
within the telescoping segment of the tension tube to lock it in that
position, which holds the beam in alignment. This sequence is repeated
for each vertical beam. One mobile assembler and one mobile beam
package holder are placed on their receptacles on the lower core
structure. Finally, the second set of assembler equipment is installed on
the bottom side. The second Shuttle ϐlight contains two beam packages.
The beam packages are 60-ft long and ϐill the cargo bay. A second
robotic arm captures and stabilizes the antenna core while the primary
robotic arm places the beam package in the assembler beam package
holders. This task is repeated on the opposite side. The antenna core is
now ready to self-erect additional 60-ft cubes.
The central core system concept was conceived to initiate the
assembly process and support continued construction operations. This
ϐirst 60-foot cube is essentially an active orbital vehicle with all
systems for self-support, such as an electrical power system, solar
panels, attitude control and a complete communication system. At this
point, the assemblers can be directed from the ground or the crew.
Thirty-eight more cubes are constructed using the assemblers. When
this structure is completed, the assembly equipment is stowed, and the
structure is readied for boost. This centre segment of the MPTS is

boosted to geosynchronous orbit with space tugs marking the
beginning of phase two for assembling the remaining 2670 cubes. The
structural elements required for the assembly are transported with the
Space Shuttle to awaiting space tugs, which will then take delivery of
the beam pallets and transport them to the building site in
geosynchronous orbit.
Here, the typical assembly sequence required to complete a 60-ft
cube would start with a triangular beam placed on the end of the
previously constructed beam end and welded in place. Next, a
horizontal telescopic tension tube is extended to the opposite corner
and welded. The assembler manipulator positions the beam to align it
in the plane of the tension tube. Pyrotechnics pins are activated to lock
the telescoping tension tube segment, which holds the beam in place.
This procedure is repeated for the vertical tension tube. The
manipulator then moves a triangular crossing beam and aligns both
ends to that of the two previously laid horizontal beams. Once in
position, both ends are welded in place. Next, the two vertical (square)
beams are placed at the cube ends. Their ends are welded in place and
again aligned with the cross braces. Both the top and bottom
manipulators would be used for this task. Finally, the bottom triangular
beams are put in place. They are individually aligned and welded at
each end. At the same time, lower tension tubes are locked as the
manipulator locates the end of each horizontal beam (Figures 8.4 and
8.5).

Figure 8.4 MPTS phase one core segment assembly (ref [Ch 07 Ref 17] Page 101).
[Source: Orbital assembly and maintenance study (pdf), p. 101-102. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19750024071]

Figure 8.5 MPTS 60-ft cube structural assembly (ref [Ch 07 Ref 17] Page 106)
[Source: Orbital assembly and maintenance study (pdf), p. 106-107. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19750024071]
The Orbital Construction Demonstration
Article

Although the Martin Marietta proposal aimed at supporting the space
agency in their quest to exercise the art and science of on-orbit
assembly, it was targeted at a speciϐic application, namely constructing
the one-kilometre diameter MPTS. Furthermore, it made negligible use
of the Space Shuttle, requiring only two ϐlights to put together the core
cube and leaving the rest of the assembly to ground-controlled robotic
equipment.
The Grumman Aerospace Corporation instead took a broader
approach and presented a veritable general-purpose shipyard
denominated the Orbital Construction Demonstration Article (OCDA).
It was to be a free-ϐlying construction base and technology facility for
near-term ϐlight programs aimed at exploring and honing the multiple
facets of construction and operations of future large structures and
associated subsystems to a point where programmatic decisions could
be taken for the approval of monumental construction programs, such
as solar power satellites. The nine-month study deϐined a baseline
candidate that best embodied the structural principles of large
structures and employed crewed and automated techniques for
assembly operations demonstration. Four major assemblies would
characterize the OCDA conϐiguration: a platform, core module/mast, a
rotating solar array, and a rotating boom (Figure 8.6).

Figure 8.6 The Orbital Construction Demonstration Article.
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 2: Technical, (pdf) p. 76. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021208]

The platform provided a sizeable 32 x 72 x 4 m work area with
equipment tie-down points, two cargo berthing ports and support for
the attitude control system and orbit-keeping propulsion units. The
72-m length was selected based on a case study that would use the
OCDA to construct a 100-m diameter antenna for radiometry. Although
a 50-m length would have been sufϐicient, the additional 20 meters
were judged necessary to house the platform’s core module/mast and
provide clearance with the rotating solar array. The platform has an
open grid layout with twenty 8 x 8 x 4 m rectangular prisms or bays.
Each bay provides nodal pickup points to support ϐixtures compatible
with a Shuttle pallet of experiments and equipment. The bays consist of
deployable triangular trussed beam members and diagonal bracing to
increase shear and torsional stiffness. A 24 x 32-m open bay offers an
unrestricted worksite for assembling and mounting large components
such as solar arrays, radiators, and mirrors for applications such as
solar power satellites or large radiotelescopes.
Centrally located at the platform edge, the core module/mast
houses the platform’s subsystems, including attitude control, power
regulation and control, and communications and data handling. It also
includes a Shuttle compatible docking mechanism and the rotary joint
interface with the solar array and rotating boom.
The 108-m long boom is built up in 8-m and 16-m long sections of
deployable structure, containing wiring and the rail elements of a track
system supporting a manipulator carriage and material traveller. The
carriage supports a standard Orbiter robotic arm, is unpowered and is
shifted along along the boom by the traveller. When the manipulator
carriage is at the desired location, it is locked to the rail and uncoupled
from the traveller. An electrical umbilical is hard-wired to the
manipulator and runs from the umbilical reel down the boom to the
docking port on the core module. The Orbiter’s robotic arm operator
manoeuvres the manipulator. The traveller is an electrically powered
cart that rides the boom to relocate the manipulator carriage and
transport crew and material to the worksite. It draws power from a
power pickup rail mounted on the boom (Figure 8.7).

Figure 8.7 The OCDA rotating boom manipulator and traveller
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 2: Technical, (pdf) p. 123.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021208]
The solar array is mounted on the upper end of the core
module/mast and can be arranged in two layouts: a modestly sized
array to provide housekeeping power for the platform functions
Shuttle support and moderate experiment load and a very large array
for speciϐic experiments requiring high power. For this purpose the
array design is modularized to facilitate assembly and to match the
deployed array with the power requirements.
Materials are unloaded from the Orbiter’s payload bay and
transported to the assembly site. Equipment handover to the boom
traveller is accomplished with the participation of the Orbiter’s robotic
arm. The boom is rotated to the assembly site while the traveller
carries crew and materials. At the assembly site, the boom manipulator
removes and positions the equipment for assembly. When the boom
manipulator requires relocation, the traveller is coupled to it and
moves it to the new work area.
Assembly of the OCDA would require three ϐlights. On the ϐirst one,
the core is deployed and mated to the Orbiter docking module; a single
solar array element is deployed; the boom stud is assembled; and the

core platform cubes are constructed. The second ϐlight would
demonstrate structure construction techniques by assembling the
boom, completing the solar array and a major portion of the platform.
On the ϐinal ϐlight, the platform is completed, and electrical power and
mounting structures are installed for subsequent experiments.
The structural cubes of the platform would be constructed using an
assembly ϐixture erected over the aft end of the open Orbiter’s cargo
bay. The ϐixture would be made of composite material to minimize
thermal distortions. It was sized to enclose an 8 x 8 x 4-m structural
cube built by drawing components from the cargo bay and assembling
the pieces within the ϐixture into a partial platform cube. The cubes
would be in the form of an open C or L ϐigure, stabilized by tension
rods. Upon completion, the partial cube is detached from the ϐixture by
the Orbiter’s robotic arm and then attached to the rotating boom
traveller for transportation to the assembly site. Here, the cube is
removed from the traveller by the boom manipulator, which attaches it
to the existing structure. Later alignment is completed by
extravehicular activity. Upon completing the mission, the ϐixture may
be disassembled and repacked into the Orbiter or left attached to the
platform for subsequent construction (Figure 8.8).

Figure 8.8 The Orbiter assembly ϐixture. An open partial cube C-section has just been assembled,
including tension rods, and it is ready for relocation on the platform.
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 2: Technical, (pdf) p. 105.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021208]
Overall the OCDA would demonstrate numerous objectives across
four key technology areas: large structures large solar arrays power
distribution systems propulsion and stabilization. It was also felt that
the OCDA would constitute a logical programmatic step between the
capability afforded by individual Shuttle missions and the capabilities
for a permanent crewed facility. Grumman’s engineer highlighted that
several demonstration objectives satisϐied by the OCDA initial
deployment could also be addressed through a series of bespoke
Shuttle sortie missions. However they showed how this would require
at least three or four extra ϐlights to accomplish the same objectives.
Furthermore an even more signiϐicant advantage of the OCDA approach
was that at the end of its construction period NASA would have had an
orbiting facility which could continue to be utilized to evaluate the
question of what kind of factory would be needed to cost-effectively
perform the repetitive in-space manufacturing operations needed for
large orbiting structures (Figures 8.9, 8.10 and 8.11).

Figure 8.9 Key large structures technology objectives satisϐied by the OCDA.
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 34.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021207]

Figure 8.10 Key large solar array and power distribution system technology objectives satisϐied
by the OCDA
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 35.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021207]

Figure 8.11 Key propulsion technology objectives satisϐied by the OCDA
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 35.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021207]
Almost one-third of the Grumman report was dedicated to
formulating the basics of three program scenarios selected as potential
applications for utilization of the assembled OCDA. The ϐirst program
envisioned it as a construction platform to build a demonstration
photovoltaic solar power satellite pilot plant. The plant would be built
over seven missions starting with the erection of a large ϐixture
mounted to the OCDA and serving as the “ground” for the fabrication
and assembly of the pilot plant’s structural component. The plant
would consist of a microwave antenna rotary joint assemblies solar
collector and necessary subsystems. Upon completion the pilot plant is
released and operates as an autonomous satellite collecting solar
power beaming it to receivers on the ground providing up to 50 kW of
power. The second program scenario expanded on the ϐirst one by
increasing the pilot plant size building additional structures and
performing numerous testing of its components. It would also include a
demonstration of installing a relatively large electrical propulsion unit.
Finally the third program scenario emphasized the construction of a
large antenna with an aperture diameter of 100 meters for
communications or radioastronomy (Figure 8.12).

Figure 8.12 A large antenna built with an OCDA.
[Source: Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 53.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021207]
The Space Construction Automated Fabrication
Experiment
In proposing the Microwave Power Transmission System, Martin
Marietta contemplated fabricating the structural members of the
platform in an orbiting factory employing raw materials transported by
the Shuttle. Eventually, the approach was quickly dismissed on the
ground that the technology for on-orbit manufacturing was inexistent.
With the Space Construction Automated Fabricated Experiment
Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS), General Dynamic aimed at ϐilling such a
gap by formulating a bespoke technology for the automated fabrication

and assembly of structural elements using the Space Shuttle as a lunch
vehicle and construction base.
The beam builder was an electro-mechanical automatic machine
for fabricating beam assemblies from non-metallic materials stored
within the machine itself. The apparatus was conϐigured to produce
beams consisting of three subselments: continuous cap members,
equally spaced upright cross members, and continuous diagonal cord
cross-bracing, with joints accomplished by ultrasonic welding. This
beam construction concept was selected as a result of a compound
trade study which considered several beam concepts and the
characteristics of their corresponding beam builders (Figure 8.13).

Figure 8.13 The structural conϐiguration of the beam fabricated and assembled by the beam
builder.[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study
(SCAFEDS). Volume 2: Study results (pdf), P. 25. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19780017169]
The basic beam uses ground preconsolidated laminated composite
strip material for caps and cross-members. The cord diagonal is resin-
impregnated to assure preload retention and provide improved

packaging efϐiciency. It also reduces beam weight and beam-builder
power requirements. Diagonals are preloaded to prevent loss of shear
stiffness due to differential cap-diagonal thermal deϐlection during
sun/shadow transit. Using ultrasonic spotweld for joining the beam
subelements would preclude the use of adhesives and prevent debris
that could have occurred with other joining techniques.
A comprehensive material evaluation process was used to select
the beam cap and cross-member laminate deϐinition. Glass and
graphite layers were combined into a lay-up designed to display high
stiffness, high strength and low coefϐicient of thermal expansion. Such
a thermoplastic graphite/ϐiberglass composite can be manufactured in
a convenient form suitable for storage within a small volume. Another
advantage is that it lends itself to automatic fabrication processes
because it is heat formable and is suitable for spotwelding.
Before designing the beam builder apparatus, General Dynamics’
engineers had to resolve the basic steps of the fabrication/assembly
process. On a conceptual basis, the beam builder would have to
accommodate the following operations:
Storage: the ϐlat strips of material for the caps and cross members
and the cord for the diagonals are stored by a process that provides
safe, positive containment and easily dispenses the material.
Heating: the ϐlat strip material for the caps and cross-members is fed
through a heating section in preparation for forming. The heating
section applies heat only to bend zones to conserve energy.
Cooling: on exit from the forming process, the beam members are
cooled to a satisfactory temperature before exposure to a structural
load.
Drive: the beam is moved through the fabrication process and
deployed into space by a drive mechanism on each cap member. The
drive mechanism also provides the force to extract the cap and
cross-member material from storage and pull it through the forming
process.
Diagonal cord applicator: as the beam advances through the
fabrication process, the diagonal chord members are plyed across
each face of the beam. The cords are properly tensioned and
positioned for joining.

Cross-member positioning: A positioner apparatus grasps the
member before the ϐinished cross-members are cut to length. After
cutoff, the positioners rotate and translate the cross-members into
position for joining to the caps.
Joining: when the cross-members and the chords are positioned and
tensioned, the joining process permanently joins the beam elements
together.
Cutoff: cut off devices are required to cut cross-members to length
and to cut off ϐinished lengths of the beam.
Two approaches to beam fabrication were considered: cyclic feed,
whereby the beam advances one bay length, then pauses to allow the
assembly operations to be performed in place; and constant feed,
where the beam advances at a constant rate and assembly operations
are performed in motion relative to the beam builder.
In the cyclic-feed operation mode, the process would operate for a
40-second run period during which the caps and beams are advanced
at 2.2 meters per minute. After 1.43 meters of beam extension, a pause
of 40 seconds is made for cross-member and diagonal cord
attachment. During the pause period, the formed cross-members are
grasped by the positioner, cutoff, and positioned on the caps. Next, the
diagonal cords are aligned between the cap and cross member by the
cord feed mechanisms, and the cord and cap are ultrasonic weld-joined
to the cap. The beam builder then repeats the operating cycle.
In the constant-feed, the beam builder installs cross members and
positions cords while the caps move at 1.1 meters per minute. A
reciprocating carriage is provided for cross-member attachment. The
carriage-mounted assembly units move at the same feed rate as the
caps and cross-members and are thus able to grasp, cutoff, position,
and attach the cross-members as the beam advances at a constant
speed. After a 40-second working cycle, the carriage is returned to the
start position in 40 seconds and then advanced for another work cycle.
Eventually, the cyclic-feed mode was selected because the travelling
carriage on the continuous-feed fabricator would increase machine
length, weight, and complexity. Also, cooling the material in a constant-
run process would have required a more sophisticated system, such as
radiative cooling, cryogenically cooled box, reciprocating platens, or
multiple ϐluid-cooled contact rollers. Another advantage of the cyclic

feed is automatically assessing the quality control parameters under
static conditions during assembly operations. If an out-of-tolerance
condition is detected, the cycle is automatically interrupted while the
beam is not in motion, and the process has not advanced beyond the
faulty operation. Instead, a continuous run process would advance
beyond the faulty operation because of the time delay in stopping the
beam and travelling carriage, causing greater difϐiculty in recovering to
a ready-to-run status.
Four beam builder conϐiguration options were developed based on
the above criteria, leading to a ϐinal candidate that used a so-called
rolltrusion forming process. The cap forming and drive section
contains all the elements to continuously process ϐlat strips of
thermoplastic material into the baseline cap conϐiguration.
Approximately 918 m of material is coiled in a roll retained in the
storage canister. The roll turns freely on bearing mounted rollers and
unwinds uniformly as the material is used. The canister is halved, with
the outer half hinged to permit the material roll insertion. When the
canister is closed and latched, an access panel in the hinged half is
opened to allow the material to be routed over the heating section
guide rollers into the forming section.
The heating section is a continuous assembly with an internal
passageway for the ϐlap strip cap material. Continuous heating
elements, each consisting of continuous wire helically wound on a
concentric dielectric base located at the foci of paraboloid reϐlectors,
are positioned on the three centerlines about which the cap radii are
subsequently formed. The heating section is partially built into the
storage canister with heaters and reϐlectors mounted on the access
panel and extends from the access panel to the forming section
entrance. The heated material then passes into the rolltrusion forming
section, which is also equipped with strip heaters to preheat initially
cool material curing machine start-up (Figures 8.14 and 8.15).

Figure 8.14 The beam builder and its main electro-mechanical components.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS).
Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 18. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19780017168]
Figure 8.15 The cap forming machine assembly.[Source: Space Construction Automated
Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS). Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf) p. 20.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780017168]

After forming, the material passes into the cooling section where it
is contact-cooled by aluminum platens which cool one complete bay
length of the cap section during the 40 second pause period. The drive
section has four friction rollers which provide the necessary force on
the cap to hill the material from the storage roll through the
heat/form/cool sections. The three cap drive sections also provide the
force to advance the beam out of the beam-builder. The independent
cooling system interfaces with the cap forming machine and provides a
low energy, low weight alternative to the Orbiter heat rejection system
by eliminating long runs of ϐlex line and the associated handling and
reliability problems. It supplies coolant to the inside cooling platens
and the reϐlector bodies and rejects the accumulated waste heat from a
radiator mounted on one cross-member feed clip.
The cross member storage and feed clip subassembly supports a
stack of 650 cross-members which it feeds to the beam assembly
process on four serrated timing belts. Cross-member sides are ϐlared to
improve feed and packing density and reduce clip length and weight.
With the handler in position to receive the next cross-member,
retainers on each end of the crossmember are retracted, and the clip
drive stepper motors are activated, advancing the stack until a sensor
in the handler is triggered. Next, the motors stop, ϐingers on the
handler close and grasp the cross-member, and the retainers re-engage
to index the next cross-member. The cross-member positioner arm
then rotates and translates to remove the cross-member from the clip
and lay it in the proper position for welding to the cap members
(Figure 8.16).

Figure 8.16 The cross member clip and feed mechanism (top), and the cross member positioner
(bottom).
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS).
Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 21. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19780017168]
During cross-member positioning the cord plyers are positioned at
their extreme travel stops to provide clearance. The cord plyer
mechanism consists of six reciprocating cord plyer subassemblies
driven along a guide beam by a motor-driven ball reverser lead screw.
A cord is supplied to each plyer from a storage spool over a series of
pulleys. Using dual (forward and aft) cord plyers permits the two cords
on each side of the beam to be applied without interference between
the moving; plyers. The aft cord plyers being further from the
attachment station require a longer stroke to achieve the required
cord/cap angle. A cord tension force of 10 ± 2 lb measured by a force
transducer attached to a guide pulley is applied to each cord during
assembly. This preloads the cords sufϐiciently to preclude any
slackening or over tensioning due to thermal and deϐlection effects.
With cord plyers and cross-members in position the ultrasonic welding
heads are advanced and activated momentarily to allow a pin on each
weld head to pierce the cross-member and cap below each cord. When

piercing is completed the cord plyers move to the ready-to-weld
position while cord tension is maintained by the cord tensioning
mechanism (Figure 8.17).
Figure 8.17 The cord plyer mechanism.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS).
Volume 1: Executive summary (pdf), p. 22. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19780017168]
The beam-builder welding mechanism has six ultrasonic weld head
assemblies arranged in pairs at each cap. A beam cutoff mechanism
severes each cap and cord member to separate a completed beam from
the beam builder.
While the ϐirst part of the SCAFEDS study and report focused on the
tradeoff that ultimately led to the design of the beam builder as
described in the previous paragraph, an equal amount of pages (and
time) was devoted to a prospective seven-day long ϐlight to put the
beam builder through its paces by assembling a free-ϐlying “ladder”

platform representative of a large orbital system, such a solar power
satellite (Figure 8.18).
Figure 8.18 The “ladder” platform to validate and put the beam builder throug its paces.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS),
part 2 (pdf), p. 13. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780015169]
The platform would consist of four 200-m long longitudinal beams
intersected by nine ten-m long cross beams. Such a mission, forecast to
occur by mid-1982, would have developed and demonstrated basic
truss element fabrication dynamic and thermal response of a large
truss structure separation and recapture as a prelude to optional
revisit missions application of experiments and support subsystems
and EVA activities by a nominal crew of four astronauts.
Construction of the platform would occur with the support of an
assembly jig designed to perform the following operations in this
sequence (Figure 8.19):

Figure 8.19 Functional diagram of the assembly jig.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS),
part 2 (pdf), p. 77. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780015169]
Position and support the beam builder to fabricate the four
longitudinal beams. This is accomplished with a carriage and a roll
and turn mechanism, and a latching mechanism to secure the beam
builder to the jig.
Grasp and retain each longitudinal beam in position after it is
completed and cut off from the beam builder. This requires
retractable retention and guide mechanisms at three locations for
each beam.
Position and support the beam builder for the fabrication of cross
beams. This is accomplished with the carriage and roll/turn
mechanism.
Advance all four longitudinal beams into the proper position for
joining to each cross beam. This is accomplished with a drive
mechanism provided for each beam.
Use a cross beam positioner mechanism to grasp and place each
cross beam into the proper position after it is completed and cut off
from the beam builder.

Join the cross beam to the four longitudinal beams using automatic
welding mechanisms.
Allow the platform to be quickly released for free-ϐlying deployment.
The assembly jig is stored horizontally within the Orbiter’s payload
bay. During the ascent to the delivery orbit, the equipment is inactive,
requiring only the Orbiter’s mechanical and caution/warning support.
Before the start and during the initial phase of the beam building
experiment, an EVA operation is performed to ensure the equipment is
functioning properly.
Upon deployment of the assembly jig to a position perpendicular to
the Orbiter’s payload bay, the beam builder, moving to successive
positions along the jig, automatically fabricates the four triangular
longitudinal beams. The assembly jig provides retention of each beam.
When the ϐirst beam is ϐinished, a dynamic response test is conducted
to determine beam characteristics, with data fed back to the ground to
compare with predicted behaviour to help predict the characteristics
and behaviour of the completed platform. The test aims to measure the
response of a single beam to the dynamic load imposed upon it by the
beam builder, assembly jig and Orbiter, plus variable loads from a
vibrator assembly. The actual response in orbit would be compared to
the analytically predicted response to conϐirm how closely they match
and if any changes in the experiment protocol should be instigated if
the data are signiϐicantly different. The analysis of the resultant beam
responses will provide data for improved models for accurate
prediction of the dynamic response of beams and larger structures
composed of beams of the same type constructed in orbit for future
operations.
On the third day the beam builder is moved to a position parallel to
the assembly jig’s longitudinal axis and fabricates the ϐirst of nine
shorter cross beams. After cross beam attachment the partially
completed assembly is automatically transported across the face of the
assembly jig to the next crossbeam location where another one is
fabricated and welded in place. The process repeats until the “ladder”
platform is complete. It is worth noticing that during the beam building
operation the equipment operates automatically under the control of
the experiment computer control of the mission control and the crew
in a supervisory role.

The completed platform is then translated across the assembly jig
to preselected positions to install instrumentation, subsystems, and
free ϐlight experiment equipment via EVA. Such hardware would
include a solar array placed at the end of the platform for maximum
exposure to the Sun; a subsystem package containing avionics
equipment, as well as batteries and other electrical power system
components; cold gas reaction control system for spin-up of the
platform near the end of its mission life for the atmospheric
composition experiment; a thermal shade to cause an unsymmetrical
temperature distribution to permit temperature pattern and platform
distortion measurements; a laser beacon, detector array and
retroreϐlectors, to provide real-time structural distortion
characteristics during structural and thermal tests; a grapple ϐixture
placed near the platform’s center of mass to enhance stability during
handling operations with the robotic arm. Equipment installation is
accomplished with an EVA workstation, including a bridge, carriage,
and chair. The EVA astronaut places themselves within the chair, where
foot and body restraints allow them to maintain a neutral body
position. The chair is mechanically attached to the carriage, which is
connected to the bridge. Such a conϐiguration allows positioning the
astronaut over any position on the platform within reach of the bridge
mechanism. A control panel allows the astronaut to control their
position with respect to the platform manually (Figures 8.20 and 8.21).

Figure 8.20 The EVA work station set up to aid the installation of subsystem components and
experiment equipment.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS).
Volume 2: Study results (pdf), p. 256. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780017169]

Figure 8.21 The general arrangement of the equipment installed on Flight Day Three
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS),
part 2 (pdf), p. 42. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780015169]
On the fourth day dynamic response and thermal deϐlection
experiments are performed on the completed platform. Once again the
complete platform dynamics experiment aims to provide on-orbit data
on dynamic responses of space structures and compare these to the
analytically predicted response to see how closely they match. The
thermal deϐlection experiment aims to provide data on temperature
variations in different parts of the platform structure and on any
deformation of the structure caused by the temperature difference.
On the morning of the ϐifth day, the separation and recapture
demonstration experiment takes place. First, the platform is translated
to a position where the center of gravity is directly above the Orbiter’s
robotic arm. Next, six accelerometer packages and platform
subsystems are turned on so that the accelerations experienced by the
platform during release, free-ϐlying and capture can be transmitted to
the Orbiter and ground control. The robotic arm end effector captures
the platform. Next, the platform is released from the assembly jig. Then
it is pulled away using the robotic arm. When a safe clearance distance
is reached, the platform is released from the robotic arm, and the
Orbiter is moved away using vernier thrusters. The platform is aligned
with the long axis along the local gravity vector and with a rotation
period equal to the orbital period so that the long axis remains aligned
with the local gravity vector. After separation, the Orbiter ϐlies around
the platform to determine the impact of the Orbiter attitude control
and maneuvering thrusters on the platform. The recapture operation is
a reverse of the separation sequence. Additional dynamic and thermal
testing are performed in the afternoon (Figure 8.22).

Figure 8.22 Platform assembly sequence Flight Day One to Four.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS),
part 2 (pdf), p. 30. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780015169]
On the sixth day an unscheduled maintenance and repair
demonstration is performed by EVA. The spacewalkers would use their
Manned Maneuvering Units to transverse along the platform to
perform a simulated repair both on the platform itself and on the beam
builder. On the seventh day the platform is released for the free-ϐlying
portion of the mission. After observing the platform for a short time
after release the crew returns home.
As the platform remains in orbit, two experiments, whose
equipment had been installed on the third day, are carried out. These
are the geodynamic experiment and the atmospheric composition
experiment. The former was to map anomalies in Earth’s gravity ϐield
to obtain data on the internal mass distribution of our planet; the latter
was to measure the composition and density of the atmosphere at the
orbital altitudes of the platform.
A revisit mission could be considered to install additional
experiments, such as an exposure facility to mount samples exposed to

the space environment and a deep space tracking antenna as a relay
satellite. On the same mission, a propulsion stage could be attached to
the platform so that it could be boosted into an elliptical orbit after
experiment installation. This would extend the orbital life of the
platform and allow more crew visits for the installation of additional
experiments (Figure 8.23).
Figure 8.23 Platform assembly sequence Flight Day Five to Seven.
[Source: Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study (SCAFEDS),
part 2 (pdf), p. 32. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780015169]
The Engineering Technology Veriϐication
Platform
The beam builder would also take center stage in the assembly of the
Engineering Technology Veriϐication Platform (ETVP). Proposed by
Rockwell International, it was another option offered to NASA to

develop a facility for the on-orbit assembly of large area space systems
and user technologies demanding such an infrastructure.
As a ϐirst step, Rockwell undertook an initial industry survey in the
fall of 1978, which investigated the utility of a large space platform for
the communication industry. Most carriers favoured large platforms,
especially if replacement and repair of communications systems were
feasible in geosynchronous orbit. This report concluded that due to the
extraordinary growth of satellite communications, the limited
bandwidth, and the crowded occupancy of the orbital arc, saturation
would occur in the 4/6 GHz band in 1989-1992 and the 12/14 GHz
band in 1993-1996. This saturation is due to the single-bean per
satellite systems in present use. Hence, the study recommended an
Engineering and Technology Veriϐication Platform to verify certain
multiple-beam antenna characteristics in time for commercial
platform applications in the 1990 to 1994 time frame. At the same
time, the report recommended that other users share in using the
Engineering and Technology Veriϐication Platform to reduce cost and
beneϐit from redirected use of the multiple-beam antenna. Suggested
user experiments included: propagation measurements, RFI, low-cost
TV, electronic mail pilot program, data relay, and emergency aircraft
beacon locating. Other suggested payloads were a test plan to develop
a solar-based power satellite, radiotelescopes, interferometers, and
pilot testing of space-based radar antenna concepts (Figures 8.24, 8.25
and 8.26).

Figure 8.24 The ETVP Conϐiguration.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Platform deϐinition (pdf), p. 30. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013905]

Figure 8.25 An ETVP platform conϐigured as a space-based radar pilot test plant
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Platform deϐinition (pdf), p. 20. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013905]
Figure 8.26 An ETVP platform conϐigured as a space-power satellite pilot test plant
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Platform deϐinition (pdf), p. 67. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013905]
From a holistic point of view, the ETVP would serve as a
demonstration project for large area space systems, providing a
valuable learning experience in the design and construction of
lightweight space structures. In this capacity, it could serve as a test-
bed to explore the behaviour of space structures in the zero “g” gravity
gradient and thermal environments. It could also serve as a meaningful
experiment and demonstration of control dynamics interactions with
structural modes. The platform could further investigate system
interactions with orbit transfer propulsion, thrust vectoring control
dynamics, loads and vibration environments imposed on subsystems
and payloads. It would serve as a useful demonstration covering facets
of space construction such as beam joining/welding,
module/component installation, and structural alignment. Another

technology objective would be to demonstrate on-orbit servicing
techniques and concepts, possibly including both crewed servicing
modes and remotely controlled suitable to early GEO applications
(before crewed missions to GEO were possible). Additional experience
would be gained in high power (and possibly high voltage) electrical
power generation, distribution and switching systems and
components. Thus, besides being a development tool, the platform
could be considered a set of experiments in itself, particularly during
construction and initial mission phases.
The principle portion of the platform is 107 m long. Eight attaching
ports provide antennas’ attachment or structural support elements for
very large antennas. The ports are located on the ends of the 17.4-m
long crossbeams, spaced 20 m apart. Electrical power is provided by
four solar array panels generating approximately 60 kW. Four RCS
engine modules are located at the extremities of the platform to
provide both attitude control and translation thrusting capability. The
ETVP can operate at GEO and LEO and is transported to GEO with low-
thrust chemical propulsion modules. Four individual modules provide
the attitude and the orbit makeup thrust. Each module contains its
propellant, engines, valves, and controls. The modules are sized for 7-
year GEO operations, both in the quantities of propellant and nozzle
lifetimes.
Resupply would consist of the removal of the spent module and the
installation of a new module assembly. This arrangement requires only
the necessity for making electrical-type connections for power and
data control; no ϐluid connections are required. Appropriate
environmental protection and thermal control are provided on each
module.
Maintenance of individual components was also entailed. The
operational philosophy was that the ETVP be remotely serviced.
Therefore the subsystem components were grouped into modules to
facilitate this servicing objective rather than handling each component
element. In those cases where there was redundancy the redundant
components were grouped separately. For example the electrical power
system nickel-hydrogen battery cells were consolidated into seven
large units to reduce the number of items being handled during
servicing.

The thermal control system would utilize two deployable radiators.
A system control module was required to house all the systems
necessary to operate the platform. This module would include the solar
array power generation, the power regulation and distribution
electronics, the power storage battery system, and sensors for
guidance navigation and control. This requirement concentrated all
systems into a single module that could be installed as an integral unit.
This requirement also provided a single location for servicing and
maintenance of the equipment.
All systems would be packaged into line replacement unit modules,
conϐigured for removal and replacement by the Orbiter’s robotic arm in
LEO and by remote or crewed servicing vehicles in GEO.
The tri-beam is the basic strongback to which the orbit transfer
propulsion modules are mounted through the provision of a thrust
structure and to which the solar array and control module are mounted
through the provision of a support strut assembly. Both structures are
deployable space trusses. The four RCS thruster module packages are
mounted to the end outriggers and are placed so that their center of
mass is nominally on the neutral axis of the outriggers. Mounting
provision for eight antennas is provided at the extremities of the
remaining four outriggers.
The primary structure of the ETVP would consist of automated
space-fabricated beams arranged in a triangular section 4.96-m deep
with in-plane mounted cross members. In conjunction with the 17-m
cross-members, the depth of the tri-beam would be within the
envelope of the Orbiter’s robotic arm reach. This size tri-beam also
permits the construction ϐixture used for the beam manufacturing
operations to be folded and stowed within the Orbiter cargo bay.
Similarly to the General Dynamic’s platform, also for the ETVP
assembly, the Orbiter would become the construction facility with all of
the construction activities performed in its immediate vicinity. During
construction, the Orbiter is not required to maintain a prescribed
orientation; rather, a free-drift mode is used. This decision was based
on considerations of potential stress loads and equipment
requirements for handling large objects during periods when thrusting
would be required in the case a prescribed orientation had to be
maintained, considerations of costs and complexity of control systems,

weight, and volume requirements for the Orbiter’s reaction control
system fuel consumption during construction.
The basic strategy concept regarding construction equipment was
that automation and parallel operations should be used to minimize
the travel time of the principal construction equipment and EVA
personnel. Following the “bring the work to the workplace” (as in a
factory assembly line) approach, the physical embodiment of this
concept led Rockwell’s engineers to develop two major construction
stations (Figures 8.27 and 8.28).
Figure 8.27 The construction ϐixture systems for ETVP assembly.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf),
p. 21. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]

Figure 8.28 The construction ϐixture and associated equipment.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf),
p. 19. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
Construction station #1: the concept for this key construction
station (also referred to as the construction ϐixture) sets the major
activity patterns and enables on-orbit construction out of the Orbiter.
The station includes a basic building ϐixture having a yoke shape to
accommodate the tri-beam conϐiguration of the ETVP cross-section,
and roller supports that grip the longitudinal beams after they are
fabricated and cut off from the beam builder machine. It might be
thought of as a small satellite space factory. This concept permits a
minimum of power for illumination and TV services, maximizes the
use of a single Shuttle robotic arm for handling and installation of
components, minimizes EVA travel time and fuel/power demand, and
provides for extraordinary ϐlexibility in scheduling installations and
LEO servicing of individual payload modules and spacecraft modules. It
is designed to be stowed in the Orbiter bay relatively compactly,
permitting initial removal and setup on a docking port as if it were a
standard Orbiter payload package. The major portion of the station is

designed for semi-automatic, remotely controlled deployment within a
relatively short time.
Essentially the ϐixture would serve as a master tool or jig to
accurately position and hold the beam segments during the fabrication
and joining process and give repeated access to any location on the
structure for subsequent system installation functions. In this way the
construction sequence would be uncoupled from the Orbiter’s payload
bay packaging and related logistics constraints. The apparatus would
also have provisions for a variety of construction-related interfaces
such as: electrical power interfaces with the Orbiter and mechanized
construction equipment/aids; signal interfaces for controlling the
construction system and operations; EVA monitor and duty stations;
parts storage convenient to their usage in the construction process;
and mounting/storage provisions for construction support equipment
which may be left in orbit between visit. In addition the ϐixture would
translate back and forth along the platform as it is being built. Finally it
would include berthing and docking interfaces with the Orbiter and
enable a docked Orbiter to rotate a minimum of 360 about the axis of
the docking port. During unattended operations (between construction
periods) this station would also provide attitude control and
housekeeping functions. Solar arrays and batteries would power the
station while unattended becoming an active satellite controllable
from the ground (Figures 8.29 and 8.30).

Figure 8.29 Construction Station #1 and beam builder machine technical overview.[Source:
Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p. 155.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]

Figure 8.30 Construction Station #1 and beam builder machine technical overview (cont).
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p.
156. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
Construction station #2: This station consists of many important
separate equipment items of special-purpose nature that assist in the
automatic fabrication of assemblies of crossbeams and transverse
beams. The station includes a beam builder support and control the
dispensers for attachment ports the devices for installing intersection
ϐittings and remote servicing teleoperator) docking ports reels
installation devices for electrical lines and supporting/translating
rollers for beam translation beyond the beam builder machine. Such
devices facilitate rapid construction and high productivity of the crew.
The design of this secondary station includes using a structure (Y-
frame) that acts both as a support cradle during launch and return and
a construction ϐixture for on-orbit operations (Figure 8.31).


Figure 8.31 Construction Station #2 technical overview[Source: Space construction system
analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p. 157. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
Three ETVP would be assembled over three ϐlights. The scope of the
ϐirst mission involves the construction of the basic structure (except
for certain bracing struts), and the installation of basic wiring,
connectors, and attachment ports. In addition, instrumentation,
libration damping, communications and control systems to facilitate
rendezvous and berthing to the construction ϐixture on the second
mission are installed. Such active spacecraft functions are provided in
the construction ϐixture erected during the ϐirst mission. Secondary
level requirements include establishing that the basic structure is
within acceptable tolerances for straightness and twist and recording
observable structural deviations for future reference in payload
installations.
The construction process begins after arrival at orbital altitude. The
initial effort is to grasp the stowed construction ϐixture with the
robotic arm standard end effector, rotate and translate it to a position
near the forward end of the payload bay, where it is docked to a special
berthing ϐixture on the Orbiter and remotely deployed. The robotic arm
handling method was selected to avoid the complexity and constraints
on the motion required to rotate the construction ϐixture into position
by a special mechanism. Besides, subsequent ϐlights would require a
similar berthing activity to attach the Orbiter to the construction
ϐixture.
The next step is to extract the beam builder and its attached
devices, transport it to the deployed construction ϐixture and install it
on the rotary head to fabricate the ϐirst longitudinal beam. The device
for attaching the beam builder to the construction ϐixture is a self-
aligning 3-petal device. It also includes electrical connectors for power
control and sensor signals between the beam builder assembly and the
construction ϐixture/crew cabin. After checking out the system,
fabrication begins on the ϐirst longitudinal beam. First, the beam
builder forms a short section and stops. An attachment port is then
installed, and fabrication continues until sufϐicient length is achieved.
The beam is then cut, translated longitudinally a short distance by the
powered rollers of the construction ϐixture and held while another

attachment port is installed. The beam builder complex is then rotated
120-degree to a new position where it again fabricates a longitudinal
beam.
During this period, the previously built longitudinal beam is
withdrawn through the construction ϐixture while a harness of
electrical cables is unreeled and attached to it along one face. After
fabricating the second longitudinal beam and assembling its
attachment ports, the beam builder is again rotated 120-degree
counterclockwise, and the third (apex) longitudinal beam is fabricated.
The ϐirst longitudinal beam (with installed electrical lines) is returned
to its original fabricated position during this period. Upon completing
all three longitudinal beams, the beam builder is transported from the
construction ϐixture to the second construction station. The support
tripod for the beam builder (which is left attached to the construction
ϐixture during the move) is then removed from the construction ϐixture
and stowed in the payload bay.
Additional reconϐigurations of the construction ϐixture and the
attach port installation system are accomplished to prepare for the
fabrication and assembly of crossbeams and transverse beams. One
crew member suits up and egresses to visually inspect construction
station #2 and then occupies the EVA work station on the construction
ϐixture. They remain in the vicinity of construction station #2 during
the initial fabrication of the ϐirst transverse beam, and they also
observe and may help guide (by words and signals) the robotic arm as
it grapples and connects to a special end effector to handle the beams
fabricated at the second work station (Figure 8.32, 8.33, 8.34 and 8.35).

Figure 8.32 Fabrication of the ϐirst longitudinal beam and setting up of construction station #2.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p.
101. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]

Figure 8.33 Fabrication of the second longitudinal beam during wire laying on the ϐirst
longitudinal beam.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf),
p. 102. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
Figure 8.34 A detail of the construction ϐixture beam builder positioner
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf),
p. 303. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]

Figure 8.35 The beam builder has been moved to construction station #2 and fabrication of the
ϐirst transverse beam has begun.[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report
Construction Analysis (pdf) p. 105. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
Upon completion of the ϐirst transverse beam, the robotic arm
transports it to the forward side of the construction ϐixture, where it is
transferred to a special beam positioner under the control of the
astronaut at the EVA work station. In the meantime, a second
transverse beam is being fabricated, and the robotic arm must return
to grasp it and transport it to the aft portion of the construction ϐixture.
The EVA astronaut joins the ϐirst transverse beam to the longitudinal
beams by electrical heating of intersection ϐittings and makes initial
hookups of the cross brace cords at the joints. The process is repeated
for the second transverse beam. The ϐirst (long) crossbeam fabrication
is started after the second transverse beam is removed from
construction station #2. This crossbeam has attachment ports at each
end, docking ports for teleoperator servicing and electrical wiring, and
the intersection ϐittings on the transverse beams.
This crossbeam is transported and joined to the longitudinals in the
same manner as are the transverse beams but also requires the EVA
astronaut to connect electrical wires to the ϐirst longitudinal beam. The
complete structural assembly is then translated through the
construction ϐixture to a position for assembly of a second set of three
beams to form a new frameset. In the meantime, fabrication is initiated
on the next transverse beam, which is grasped by the robotic arm and
positioned as close as possible to be ready to join the longitudinals. At
the end of the translation, observation and record are made of the
structural alignment using an electro-optical measuring system
described later. The complete cycle of fabrication and assembly of
crossbeams and transverse beams is again repeated, with a few
exceptions. The exceptions include the omission of electrical lines on
the short crossbeams (and thus deleting the interconnection to
longitudinals), and the addition of more connections and subsequent
tensioning of cross-brace cords as each beam is joined (Figures 8.36,
8.37 and 8.38).

Figure 8.36 The ϐirst transverse beam has been transported to the construction ϐixture while a
second beam is built.[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report
Construction Analysis (pdf), p. 106. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]

Figure 8.37 The ϐirst long crossbeam has been built, and an astronaut is completing the electrical
connections.[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction
Analysis (pdf), p. 109. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]

Figure 8.38 The platform has been translated to allow for a new section to be assembled.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p.
110. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
The construction process continues with alternate frames
containing long crossbeams and short crossbeams until completed
(Figure 8.39).
Figure 8.39 The planned conϐiguration of the ETVP at the end of the ϐirst construction mission.
[Source: Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p.
92. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
The ϐirst major construction activity during the second mission is
installing the forward assembly support structure. This structure
consists of several struts joined together by hinges to allow folding into
a compact unit for ease of stowing in the Orbiter’s payload bay. The
folded structure is removed from the payload bay by EVA using a
cherry picker mounted on the robotic arm’s end. The support structure
is transported to the forward end of the ETVP, unfolded and installed.
The next item to be installed is the forward assembly, which consists of
the control module and the stowed solar array. A deployable tray on the
control module is used to bridge the control module and the ETVP and
carry all the electrical cablings between them. This cable tray is next
deployed. Brace struts are then removed from a canister, and with the
EVA support, they are installed between ends of adjacent long and short
cross beams. The next task is the deployment and joining of the thrust
structure at the aft end of ETVP.
This structure supports the three inter-orbital thrust engines and
distributes their thrust into the platform structure. It consists of three
separate struts and a folded assembly which contains ϐifteen struts
hinged together. An electrical harness attached to the strut assembly
links the three inter-orbital thrust engine attach ports to a connector

located at the attach point for the apex longitudinal of the ETVP. This
conϐiguration was chosen to compromise ease of stowing and ease of
erection and installation. The thrust structure is installed by the EVA
astronaut on the cherry picker in much the same way as the forward
support structure. The main difference between the forward and aft
support structure is the need for three separate struts on the aft
assembly, which are installed independently before the folded strut
assembly (Figure 8.40).
Figure 8.40 The forward support structure and assembly has been installed along with the
diagonal braces bridging the short and long cross beams.[Source: Space construction system
analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p. 183. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19800013888]
The nature of the third mission is similar to that of the second,
except that it is shorter. There are only two signiϐicant types of
construction activities: installing the reaction control system pods and
performing the ϐinal activation and checkout of the platform. Payload
modules could also be considered for installation, given that
considerable volume would still be available in the payload bay beyond
that required to accomplish the mission’s primary objectives. At the

end of the mission, the construction ϐixture is left on the operational
platform spacecraft in a passive state to aid later servicing, payload
installation, and payload changeout or modiϐications during operations
in low earth orbit. It will be removed prior to transfer to GEO (Figure
8.41).
Figure 8.41 Two RCS modules have been installed at the forward end of the ETVP. Two more
modules will be installed at the platform’s aft end.[Source: Space construction system analysis.
Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis (pdf), p. 223. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19800013888]
REFERENCES
NASA (1975) Orbital assembly and maintenance study. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19750024071
NASA (1977a) Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 1: Executive summary. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021207
NASA (1977b) Orbital construction demonstration study. Volume 2: Technical. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770021208
NASA (1978a) Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study
(SCAFEDS). Volume 1: Executive summary. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19780017168
NASA (1978b) Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study
(SCAFEDS). Volume 2: Study results. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780017169

1
NASA (1978c) Space Construction Automated Fabrication Experiment Deϐinition Study
(SCAFEDS), part 2. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19780015169
NASA (1980a) Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Platform deϐinition. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013905
NASA (1980b) Space construction system analysis. Part 2: Final report Construction Analysis.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19800013888
Footnotes
Note that two sets of mobile assemblers would be needed since the manipulators would not
easily reach through the structure on the opposite side.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_9
9. Space Shuttle and Skylab: A Missed
Opportunity
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
Introduction
When on February 8, 1974, astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson
and William R. Pogue splashed down in the calm waters of the Paciϐic
Ocean, it marked not only the end of the third visit to the Skylab space
station but also the termination of any prolonged NASA crewed activity
in low-Earth orbit for the time being. Skylab was NASA’s ϐirst attempt
to step aside from the business of landing on the Moon to focus on
developing experience and capabilities in living and working in space
for long periods.
Skylab, the largest infrastructure ever orbited up to that time,
consisted of a complete Saturn V’s third stage stripped off its
propulsion-related subsystems and outϐitted for human inhabitance
plus additional external hardware. The stage’s sizeable liquid hydrogen
tank had been split into two decks, stacked vertically and extending
over its diameter. The top ϐloor provided a working environment for
research activities, while the bottom one offered individual
accommodation suites and a common area for dining and exercising. It
also included decent toilet facilities and a rudimentary shower for the
ϐirst time. The stage’s smaller liquid oxygen tank was a repository of
trash and waste. With such an arrangement, the Saturn V’s third stage
assumed the denomination of Orbital Workshop (OWS). Additional
working areas were the Multi Docking Adapter (MDA) and the Airlock

Module (AM), both at the front end of the OWS arrayed along its
longitudinal axis. The MDA enabled the visiting crew to link their Apollo
capsule to the outpost’s front end. A radial docking port offered an
alternative point of connection if the main one was inoperative or for a
second Apollo capsule on a rescue mission. Sandwiched between the
OWS and the MDA, the AM offered an airlock for extravehicular
activities and housed most primary equipment for the environmental,
thermal and electrical subsystems. A large truss structure,
denominated the Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM), was atop the MDA. It
contained four telescopes designed to investigate the Sun’s anatomy
and physiology. The astronauts would monitor and command their
operations via a control station within the MDA. Two sizeable solar
array wing assemblies were added to the OWS to generate the
electricity required by the power-hungry outpost. Unfortunately,
during launch, one of the solar wings was torn away so that only one
assembly supported the outpost for all of its life. On top of the ATM,
four long solar panels, arranged as petals, supplied vital energy for the
solar telescopes and associated hardware. In place of the J-2 rocket
engine at the bottom of the stage, twenty-two spherical tanks held
pressurized nitrogen gas for the Thruster Attitude Control Subsystem
(TACS) to assist the primary source of attitude control offered by three
control moment gyro assemblies housed within the ATM. Two
redundant water-based cooling loops collected the heat generated
onboard and dissipated it through a large radiator at the very aft end of
the OWS (Figure 9.1

Figure 9.1 A cutaway illustration showing the main components of Skylab.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-0101536]
).
Launched on May 14, 1973, three back-to-back crewed missions,
each longer than the previous one, successfully occupied Skylab logging
171 days of activities for nine months. Skylab was a sound project, but
it had an Achilles’ heel. Unlike the International Space Station, which is
periodically visited by freighter spacecraft to deliver consumables,
experiment hardware and other goods, Skylab lacked the capability of
being serviced and refurbished. In fact, given the small stowage volume
of the Apollo capsule, Skylab was launched in the so-called “all-up”
conϐiguration, with all the supplies, gear, equipment and consumables
to support three crews. As Skylab kept silently orbiting Earth, eager for

its systems to be once more reactivated, NASA was busy developing
the next-generation spacecraft that, among the other things, was also
meant to service space stations. That spaceship was the Space Shuttle.
Saving Skylab: The Lost Mission of STS-3
Just before departing, the last Skylab crew deactivated all of its
subsystems, vented the atmosphere into space and placed the outpost
in a stable gravity-gradient attitude. Slowly but surely, the feeble
atmospheric drag would pull the giant space station towards glorious
and ϐiery destruction into the atmosphere. Projections were that this
should happen sometime in March 1983. NASA did not have plans to
reactivate Skylab, but at the same time, it was hoped that one of the
early Shuttle ϐlights could be dispatched for a reboost into a higher
orbit. If successful, other ϐlights might follow to repair and restore
Skylab for residency and possibly expanded capabilities.
Meanwhile, measurements of the Sun’s activity made it clear that it
was more intense than anticipated, with the consequence that the
Earth’s atmosphere was being inϐlated, increasing its density even at
the orbital altitude of Skylab1. It was bad news, as Skylab would now be
subject to higher drag, accelerating its orbital decay. In addition, budget
constraints had prevented the installation of a means to assure a
controlled deorbiting. On the other hand, at that time, there was little
concern within the aerospace community that pieces of space junk
might endanger inhabited areas on the ground. But Skylab was not a
small piece of orbital debris and considering that 90% of its orbit
overϐlew populated regions, concern began to grow that damage to
properties and people might occur.
As the Enterprise was being readied for the atmospheric test ϐlight
campaign, by early 1977, NASA Headquarters had instructed the
Johnson Space Center (JSC) and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to
outline the requirements for a possible Space Shuttle reboost mission.
However, by March, the two research centres informed Headquarters
that such an expedition would not be feasible earlier than the ϐifth
Shuttle ϐlight, scheduled sometime in late 1979. Meanwhile, Sun’s
activity intensity kept increasing. Therefore, the space agency
determined that the reboost mission should be brought forward and

attempted on the third Space Shuttle test ϐlight and that the hardware
should be built in earnest. Accordingly, in November 1977, Marshall
Space Flight Center awarded a $1.75 million contract to Martin
Marietta to develop and deliver a Teleoperator Retrieval System (TRS).
It was a propulsion unit to boost Skylab to a higher orbit. In the
meantime, Apollo 13 veteran astronaut Fred W. Haise Jr and Skylab
veteran astronaut Jack R. Lousma were assigned as, respectively,
Commander and pilot of the rescue mission and began their training.
Since Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking procedures were still
in their infancy, it was determined that a better knowledge of Skylab’s
true conditions should be gained. While the laboratory could be
tracked by ground radar stations, following the departure of the last
crew, NASA had not spent time and resources interrogating Skylab’s
systems. Therefore, in February 1978, an eight-man team, four from
MSFC and four from the JCS, were dispatched to Kindley Naval Air
Station, Bermuda, to awake the slumbering giant and perform a health
check. The selection of the Bermuda station stemmed from the fact
that this was the only installation that could still transmit and receive
the UHF signals emitted by Skylab’s telemetry equipment. The team
interrogated the outpost between March and June 1978, and the
obtained data yielded a positive and encouraging assessment of
Skylab’s conditions.
For instance, it was determined that no structural damage had
occurred and that every system was functional despite some
degradation. It was estimated that the temperature inside the orbital
workshop was cyclically ranging between 75 and 250°F and that the
outpost was spinning around its longitudinal axis at a rate of 1.2-
deg/sec. Combining these data was enough to determine that neither
insulation debonding nor hazardous material degradation had
occurred. Analysis of power data, voltage, and currents established that
the power generation capability of the only available solar array wing
had degraded by approximately 9% since the last crewed mission. The
excellent quality of the telemetry data proved that the communication
and data acquisition system had not deteriorated. The Thruster
Attitude Control System was exercised, and zero leakage was observed.
The integrity of the airlock module was checked by pressurizing the
cabin to 0.6 psi. Monitoring the pressure decay and temperature over

time proved that the airlock module’s structural and mechanical
systems were in good condition. The equipment of the primary and
secondary loops of the active thermal control system was found in
excellent condition, and that little leakage had occurred during the
dormant period. However, both circuits were inoperative due to
insufϐicient coolant ϐluid. The passive thermal system was likewise in
satisfactory conditions, as indicated by the nominal temperatures
recorded during the interrogation. The favorable thermal environment
and the adequate state of other equipment ensured that the
environmental control system most likely was still functional. By early
May, the batteries within the AM and ATM were recharged. In addition,
Skylab was placed into a solar inertial low-drag attitude to extend the
solar panels’ exposure on the OWS and ATM to sunlight by early June. It
had the beneϐit of reducing reliance on the onboard batteries since
they were showing signs of overheating, causing frequent shutdowns.
To a large extent, Skylab was given a clean bill of health, raising hopes
that the laboratory could be given a second life.
In the meantime, by April 1978, Martin Marietta had established the
conϐiguration of the TRS. It would have a central core with its
propulsion system and provisions for accommodating strap-on kits for
additional propulsion requirements. The core was a box-like structure
1.2 x 1.2 x 1.5 meters (4 x 4 x 5 feet), with a triad of attitude control
thrusters on its eight corners to provide three-axis attitude control and
backward and forward maneuverability. Not surprisingly, Lousma
describes the TRS as “the size of a dump truck…it was quite large”.
Guidance, navigation and control, communication and data
management equipment and propellant tanks were housed within the
core and primarily designed utilizing off-the-shelf hardware already
qualiϐied under previous programs or about to be certiϐied as
spaceworthy. This simpliϐied the project and reduced development
time and costs. A docking system was placed on the forward end of the
core, together with two TV cameras. Finally, a support structure was
created to mount the TRS within the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The system’s
conϐiguration was such that it could also be used for other tasks, such
as moving space station components (Figure 9.2).

Figure 9.2 A labelled drawing of the Teleoperator Retrieval System.
[Source: http:// images. jsc. nasa. gov/ lores/ S78-23631. jpg]
Once in orbit, the Space Shuttle would station-keep at
approximately 300 meters (984 ft) from Skylab, and the TRS would
self-eject from the payload bay. From the ϐlight deck aft station, Lousma
would have used a unique hand controller and displays to remotely
dock the TRS at the forward docking port of Skylab. As Lousma
explains, the TRS control system had to be sized to accommodate a
moderate dynamic motion: “One of the things that were necessary to
deϐine was the power that was going to be in the control system. We
knew that the Skylab wasn’t just sitting there motionless, waiting to be
docked with, but it was actually augering through the sky with a motion
that made its nose wobble in a circle. So when we designed the booster
package, it had to be capable of being ϐlown to match that wobble of the
docking port around a centerline; it was auguring around a centerline
in a circular motion. So I had to ϐly that booster over there, match that
circular motion, and have enough power in the control system to make

sure that could be done. We set up a simulation system over at
Marshall. We simulated the known wobble of the Skylab and made sure
we could get to that, then we added to it and made a bigger wobble so
we could size the control system. That was part of the development.
The operational part had to be compatible with what was up there”
(Figure 9.3).
Figure 9.3 The Teleoperator Retrieval System is boosting Skylab to a higher orbit.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-s78-23630]
To propel Skylab on a higher or lower orbit2, the TRS’s core lodged
four strap-on propulsion kits, each 0.9 m (3 ft) in diameter and 1.5 m (5
ft) in length, ϐilled with 680 kg (1,500 lb) of hydrazine for a combined
total thrust of at least 3,500 N (800 lb). Calculations showed that two
burns of about 13.5 minutes each would be enough for a re-boost,

while one long burn of about 27 minutes would accomplish the deorbit
mission.
STS-3 was living on borrowed time and was quickly running out of
time. “The scientists and engineers noticed that every time there was
an event on the Sun, the Skylab came down more quickly than it did
before. We learned that there was much more out there than we had
thought. Fred and I would come into work every morning, and they’d
have a picture of the Sun and have a picture of where the Skylab was on
the wall. We had a whole history of them. Sure enough, solar activity
was making the Skylab’s altitude decline”, Lousma remembers.
Furthermore, not everybody was enthusiastic about saving Skylab.
For instance, Chris Kraft, the director of the Johnson Space Center,
thought that the almost four-million dollar expenditure projected for
the rescue would be better spent to accelerate the Space Shuttle
development. When complications in the development of the Orbiter’s
main engines slipped the date for STS-3 to March 1980, it was clear
that Skylab’s fate had been sealed. On December 15, 1978, NASA
Administrator Robert Frosch ofϐicially informed the President that
Skylab could no longer be saved and that the space agency would direct
its efforts on guaranteeing as much safe re-entry as possible.
The Skylab Reuse Study
Had STS-3 been able to rescue Skylab, NASA would have had in its hand
an old but still valuable asset with which to bolster human spaceϐlight
activities during the early years of the Space Shuttle program.
Therefore, in parallel with the ground interrogation work and
development of the TRS, NASA tasked the McDonnell Douglas
Astronautics Company to determine what it would take to reactivate
and reuse Skylab and what beneϐits would derive. Aptly named the
“Skylab Reuse Study”, the evaluation was conducted between
November 1977 and October 1978, and the ϐinal report was issued in
December 1978.
The assessment determined that there would be valuable
advantages and suggested a four-phase approach that would gradually
bring Skylab to augment NASA’s activities in space greatly. Phase I, the
ground interrogation work that established Skylab’s health, had already

been undertaken. The positive ϐindings of Phase I shaped the requisites
of Phase II, otherwise known as the inspection/refurbishment phase.
A minimum of two Shuttle visits were planned to conduct an
external and internal photographic coverage for an up-close
assessment of the actual conditions of Skylab and carry out a
refurbishment of its habitable areas by the installation of kits to assure
crew safety, an acceptable shirtsleeve working environment, ϐlight
control reliability, and reconϐiguration of onboard subsystems for
improved ground interrogation and control. Furthermore, these ϐlights
would offer an invaluable opportunity to test and reϐine Space Shuttle
rendezvous and docking procedures.
As far as the refurbishment kits were concerned, they were
separated into three groups, and a ϐly-up priority rank was assigned
depending on the critically of the equipment. This offered latitude in
delivering the kits on separate missions or as part of one single
shipment. It provided NASA with funding ϐlexibility during this phase of
Skylab reactivation. More speciϐically, the so-called Kit A had the
highest criticality rating as it would be mandatory for ϐly-up on the ϐirst
revisit mission. Its content would ensure crew safety and
accomplishment of the mission. One such apparatus was the oxygen
and nitrogen resupply module, made of two concentric spherical tanks
holding the ϐluids at cryogenic temperature (Figure 9.4). The inner one
would be storing 1308 lbs of nitrogen while the outer one some 1124
lbs of oxygen, enough for a cumulative 90-days of laboratory crewed
operations. The spheres would be suspended by a bicycle spoke type
arrangement ϐitting within a 10-ft diameter envelope. The module was
to reϐill the Orbital Workshop’s Environmental Control Support System
and the Thruster Attitude Control Subsystem. Recharge of both
systems would be accomplished by EVA installation of supply lines to
the quick-disconnect umbilicals for each system, located in the orbital
workshop aft end and airlock module for, respectively, the nitrogen and
oxygen. Fluid transfer could then take place by exploiting the heat
generated onboard the Space Shuttle to gasify the cryogenics and thus
displace them to their destination. Kit A would also include new
instrumentation for communication and data handling, equipment for
servicing the coolant loop in the airlock module, charcoal canisters for

air ϐiltering in the habitable areas, carbon dioxide detectors and
mobility aids for intra and extravehicular activities.
Figure 9.4 The Oxygen-Nitrogen resupply module.
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 57. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]
Apparatus for Kit B had the second-highest critically rating and
consisted of a new package of control moment gyros to replace those in
the Apollo Telescope Mount. Although still active, they were expected
to fail before the ϐirst Shuttle revisit ϐlight.
For phases III and IV of the Skylab reuse plans, some extra payloads
would be connected to the outpost. In this regard, it was foreseen that
some of them might demand attitude requirements that could
potentially expose any part of the Skylab habitation volume to
unacceptably high temperatures. For this reason, Kit B also included
the so-called 360° solar shield kit. It would have been the most visible

and interesting refurbishing implement. It would consist of a soft
coated fabric attached to a framework enclosing the orbital workshop.
After removing the original one-sided thermal shield deployed during
the original Skylab missions, assembly of the framework could begin.
The framework would consist of one 1 x 10-meter triangular
strongback spanning the length of the orbital workshop and attached
to it through four spring-loaded clamps clasping on a hat stringer. A
cable from each end of the strongback would then be wound around the
full circumference of the orbital workshop. These cables would form
the foundation to lay a segmented frame wrapping around the orbital
workshop. Upon completion of the framework, the soft shield would
then be spread out, and the cables tightened to add rigidity to the
assembly. Cutouts in the fabric would be sliced for unobstructed access
to the two scientiϐic airlocks and window. Assembly would be made by
extravehicular activity and without speciϐic modiϐications to the Skylab
structure. The reuse study team conceded that a more detailed
thermal, structural, and meteoroid impact analysis might determine
that a hard shield would be better than a soft one. In either case, the
framework would be the same (Figure 9.5).

Figure 9.5 A schematics of the Skylab 360° solar shield kit assembly.
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 119. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]
An essential piece of hardware for Phase II was the Docking Adapter
(DA)/Interface Module (IFM), making Skylab compatible with the Space
Shuttle. The DA would act as the structural interface between the
Orbiter’s androgynous docking mechanism and the Apollo drogue-and-
probe docking apparatus on Skylab. It would also increase clearance
from the Shuttle’s external envelope and would be able to bear the
increased docking loads due to the Orbiter’s 97,000 kg (215,000 lbs)
mass vs the Apollo command and service module’s mass of 13,500 kg
(30,000 lbs). In the ϐirst Phase II mission, the DA was docked to Skylab,
propelled by a TRS. Then, after the TRS had returned to the payload bay,
the Shuttle would dock. The docking adapter is thus returned to Earth,
where it is disassembled and upgraded to become the Interface Module
(IFM). The IFM would offer the multi-port docking capability required
for Phase III and IV to dock additional hardware. In addition, the design
of the interface module was to include mounting provisions to accept
optional subassemblies such as control moment gyros or high-
pressure tanks. Such subassemblies could be installed before launch or
outϐitted on a subsequent mission via extravehicular activities.
For this reason, all subassemblies had a bolt-on conϐiguration to
ease their installation even in orbit. Another option was relocating the
docking adapter to the radial port of the MDA at the end of the ϐirst
Phase II mission. The second visit would then deliver a fully assembled
interface module. A different alternative was leaving the docking
adapter in place and upgrading it to the interface module during the
second ϐlight by bolting on the required extensions using
extravehicular activity.
The original Skylab conϐiguration had the EVA airlock in the main
Airlock Module, blocking the main crew longitudinal passageway. In
other words, the non-spacewalking crew members would have to stay
either in the workshop or in the MDA but could not move from one area
to another as the EVA airlock was in the way, demanding the closure of
the aft and forward hatches in the Airlock Module. For the ϐirst
missions of the Skylab reuse program, it was conceded that EVAs could
take place either via the exiting airlock or through the Orbiter’s.

However, the report advocated against the continued use of Skylab’s
airlock. It mentioned factors such as the potential of high frequency
(even daily) EVA in support of space construction activities; increased
crew size with two shifts that would require full access at all times of
the orbital workshop areas; and the fact that the new spacesuits being
developed for the Space Shuttle program would allow the astronauts to
work autonomously without any umbilical connection for power and
life support as it had been the case until then. For these reasons, the
study recommended incorporating provisions in the IMF to install a
dedicated airlock derived from the basic Orbiter’s unit (Figure 9.6).
Figure 9.6 A schematics of one proposed conϐiguration for the Interface Module.
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 181. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]
The Skylab Reuse Study: Shuttle Operations
and Continued Growth
The successful completion of Phase II would have unlocked Phase III,
that is, Shuttle-tended operations. During this phase, Skylab was to
serve as an extension of the congested volume of the Space Shuttle
cabin crew. It would offer between 85 to 115 cubic meters of free space,

including a compartmentalized galley, gym facilities and a waste
management area (otherwise known as a toilet!). In addition, a total of
six or seven private sleeping areas similar to those utilized by the
original Skylab crews could be quickly put together without creating
unacceptable conditions. With Space Shuttle missions planned to last
up to 30 days, the availability of additional personal space would have
greatly relieved the physical burden that such long ϐlights would have
inevitably bestowed on the crew. In the Shuttle-tended mode, the
Orbiter would remain docked to Skylab during the entire mission.
Thus, the docked Orbiter with a cargo bay Spacelab could be dedicated
to payload operations, while the Skylab space habitat could provide
crew support and accommodation. In this mode, Skylab would be used
during off-working hours to provide eating, sleeping, exercise,
recreation, and personal hygiene facilities.
Although the solar panel arrays were still functioning, a quick
analysis of their residual capability showed that they could not sustain
any meaningful activity in the long run. Estimates were that a total
solar cell degradation of approximately 20% would occur by 1984. It
meant that Skylab would produce only 5.5 kW of power, consuming 3.5
kW to 4.5 kW on its own. Therefore just 1 to 1.2 kW would be at the
payload’s disposal. With such limited energy, only small suitcase-sized
or low-power onboard experiments could be conducted. In the
meantime, the Space Shuttle was troubled by a similar problem. Even
before its ϐirst ϐlight in space, NASA had started conceptual studies to
investigate how more energy could be generated for long power-
hungry Spacelab missions. A solution presented by the Marshall Space
Flight Center was the so-called 25 kW Power Module. It consisted of a
free-ϐlying platform that relied heavily on the hardware of the Apollo
era. Meant to be delivered aboard the Shuttle, the primary structure
was based on the Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM) connected to a tubular
forward truss that carried a single-axis gimbaled solar array. It would
also have two docking ports. Docking and payload berthing would be
executed with the Orbiter’s robotic arm. Electric power would be
generated from the single-axis tracking array, aimed by Sun sensors.
Batteries would provide power for the night side of the orbit and would
be recharged in daylight. Refurbished and upgraded Control Moment
Gyros (CMG) commanded by an ATM computer would manage the

platform’s attitude, aided by the reaction control system of the Space
Shuttle when necessary. As the baseline power output of this free-ϐlyer
was 25 kW, it was known as the 25 kW Power Module. However, it was
presumed that future versions would provide 100 kW or more. Phase
III of the Skylab reuse program advocated the inclusion of one such
module, which would also satisfy Phase IV’s mission objectives. The
power module was to be docked at the interface module parallel to
Skylab’s vertical axis, and the two leading solar panels on the ATM
would have to be folded due to interference with the power module’s
radiator panels. As the power module was expected to become
operational by the end of 1983, it was anticipated that by January 1984,
one such module would be on Skylab, ofϐicially opening the laboratory
for Phase III.
Phase IV, or the continued growth phase, would have opened the
doors to Skylab being continuously operated by regular crew rotations
every 60 to 120 days. While in Phase III, the Space Shuttle and Skylab
would stay docked for the full duration of the mission, in Phase IV, the
Shuttle would only remain for the crew exchange and delivery of
logistics. The shift to Phase IV relied on a logistic resupply system,
which replenished the existing storage capabilities and additional on-
orbit storage. In this regard, both a single and double Spacelab pallet
and short and long Spacelab modules were investigated as logistics
modules and the alternative of being left in the payload bay during
transferring or berthed to Skylab’s interface module. The latter option
appeared more favourable because it would reduce crew time, support
logistic resupply, and serve as a pantry for improved inventory control
of consumables and trash storage. Between a Spacelab pallet and
pressurized module, the latter was found more convenient because of
several decisive factors: EVA consumables transfer not required, ease
of access, a secondary retreat centre with consumables, and ground
packaging with new crew familiarization. It was predicted that such a
logistic system could be available by mid-1985, opening Skylab for
continuous habitation by 1986 (Figures 9.7, 9.8, 9.9, 9.10, 9.11, 9.12 and
9.13).

Figure 9.7 Skylab conϐiguration for Shuttle-tended operations during Phase III.
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 218. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]
Figure 9.8 A summary of the possible logistic crew support options for Phase IV.

[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 247. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]
Figure 9.9 Logistic Option 1: pressurized module in the cargo bay (shirtsleeve transfer).
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 249. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]

Figure 9.10 Logistic Option 2: pressurized module berthed to Skylab (shirtsleeve transfer).
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 250. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998]

Figure 9.11 Logistic Option 3: Spacelab pallet in cargo bay (EVA transfer).
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 251. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998

Figure 9.12 Logistic Option 4: Spacelab pallet berthed to Skylab (EVA transfer).
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 252. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998

Figure 9.13 Logistic Option 5: modiϐied Space Shuttle (shirtsleeve transfer).
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 253. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998
While important activities could have been accomplished during
Phase II, the signiϐicant achievements of the Skylab reactivation
program would have accrued from Phase III and IV. In this regard, the
Skylab Reuse Study reserved several pages expounding a host of
fascinating possibilities. For instance, advanced Spacelab-based
payloads could be berthed to the outpost and run for a much longer
time than that granted by a Space Shuttle ϐlight.
Skylab would also beneϐit the materials processing program by
utilizing its working volume to set up a limited-scale prototype
production facility. For example, if early results proved promising,
limited production of economically attractive quantities of
monodispersed polymers could be accommodated. The lower cabin
pressure of Skylab, ϐive psi as opposed to 14.7 psi of the Space Shuttle,
and the potential of operating the orbital workshop as a cold room
were posited for bioprocessing activities. Dedicated modules could be
berthed to the interface module. Material processing modules and

internationally- or privately-owned processing facilities were also put
on the table.
The framework laid in Phase II to support the 360° sun shield was
proposed as a carrier of advanced external experiments similar to
those ϐlown a few years later by the Long Duration Exposure Facility
(LDEF)3. In this regard, additional triangular beams spanning the
length of the orbital workshop and connected to the two
circumferential frames were to be installed above the sun shield. This
construction could have accepted 70 LDEF standard experiment trays,
whose installation, retrieval and transport would have been carried out
using extravehicular activity. Furthermore, as the Skylab was meant to
be used for at least another ten years, the exposure time would have
been virtually unlimited, allowing experiments to be retained in the
space environment for extended periods (Figure 9.14).
Figure 9.14 The Skylab reuse long-duration exposure installation.
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 121. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998
The study also proposed to use the sun shield framework to
support the development of techniques for in-space assembly and
construction projects such as solar power satellite test articles,
geostationary platforms, radiometer antennas, multi-beam antennas,

etc. A possible conϐiguration consisted of a triangular trusswork
platform attached to the thermal shield strongback and supported at
the circumferential frames. On the platform, elements could be
assembled with a robotic arm similar to the Space Shuttle’s. The arm
would be mounted on a turntable to access much of the assembly
activity zone. A control console on the rotating base would allow a
spacesuited astronaut visual control of virtually all robotic operations.
The study also highlighted how construction equipment and
procedures required to implement construction projects could be
developed with a dual approach employing the Space Shuttle and
Skylab. For instance, the Space Shuttle could support the development
of automated equipment to fabric beams and truss structures, with
Skylab concentrating on using such elements to trial and develop
construction techniques, procedures, timelines, and evaluate structural
element concepts and costs. The large open volume of the orbital
workshop could also be utilized as a development shop for several
space construction-related activities. Small-scale construction projects
could be undertaken by fully suited up astronauts to assess, for
example, the effectiveness of tools and holding ϐixtures within a safe
environment. As an intermediate step between ground-based neutral
buoyancy tests and space-based EVA support construction projects,
intravehicular activities performed in the orbital workshop could
demonstrate and reϐine work standards left uncertain by the
groundwork alone (Figure 9.15).

Figure 9.15 A schematics of the proposed Skylab construction facility.
[Source: Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1 (pdf), p. 122. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19790011998
Skylab was conceived as an extension of the Apollo lunar program,
and as such, it retained key design and operational characteristics of
that program. For instance, one of the most signiϐicant carry-over
features was the ϐive psi cabin pressure of the Apollo Command
Module. As the command module served as the crew’s transportation
system and remained docked to the station, the simplicity of crew
transfer, safety, and the potential cost of additional transfer airlock
hardware dictated that Skylab cabin pressure would also be kept at ϐive
psi with a pure oxygen atmosphere. However, the Space Shuttle was
designed for a 14.7 psi cabin pressure with an oxygen and nitrogen
mixture that replicated the percentual composition of the atmosphere
at sea level. For this reason, the Skylab reuse study contained a long
section devoted to analyzing how to allow crew transfer between the
two spacecraft without the astronauts incurring the dreadful “bends”
when moving to a lower-pressure environment. There are two
approaches to tackle this problem: (1) pre breathing for up to three
hours depending upon the cabin pressure’s ratio, and (2) eliminating
the pre breathing constraint by narrowing the pressure differential
between the two operating volumes. For Phase III, the former approach

was to be selected. The Space Shuttle and Skylab would be left at their
nominal design cabin pressure, requiring crew members to don oxygen
masks for two to three hours of pre-breathing before each payload
operations work period. This mode of operation would normally
require crew transfer to the Skylab of one trip per day. Orbiter facilities
would provide lunch and personal hygiene requirements during the
working day. Therefore, the crew would rest, eat, and attend personal
hygiene in the Skylab orbital workshop at the end of the working day.
The next morning, the crew would transfer back to the Orbiter to work
and would not return to Skylab until the end of the working hours.
However, three hours before re-entering the station, they would have
to don oxygen masks for pre breathing and thus purge their body’s soft
tissues and blood of the accumulated nitrogen. While this approach
would be acceptable for the early missions, the report showed a
deϐinite interest in eliminating the pre breathing requirement by
adjusting the Orbiter’s and Skylab’s operating pressure to 12.8 psi and
6.4 psi, respectively. Such a ratio would allow the crew to transition
seamlessly between the two spacecraft without any prebreathing.
However, the report strongly suggested carrying out a more extensive
structural analysis to ensure that the higher working pressure within
Skylab would not detrimentally erode the safety margins. Based on
preliminary analyses, it was conceded that certain subsystem
components might need replacement with new parts capable of
withstanding the higher pressure.
In summarizing the study, the report conϐirmed that Skylab was in
remarkable good condition and could indeed be returned to
operational capability in conjunction with the Space Shuttle program
and a modest investment of ϐifty million dollars. As stated in the report,
Skylab would offer vast potential for enhancing Space Shuttle missions
and the most economical and cost-effective means for NASA to activate
an operational space station. In fact, across the study report, it was
stressed repeatedly how Skylab would offer large volume living
quarters for up to seven crew persons who would enjoy private
sleeping areas, pleasant and well-equipped galley and eating areas,
ample space for work and eating areas, ample space for work and
exercise, effective trash management capabilities, free volume for rest
and even a sickbay. The study also stated that perhaps the most

signiϐicant advantage would be the possibility of a low-cost approach
to the investigation of long-duration and continuously occupied
operations.
The Solar Scientiϐic Instruments
Spacelab/Orbiter Report
On July 11, 1979, Skylab became the biggest artiϐicial meteor up to date,
burning through the atmosphere down to Australia, where inhabitants
southeast of Perth received a light shower of debris. Fortunately, no
damage to properties or people was reported.
However, one last chance remained for marring the Space Shuttle
with Skylab-era hardware. NASA had built a second Skylab station as a
backup if a catastrophic failure had occurred to the ϐirst. Had not
funding been cut and diverted to the Space Shuttle program, this
second station could have offered NASA three additional long-duration
missions and extra experience in working and living in space. Having
missed its opportunity to ϐly in space, this fully functional station was
dispatched in 1976 to the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum
in Washington DC, where to date, visitors can walk around and roam
inside the Orbital Workshop and appreciate ϐirsthand the size of
America’s ϐirst space station and picture for themselves how life on
board would have felt like4.
While the Orbital Workshop was sent to the museum, the backup
Apollo Telescope Mount was retained for longer as NASA considered
the opportunity to salvage part of its hardware for accommodation in
the Shuttle’s cargo bay. When looking at a pictorial representation of
Skylab or one of the many pictures shot in orbit, it is easy to identify
the ATM as that section of the station lying in front of the orbital
workshop area rotated 90-deg vertically. Its most distinct feature is a
group of four solar panels extending like a petal radially away from the
centerline. Its main function was to house eight telescopes, some 3-
meter long and 900 kg heavy, dedicated to investigating the Sun’s
anatomy and physiology5. The telescopes were housed within a
cylindrical canister whose volume was divided into four quarters by a
cruciform structure called spar, or optical bench and provided for the

mounting of the telescopes. There was a sun-shield and cover on the
front (sunward) end of the canister, with openings and individual doors
for each instrument. During ground storage, launch, and at times when
orbital contamination was expected, these experiment doors were
closed to protect the solar telescopes and their optical components
(Figures 9.16 and 9.17).
Figure 9.16 A cutaway view of the ATM showing its main components
(ref https:// science. ksc. nasa. gov/ mirrors/ images/ html/ sky_ ov. htm)

Figure 9.17 An global overview of the ATM
(ref http:// grin. hq. nasa. gov/ ABSTRACTS/ GPN-2000-001055. html)
In March 1981, under contract with NASA, Martin Marietta
published a report titled “Feasibility Study of the Solar Scientiϔic
Instruments for Spacelab/Orbiter”, in which they made a case for
adapting the ATM’s canister and associated equipment to mount it into
the Space Shuttle’s payload bay and, as a study case, carry three new
instruments for solar observations. These telescopes were:
The Solar Extreme Ultraviolet Telescope and Spectrograph to
investigate fundamental problems of solar physics such as the
energy and mass balances in closed magnetic ϐield regions in the
corona; mass and energy transport into the solar wind; the
characteristics of the emergence and evolution of active coronal
regions and their relation to ϐlare activity and coronal holes.
The Solar Active Region Observatories from Spacelab, whose prime
objective was taking detailed measurements of the temperature,
density, and pressure within coronal loops to precisely determine
the absolute values of the radiative ad conductive heat loss terms for
a given solar magnetic ϐield loop.

The Spacelab Lyman Alpha-White Light Coronograph to measure
coronal temperatures, densities, and ϐlow velocities for solar
structures throughout the solar wind acceleration regions of the
inner corona.
The Martin Marietta study emphasized the pointing system, which is
essential in precisely maintaining the telescopes aimed at their target
within the established tolerances. The ATM hardware was evaluated
for use with three pointing systems: the existing ATM-based ϐine
pointing control system, the Instrument Pointing System (IPS) being
developed for the Spacelab program, and the Annular Gimbal System.
The assembly would be positioned close to the Orbiter’s center of
gravity to facilitate pointing retention even during manoeuvring of the
Orbiter. Each pointing system would require a different conϐiguration
for installing the ATM canister in the payload bay (Figure 9.18).
Figure 9.18 The three possible pointing systems for the ATM canister mounted on the Space
Shuttle.

[Source: Feasibility study of the solar scientiϐic instruments for Spacelab/Orbiter (pdf), p. 15.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830004875]
For instance, in the case of the ATM integrated concept, the canister
would be supported by a bespoke truss structure, called the Canister
Support Structure, anchored at four points to the payload bay. The
support structure would also include ancillary equipment such as
locking interfaces for launch and landing, gimbals connected to the
spar via a girth ring to maneuver the canister during observations,
electronic equipment, and an active cooling system and equipment for
data management. One deviation consisted of moving the electronic
equipment, avionics and other subsystems into a pallet installed aft of
the support structure.
If marred with the IPS, the ATM canister would require trivial
external modiϐications as the existing thermal control system was
deemed adequate to maintain an acceptable temperature for the
experiments. A cylindrical shell would provide the structural interface
between the ATM canister and the pointing system. Furthermore, the
existing ATM canister would rely on the IPS pointing system consisting
of three rotation gimbals: an azimuth gimbal, a roll gimbal, and an
elevation gimbal. The canister would be connected to the gimbal
system at the so-called Payload Attachment Ring (PAR), which was
attached to the elevation gimbal. The advantage was that the IPS was a
piece of hardware already being developed by the European Space
Agency for the Spacelab module and thus available without NASA
having to produce new hardware. Perhaps even more important was
that the ATM canister would be stowed horizontally rather than
vertically in the payload bay. As in the mounting on the Canister
Support Structure, there was potential to lengthen the canister to
accommodate longer instruments. In orbit, the IPS would swing the
ATM canister out of the payload bay, manoeuvring towards the desired
target (Figure 9.19).

Figure 9.19 The main components of the Spacelab Instrument Pointing System.
[Source: Spacelab News Reference (pdf), p. 40. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19900066918]
The Annular Suspension and Pointing System Gimbal was an in-
house alternative to the IPS and would work similarly. It would consist
of a three-gimbal system with the payload attached to a Payload
Adapter Plate, which was part of the Payload Mounting Structure
connected to a roll gimbal. Also, in this case, the ATM would be stowed
horizontally and thus allow further length growth if required.
In summary, the study results showed that the ATM hardware did
have the potential for reuse in either the ATM pointing system mode or
the NASA/ESA-provided pointing platform options. Indeed, it stressed
that the concept of utilizing the backup ATM hardware for Shuttle
ϐlights was both feasible and economical. Furthermore, the report had
indicated that the ATM hardware already existed, and therefore, there
was no need for new hardware design, development, testing or
fabrication. Furthermore, based on the experience gained with the

Skylab missions, hardware reliability and safety had already been
established. Furthermore, the ATM canister assembly already had a
complete self-contained thermal control system capable of
maintaining close thermal tolerance on the payload. Hence, the
assembly could be easily mounted on the IPS or AGS, eliminating the
need to cross the gimbals with ϐluid lines. Finally, any proposed
concepts could be integrated as a payload of opportunity with other
primary mission payloads. However, it was also highlighted that
additional study effort was required for any of the hardware usage
options, in particular in the areas concerning instrument size (both
cross-section and length) versus canister envelope; aperture door
conϐiguration (universal door versus dedicated doors for each
mission); and overall instrument accessibility.
Eventually, this opportunity for a joint partnership between Skylab
hardware and Space Shuttle did not bear any result, and the backup
ATM canister was also donated to the Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum, where it underwent extensive restoration. Since early
2017 it has been on display.

Epilogue
On March 22, 1982, Columbia entered orbital space for the third time to
perform an aggressive script of testing, this time under the most
exhausting thermal conditions. “Our testing of the Space Shuttle had to
do with the thermal characteristics of the Shuttle…one of our primary
objectives was to see what happened to the Shuttle and its heating and
cooling systems if you pointed it at the Sun for long periods …It was
always pointed at the Sun, to see if the heating system would keep the
cold end warm, and if the cooling system would keep the hot end cool”,
STS-3’s Commander Jack R. Lousma6 remembers. Throughout the
mission, Columbia was placed into four different inertial attitudes for
extended periods to determine the thermal response of speciϐic areas
of her structure. At the same time, Lousma and crewmate C. Gordon
Fullerton spent some 48 hours testing the robotic arm. “We were also
testing the arm the Canadians made to take things out of the cargo bay
and put them in space and vice versa…The second ϐlight had tested the
arm, but we were going to be the ϐirst to test it with something on it…
We had a small cylindrical payload...it was probably about ϐive feet in
diameter and about two or three feet deep. Just a round thing, but it
wasn’t just a round massive thing. It had some sensors in it to measure
the environment around the Space Shuttle to see what kind of
environment it would be for scientiϐic investigation in the future. So
while we were moving the arm, we were just taking all this data as
well...We tested the arm for half a day for four different days...The arm
worked very well”, Lousma continues. Initially planned to last seven
days, adverse weather conditions had made Edwards Air Force Base
unsuitable for landing. The crew was ordered to spend an extra day in
orbit, and on March 30, Columbia soft-landed at the Northrop Strip at
White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico.
Had the ϐirst Shuttle ϐlight not been delayed to 1981, STS-3 would
likely have attempted a rendezvous and reboost of Skylab, giving NASA
the chance of resuming long-duration spaceϐlight two decades before
commencing to build the International Space Station. The space agency
would have also acquired invaluable experience recovering lost space
hardware for later refurbishment or safe and controlled dispatch into
the atmosphere graveyard.

1
2
3
4
REFERENCES
NASA (1978) Skylab reuse study, ϔinal report. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19790075817
NASA (1979a) Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 1. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19790011998
NASA (1979b) Skylab reuse study, reference data, part 2: Appendixes. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19790011999
NASA (1983) Feasibility study of the solar scientiϔic instruments for Spacelab/Orbiter. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19830004875
NASA (1990) Spacelab News Reference. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19900066918
Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments. – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
Just before leaving, the last Apollo crew had pushed Skylab into a 433 x 455 km orbit.
 
At the time it was still not clear if Skylab would be pushed on a higher orbit for later
refurbishment or was to be ditched into the atmosphere in a controlled manner to ensure it would
not rain down on inhabited land masses. Such concern had rapidly spread worldwide following
the uncontrolled re-entry of the Soviet satellite Cosmos 954 which disseminated several
fragments over northern Canada. Considering that Cosmos 954 was powered by a small nuclear
reactor, this meant that these pieces of scrap where nothing less than radioactive!
 
The LDEF was a passive rack comparable in size to a school bus, to expose various materials
samples to the space environment. Deployed by STS-41C as planned, it as to be retrieved in 1986
but the Challenger disaster meant it remained in space until recovered by STS-32 in January 1990,
shortly before its orbit would have decayed.
 
If you happen to visit the museum, you might want to remember that you are walking through a
real piece of spaceworthy hardware rather than just a replica.
 

5
6
A second but nevertheless essential function, was to house the three gyroscope assemblies
without which the station could not maintain its attitude during solar observations.
 
The original STS-3 had Apollo 13’s veteran Fred Haise to command the mission along with Jack
Lousma as pilot. Sometime after the re-boost mission had been cancelled, Haise resigned from
NASA. Lousma was promoted to the Commander chair and Gordon Fullerton was nominated as
pilot.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_10
10. Space Shuttle in Uniform
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
The Lost Polar Mission
As early as 1971, the decision was taken that the Space Transportation
System would exploit both the Kennedy Space Center in Florida and
Vandenberg Air Force Base in California as a launching site. The latter
would suit orbiting weather and reconnaissance or spy satellites such
as the Key Hole and HEXAGON spacecraft series. Spy and weather
satellites operate best when circling the Earth in a polar orbit, an
orbital path that ϐlies over both poles. In this manner, they can oversee
the whole surface of the planet a few times a day, depending on orbit
design.
Although feasible, launching into polar orbit from Florida1 is not
pursued as the ascent trajectory would trace over densely inhabited
areas of the US East Coast and Canada, seriously jeopardizing their
safety. It is easy to visualize the shower of toxic fuel and hot debris
deluging the defenceless population following a rapid unscheduled
disassembly2. Besides, even in the case of a successful launch, ensuring
the spent rocket stages fall far from populated areas would remain a
concern. Strict weather control in the overϐlown areas would be
paramount to prevent high-speed winds from pushing a falling spent
stage away from the planned safe crash site. Under such constraints,
the launch could only occur if weather conditions are optimal along the
entirety of the ascent ground track, a situation whose likelihood is
often remote. This is why the highest orbital inclination achievable
when launching from the KSC is limited to ϐifty-seven degrees. Hence,

an ascending rocket can ϐly over the Atlantic Ocean while paralleling
the US East Coast3 without straying in the US and Canadian mainland.
For the Space Shuttle, ascent abort scenarios had also to be considered.
Based on when the abort was called up, chances were that the Orbiter
could try an emergency landing on Soviet or Chinese territory. That was
the last situation the DoD would have liked to ϐind itself in: an Orbiter
loaded with secretive spy hardware on the enemy territory such
equipment was meant to pry! It may be argued that polar missions
could be launched off the Kennedy Space Center by ϐlying southwards
(towards the Equator). Yet, the same issue of safeguarding the civilian
population would present itself due to the ascent ground track
intersecting Cuba and the eastern tip of the South American continent.
Vandenberg was the only viable option. Located on the Central
Coast of California, about 240 Km Northwest of Los Angeles,
Vandenberg Air Force Base started before World War II as a US Army
armoured division training site called Camp Cooke. In 1955, the Air
Force claimed it as a secure launch site for long-range ballistic missile
tests for targets in the Paciϐic Ocean and space launches into polar
orbit. On October 4, 1958, the site was renamed Vandenberg Air Force
Base (AFB), honouring the late General Hoyt S. Vandenberg. Being on a
ϐlat plateau, surrounded by hills and canyons, and the relative
remoteness from populated areas made it the ideal place for military
space missions. A rocket could be sent into polar orbit, ϐlying
southward over the Paciϐic Ocean and avoiding overϐlying populated
areas. The Space Shuttle was not the ϐirst human spaceϐlight program
housed at Vandenberg. In fact, in March 1966, works had begun to
construct the Space Launch Complex 6 (SLC-6), a series of
infrastructures destined to prepare hardware and crews for MOL
missions4. Cost overruns, delays and the emergence of new technology
quickly caused the program’s demise, and the abandonment of SLC-6
followed. When the Space Transportation System came along, and with
a close eye on the budget, it was only natural to refurbish the old SLC-6
and make it Space Shuttle-worthy. This option was ofϐicially approved
in 1975, and four years later, the requaliϐication of the site started. For
the MOL spacecraft/launcher, a mobile service tower, a ϐlame trench
duct5, and a launch control center had already been built. However, the

complexity of the Space Shuttle required extra facilities to be erected.
In essence, Vandenberg was to become a carbon copy of the KSC.
Richard W. Nygren, who in the early 1980s held the position of
Assistant to the Director of Flight Crew Operations, recalls how “we
realized that we were going to have the same operations at
Vandenberg as we were going to have at Kennedy, so we needed a
facility for the crews to stay in pre-launch. We needed something
equivalent to the KSC crew quarters out there; we needed to get a
facility where the crew guys could be housed...we were going to be
involved with a lot of their pre-launch testing with terminal countdown
demonstrations. They were going to end up doing a ϐlight readiness
ϐiring. We were going to get involved with a lot of their ground
procedures. ..we were going to need a place for the crew guys to be
housed when they were out there for pre-launch activities and the Cape
Crusaders that were going to be out there. We would need ofϐice space.
We were working the logistical build up for when the Orbiter got there
and started doing testing, so we’d have all of the infrastructures in
place to make things come together”.
Although Vandenberg had to mimic KSC as far as operations were
concerned, the local geography and airbase layout noticeably affected
those operations, which would occur as a combined effort of three sites
fairly separated from each other. The North VAFB housed a 200 ft by
15,000 ft runway to receive a gliding Orbiter returning from a classiϐied
mission or a Boeing B747 modiϐied to ferry the Space Shuttle across
the country. Astronaut Richard Covey remembers his fellow astronaut
pilots’ skepticism: “we ran tests on making Shuttle approaches to the
runways at Vandenberg, which was sloped, and everybody worried
about whether the slope of the runway would cause problems in ϐlying
the big glider down, because it was a one-and-a-half degree slope,
which is not severe, but the ϐinal approach of the Shuttle is only a two-
and-a-half degree glide path, so one and a half degrees, relative to that
two and a half degrees, can make a big difference...so we were trying to
ϐigure out if that was a problem. We ran a test out there. That was fun,
and took the Shuttle Training Aircraft out and ϐlew it around the
runways”. At wheel stop, post-landing ground equipment would be
positioned around the vehicle to prepare for towing to the nearby
Orbiter Maintenance Checkout Facility (OMCF). There it would be

processed for the next mission. Ancillary facilities such as the
Hypergolic Maintenance and Checkout Facility (HMCF) and Flight Crew
System Facility (FCSF) completed the North VAFB site. Once declared
ready for another ϐlight, the Orbiter would be transported to the SLC-6
launch pad at the South VAFB site.
At KSC, the Space Shuttle was moved from the Vehicle Assembly
Building (VAB) to one of the two launch pads ϐive miles away through a
behemoth crawler. At Vandenberg, the local geography demanded a
meandering itinerary to bring the Orbiter from the North to the South
site. As astronaut Richard Covey remembers: “the whole operations
was going to be really weird out there. Getting from the runway to the
launch pad, you know, it was up and down hills and through the valleys,
because of the way California is built. They had made special
provisions for being able to tow the Orbiter along roads and stuff to get
it from the runway down to the launch pad. It was very interesting”.
After all, Vandenberg had not been built with the Space Shuttle in mind,
and the 16-mile journey through public and airbase roads
demonstrated that (Fig. 10.1).

Figure 10.1 Space Shuttle Enterprise transported to the South VAFB site. The difϐiculty of
moving the Orbiter through the existing roads is discernible.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-KSC-85PC-176]
Operations at the South VAFB site would begin with rail delivery of
the solid rocket motor segments from the manufacturing plant in Utah.
Then, a modiϐied harbor two miles from the South VAFB would receive
the External Tank shipped by barge via Panama Canal from the
manufacturing facility in Louisiana. Finally, boosters and the External
Tank would undergo ϐinal preparation in their dedicated storage and
checkout facility before moving to SLC-6. The former MOL mobile
service tower was adapted to the Space Shuttle by reducing its height
by some 40 feet and moving it some 150 feet further away from its
previous location. In addition, the 40-ton crane was replaced with a
200-ton hoist with which the supersized and heavy components of the
Space Transportation System could be handled.

It is no secret that the Space Shuttle was signiϐicantly susceptible to
weather conditions, and at Vandenberg, the situation would have been
even worse than in Florida. In fact, in the wintertime, winds in the area
funnelled by the surrounding hills can easily create gusts up to 47 mph,
which would have easily endangered the ϐine mosaic of thousands of
tiles plastering the external surface of the Orbiter. A large vertical
shelter called the Shuttle Assembly Building, or the Windscreen, was
added to assure all-year-round operations. It would be used to
assemble and protect the Space Shuttle stack from the external
environment while waiting for launch. The launch site would look like a
giant clam, with the mobile service tower and the Shuttle Assembly
Building tightly enclosing the Space Shuttle and its components. With a
cost of some $80 million, the Shuttle Assembly Building was the largest
single modiϐication made to the original design of SCL-6. It must be
conceded that it was a smart solution. In fact, on several occasions, the
temperamental Floridian weather inϐlicted severe damage to the
Orbiter and External Tank, which required expensive repairs either at
the launch pad or back to the vehicle assembly building (Fig. 10.2).
A good example is the three-month delay STS-117 incurred in 2007
due to a hail storm that caused some 2000 damage sites on the
External Tank protective foam and some minor damage to Atlantis.
Considering how intolerant the Space Shuttle was to inclement
weather, it would have made sense to build something like SLC-6 rather
than keeping the open air-launch pads leftover from the Apollo
program6. However, the usual deϐiciency in funding forced NASA to
continue using existing hardware even if it resulted in a heavy toll on
the operations. At SLC-6, the stack would be built directly on the launch
pad and within the protective enclosure of the Windscreen and mobile
service tower. This arrangement would provide a much-needed
weather shelter and offer a barrier to peering eyes as classiϐied
missions were being processed. Assembly would take place in the usual
manner, with the solid rocket boosters put together ϐirst, followed by
the External Tank ϐirmly installed between the two towering boosters.
Then the stack would be completed by connecting the Orbiter to the
External Tank. In the meantime, the payload would be handed over to
the adjacent payload preparation room for ϐinal checking out and then
transferred by crane to the payload changeout room. This was another

mobile structure that would have rolled inside the Shuttle Assembly
Building for payload installation into the Orbiter.
The countdown would follow, preceded by a rollback of the mobile
service tower and Shuttle assembly building to their “parked for
launch” positions, respectively, 375 and 285 feet from the Shuttle stack.
Hydraulic jacks would raise the building on and off their tie-downs, and
the travelling drive system would move each building at speeds up to
40 feet per minute. It would have taken some forty to ϐifty minutes,
including unlocking the tie-downs, travelling and relocking.
Figure 10.2 An aerial view of the South VABF site with indications of the main infrastructures.
Orbiter Enterprise was used to test handling procedures in preparation for the ϐirst Space Shuttle
mission out of Vandenberg.
[Source: https:// images. nasa. gov/ details-KSC-85PC-178]

Undoubtedly, SLC-6 was the right type of launchpad for the Space
Shuttle. Elaborate but effective in guaranteeing protection from the
external environment up to a few hours prior to launch. It came,
however, with a high price tag. From an estimated cost of $251.8
million in 1978, it doubled by May 1986, chieϐly due to unforeseen
setbacks. For instance, after Columbia’s maiden ϐlight, it turned out that
more water than expected had to be used for sound suppression
purposes at liftoff. At SLC-6, this translated into a $45 million facility to
treat and safely dispose of some 4000 tons of water contaminated by
the solid rocket booster exhausts. There was also a blast protection
issue for the adjacent launch control center. At KSC, each time the
External Tank ϐilling procedure started, all but essential staff had to be
evacuated within ϐive miles of the launch pad due to the hazard posed
by a tank full of highly reactive hydrogen and oxygen. Also, sound levels
and vibrations during a Space Shuttle launch were deemed so intense
that being closer than two miles from the pad would elicit an expedited
death by being ripped off and shredded in pieces by sound and
vibrations. As the launch control center at SLC-6 would be just 1200
feet from the launch pad complex, it had to receive adequate
reinforcement.
Another concern was ice building up on the launch pad
infrastructure caused by low temperatures in a highly humid
environment. At Vandenberg, the local weather further exacerbated the
problem, resulting in a $12.8 million anti-ice system of two jet engines
blasting hot air on the infrastructure. It was, however, doubtful that
such a system could work. By the mid-80s, SLC-6 not only had to take
care of cost overruns for new facilities and improvements needed to
make it fully Space Shuttle-worthy, but it also had to ϐind its raison
d’etre.
When the DoD was fully supportive of the Space Shuttle program,
Vandenberg was meant to host some twenty launches annually. It
would also have facilities for two launch pads, and two Orbiters would
be exclusively dedicated to military ϐlights. By 1981, the projections
had halved, with ten ϐlights a year and only one launchpad. Four years
later, support faded away even more, with just two annual launches
starting in 1988. However, there was still hope that the ϐlight rate

would ramp up to four, maybe ϐive, annual ϐlights after a few years of
operations and conϐidence in the Shuttle program had grown.
Designated STS-62A, the ϐirst ϐlight out of Vandenberg would occur
in March 1986, after an initially planned launch date in October 1985
was postponed to January 1986. On February 15, 1985, a NASA press
news reported that “Veteran Space Shuttle commander Robert L.
Crippen will head the crew of mission 62-A...Other crew members
named include pilot Guy S. Gardner and mission specialists Dale A.
Gardner, Jerry L. Ross and R. Michael Mullane”. In addition to the
professional astronauts, two payload specialists would join the crew.
As Jerry Ross remembers, “John Brett Watterson was going to be one of
the payload specialists, and the other one would have been Randy T.
Odle, another Air Force ofϐicer, but Rand had been bumped by Edward
Cleveland “Pete” Aldrige, who was undersecretary of the Air Force, so
that would have been some pretty high-power folks ϐlying with us on
that ϐlight”.
Less than a year later, the Challenger tragedy put on hold for the
foreseeable future any plan of human-crewed ϐlights out of SLC-6. By
mid-1986, a report to the Senate highlighted how SLC-6 was not yet
ready to accommodate Space Shuttle launches. One remaining
unsolved issue related to getting rid of trapped liquid hydrogen
underneath the launch pad basement. At least $8 million were deemed
for implementing a working solution, and it was estimated that ϐlights
could not take place earlier than late July 1989. In the following months
and years, the need for SCL-6 came under more scrutiny as the ϐirst
operational ϐlight was being postponed further to the right. Eventually,
the Air Force decided to mothball the whole site despite the enormous
investment made up to then. As a result, Vandenberg once again
missed the opportunity to launch a crewed spacecraft.
How would STS-62A have looked like had it not been cancelled? For
Ross “it would have been a fascinating ride. We were going to go into a
seventy-two and-a-half-degree inclination orbit...apogee was going to
be something like 380 nautical miles with a perigee around 240 or
so...it would have been a dual shift....we had two main payloads. One
was called Teal Ruby, and it was a prototype satellite…a staring mosaic
infrared sensor satellite that was trying to be able to detect low-ϐlying
air-breathing vehicles, things like cruise missiles, and a way to try to

detect those approaching US territories. The other satellite...had a
series of different types of ultraviolet and infrared telescopes on it and
basically was trying to get background information about the
environment of space so that they could use it for information and
designing interceptor missiles, seekers and things like that in the
future”. From an astronaut’s point of view STS-62A would have been a
truly unique experience, as Mullane explains: “The idea of ϐlying in
polar orbit, oh, man, I was just looking forward to that so much. You’re
basically going to see the whole word. In a low inclination orbit you
don’t get to see lot of the world. So I was really looking forward to that”.
The understandable disappointment in seeing such a mission being
cancelled forever had, however, a bright side that could not be
underestimated. While a few centuries ago, people could be burned to
death for even thinking about it, it is nowadays a matter of fact that the
Earth rotates around its axis. If we multiply the angular velocity,
roughly 15 degrees per hour, by the planet radius7, we obtain that an
object on the surface at the Equator has a tangential velocity of over
1000 miles per hour! This is good news to a rocket engineer since a
rocket lifting off at the Equator will leave the launch pad with already
1000 miles of horizontal velocity in the direction of Earth’s rotation.
The practical result is that rocket performances are improved by
reducing fuel or increasing payload or orbit altitude. However, the
higher the latitude, the lesser the effect of Earth rotation due to the
ever-decreasing radius. The poles are extreme, with no contribution at
all given the nil radius. Therefore, the poles would be the preferred
launching site for polar missions since there a rocket will not receive
any push toward the East during its ascent. The impracticality of
placing a launch pad at the poles demands that a rocket has to nullify
the push toward East received by the Earth’s rotation for polar
missions. Otherwise, it will never be able to enter a polar orbit. In other
words, this means that more fuel has to be carried out or that less
payload can be brought into orbit. This is why the farther away from
the Equator a launching site is, the better it is for polar missions. At 51-
degree of latitude North, Vandenberg was best suited for polar
missions than KSC since the eastward push would be greatly
minimized.

To recover some capability and allow the Space Shuttle to carry into
a polar orbit at least 32,000 pounds, as required by the DoD, it was
decided to act on the solid rocket boosters. They were the only
components that could be completely redesigned and made lighter.
Before Columbia’s maiden ϐlight, from February through October 1981,
preliminary studies were conducted to ascertain if it would be feasible
to build the boosters out of the same composite materials (carbon
ϐibers impregnated with epoxy resin) the large payload bay doors were
made of. Those feasibility studies showed that it was indeed possible
and that the industry had the capability of doing so. The Filament
Wound Case (FWC) booster was born. At the same time, it was also
stressed the importance of building up a database of accurate
mechanical properties for composite materials. While the behavior of
carbon ϐiber/epoxy composite material was already well known, for
the FWC boosters, their mechanical properties had to be explored in
even more depth. This time composite material would be employed on
a primary structure8. Nowadays, aircraft such as the Boeing B787 and
Airbus A350 have their primary structure made almost entirely of
composites. In the early 80s, there was no aeronautical application that
made such an extensive use of composite material on an aircraft’s
primary structure, let alone on a spaceplane. FWC boosters were set to
become the ϐirst of such aerospace applications. Given the enormous
stress that the high pressure burning propellant would induce on the
booster’s structure, it was necessary to know these materials to design
a motor case capable of the same structural strength as the steel motor
case of a conventional solid rocket booster. Hence the need for a test
campaign to predict the mechanical properties of composite materials
more accurately and inform how booster cases could be designed. The
beauty of composite materials is that they can be shaped according to
the stress they need to withstand at each speciϐic point of the
structure. This is achieved by adding layer upon layer of carbon ϐibers
and changing their orientation and number. Said in other words, a
piece of structure made of composite material can be highly
customized to account for particular stress distribution. While it is true
that structures made of metallic material are designed based on stress,
composite materials allow for greater and more accurate tailoring with
considerable weight saving.

An FWC booster would have had the composite shell manufactured
with carbon ϐibers wetted with epoxy and wound in layers on an
aluminum mandrel. Each layer thickness and ϐiber direction would be
carefully selected to satisfy membrane stiffness9 and joint integrity.
Each segment end would be joined to steel rings by a pinned tang and
clevis arrangement. The four ϐilament wound cylindrical segments
making up one booster would then be ϐield-spliced by steel-to-steel
joints that are substantially identical to those on the standard solid
rocket booster. The design of the new boosters maintained the same
interface with the Orbiter, the External Tank and launch facilities. At
least a pair of FWC boosters were built and readied for STS-62A. The
Challenger tragedy quickly ended the program, with great relief for the
astronauts. Ross remembers: “They had the same joint design as the
steel cases and since the graphite ones would have been more ϐlimsy,
more ϐlexible, we always were wondering what would have happened
to us had we tried to launch with those, considering the Challenger
accident and the gas seeping past at the seals in those joints”.
Astronaut Richard Covey backs up Ross’s fears: “These were scary
boosters, because they had a lot more ϐlex in them. So none of us were
really sorry to see that go away after the Challenger accident, and the
DoD missions went away and we decided we weren’t going to launch
out of California with the Space Shuttle”.
The STS-62A’s crew had lost their mission, but not the chance of
ϐlying a classiϐied mission. By the time Discovery and STS-26 returned
the Space Shuttle program to operational service, the DoD had clariϐied
that Space Shuttle services were no longer required. Every military
payload would be now delivered by expendable launch vehicles such as
the Titan family rockets. Only a handful of satellites, vital to national
security but too large and heavy to be accommodated on existing
expendable rockets, would be hauled into orbit with the Space Shuttle.
The former STS-62A crew was allocated to STS-27, except Robert L.
Crippen and Dale A. Gardner, replaced by Robert “Hoot” Gibson and
William M. Shepherd. In the early afternoon of December 8, 1988, the
STS-27 crew and Atlantis began the long-awaited secret voyage into
space. Even today, little is known about this mission. It is known that
mission specialist Richard Mullane used the robotic arm to deploy a
huge Lacrosse I satellite. This was a side-looking radar, all-weather

surveillance satellite for the National Reconnaissance Ofϐice and CIA. It
appears that due to an unknown malfunction, Gibson brought Atlantis
back to the satellite for a rescue attempt. Details, however, are not
available. According to some sources, they might have carried out a
spacewalk, maybe to release some jammed appendage.
The “Big Bird”
As early as May 1963, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the
National Reconnaissance Ofϐice (NRO) began talks about a prospective
successor to the highly successful GAMBIT and CORONA spy satellite
programs. Intense debates and “turf” wars between the two agencies
led eventually to the establishment of the Hexagon program. In October
1966, the CIA awarded Perkin-Elmer (PE) the contract for the camera
system’s design, development, and fabrication. In July 1967, the NRO
assigned to the Lockheed Missile & Space Company (LMSC) the design
of the new spy bird.
For measurement purposes, such as resolving the size of a target on
the ground, the imagery captured by a spy satellite must rely on the
precise moment the picture was snapped. In the CORONA system, this
was accomplished by employing a stellar-index camera, which took
pictures of both the starϐield and the ground, thus allowing analysts to
determine vehicle altitude and position accurately. In addition, this
made it possible to prepare maps from CORONA imagery. Given the
leap in reconnaissance-gathering afforded with the CORONA imagery, it
was only predictable that the intelligence agency would expect the
same capability from the Hexagon spacecraft. Hence, in July 1968, Itek
became the prime contractor for the mapping camera module and
stellar index. In the same year, General Electric (GE) was assigned to
develop the Return Vehicles (RV) for the exposed ϐilms. As was already
the case for the CORONA and GAMBIT satellites, the imagery was
recorded on ϐilm spools. The exposed ϐilm was then stored in a capsule
ejected off the spacecraft, and upon atmospheric re-entry, it was
captured mid-air. Hexagon would be the last spy satellite to operate on
ϐilm. Its successor, the KH-11 Kennen satellite, ϐirst launched in 1976,
already used a digital camera. With it, images could be directly
downloaded to a receiving station, considerably shortening the

intelligent agency’s time between image acquisition in space and
retrieval (Fig. 10.3).
Figure 10.3 The main elements of the Hexagon spacecraft.
[Source: Hexagon American’s Eyes in Space (pdf), p. 2. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ 
Portals/ 65/ documents/ history/ csnr/ gambhex/ Docs/ Hex_ fact_ sheet. pdf]
With an approximate length of nearly 56 ft and diameter of 10 ft,
the Hexagon spacecraft vehicle (SV) consisted of three major structural
sections: an Aft or Satellite Control Section (SCS) housing the SV
control and support provisions; a Mid-Section accomodating the stereo
reconnaissance cameras, their ϐilms supply, and support equipment;
and the Forward Section that supported four Return Vehicles (RV). To
grasp the sheer size of the Hexagon spacecraft, consider that the
spacecraft weighed ϐive times more than the CORONA payload, some
22,500 lb compared to 4,280 lb. Understandably, it gained the moniker
of “Big Bird”. The satellite was designed to ϐit comfortably within the
payload fairing of a Titan III-D booster.
The Hexagon sensor subsystem developed by PerkinElmer
consisted of a two-camera assembly, the ϐilm supply, and four take-ups.
Located in the Mid-Section, the camera assembly contained a pair of

panoramic cameras mounted in a frame: Camera A installed on the port
side, looked forward; Camera B installed on the starboard side, looked
aft. This system, which contained both reϐlection and refracting optical
elements, was mounted on an optical bar. Perkin-Elmer’s optical bar
involved two one-m diameter tubes, each containing a 75-cm (30-in)
optically ϐlat mirror. This was mounted at a 45-degree angle to reϐlect
the ground images through a corrector plate into a 91-cm (36-in)
concave main mirror at one end of the tube. Images collected in the
main mirror were then focused through a hole in the ϐlat mirror and
into a compound lens behind the ϐlat mirror. The compound lens then
projected the images onto the ϐilm platen at the opposite end of the
optical tube. As the satellite moved through space, each optical bar
tube rotated about its longitudinal axis in opposite directions. This
provided a panoramic image, up to 120-in wide. Each optical bar was
longer than the payload section of CORONA. To test the tubes, Perkin-
Elmer built an entirely new facility at Danbury, Connecticut (Figs. 10.4
and 10.5).
Figure 10.4 A see-through view of the Hexagon satellite.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf), p.
20. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 

All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
The four large return vehicles provided the take-up capability of the
camera system, with each capsule capable of returning up to 450 lb of
exposed ϐilm. Initially, the ϐilm was routed through each return vehicle
and taken up on the forwardmost available one. Once a return vehicle
was ϐilled, the ϐilm was cut at the entrance, and the capsule was sealed.
The next available return vehicle would then start ϐilling with ϐilm.
Upon reaching the scheduled retrieval, the satellite would be placed
into an optimum pitch orientation for a return vehicle clean separation
and injection into the re-entry trajectory. The re-entry sequence
consisted of spin-up, retro rocket burn, de-spin, propulsion assembly
ejection, ballistic re-entry into the atmosphere, parachute deployment,
and heat shield separation at the design altitude. The RV ϐlight was
normally completed by aerial recovery of the payload capsule,
suspended on the main parachute. Water recovery capability and a
delayed sink capability were also provided. After recovery, the takeup
assemblies were returned to Perkin-Elmer for refurbishment and
reϐlight (Fig. 10.6).
Figure 10.5 The camera elements of the Hexagon spacecraft.
[Source: Hexagon American’s Eyes in Space (pdf), p. 2. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ 
Portals/ 65/ documents/ history/ csnr/ gambhex/ Docs/ Hex_ fact_ sheet. pdf]

Figure 10.6 Sequence of Hexagon return vehicle retrieval.
[Source:https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ images/ gambhex/ Gambit_ and_ Hexagon_ 
Postcards/ 300_ dpi/ 2. jpg]
Solar arrays on the aft section delivered power to the spacecraft,
including a set of rechargeable batteries that would take over during
orbital night times. An Earth-oriented attitude was provided by the
Attitude Control System (ACS) with the help of the Reaction Control
System (RCS). The Orbit Adjust System (OAS) provided adjustments
such as corrections of orbit injection errors, drag compensation, and
deorbit. Both systems used catalytic decomposition of monopropellant
hydrazine to generate thrust. The systems were pressure-fed with the
pressurizing gas enclosed with the hydrazine’s propellant tank.
Launched for the ϐirst time on June 15, 1971, the Hexagon program
lasted until April 18, 1986, when the twentieth spacecraft was lost,
some nine seconds after liftoff, due to a catastrophic failure of the Titan
III-D booster. Nevertheless, during its 13 year-life, Hexagon proved to
be an invaluable intelligence collection tool. Hexagon met 70 to 80 per
cent of all the US Intelligence Community’s surveillance requirements.

It played a key role in monitoring Soviet research and development,
production, and deployment of strategic offensive and defensive
weapons systems. Hexagon’s broad area coverage capability bestowed
US ofϐicials with high conϐidence that the United States could detect
any new Soviet installations or activities early in the construction
phase. The ability of Hexagon to furnish high-quality imagery of
military installations also allowed US intelligence analysts to develop
and maintain very accurate, order-of-battle information on Soviet and
Chinese forces. Entire Soviet military districts, for example, could, at
times, be imaged on a single mission. Hexagon was also tasked to
provide coverage of Soviet and Chinese nuclear test sites, often
providing complete coverage of these test sites in a single image. This
allowed US ofϐicials to monitor test preparations closely and assemble
data on the tests themselves. Hexagon also played a key contributing
role in US economic forecasts and projections regarding the Soviet
economy. For instance, Hexagon provided economic intelligence on
Soviet heavy metal production, oil and natural gas exploitation, nuclear
production, and conventional electrical power capacity. It also
photographed grain-growing regions allowing accurate US predictions
on Soviet grain production. In addition to its coverage of the Soviet
Union and China, Hexagon produced more detailed knowledge of third
world development than any system before. Moreover, the Defense
Mapping Agency and other government agencies that produced maps
and charts were almost solely dependent on Hexagon for mapping
source materials.
The STS-Hexagon Study
The Space Shuttle development was signiϐicantly inϐluenced by the US
Air Force’s requirement to launch secretive satellites and missions
from the Vandenberg Air Force base. One such payload it was
requested to accommodate was a Big Bird-type satellite. Therefore, it
was ϐitting that in the Summer of 1973, the NRO commissioned the
LMSC and PE a feasibility study to establish operational, design
concepts, and associated system costs for a future Space Shuttle
compatible Hexagon Satellite Vehicle (SV). As a general criterion,
commencing from 1982, two annual missions were considered, each

lasting a minimum of 120 days. Launch and re-entry of the SV/Shuttle
pair would occur at Vandenberg. The exposed ϐilm was still to be
recovered conventionally with return vehicles, except that the Space
Shuttle crew could retrieve the last take during a resupply or servicing
mission.
Three operational concepts were appraised individually and in
combination: resupply for on-orbit replacement of expendables;
maintenance for on-orbit replacement of failed or life-limited items;
and refurbishment with a return to Earth and restoration to ϐlight
conditions. In addition, six Hexagon SV baseline conϐigurations were
developed for use in trade-off studies to decide the optimum operation
mode (Fig. 10.7).
The primary consideration for resupply and maintenance of
Hexagon-type vehicles was the weight of expendables (propellant,
pneumatics, ϐilm, and RVs) to be resupplied. It was felt that replacing
worn-out or failed equipment was less complex than resupplying
expendables, such as propellants. Therefore, the latter option was not
contemplated in this portion of the study. Instead, SV conϐigurations
were developed by considering the balance which must be maintained
between expendables. As the number of return vehicles and associated
quantity of ϐilm was increased, the available propellant for orbit
maintenance decreased to prevent exceeding the Orbiter’s 35,000 lb
lifting capability. Given the payload bay size, 15-foot diameter and 60-ft
length, spacecraft conϐigurations with 4, 6 and 8 return vehicles were
developed.
None of the conϐigurations considered RVs’ resupply, or
replacement, while on orbit. P-E ruled out this approach. The re-
establishment of a ϐilm path after individual RV replacement would
have entailed the introduction of numerous cut and splice devices,
each of which represented a single point of failure. The ϐilm path would
be interrupted by replacing an entire section, which included the ϐilm
supply, at only two points: into and out of the camera system.
In studying resupply and maintenance concepts, LMSC adopted a
parametric approach and assumed that resupply/maintenance
activities would call for handling space replacement units (SRU) at
module, subsection, and section levels.

Three operational modes for unit replacements were scrutinized:
formation ϐlying, soft dock, and hard dock. In the formation ϐlying
mode, the Orbiter and Hexagon would maintain constant separation
and relative attitude with no mechanical coupling. However,
maintaining a spatial relationship would have proven challenging at
just 100 nm of altitude. At such a low altitude, typical for
reconnaissance satellites, the atmospheric drag would have rapidly
separated the two vehicles and induced unwanted changes in
reciprocal orientation. Furthermore, the frequent ϐiring of the reaction
control system on both spacecraft would have led to the rapid
depletion of onboard consumables, in addition to the hazard of
operating each other’s reaction control systems in proximity to one
another. As proven by service experience10, the plume of even a nimble
reaction control thruster can induce perceptible oscillations and
structural loads when pointed towards a fellow spacecraft.

Figure 10.7 Prospective Hexagon conϐigurations compatible with the Space Shuttle.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
61. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
Furthermore, the ϐiring of the Orbiter’s reaction control system
thrusters could have easily obstructed and damaged the sensitive and
sophisticated optics of the Hexagon spacecraft. Flying at higher
altitudes could have helped attenuate this problem, but it would have
invited a penalty on payload weight because of the extra propellant
needed by the Orbiter to achieve a higher orbit. Another area of
concern related to how Hexagon would have dynamically responded
upon removing or replacing an SRU. A potential hazard existed that the
spacecraft could destabilize and impact the Orbiter. Moreover, a
requirement existed that removing one SRU would not cause the
spacecraft to become unstable or disabled. Hence, Hexagon would
require an extra layer of redundancy to ensure that no matter what
SRU has been removed, the spacecraft reaction control system would
remain functional. This also entailed that the Space Shuttle crew could
monitor the spacecraft and, if necessary, take manual control.
Therefore, LMSC discarded the Formation Flying mode of operation

based on feasibility and technical risk in combination with Space
Shuttle and crew safety.
In the soft dock mode, the Orbiter and Hexagon would be coupled
by at least one robotic arm. Reaction control systems on the Hexagon
and Space Shuttle would be inhibited to avoid mutual contamination
and attitude destabilization. Given the sizeable cross-section of the
Hexagon, the low-orbit altitude drag would still induce a differential
drag between the satellite and Orbiter, forcibly altering the two
spacecraft’s reciprocal position and attitude. Therefore, the crew
would require loading the robotic arm control computer with a
predetermined sequence of joint motion to compensate for drag
variance and robotic arm dynamics and keep Hexagon in a ϐixed
position relative to the open payload bay. The design of the Hexagon
would also require the addition of several grapple ϐixtures for the
Orbiter’s robotic arm to ensure complete access to the entire periphery
of the spacecraft. Only the spacecraft side common to the grapple
ϐixture captured by the robotic arm would be accessible for SRU
replacement by spacewalking astronauts. In other words, if the robotic
arm were attached to the bottom side, only SRU on the side would be in
easy reach. To get to the top of the spacecraft, the crew would have to
disengage the robotic arm and allow Hexagon to change its attitude
until presenting the top side. Then they would re-capture the satellite
and continue with the mission objectives. The above analysis and
evaluation lead to a rapid rejection of the soft dock mode.
In the hard dock mode, the SV is assumed to be rigidly attached to
the Space Shuttle via a docking collar. The relative motion due to
differential drag and robotic dynamics is eliminated, and
contamination problems are removed because both spacecraft’s
reaction control systems are powered down after docking. LMSC
selected this concept as the operational mode for resupply and
maintenance. Subsequently, Hard Dock/EVA cases were developed and
documented by design sketches. The best EVA cases were evaluated
against alternative methods that would employ robotic arm operations
in conjunction with special equipment. Except in replacing modules
weighing less than 100 lb, the EVA mode proved consistently inferior.
Of the possible EVA functions evaluated, the most plausible was
deemed enhancing the RMS/special equipment method in an active

role as on-site monitoring and immediate availability for
troubleshooting. Therefore, the EVA method was eliminated from
further consideration, and the RMS/Special Equipment method was
pursued.
Several handling and transfer concepts appeared viable. For
instance, a rotisserie-style rotating storage unit laid in the payload bay
could house the new SRUs and empty slots to store the removed
components. In such a scenario, the satellite rotates on a docking ring
to grant the robotic arm’s operator access to any areas requiring an
SRU replacement. At the same time, the storage unit rotates to bring
into easy reach of the robotic arm the new SRU or the slot where to
store the removed unit from the spacecraft (Fig. 10.8). In the so-called
reverse transfer concept, the storage unit and the spacecraft are
brought into a parallel orientation, either by swinging the SRU storage
unit out of the payload bay or swinging the spacecraft down to the
storage unit in the payload bay. The transfer of SRUs would occur with
a telescopic mechanism running the full length of the spacecraft and
with a pivoting mechanism at the free end to pick up the SRUs on the
satellite and storage unit. Both satellite and storage unit rotate on their
long axis to allow access to any area requiring component replacement
and storage bay (Fig. 10.9).

Figure 10.8 Hard Dock mode handling and transfer concept: rotisserie-style.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
76. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
The swing arm concept traded space optimization in the storage
unit with operational complexity. This concept proposed a rotating
storage unit in the payload bay and a sturdy mechanism swinging
between the spacecraft and the storage apparatus. The transfer head
on the mechanism reverses and moves up and down to access the
storage unit and the appropriate location on the spacecraft. In this
concept, the transfer head can (1) remove the old SRU; (2) reverse
while still holding that SRU; (3) travel to the storage location and pick
up the new SRU; (4) reverse while holding both SRUs; (5) place the old

SRU in the same storage location as that just vacated by the new SRU;
and (6) then travel to the SV location and install the new SRU. The
advantage of this concept was that a spare set of storage locations
would not be required, leading to savings on weight and storage unit
construction (Fig. 10.10).
Figure 10.9 Hard Dock mode handling and transfer: reverse transfer concept.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
76. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
The direct transfer concept eliminated the intermediate transfer
mechanism of the reverse and swinging arm concepts. Instead, the
spacecraft and storage unit face each other, either perpendicular or
parallel to the payload bay. The SRUs are stored in the storage unit on a
transfer mechanism that extends from the storage unit to install the
SRU into the spacecraft vehicle. The satellite and storage unit rotate
along their longitudinal axis so the SRU storage bay and component
requiring replacement on the spacecraft can face each other. In this
concept, a full set of open bays in the storage unit is required for each
size SRU (Fig. 10.11).

Figure 10.10 Hard Dock mode handling and transfer: swing arm concept.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
76. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]

Figure 10.11 Hard Dock mode handling and transfer: direct transfer concept.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
76. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
Eventually, mixing the best features yielded by the four hard dock
transfer modes previously discussed were suggested. The Hexagon
satellite would be hard docked perpendicularly to the payload bay and
then rotated down parallel to it. A drum-like rotating storage unit is
located at the forward end of the payload bay, allowing for merging the
rotisserie-style and direct transfer concepts. The drum and satellites
rotate until the component requiring replacement and the replacement
unit face each other. Then a direct transfer mechanism at each location
on the unit extends to remove the old SRU, stores it in a spare location
in the storage unit and installs the new unit. The forward section
containing the recovery vehicles is replaced as a complete block. The
new segment is carried in the lower half of a storage assembly located
towards the aft end of the Orbiter’s payload bay. The upper half of the
assembly is open to receive the old section when it is detached from
the spacecraft. With this concept, the storage assembly extends from
the payload bay to engage and support the old section. Once held

securely, the connections to the rest of the spacecraft are withdrawn,
and the storage unit rotates to separate them and bring the new
forward section into position. The connections are extended to secure
the new recovery section when the new section is in position. The old
section is, at this time, in the lower half of the storage assembly, which
is then withdrawn back into the payload bay. This concept allows the
replacement of recovery sections containing failed return vehicles or
the last return vehicle ϐilled with ϐilm. In this latter case, the return
vehicle would hitch a ride home in the Orbiter’s payload bay, dodging
the expense, and risk, of an aerial recovery. Finally, the concept would
prove suitable for propellant resupply activities. In this case, a probe
would be extended into the spacecraft to enable the transfer of
propellants and gases (Fig. 10.12).
The ϐirst part of the report concluded that both resupply and non-
resupply missions were technically feasible. Therefore, the cost was
chosen as the signiϐicant variable trade-off parameter to discriminate.
The cost of a resupply conϐiguration was higher than a comparative
non-resupply conϐiguration due to the development of a resupply kit
and a spacecraft capable of being resupplied. The program’s
development phase would have called for substantial annual
expenditures, although analysis showed that the recurring expenses of
resupply and non-resupply conϐiguration were comparable.
It was considered if savings could be achieved by sharing the
resupply missions with other programs. However, it was soon realized
that no signiϐicant economic beneϐits could be realized as resupply
missions would ϐill the payload bay almost to the brim, leaving little
volume or mass available for additional payloads or mission objectives
to be performed post resupply.
Next, the impact of the resupply kit refurbishment cost was
investigated. The analysis showed that even if the cost to refurbish the
resupply kit were zero, the conϐiguration would still not become
economically feasible. In addition, a delta cost of zero or less would not
eliminate the high one-time costs for the development of a resupply
capability. A review of the cost estimates clearly showed that the
resupply conϐigurations were not cost-effective; therefore, a non-
resupply conϐiguration was selected for further detailed study,

revealing that longer life conϐigurations would have lower recurring
costs.
Figure 10.12 The main features of the selected resupply and maintenance concept.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
23. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
Based on the above considerations, the report proposed substantial
changes to the existing Hexagon spacecraft to create reusable spy
satellites that could be brought back to Earth for maintenance and then
re-launched while not endangering the safety of the Space Shuttle and
crew. For instance, all tanks were to withstand the return
environment/loads while fully loaded in a launch abort condition.
Furthermore, in such a scenario, the satellite would have to get rid of
its propellant load through the Orbiter’s dump system and
depressurize any tanks before landing.
The Hexagon designed speciϐically for the Space Shuttle, would
have an overall length of 56 feet and carry six return vehicles, each
housing its ϐilm load, allowing for the individual re-entry and recovery
of exposed ϐilm. This capability was retained for the STS-compatible

conϐiguration to allow ϐilm recovery at the desired time, regardless of
an Orbiter’s availability or if the satellite could not be retrieved.
The primary considerations for the structural design were
compatibility with the structural attachments within the Orbiter’s
payload bay and loads exchanged with the Orbiter. In addition,
provisions for good access to equipment during the refurbishment
operations were imposed.
Experience with the existing Hexagon program indicated that many
test failures occurred following activities where signiϐicant personnel
work and hardware removal/replacements were being performed on
the vehicle. Therefore, to reduce these test problems and bestow the
greatest conϐidence in the ϐlight readiness of a refurbished satellite, the
following requirements were stipulated: minimize the disassembly of
the vehicle, minimize hardware removals, and ensure the best possible
access for work required on the vehicle. In addition, a system-level
environmental retest of a refurbished vehicle was to be reduced by
holding vehicle disassembly to a minimum. In this way, hardware
environmental exposure and operating time during ground testing
would be reduced, which is the prime consideration for a long-life
vehicle and cost reductions.
As a consequence, signiϐicant design features were incorporated.
For instance, to improve ground personnel access, the satellite
structure was modiϐied to a truss design and the components of the
satellite’s aft section were placed in external locations. For easy
removal/installation of components, all camera system components,
except the ϐilm path pneumatics and supply unit, were modularized
onto a removable platform, thus providing a simple interface for
camera system removal and reinstallation during the refurbishment
operations. The camera system optics were increased in size to
provide the required ground resolution of 2.27 ft at altitudes of 120
nm. Finally, the propulsion system was redesigned to permit ϐlushing,
purging, and thruster replacement at the systems level of assembly.
The lightweight and low-cost open truss of the satellite’s forward
structure supporting the return vehicles would afford access to the ϐilm
path and supporting mechanisms and pyrotechnics for inspection and
refurbishment. In addition, the structure included two large box beams
in the central region to hold the camera system and give the torsional

strength and stiffness required to react to the mounting loads
exchanged with the Orbiter’s payload bay. For the satellite’s aft section,
a box-like structure was chosen to offer sufϐicient external mounting
space for subsystem components so that refurbishment could be easily
accomplished (Figs. 10.13 and 10.14).
Figure 10.13 A three-view drawing showing the structural conϐiguration of the STS-compatible
Hexagon satellite.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
108. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
It being stowed within the protective cocoon of the Orbiter, the
satellite would be exposed to considerably less severe ascent heat
loading, allowing lightweight external shields for component
protection from the orbital temperature swings. Likewise, the Orbiter’s
payload bay environment would greatly reduce contaminant ϐluxes
impinging on the satellite, virtually eliminating the requirement for
large tolerances in optical properties of external thermal control
coatings.
New mechanisms would require development and qualiϐication
tests, and besides the usual static and dynamic tests, cyclic loading
tests were to be performed to demonstrate the reusability and

predictable repair requirements. A signiϐicant problem was posed by
the solar arrays as the satellite could not be retrieved if they were
extended. The use of a retractable array was therefore chosen. A
pyrotechnic-activated separation system was added if the retracting
mechanism had failed. In this way, such a failure would not have
prevented the retrieval of the satellite.
The orbit adjusts/reaction control system required considerable
modiϐication to meet the safety, life, and refurbishment requirements.
For instance, the tank for the orbit control system was increased in
size, and the orbit adjusts and reaction control systems were
integrated to conserve weight and provide ease of refurbishment. A
repressurization system was added to account for low pressure in the
propellant tanks during ascent and to minimize the tank size versus
that required for a blowdown system. Propellant dump capability was
incorporated to allow propellant dump during ascent aborts and on-
orbit operations with the Orbiter. A redundant orbit adjust engine was
added for increased reliability and redundancy during rendezvous
maneuvers and to eliminate the need to requalify the existing engine.
The propulsion subsystem needed to satisfy requirements such as
orbit adjust and attitude control capability for nine months of on-orbit
life; backup attitude control capability for return vehicle recovery,
spacecraft retrieval, or deboost events; propellant dump capability for
abort and on-orbit retrieval; propellant tank at standby pressure
during ascent; and refurbishment ease (ϐlush/purge/hardware
replacement). Two propulsion systems were reviewed: bipropellant
and monopropellant. The former was considered favourable from a
weight savings standpoint (because of higher speciϐic impulse) but
was dropped as a candidate because of overall disadvantages in terms
of development cost, reliability, refurbishability, operations, and safety.
The monopropellant hydrazine system offered the beneϐits of an
integrated orbit adjust and reaction control system along with the
simplicity of a common propellant tank. Evaluation of blowdown and
external repressurization systems indicated that, although the
blowdown mode offered simplicity and higher reliability due to fewer
components, it required a larger tank impacting vehicle integration
considerations. In contrast, the external repressurization system
provided a minimum tank size and offered the additional safety feature

of a low-pressure capability during ascent. Based on tank size
constraints (for a propellant load of 7100 lb), the external
repressurization system was selected for this design.
Figure 10.14 An holistic overview of the modularity characteristics of a Space Shuttle-
compatible Hexagon.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
134. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
Most satellite pre-launch tests and preparations would be
conducted in a test area at the launch site but independent of that
processing of the Orbiter. After these pre-launch activities, the satellite
is loaded into the Orbiter at the launch pad for ϐinal preparations,
countdown, and launch. Most of the ϐirst orbit would be devoted to
monitoring Hexagon’s health to ensure all systems survived ascent.
The crew would then load the commands for the pre-deployment tests
into the spacecraft’s brain. Pre-deployment tests and telemetry checks
are conducted during the second orbit. Should any problem be
disclosed during the test, the dedicated Hexagon’s control center would
be ready to assist the crew with corrective actions. It also noted that
while Hexagon is still in the payload bay, the crew would always have at

their disposal the possibility of quickly releasing the satellite in the
case they had to perform an emergency re-entry.
If no problems occurred, the crew would ϐinally input the
deployment sequence and move the spacecraft out of the payload bay.
Final health tests can then be conducted prior to release. After release,
the Orbiter is moved a safe distance away from the spacecraft. The
crew would turn spacecraft control over to the ground for orbit
operations at the ϐirst tracking station contact following these
activities. The crew is now ready for retrieval of the expended
Hexagon. The study report envisaged a ϐleet of at least two Hexagon so
that there would always be one satellite in orbit while its sibling was
undergoing refurbishment. In this way, a single Space Shuttle ϐlight
could be tasked with both satellite deployment and retrieval.
Following landing, the expended spacecraft would be placed in a
safe mode for transportation and acceptance into the factory
cleanroom facilities. In particular, as soon as possible after landing, the
ground air conditioning is connected to the Orbiter payload bay to
prevent SV equipment temperatures from exceeding speciϐication
values. After deservicing operations, the Orbiter is towed to the
maintenance and checkout facility for spacecraft removal. Once inside,
the external surfaces of the payload bay doors are cleaned, and a
ϐlexible enclosure is lowered from the clean overhead room and is
attached and sealed around the edges of the payload bay doors. The
environment is then established to the required cleanliness levels, and
the payload bay doors are opened. Next, a horizontal handling crane is
operated to remove the spacecraft from the payload bay.
The satellite is then positioned on a horizontal workstand in the
cleanroom, where the shipping preparations are performed. Shipping
preparations would have included cleaning the satellite’s external
surfaces of orbital contaminants to an acceptable level for entering the
even cleaner factory facilities; removal of any unexpended
pyrotechnics such as those return vehicles retro motor initiators if one
or more capsules had not been recovered; discharging of the secondary
batteries; draining of any residual propellants that had not been
dumped; complete ϐlushing and purging of the propulsion system along
with thrusters removal to prevent contamination of unused redundant
thrusters and facilitate ϐlushing and purging operations. Following

these activities, a protective wrap is installed, and the satellite is
shipped to the factory by aircraft. It was estimated that these post-
landing activities would take some eight days, from landing to
shipment.
Following the ϐlushing and purging of the propellant system at the
landing site and shipment of the spacecraft to the factory, the camera
system, supply unit, and solar arrays are removed for refurbishment.
The camera system is shipped to Perkin-Elmer to replace worn-out or
contaminated mechanical components. Then after testing is returned
to LMSC for installation into the next vehicle to be refurbished. The
supply unit is removed for similar refurbishment operations and
reloading of ϐlight ϐilm. The orbit adjust engines and reaction control
system thrusters are removed and their catalyst beds replaced. The
solar array modules are returned to the module for refurbishment,
consisting of a complete electrical/mechanical functional test,
including deployment and retraction operations. An illumination test is
also performed to verify that solar panel output performance is still
within speciϐication requirements. The modules are then returned to
the vehicle during horizontal shipping preparations.
The batteries are replaced with new or refurbished ones before the
next ϐlight. Thermal blankets are removed for cleaning and repair and
to grant hardware access. Other hardware removals required during
the refurbishment program include hardware that has failed or is
determined to be out of speciϐication during ϐlight or post-ϐlight
systems testing; hardware that has or will exceed its operating or
calendar life by the end of the next ϐlight; and unused pyrotechnics, and
pyrotechnic-operated valves. Hardware that had remained with the
spacecraft after separation of the return vehicles is removed and sent
to the contractor for possible refurbishment. The camera system
articulators are also replaced and refurbished at Perkin-Elmer.
Following these activities, the spacecraft is ready to install new return
vehicles. The ϐilm path is optically aligned, and an
electrical/mechanical functional test of the ϐilm path is then performed
to verify takeup performance, ϐilm tracking, and ϐilm transfer functions
(Fig. 10.15).

Figure 10.15 Spacecraft refurbishment concept.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
192. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
In parallel with the above activity, the orbit adjust engines and
reaction control thrusters are removed and replaced with new or
refurbished units, and the propulsion system is leak checked. The old
units are shipped to the subcontractors and refurbishment, where each
unit is disassembled and rebuilt with a new catalyst, injector, valves
and instrumentation as required. A normal hot-ϐire acceptance test is
performed before shipment back to LMSC. A detailed physical
inspection is performed on the spacecraft hardware, including thermal
surfaces, critical structures, harnesses and components.
After completing the above refurbishment operations, the supply
unit, loaded with test ϐilm, and the camera system are reinstalled, ϐilm
paths mated, and alignments veriϐied. After reinstallation of the
refurbished hardware, a comprehensive electrical/mechanical
functional test is performed to verify the spacecraft vehicle’s functional
integrity, including the camera and ϐilm path components. In the case of
signiϐicant hardware replacement, thermal/vacuum retest would also
be considered. Finally, the spacecraft is shipped to the launch site and
readied for the next ϐlight (Fig. 10.16).

Figure 10.16 The overall timeline of the major activities to turn around a Hexagon spacecraft
from landing to launch.
[Source: Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS (pdf) p.
193. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf]
REFERENCES
NRO (2011a) Hexagon American’s Eyes in Space. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ 
documents/ history/ csnr/ gambhex/ Docs/ Hex_ fact_ sheet. pdf
NRO (2011b) The Hexagon Story. Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ History-and-Studies/ Center-
for-the-Study-of-National-Reconnaissance/ The-GAMBIT-and-HEXAGON-Programs/ 
NRO (1973) Final Report for Design Study For Hexagon Reconnaissance System Using STS.
Available at: https:// www. nro. gov/ Portals/ 65/ documents/ foia/ declass/ FOIA%20 for%20 
All%20 -%20 Releases/ F-2017-00070r. pdf
Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments. Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
According to the laws of spaceϐlight mechanics, the lowest orbital inclination that a rocket can
achieve is equal to the latitude of the launching site. In the case of the Kennedy Space Center, this
means that a payload can be delivery in any orbit ranging from 28.5 degrees (the latitude of the
KSC) and 90 degrees (polar orbit). If necessary, the payload can be subsequently maneuvered into
a lower inclination orbit but at a high fuel cost making it more convenient launching from a site at
a lower latitude. For this reason, the closer to the equator the launching site is, the wider the
selection of orbital inclinations accessible.
 
The terms, coined by rocket tychoon Elon Musk, has now become the technical terms for the
somewhat less elegant “rocket explosion”.
 
This does not meant that launches over solid ground cannot occur. In fact, Russian and Chinese
rockets ϐly over large areas scarcely populated since they do not have a launch facility close to the
ocean.
 
The Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) was a 1960s Air Force program with the ostensible
assignment to orbit military personnel to conduct scientiϐic experiments to determine the
“military usefulness” of humans into space and the techniques and procedures for doing so if the
need ever arose.
 
Flame trenches are always dug underneath a rocket launch pad for an easy discharge out of the
launch pad area of the rocket engines’ exhaust at lift off. In this way the exhausts do not linger on
the launch pad base or bounce back to the ascending rocket which could ϐlood the rocket engines
and lead to an expeditious destruction of the rocket.
 
The Space Shuttle launch pads were composed of a ϐixed and rotating service structure that
closed around the stack while awaiting at the launch pad. However the rotating structure
provided only limited weather shielding, as its main purpose was to allow loading of the payload
into the vertically oriented payload bay.
 
This is the radius measure from the Earth’s rotational axis, not from the planet’s center.
 
The payload bay doors were not primary structure as they only acted as aerodynamic fairing
and were not designed to withstand ϐlight loads exchanged by the surrounding fuselage. The SRB
case was instead the primary structure of the booster itself.
 

9
10
Membrane stiffness is the difϐiculty of bending a laminate of composite material when a
compressive force on the laminate plane is applied at two opposite side. As an experiment, hold
with your two hands a sheet of paper and bring the two opposite sides close. Try the same
experiment with a sheet of cardboard. A greater force is required for bending cardboard than with
the sheet of paper. The membrane stiffness of the paper is substantially inexistent while for the
cardboard is considerably greater. Changing the number of layers, their thickness and orientation,
the membrane stiffness can be radically altered.
 
For instance, as during the ϐirst mission to the Skylab space station where ϐiring of the reaction
control system of the Apollo spacecraft proved sufϐicient to destabilize the massive outpost.
 

(1)
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_11
11. Lost Science and Technology
Missions
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
The Research and Application Module
Space is not the exclusive domain where NASA operates its assets and
conducts research. In fact, throughout the years, the American space
agency has enjoyed several research opportunities well within the
boundaries of the Earth’s atmosphere, onboard aircraft ϐitted as an
airborne laboratory. For instance, in the sixties and seventies, the NASA
Ames Research Center ϐlew a Convair 990 and Lear Jet, respectively, a
jet airliner and a business jet, for astronomical and Earth observations.
Such platforms provided a quick turnaround of experiments, short lead
times, allowed for multidiscipline missions with the direct
involvement of the scientists, afforded a rapid, high-quality data return
and, last but not least, a comfy short-sleeve environment. Ames
managers and scientists argued that such beneϐits could be expanded
and extended to a crew-tended spaceborne platform with the
additional beneϐits of weightlessness, higher altitudes, comprehensive
Earth coverage and limitless vacuum.
Moreover, they argued that the generous cargo bay envisaged for
the emerging Space Shuttle would allow the installation of a one-of-a-
kind laboratory to manifest on sortie missions1. Their argument was
so convincing that from September 1971 to January 1972, a small team
from the Marshall Space Flight Center’s Preliminary Design Ofϐice
explored how such a concept could work in practice. Within ϐive

months, they came up with the idea of a laboratory that would be
installed within the Space Shuttle’s payload bay. The study
recommended that such laboratory, called Sortie Can, be composed of
two sections: a pressurized module twenty-ϐive feet in diameter and
ϐifteen feet in length, and an open-truss section of variable length onto
which install experiments to be directly exposed to the vacuum of
space. Additional features for the pressurized module would include
internal rack mountings for experiments, a workbench, observation
and optical windows, an airlock and boom for the external deployment
of experiments and a pointing system for astronomy instruments. The
adjective “sortie” was to show that the laboratory would be ϐlown for
relatively short periods (up to 30 days at a time) and emphasized the
low cost of its operations. The latter aspect was a high selling point for
the Sortie Can laboratory concept. The excessive costs associated with
space hardware development are mostly related to using high-priced
expendable launchers2 and lack of an on-orbit infrastructure for
servicing and refurbishing space assets when they suffer failure and
operations are prematurely halted or considerably reduced in scope3.
One way of increasing mission success and delaying the onset of
catastrophic malfunctions is to improve spacecraft and payload
reliability through long, big-budget and rigorous ground test
campaigns. The aim is to subject the hardware to the most severe load
conditions (e.g., vibrations, magnetic ϐields, whooping temperature
variations, and so on) that they are likely to encounter during their
orbital life and guarantee that nothing will fail. Also, multiple back-ups
of several spacecraft and payload components are built to provide
alternative units in case of failure during testing. As one would expect,
space hardware is manufactured with high-spec materials whose
development and certiϐication place an additional burden on the
funding allocated to a space mission. Furthermore, costs escalate when
the design does not incorporate any possibility of maintenance and
repair. This approach is called fail-safe design, and for critical
components is often the only approach allowed by safety concerns. For
instance, a car engine’s timing belt is designed for a long life so that a
failure will not occur before the car is sent to a scrapyard. It would be
certainly possible to create a vehicle to be entirely fail-safe so that it
never requires an oil ϐilter change or brake replacement. However, the

development costs and the consequent retail price would quickly shut
down the assembly lines and bankrupt the manufacturer. Nevertheless,
this approach seems to work for space hardware or at least it is
tolerated4. It surely has the advantage of delivering payloads and
spacecraft with the highest probability of success, but along with the
exorbitant costs, another victim is ϐlexibility.
It is standard practice for laboratory equipment and experiments to
be upgraded as investigation results prompt the principal
investigator(s) to seek more data and expand on the research
objectives. Such an approach implements the most up-to-date, cutting-
edge technology into the new instruments for the highest scientiϐic
yield. This is a relatively undemanding process for an Earth-based
laboratory as a given experiment or device can be redesigned, rebuilt,
and put to work. However, for a space-based laboratory, such as a
telescope or Earth-sensing satellite, the intermediate step of thorough
testing and fail-safe design approach entail a long waiting time before
any new or upgraded experiment can be ϐlown. Besides, given the lack
of on-orbit serviceability, any new or enhanced investigation will also
need a brand new spacecraft as a platform. By the time this occurs, the
instrument might be already technologically outdated. This is not the
environment in which the scientiϐic community works, as research
should be conducted continuously or without long breaks and with the
best technology available.
Reusability and the high yearly ϐlight rate, so much touted for the
emerging Space Shuttle, were poised to reform space-based science
and bring it up to the standards enjoyed by its earthly counterpart,
lowering costs and bringing ϐlexibility. For instance, a high ϐlight rate
would allow principal investigators to ϐly their experiments as often as
they wished and within a reasonable short time. Furthermore, should
mechanical failures or malfunctions occur, the crew could attempt
some in-ϐlight maintenance. In alternative, the experiment would be
returned home, repaired and reϐlown as an improved unit shortly after
on the next available Shuttle. This meant that experiment hardware
would no longer undergo an extensive certiϐication campaign or
comply with the stringent fail-safe design requirements. Instead,
cheaper off-the-shelf commercially available equipment would be
approved for space applications, provided they met outgassing and

ϐlammability requirements. In other words, a Sortie Can would give an
experiment and the supporting science community a quick turnaround
and a short lead time never enjoyed before in space research. Possible
ϐields of analysis and technology applications would include physics,
Earth observations, communication/navigation, material and life
science. In the interim time leading to the assembly of a space station,
sortie missions would transform the Space Shuttle from just a simple
truck for on-orbit deliveries into a proper mini-station. Considering
that the space station project was already slipping behind schedule and
into a long-term delay, the sortie missions would allow the space
agency to fully exploit the capabilities of the Space Shuttle while
bolstering the ties with the scientiϐic community.
Based on the positive results obtained by the Ames study on the
sortie can missions, Dale Myers, the NASA Associate Administrator for
Manned Space Flight, authorized the Marshall Space Flight Center to
continue in-house studies and planning for the deϐinition phase of a
Sortie Can project. By March 1972, a development project timeline was
drawn that foresaw a one-year period for the deϐinition of
requirements, followed by ϐive years of design and development and a
maiden voyage no later than 1978. Total project funding was estimated
to range between 90 to 115 million US dollars, with the stated intention
of using as much as possible in-house workforce and resources
whenever possible.
While the Sortie Can concept was taking shape, so did the deϐinition
of an alternative, called the Research and Application Module (RAM).
The patron of this facility was the Convair Division of General
Dynamics, whose intention was to develop a series of spaceborne
laboratories suitable for the Space Shuttle and space station. Their
rationale lay in the assumption that the space station would have a
core section and a complement of research-type facilities. The core
section would take care of the proper functioning of the outpost by
producing electric power, maintaining the attitude, and providing crew
quarter accommodations. The research facilities would support a
laboratory-like environment whose outϐit and experiment complement
would be tailored to the current research needs. The Space Shuttle
would transport the RAM modules to the space station and retrieve
them for refurbishment. NASA’s interest in further pursuing this

concept was manifested by supporting Convair in a phase B study from
May 1971 to August 1972. It resulted in a 3-volume report spanning
some 700 pages of technical expositions, data spreadsheets and
engineering drawings. Convair dispensed an in-depth analysis of three
types of RAM hardware: pressurized, unpressurized, and free-ϐlying
(with the option of being pressurizable) (Figure 11.1).
Figure 11.1 A synoptic diagram showing Convair’s family of RAM hardware.[Source: Research
and Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure (pdf), p. 41.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129]
As far as the pressurized modules were concerned, the report
stipulated three possible ϐlavors:
1.
Sortie RAM: a pressurized RAM that would remain attached to the
Orbiter and conϐigured as a basic laboratory with experiments.
Missions would span 7 to 30 days. The module would supply
resources and services beyond those provided by the Orbiter.
 
RAM S
M d l (RSM)
i
d RAM h
ld
i

2. RAM Support Module (RSM): a pressurized RAM that would remain
in the Orbiter’s payload bay to expand accommodations for extra
crew members or payload specialists. It would also act as the
interface between the Orbiter and other RAM elements, with which
it would share its subsystem resources and services, such as
electrical power, thermal control, environmental control and life
support.
 
3.
RAM Payload Module: a minimal autonomous module that offered
additional volume used with a Sortie RAM, a RAM Support Module,
or a space station. In the latter case, Convair expected the module
to be conϐigured to provide a comprehensive laboratory capability
in one or more disciplines while remaining attached to the space
station for an extended duration.
 
Convair conceived all types of RAM modules with the highest possible
commonality despite their different capabilities and roles. For
instance, the pressurized structural shell was identical for the three
modules, and subsystem components for a Sortie RAM and RSM would
share similarities. Furthermore, to minimize development and
production costs, many Orbiter’s components, such as fuel cells,
storage tanks, life support systems and thermal control system
components, were identiϐied as compatible with the RAM system
requirements.
As far as the Sortie RAM was concerned, the module was
approximately 18-foot long with a nominal outside diameter of 14 feet.
An interface adapter at the forward end allowed mating to the Orbiter’s
crew cabin. For safety, components such as the fuel cells, reactant
storage tanks, high-pressure nitrogen storage tanks, and the freon loop
components of the thermal control system were to be mounted
externally. The remainder of the subsystem equipment would be
packaged compactly at the forward end (relative to installation in the
Orbiter cargo bay) and adjacent to the structural skin to provide the
greatest clear interior volume for installing control and display console
experiment-peculiar equipment without impairing access to critical
components. The basic subsystem resources provided by a sortie RAM
would include environmental control and life support, thermal control,
data management and onboard checkout, electrical power, and

habitability functions not provided by the Orbiter, such as
workstations and restraints. In orbit, it would house two mission or
payload specialists (Figure 11.2).
The need for a RAM Support Module stemmed from considerations
related to the expected time required to maintain and refurbish a
Sortie RAM after each mission. Since a Sortie RAM was to incorporate a
full complement of subsystems, Convair estimated that while
subsystem maintenance and checkout could be easily accomplished in
under two weeks, changing payloads from one discipline to another
could require three months, depending on the complexity of the
payloads. Therefore, considering the weekly ϐlight rate envisioned for
the Space Shuttle, Convair recognized that there would be a deϐinite
economic advantage in using separate modules for the payloads and
the subsystems. In other words, the Sortie RAM interiors would be
arranged with the experiment payloads dedicated to the missions,
while most of the subsystem resources needed by the module would be
lodged into the RAM Support Module. Hence, a single RAM Support
Module would serve several relatively inexpensive payload modules
(the Sortie RAM) (Figure 11.3).

Figure 11.2 A cutaway view of the general arrangement of a Sortie RAM[Source: Research and
Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure (pdf), p. 56.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129]
Furthermore, a RAM Support Module could also incorporate the
living and working provisions for up to four additional payload
specialists, except for the hygiene and food management facilities,
which the Orbiter would procure. An interesting provision was the
sleeping bunks, which would double as seats for the ride to orbit. A
ladder connecting the bunks and located adjacent to the seat backrests,
approximately at the astronaut’s shoulder, would allow them to ingress
the module and position themselves for launch. It would also be their
way out in the case of a launch pad emergency. As preposterous as it
might sound, according to Convair’s report, simulations demonstrated
that four persons could evacuate the module in just 18 seconds!
(Figures 11.4 and 11.5).
Figure 11.3 A cutaway view of the general arrangement of a RAM Support Module[Source:
Research and Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure
(pdf), p. 118. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129]

The third pressurized RAM module, the RAM Payload Module, was a
payload carrier applicable to both the sortie and station-attached
missions (Figure 11.6). It would be offered as an 18- or 32-foot long
module depending on the volume of payload equipment required.
Unlike the previous modules, it would receive supporting resources
(e.g., electric power, thermal control) via a RAM Support Module if
ϐlown on the Space Shuttle or via the space station for station-attached
missions.
To accommodate large experiments or apparatus operating in the
vacuum of space (such as for astronomy payloads), Convair proposed a
semi-shell structure made of a series of cross-section frames,
longitudinal stringers and skin panels, forming the so-called RAM
Pallet. It would be used with a Sortie RAM or a RAM Payload Module in
sortie-mode. Power, control, data management, and thermal control
would be provided by the Sortie RAM or RAM Support Module when
used with the RAM Payload Module (Figure 11.7).
To cater for payloads requiring a stable platform and a
contamination-free environment beyond the capabilities of the Space
Shuttle or station, Convair added a free-ϐlying RAM. Such a module
would be capable of operating uncrewed and unpressurized for a long
time between maintenance and servicing by a Shuttle crew or at the
space station (Figure 11.8).
During experiment operation, the free-ϐlying RAM would be
completely self-sufϐicient. Major subsystem components included
electrical power provided by roll-out solar cell arrays and nickel-
cadmium batteries; control moment gyroscopes for stabilization with
electro-magnetic torque bars for momentum desaturation; a dual-loop
water/freon thermal control system; a hydrazine propulsion/RCS (in
replaceable units on the Shuttle-supported free-ϐlying RAM); and VHP,
S-band, and Ku-band communications. In addition, repressurization
and environmental control life support functions would be provided by
the sortie RAM or space station during service operations. The module
had an outside nominal diameter of 12 feet to allow space for the
external subsystem assemblies, which had to remain within the
Orbiter’s cargo bay 15-foot diameter. It was 22-foot long with a docking
assembly and contamination shield at one end. A pressure bulkhead

would close the opposite end and had provisions for accommodating
payloads and their mounting requirements.
Figure 11.4 A cross-section of a RAM Support Module showing the accommodation provisions
for the extra four crew members.[Source: Research and Applications Module (RAM) phase B
study. Preliminary design review brochure (pdf), p. 154. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19730006129]

Figure 11.5 A simulation of egress from a RAM Support Module on the launch pad[Source:
Research and Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure
(pdf), p. 156. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129]

Figure 11.6 A cutaway view of the general arrangement of RAM Payload Module[Source:
Research and Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure
(pdf), p. 162. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129]
Figure 11.7 A cutaway view of the general arrangement of RAM Pallet[Source: Research and
Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure (pdf), p. 116.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129].
Four ϐlexible rollout-type solar arrays would provide prime power
generation aided by nick-cadmium batteries for electric current
discharge on the orbit’s night side. Propulsion for attitude control,
station keeping and manoeuvring for docking with the Shuttle or
station was provided by four modules, each containing six
monopropellant hydrazine thrusters for translation and rotational
control on all three axes. Two additional thrusters were added to the
station-supported free-ϐlying RAM for active docking operations. The
thermal control system was split between a water and freon loop. The
former would run internally because of commonality with the other
RAM modules’ thermal control system and its excellent heat transfer
capability. The water would transfer heat to the external Freon circuit
across an interloop heat exchanger. This heat would then be
transferred to the radiator panels and rejected to space. The warm
freon lines were routed close to the propellant tanks and lines to

prevent the propellants from freezing. As far as habitability of the
module was concerned, the only items permanently installed aboard
the free-ϐlying RAM would be mobility aids and restraints. However,
other items to support the crew and stored in a Sortie RAM or station
would be stored during module delivery and servicing operations. The
module would also contain means for pressurization, depressurization,
and distribution of air supplied by the station or Shuttle to afford
shirtsleeve access.
A free-ϐlying RAM would serve well for astronomical observations
due to stringent pointing accuracy and vibration requirements
unachievable by a space station. Hence, Convair’s report made the case
to include the free-ϐlying RAM for crew-tended observatories in
conceptual development at that time, such as the Advanced Stellar X-
Ray Observatory, the Large Space Telescope Advanced Stellar
Observatory, the Advanced Solar Observatory, and the High-Energy
Observatory. The RAM would act as a stable platform carrier for the
observatories’ equipment and allow housing some of the observatory’s
apparatus within its volume, affording an easy way to carry out
servicing and maintenance without recurring spacewalks (Figure
11.9).

Figure 11.8 A general overview of the free-ϐlying RAM.[Source: Research and Applications
Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review brochure (pdf), p. 240. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129].

Figure 11.9 A free-ϐlying RAM supporting the equipment for a stellar X-ray observatory. Note
how the RAM contains equipment belonging to the observatory, making it easy to swap old
instruments with new ones or carry out needed maintenance and refurbishment.
[Source: Research and Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review
brochure (pdf), p. 286. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129]
At ϐirst sight, the NASA Ames’ Sortie Can and Convair’s RAM module
looked almost identical. However, they could not be any more different
when mission capabilities are considered. While the Ames’s Sortie Can
ϐit only within the Space Shuttle, the RAM had greater ϐlexibility as it
could be modiϐied or adapted to support many missions. Eventually,
politics and ϐinancing chose NASA’s Sortie Can as the winning concept.
In order to reduce the ϐlow rate of funding being assigned to the
development of the national Space Transportation System (which also
included the development of the sortie laboratory) and to extend its
development to international partners, on September 24, 1973, NASA
and ERSO5 signed an agreement for the development and building of
the Sortie Laboratory.
The result was Spacelab, a laboratory designed to include a
pressurized module connected to the Orbiter’s living quarters and in

which the astronauts would spend most of their time performing the
battery of investigations selected for their mission. In addition, an
unpressurized platform named “pallet” was also designed for
experiments needing direct exposure to the vacuum of space or for
fully autonomous investigations. However, like NASA’s Sortie Can
concept, Spacelab was meant to live only within the Orbiter’s payload
bay and thus would not allow the ϐlexibility and modularity of the RAM
proposal.
The Shuttle Payload Planning Working Group
Sortie Can and RAM were born out of the necessity of conducting
science and technology application research without the availability of
a space station. By the time Nixon’s administration kicked off the Space
Shuttle program, plans for a space station and other man-tended
outposts had already been mothballed. Nevertheless, sortie Can and
RAM would offer a practical and sensible way for space-based research
to be carried out. While both aimed at the same goal, the Sortie Can
won the contest. In fact, without any man-tended outpost, the
operational ϐlexibility offered by RAM modules was no longer required.
However, the enthusiasm and inventiveness of NASA engineers had
to be met by the scientiϐic community. From July 31 to August 4, 1972,
the Space Shuttle Sortie Workshop was held at the Goddard Space
Flight Center. The intent was to involve NASA scientists in the
deϐinition of the operations for the Sortie Laboratory6 and to help the
NASA scientiϐic community broaden their vision and think through
new innovative ways in which experiments could be run in space.
Under the leadership of the NASA Associated Administrator for Space
Sciences, Dr John E. Naugle, the workshop produced a two-inch think
report detailing potential uses for the Sortie Laboratory and
suggestions for research, new application technologies to investigate,
and how astronauts involvement could enhance such activities.
Subsequently, the working groups established during the Goddard
meeting were extended to encompass the scientiϐic community
outside the NASA family, and by March 1973, several other
recommendations and suggestions for experiments and hardware for
the Sortie Laboratory were published. Despite the number of research

applications and themes identiϐied, the scientiϐic community gave a
lukewarm welcome to the Sortie Laboratory concept. In fact, up to that
time, experiments had been ϐlown on sounding rockets or automated
satellites. The crew’s presence in the loop was mainly seen as a
nuisance requiring extra development work and cost to make the
experiments human-rated. The scientiϐic community was not keen on
giving up their way of doing space science. The greater concern was the
fear of being left aside without any opportunity for involvement while
the investigation was taking place. Once again, the Space Shuttle was
breaking an old school of thought, bringing a new exciting possibility to
the table.
Throughout 30-years of the Space Shuttle program, the European-
built Spacelab ϐlew 24 times, producing a myriad of scientiϐic papers
related to hundreds of experiments ranging from life sciences to
materials to astrophysics. Most of those experiments originated from
the meetings held in the early 1970s when NASA and the scientiϐic
community worked to establish a productive relationship and
deϐinition on how they could best use the capabilities offered by the
Space Shuttle. Unfortunately, however, some of the concepts laid out
during those meetings never left the pages of the published reports.
The next paragraphs will recall some of those lost missions.
The Shuttle InfraRed Telescope Facility
It was only natural that the Space Shuttle would be considered an
orbital platform for astronomy, given that space-based astronomy
offers signiϐicantly increased spectral coverage and angular resolution
than that attainable by ground-based observatories. Plans were
already being drawn to deϐine and design a Large Space Telescope
(LST), later renamed Hubble Space Telescope, optimized for the
ultraviolet and visible regions of the spectrum with limited infrared
capabilities.
Given the limited infrared observation capabilities of the LST, the
astronomy community and NASA presented a 1.5-m aperture telescope
cryogenically cooled to 20°K for observations in the 10-50 μm
wavelength region. Dubbed the Shuttle Infra Red Telescope Facility
(SIRTF), the telescope was envisioned as a Cassegrain with a primary

mirror of at least 0.5-deg ϐield of view, a modulating secondary mirror,
cooled bafϐles, a movable sun shield and a removable thin plastic
window for protection from contaminants. The telescope would be
mounted on gimbals on a pallet. Crew access to the focal plane would
not be necessary. Instead, a rotating tertiary mirror in the instrument
bay would be commanded to direct the light beam into different
instruments. The instruments could be interchanged from mission to
mission to accommodate the needs of different investigators. A
possible proposed complement of instruments and detectors would
have included the following:
1.
A broad-band infrared ϐilter photometer using a liquid helium-
cooled detector.
 
2.
An infrared photoconductor detector array (liquid helium-cooled).  
3.
A Fourier spectrometer (liquid helium-cooled).
 
4.
A linear and circular infrared polarimeter.
 
5.
A grating spectrometer with multichannel detectors for
intermediate band infrared spectrophotometry.
 
To prevent contamination from efϐluents released by the Space Shuttle,
such as extra water produced by the onboard fuel cells, the telescope
was to be swung out of the payload bay for the duration of the
observations (Figures 11.10 and 11.11).

Figure 11.10 The 1.5-m infrared telescope in operation on the Space Shuttle[Source: Shuttle
infrared telescope facility (SIRTF) preliminary design study (pdf) p. 34. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 19760025925]

Figure 11.11 An isometric cutaway view of SIRTF innards.[Source: Shuttle infrared telescope
facility (SIRTF) preliminary design study (pdf) p. 39. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19760025925]
The Large Uncooled Infrared Telescope
Small aperture telescopes become severely limited at the far-infrared
and millimetre wavelengths due to diffraction requiring large diameter
telescopes to achieve higher angular resolutions. In fact, in this way, the
signal-to-noise ratio is maximized for a given exposure time. The
astronomy working group of the Shuttle payload planning workshops
quickly identiϐied the spacious Space Shuttle’s payload bay as the right
platform for such a telescope that could be designed with a simple
conϐiguration. In fact, by virtue of its ample diameter, bafϐling and
shielding from the Sun, Earth and Moon could produce enough
radiative cooling to achieve temperatures lower than 200°K, suitable
for investigations of solar system bodies and other objects of high
infrared brightness, which generally do not require cryogenic cooling
of telescope surfaces. Furthermore, shielding by the body of the Shuttle
itself would be used. Before launch, precooling of the telescope to
operating temperature would be required, and proper insulation to

maintain such temperature during ascent until the payload bay doors
could be opened. Additional simpliϐication would come from reliance
on the Shuttle to provide a baseline pointing and stability of about one
arcmin to obviate the need for large and heavy mounting and pointing
systems usually associated with telescopes of this size. Two
conϐigurations were studied. One consisting of a 4.2-m off-axis
paraboloid primary mirror mounted perpendicularly to the housing
pallet and with focus inside a sortie lab. In the other conϐiguration, a
very large 4.2 x 8.4 primary mirror rested ϐlat on the housing pallet. The
primary focus instruments would be mounted on a structure deployed
after the payload bay opening. Both conϐigurations would leave enough
room in the cargo bay for additional payloads (Figure 11.12 and 11.13).
Figure 11.12 The off-axis conϐiguration of the large uncooled infrared telescope. Note how the
focus of the paraboloid is in sortie lab-mounted instrument[Source: The Space Shuttle payload
planning working groups. Volume 1: Astronomy (pdf) p. 44. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19740007405]
As described by the working group, the large uncooled infrared
telescope would be best suited for observations in narrow bandwidths
over small ϐields of view. Observation programs emphasized the
detection and spectroscopy of molecular emission and, where possible,
absorption from interstellar clouds. Forbidden atomic transitions at
far-infrared wavelengths in the interstellar medium were also targets

of interest. Infrared studies of solar system bodies and other objects of
high infrared brightness would also be customers of such a telescope
as observation of such targets generally does not require cryogenic
cooling of telescope surfaces. Solar physics would also beneϐit from
using a large infrared telescope to study the Sun’s chromosphere and
low corona. Such observations would come at the end of a dedicated
astronomy mission, at which time the mirror could be heated without
compromising the primary objectives of the ϐlight.
Figure 11.13 The very large ϐlat conϐiguration of the large uncooled infrared telescope.[Source:
The Space Shuttle payload planning working groups. Volume 1: Astronomy (pdf) p. 44. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19740007405]
The Accessible Focal Plane Telescope
In July of 1974, in response to the Announcement of Opportunity for
Spacelab UV-Optical Telescope (SUOT), a group of astronomers at the
NASA Johnson Space Center headed by Dr Karl G. Henize proposed an
accessible-focal-plane telescope attached to the aft end of a Spacelab
pressurized module. The rationale for such a conϐiguration was to
provide a facility for astronomy that would meet the fundamental
concept of Shuttle sortie operation - a facility in which astronomers
could operate low-cost manually controlled instruments in a

shirtsleeve environment. The basic conϐiguration envisioned a
Ritchey-Chretien three-mirror system with a modiϐied focus inside a
Sortie lab. Image detectors, photometers or spectrographs inside the
sortie lab could be made to rotate with the image or could be fed
through an image de-rotator. In addition, provisions would be made for
evacuating an instrument chamber at the focal plane.
A support cone carried the telescope tube, and its external
mounting attached directly to the outer ring of bolts at the aft end of
the cylindrical section of the Spacelab module. The support cone thus
would cover the conical aft end of the Spacelab module without
touching it. An airlock penetrating through the Spacelab module aft
cone provided a path for the light to reach the observing instruments
mounted on an adapter attached to the airlock. The primary function of
the instrument adapter would be to de-rotate the image and provide
error signals for tracking and stabilizing the image through a focal
plane guiding system using focal plane detectors. This included control
of the secondary mirror. Secondary functions would include a direct
ϐield viewing system for target identiϐication and alignment. The
instrument adapter also had a quick-release retention mechanism for
mounting scientiϐic instruments. It was intended that such a telescope
would provide a unique test facility for instrumentation or high-risk
observing programs being considered for other telescopes, such as the
LST, and relieve the LST program from observing moderately bright
objects for which a smaller telescope would have sufϐiced (Figure
11.14).

Figure 11.14 A cross-section view of the Accessible Focal Plane Telescope and its attachment to
a Spacelab module.
[Source: Design study of the accessible focal plane telescope for Shuttle (pdf), p. 10-11.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770019999]
The Plasma Physics and Environmental
Perturbation Laboratory
Early in the Space Shuttle program, it was recognized that it would also
be suitable to serve the atmospheric and space physics community to
understand the dynamical processes of the sun-earth system exploring
cause-effect relationships, perform plasma physics investigations not
feasible in ground-based laboratories, and conduct investigations to
understand planetary and cometary phenomena. In this regard, the so-
called Plasma Physics and Environmental Perturbation Laboratory
(PPEPL) was proposed.
PPEPL would be housed in a pressurized and pallet conϐiguration
deployed perpendicularly to the payload bay bringing the aft end of the
laboratory to approximately ϐifty feet above the cargo bay. A ϐlexible
pressurized tunnel allowed the astronauts to move between the crew

cabin and the laboratory module. Typical hardware on the pallet would
consist of deployable articulated booms, antennas, particle detectors,
magnetometers, high-power electron-ion beam guns complete with
power supply and other equipment for experiments in wave-particle
and beam-plasma interaction, wave characteristics, and wake and
sheath measurements. In addition, the pressurized module would
contain the control and display consoles to operate the instruments
and experiments (Figures 11.15 and 11.16).
Figure 11.15 An overview of the basic PPEPL basic conϐiguration.[Source: The Space Shuttle
payload planning working groups. Volume 2: Atmospheric and space physics (pdf), p. 61. Available
at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19740007406]

Figure 11.16 A deployed PPEPL laboratory.
[Source: The Space Shuttle payload planning working groups. Volume 2: Atmospheric and
space physics (pdf), p. 61. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19740007406]
As reported by the Shuttle Payload Planning Working Group, the
PPEPL would make the Space Shuttle an active actor in the ϐield of
experimentation and observations. For instance, the Shuttle could be
used to release a tracer, such as lithium, outside the magnetosphere for
recording its subsequent motions to resolve the question of what
fraction of the solar wind enters the forward magnetosphere near the
neutral points and what fractions enter through the tail. Another
entailed used for the PPEPL was to “paint” a signiϐicant fraction of an
entire orbit with chemicals, such as barium or helium, so that its
distribution through the atmosphere could be observed with aircraft
and ground-based cameras. It was estimated that such an experiment
could yield in one day more information on global atmospheric
circulation than years of spot-probing the atmosphere with sounding
rockets. Electron accelerators to generate artiϐicial auroras could
answer important questions concerning acceleration mechanism and
plasma instabilities. Gaseous reactions and excited states could be

investigated by releasing appropriate quantities of gas. As they get
excited by sunlight, lasers, or beams of electrons, it would be possible
to investigate chemical reaction processes occurring in the
atmospheres of other planets. As the list of viable uses of a PPEPL
laboratory continued, it was evident how its proponents had engraved
in their minds the well-known motto that “the sky is the limit”.
The Communication and Navigation Research
Laboratory
In the early 1970s, terrestrial communication and navigation aided by
satellites were just in their infancy, and much was to be learned at a
basic level before technological applications could be rolled out. From
June 1971 through October 1972, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
contracted the TRW Systems Group to conduct a study on the
deϐinition of a Communication and Navigation Research Laboratory
(CNRL). As summarized in the report issued to the space agency, the
CNRL was a general-purpose laboratory that could accommodate a
wide variety of experiments. A crew could effectively increase
experiment efϐiciency by certain observations, modiϐications,
calibration, and limited maintenance setups. Furthermore, it was
envisioned that the crew would monitor experiment progress and
perform preliminary data evaluation to verify proper equipment
functioning and terminate or redirect experiments to obtain the most
desirable results. The report highlighted how such a crew-tended
laboratory’s ϐlexibility and unique capabilities would greatly simplify
space experiments, resulting in commonality in many supportive
subsystems, thus reaping the beneϐits of reusability and reduced
experiment costs. It was anticipated that such a laboratory could
complement the various automatic programs related to this discipline
by providing a facility for testing and evaluating future experiments
and systems, thereby paving the way for the operational systems of the
future.
The major elements of a CNRL prospective conϐiguration consisted
of a Sortie Can module and a pallet. The pressurized module would
house the crew station experiment operation displays and controls;
experiment unique transmitters and receivers; laboratory common

core equipment; and laboratory supporting subsystems such as
structure, environmental control/life support, thermal control,
electrical power, communication and data management. The
laboratory interior was designed for maximum experiment
reconϐiguration ϐlexibility and would include three display/control
consoles (laboratory systems, radio frequency experiments, laser
experiments), a workbench, experiment common core and unique
equipment.
The pallet would be attached to the pressurized module end dome
and house externally mounted apparatus such as antennas, low noise
receivers, transmitters, and optics. The antennas were attached on
cross truss supporting members to increase the elevation from the
cargo bay ϐloor and thus improve the ϐield of view from the cargo bay.
One such apparatus would be a parabolic antenna launched in a stored
position pointing down into the pallet and then erected in orbit.
Another piece of equipment would be an 18-inch reϐlective laser
telescope gimbal-mounted in a thermally insulated stable housing.
Such so-called “in-bay” CNRL conϐiguration would allow ϐlying the
Orbiter in a propellant-optimum ϐlight attitude. However, the downside
was that this approach placed the sensors/antennas in or near the
cargo bay door-sill plane of the Orbiter. Although it would allow an
adequate ϐield of view for the antennas for Earth sites within 40 to 60
degrees of nadir, the ϐield of view would be restricted for some
antennas in the vicinity of the horizon and any antenna requiring relay
satellites. The Orbiter could be maneuvered to make other satellites
visible to the antennas, but with an impact on stabilization propellant
consumption and simultaneous earthward ϐields of view.
Therefore, the only way to achieve adequate array span and
optimum Orbiter attitude was to deploy the system out of the Shuttle
bay. The pressurized module end dome ring was modiϐied to accept a
16-foot boom structure operated by a drive motor system. After a 90-
degree rotation of the pressurized module out of the Orbiter bay, the
antenna boom is erected and oriented normal to the Shuttle
longitudinal axis. This out-of-bay conϐiguration offered several
advantages. First, it would permit antenna placement well above the
Shuttle for a fuller radio frequency ϐield of view and, at the same time,
shorten antenna transmission coaxial cable runs to approximately one

half that of the in-bay concept. Secondly, it would permit antenna
boresight error adjustments to be made. The disadvantage relates to
fail-safe operations. Positive means would have to be employed to
ensure that the pressurized module with its antenna boom would
retract and rotate back into the Shuttle Orbiter bay so that the bay
doors could be closed for Earth entry/landing (Figures 11.17 and
11.18).
Figure 11.17 Proϐile of the in-bay conϐiguration of the CNRL laboratory[Source: Deϐinition of
experiments and instruments for a communication/navigation research laboratory. Volume 3:
Laboratory descriptions (pdf), p. 189 . Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730011548
].

Figure 11.18 The out-of-bay conϐiguration of the CNRL laboratory[Source: Deϐinition of
experiments and instruments for a communication/navigation research laboratory. Volume 3:
Laboratory descriptions (pdf), p. 189 . Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 
19730011548].
Orbital Research Centrifuge
Weightlessness is one of the most enviable perks that an astronaut
ϐlying in space can experience. However, it is also unforgiving to human
physiology. Just a few days in space without adequate physical exercise
would rapidly degrade even the ϐittest spacefarer’s bone structure and
muscle mass, seriously jeopardizing their recovery once returned to
Earth. Recent studies have also shown how vision might be severely
affected due to a redistribution of the ϐluid pressure into the skull
cavities, which can deform the eyeballs and optic nerves. It has been
proven that visual acuity loss is permanent for some astronauts, with
no chance to return to normal pre-ϐlight vision. Although not fully
understood, the immune system is also compromised and weakened.
At the same time, weightlessness offers countless opportunities to
probe into physical and chemical phenomena impossible to reproduce
in the one-g environment that we experience daily and that could be
spun off into manufacturing activities for off-world fabrication of
products.
A General Dynamics study published in May 1971 addressed such
considerations and proposed a Space Shuttle-based orbital centrifuge
apparatus. Such a facility could enable the acquisition of information

for the design of advanced space vehicles capable of generating a level
of artiϐicial gravity; evaluation of new ways by which the crew’s
existence in the space environment could be supported, and provide a
concept to advance the general scientiϐic knowledge in experimental
areas that cannot be duplicated on Earth. The three-volume report
suggested ϐive conϐigurations for turning a Space Shuttle into an orbital
research centrifuge (Figure 11.19).
Figure 11.19 The ϐive orbital research centrifuge conϐigurations identiϐied by the General
Dynamics study for the Space Shuttle
[Source: Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 39. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19710025905]
The simplest conϐiguration was the centrifuge in an expandable
housing. It incorporated an inϐlatable enclosure rigidly attached to a
RAM Support Module. After launch and attaining a stable orbit, the
cargo bay doors would be opened and the RAM Support Module (with
the centrifuge module) erected and locked in position at an angle
above the payload bay. The centrifuge housing module would then be
pressurized to change its geometry from a semi-cylinder of 14-ft

diameter by 26-ft long to a spherical experiment chamber of 22 feet in
diameter. Access would occur via the RAM Support Module through a
48-inch tunnel perpendicular to the chamber forward bulkhead. At the
center of the chamber, the tunnel turned 90° to terminate on a hub
assembly to mount the centrifuge equipment and housing the ring
drive assembly. An opening through the hub would provide access to
the experiment chamber and the centrifuge module from within the
hub. The chamber would include a walking ϐloor, attachment ϐixtures
for the orientation and support of experiment equipment, habitation
equipment, bed, work surfaces, waste collection, and centrifuge
equipment. The centrifuge apparatus was to have a spinning radius of
110-inch, allowing occupancy by one test subject at a time, which could
be subject to a range of g-levels from zero to 6.5 over an angular
velocity of 0 to 43.7 rpm (Figures 11.20 and 11.21).
Figure 11.20 The centrifuge in the expandable housing conϐiguration[Source: Orbital research
centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3. Space Shuttle compatible
Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 45. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19710025905].

Figure 11.21 The typical centrifuge equipment envisioned for the centrifuge in expandable
housing conϐiguration
[Source: Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 21. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19710025905]
The so-called shell centrifuge conϐiguration would offer a larger
centrifuge apparatus, which was proposed as a 16-ft and 22-ft radius
facility with a centrifuge chamber diameter of 10 feet and 14 feet. Both
would consist of a centrifuge experiment module attached to a RAM
Support Module (RSM) utilizing a rigid hinged (in the case of the 22-ft
radius facility) tubular structure which would serve as a passageway
between the module and the facility. Thus, the transfer of crew and
equipment between the centrifuge and support module would be
possible at all times. In both instances, the general structural
conϐiguration of the rotating portion of the centrifuge was that of two
concentric shells. The outer shell was designed to react to pressure
loads and provide environmental protection for the test subjects. It
consisted of a stiffened pressure shell with thermal insulation and a
minimum weight micro-meteoroid bumper. The ends of the outer shell
structure were closed off with semi-spherical bulkheads. It was also
connected to the supporting tubular structure through a pivot ϐitting
attached to the nonrotating tunnel. A bearing system mounted on the
outer shell and a nonrotating tunnel allowed the whole centrifuge
module to rotate. The inner shell consisted of a
habitability/experimentation area and a counterbalance area
connected across a central hub. The basic structural shape was a long
cylinder intersected by a second that served as the hub. No signiϐicant

pressure differential existed across the cylinder so that in operation,
only inertial loads would be reacted (Figures 11.22 and 11.23).
The centrifuge, the tunnel and the RSM adapter were designed for
an internal pressure of 14.7 psi. The centrifuge would accommodate
equipment in various locations and conϐigurations for performing
zero-g, artiϐicial-g and habitability experiments. After attaining a stable
orbit, the cargo bay doors would be opened and the RSM (with the
centrifuge module attached) erected and locked in position so that the
rotatable shell clears the edge of the cargo bay. During the launch, the
centrifuge module was unoccupied and pressurized with its systems
dormant. After module deployment, the crew would enter the
centrifuge from the RAM Support Module through the access tunnel.
Systems would be activated and check out initiated. When all
subsystems had been checked, the crew would leave the centrifuge
before the initial spin up. This would require spinning the centrifuge to
a very low rpm and manually monitoring any imbalance. If all sensor
output were found within tolerance (near zero), the counterbalance
system would be locked, and the centrifuge spun up to its maximum
rpm. During this phase, the Orbiter’s reaction, which may indicate an
imbalance in the outer shell, would be observed and trimmed out as
required. The centrifuge would then be reoccupied, the counterbalance
system reactivated, and spin up to the desired experiment rpm would
proceed.
The 16-foot radius centrifuge module was designed for occupancy
by two crew members plus equipment for a full range of artiϐicial-
g/zero-g experiments over 30 days and permits the evaluation of all
factors indicated by the habitability experiment group. This included
heating and preparing food packets; dining area, sleeping area;
recreation area and a hygiene facility containing a shower, waste
collection and waste disposal. Adequate storage was provided for
habitability items. The internal layout was conϐigured to allow
rearrangement and reorientation of the individual amenities with
respect to the spin plane. A full 30-day supply of expendable (food,
water, etc.) would be stored within the rotating assembly, as these
items could be transferred in bulk even during centrifuge operation.
Similarly, waste products would be encapsulated and periodically
removed for storage within the boom or the module adaptor.

The 22-foot radius centrifuge conϐiguration would provide an
increased volume and radius. This was accomplished by moving the
spin axis close to the RAM Support Module, increasing the experiment
chamber diameter to the maximum cargo bay envelope, and tilting the
rotating assembly away from the support module to provide rotational
clearance. The result was an experiment ϐloor radius and chamber
diameter of, respectively, 22 feet and 14 ft. Compared to the previous
conϐiguration, this version would sport a generous usable interior
volume, permitting the accommodation of four astronauts with an
acceptable degree of comfort and efϐiciency. Eating and food
preparation would occur using a small, combined food processor and
table patterned after that ϐlown on the Skylab space station. Food
would be pre-packaged and stored in a wall unit adjacent to the
eating/food preparation area. Waste disposal from the dining activities
would occur by compaction and temporary storage in sealed
containers which could then be periodically removed and stored in the
nonrotating portions of the assembly. Replenishment of food stores
and expendables in the support module could be accomplished while
the machine rotates. In the proposed layout, one-quarter of the wall
area would be devoted to the hygiene facility. This area was partitioned
off from the rest of the compartment and included a sink, faucet, urine
collector, simple shower, waste management equipment and storage
lockers. The design and space allocation were patterned to allow usage
both in zero-g and artiϐicial gravity modes. The report even considered
a laundry facility as part of a habitability experiment or as an
operations support item.
Provisions for sleep and relaxation included four individually
compartmentalized bunks. These berth compartments would afford
reasonable privacy and contain storage areas for personal effects. The
bunks were oriented at 90 degrees to one another (circumferentially
and axially with respect to the spin axis) to assess sleep comfort. The
compartment’s unobstructed central area- normally the scene of
experiment activity during the work period – would be readily
applicable to off-duty activities, exercise, and entertainment.

Figure 11.22 The general arrangement of the 16-foot radius/10-foot diameter centrifuge
chamber.
[Source: Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 54. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19710025905]

Figure 11.23 The general layout and erection geometry of the 22-ft radius/14-ft diameter
centrifuge chamber.
[Source: Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 71. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19710025905]
Figure 11.24 The internal arrangement and equipment location for the 14-ft diameter centrifuge
chamber.
[Source: Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 91. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19710025905]
An even larger centrifuge facility would be realized with the so-
called artiϐicial-g module (AGM), 14-ft in diameter and 18-ft long,
attached to the RAM Support Module by an extensible tubular structure
serving as a passageway between the two modules (Figures 11.24 and
11.25). Artiϐicial gravity would be obtained by rolling the Orbiter about
its longitudinal axis at various rates. The artiϐicial-g module was
designed for normal occupancy by four crew members and included
equipment and facilities to perform a full range of artiϐicial-g/zero-g
experiments. The spin radius would be variable in ϐixed increments
(tunnel section lengths) from approximately 60 feet to 125 feet. Such a
conϐiguration would provide a range of g-level from zero to one-g over

an angular velocity range of 0 to 6 rpm. Transfer of crew and equipment
between the artiϐicial-g module and the RSM would be possible during
rotation except during radius changes. It was assumed that the crew
would evacuate the module in this case. Therefore, the tunnel would
not be depressurized during the radius change.
After launch and attainment of a stable orbit, the cargo bay doors
are opened, and the RSM (with the artiϐicial-g module attached) is
erected and locked in position so that the extensible tubular tunnel is
normal to the longitudinal axis of the Orbiter. The tunnel and the
artiϐicial-g module would be pressurized during launch, with all
systems dormant and the module unoccupied. After deployment, the
crew would enter the tunnel and the artiϐicial-g module when systems
would be activated and checked out. Following checkout, the crew
would leave the module, and the Orbiter would be placed into a slow
roll and extension of the tunnel instigated. After successive sections of
the tunnel were extended, the roll rate was adjusted to maintain a
nominal roll rate. Successive sections of the tunnel could then be
extended. Upon reaching the desired radius, the astronauts would
transfer to the AGM, and the conϐiguration spun up to the desired
rpm/g-level combination.
A variation of this conϐiguration replaces the extendable tunnel
with a rigid, ϐixed-length one. Another option consisted in deploying
the artiϐicial-g module by a series of cables allowing an extension up to
125 feet from the Orbiter (Figure 11.26). This conϐiguration, however,
would require a completely self-sustaining artiϐicial-g module as there
would not be any link with the support module during the rolling of the
Orbiter. The artiϐicial-g module would be a modiϐied RAM Support
Module containing a full complement of subsystems to make it an
autonomous spacecraft, such as environmental control, electrical
power, communication, data, food and waste management subsystems.
It would also include an extension consisting of a short cylindrical
structure to house propellent and pressuring tanks to initiate the
rolling and stabilize the module and Orbiter assembly during spinning.
As far as the deployment was concerned, it would begin by erecting and
locking the artiϐicial-g module in a position normal to the roll axis of
the Orbiter. The crew would then enter the module to activate and
check all systems. Next, the test subjects would enter the experiment

module and the Orbiter placed into a slow roll and the artiϐicial-g
module separated from the RAM Support Module until the desired
experiment radius is reached. After a ϐinal check of all systems, the
conϐiguration is spun up to the desired rpm/g-level combination. All
radius changes would be accompanied by a roll rate reduction, stability,
and systems check.
Figure 11.25 The general arrangement of the extendable tunnel conϐiguration[Source: Orbital
research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3. Space Shuttle
compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 105. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19710025905]
Figure 11.26 The general arrangement of the cable connected conϐiguration.

1
2
3
[Source: Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS) (pdf), P. 127. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19710025905]
REFERENCES
NASA (1971) Orbital research centrifuge. Experiment performance options and cost, volume 3.
Space Shuttle compatible Experiment Performance Options (EPOS). Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. 
gov/ citations/ 19710025905
NASA (1972) Research and Applications Module (RAM) phase B study. Preliminary design review
brochure. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19730006129
NASA (1973) Deϔinition of experiments and instruments for a communication/navigation
research laboratory. Volume 3: Laboratory descriptions. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 19730011548
NASA (1974a) The Space Shuttle payload planning working groups. Volume 1: Astronomy.
Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19740007405
NASA (1974b) The Space Shuttle payload planning working groups. Volume 2: Atmospheric and
space physics. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19740007406
NASA (1976) Shuttle infrared telescope facility (SIRTF) preliminary design study. Available at:
https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19760025925
NASA (1977) Design study of the accessible focal plane telescope for Shuttle. Available at: https:// 
ntrs. nasa. gov/ citations/ 19770019999
Sivolella (2017) The Space Shuttle Program: Technologies and Accomplishments. – Springer
International Publishing; ISBN 978-3319549446; Paperback: 372 pages.
Footnotes
These were ϐlights in which the primary objectives were related to perform research and
experimentation rather than engaging in activities such as satellite deployment/retrieval and
construction of orbital infrastructures.
 
Think about using your car for just one trip, throw it away and buy a new one for the return trip
and repeat the process every time you use your vehicle. You will understand the ludicrous way in
which space exploration is still being carried out.
 
Once again, think about your car and writing her off every time she suffers a mechanical
malfunction due to lack of car mechanics or break down recovery service.

4
5
6
 
SpaceX in recent years as forceably demonstrated that partially reusable rockets are possible to
operate at a proϐit. Furthermore, several other rocket companies are working towards
implementing as much reusability as possible in their launcher designs.
 
The European Space Research Organization (ESRO) was one of the two progenitors of the
European Space Agency (ESA). The other parent was the European Launcher Development
Organization (ELDO
 
At this point the word “can” had been dropped in favour of the more technical and professional
term “laboratory”.
 

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
D. Sivolella, The Untold Stories of the Space Shuttle Program, Space Exploration
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19653-9_12

(1)
12. Epilogue
Davide Sivolella1  
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK
 
“Mission complete, Huston”, Atlantis Commander Chris Ferguson uttered
as he gracefully brought to a halt for the very last time the older
surviving Orbiter. At 5:57 am EDT on July 21, 2011, his words marked
the deϐinitive ending of the Space Shuttle program. “We copy your
wheels stop and we’ll take this opportunity to congratulate you, Atlantis,
as well as the thousands of passionate individuals across this great
spacefaring nation who truly empowered this incredible spacecraft,
which for three decades has inspired millions around the globe. Job well
done America”, capcom Barry “Butch” Wilmore echoed from Mission
Control.
Indeed the Space Shuttle program had been a job well done. The
Space Shuttle succeeded in becoming the ϐirst reusable spacecraft.
Columbia ϐlew twenty-seven times1, Challenger nine times2, Discovery
thirty-nine times, Atlantis thirty-three times and Endeavour twenty-
ϐive times. In total, the Space Shuttle program tallied an outstanding
134 ϐlights. What a tremendous achievement! Three decades of ϐlight
operations included satellite breakdown recovery service3; space-
borne telescope repairs, and upgrades4; thirty-six ϐlights built the
International Space Station along with several others in which
assembly techniques and hardware were trialled and validated;
twenty-two ϐlights were exclusively dedicated to scientiϐic research
with Spacelab5; numerous civilian and military satellites were
dispatched to their ϐinal orbital destination, including space-borne
telescoped such as the famed Hubble Space Telescope; interplanetary
probes were ϐlung to the far reaches of the Solar System; and several
other missions ϐlew unique hardware such as equipment for high-
resolution mapping of the Earth’s surface or a sophisticated apparatus
ϐlown twice to test the dynamics and usefulness of tethered systems.

The list of achievements fulϐilled by the Space Shuttle program is
extensive and would ϐill several pages. Ostensibly, though, such
inventory would not comprise the assembly of Space Operation
Centers, in-orbit cryogenic refuelling, External Tank-based large
telescopes, missions dedicated to artiϐicial gravity study, large-scale
manufacturing of pharmaceutical products and any other mission or
hardware whose story has been told in the previous chapters.
It begs the question: what happened? Why have these stories never
materialized? This author’s opinion is that the chief culprit was the
complexity of the Space Shuttle system, which made it too expensive to
operate, failing to deliver the promised cheap access to space.
Complexity is not necessarily a negative attribute, as long as it is
understood, properly managed, and implemented. NASA’s mistake was
to jump from the “simple” Apollo capsule to a Boeing B737-like
spacecraft without any intermediate step. It is as if following the
maiden ϐlight of the Wright Flyer I on December 17, 1903, the Wright
brothers had set up to build a Boeing B747! Instead, the Queen of the
Skies6 came about some six decades later after thousands of technical
innovations had been implemented and millions of hours of ϐlying
experience and operations had been accumulated. NASA would have
been better off starting with a smaller spacecraft, maybe only for crew
and small payload delivery to a space station assembled using Saturn
V-class rockets. A spaceship similar to the European Space Agency’s
Hermes or the Dream Chaser that Sierra Nevada Space is currently
developing would have been the right size for the job. Orbital tugs and
space stations could then be assigned for research, manufacturing and
satellite servicing. In this way, experience in operating a reusable
spacecraft would be gained, and upgraded versions could be rolled out
with improvements in reliability and safety. Operational costs would
have been more contained and would have decreased over time. Then
if the need arose, a bigger and more complex reusable spacecraft could
have been developed, building on the experience gained until then.
Costs, reliability and safety would have been better than those enjoyed
by the Space Shuttle. If maintenance proved so expensive and lengthy
before each ϐlight, it is because of inexperience in operating a reusable
spacecraft, let alone one as large as a narrow-body airliner. NASA had to
learn from scratch, often pursuing a trial and error process.

With enough cash, NASA could have built space stations, expanded
our presence up to Mars and jump-start a space-based manufacturing
industry. With enough money, Saturn V launchers could be kept in
production, or a new heavy lifter rocket could be developed from
scratch. This would have signiϐicantly reduced the size of the Orbiter,
limiting its role in moving people and small cargo. As the beneϐits of
space explorations have never been fully understood by the general
public and politicians, NASA was barely allowed to build the Space
Shuttle. They were forced to sell it as a jack of all trades for the space
business. All of a sudden, complexity was appreciably increased. They
were also obliged to the USAF requirements to have a voluminous
cargo bay and broad wings to ϐly their cumbersome spy satellites. Such
conditions profoundly added more complexity, and once again, NASA
was not allowed to learn from operating a smaller spacecraft. On the
other hand, the option was not to have a Space Shuttle. It was a
between-a-rock-and-a-hard-place conundrum from which there was no
easy way out.
High operating costs resulted in a ϐlight manifest signiϐicantly
reduced. At its peak in 1985, NASA was able to launch nine missions,
but it imposed a conspicuous strain on the agency’s human and
technical resources. It was a far cry from the weekly ϐlight scheduled
initially envisioned when NASA sold the Space Transportation System
to Congress. Such a slow-motion ϐlight manifest allowed technology to
catch up and make some missions superϐluous. For instance, by the
time the last HEXAGON satellite launched, the next generation of
intelligence-gathering satellites, the KH-11 KENNEN was already
operative. It was the ϐirst American satellite to utilize digital imaging
technology to obtain real-time imagery and download it to the ground
for processing. The complex system of cameras impressing imagery on
ϐilm tape hundreds of feet long, which required delivery via return
vehicles captured mid-air, was no longer required. Hence, no need for a
Space Shuttle-compatible HEXAGON and resupply missions, as
described in Chapter 10. The same goes for technology demonstration
missions such as the Plasma Physics and Environmental Perturbation
Laboratory and the Communication and Navigation Research
Laboratory, described in Chapter 11. The experiments envisioned for
those missions were more suitable for automated satellites that could

operate continuously for years rather than just a couple of weeks if
they had ϐlown on the Space Shuttle.
Other missions, such as the orbital research centrifuge for artiϐicial
gravity studies discussed in Chapter 11, never emerged because of a
pathological absence of an actual interest in pursuing such
investigations, despite industry recognition that any human mission to
Mars or deep space do warrant artiϐicial gravity to preserve the
astronaut’s wellbeing. The Challenger disaster further accentuated how
the Space Shuttle was far from a regular passenger airliner, eroding the
conϐidence in its capability of assuring regular inexpensive access to
orbit. The three-year-long hiatus following the loss of the second oldest
Orbiter forced missions such as the Electrophoresis Operations in
Space (EOS-1) reviewed in Chapter 6 to never taste the microgravity
environment of space, destroying the possibility of laying a solid
foundation for space-based manufacturing industry. With the only
available ride to space being grounded, McDonnell Douglas’s EOS-1
supporters had no choice but to let industry revert to earth-based
processes. After all, as much as McDonnell Douglas was forward-
looking, they were still in the business of making money.
Combined with a thin ϐlight manifest, the lofty programmatic costs
conjured up to kill useful upgrades such as the Power Extention
Package or 25 kW Power Modules illustrated in Chapter 2. Again, the
space agency did not have sufϐicient funding to move such proposals to
a ϐly-ready status as the empty ϐlight manifest was insufϐicient to
prompt such modiϐications even though they would have resulted in a
more capable Orbiter and thus attract more mission opportunities. It
was a variation of the chicken-and-egg conundrum. Funding was
required to expand on the Orbiter’s capabilities and reliability which
would have intensiϐied the ϐlight manifest. However, because of the
existing lightweight manifest, such funding was not provided as the
Space Transportation System was deemed already too expensive and
thus not worthy of extra R&D resources that would have resulted in a
cheaper system after the initial investment. The same goes for the
liquid ϐly back boosters reviewed in Chapter 3. While looking feasible
on paper, they would have entailed such an extensive redesign of
ground infrastructures and operations while trying to ϐit within the

geometric constraints of the existing launch pad and Orbiter
conϐiguration that the effort looked not worthwhile.
Of course, there were attempts at reducing launch costs and
increasing reliability. As a result, several uncrewed versions of the
Space Transportation System were proposed throughout the program’s
life. For instance, in the so-called Shuttle-C approach, championed by
the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the reusable Orbiter was
replaced by an expendable cargo carrier (also called the Shuttle-C
Cargo Element (SCE)), comprising a circular cargo carrier section
attached to an aft fuselage or boattail, based around the Orbiter’s main
propulsion system and engine thrust structure (Figure 12.1).
The cargo carrier would be an extended Orbiter’s payload bay, 25-m
long and 4.6 meters in diameter, equipped with two sets of Orbiter like
doors. With this conϐiguration, the Shuttle-C could accommodate a
payload as wide and more than one third longer than the baseline
crewed Orbiter’s payload bay.
The cargo carrier would attach to the aft fuselage section, which
used a less complex and cheaper design approach, including an
integrated Orbital Maneuvering System and Reaction Control System
housed within an aluminium and steel construction. The aft fuselage
would house major components of the Orbiter’s main propulsion
system, such as the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen feed lines,
associated hardware, and the main engines. Two or three main engines
could be used depending on payload weight and orbit. In the two-
engine conϐiguration, the aft fuselage would only require minor
modiϐications, such as removing the third engine and associated
hardware; the three-engine version would be ϐlown essentially without
changes compared to the baseline Orbiter. Because the SCE would burn
in the atmosphere following payload release, the Shuttle-C would be
propelled by main engines at their last life cycle after being used for
many missions on the crewed Orbiter. The aft fuselage would also
function as a major thrust structure distributing the thrust load from
the main engines.
Other changes from the baseline Orbiter included switching the
insulation from tiles to spray-on foam and deleting the orbital
maneuvering engines and the aerodynamic surfaces. The reaction
control system thrusters were retained, albeit with a simpliϐied design.

Batteries were substituted for the cryogenic fuel cell system since time
in orbit would be limited, and thus power demand less than the
baseline Orbiter. An important aspect of the SCE was design robustness
and design margins. Rather than designing a lightweight structure to
save a few extra pounds, a margin of safety of 1.5 was used (rather than
1.25 as in the baseline Orbiter) to reduce preϐlight certiϐication and
testing.
Figure 12.1 The Shutte-C conϐiguration
[Source: A Near-Term, High-Conϐidence Heavy Lift Launch Vehicle. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 20080043657]
Operations of the Shuttle-C would greatly resemble that of the
baseline Shuttle. If desired, payloads could be processed in the existing
facilities or a new bespoke facility. Launch and ascent would be
essentially identical to the baseline Shuttle. The External Tank would
be lost in the atmosphere, and the twin Solid Rocket Boosters would be
recovered at sea. Once in orbit, the payload bay doors are open and the
cargo deployed. For a mission involving the assembly or servicing of
large payloads, such as a space station, the Shuttle-C would rendezvous
with an Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle. In any case, after payload
deployment, the cargo element would be discarded into the
atmosphere into the open ocean.
Estimates were that a Shuttle-C would haul up to 60 metric tons of
payloads into Low Earth Orbit. Later versions with a larger and longer
cargo carrier (7.6 by 27.4 m) would allow voluminous payloads up to

70 metric tons to reach lunar orbit. Signiϐicant and varied possible
payloads or missions were envisioned for Shuttle-C. For instance, the
assembly of the then-called Space Station Freedom could be greatly
enhanced in that modules could be fully outϐitted and checked out on
the ground and launched intact, thereby reducing the number of
assembly launches. In addition, shuttle-C could dispatch interplanetary
probes on a direct trajectory, shortening ϐlight times, reducing
operational complexity and cost, and increasing spacecraft reliability. It
could even support efforts in sending the ϐirst crew to the Red Planet or
for the automated retrieval of soil samples. Shuttle-C could also be a
potentially powerful tool for the space science and applications
community. Typical examples would be large aperture telescopes that
would follow the Hubble Space Telescope, such as a 40-m diameter
Large Deployable Reϐlector for infrared astronomy to be assembled in
orbit.
Shuttle-C could also serve as a ϐlying test bed for new and modiϐied
systems, including propulsion advances, before committing to
operational use on the crewed Space Shuttle. Shuttle-C would provide a
means to allow systems upgrades to be tested. For instance, an
advanced External Tank using composite structures, non-foam
insulation, and other features could be tested with no risk to a crew.
Beyond simply testing a system, such ϐlights would also validate
aerodynamic and aerothermal predictions that available facilities or
computational techniques could not fully test. Shuttle-C could also test
advanced replacements for Orbiter’s hydraulic, structural and reaction
control systems. New operations could be investigated by testing
propellant scavenging and orbiting the External Tank. Finally, Shuttle-C
could serve as a short-duration, stable platform for small payloads that
would ϐill empty spaces in the SCE and operate autonomously after
delivery of the main payload and before deorbiting the SCE. Further,
the structure of the SCE could also serve as a highly stable rigid
platform, complete with subsystems, for certain astronaut-tended
payloads
The Shuttle-C was a natural, low-cost evolution of the baseline
Space Shuttle to demonstrate that “new” launch capabilities could be
provided over the years by continual upgrades to an existing system
rather than developing a new concept and system with associated R&D

costs. Development of the Shuttle-C, and its production, would have
required only a modest investment in new or modiϐied systems and
facilities. In fact, the main concern in designing the Shuttle-C was to
maximize the use of existing systems and minimize changes to the
vehicle and ground facilities to reduce further development costs.
Hence the reason the design looked much like a baseline Orbiter, minus
its wings and vertical ϐin.
Studied extensively from the beginning of the 1980s, the study had
progressed to the point that a mockup of the cargo/propulsion element
was built. Unfortunately, the approach fell out of favour because of
budgetary pressure. It was revised in the early 2000s following the
announcement in April 2004 that the Space Shuttle program was
deϐinitively cancelled and replaced by the so-called Vision for Space
Exploration (VSE). Championed by the George W. Bush Jr.
Administration, the VSE was to return NASA beyond Low-Earth Orbit
while maintaining access to Low-Earth Orbit to support the activities
of the International Space Station. Several so-called Shuttle Derived
Launch Vehicles (SDLV) were proposed, such as the Side-Mount Heavy
Lifter, capable of hauling up to 93 metric tons to Low-Earth Orbit. The
cargo carrier element was sized to carry large payload sizes up to 7.5
meters in diameter and 35 meters long. Its design differed from the
Shuttle-C in being less analogous to a converted Orbiter’s payload bay
and more analogous to a payload fairing structure, although
strengthened by a keel, longerons, and ring frame structures for side
mount on existing External Tank struts.
Furthermore, the aft propulsion module would be recovered in the
Atlantic Ocean some 1100 nautical miles from the launch site. Five
movable drag ϐlaps would stabilize the module during re-entry and
provide a degree of control on entry-load. The ϐinal descent would be
on three main parachutes assisted by landing rockets that would
reduce impact loads (similar to the methodology used by the Russians
in landing their Soyuz spacecraft). A spray shield would be deployed
before landing and cinched to cover the engine bells to protect the
engines and avionics from salt water following an ocean landing. After
landing ϐlotation, bags would be deployed to maintain an upright ϐloat
position in sea wave conditions until recovery is accomplished by an
ocean-going recovery vessel stationed nearby to rapidly recover the

landed module and return it to the Kennedy Space Center launch site
for processing and reuse. It was estimated that using a recoverable
propulsion/avionics module would result in estimated net cost savings
per ϐlight of $150 M. This heavy lifter could also be conϐigured to carry
cargo only or a combination of cargo and crew. In the latter case, a Crew
Exploration Vehicle, a capsule meant to replace the Space Shuttle for
ferrying astronauts, would sit atop the cargo carrier. Until 2009, several
conϐigurations were proposed for such a heavy-lift launcher (Fig. 12.2).
Figure 12.2 One of the Heavy Lift Launcher solutions proposed in the late 2000s as Space Shuttle
replacement.
[Source: Shuttle-Derived Heavy Lift Launch Vehicle. Available at: https:// ntrs. nasa. gov/ 
citations/ 20080043657]
Like in the case of the Shuttle-C, they aimed at decoupling the
transport of astronauts and cargo. In fact, a great deal of complexity
characterizing the Space Shuttle was due to the stringent requirements
to maintain the crew in a safe and comfortable environment. Human
rating a spacecraft requires extra complexity, whose cost will rapidly
escalate as the vehicle size increases. For instance, without wings, the
Shuttle-C was reduced essentially to a ϐlying payload bay getting away

from the complex and fragile thermal protection system and the
environmental control life support system and other apparatus
necessary to keep the crew alive. As stated earlier on, a smaller
spacecraft for the exclusive role of astronaut transportation would
have resulted in a more manageable and safer vehicle. Once again, such
proposals never left the drawing board, and to date, they are simply
recorded in catchy PowerPoint presentations. The failure in securing a
successor to the Space Shuttle, especially one exploiting most of the
existing hardware, highlighted another big issue at the heart of NASA:
lack of a consistent direction.
Since the ending of the Apollo program, the space agency has found
itself at the mercy of several administrations, each with an agenda
which hardly provided a seamless continuity to NASA’s overall reason
d’etre. This was evident when the George W. Bush administration
replaced the Space Shuttle program with the Constellation program
aimed at returning to the Moon. Two rockets were proposed, a heavy-
lifter called Ares V and a smaller launcher for crew transportation,
called Ares I. Then, the Obama administration scrapped the
Constellation program on the ground because it was too expensive.
However, it retained the Orion spacecraft, an Apollo-style capsule (only
larger) to ferry astronauts to and from the International Space Station.
NASA was set on a path to carry out deep-space exploration, such as
visiting an asteroid. Once it became apparent that such a mission
would be as expensive as a lunar landing, it was downsized into the so-
called Asteroid Return Mission. It entailed capturing a small Near-Earth
Orbit asteroid and parking it in lunar orbit so that astronauts could
visit it and collect samples. The Trump administration promptly
discarded the Asteroid Return Mission and replaced it with the Artemis
program. Once again, NASA was to return to Moon. Luckily, the current
Biden administration has maintained NASA on the same path.
However, the Obama administration also set NASA on a new path, a
new way to do business that relies on private commercial companies
to take on the function of service providers. Such a momentous
decision injected a strong dose of vitality into SpaceX, allowing it to
develop into a fully-ϐledged rocket company that has turned the
industry upside down and challenged titans such as United Launch
Alliance (ULA) and the European launch industry. SpaceX has

substantially reduced the cost of space access by heavily implementing
a vertical integration in their manufacturing processing and pushing
without restraint for reusability. The highlight of a SpaceX’s Falcon 9
launch is witnessing the ϐirst stage returning for a bull’s eye landing on
a pad close to the launch site or a barge in the ocean. The success rate
is such that it has now become routine.
As the basic rule of evolution states, only the ϐittest ones survive.
Therefore, indirectly SpaceX has pushed other companies to follow
through. For instance, ULA has developed a new launcher, the Vulcan,
which will include a recoverable ϐirst stage’s engine section module
and a reusable second stage. Essentially, once the main payload has
been delivered, the second stage takes on a new life as a space tug
opening countless possibilities such as satellite repositioning or
docking to a commercial space station where the stage can be cut to
pieces and the metal used for manufacturing processes. The advent of
reusable and cheap launchers, such as the SpaceX Falcon 9 and the
upcoming ULA Vulcan, is already poised to open the way to the
successors to the International Space Station. The future outposts will
be built by private commercial companies. They will offer their
services to NASA or other customers for a fee. As of time of writing
(June 2022), NASA has already awarded fundings to private companies
for the development and orbiting of new space stations before the end
of the International Space Station program. One such company is
Axiom which is already cutting metal for the ϐirst module of their
proposed space station. In addition, a partnership between Blue Origin
and Sierra Space is working towards a concept called Orbital Reef. As
stated on their website, Orbital Reef will be a Low Earth Orbit space
station for commercial space activities and space tourism uses. A
competitor to Orbital Reef is Starlab, under development by Nanoracks
and Lockheed Martin. At least initially, these outposts will be smaller
than the International Space Station. However, they will be easier to
manage and maintain, leaving more volume and time for conducting
research and manufacturing activities in orbit. In other words, these
outposts are a modern revisitation of the Space Operation Centers
discussed in Chapter 5.
On the front of satellite servicing, Northrop Grumman has already
successfully recovered two satellites in geostationary orbit, and more

missions are in the books. With considerably cheaper access to space,
satellite servicing might easily become a viable economic proposition.
Other companies, such as San Francisco based Orbit Fab, are actively
pursuing spacecraft acting as orbital gas stations whose propellant can
be sold to users requiring such services. UK-based startup Astroscale is
capitalizing on such easy access to provide an orbital clean up service
by removing orbital debris, a topic that is becoming hotter and hotter
given the increasing number of near-missed collisions between
operational satellites and large pieces of debris.
The list of what the commercial private space industry is currently
achieving can easily ϐill several pages, and chances are that new
companies will have entered into the game by the time you are reading
these words. The point is that with access to space becoming cheaper
and cheaper and more reliable, the untold stories of the Space Shuttle
program (at least most of them) will ϐinally become a reality, allowing
humankind to become a spacefaring civilization.
REFERENCES
NASA (2008) A Near-Term, High-Conϐidence Heavy Lift Launch Vehicle. Available at: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ citations/ 20080043657
https:// www. space. com/ 12379-ϐinal-space-shuttle-mission-landing-atlantis-shuttle-era. html
https:// www. ulalaunch. com/ rockets/ vulcan-centaur
https:// www. orbitalreef. com/ 
https:// www. nanoracks. com/ 
https:// www. momentus. space/ 
https:// www. astroscale. com/ 
https:// www. axiomspace. com/ 
https:// www. sierraspace. com/ 
https:// www. spacex. com/ 
Footnotes

1
2
3
4
5
6
This number includes the last fatal mission, STS-107.
 
The last ϐlight is not considered as she did not reach orbit.
 
During STS-51A in November 1984, two telecommunication satellites were recovered, returned
to Earth for refurbishment and returned to orbit years later on an expendable launcher. On both
STS-51I in August 1985 and STS-42 in January 1992, a large telecommunication satellite was
repaired by crew and brought back to life.
 
During STS-41C in April 1984, the crew repaired the solar watcher Solar Max and ϐive servicing
ϐlights repaired and upgraded the Hubble Space Telescope.
 
Built by the European space industry, Spacelab consisted of a pressurized module to extend the
working area available to the crew, as well as an unpressurized carrier and other related
hardware.
 
This is how the Boeing B747 is often referred to, giving that it is one of the most beautiful and
signiϐicant aircraft ever built.
 

Index
A
Airborne Support Equipment
Apollo Telescope Mount
B
Boosters
Abort modes
Filament Wound Case booster
General Dynamics Liquid Rocket Booster
Liquid Fly Back Booster
Martin Marietta Liquid Rocket Boosters
Solid Rocket Boosters
C
Charles D. Walker
Construction ϐixture
Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES)
Convair
Cryogenic Fluid Management
Cryogenic Fluid Management Experiment
Cryogenic Fluid Management Facility
Cryogenic propellant transfer
D
Department of Defence (DoD)
E
Electrophoresis Operations in Space
External Tank
Aft Cargo Carrier
Large Area Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope
Propellant Scavenging System
Structural conϐiguration
Very Large Space Telescope
Extra Vehicular Activity (EVA)

F
Frederick H. Hack
G
Gamma Ray Observatory
General Dynamics
Grumman Aerospace Corporation
L
Launch pad
Flame trench
Flyback Booster Processing Facility
SLC-6
Liquid Acquisition Devices
Lockheed Martin Space Corporation
M
Martin Marietta
Maxim Allen “Max” Faget
McDonnell Douglas
O
Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle
Orbital Service Module
Orbital Transfer Vehicle
P
Perkin-Elmer
Propellant Management Devices
R
Robotic arm
Rockwell International
S
Solar array
Space Based Solar Satellite
Spacelab

T
Teleoperator Retrieval System
Thermo and Hydrodynamic Experiment Research Module in Orbit
Titan launcher
U
Upper stage
Advanced Shuttle Upper Stage (ASUS)
Centaur-G
Centaur-G Prime
Inertial Upper Stage (IUS)
Payload Assist Module (PAM-D)
US Air Force
US Congress
V
Vehicle Assembly Building

