www.allitebooks.com

SketchUp 2014 for Architectural 
Visualization
Second Edition
Create stunning photorealistic and artistic visuals 
of your SketchUp models
Thomas Bleicher
Robin de Jongh
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

SketchUp 2014 for Architectural Visualization
Second Edition
Copyright © 2014 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either expressed or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: April 2010
Second edition: May 2014
Production Reference: 1200514
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78355-841-4
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Aniket Sawant (aniket_sawant_photography@hotmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Thomas Bleicher
Robin de Jongh
Reviewers
Ricky Mujica
Atulit Kumar
Francis Perea
Orlando Toro
Commissioning Editor
Martin Bell
Acquisition Editors
Rebecca Youé
David Barnes
Content Development Editor
Azharuddin Sheikh
Copy Editors
Alisha Aranha
Janbal Dharmaraj
Mradula Hegde
Insiya Morbiwala
Karuna Narayanan
Laxmi Subramanian
Technical Editors
Kunal Anil Gaikwad
Pramod Kumavat
Mukul Pawar
Siddhi Rane
Project Coordinator
Kranti Berde
Proofreaders
Ameesha Green
Linda Morris
Bernadette Watkins
Indexer
Tejal Soni
Graphics
Abhinash Sahu
Production Coordinator
Nitesh Thakur
Cover Work
Nitesh Thakur
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Thomas Bleicher has graduated as an architect in Germany and worked as an 
architect, lighting designer, and daylight consultant in the UK. SketchUp is a central 
part in his work. He is now working as a design coordinator in the Cayman Islands.
To Jacqueline, for everything.
Robin de Jongh is the author of several books on professional workflows with 
SketchUp, GIMP, and Unity3D. He has worked for many years in the construction 
industry as a CAD designer and at one time ran his own architectural visualization 
company using SketchUp as the main presentation tool. He now works as an 
acquisitions editor for Manning Publications where he mentors new authors, 
and publishes books on Open Source technology topics.
You can find him blogging at www.robindejongh.com.
I would like to thank my co-author Thomas Bleicher, for an amazing 
job with the update and for working so hard to make the second 
edition of this book even more valuable for the readers. Thanks to 
our Acquisition Editor Rebecca Youé who ably guided the project 
from start to finish. Also, special thanks to Kim Frederik and Patrick 
Nieborg who have selflessly guided a generation of would-be 
digital artists on various SketchUp rendering forums, to Ioannis 
Pantazopoulos—creator of Thea Render, and the still great (and 
still free) Kerkythea. Thanks to the entire team at SketchUp HQ for 
their continued superb work on SketchUp, the software that didn't 
just lower the entry barrier for 3D modeling and visualization... 
but destroyed it!
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Ricky Mujica is a New York City born illustrator and alumni of High School of 
Art and Design, Parsons School of Design, and Parsons in Paris. He specializes in 
book cover illustration using digital media, and fine art using traditional media. 
He started his illustration career in 1983 using traditional oil paints and made his 
first digital illustrations in 1997. He has hundreds of illustrations to his credit and 
has collaborated in beta testing and the creation of several user manuals for projects 
involving specialized, industry-specific CG software packages.
His clients include Harper Collins, Harlequin Books, Bantam, Dell, Little Brown 
Books, New York Times, Daily News, Ebony Magazine, US Tennis, 7UP, Scholastic 
Books, among others.
He has been included in the Society of Illustrators' annual shows on several 
occasions and has won several awards including "Best in Show" at the 
New York City Art Expo.
I would like to thank Packt Publishing for giving me the opportunity 
to review this fantastic book.
Atulit Kumar is a graduate student at Carnegie Mellon University's Entertainment 
Technology Center. His primary interests are computer graphics and specifically 
physically based rendering and animation. Over the course of his undergraduate 
and graduate studies, he has interned at Intel Labs and Disney Research where 
he researched on high performance computing and physically based character 
animation, respectively.
He is also a technical reviewer of 3D Printing with SketchUp, Packt Publishing.
www.allitebooks.com

Francis Perea is a Professional Education Professor at Consejería de Educación 
de la Junta de Andalucía with more than 14 years of experience. He has specialized 
in System Administration, Web Development, and Content Management Systems. 
In his spare time, he works as a freelancer and collaborates, among others, with ñ 
multimedia, a little design studio in Córdoba working as a system administrator 
and main web developer.
When not sitting in front of a computer, he can be found running or ridding his bike 
through the tracks and hills in Axarquía County where he lives.
I would like to thank my wife, Salomé, and our three kids, Paula, 
Álvaro, and Javi, for all the support they give me, even when we 
all are busy. There are no words enough to express my gratitude.

I would also thank my colleagues in ñ multimedia and patient 
students. The need to be at the level you demand is what keeps 
me going forward.
Orlando Toro is a visualization artist and freelance designer based in 
Barquisimeto, Venezuela. His background is Computer Science with extensive 
experience with PC and Network Support. After discovering the world of Computer 
Graphics, he specialized in 2D and 3D graphic arts, which has allowed him to 
produce visuals for a wide range of projects, in and out his country. He also works as 
a photographer and session drummer. He is the CEO and Owner of Atenax Project 
(visual art) and bbluestudios (photography and film), 3D partner at Mytoslab in 
Greece, Technical Reviewer at Packt Publishing, and contributor of Semeruco Films, 
Unidad Metrica and Aporta Comunicación Integral in Venezuela. Outside CG, 
Orlando is a partner at Odontospa (dental clinic and spa) and CEO and founder of 
Tamborire.org (Online Musicians Academic). When he is not doing 3D, he is busy 
with photography, training workshops, playing drums, or just hanging out with his 
wife and son, which he really loves to do.
I want to first of all thank God for all the blessings, to my family, 
my wife, and my son for always being there for me at all times and 
being my light on the road. Thanks to Packt Publishing crew for the 
opportunity, support, confidence, and such a fabulous time creating 
this book. It was an amazing experience!
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to 
your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up 
for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books 
and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read, and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Quick Start Tutorial	
7
The SketchUp interface	
8
The main window and pallets	
9
Toolbars	
9
The status bar	
10
The Value Control Box	
10
Pallet windows	
10
The Getting Started toolbar	
11
Navigation	
11
Select and Erase	
12
Drawing tools	
13
Edit tools	
14
Core concepts	
15
Splitting and healing	
15
Groups	
15
Inferencing	
16
Layers and visibility	
16
Further resources	
16
Modeling the room	
17
Setting up the view	
21
Setting up the camera view	
22
Saving the camera view	
23
Setting up the sun	
23
Applying SketchUp materials	
24
Timber flooring material	
25
Modeling the window	
28
Painting with digital photos	
31
Doing a test rendering	
33
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Enhancing SketchUp materials	
34
Saving the image	
38
Summary	
38
Chapter 2: Collecting a Toolset	
39
Free, libre, or what?	
40
Trimble SketchUp	
40
SketchUp Pro, LayOut, and Style Builder	
41
The 3D Warehouse	
42
Unlimited upgrades – Ruby plugins	
45
The Extension Warehouse	
45
The Extension Manager	
46
Old style Ruby scripts	
48
Thea Render	
50
Why use Thea Render?	
50
Installing Thea Studio	
50
Installing the Thea for SketchUp plugin	
51
Downloading bonus content	
51
Image-processing studio with GIMP	
53
Why do I need a professional-level image processor?	
53
Grabbing a copy of GIMP	
54
Becoming a movie-making genius...almost!	
55
Why can't I just use the output from SketchUp?	
55
VirtualDub	
56
Mac alternatives	
57
HandBrake	
57
Summary	
57
Chapter 3: Composing the Scene	
59
The importance of planning	
60
How to begin with the end in mind	
60
Sketch out your visuals	
61
Think like a film set designer	
62
Setting up an arch-viz scene	
63
Importing terrain data	
63
Using a site photo with Match Photo	
66
What you need from a Match Photo image	
67
Setting up a Match Photo scene	
68
3D drawing in a 2D photo	
71
Setting up a real-world location and the Sun's position	
73
Setting up the time and date for shadows	
75
Sketch plan	
76

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Starting with a 2D CAD site plan	
77
Setting up a CAD site plan	
78
Cleaning up the imported CAD data	
80
Importing 3D data from CAD	
81
Fleshing out your site plan	
82
Massing the buildings	
82
Setting up the camera to challenge and impress	
84
Changing the field of view	
85
Think like a pigeon	
85
Orthographic and parallel projection	
88
Saving days of toil with ready-made scenery	
89
Billboard scenery elements	
89
Creating billboard elements	
91
Framing the scene with entourage	
92
The specifity trap	
93
Rough placeholders	
93
Inserting entourage placeholders	
94
Printing a test view	
94
Summary	
95
Chapter 4: Modeling for Visualization	
97
Project file layout	
98
Creating the basic building shape	
98
Swapping _LR with _HR resolution versions	
99
Carving out the detail	
100
Modeling buildings in SketchUp	
101
Modeling detail from CAD elevations	
101
Modeling from a photograph	
104
Modeling by eye or measurements	
107
Low polygon modeling techniques	
108
What is low polygon?	
108
So what's the big deal about low polygon modeling?	
109
Will I see it?	
111
Can I replace it with 2D?	
111
Can I reduce the number of segments in an arc or circle?	
111
Using components to increase productivity	
114
How to benefit most from using components	
115
Using dummy components	
115
Using the Outliner for easy access	
117
Why you should name components	
118
3D Warehouse components – problems to be aware of	
118
Purging 3D Warehouse components for your own use	
119
Default material	
120

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Handling challenging modeling tasks	
120
Windows and doors	
121
Roof	
124
Flashing details	
125
Modeling ridge tiles	
127
Copying the tiles	
129
Curtain walls	
133
Masonry features	
134
Roads	
134
Realistic roads and pavements	
135
Landscaping with sandbox – watch your polygon count	
136
Modeling for realistic highlights in interior scenes	
136
What's the problem with sharp edges?	
136
The RoundCorner plugin	
137
Preparing for photorealistic rendering	
138
Summary	
141
Chapter 5: Applying Textures and Materials for 
Photorealistic Rendering	
143
Deciding to use textures	
144
The texturing process flow chart	
144
Beginning with basic photo textures	
145
Starting with Match Photo textures	
146
Using textures from the photo modeling process	
147
Using basic seamless textures	
147
Applying SketchUp's own textures	
147
Scaling textures	
148
Coloring textures	
149
Using Google Street View	
150
Traveling the world for real textures	
150
Advanced texturing techniques	
152
Applying whole photographs as textures	
152
Where to find texture photos	
153
Setting up a fake room	
154
Creating balsa wood film scenery props	
158
Using, finding, and creating tileable textures	
161
Manipulating textures	
161
Exact texture placement	
162
The free pins mode	
164
Creating your own seamless textures	
164
Correcting perspective in GIMP	
164
Tiling via an automatic filter	
167

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Tiling method two	
168
Importing a texture into SketchUp	
171
Saving a material to a library	
173
Quick recap on textures	
175
Advanced image considerations	
175
Texture size	
175
File type	
176
Compression	
177
Balancing size and compression	
177
Modifying textures for added realism	
180
Telling SketchUp to link to an image editor	
180
Making unique textures for surfaces	
181
Editing textures in GIMP	
182
Adding some muck and variation	
183
Adding extra elements to a texture	
185
Adding extra detail	
188
Knowing when to call it quits	
189
Summary	
189
Chapter 6: Entourage the SketchUp Way	
191
The notice hierarchy	
192
Supporting the scene	
192
Be the marketing exec	
193
Choosing entourage	
194
At which stage do I introduce entourage?	
194
What's my acquisition strategy?	
195
2D or not 2D, that is the question	
196
Furniture	
196
Manufacturers' websites	
198
The 3D Warehouse	
198
List of websites	
198
People cutouts	
199
Creating 2D people components	
201
Scaling the person	
202
Tracing the outline	
202
Applying the photo texture	
204
Checking for halos	
204
Drawing the innards	
205
Creating the face-me component	
206
3D people and the uncanny valley	
207

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Vegetation	
208
Non-photoreal sketchy trees	
208
Want an automatic veggie maker?	
209
Vehicles	
209
Summary	
210
Chapter 7: Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp	
211
SketchUp's native output	
212
Editing SketchUp's built-in styles	
213
Get some style!	
215
Saving 2D images in SketchUp	
215
The Dennis Technique	
216
Setting up the Dennis Technique in SketchUp	
218
Creating the Color Wash image	
219
Lines only	
220
Lines and shadows	
221
Exporting the scene tabs	
222
Setting up GIMP for the Dennis Technique	
224
Using layer masks in GIMP	
228
Using layer masks for the Dennis effect	
228
Using a sky image in GIMP	
230
Creating a vignette layer	
232
Modifying the final composition with new SketchUp output	
234
Modifying the Dennis Technique	
234
Richard's sketchy pencil technique	
237
Setting up the Pencil Sketch Technique in SketchUp	
237
Setting up the Pencil Sketch Technique in GIMP	
241
Creating pencil shading in GIMP	
243
Adding some grunge – the Dirty Hands layer	
244
Finishing touches	
245
Summary	
247
Chapter 8: Photorealistic Rendering	
249
Why use an external renderer?	
249
Geometry	
250
Materials	
250
Lighting	
252
Daylight	
252
Artificial lighting	
252
Advanced features	
253
Setting up for photoreal rendering	
253
Rendering process	
254

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Thea for SketchUp interface	
254
The Thea Tool window	
254
The Thea Rendering Window	
255
Step 1 – Preparing the SketchUp model	
257
Step 2 – Performing an initial test render	
257
Common import bugs and how to rectify them	
259
Clay rendering	
260
Step 3 – Assigning materials	
261
Applying predefined materials	
261
Light-emitting materials	
264
One-sided materials	
267
Importing Thea materials to SketchUp	
268
Summary on materials	
269
Step 4 – Defining lighting	
269
Preparing the test scene	
270
Using daylight	
271
Testing the sun and sky with clay render	
271
Adjusting the daylight settings in Thea	
273
Image-based lighting	
274
How Smart IBL works	
277
Saving the sky settings	
277
Artificial lighting	
278
Creating Spotlights in SketchUp	
278
Rendering artificial light	
279
Changing the light parameters	
281
Point lights	
283
Adding light-emitting materials	
283
The final indoor render	
284
Step 5 – Inserting extra entourage	
285
Step 6 – Production rendering	
287
Test production render	
287
Reducing the render time	
288
The final render	
288
Saving the final image	
289
Step 7 – Postproduction rendering	
290
Depth render	
291
Alpha (mask) render	
292
Summary	
293

Table of Contents
[ viii ]
Chapter 9: Postproduction in GIMP	
295
Part 1 – tweaks and lighting levels	
296
Adjusting levels automatically	
297
Adjusting levels manually	
298
Using the Levels dialog	
298
Adjusting the brightness balance	
301
Correcting individual color channels	
301
Removing unwanted image noise	
302
Using the G'MIC plugin	
304
Adding light bloom	
306
Simulating depth of field	
309
Creating depth of field using a depth render	
311
Lighting effects	
314
Adding light effects in GIMP	
314
Discovering weird and wonderful lighting filters	
316
Using a vignette layer to finish the image	
316
Fading out the edges with a vignette	
316
Part 2 – compositing multiple images	
319
Using a mask render for windows	
319
SketchUp window reflections without rendering	
320
Using paths to mask photos	
323
Summary	
327
Chapter 10: Animations	
329
Using the same principles for stills and animation	
329
Making a start – sketching it out	
330
Writing out the itinerary	
330
Generating the storyboard	
331
Dealing with detractions	
332
The storyboard	
332
Animating in SketchUp	
333
Creating a simple walkthrough	
334
Animation settings	
336
Getting the timing right	
337
Adding individual timing to scenes	
337
The Flightpath animation	
339
Smooth transitions	
339
Fine-tuning with CameraControls	
343
Camera pan, roll, and tilt	
343
Let's put it together	
344
Interesting details and viewpoints	
346

Table of Contents
[ ix ]
Authoring video sequences	
347
High-resolution animation from SketchUp	
349
Saving individual frames for an animation	
349
Animating with Thea	
350
Compositing in VirtualDub	
351
Creating an animation from still images	
352
Creating the final video composition	
355
Compressing for online streaming services	
356
Creating an MP4 video with HandBrake	
356
Summary	
359
Chapter 11: Presenting Visuals in LayOut	
361
Getting started with LayOut	
362
Creating a custom page border	
362
Using Auto-Text	
365
Displaying SketchUp models in LayOut	
366
Preparing SketchUp scenes for LayOut	
366
Aligning the view to the model	
367
Display a SketchUp 3D view	
368
Adjusting the display style	
370
Using SketchUp styles	
371
Creating multiple views in LayOut	
372
Arranging the viewports	
374
Annotations in LayOut	
375
Using scrapbooks	
375
Displaying SketchUp sections	
377
Creating section line work	
377
Dimensions	
380
Slideshows and presentations	
380
Creating a presentation	
381
Adding further elements to enhance LayOut pages	
381
Exporting and printing	
382
Exporting a PDF document from LayOut	
382
Export to print	
383
Summary	
383
Chapter 12: Interactive Visualization	
385
Lighting animation with Thea Relight	
385
Preparing the SketchUp scene	
386
Exporting to Thea Studio	
387
Using Relight	
388

Table of Contents
[ x ]
Creating a Relight animation	
389
Changing materials with Colimo	
391
Immersive environment with LumenRT	
392
Using the LumenRT plugin in SketchUp	
392
Editing materials	
393
Adding digital nature components	
394
Adding lights	
396
Exporting the scene	
397
Navigating the LiveCube	
398
LiveCube tools and settings	
399
Exporting images	
400
Creating an animation	
401
Editing an animation sequence	
402
Editing a movie	
402
Exporting a video	
403
Publishing the LiveCube	
404
Summary	
405
Appendix: Choosing a Rendering Software	
407
Index	
415

Preface
SketchUp 2014 for Architectural Visualization Second Edition shows you how to master 
SketchUp's unique tools to create architectural visuals using professional rendering 
and image editing techniques in a clear and friendly way. You will be able to get 
started immediately using SketchUp 2014 (Pro or Maker), professional rendering, 
and image processing software.
The book shows you how to create watercolor and pencil-style sketchy visuals. You 
will also create composites of real and rendered images, creating digital and paper 
presentations to wow clients. If you are impatient, you will find a "quickstart" tutorial 
in the first chapter to get you rendering a photorealistic scene immediately. The rest of 
the book builds on this knowledge by introducing you gradually to in-depth concepts, 
tricks, and insights in an easy-to-follow format through quick tutorials.
Using easy step-by-step explanations, this book opens the door to the world of 
architectural visualization. With no prior visualization experience, you will quickly 
get to grips with materials, texturing, composition, photo-compositing, lighting 
setup, rendering, and postprocessing. You will be able to take SketchUp's "sketchy" 
output and add the artistic touch to create pencil and watercolor scenes.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Quick Start Tutorial, provides an immediate fix if you're impatient to get 
photorealistic rendered SketchUp scenes. Straight away, you will learn how to model 
the gallery scene, set up lighting, add materials, and finally render in Thea Render.
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, helps you select the right SketchUp 2014 edition. 
Did you know that by downloading a few free plugins or other software, you can 
turn SketchUp into a fully functional 3D visualization and animation suite, similar 
to high-end commercial software? Follow this chapter to obtain all the goodies.
Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, discusses how to take the hard work out of modeling 
by setting up your scenes prior to starting modeling work. You will learn how 
to start from CAD plans or site images and build the scene optimized for quick 
rendering or animation later.
Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization, discusses a number of techniques specific to 
SketchUp. SketchUp is so easy that we are tempted to jump right in and model 
everything. But this can lead to an ineffective model, which will slow down your 
computer and your progress. This chapter will lead you through some advanced 
modeling methods that will save you time and hassle and will allow you to produce 
large and complex models.
Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering, is concerned 
with applying materials and textures for added realism, as the name suggests. 
Now that we all have digital cameras and easy access to online image resources, 
we have an effective way of "dressing" the model. The tutorials in this chapter show 
you how to use SketchUp's unique photo and material handling tools to create 
intricately textured models.
Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way, shows the challenges and solutions for 
using entourage. After you've created the scene, modeled the building, and 
applied materials, you'll want to add life to the scene with entourage. Learn how 
to find the best people, foliage, vehicles, and furniture online or create your own 
personal collection. With the methods in this chapter, you will be able to build up 
a comprehensive library to use, give, or sell to others.
Chapter 7, Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp, discusses all the basics you need to 
create artistic visual styles using GIMP. Exporting images from SketchUp is not the 
only way to produce sketchy visuals. By combining several image layers in GIMP or 
Photoshop, you will learn how to simulate sketchy pencil and watercolor styles. 
Fans of this style will be pleased to know that the famous Dennis Technique is 
presented in this chapter along with Dennis's own creations.
Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering, lets you explore our rendering software in 
more detail, giving you the skills and confidence to tackle any rendering project. 
A hassle-free method of working is introduced along with proven settings for 
outdoor and indoor scenes.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 9, Postproduction in GIMP, lets you double your skills as a rendering artist. 
The rendering process isn't the end of the line, because there are lots of subtle 
but important after-effects you can apply to make the image even more effective. 
This chapter covers how to add reflections without rendering, creating depth of 
field effects from a depth render, adjusting levels for realistic daylight scenes, and 
composing real and rendered images.
Chapter 10, Animations, discusses the basics for producing animated walkthroughs 
and flyovers. The crowning glory of your visualization project is likely to be a 
rendered or artistic-style animation. The tutorials in this chapter will take you 
through this step-by-step process, showing you how to create storyboards, set 
up cameras and paths in SketchUp with extra plugin functionality, export test 
animations and final renders. Photoreal animations are then combined to make 
a simple show reel.
Chapter 11, Presenting Visuals in LayOut, lets you experience the capabilities of the 
LayOut tool. LayOut is bundled as part of SketchUp Pro and is introduced in this 
chapter for those who wish to explore the free trial before committing to Pro. You 
will learn how to bring together SketchUp models and artistic or rendered output 
into a screen presentation or printed portfolio, adding borders, text, and dimensions.
Chapter 12, Interactive Visualization, takes you beyond the limits of classic architectural 
visualization and explores options of interactive 3D presentations. We will show you 
how to use new technologies to create a first-hand experience of the SketchUp design 
for your clients.
Appendix, Choosing a Rendering Software, gives you a few pointers towards choosing a 
rendering software that will fit your requirements and lists a few representative and 
popular choices.
What you need for this book
To run the examples in the book, you will need the following software:
•	
SketchUp 2014 (Maker or Pro)
•	
Thea Render (the trial version will do if you just want to try the waters)
•	
GIMP or Photoshop for editing and combining images
•	
VirtualDub (Windows) or Zeitraffer (Mac)
•	
MovieMaker (Windows) or iMovie (Mac) to create movies
An Internet connection is needed for some sections of the book.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Who this book is for
This book is suitable for all levels of SketchUp users, from amateurs right through 
to architectural technicians, professional architects, and designers who want to take 
their 3D designs to the next level of presentation. SketchUp 2014 for Architectural 
Visualization is also particularly suitable as a companion to any architectural design 
or multimedia course and is accessible to anyone who has familiarized themselves 
with the basics of SketchUp through online videos.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning:
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"Save in the My Documents folder."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on 
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: 
"Select the image you want to use and click on Open".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for 
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.

Preface
[ 5 ]
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send 
us a note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or e-mail 
suggest@packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book on, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this book
We also provide you a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams 
used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the changes in 
the output. You can download this  file from: https://www.packtpub.com/sites/
default/files/downloads/8414OT_ColoredImages.pdf
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased 
from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you purchased this book 
elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to 
have the files e-mailed directly to you.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes to 
happen. If you find a mistake in our books – maybe a mistake in the text or the code 
– we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so you can save other 
readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent version of the book. If you 
find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/support, 
selecting your book, clicking on the let us know link, and entering the details of your 
errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the errata 
added to any list of existing errata. Any existing errata can be viewed by selecting 
your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 6 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, 
please provide us with the location address or web site name immediately so that 
we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Quick Start Tutorial
So, you've decided to learn how to use SketchUp for architectural visualization? 
Maybe a friend told you how easy it is, and you decided to give it a go yourself? 
Or you heard all the hype about it on the Internet? Well, whatever your reason for 
picking up this book, you've come to the right place! SketchUp is the easiest, most 
powerful, effective, and fun-to-use application you will ever come across for 3D 
work. This book shows you how to use SketchUp and other software to achieve 
great architectural visuals in no time.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 8 ]
This chapter shows you all you need to get up and running immediately, and it 
will give you a flavor of what is in the rest of the book. In this chapter, you will 
learn how to produce the following:
•	
A photorealistic rendering of a scene modeled in SketchUp
•	
Real-world shadows and lighting using a physically accurate light simulator
•	
Materials that reflect or absorb light
When you have followed the tutorial and seen how easy it is to produce great results 
with SketchUp, you will be able to go on and refine your skills and techniques in the 
subsequent chapters. The rendering software you'll be using is Thea Render, which 
is a professional visualization software. Rendering is the process that generates an 
image from the 3D-scene geometry you prepare in SketchUp. To find out more about 
Thea and how to install it, jump to Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, but come back again!
Here's what you can expect from just 20 minutes of modeling and rendering:
•	
Reflection, highlights, and surface texture even with simple materials
•	
Soft shadows and indirectly lit surfaces
•	
Physically accurate lighting from the Sun and sky
If all that's achieved with just a few minutes in SketchUp and a bit of rendering, what 
do you think you could do after reading the whole book? Have you ever achieved 
such great results as quickly in any other software package?
This chapter is as much about expelling the myths about SketchUp as it is an 
introduction to photorealistic architectural visualization. I hope you will be 
enthused by it when you see the quality of your own results.
If you don't have SketchUp installed already, you should now 
skip ahead to Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, where you will find 
the download and installation instructions for SketchUp and 
Thea Render.
The SketchUp interface
To make sure that you know at least a bit about SketchUp, we will give you an 
ultra-short overview of the main interface elements and drawing tools. If you 
already know how to use it, you can skip this section and start with the Modeling 
the room section.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
The main window and pallets
The SketchUp user interface consists of the main 3D window with tool bars and a 
number of pallets that can be switched on and off as required.
The main window along the top edge has a menu bar with several entries 
(on Mac, this will appear at the top of the screen) and a number of toolbars. 
When you start SketchUp with a new empty scene, you will find a stylized 
person near the coordinate origin. This person can give you a bit of reference 
about the size of your scene until you have added your own geometry.
Toolbars
Toolbars behave differently on Windows and Macs: In Windows, you can enable and 
disable individual toolbars by navigating to View | Toolbars. For a start, you should 
have at least the Getting Started toolbar enabled. As in other Windows applications, 
toolbars can be disconnected from the main window and left floating on the screen 
or aligned along the vertical edge of the main window. J
ust click on the small grey 
dots at the left edge of a toolbar and drag it around.
On Mac, you only get one toolbar, but it is easy to customize its content. 
Just right-click and select Customize Toolbar from the context menu. You can 
enable additional floating toolbars by navigating to View | Tool Pallets. These 
tool pallets can't be docked to the main window, though.
Some plugins also add new toolbars to your screen when they are installed. 
You can enable and disable these like any other toolbar.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 10 ]
The status bar
Along the bottom of the main window, you can see the status bar. You should 
always keep an eye on the text displayed here, because it gives you a clue about 
the options that are possible with your currently selected tool. For example, in the 
previous screenshot, the line tool is active, and SketchUp expects the input of the 
endpoint or a numeric length for the line.
The Value Control Box
Anytime SketchUp allows you to enter a value such as the dimensions of a 
rectangle, you can just type the values. There is no input box that you have to 
click first. Whatever you type will be displayed in the Value Control Box (VCB). 
This is the small text area at the right end of the status bar.
SketchUp is very accommodating in what it allows for input. Although SketchUp 
uses inches as its internal unit, the default unit size for numeric values is set via 
the file-specific template. If you use a template based on millimeters and enter 500, 
SketchUp will create a line or rectangle of 500 mm length. If you use a template 
based on inches, it will instead create a 500 inch long element. However, you can 
add a common unit indicator such as 500mm (for 500 millimeter) or 5'6" (for 5 feet 
and 6 inches) to enter a dimension regardless of the current template.
Other possible inputs are the number of elements for an array or the number of 
sides for a circle or polygon. Just remember to look at the status bar for a hint.
Pallet windows
The dialog boxes or pallet windows are not integrated in the main window. These 
are individual windows that float on top of the main SketchUp window and usually 
contain lists of materials or styles to choose from. You can enable and disable the 
dialog boxes via the Window menu. Some tools (such as the Paint Bucket tool) also 
show the associated dialog box when they are selected. Some dialogs are universally 
useful, and you should keep them around any time. These are as follows:
•	
Entity Info
•	
Layers
•	
Materials
•	
Outliner
Other dialog boxes are only useful for specific models (such as Component Attributes) 
or at a later stage in the modeling process. We will introduce each window later when 
we need its functionality.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
You can organize your dialog windows in a stack and move them around the screen 
as one unit. The stack also snaps to the top or side of your screen and the side of the 
main SketchUp window. In the stack, all windows will take the same width, but you 
can still change the height. You can also double-click on the title bar of a window to 
collapse or expand its main content. You can keep many dialogs in the stack if you 
keep the windows that you are not using at that moment collapsed.
In the rest of the book, we usually refer to the dialog windows as pallets to avoid 
confusion with other dialogs that occasionally pop up in SketchUp. This is also 
consistent with other applications such as GIMP.
The Getting Started toolbar
Without any modifications, SketchUp's default toolbar contains a selection of tools 
that are frequently used and are important to know. This selection is called the 
Getting Started toolbar. The following screenshot shows the Getting Started toolbar:
Navigation
To move around in the 3D scene, you use the navigation tools. You can also find 
these in the Camera toolbar and the Camera drop-down menu. The following 
screenshot shows the navigation tools:
Orbit
The Orbit tool (the icon with the red and green arrows) is what you will mostly use 
to move your viewpoint. When you click on the tool button, your cursor changes 
to the tool icon, and you can change your perspective viewpoint up, down, left, or 
right by left-clicking on the scene and moving the mouse while you keep the button 
pressed. Note that your view also rotates so that you are still looking at the same 
object, only from another direction.
You can quickly activate the Orbit tool via the O key on your keyboard, but the best 
way to switch to Orbit is via the middle mouse button or scroll wheel. Just pressing 
and holding the button will activate the Orbit tool without interrupting any other 
tool that you are using.
www.allitebooks.com

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 12 ]
Pan
Next in line is the Pan tool (hand icon); it is also accessible via the H key. This tool 
translates your viewpoint relative to the scene. Again, select the tool and keep the 
left-mouse button pressed while you move your mouse over the screen. You can see 
how the scene "moves" in the 3D window according to your mouse movements. In 
reality, it's not the scene that moves, but it is your viewpoint (or camera if you like) 
that moves in the opposite direction.
Zoom
Finally, there are the Zoom and Zoom Extents tools that will move your viewpoint 
in and out of the scene, thus showing you a smaller or larger part of the model. The 
Zoom tool works again via the left-mouse button, but it is far easier to zoom in and 
out with a scroll wheel on your mouse. The Zoom Extents tool moves and centers the 
camera to show the whole model. This is very useful whenever you get lost in your 
scene or something obstructs your view of the part that you want to work on.
Keyboard shortcuts
Frequently used tools are accessible via keyboard shortcuts. Mastering 
these can speed up your SketchUp work significantly. Check the 
SketchUp quick reference cards available at www.sketchup.com/
content/quick-reference-cards-0 for details.
Select and Erase
The Select tool (arrow) and Eraser tool are not actually drawing tools, but 
you should know how to remove elements when you have created them. 
The following screenshot shows the Select and Erase tools:
The Select tool works as expected. Just select the tool (the keyboard shortcut is 
Space bar) and click on any element in the scene. If you hold down the Shift key, 
you can add and remove elements from the selection. If you double-click on 
an element, the elements that are immediately connected are also selected and 
triple-clicking will select all the elements that are in contact with it. For example, 
if you click on one side of a cube, only the polygon will be selected. Double-click on 
the cube, and you select the polygon and the four surrounding edges. Triple-click 
and the entire cube will be selected.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
To use the Eraser tool, you don't need to select an element; you just use the tool and 
click on the element you want to delete. Intuitively, the Delete key on your keyboard 
works as well when the item is selected.
Drawing tools
To create new elements, you use the drawing tools. You can also find them in the 
Drawing toolbar or via the Draw drop-down menu. In SketchUp 2014, the Getting 
Started toolbar shows a collapsed view of the main drawing tools. To access the 
hidden functions, click on the arrow next to each icon and select the specific feature 
from the drop-down list. In the following image, you can see the default tool icons 
and the functions that they access:
The Line tool draws a straight line between two points. A line in SketchUp is also 
called an edge. Three or more lines can form the boundary of a polygon. When you 
create a closed line loop out of coplanar lines, a 3D surface is created between them.
The Rectangle tool creates a rectangular polygon and the four edges surrounding 
it. If you delete the polygon afterwards, the edges will still remain. You can use the 
numeric input option to specify an exact width and height after you have placed the 
first point of the rectangle.
For the Circle and Polygon tools, you first place the center point and specify 
a second point on the circumference. Alternatively, you can specify the radius 
numerically. If you type a number before you place the center point, you set the 
number of sides (in SketchUp, even a circle is made out of short straight segments, 
but you usually don't see them).
You can also specify the sides of a circle segment created with the 2 Point Arc tool, 
but to place it, you pick the start and end points and then indicate the bulge of the 
arc (numerically or by picking a third point). SketchUp 2014 also introduced two 
new arc tools: Arc and Pie. You use these by picking the center of the arc first and 
then the start and end of the segment.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 14 ]
Edit tools
In SketchUp, the drawing elements only create flat surfaces. To create volumetric 3D 
objects, you have to extrude one of these polygons using the Push/Pull tool. You can 
see the icon in the following screenshot (first icon from the left):
The Push/Pull tool is probably the quintessential SketchUp tool. To use it, select the 
tool and then move the cursor over an existing surface. Surfaces that can be extruded 
will be shown in a darker shade while the cursor is above them. Click anywhere 
inside the surface and move the mouse up or down along the surface normal. You 
will see that the polygon will be extruded to a box or prism shape along its surface 
normal. To set the endpoint for the extrusion, type the desired height of the object or 
click somewhere in the scene to set the height via reference.
The next modification tool is the Offset tool. The workflow of this tool is similar 
to that of the Push/Pull tool, but the edges of the surface will be offset in the plane 
of the surface, not orthogonal to it. Again, you can specify the offset distance via 
keyboard inputs or reference points.
The Move tool (four-way arrow) is a universal tool in SketchUp. You can use it to 
move an object as well as rotate or copy it or create a linear array. To simply move 
something, select the object (or objects) and then activate the Move tool. Click 
somewhere in the scene to set a reference point and move the cursor in the direction 
that you want the object to move. You can set the distance via keyboard inputs or by 
clicking again to set the end point for the move.
To create a copy, you follow the same steps mentioned earlier, but you have to hold 
down the Ctrl key (or the Option key on Mac) before you click to set the start point. 
A useful variation of this is the creation of an array instead of a single copy: After 
you have placed your first copy, you can type an asterisk (*) followed by the number 
of copies you want to create. For example, type *5 if you want to create five copies of 
the object, each with the same distance from the previous copy. You can also move 
the first copy to the end of the array and then type /5 to create four further copies, 
which are evenly spaced between the first and the last ones.
The Rotate tool (two round arrows) works like the Move tool but rotates the object 
around a center. It can also be used to create polar arrays of objects.
The Scale tool is the last of the standard modification tools. When you select it, you 
will see green boxes around the object that you want to scale. Select one of the corner 
boxes to scale the object in two (or three) dimensions, or select a box in the middle to 
scale in one dimension only. You can also type in a number such as 2.0 for a fixed 
scaling factor to double the size of the object.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
To mirror an object in SketchUp, use the Scale tool, scale the object 
along a single axis, and use a scaling factor of -1.
Core concepts
The tools we have introduced so far should be familiar to you if you have used 3D or 
CAD software before. The following sections highlight a few of the drawing concepts 
that make SketchUp such a unique tool. It is essential to understand these ideas to 
achieve a productive workflow and get the most out of the SketchUp tool set.
Splitting and healing
Lines and other edges that are part of a new element do interact with existing 
geometry: a line crossing another line or 3D surface will split this other element in 
two (two independent lines or two surfaces). On the other hand, if you remove a line 
between coplanar surfaces, the surfaces will merge into one. This is sometimes called 
"healing" of an edge or face. The endpoints of lines will also merge with the existing 
geometry. If you draw a line from one corner of a rectangle and then try to move the 
line, it will take the corner point along and distort the rectangle.
Groups
To avoid the interaction of  geometry with each other, you can place elements into 
groups. Elements in a group will only interact with elements in the same group 
but not with anything outside. You will use groups a lot when you build complex 
models. Components are a special type of group; they all share one common 
definition, and so any change applied to one instance of a component is visible 
in all the other copies. You may know this concept from blocks in AutoCAD.
To create a component, select all the edges and faces you want to have in the group 
and then right-click on it and select Make Group from the context menu. A group 
also provides a bit of protection for its elements. You have to double-click on the 
group first before you can modify any of the geometric elements in it. You can still 
snap to the edges and corners, though.
If you find that you left out some elements after you created the group, you can select 
them and navigate to Edit | Cut to move them to the clipboard. Then, double-click on 
the group to allow changes and navigate to Edit | Paste in Place. The elements will be 
inserted in the same location, but now, they are part of the group.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 16 ]
Inferencing
For precise drawing, you can snap to the end and midpoints of a line or an edge. 
You will also see the appearance of colored guidelines while you are drawing, 
and your cursor will have a tendency to follow these guides. This is known as 
inferencing, and it allows you to draw elements that are precisely aligned with 
the current coordinate system or other existing geometry.
The simplest inferencing takes place when you draw a line close to the cardinal axes 
of the scene. If you try to draw a line that is roughly parallel to the y axis (green axis), 
you will see that the unfinished line segment will suddenly align itself with the y axis 
and turn green. If you move the cursor a bit, this will only change the length of the 
line but not the direction. Only when you move the cursor far away enough from the 
y axis, the unfinished line will snap back to the pencil tool. This works for all three 
axes and with any tool in SketchUp. Sometimes, you may want to switch it off, but 
unfortunately, there is no way to do this. You can only zoom in closer to your scene 
to make the inferencing less sensitive.
Layers and visibility
One last feature you should know about before we model a room is layers. Like in a 
CAD application, you can assign elements to a specific layer and turn the visibility of 
layers on and off. Note that the geometry will still interact with each other even if it's 
on a hidden layer. It is a good practice to create all geometric elements on the default 
layer (Layer0) and only assign a group or component to a different layer. We will 
discuss the use of layers in more detail later in the book.
You can also temporarily hide specific objects if they are getting in the way. 
For example, if you want to see the inside of a room, just select all the elements 
and then right-click and select Hide from the context menu. To make them visible 
again, navigate to Edit | Unhide | All.
Further resources
There are many useful resources available online to help you improve your 
SketchUp skills. They are as follows:
•	
The SketchUp Concepts Guide page (help.sketchup.com/en/
article/115426) for a quick overview
•	
The SketchUp User's Guide page (help.sketchup.com/en/
article/116174) for a detailed description of the tools and their use
•	
YouTube channels, harwoodpodcast and 4sketchupgo2school, for many 
detailed video tutorials to introduce various modeling techniques

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
After this quick introduction, we can now continue with a hands-on tutorial. 
We will create a simple interior scene and use the Thea Render plugin to create 
a photorealistic rendering.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for this book from your 
account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you purchased this book 
elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support 
and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
Modeling the room
One of the common misconceptions about photorealistic modeling and rendering 
is that it requires very detailed models before the rendering is effective. This simply 
is not true with today's software sophistication. The gallery scene you'll be modeling 
here is simple and easy to produce in SketchUp, just like the majority of rooms in 
the real world:
1.	 Start by firing up SketchUp; then select Model Info from the Window menu.
2.	 Select Units from the list on the left.
3.	 Set the units to the values shown in the following screenshot. You can use 
inches if you like, but you may find it easier to follow if you use millimeters:

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 18 ]
4.	 Close the Model Info dialog window by clicking on the red X button.
5.	 Start modeling by selecting the Rectangle function from the Draw menu.
6.	 Click on the origin and draw a rectangle of any size. Click on the left-mouse 
button to place the opposite corner and create the rectangle.
7.	 Now, type in 4000,10000. This appears in the little text box at the 
bottom-right corner of the screen (VCB). Hit Enter, and your rectangle 
will resize to 4,000 mm by 10,000 mm (4 x 10 meters).

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
8.	 Rotate the view by pressing the middle-mouse button (MMB or scroll wheel) 
and moving the mouse. Now, select the Push/Pull tool and click on the 
rectangle, moving the mouse to extrude the rectangle into a box, as seen 
in the following screenshot:

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 20 ]
9.	 Type 3000 and hit Enter.
10.	 Draw a rectangle on the end face, as shown in the previous screenshot.
11.	 Now, select and delete the face (hit the Delete key or right-click and select 
Erase from the context menu).
12.	 Triple-click on the geometry. Notice how all the connected faces are 
now selected.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
13.	 Right-click and select Reverse Faces. The outside faces will now be drawn in 
a darker shade. We need to do this because we're going to place the camera 
inside the room you've just created.
Setting up the view
You're now going to set up the camera view and sun lighting. You might have 
noticed that there are very few actual camera buttons in SketchUp. This is because 
SketchUp is all about "what you see is what you get". If you see it on the screen, 
this is what you'll see in your render. All the complex camera stuff is taken care 
of in the background, and the right settings will be exported to the renderer without 
you or me having to worry about it. We will look at how to set up scenes for 
maximum impact in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene.
www.allitebooks.com

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 22 ]
Setting up the camera view
The following are the steps to set up a view interactively:
1.	 Rotate and zoom in on the view so that you're more or less looking at the 
scene, as shown in the following screenshot.
2.	 Navigate to Camera | Walk.
3.	 Type in your eye height in mm (say, 1200). The camera changes to a view 
from this eye level. A lower viewpoint will make the room look a bit bigger.
4.	 Navigate to Camera | Look Around to move your head around and 
compose the view you want, and use Walk to move in or out of the scene by 
holding the left-mouse button and moving the mouse up or down.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Saving the camera view
Now that you're happy with the view you have created, you need to save it so that it 
can't be changed by accident or while doing further modeling tasks. You do this by 
creating a scene that will be imported into the rendering software as a camera view:
1.	 Navigate to Window | Scenes.
2.	 Press the "Plus" icon in the pop-up window. A new scene is created, and a 
tab called Scene 1 will appear at the top of the main viewing window.
Rotate your view now with the middle-mouse button, then click on the tab. You are 
taken back to the view that was used when you created the scene. Scenes retain their 
view settings as part of their options.
Setting up the sun
We want to get some direct sunlight in through the window to bounce off the 
wall and floor. Within SketchUp, the "sun" only lights up areas that are not 
obstructed, and there is a sharp contrast between light and dark. In the renderer, 
the sunlight will bounce into the whole room. There is more on lighting in Chapter 8, 
Photorealistic Rendering. You can change the lighting and shadows in a scene by 
changing the Sun's position via date and time as explained in the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Window | Shadows to activate the Shadow Settings panel, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 24 ]
2.	 Click the icon in the top-left corner of the panel to switch on the display 
of shadows.
3.	 Move the sliders around for Time and Date until you get the effect that is 
similar to the previous screenshot.
4.	 When you have found a nice setting, click on the Update icon from the 
Scenes panel and confirm to update all the settings in the popup window. 
Shadow settings are part of the scene information, and by updating the scene 
now, you can return to your settings later just by clicking on the scene tab.
You now have all the lighting you need for a daytime indoor scene. The following 
screenshot is what you would get if you did a quick test render in Thea Render. 
As you can see, the whole room is lit by the sun, just as it would be in real life:
Applying SketchUp materials
You will now add some flooring materials straight from the ones included in 
SketchUp. In Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering, 
we will look at creating and obtaining many more materials from photos and online 
texture banks. For now, let's stick to what's already there, so you can see how good 
a render you can get straight out of a basic, no frills, SketchUp model.

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
Timber flooring material
In SketchUp, materials are applied with the paint bucket tool. You only need to 
select the right material or color and "pour" it onto a surface:
1.	 If the Materials pallet is not visible, navigate to Window | Materials to 
enable it.
2.	 Select Wood from the drop-down box.
3.	 Select a wood material by clicking on one of the thumbnail images. 
Your cursor will change to a Paint Bucket symbol.
4.	 Click on the floor to apply the material. Try a few different wood patterns 
until you find the one that you like best.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 26 ]
5.	 Now, draw a rectangle on the floor for a carpet, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 Use the Push/Pull tool to slightly elevate the rectangle.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
7.	 Select a carpet texture and paint it onto the raised surface, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
You've now got two textures in the scene that you'll be able to modify in Thea to 
add shininess, highlights, or reflections. The matt will stay as it is. You will learn 
how to add surface details such as the ones in Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering. 
We will look at creating and applying SketchUp materials in more detail in 
Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 28 ]
Modeling the window
The scene doesn't look realistic with just a hole in the wall. Let's make a window 
using SketchUp's Push/Pull tool. It will help if you hide the wall and ceiling now. 
This will  allow you to view the room more easily as you progress with the tutorial. 
You will reinstate them later when they are needed again.
1.	 Zoom and rotate out to a bird's eye view of the room.
2.	 Select the wall face to the left of the window and the ceiling.
3.	 Right-click on one of them and select Hide from the context menu, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
To create a window reveal efficiently, we have to be a bit creative with the tools that 
SketchUp offers:
1.	 First, use the Line tool (Draw | Line) to draw along the edge of the existing 
window opening. Make sure that you snap to the endpoints (corners) at the 
beginning and end of the line.

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
2.	 As soon as the line is completed, SketchUp will close the opening with a new 
rectangle. Use the Push/Pull tool to push the new rectangle outwards by 
about 200 mm. This will create a reveal for the window.
3.	 Delete the window rectangle again. As you see, the fastest way to create the 
four sides for the reveal is to create and extrude an extra rectangle that we 
do not need.
4.	 With the Line tool, draw a line out from the edge of the bottom window 
along the green axis, then down along the blue axis, back to the wall, 
and back to the start, as shown at the left in the following image.
5.	 Select the Arc tool from the Draw menu. Draw an arc as shown in the 
following image; then, delete the corners with the Erase tool (middle of 
the following image).
6.	 Use the Push/Pull tool to extrude the shape along the bottom of the window 
in the first part of the image and then from the other direction to form a 
windowsill, as shown in the following image:
7.	 Select the Rectangle tool and move the cursor along the top corner of 
the window. When you see a Tooltip saying Midpoint, click and draw 
a rectangle across the lintel.
8.	 Use the Arc tool to round off the front and delete the corners as you 
did earlier.
9.	 Use the Push/Pull tool again to extrude the shape down to span the 
whole window frame.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 30 ]
10.	 Create the glass pane by selecting the midpoint of one corner and then 
the opposite corner with the Rectangle tool, as shown at the right of 
the following image:
11.	 Select this rectangle and apply the Translucent_Glass_Blue material from 
the Translucent collection with the Paint Bucket tool on both sides of the 
rectangle (inside and outside). Your scene should now look similar to the 
following screenshot:
12.	 If any wall faces have turned blue, select them now. Right-click on them 
and select Reverse Faces from the context menu.
13.	 Reinstate the hidden faces by navigating to Edit | Unhide | All.
14.	 Check if these faces also need reversing.
15.	 Double-click on the Scene 1 tab to reset the view to the interior of the room.

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
Painting with digital photos
For the artwork on the wall, you can simply grab some images of your own 
or browse the Web. For this tutorial, it doesn't matter where you get them from. 
However, if you have some art of your own, why not scan or photograph it 
and use it here? It can be your own 3D portfolio!
1.	 Select Import from the File menu.
2.	 Change the Files of type: option to All Supported Image Types.
3.	 Choose an image you want to use for your artwork.
4.	 Now, move the cursor to the wall and click on it to set the bottom-left corner 
of the image. Stretch the image to the size you want and click on the wall 
again, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Repeat this for more images. Remember to click on the Scene 1 tab from 
time to time so that you can see what will or will not be in the frame when 
you render.
6.	 Trace a rectangle around each image. You can snap to the corners of the 
images to draw accurately.
www.allitebooks.com

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 32 ]
7.	 Finally use the Push/Pull tool to give each canvas some depth. You can see 
the canvas edge in the following image:
Click on the Scene 1 tab to check your scene from the camera's position. You should 
have something similar to the following screenshot. Move the person around a bit to 
give her a better view or remove her altogether if you prefer:

Chapter 1
[ 33 ]
Doing a test rendering
We are already in good shape with our scene. So, the first thing we should do is a 
test rendering:
1.	 Navigate to Plugins | Thea Render | Thea Rendering Window to open 
the main rendering window within SketchUp.
2.	 Below the main window area, you will find the rendering controls. 
Check if the Mode is set to Unbiased (TR1) on the Rendering tab.
3.	 Now, just click on the Start button in the middle (the triangle pointing to 
the right) to export the scene and get the rendering started.
After a short time, the rendering will appear and will improve gradually. 
Most likely, it is going to be too dark to see anything, though. While the rendering 
is still continuing, you can adjust the brightness of the image:
1.	 Switch to the Display tab.
2.	 Adjust the setting for ISO to 800 or 1600.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 34 ]
Give it a bit of time to render until you have a good idea of the light and reflections; 
then hit the Stop button at the far right. You should notice the following:
•	
The image aspect ratio is different from the SketchUp view
•	
The floor is not as reflective as we would expect from a polished laminate
•	
The light is diffused near the window, and the shadows are not sharp as we 
see in SketchUp
This is not too surprising since at the moment, all materials have the same properties 
(except for the window that is translucent). To improve the image, we have to define 
some additional properties for the materials.
Enhancing SketchUp materials
In order to produce photorealistic images, we need to improve the optical 
characteristics of the SketchUp materials. Without any special assignment, 
SketchUp materials get translated into a default material that only maintains 
the color and texture from SketchUp. To define advanced properties, we can use 
the Thea Tool window:
1.	 Open the Thea Tool window by navigating to the Plugins | Thea 
Render menu.
2.	 On the Camera tab, change the Aspect ratio to SU Window.
3.	 Click on the Materials tab. You will see the materials dialog shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 35 ]
4.	 In the drop-down menu at the top, select the Translucent_Glass_Blue 
material. This is the material we used for the window.
5.	 In the drop-down menu below the preview area, select Thin Glass.
6.	 Click on the SU button to the right of the Color label. A new (blue) 
button will appear next to it.
7.	 Click on it to open a color selector.
8.	 Pick a white color from the palette and click on OK to close the selector.
9.	 You can leave the remaining options for the glass material as they are.
10.	 Next, select the material you used for the floor (Wood_Floor_Light in 
our case).
11.	 In the second drop-down, pick Thea Material (Mat-Lab).
The Thea Material Lab window will open and show a preview of the material as it 
is. You can see this in the following screenshot:

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 36 ]
1.	 Below the Preview panel, you will find the material properties panel. 
Find the Coating button in the bottom-right corner of the window and 
click on it (only once!).
2.	 A new layer will be added to the material built up, and the preview 
window should update in a short time. You can see the change in 
specular highlights in the preview.
3.	 Click on the Accept button to the left of the Material Lab window to 
apply your changes and close the window.
4.	 Finally select the carpet material (Carpet_Pattern_LeafSpares_Tan).
5.	 Select Matte as Thea material type.
6.	 Increase the Bump value to 50%.
With these changes, we have addressed the issues we noticed in our first test 
render. We are ready to give it another go!
1.	 Open the Thea Rendering Window again.
2.	 Check if the rendering mode is still set to Unbiased (TR1).
3.	 Press the Start button. The scene will be exported again, and a new 
rendering process starts.
4.	 Let the rendering continue for a while until you can make out a few 
more details.
5.	 If you find that the rendering is too bright or too dark, switch to the 
Display tab.
6.	 Adjust the ISO, Shutter, and f-number settings until the image 
is reasonably lit. You can see a possible combination in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 37 ]
When the image quality has progressed sufficiently, you can check the issues we 
noted earlier. You see that the sunlight through the window is now clearly defined; 
there is a bit of specular reflection visible on the floor, and the carpet does not seem 
to reflect the light anymore.

Quick Start Tutorial
[ 38 ]
Saving the image
The rendered image will progress in the render window. With each new pass, 
the image will look a bit better. The unbiased rendering process will continue 
like this but it will never finish. You can set Limits for Time or Samples on the 
Rendering tab to terminate the rendering after a specific time, but you can also just 
stop the calculations when you think that the quality of the image is sufficient:
1.	 Either wait for your Limit to be reached, or click on the Stop button to 
interrupt the rendering.
2.	 Click on the Save Image button at the far left of the screen, and choose a 
name and file type for the rendered image. PNG is usually ok.
Summary
This chapter was designed to give you a taste of how easily and quickly you can 
get great photorealistic results with the SketchUp and Thea Render combination.
In particular, you have learned the basic steps towards modeling a simple indoor 
studio scene and setting up a daylight environment in SketchUp. You have also used 
the Thea Render plugin to assign advanced optical properties to SketchUp materials 
and created a photorealistic rendering without leaving the SketchUp interface.
This is the basic framework for achieving successful renderings of most interior and 
outdoor scenes. You're now able to immediately apply what you've learned in your 
own projects. The remaining chapters in this book provide additional information 
when you want to take your skills a step or two further. You can dip in whenever 
you need some specific guidance or follow the chapters in a course format.
In the next chapter, you'll find out how to create your own visualization and 
animation studio setup to create even better architectural visuals!

Collecting a Toolset
"As an artist, all I need is my paints and brushes - and someone to drag me away 
when the canvas is done."
                                                                                                        – Pablo Picasso
SketchUp is a great tool for editing 3D content. It has a simple interface, is easy to 
understand, and very powerful for architectural modeling. No wonder it became 
one of the standard tools that you can find in every design studio.
Part of its success is the focus on simple modeling tasks and the fact that it was 
available for free, while it was owned by Google. However, this means that we 
have to look for other programs and utilities to assist us in the creation of rich 
and realistic architectural visuals and use a number of tools to manipulate and 
postprocess the generated images.
In this chapter, you will learn to perform the following tasks:
•	
Select the right SketchUp 2014 edition for you
•	
Discover plugins to improve the SketchUp workflow
•	
Set up a postprocessing studio for our renderings
•	
Install Thea Render and integrate it into SketchUp
•	
Get ready to produce animations from our images

Collecting a Toolset
[ 40 ]
Free, libre, or what?
One of the biggest changes for the end user that came out of the acquisition of 
SketchUp by Trimble affects the licensing of SketchUp. Google saw SketchUp as 
a tool to enable everyone to produce content for Google Earth, and Google being 
Google, they could also afford to give it away for free to everyone.
Unfortunately, Trimble had other ideas, and one of the first changes was to discontinue 
the free SketchUp edition for professional users. You can still download and use a free 
version (since 2013, it is called SketchUp Make), but you are not allowed to use it for 
commercial projects. This is good because it still allows everyone access to a fantastic 
tool to realize their dream projects and to learn and test the software without the need 
to pay for a license. It also pushes SketchUp as a professional tool back among all the 
other commercial software that promises quality and efficiency for a price.
In the previous edition of this book, good arguments were made for the use of 
free software in our visualization workflow. These arguments still stand, and we 
still encourage you to use free and open source software wherever it makes sense. 
However, when you work for money, the time you spend on training and learning 
several tools also has to be considered as an investment. It can be more effective to 
choose a commercial software package that you or your colleagues already know, 
over a free tool that does a similar job. For the rest of the book, we try to present both 
options when possible but will demonstrate the techniques only for the tools that are 
available to everyone.
Trimble SketchUp
Before you can go off and download SketchUp, you have to choose the type of work 
you are going to do with it. The following three options are available:
•	
Professional Work will lead you to SketchUp Pro 2014.
•	
Personal Projects will lead you to download SketchUp Make.
•	
Educational Use lets you decide which one you want. You will get discounts 
if you choose SketchUp Pro.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
The following screenshot shows the options that you can select as per your 
requirement when you go on to http://www.sketchup.com/download:
SketchUp Pro, LayOut, and Style Builder
Every download also includes LayOut and Style Builder, but these will stop working 
after a trial period of 8 hours, unless you buy and register a license. In these 8 hours, 
you can explore if the features it offers are really what you are looking for and decide 
if SketchUp is the right tool for you. Since you are reading this book, you obviously 
have made the right decision. A word of warning: SketchUp Pro will stop working 
altogether after 8 hours of use if you do not purchase and enter a license. In the 
previous editions, you could still use it with a limited feature set.
LayOut is a standalone program and is explained in more detail in Chapter 11, 
Presenting Visuals in LayOut. With LayOut, you can easily import your SketchUp 
models and create slideshow pages for print or onscreen presentations rather like 
PowerPoint or Keynote. Style Builder is an external tool for the creation of new 
visual styles that can be used in SketchUp.
SketchUp Pro also enables you to import and export CAD data, which is a must 
when using SketchUp within a professional workflow. You also gain the privilege of 
creating dynamic components, which work a little like dynamic blocks in AutoCAD.
An additional import format with SketchUp Pro:
•	
AutoCAD (.dwg, .dxf)
www.allitebooks.com

Collecting a Toolset
[ 42 ]
Additional 2D-export formats with SketchUp Pro:
•	
Portable Document Format (.pdf)
•	
Encapsulated Postscript (.eps)
•	
Epix (.epx)
•	
AutoCAD (.dwg, .dxf)
Additional 3D-export formats with SketchUp Pro:
•	
3DS (.3ds)
•	
Collada (.dae)
•	
AutoCAD DWG (.dwg)
•	
AutoCAD DXF (.dxf)
•	
FBX (.fbx)
•	
IFC (.ifc)
•	
Google Earth (.kmz)
•	
OBJ (.obj)
•	
XSI (.xsi)
•	
VRML (.vrml)
The 3D Warehouse
Google has established the 3D Warehouse as a platform for SketchUp users to easily 
share their models with the rest of the world. Trimble also took over the Warehouse 
from Google when it acquired SketchUp. Thanks to the large and active user group 
that SketchUp has gained over the last few years, the Warehouse is an invaluable 
resource for all sorts of 3D models that you can use to enrich your own designs.
In SketchUp 2014, the 3D Warehouse browser received a web technology based 
face lift:
1.	 Open SketchUp 2014 with a new scene.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
2.	 Navigate to File | 3D Warehouse | Get Models ….
3.	 A browser window will open. This window allows you to search for key 
words in the models.
Use the search key, author:Google, to focus on components that 
were distributed as bonus packs in the earlier versions of SketchUp.
4.	 Use the navigation buttons or enter different key words to refine your search.
5.	 When you have found a component you like, click on its tile. The component 
details will be displayed.
6.	 Hit the Download button, and you will be prompted if you want to load the 
component directly into your SketchUp model.

Collecting a Toolset
[ 44 ]
7.	 Select Yes, and the component will be downloaded ready to be placed into 
the model.
8.	 The cursor will change to the Move tool, and the newly downloaded 
component will stick to the mouse until you assign it a position in your model. 
You will see a window similar to the one in the following screenshot:
If you choose not to insert the component directly into the scene, you can still 
download and save it to your hard drive. Using this method, you can find and 
collect all the bonus pack components from the 3D Warehouse. Of course, you 
only need to download components you are likely to use.
The main collections that you should look for include the following:
•	
construction
•	
film and stage
•	
architecture
•	
landscape architecture

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
•	
mechanical
•	
2D People
•	
transportation
•	
shapes
Unlimited upgrades – Ruby plugins
If you've ever looked over the shoulder of someone who has been using SketchUp 
for a long time, you'll see lots of buttons you never came across earlier. If you wait 
until they've gone for a break and secretly check out what's in their menus, there'll 
be twice as many menu items as yours.
These additional tools are due to the SketchUp Ruby API (Application Programming 
Interface) that allows anyone with a bit of knowledge of the Ruby programming 
language to create new functions that can be used in SketchUp. The plugins can extend 
SketchUp with simple tools that help you to do an ordinary task in a slightly different 
way or can automate complex procedures that can even generate entire cities.
With SketchUp 2014, Trimble also updated the Ruby API to a new 
version. The changes are small, but there are some scripts that cause 
problems with the new version of SketchUp. Most actively maintained 
scripts should be updated in a short time, though.
In SketchUp 2014, the installation of plugins is fully integrated via the Extension 
Warehouse, Extension Preferences, and finally via the Plugins folder for older 
Ruby scripts that do not offer the full functionality of extensions.
The Extension Warehouse
The most convenient way to download and install Ruby scripts is via the Extension 
Warehouse menu entry:
1.	 You can find it in the Extension Warehouse browser in the Window menu.
2.	 Locate the search entry box in the top-right corner and enter your search 
term (for example canvas).
3.	 A list of related plugins is displayed (or in the case of canvas, only one plugin 
is displayed).

Collecting a Toolset
[ 46 ]
4.	 Select the plugin you are interested in, and you will be shown the details 
page. Usually, there is a short video presentation of the tool at the top of 
the page.
5.	 If you want to download the plugin, select the red Install button in the 
top-right corner of the details page and confirm that you really want the 
plugin to be installed.
6.	 The plugin will now be downloaded and installed. Afterwards, the label of 
the button will have changed to Uninstall. This tells you that the plugin is 
successfully installed.
Take a few moments to browse the categories and plugins in the Extension 
Warehouse. You may not see the benefit of many of the available tools yet, but 
once you have some experience with SketchUp modeling and the type of 3D 
scenes you are frequently working with, you may remember that there was a 
tool in the Warehouse that could help you perform your task more efficiently.
The Extension Manager
Extensions that are available as a direct download, but not within the Extension 
Warehouse, can be installed via the built-in Extension Manager. Ruby scripts that 
can be installed via the manager have a *.rbz file extension (they are, in fact, 
common *.zip files with a bit of extra programming sauce). As a demonstration 
for this type of extension, we will install the SketchUcation Plugin Store:
1.	 Open a web browser and go to http://sketchucation.com/resources/
plugin-store-download. You will get to a page that is shown in the 
following screenshot.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
2.	 Download the extension archive, SketchUcationTools.rbz, via the 
Download Now button and save it to your hard drive.
3.	 Open SketchUp and navigate to Window | Preferences (on Windows) 
or SketchUp | Preferences …(on Mac).
4.	 The System Preferences window opens, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 In the list box to the left, highlight the entry, Extensions. You will now see 
a list of extensions that are already installed on the right.
6.	 You can enable and disable the extensions with the checkbox next to the 
extension names.
7.	 Click on the Install Extension… button at the bottom of the window.
8.	 A file browser pops up. Navigate to your download location and select 
the SketchUcationTools.rbz file.
9.	 Click on Open and wait for the confirmation that the installation was 
successful.
10.	 Check that the new tool is now listed among your other extensions.
11.	 Close the System Preferences window.

Collecting a Toolset
[ 48 ]
You will find a new submenu called SketchUcation under the Plugins menu 
(the Plugins menu only appears after you install a plugin). The SketchUcation 
Plugin Store entry starts the store browser window, but you have to register on 
the SketchUcation website before you can use the store (the other tools work 
without registration).
The Plugin Store is great, because it gives you access to a much larger number of 
plugins than the Extension Warehouse. The plugins are mostly developed by members 
of the SketchUcation community, so when you read about a new plugin in one of the 
SketchUcation forums, chances are that you can just go and download it right away. 
Version 2.0.0 of SketchUcation Plugin Store is shown in the following screenshot:
Old style Ruby scripts
Now and then, you will come across an older Ruby script that cannot be installed via 
the methods discussed earlier. These are either single Ruby files or a file and a folder 
with additional resources. In both cases, you just need to copy the file(s) into the 
SketchUp Plugins folder and restart SketchUp.

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
Since SketchUp 2014, the Plugins folder is located in the Windows user profile, and 
you first have to make the AppData folder visible before you can access its content:
1.	 Open a Windows Explorer window.
2.	 Navigate to Tools | Folder options….
3.	 In the new window, select the View tab.
4.	 Under Advanced settings, select the Show hidden files and folders option.
5.	 Check that you can now see a folder called AppData in your home folder 
(C:\Users\<username>).
On a recent Mac (OS X 10.7 and later), you also have to unhide your personal 
Library folder. On older Macs this folder is visible by default. Perform the 
following steps on your Mac machine:
1.	 Open Terminal.app and type the following command:
chflags nohidden ~/Library
2.	 Check in Finder that you can see a folder called Library in your user folder.
You are now ready to install the Ruby script using the following steps:
1.	 Download the script file to your computer.
2.	 If it is a *.zip archive, unpack it to a temporary folder and locate the *.rb 
and other necessary files and folders.
3.	 If there is some documentation, such as a README.txt file, read it now!
4.	 On Windows, just open the C:\Users\<username>\AppData\Roaming\
SketchUp\SketchUp 2014\SketchUp\Plugins folder.
5.	 On a Mac, the folder is in your home directory under Library/Application 
Support/SketchUp 2014/SketchUp/Plugins.
6.	 Copy the necessary file (or files) into the Plugins folder.
7.	 Restart SketchUp.
The plugin will now execute when SketchUp starts up and create the necessary 
toolbar buttons, menu, or context menu entries.
Now you know all the options to install Ruby plugins in SketchUp. You'll discover 
several of these as we progress through the book. Just go ahead and install them.

Collecting a Toolset
[ 50 ]
Thea Render
There are an incredible number of rendering applications and plugins out there that 
range from professional high-end renderers to small experimental one-man projects. 
Technologies range from physically based radiosity engines to gaming platforms, 
and then, you have to decide how tightly you want your renderer integrated into 
SketchUp. A strong integration usually means sacrifices in render options or quality.
To help you choose the perfect renderer for your requirements, we have prepared 
a short and noncomprehensive list of the currently available renderers at the end of 
the book. By the time you have read the rendering chapters in this book, the entire 
technobabble will make complete sense; we promise.
Why use Thea Render?
Although it is relatively new among the SketchUp render extensions, we have chosen 
Thea Render for this book for several reasons:
•	
It is a mid-priced product but also has a free trial version available. If you 
decide to buy it (after testing), you won't have to apply for a bank loan to 
get the full version.
•	
It has a biased and unbiased render engine for the fast rendering of 
animation frames and simple high-quality photo-real still images.
•	
It comes as an integrated plugin as well as a fully featured standalone 
studio application.
•	
It is under active development and is constantly evolving.
•	
There are plenty of other features that will keep you busy experimenting, 
long after you have mastered the basics of image rendering.
•	
Last but not least, Thea is written by the same developer team that created 
Kerkythea. These guys know what they are doing.
Installing Thea Studio
Begin by downloading the Thea Studio installer from the Thea Render website at 
http://www.thearender.com.
On Windows, just double-click the installer and follow the steps of the setup wizard. 
Make a note of the data location folder. This folder will contain the materials and 
resources that we will need later on in the book.

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
On a Mac, double-click on the disk image (*.dmg) file. Finder will show the 
contents of the file. Select Thea.app and drag it into your Applications folder. 
Open Applications and double-click on the new Thea.app file. Now, you will be 
prompted to choose or confirm the data location folder. Afterwards, the Thea Studio 
application will start.
Installing the Thea for SketchUp plugin
The Thea for SketchUp plugin installer is provided as a setup wizard that does not 
require the usual extension installation method, as shown in the following steps:
1.	 Download the plugin from the website's download section. Look for the 
SketchUp Plugin link in the sidebar to the right, and download the installer.
2.	 Close SketchUp if you have it open.
3.	 Double-click on the installer file to start the setup wizard.
4.	 Follow the steps through.
5.	 If you have more than one edition of SketchUp installed, you can install the 
plugin for all the versions at the same time.
6.	 Open SketchUp and confirm that the Plugins menu now shows a submenu 
for Thea Render.
Downloading bonus content
As a licensed user, you have the opportunity to download additional materials to 
use in your renderings. To gain access to the content, you need a user account for 
the Thea Render forums:
1.	 Sign up for a user ID at http://www.thearender.com/forum. Sign up with 
the same e-mail address you used to buy your Thea license.
2.	 Send an e-mail to license@thearender.com (again, from the same e-mail 
account). Add your forum nickname, and ask to be added to the Licensed 
User Club.
3.	 When your club membership is confirmed, you can access the forum with 
links to the additional downloads.
4.	 On the Thea website, navigate to Resources | Libraries.
5.	 Follow the Download link for each library to the forum post. From the links 
in the post, you can download a compressed archive of the library.
www.allitebooks.com

Collecting a Toolset
[ 52 ]
6.	 Extract the library after the download. You will get a *.lib.thea file.
7.	 Double-click on the *.lib.thea file to start the Thea library installer.
8.	 The Install Library dialog will prompt you to confirm the data folder and 
accept the license. Click on the check button to complete the installation.
9.	 Repeat steps 5 to 8 for each library you want to install. The Install Library 
dialog that appears while installing the Brick Walls library is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
To make your new Thea materials available in SketchUp, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Download the Material Libraries in SKM format item from the libraries.
2.	 Extract the *.zip file.
3.	 On Windows, copy the individual material folders into the C:\Program 
Files\SketchUp\SketchUp 2014\Materials\Thea Materials application 
folder. You will already find folders for the Thea standard materials that 
have been created by the Thea installation.
4.	 On Mac, you can copy the folders either in your user specific library path, 
Library/Application Support/SketchUp 2014/SketchUp/Materials, 
or in the system-wide folder, /Applications/SketchUp 2014/SketchUp.
app/Contents/Resources/Content/Materials. In this second location, 
the materials will also be available for other users on your computer.
Now, you have all the first-class materials available in SketchUp. These materials 
will translate to high-quality materials in Thea.
Image-processing studio with GIMP
If you already have Photoshop (the commercial equivalent of GIMP), lucky you! 
All of the instructions for GIMP in this book should work for Photoshop too, so you 
don't need to install GIMP (unless you have trouble following the GIMP instructions 
in this book). Photoshop Elements or similar software won't do, because they don't 
have layer masks.
Why do I need a professional-level image 
processor?
Creating great architectural visuals in SketchUp requires a large amount of digital 
image processing. This is a good thing, because it makes our lives easy, as we 
will see later. Every digital image we use greatly diminishes the need for creating 
complex geometry in SketchUp. So, we need to have tools at our disposal that will 
quickly and easily manipulate all the different photos and textures that will go into 
SketchUp, and all the images that come out. We will also be combining the output 
from SketchUp with rendered images later on.

Collecting a Toolset
[ 54 ]
Should I buy a pen tablet?
The answer to this is yes. If you're going to spend a lot of time doing 
architectural visuals, you will find that the finer control and comfort 
of a tablet over a mouse is well worth the investment. Some small and 
mid-sized tablets receive excellent reviews and should be sufficient for 
most people. They also start at a price of less than $100, so you don't 
have to make too much of an investment.
Learning what GIMP/Photoshop can do will be one of the Eureka moments in 
this book. Until you learn about layers and masks, the door to digital graphics will 
remain firmly closed to you. Layers will allow you to composite multiple takes of 
the same scene together so that you get the best out of SketchUp's native output.
Grabbing a copy of GIMP
Although the GIMP project does not provide official installers, contributed 
precompiled binary setup files are linked on their web page for the Windows 
and Mac platforms.
1.	 Open http://www.gimp.org/downloads/ in your browser.
2.	 Click on the download link for the most recent version and save the installer 
file to your hard drive. For Mac users, we recommend that you download 
GIMP from http://gimp.lisanet.de/Website/Download.html, because 
it comes with all the filters and extensions we will need.
3.	 Double-click on the installer file to start the installation routine on Windows, 
or open the disk image file (*.dmg) and drag the GIMP.app package into the 
Applications folder if you are on a Mac.
4.	 The first time you start GIMP, it will prepare some files for later use. 
This may take a few moments.
5.	 If you are on Windows and used a download link from gimp.org, you 
should also download the gimp extensions from https://code.google.
com/p/gimp-extensions. This download contains all the filters we will 
use in this book.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
Becoming a movie-making genius...
almost!
Alright, we're not going to turn you into a fully clued-up movie producer just yet. 
However, you don't have to be one with the following video-editing tools. One of 
the most painful experiences we had while researching this book was navigating 
through the maze of compression codecs, frame rates, aspect ratios, and other thorny 
issues that make digital moving-image production such a nightmare.
In this book, we will produce animations that are suitable for upload to popular 
video streaming sites such as YouTube or Vimeo. For this, we will use the following 
two dedicated tools:
•	
VirtualDub (Windows) to create an animation out of our rendered images
•	
HandBrake (Windows and Mac) to convert the video into a streaming 
version with H.264 compression
We will look at the details of the process of making a movie in Chapter 10, Animations, 
and also introduce a few other tools to make our lives as movie producers easier.
Why can't I just use the output from 
SketchUp?
The raw animated output from SketchUp will invariably be one of the following:
•	
Strongly compressed with visual artifacts and noise
•	
Impractically large in size
•	
Limited to the artificial SketchUp styles
Following the easy steps in Chapter 10, Animations, with the software you're about to 
download will sort out all three problems. You will be completely amazed at how 
much the file size can be reduced with no perceivable reduction in quality.

Collecting a Toolset
[ 56 ]
VirtualDub
VirtualDub is the answer to most of our moving image woes on Windows. It's free; 
this is unbelievable as the next best available software is Adobe After Effects or 
Autodesk Combustion, both retailing at around $1000. VirtualDub will allow you to 
composite still images together to form a video, with the use of a whole host of filters 
thrown into the bargain. The GUI of VirtualDub Version 1.8.6 is similar to the one 
shown in the following screenshot:
VirtualDub doesn't have an install program, so you will have to save it somewhere 
and create a desktop shortcut to it manually. Here's how to do it:
1.	 Get the latest stable release of VirtualDub from 
http://www.virtualdub.org. Just follow the links to the 
download mirror. Do not download the 64-bit version even 
if you are on a 64-bit system!
2.	 Save the ZIP file to your hard drive.
3.	 Extract the VirtualDub folder from the archive.
4.	 Move the entire VirtualDub folder to a permanent location on 
your hard drive (for example, C:\Program Files).
5.	 Open the folder and right-click on the VirtualDub.exe file.
6.	 Select Send to | Desktop (create shortcut).
7.	 A new icon will be created on your desktop.

Chapter 2
[ 57 ]
Mac alternatives
If you work on a Mac, chances are that you already have an application that 
can convert a set of images into a video. QuickTime Pro can be used for this and 
is very popular on Mac. If you don't have suitable software and also don't want 
to spend any money on new software just to create videos, you will still be able 
to generate animations with the free app Zeitraffer from the Apple App Store. Just 
type zeitraffer in the search field in the App Store, and download it to your Mac.
HandBrake
We will use HandBrake to convert the animation from VirtualDub into a 
compressed streaming video format that is suitable for websites such as YouTube. 
HandBrake is available for both Windows and Mac OS X platforms. Just head to 
http://handbrake.fr, and download and install the latest version.
Summary
So now, you're all set! In this chapter, you were introduced to the following concepts 
that will be at the core of your arch-viz activities:
•	
How to find and install unlimited 3D content from the 3D Warehouse
•	
Upgrade and extend SketchUp via the extension system
•	
Why a professional-level graphics tool like GIMP is so important
•	
Becoming a movie-making genius (almost) overnight
•	
Using a fully functional pro renderer integrated with SketchUp
Congratulations! You now have a fully functional visualization studio. This setup 
will save you an enormous amount of time later. It sets you up with a seamless 
workflow that works and works.
Now, go to the next chapter to get started with visualization in SketchUp, or return 
to Chapter 1, Quick Start Tutorial, if you were skipping ahead for the software!


Composing the Scene
Imagine you're a wildlife photographer. You're stalking a rare, brightly plumaged 
bird through the undergrowth. You lie in the grass for hours, centipedes and large 
spiders crawling over your face and neck. Then, when your body is stiff and aching, 
sun baked and drenched in sweat, the bird alights on a log with a fish in its mouth, 
the sun glimmering delightfully from the scales. You squeeze the shutter and 
success is yours.
Now, imagine yourself, instead, in a vast empty film studio. It's bare. 
Everything is lit in the same uniform, bright, diffused boring light. There's 
nothing to photograph except a skip full of plywood and canvas sheets. 
You'll have to make up your own scene.
In this chapter, you will learn how to plan out and set up a scene so that success is 
guaranteed later. You will discover the following:
•	
The main ways to start your scene
•	
Framing the scene using carefully chosen entourage place markers
•	
Using virtual plywood props and painted backdrops
•	
How to set up the sky, sun, and shadows
•	
How to set up lively camera angles to add interest

Composing the Scene
[ 60 ]
The importance of planning
The lack of subject matter is the reality for architectural visualizers. While a 
photographer creates art from what's available in nature, the architectural visualizer 
is faced with having to create everything from scratch, just like a film or stage 
designer. So, what will you show when you can show whatever you like?
•	
Close-ups of the building facade or views of the whole site?
•	
Worm's-eye view, a person's eye level, or aerial view?
•	
Photorealistic or artistic watercolor?
•	
Animation or stills?
•	
Flyovers or walkthroughs?
•	
Shadow studies?
•	
Sections through the building, individual wings, or phases?
It's a bewildering array of possibilities, and the temptation is always just to launch 
in and start building.
How to begin with the end in mind
Many people (often including me) start right out, modeling everything they see in as 
much detail as possible and simply run out of time. Their presentation is unfocused 
and patchy, because having modeled everything, they sure as anything want to 
include it all in the presentation!
The better way to go about it—the vital ingredient to success—is to begin with the 
end in mind. Sketch each still. Storyboard each moving sequence. Then, model only 
what you need to get these shots done. This way, you conserve energy in the areas 
that don't need your time and divert it to the areas that do.
There's much more detail on planning for animations or stills in 
Chapter 10, Animations. If you're designing a scene for animation of any 
kind, you should definitely read that chapter before you start modeling. 
If you're just doing stills, that chapter will help, but it isn't essential.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Sketch out your visuals
Take a few sheets of paper and a thick pencil or marker and sketch each visual 
you wish to create. Sketch quickly, and don't worry at all about making it look good. 
If you want to, include written information here about how you will achieve each 
item in the scene; here's one as an example:

Composing the Scene
[ 62 ]
I've included positions of people and plants (entourage), notes on whether details will 
be modeled or textured, and information on where the background and the sky will 
come from (in this case, an image for the background and a basic sky will be chosen 
from within the rendering software). Draw a frame to help you compose the view.
Now that you've sketched your main visual, how about some extra views? It's often 
good to give an idea of the building's context and maybe a close-up, to show some 
neat features, as shown in the following image:
These will help focus your mind on what you want to show and what you can 
leave out. You can refer to these images when you need them. You can see how 
we progress with this visual later on in the chapter.
Think like a film set designer
Successful film and stage designers save time with the following visual tricks:
•	
Painted scenery backdrops
•	
2D cardboard cutouts swapped for 3D items
•	
Modeling highly detailed images only for close-up shots

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
In this chapter, we will introduce the use of a backdrop image for whatever stays in 
the background and never enters into a close shot. We will also use 2D cutouts for 
peripheral elements rather than 3D geometry, which eats up our modeling time. Once 
you have mastered these simple time-saving principles, you'll be a top arch-viz artist.
Setting up an arch-viz scene
There are several ways to begin setting up our scene. All of these will help anchor 
your scene in the existing surroundings and give the model a context and scale that 
our audience needs to relate to the project.
The following are the main scene setup methods:
•	
Import a satellite image and terrain data via geolocation
•	
Use a site photograph with the Match Photo tool 
•	
Import a scanned site map, image, or pencil sketch
•	
Build on data from an imported CAD file
Any of these can be used in combination, and it is this flexibility that makes 
SketchUp so unique. SketchUp is equally at home with accurate CAD, as it is with 
pencil concept art. We're going to look at each of these starting points individually 
so that you can choose the best combination for your particular way of working.
Of course, you can also just start sketching away and build up a complete scene 
with context from scratch. However, there is nothing special about this, is there?
Importing terrain data
Thanks to its history with Google Earth, SketchUp offers an easy way to import a 2D 
site image from Google Earth. Often, this is the quickest way to get context information 
on a site, especially in the early stages of a concept design or projects in faraway places, 
where detailed survey maps are hard to come by or do not exist at all.
1.	 Open the tool by navigating to File | Geo-location | Add Location....

Composing the Scene
[ 64 ]
A slimmed down Google Earth browser window, as shown in the following 
screenshot, will appear, and as a seasoned Google Maps user, you should 
feel right at home:
2.	 Use the search bar at the top of the window or the zoom and navigation 
controls to focus on a piece of land you want to use for the model.
3.	 Click on the Select Region button in the top-right corner of the screen, 
when you have found the right place.
4.	 A frame with a pin in each corner appears.
5.	 Adjust the frame so that the center shows the area you want to import into 
your model.
6.	 When you are done, click on the Grab button in the top-right corner of 
the screen.
7.	 The image will be imported and centered into your model.
8.	 However, that's not all. Navigate to File | Geo-Location | Show Terrain.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
9.	 The image turns into a textured 3D landscape with true elevation 
information, as seen in the following screenshot:
Let's inspect what we have just imported into our model. Open your Layers dialog. 
You will find two new layers in the model: one called Google Earth Snapshot and 
the other called Google Earth Terrain. On the snapshot layer, you can find the 
flat 2D image of the site that was displayed first. The terrain layer contains the 3D 
topographic mesh as a component. Switching between the two via the Show Terrain 
option toggles the visibility of the layers, so that only one is present in the scene.
The import also gave our model the correct coordinates of the location that we 
picked. In the Geo-location section of the Model Info dialog, you can see the name 
of the new Location and information about the Latitude and Longitude.
To modify the imported terrain to fit your new design, do the following:
1.	 Right-click on the component and select unlock.
2.	 Right-click again and select explode.
3.	 Show the hidden elements by navigating to View | Hidden Geometry.
4.	 Navigate to View | Face Style to disable textures and, maybe, even switch 
to a Wireframe view of the model. You will now see the individual lines that 
make up the imported terrain.

Composing the Scene
[ 66 ]
There are a number of plugins and extensions out there that can help you with 
editing free form geometry such as terrain meshes. The Sandbox Tools are already 
included in SketchUp, and several others are available via the Extension Warehouse 
and Plugin Store. If you are planning to do this type of modeling a lot, it is worth 
checking them out.
Using a site photo with Match Photo
One of the best ways to bring across the concept of a new building is to put it into 
its existing setting. We can do this with a photo of the site as it is now, before the 
building commences. It's also one of the easiest ways of producing great architectural 
visuals because you don't have to worry about all the extra bits of the entourage that 
need to be selected and arranged. They're already in the photo.
If you can get your hands on a decent camera and the site is relatively uncluttered, 
this may be the best way to go. The following is an example image of a home that is 
about to undergo renovation:

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
What you need from a Match Photo image
You're going to use the tool Match Photo to set up the SketchUp camera, so that it 
matches the position and focal distance of the camera you used to take your photo. 
Before SketchUp Version 6, we used to do this by trial and error, but since Version 6, 
SketchUp includes Match Photo, which automates the whole task for you. Using this 
feature, you can create "before" and "after" photos that are very useful for renovation 
projects, such as the home extension shown in the following image. The realism 
that the architect has achieved here wouldn't have been possible without exactly 
matching the camera view:
First, some points about the kind of photographs you need to take:
•	
The image needs to show strong vertical and horizontal corners or lines
•	
Horizontal lines need to form a true right angle, such as the corners of a 
90-degree building
•	
The picture should be taken with a horizontal line of sight (don't tilt the 
camera up or down)

Composing the Scene
[ 68 ]
•	
Sunny days with defined shadows work best when you are planning to use 
the scene for photorealistic rendering
•	
The image can't be cropped or changed in proportions by an 
image-editing program
•	
Use a digital SLR with good lenses if possible. Failing this, a high-resolution 
compact camera or even a good smartphone camera will do
For a before and after scene, it is important to make a note of the following 
important details:
•	
The date and time of day
•	
The site map or location sketch (to work out the North location)
•	
Take a reference photo of the sky
•	
Include some right angles in the frame (like the corner of a building)
These allow SketchUp to recreate the position of the camera and sun. 
You might wish to use the sky's photo to select similar sky settings in your 
rendering application or to pick a similar HDR sky for rendering (for example, 
clear, cloudy, or overcast).
Setting up a Match Photo scene
Match Photo works by recognizing perspective foreshortening in the frame. In order 
to do this, there have to be some buildings or walls or other items with right angles. 
All you have to do, is open the photo in SketchUp and line up some colored lines 
with these features.
1.	 Select a suitable site image.
2.	 From the drop-down menu, navigate to Camera | Match New Photo.
3.	 Navigate to your photo and select Open.
4.	 The image will be imported and red, green, and blue lines will be 
displayed on top.

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
5.	 Move the origin point (the yellow square) to a corner of a building 
(or other architectural feature of the building) at ground level, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click and hold the left-mouse button to move the grips.
7.	 Align one of the green dotted lines along an edge going off to the right.
8.	 Align the second green line in the same plain but higher up the blue line 
(the z axis), as shown in the following screenshot:

Composing the Scene
[ 70 ]
9.	 Do the same with the two red lines to the left.
10.	 Click on Done, as shown in the following screenshot:
SketchUp has now created a new scene (see the tab at the top of the 3D window), 
which you can click on whenever you want to come back to this view. You will see 
the image only in this scene. If you move the viewpoint away from the viewpoint of 
the image, the backdrop will disappear.
You have now set up the blue, green, and red axes to correspond to the 
up/down, forward/backward and left/right directions that you have captured 
in the photograph. Having done this, you can now happily draw away in the 
scene, knowing that the model you create will always look as if it is right within the 
photograph. The depth of the field, focal length, and eye height have all been taken 
care of. This is a big deal, because doing this by trial and error would have taken far 
more time and probably caused a lot of frustration!

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
3D drawing in a 2D photo
You can now test your new perspective setup by drawing a simple box into the 
scene. If this looks right in relation to the photo, you know you've done the Match 
Photo process correctly.
1.	 Select the pencil tool.
2.	 Click on the origin (where the blue, red, and green axes meet).
3.	 Move up the blue axis and click on the blue axis to set the end point 
of the line at the height of the eaves or gutters of the building.
4.	 Move along the green axis and click  on a point along the axis to define 
the width of the facade.
5.	 Move down the blue axis, hold the Shift key to activate the constraint to 
the blue axis and click on the origin.
6.	 Release the Shift key and click on the origin again to complete the face, 
as you can see in the following screenshot:
7.	 Select the Push/Pull tool.

Composing the Scene
[ 72 ]
8.	 Push the face along the red axis to form a 3D box, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
The perspective of this box should be in keeping with the house, wall, or any other 
right-angled item that you included in your photo. If it isn't, just click on the photo 
match pallet, click on the cogs symbol to edit the Match Photo setup, and tweak 
the dotted lines. The best indication that you're right is when the blue axis lines up 
perfectly with the corner.
You have just created a 3D box to represent the existing building. Rotate the 
view with the mouse to view it. Notice that the photo disappears. Don't worry; 
you can bring it back at any time by clicking on the scene tab that the Match Photo 
tool created at the start. 

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
You can now draw or add anything onto this scene, and it will look correct if 
you place items into the scene in relation to the 3D box, as you can see in the 
following screenshot:
Setting up a real-world location and the 
Sun's position
Before we can create renderings of the new geometry that blend in with the rest of 
our photo, we have to set the location and orientation of our scene. Once this is set, 
the shadows on the model will match up with the shadows in the picture.
For scenes created with the Match Photo tool, setting the orientation is important, 
because the lines you set as your x and y axes are most likely not aligned with East 
and North, respectively. Unfortunately, the simple controls for the location and 
orientation settings have been removed since SketchUp 2013.

Composing the Scene
[ 74 ]
Luckily, you can still download a plugin by Jim Foltz. This plugin recreates 
the necessary controls. He has kindly allowed us to provide a copy of the Ruby 
files on the Packt support website. Go to http://www.packtpub.com/support 
and select the title of the book from the drop-down list. Then, download the files 
model_location.rb and inputbox.rb from the Chapter 3 folder and copy them 
both into your plugins folder (refer Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, for details). 
Restart SketchUp, and you will find a new Model Location entry under the 
Plugins menu, as shown in the following screenshot:
With this simple tool, you can set the location, time zone, and North orientation of 
your scene. A simple way of going about this is to set up the location, date, and time 
of day using the Shadow Setting menu in SketchUp. If you have previously noted 
down the time and date when you took the photo, you can set this up now too.
1.	 Open the plugin from the menu by navigating to Plugins | Model Location.
2.	 Set the Latitude and Longitude of your site.
3.	 You can also give a name for the Location and Country, but this has no 
influence on the Shadow Setting.
4.	 Change the Time Zone to the right offset for your country. If you want to 
simulate Daylight Saving Time, also set the Daylight option to true.
5.	 Set Show North? to true. The North direction will now be displayed in the 
model as an orange line. Adjust the North Angle until the line points to the 
geographic North in the model.

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
Setting up the time and date for shadows
All that remains is to tell SketchUp what time of day and date the photo was 
taken. You can do this with the Shadow Settings dialog box, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
1.	 Navigate to Window | Shadows.
2.	 Use the sliders or type in the date and time.
3.	 You can adjust the time zone here as well. Notice that the setting will also 
update in the Model Location plugin.
4.	 If you don't see the shadows in the model yet, open the View menu and 
click on Shadows. A check mark indicates that shadows are displayed in 
the model.
Use this function to set up accurate shadow studies for all your 
projects. For example, you can now check the sunlight that each 
room will receive at any day of the year.
You have now set the location, orientation, time, and date of your site. This means 
that the Sun and shadows will behave just as they would if you were really there.
Check the shadow cast by the box. Does it match with the photo? If not, you may 
have got the North orientation mixed up or forgotten to set the correct location. 
You can go back and change this now. You can also use trial and error on the 
sliders for the date and time to match the shadows in the photo as closely as possible.
Now that you've learned everything you need to know about setting up a physically 
accurate environment, let's look at the other great methods you can use to set up 
a site in SketchUp. Don't forget; even though shadows and shading look quite 
cartoony now, these settings will be used to define the physically accurate Sun 
and sky conditions when you export them to a renderer.

Composing the Scene
[ 76 ]
Sketch plan
SketchUp works surprisingly well with sketchy details. So, even importing a rough 
sketch plan or a scan of an old hard copy drawing you might have found lying 
around still works well as basis for your 3D scene.
1.	 Scan the map image. Don't go crazy with the scan resolution (DPI). Use just 
enough quality to clearly see the lines you are going to use in the model.
2.	 Save it as a JPEG or PNG image.
3.	 In SketchUp, navigate to File | Import....
4.	 Navigate to the image and click on Open.
5.	 Click where you want it and drag it to a size about as big as the site.
6.	 If your image contains a drawing scale, measure the size of the scale in the 
scene and scale the image.
7.	 Now, you can start creating your geometry right on top of the image and 
build up the footprint and floor plans of the building.
As long as you use the image lines as guides, you will produce a proportional model. 
It is surprising how little detail you need to start drawing meaningful 3D visuals.

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
Now, just try to draw a very basic (or pretentious) house and garden plan or 
look for one in an architectural or DIY magazine. Scan this into the computer, 
or alternatively, find one on Google Image Search and use that. Can you see how 
easy it is to construct from sketches? The important thing here is that you've used 
a proportional sketch or drawing as guideline rather than just starting to draw in 
3D from scratch.
Starting with a 2D CAD site plan
If you have an existing CAD drawing, either a proposed or existing site plan, you 
can easily import it into SketchUp and build up the 3D site from there. The benefit of 
a CAD drawing over an image is the precision that CAD data provides. Also, CAD 
lines will be imported as SketchUp edges, which you can snap to when creating the 
3D elements.
You should have a CAD application such as AutoCAD LT or a free alternative 
such as DoubleCAD XT (www.doublecad.com) or DraftSight (www.3ds.com/
products-services/draftsight/) available to do some cleanup work. Usually, 
CAD drawings are not optimized for rough SketchUp work but contain a lot more 
information than necessary. Here are a few things you should look out for before 
you import a CAD drawing into SketchUp:
•	
Remove unnecessary elements such as text, grid lines, or sheet 
layout elements
•	
Remove pattern fills and hatches, especially if they are individual lines 
and not complex drawing elements
•	
Use the explode command to convert 2D polylines to normal lines
•	
Remove geometric details you will not use in your model (such as 
crown molding)
•	
Identify the layers you do need for your model (walls, doors, windows, 
and hard landscape) and delete all the others
In Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization, you will also learn how to import and use 
CAD elevations (side and front views) to build up the detail.
You need SketchUp 2014 Pro to import DWG or DXF files 
into your scene.

Composing the Scene
[ 78 ]
Setting up a CAD site plan
Follow these basic steps to clean up your CAD drawing for use in SketchUp:
1.	 Open the CAD plan in your CAD drawing application.
2.	 Save a copy of the file and rename it cadplan_xref.dwg or similar.
3.	 Delete all the lines, hatchings, xrefs, dimensions, text, and blocks you 
don't need.
4.	 You can keep the 2D blocks representing the elements that you do want to 
replace with 3D geometry (such as plants) in your drawing, but make sure 
that the blocks do not contain too many lines.
5.	 You should be left with clear outlines of buildings, roads, and landscaping.
6.	 Select everything and move it near to the absolute origin (0,0) of the drawing.
7.	 Zoom to extents to verify that no stray lines are left at a great distance 
from the center.
8.	 In AutoCAD, you can use the purge command to clean up the drawing 
structure and remove unused elements and layers.
9.	 Hit Save.
You now have a basic plan from which you can begin modeling the environment 
around your building and the building itself. Now, you need to import it into 
SketchUp at the correct scale.
1.	 Open up SketchUp.
2.	 Start the import tool by navigating to File | import.
3.	 Change the Format drop-down box to AutoCAD Files.
4.	 Hit the Options... button and verify the import settings, as follows:
°°
Adjust the Scale to fit to your CAD drawing scale
°°
Preserve drawing origin is useful if you have split your CAD 
drawing in multiple files (such as floor levels) and want to import 
them at the same position in the model

Chapter 3
[ 79 ]
°°
Merge coplanar faces and Orient faces consistently are relevant 
if you import 3D elements. You can always have them checked, 
as seen in the following screenshot:
5.	 Select your drawing file and click on Open.
6.	 You will see a progress window displaying the elements that are 
being processed. At the end, a summary of imported drawing elements 
is displayed.
7.	 Hit Zoom Extents. If the view zooms out so far that you can't identify any 
of your drawing elements, you will see that there were some stray lines left 
in the drawing that were not deleted. You can try and hunt them down in 
SketchUp or return to the CAD drawing to delete these lines and repeat the 
import. Either way, you should remove these extra lines.
8.	 If your scene already contained an element (such as the default Sophie 
component), all lines will be combined in a component. If the scene was 
completely empty, the lines will be independent. If this is the case, select 
all the lines now and turn them into a component.
9.	 Use the Tape Measure tool to verify the size of the imported lines. Measure 
the length of an element with a known dimension (such as a wall) and make 
sure you snap to the end points of the line.
10.	 If the scale is not correct, just type the correct length right after you took the 
measurement and hit Enter.
11.	 SketchUp will ask: Do you want to resize the model?
12.	 Confirm that you want to resize the model, and all drawing elements will be 
scaled to the correct size. Measure the new size again to confirm.

Composing the Scene
[ 80 ]
In the following screenshot, you can see an imported CAD plan scaled to the right 
size. You can compare the size of the person with the size of the door opening or a 
chair to confirm the correct scale.
You now have the plan within SketchUp and scaled to real-world dimensions. 
This is important, because SketchUp is built for real-world architectural models, 
and every component you will add to your model (such as persons or plants) 
will come in at a realistic size.
Cleaning up the imported CAD data
If you only have a few layers in your CAD file, you can leave it at that. However, 
if there are dozens of layers in the file, these have now been replicated in SketchUp. 
It's time to do a bit of cleanup work:
1.	 Open the Layer dialog by navigating to Window | Layers.
2.	 Activate Layer0.
3.	 Select all the CAD layers by holding down the Shift key.
4.	 Select the minus icon at the top to delete all the layers.

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
5.	 A popup will give you a choice about what to do with the content of the 
layers. Select Move to Default Layer.
6.	 Click on Delete.
7.	 The layers will vanish, and all content will be placed on Layer0.
8.	 Create a new layer called CAD drawing.
9.	 Select the component of the drawing and assign it to the newly created layer. 
Now, you can switch off the layer when you don't want to see it in your model.
CAD applications use layers to separate elements. In SketchUp, all the basic 
elements should be drawn on Layer0, and only the containers (groups and 
components) should be assigned to a different layer to control the visibility 
of the object. We have created this structure in SketchUp and at the same time, 
got rid of a number of imported layers that are not useful to us.
Importing 3D data from CAD
If you are lucky and can get a ready-made 3D model for your visualization project, 
you can also import the entire 3D model into SketchUp. The supported formats are 
as follows:
•	
DWG/DXF
•	
3DS
•	
DAE (Collada)
•	
OBJ (via plugin only)

Composing the Scene
[ 82 ]
When you import 3D content from another application, you have to be careful with 
the complexity and level of detail. CAD and BIM models can be large in dimensions 
but still model every detail down to the doorknob in very high resolution. If you 
actually succeed with the import, the performance of SketchUp will certainly suffer.
Most CAD applications will create triangle surfaces when exporting 3D objects, 
because these are the most basic objects that every application can handle. In 
SketchUp, we would prefer to have complex polygonal faces to make use of the 
native surface tools. Luckily, there is a plugin that can combine triangles to polygons 
for us. It is Cleanup by Thomthom. You can download it from the Plugin Store.
Although importing a finished 3D model may look like a big time saver, you will 
find that you will have to spend a lot of effort on cleaning up, restructuring, and 
converting the triangular surfaces into something that can be easily handled and 
modified with SketchUp. Therefore, directly importing CAD or 3D data is most 
useful for objects that you are not going to edit a lot, such as a car or a surrounding 
urban block. If you are going to make a lot of modifications to the geometry, it 
may be faster to recreate the model from scratch with all the tools and the correct 
structure of a SketchUp model.
Fleshing out your site plan
Now that you've set up your site base using one of the methods introduced in the 
preceding section, you can flesh out the volumes in no time. This process is called 
massing. The idea here is to give an overall impression of the 3D space that buildings 
occupy. Details can be modeled later on, provided they will be visible in the frame.
Massing the buildings
To begin massing your context, perform the following steps:
1.	 Make sure that your base plan is turned into a group.
2.	 Right-click and select Lock. Now, you can't inadvertently change anything.
3.	 With the pencil tool, retrace the outline of a building.
4.	 Notice how the rubber band turns magenta to lock to the perpendicular 
(right angle) of an existing line. In this way, you can draw all walls at right 
angles to the first wall.
5.	 Complete the outline by returning to your starting point. SketchUp will fill 
the outline with a surface.
6.	 Push-pull the surface up to the height of the building.

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
You can turn the building now into a component to use elsewhere:
1.	 Triple-click on a surface of the new building.
2.	 Check that all the lines and polygons that belong to the building are 
now selected.
3.	 Right-click and select Make Component.
4.	 Assign a recognizable name to the new component. If you don't have 
anything else to go by, use the street name and building number.
5.	 Repeat the previous steps to create boxes for all the buildings on your site.
Stick to adding simple blocks quickly to your site, so that you can get a good idea of 
how your new building fits in. You can create more details or add textures to these 
buildings later if you need to. The following image shows a few street blocks with 
the buildings as rough 3D shapes. It’s already enough detail to give you the overall 
idea of a city blocks and connecting streets.

Composing the Scene
[ 84 ]
Setting up the camera to challenge 
and impress
Take a look at the following two examples. Which of the two do you find 
more stimulating?

Chapter 3
[ 85 ]
The SketchUp camera view can be set up to simulate the human eye, a long-range 
camera, or even a fisheye lens. To you and me, this means that we get great flexibility 
in the effects we can achieve when composing our scene. The two images here 
demonstrate that the same model need not convey the same impression. Here, 
the first image is rather mundane and ordinary, but the second one is aggressive 
and challenging. When setting up the view, experiment with the field of view and 
different angles until you have the striking image that will wow your clients.
Alternatively, depending on what you're trying to convey, you may like to go safe 
and conventional. The choice is yours.
Changing the field of view
Carry out the following steps to change the field of view:
1.	 Navigate to Camera | Zoom or click on the Zoom icon (represented by a 
magnifying glass).
2.	 Hold down Shift and move the mouse up or down to increase or decrease 
the field of view. Notice how the background changes in relation to 
the foreground.
3.	 Notice that the Value Control Box (bottom right) changes to show the 
value of the current field of view in degrees.
4.	 Now, try typing in some values and hit Enter each time.
The beauty of SketchUp is that the view changes in real time letting you experiment 
to your heart's content. The field of view isn't the only tool you can use to break 
away from the mundane!
Think like a pigeon
Have you ever found yourself wondering what the world looks like to a pigeon 
walking around in the street? No? Well, I must admit neither have I until now, but 
let me assure you that the pigeon's view on the world is a very interesting one! Take 
a look at this sequence of three images, again starting with a standard SketchUp view 
of our model and then how a pigeon would see it on the ground and in flight. 

Composing the Scene
[ 86 ]
Which of these gives the best impression of height?

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
This just demonstrates how easy it is to surprise people by showing them buildings 
from a perspective they have never considered before. People want to be challenged 
in this way. Experimenting a little with viewing angles will pay off in the end with a 
gripping rather than a mundane image.
Of course, sometimes they just want to see how a building will look like to them. 
It all depends on knowing the audience and purpose of the visualization.
Here are some other things to try:
•	
Banking
•	
Tilting (hold Ctrl (for Windows) or Option (for Mac) while using the 
Orbit tool)
•	
Flying right in close on detail (usually, with the loss of feathers)
•	
Top-down views
•	
Panoramas

Composing the Scene
[ 88 ]
Orthographic and parallel projection
The perspective projection mimics the human visual perception, where far away 
objects look smaller and objects close up look larger. This is our natural experience, 
and we can easily relate to these images.
However, for architectural presentation, we also use parallel projection. This 
method of projection preserves the aspect ratio of vertical and horizontal lines and 
so, it is valuable to estimate the proportions of a building façade or other details.
Turning perspective view off is necessary for modeling when you need to see 
orthographic views (top, left, front, and so on). It's also good when you want to 
output these views to create 2D drawings for construction documentation. If you 
are used to 3D CAD drawing, you may even prefer this look over perspective views.
To change between the projection modes, navigate to Camera | Parallel Projection 
or Camera | Perspective. By navigating to Camera | Standard Views..., you can 
set up presets for orthographic views. If you are going to refer to a specific view 
frequently during the modeling, you can also save all the settings in a scene tab.

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
Saving days of toil with ready-made 
scenery
Robin once spent four days modeling scenery, people, trees, and streets full of 
buildings in order to finish off a view. The new building itself had only taken a day to 
model! In order to avoid this, most professional architectural visualizers make heavy 
use of paid-for entourage (trees, people, cars, buildings, and such) to liven up a view.
Of all the important developments that have made 3D computer visualization 
what it is now, the availability of digital cameras must be the most important factor. 
You will already have come across the basic techniques you need. The rest will be 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic 
Rendering, and Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way.
Billboard scenery elements
Virtually, any photo you take or find on the Internet can be turned into a scenery 
element. Take this one of wild horses, for example. Would you have ever thought 
of using an image like this in an arch-viz scene?

Composing the Scene
[ 90 ]
However, horse lovers need a home too! The rendered-up version made it to the 
finals of a rendering competition, which was designed to show off the capabilities of 
IRender without doing any postprocessing in Photoshop. All I did was to cut out the 
foreground, mid-ground, and background from the same image and set them up, as 
you can see in the following screenshot:
All you need to remember when doing this is that the further away from the 
camera the billboard image is, the larger it will have to be, so the individual 
cutouts will need to be resized by eye. Here's how it came together. This is purely 
a SketchUp output without any rendering. You can see the cutout edges in black, 
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
Harnessing the plethora of online images
In Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way, we will look at the best 
place to obtain images on the Internet, to turn them into entourage. 
However, don't forget to use them here too.
Creating billboard elements
We create billboard elements as follows:
1.	 Insert your image into SketchUp somewhere out of the way.
2.	 Right-click and select Explode.
3.	 Double-click to select and then turn the selection into a component.
4.	 Copy it using the Move tool with the Ctrl key pressed (Option on Mac).
5.	 Rotate the copy upright (90 degrees).
6.	 Place it where you need it. Scale as necessary.
7.	 Now, go back to the first copy. Double-click on it to edit it.
8.	 Select a plan view by navigating to Camera | Standard Views | Top.
9.	 Draw over areas to be clipped and deleted. The in-place component 
automatically changes too.
You can download this SketchUp scene from the download section 
of this book at www.packtpub.com/support.
When you import and explode images in SketchUp, they behave in just the same 
way as any rectangle surface with a texture applied to it. So, you can draw on it 
and erase sections. This can however be difficult when your image is in position, 
because it might be at a weird angle or obstructed by other items. Using this 
technique, you have the image lying horizontally in the plan view, so you 
can draw over it in a flat 2D view.
The following image is what the horses looked like when they were clipped. 
As you can see, you could create whole scenes just with photos and no other 
modeling at all! 

Composing the Scene
[ 92 ]
However, usually, you would use this technique to insert a foreground image of 
foliage or people and a background image of, say, a city or country scene:
Framing the scene with entourage
Having set up your scene, your choice of entourage is now the most important 
decision you will have to make in the visualization process. Clever use of the 
entourage will frame the picture, enhance it, and distract the viewer from the details 
that you don't want them to see. More than this, choosing the right kind of entourage 
can increase or reduce the render time by an order of magnitude.
Choosing your final entourage will be covered in more detail in Chapter 6, Entourage 
the SketchUp Way, and you really don't want to have to worry about specifics until 
then. Choices on what trees to use, whether they will be 3D or 2D, downloaded from 
a website or created yourself will all be decided later, and we will discover together 
what the best options for creating great looking architectural renders are. However, 
for now, what you need the most, is creative flexibility.

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
The specifity trap
What is the specifity trap? Well, I actually made up the term, so you won't find it in 
any dictionary. The specifity trap is when you bog yourself down in specifics far too 
early on in the design process. Using a specific finished entourage at this early stage 
will force your creative brain to focus on it rather than the building. Worse, it will 
take lots of computing power away from SketchUp, particularly, if you insert lots of 
3D trees or people. It's like looking around for a house to buy and then arguing with 
your partner about the shrubs next to the front lawn or rejecting the house because 
you don't like the color of the living room wall. It really doesn't matter for now.
High Polygon Count means highly detailed 3D geometry. 
It refers to the number of faces (polygons) used to create a shape or 
geometry. The higher the number of polygons, the longer SketchUp 
takes to process what's there and the more computing power it 
needs. This means that if you add a lot of detailed 3D entourage 
to your scene, you might find moving the view around extremely 
slow and jumpy. You'll learn how to model scenes with a low 
polygon count in Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization.
Rough placeholders
So, the answer to all your problems here is to insert basic, rough, sketch-like 
entourage just to indicate, more or less, where a tree, person, or car will go. 
You will change these placeholders to something nicer later. This is really easy. 
Here are the benefits of this way of working:
•	
Uncluttered workspace
•	
No high polygon 3D people/trees/cars to slow SketchUp down
•	
Creativity isn't stifled by concentrating on what doesn't really matter 
at this stage
•	
You retain flexibility to swap entourage later depending on what kind 
of output you go for (photoreal, sketchy, watercolor, and so on)
If your composition doesn't look right with basic entourage, it won't look right with 
highly polished stuff either. However, at least, you can spot this early on and make 
adjustments before you've put in too much effort.

Composing the Scene
[ 94 ]
Inserting entourage placeholders
If you haven't done so already, frame your scene exactly how you want it and 
save the view as you have it now, so that you can keep going back to it.
Based on the composition you're aiming to achieve, insert any trees and people 
as follows.
1.	 Open the Components browser by navigating to Window | Components.
2.	 Select People from the drop-down menu. The basic collection will be loaded.
3.	 Pick the 2D People collection.
4.	 In the 3D Warehouse window, select a basic person (don't worry about 
anything else for now—you'll replace them later).
5.	 Move the cursor into the view area and place the person somewhere near 
where you'd like them.
6.	 Click on the scene tab at the top of the view window and check 
whether the composition looks right.
7.	 Move the person around (watching the axis color as necessary).
8.	 Repeat steps 4 to 7 until you have populated your scene.
9.	 Choose a different collection of entourage components such as plants, 
but remember to use the most basic items for now. When you insert plants, 
you can also use the scale tool to introduce a bit of variety.
You will now have a fully composed scene: a sketched-out canvas ready for you to 
fill in the boxes. Remember to save the model!
Printing a test view
At this stage, it's a good idea to print a black-and-white version of the scene for you 
to sketch over with any ideas:
1.	 Navigate to Window | Styles to open the Styles dialog.
2.	 Select a black-and-white style from the default styles.
3.	 Navigate to File | Print from the menu.
4.	 Adjust the print option to fill the page.
5.	 Click on Print.

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
The following image is the massing model of the sketch we started with, complete 
with basic entourage and billboard backgrounds:
You can download the .skp file in the code download pack at 
www.packtpub.com/support.
Summary
You have now completed the most important stage in creating great architectural 
visuals using SketchUp! It wasn't hard, was it? The piece of paper in your hand is 
proof that a great visual is on the way. If you completed the quick start tutorial in 
Chapter 1, Quick Start Tutorial, you will know how easy the rest can be.
In this chapter, you learned how to think like a film set designer when setting up 
your scene and anchor your scene in the surrounding context. Then, you created 
camera perspectives with an extra wow factor. You have simulated accurate sunlight 
with location, orientation, time, and date in SketchUp. Finally, you used photos 
for billboard scenery and placed marker entourage to quickly view and make 
adjustments to your surroundings.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to model within SketchUp for great results 
quickly and easily. Remember that all you need to do is follow the tried and tested 
methods step by step. These individual steps are all baby steps, but at the end of the 
journey, you will be amazed at how far you have travelled. By setting up your scene 
just like you have done in this chapter, you have ensured that the rest of the process 
will be quick and easy.


Modeling for Visualization
No doubt, you're already a dab hand at creating models with SketchUp's easy-to-use 
but powerful toolset. But what precisely is modeling anyway? Simply put, it is the 
process of creating the basic geometry—polygons and other surfaces—used in a 3D 
scene. In this chapter, you will learn the modeling techniques specifically required 
for architectural visualization. We will look at the following topics:
•	
Setting up a file structure for your project
•	
Modeling details from CAD elevations or photos
•	
Low polygon modeling to increase computer speed
•	
Harnessing the power of components
•	
Modeling main building features for visualization
If you've already completed Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, you will have started 
your scene using one of the following four methods, or a combination of these:
•	
Importing Google Earth terrain data or other online mapping images
•	
Using a site photograph with Match Photo
•	
Using a scanned 2D sketch or drawing
•	
Using an existing CAD drawing
Using any of these methods will instantly give your model focus and context. 
If you haven't done so already, flesh out your main scene by replacing all the 
buildings that give context but are not the main focus, with boxes.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 98 ]
Project file layout
When starting a SketchUp project, it is a good idea to set up your file structure first. 
Start with a main folder for the project, and create subfolders inside this main folder 
for site components, images, entourage, output drawings, and whatever else you 
need. This will help you when you need to transport your main model to another 
computer or when you do your daily backups. You just grab the whole folder 
hierarchy to keep the scene dependencies intact.
Creating the basic building shape
We are going to create a dummy building within our context scene, save it as a 
separate model file, and then open it individually to start modeling the details. 
This is a good modeling technique, especially for large or intricate scenes, and will 
also keep you away from being distracted as you work on it. To create the basic 
building shape, perform the following steps:
1.	 Draw the basic outline of the building you will be modeling.
2.	 Push-pull it to the maximum height (usually the ridge height).
3.	 Triple-click on it to select all the faces and edges.
4.	 Right-click on it and select Make Component from the context menu.
5.	 The Create Component dialog box appears.

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
6.	 Click on the Set Component Axes button.
7.	 Set the origin at a corner of your building and align the main axis (in red) 
with the main facade of your building; then set the green axis to the back 
of the building.
8.	 Enter a name to identify the component in the Name field.
9.	 Click on the Create button. Your faces are now part of a component in 
the main scene.
10.	 Now right-click on the new component and choose Save As.
11.	 A file browser window opens that lets you save the component as a new 
*.skp file.
12.	 Navigate to the Components folder in your project and save it with an 
easy-to-identify name and append _LR to the filename, for example, 
Main_Street_96_LR.skp.
13.	 Repeat these steps but now replace the _LR file with _HR.
You have now created a low-resolution (_LR) and a high-resolution (_HR) SketchUp 
file from your component. You can keep the _LR file version more or less as you see 
it now, and model the _HR file version to perfection (or near enough!).
The reason for creating two versions of everything is simple: we want to stay 
as focused and unencumbered with detail as possible while we are modeling, 
and throughout the design process. When the time comes to produce some great 
visuals, we will bring all the detailed elements back in. The rest of the time, we 
will have the _LR file versions in place to give us a sense of context and scale.
This also helps us with the limitations of SketchUp. The lower the amount of 
polygons in the scene, the quicker we can maneuver around the SketchUp 
environment (also explained in the Low polygon modeling techniques section of 
this chapter). Components also have some other useful aspects that we will 
explore further in this chapter.
Swapping _LR with _HR resolution versions
Now here comes the clever bit! If you now double-click on the newly created 
*_HR.skp file, a second instance of SketchUp will start that contains only the 
content of the component. Now with the _HR component open in the second 
SketchUp window, perform the following steps:
1.	 Modify the _HR component geometry to add more details.
2.	 Save your changes.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 100 ]
3.	 Go back to the original SketchUp window that contains the main scene.
4.	 Right-click on the still _LR component in the main scene.
5.	 Click on Reload.
6.	 If the last thing you did was to save the *_HR.skp file, the content will 
update immediately because SketchUp recognizes that the file with the 
component definition has changed.
7.	 Otherwise, you will get prompted if you want to replace the existing 
component with a different file. Select Yes in this case.
8.	 Navigate to the updated component file and select Open. The scene updates 
with the changes you just made.
9.	 Repeat the steps from 4 to 8, but this time swap the _HR component with 
the _LR component.
10.	 Check your scene again and see how the simple component is back in place.
As you move along, you will use this method to swap all the scene placeholders 
that you've set up in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, with final items of entourage 
(which will be covered in Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way) and other scenery.
Let's think of an everyday example; you have a large housing site with 40 house 
plots. Each of these has 20 bushes in the garden, made of the same component but 
scaled and rotated differently to give an impression of variety. Each bush may have 
3,000 faces, giving a total of 2.4 million faces just for garden shrubs! Replacing just 
one of these component definitions with a simplified version (say a box) will update 
them all in one go and allow you to navigate your scene smoothly again.
When importing AutoCAD files, blocks import into SketchUp as 
components. If you have trees in your 2D CAD plan, you can swap 
them out for 3D versions in SketchUp using the preceding method of 
swapping. What's particularly good about this is that all copies of the 
AutoCAD block will update with the same SketchUp component so 
that you can instantly turn all 2D trees in to 3D objects in one stroke!
Carving out the detail
When visualizing with SketchUp, the great benefit is that most of the detail can be 
introduced easily with textures and photographs. So, we don't need to be a 3D CAD 
virtuoso to create great looking architectural visuals. In fact, the general rule of 
thumb when deciding whether to model more detail is: if in doubt, don't bother!

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
The following are some reasons to be lazy:
•	
You can always model more details later if you really need to, but you 
can never retrieve the time you spent if you did too much too soon
•	
Applying images and textures will work much better on simple flat surfaces
•	
The more complex your model is initially, the harder it is to change 
details later on
Modeling buildings in SketchUp is really easy. That's because SketchUp 
has been developed with the architectural market specifically in mind. 
You will already have picked up lots of useful tips from the training 
videos on www.sketchup.com/learn/videos or on YouTube.
Modeling buildings in SketchUp
Open up your main building file (that's the *_HR.skp component file created). 
We are now going to start modifying this simplified building to resemble the 
finished design.
At this stage, we really just need to focus on the major shape of the building. 
Often just walls and roof will suffice. There are several main ways of doing this:
•	
From CAD elevations
•	
From a photograph
•	
By eye or measurements
Modeling detail from CAD elevations
When your design architect can provide you with CAD drawings, this is the 
best way to start your project. Import and scale your CAD elevation using the 
methods you learned in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene. Because there is already 
some geometry in the SketchUp scene, the CAD elements will automatically turn 
into a group. To align the 2D drawing with your model, do the following steps:
1.	 Select the Move tool.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 102 ]
2.	 Hover over the CAD drawing edge a short bit in from the corner. 
The rotation grips appear as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on a grip and rotate the elevation by 90 degrees.
4.	 Move the ground level of the CAD elevation to a corresponding point in 
your model (bottom corner). Make sure you snap to the reference points.
5.	 Align the elevation with the front facade of your building (parallel or 
orthogonal as required). Use the axis constraints (by holding down the 
Shift key) to limit movement of the component to only one direction and 
then move the mouse to a corner of the building to snap to it.

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
Set up two or three elevations using this method so that you can model all sides 
of the building. Now, start creating 3D geometry using the elevations as reference 
points, as given in the following steps:
1.	 Select the Pencil tool.
2.	 Hover over the building face. Hold the Shift key to constrain the pencil line 
to this face.
3.	 Click wherever you need to on the CAD elevation as illustrated in the 
following screenshot. Can you see how the line on the face (right) follows 
wherever you move and click the pencil?
4.	 Continue to draw outlines of the main features and push-pull, inferencing 
to another elevation or plan.
5.	 Remember to create a component or group the main elements together 
when necessary.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 104 ]
The following figure shows a finished building done with this method, showing the 
CAD elevations set up at front and sides:
Modeling from a photograph
Use this method when you need to model an existing building that needs 
modifications, create building elements that already exist to include in your new 
building, or just model for fun, computer-game levels, and so on. You can use 
any photos you have taken. The perspective should be more perpendicular to the 
building to avoid any obstructions by protruding building elements. To use this 
method, perform the following steps:
1.	 Start with your basic building block.
2.	 Navigate to File | Import and then click on All Supported Image Types 
in the drop-down box.
3.	 Select the Use as texture option.
4.	 Select the image you want to use and click on Open.
5.	 Click on the bottom-left corner of the side of the building that matches 
the photo.
6.	 The bottom-left corner of the image will be anchored to the corner.

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
7.	 Now drag the mouse across until the image fills the face.
8.	 Right-click on the image, and then choose Texture | Position.
9.	 The image now shows pins of different colors in the corners.
10.	 Click once on a pin to lift it up.
11.	 Zoom in to the corner of the building image and click to place the pin there 
as shown in the preceding screenshot.
12.	 Repeat for the other three corners of the facade. Usually, you will need the 
two bottom corners and the upper corners just below the roof.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 106 ]
13.	 Now drag each pin to the right-hand side corner of your 3D placeholder box.
14.	 Repeat for the other corners. You will now see the image stretched more or 
less to fit to the face.
15.	 Right-click on the image and select Done.
16.	 You can now push-pull to increase the building to ridge height to match the 
real building size.
17.	 Draw over the geometry along the features in the image and push-pull as 
necessary to give them some depth.

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
You just created the main shape of a building using only a digital photo. This is an 
excellent and easy method for creating simple buildings. The big benefit is that textures 
are retained on the model, making the texturing process easier later on. The following 
is the finished model with no more than some roof textures and windows added:
Modeling by eye or measurements
The third way to go is to draw by eye or using basic measurements. For visualization 
purposes, nothing needs to be very accurate anyway. Just open up the _HR version of 
your building and start modeling. This method is the reason why SketchUp took off 
so quickly amongst architects. They just wanted a 3D sketchpad!
So have a go at this if you haven't done so already. Use the rectangle tool and enter 
the basic x and y dimensions on the keyboard, then use SketchUp's modeling tools 
to experiment creating basic building shapes. Review the training videos on 
http://sketchup.com/learn/videos or YouTube or use the menu entry 
Help | Help Center | Online Tutorials to find what you need.
Use construction lines
Make use of the tape measure tool to set up basic grids or construction 
lines when modeling by eye. Select the tape measure, click on a line, and 
then type in the offset dimension to create a parallel construction line.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 108 ]
Low polygon modeling techniques
In this section, we will look at the low polygon modeling techniques that are 
especially relevant for visualization, animation, and game design uses.
What is low polygon?
In SketchUp, everything you create is formed from a wire frame over which a skin 
is stretched. You can see this process happening when you draw any shape with 
the pencil tool. The lines are the frame and when a shape (polygon) is complete, the 
frame receives a skin (surface). Even complex objects are made up of flat polygons, 
but their edges are hidden so you cannot see them. Go to View | Hidden Geometry 
to see what I mean. Low polygon modeling is where you create things in SketchUp 
while constantly striving to keep the amount of polygons to a minimum. 
The following screenshot shows how to set this up:

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
So what's the big deal about low polygon 
modeling?
Have you ever downloaded a huge model from the 3D Warehouse and found that 
SketchUp becomes unresponsive? Low polygon modeling makes the difference 
between smooth and easy navigation around large scenes and a slow jumpy 
nightmare. That's because SketchUp has to calculate where all these polygons are 
many times per second when rotating/orbiting a view. This is even more difficult 
once shadows are switched on because SketchUp also has to work out where 
shadows hit each polygon. Take a look at the following model. It has 80,000 faces! 
This can really lock up SketchUp or at least make it hard to use:

Modeling for Visualization
[ 110 ]
Removing the foliage shows us where most of the polygons were used. The model 
now shows 70,000 less faces as you can see in the following screenshot. Foliage is 
often the biggest problem when downloading 3D Warehouse models. We'll look 
at cleaning up large 3D Warehouse models further in this chapter.
But things get worse. When rendering a photoreal scene, physically accurate light, 
shadows, and reflections have to be calculated by the computer for each and every 
polygon you've modeled. If you don't take polygons into account, this can add 
hours to your rendering time.
Having said all that, you really don't need to worry. With SketchUp, low polygon 
modeling is easy when you keep in mind a few simple rules; they are as follows:
1.	 Will I see it?
2.	 Can I replace it with 2D?
3.	 Can I reduce the number of segments in an arc or circle?

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
Will I see it?
The first and most important question we have to ask ourselves when we start 
modeling is, "Will this be seen in the final image?" We have already set up the scene 
and viewpoints in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, so we know what will be visible.
Ask yourself this; if you only need one view, does this house need to have a back to 
it at all? Will the interior of this building be seen when the windows are only a few 
millimeters in size in the final image? The trick here is to constantly click on the scene 
tab you have set up and check how much detail is necessary for a particular object in 
this specific view.
Can I replace it with 2D?
SketchUp has a most amazing 2D billboard capability called face-me, which we have 
already touched on in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene. You can create a 2D component 
and set it to always face the camera. This is incredibly useful for keeping the polygon 
count down, because a flat item has so few polygons compared to 3D. Face-me 
components will be covered in more detail in Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way.
As well as face-me components, simple 2D billboards can be created. You've already 
learned this skill in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene!
Another way of replacing real geometry details with 2D images is called bump 
mapping. SketchUp does not use it directly but all external renderers will offer 
this option. With bump mapping, you can modify the surface normal of a polygon 
based on an applied texture image. This adds perceived depth to a surface and 
can be very effective to add smaller geometry details such as brick and mortar or 
the gaps between timber boards. We will look at these advanced render options in 
Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering. For now, just keep in mind that there are options 
to avoid highly detailed 3D geometry and still make it look good.
Can I reduce the number of segments in an arc or 
circle?
If you keep these two criteria for modeling 3D details in mind, learning to model 
low polygon curves and circles is all the extra knowledge you need. We'll look at 
this now to see how easy it is to produce low polygon curved models.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 112 ]
All circles and curves in SketchUp are made up of straight lines. The default number 
of straight lines in a circle is 24. The following screenshot shows the straight lines 
that build a circle:
To create a cylinder with a low polygon count, perform the following steps:
1.	 Draw a circle and zoom in to the edge. You will see facetted edges as shown 
in the preceding screenshot. This is because SketchUp draws circles and arcs 
as a series of lines to create the curvature.
2.	 Now push-pull the circle to create a cylinder.
3.	 To find out how many polygons are being used to make up the cylinder 
navigate to Model info | Statistics.
4.	 The number of faces will be 26 (24 for the sides plus 2 for top and bottom). 
Now delete this cylinder and draw another circle. Select the edge only.
5.	 Right-click on the edge and select Entity Info.
6.	 Change the number of segments to 8.
7.	 You will be able to see easily how many segments (straight lines) make 
the circle.

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
8.	 Extrude the cylinder and check the number of polygons again. The number 
of faces now is just 10.
9.	 Notice that SketchUp still smoothes out the cylinder surface by hiding the 
edges even though it is hardly a curve any more.
This method can be used for all the circles and arcs to reduce the amount of segments 
wherever this will not affect the final rendering; this means most objects, and 
especially any small or distant objects.
Making circles easy to snap to later
Keep the number of segments to a multiple of four. This allows you 
to inference-snap to the quadrants of the circle or cylinder later, 
which can be very useful.
In a rendering program, all the SketchUp faces are converted to multiple triangles. 
So, there will be twice as many polygons as there are square faces in SketchUp. 
The following screenshot shows three cylinders with different segment counts 
in a typical rendering application:

Modeling for Visualization
[ 114 ]
Notice in the next screenshot of the rendered cylinders that there is no visual 
difference between the second and third cylinders made from 24- and 128-sided circles, 
respectively. The first one was made from just 8 SketchUp segments and though it 
looks bad up this close, it would still render fine for a small or distant object:
Using components to increase 
productivity
If you have come to SketchUp without any prior knowledge of 3D CAD, one of 
the features that will absolutely amaze you is components. When you create a 
component, you can copy it as many times as you like. These copies are all linked 
to the original component and are called instances. If you now change something 
in one of the instances, all the other copies will also change!
Imagine how much difference this single capability will make when modeling your 
building. The following are some of the benefits that'll allow you to ease your work:
•	
Identical things only need to be drawn once
•	
Modifying one tree, roof tile, or fence panel will update all that exist in 
the model

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
•	
Components can be created as crude placeholders first and fleshed out later
•	
You can save components to an external file and edit the details there 
without the rest of the scene present
•	
If you want to replace all the components in a scene, you just reload another 
component in its place
To organize your model, you can also use groups. Groups are more for keeping parts 
of geometry together in one place and to separate them from other geometry. Groups 
don't have the additional benefits like components have that allow all the features 
mentioned in the preceding list.
How to benefit most from using components
To benefit from using components, we just need to think smart. In your mind, break 
everything down into its smallest common parts. So, for example, ask the following 
questions while using components:
1.	 Can the item be split in two and mirrored?
2.	 Are there items of geometry within the component that can be drawn once 
and repeated (subcomponents)? For example, panes in a window.
3.	 Can I rotate, flip, or scale instances of a single component to create different 
unique items?
4.	 Can I modify an instance of a component to create some visual variety?
Using dummy components
What do you do if you need to modify a component that's hard to see or get to? 
Create an instance somewhere else in the model where you can see it better to 
modify it. When you're done, just delete it. You can also use this method when 
SketchUp is being a pain. For example, some modeling activities such as Follow-Me 
don't work so well on small geometry. So make a component, copy it somewhere 
where you can see it clearly, and scale it up by a factor of 10 or 100. Now you can 
edit it without any problems.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 116 ]
Also, have you noticed that the Sandbox tools only want to work on a horizontal 
surface? Have a go at creating a surface, make a component of it, and then copy 
and rotate it as shown in the following screenshot. When you work on the 
horizontal copy, the vertical ones are updated instantly to create some undulating 
metal cladding.

Chapter 4
[ 117 ]
Using the Outliner for easy access
One of the most under-used features of SketchUp is the Outliner view. 
Most people don't even know it's there! Navigate to Window | Outliner. 
You should see something as shown in the following screenshot:
This is the list and hierarchy tree of groups and components in the scene. Notice 
that you can click-and-drag these around. Click on one now and drag it over another 
component. It nests itself underneath that component. In this way, you can control 
how components nest within others. You can also:
•	
Select deeply nested components to edit without having to double-click 
multiple times on the screen.
•	
Right-click an item in the list and use the context menu to edit components 
and groups directly.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 118 ]
•	
Reveal hidden items because you can't see them on screen when they're 
hidden! Hidden groups and components are still displayed in gray in 
the outliner.
•	
Save and reload components.
The Outliner window will become indispensable to you as you progress.
Always close or minimize the outliner when using plugins as 
it can slow things down.
Why you should name components
Make use of the component naming fields as much as you can. When you create 
a component, give it a meaningful and distinct name to identify it among other 
components. Depending on what rendering software you use, this info may carry 
across to the renderer so that you will be able to select components by name. 
You can access these functions within the Outliner window via the context menu.
Also, think about what you will want to select once you have exported to the 
renderer; for example, components with different materials, foreground and 
background items, items you're not sure if they will make it into the final render, 
and so on. Selecting elements that are not part of a group or component within the 
renderer is always more difficult than within SketchUp.
3D Warehouse components – problems to be 
aware of
Using the 3D Warehouse will save you bags of time. However, it's not a 
panacea for all illnesses. When searching from the 3D Warehouse, be wary 
of the following points:
•	
Commercial (copyrighted) models that are passed off as someone's 
own work
•	
High polygon counts and large file sizes
•	
Sloppy modeling methods that won't allow a correct render
•	
Incorrect measurements and scale

Chapter 4
[ 119 ]
The way to avoid problems later on is to save the component to your hard drive first 
rather than importing it into the model directly. Open the component up once you've 
saved it, and take a good look at it using the outliner (to see what's hidden) and 
navigate to Model Info | Statistics to check the number of faces. You'll get a good 
feel for this when you've done it a couple of times.
Purging 3D Warehouse components for your 
own use
Here is one way of purging components, but you will probably work out your 
own version of it:
1.	 Save the component to your hard drive as a file and open the file 
in SketchUp.
2.	 Open the Outliner window and inspect the structure of the model.
3.	 Highlight each group or component in the Outliner window and 
identify the corresponding geometry in the scene. You can rename the 
groups/components, if it helps you.
4.	 If you want to keep the structure of the groups within the component, 
double-click on each component to enter into the edit mode.
5.	 Select all faces within a group and check via the Entity Info window that 
all elements are placed on Layer0 (the default layer).
6.	 Make sure that the dominant material in the component model is set to the 
Default material (the half-gray-half-blue button in the materials browser). 
For example, a car component can have materials assigned to the rims, 
the tires, and the windows, but the body should be set to default.
7.	 If you have back faces showing (gray instead of white), right-click on them 
and select Reverse Face to rectify this.
8.	 Remove or replace parts of the geometry that have too many polygons for 
your requirements. If you just want a car on the street, you don't need to 
see the steering wheel or every single bolt head.
9.	 Delete anything that you don't want in your component (excessive details, 
leftovers from the modeling, and so on).
10.	 Navigate to Window | Model Info | Statistics and click on Purge unused.
11.	 Check the scale and change the size of the geometry if required.
12.	 Move the geometry near to or on top of the origin. This will be the point you 
snap to when you insert the component into your scene.
13.	 Save it with an explicit filename in your component folder or library.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 120 ]
Default material
Leaving geometry without material (that means only with material called Default) 
is often a good way to go because the component takes on whatever material you 
give it once you've inserted it in your scene. So, for example, a car with the material 
Default applied to the bodywork can be inserted multiple times in your scene but 
each time with different body color. The rest of the materials in the component 
(such as tires or chrome) aren't affected.
Quick material removal
If a component has too many materials attached, one way to quickly 
remove them is simply to open the component separately. Open the 
Materials pallet and select the In-Model tab. Select and delete materials 
here without affecting other components or groups in your main model.
You have also aligned the orientation of the polygons to face to the outside of the 
component. This is important because some renderers will not show the back face 
of polygons properly or ignore them altogether. Moving all elements to Layer0 will 
ensure that they are always visible. You can move the entire component instance to 
another layer to control its visibility, but you don't have to be afraid that your car is 
suddenly missing its wheels because you switched off the wrong layer.
People posting to the 3D Warehouse usually don't create components with 
photorealistic rendering or low polygon techniques in mind. You always 
should check the content of third-party components and test if they work 
well with your renderer.
Handling challenging modeling tasks
We're going to look at some of the most common modeling tasks you need to know 
about. There is no dark art to any of these, but just good common sense and proven 
methods of modeling. You will be able to use these techniques time and time again:
•	
Windows and doors
•	
Roofs, flashing, and ridge tiles
•	
Curtain walling
•	
Masonry
•	
Roads and pavements

Chapter 4
[ 121 ]
Windows and doors
Don't model these! Have a search on the 3D Warehouse and see what you can 
get. There's a plethora of windows, so you should be able to find what you need. 
If not, you can use the techniques introduced in this chapter to model a door from 
a photograph. This also adds important texture details.
Once you are happy with the door or window component you have obtained, 
you need to decide how to use them in the model. This will depend on the kind 
of architectural visuals you want to produce (which you have already decided on 
in Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset). If it's non-photoreal, it doesn't really matter how 
you place them. Just stick the components to the wall of your building. However, 
with photoreal, you will probably want to see reflections on the glass, and also see 
through it into the room behind.
In Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering, we are going 
to set up a photo-textured room behind the window. For now, we will place the 
window and create a cavity behind it ready for texturing later. The cavity serves to 
simulate the room behind the window without having to model it. To create this 
cavity, perform the following steps:
1.	 Place your window component on the wall.
2.	 If the wall face is part of a group or component, double-click to edit it.
3.	 Draw a rectangle roughly the size of the room on the wall.
4.	 Push-pull to the depth of the room. Your building should now look as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Modeling for Visualization
[ 122 ]
5.	 Select all the five inner faces of the room and create a component but leave 
the Cut opening option unchecked.
6.	 Give the component a useful name such as bedroom interior.
7.	 A face will appear that covers the entire wall, including your newly created 
room component.
8.	 Select your window component and place it on the wall. It might cut an 
opening if it has been modeled with the Cut opening option.
9.	 Use the Rectangle tool and draw over your window. If you have an arched 
window, you will have to use the Pencil tool and trace along the outline until 
a polygon is created that covers the opening.

Chapter 4
[ 123 ]
10.	 Delete the rectangle or polygon. Your window component is now visible 
again as you can see in the following screenshot:
The reason we've cut a hole in the wall is that we can't be sure SketchUp's automatic 
hole cutting feature will work when the model is exported to a rendering program. 
Also, we don't know whether the windows you downloaded from the 3D Warehouse 
have this feature enabled correctly. Either way, retracing the outline of the window 
with the pencil or rectangle tool will work. Repeat this simple process for each visible 
window. You only need to do this if you're aiming for photoreal rendering later.
Now, check your window component and make sure the window pane has a 
material assigned to it that you will recognize later. If not, label it window-glass or 
similar. This is so that you can swap the material out in one go when you get to your 
rendering program. All the different types of windows in your scene should use the 
same material for the glazing.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 124 ]
Roof
Roofs in SketchUp are a doddle as you already know. There are one or two 
important tricks to bear in mind, however:
1.	 Make the roof a separate component.
2.	 First push-pull the flat roof upward a little to create a 3D box. This will make 
creating the pitched roof shape easier and also form the basis for fascias 
and so on. In the following screenshot, you can see the roof footprint being 
extruded to the full roof height. Note the small coordinate-axes symbol that 
indicates the local coordinate origin of a component:
3.	 Model items such as gutters and drainpipes separately (and only if you 
need to).

Chapter 4
[ 125 ]
Some people advocate modeling individual roof tiles for added realism. This isn't 
necessary unless the roof is the main focal point of your visual. Any texture you 
create by photographing an existing roof is already far more realistic than modeling 
tiles, because of the variation in color, weathering, and size that you will achieve. 
In Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering, we will 
look at creating tiled textures from your own photos or pictures offered on 
manufacturers' websites.
You should make an attempt at valley gutter flashing and ridge tiles because this 
makes a big difference to the realism of a roof.
Flashing details
Lead flashing at intersections of the roof is a breeze in SketchUp. Just follow 
these simple steps:
1.	 Select the Tape measure tool.
2.	 Click on a valley line. When you move the mouse now a construction line 
parallel to the valley line will be attached to the cursor.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 126 ]
3.	 Move the mouse to one side of the valley line as shown in the 
preceding screenshot.
4.	 Enter a suitable distance and hit the Enter key. A construction line appears 
at the specified distance from the valley line.
5.	 Repeat the steps on the other side.
6.	 Draw over the construction lines using the Pencil tool as shown in the 
preceding screenshot.
7.	 Fill the new faces with a dark gray color with the Paint bucket tool.

Chapter 4
[ 127 ]
Modeling ridge tiles
Ridge tiles are a little trickier because of the weird angles we get at intersections of 
pitched roofs. We are going to create a very basic ridge tile component and copy it 
along the ridge and hips (you can see this in the screenshot at the end of this section). 
Making it into a component means that if we want to make the tile more complex 
later, we only need to modify one tile, and the rest will update along with it. 
To create the tile, perform the following steps:
1.	 Find a tile manufacturer website or brochure if necessary.
2.	 In a new SketchUp file, draw a basic end shape of the tile.
3.	 Use as few polygons as possible (see the Low polygon modeling 
techniques section). Click on the arc and use Entity Info to reduce the 
number of segments.
4.	 Finish the underside off flat as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Scale the model if necessary.
6.	 Push-pull to the correct length.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 128 ]
7.	 Place the tile centered at the origin as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Rotate to align the tile along the green horizontal axis shown in the 
following screenshot:
9.	 Save the model.

Chapter 4
[ 129 ]
You have now created a simple ridge tile using a minimum amount of geometry. 
You made it a closed form so that it renders correctly even though it may not be 
placed snugly on the roof. We also moved the tile to the origin (where the axes 
cross), so that when you insert it into your scene you insert it at the center position. 
You're now ready to insert it into your scene to create the roof ridge.
Copying the tiles
In your building model, insert the tile component and place it at the corner of the 
ridge. If this is a horizontal ridge, the tile may line up quite easily. With a sloping 
ridge (hip), it's much more difficult. Through a process of trial and error, you will 
need to line up the tile along the ridge using the Move tool and the rotation grips 
shown in the following screenshot:
Now, perform the following steps to copy the tiles:
1.	 Select the tile.
2.	 Hit M to activate the Move tool.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 130 ]
3.	 Click on the intersection of the tile and ridge as demonstrated in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Hold Ctrl to toggle Copy mode.
5.	 Click on the far end of the ridge to create the final tile.
6.	 Type / followed by the approximate number of tiles (for example, /23), 
then hit Enter.

Chapter 4
[ 131 ]
7.	 Change the number until you get just about the right fit as shown in the 
following screenshot:
8.	 Double-click on the first tile.
9.	 Push-pull the top face to resize.
10.	 Slight inaccuracy over here is fine as it adds to the realism.

Modeling for Visualization
[ 132 ]
After you have done one hip, create a component of the group of tiles. You should 
be able to copy, rotate, and flip this component to create the other hips. Finally, make 
a unique component of any end tiles that need to be shaped, and shape the ends as 
shown in the following screenshot:
Try copying the component where you can access it easily. 
Create a box or rectangle through the intersection of tiles 
where you want to slice them, and use Intersect with Model 
and Erase to cut it.

Chapter 4
[ 133 ]
Curtain walls
Large expanses of glass may need some detail in the window mullions or other 
structure to look pleasing to the eye when producing photoreal visuals. When you 
introduce photoreal material qualities, you will pick up these small details easily. 
You learned how to do this in Chapter 1, Quick Start Tutorial, and it is also covered 
in more detail at the end of this chapter in the section on rounded edges.
If you are modeling for non-photoreal visuals, you probably don't need this 
level of detail. Just remember to use components for the upright and horizontal 
members of the frame so that additional detailing such as chamfers or fillets just 
need to be done once but are repeated over the whole facade. Give the glazed areas 
a consistent material name as discussed earlier. You can see an example in the 
following screenshot:

Modeling for Visualization
[ 134 ]
Masonry features
Masonry features such as stone or brick arches are best produced with photo 
textures. However, it will help at this stage to trace round the edges of a feature 
and set it in relief a little with Push-pull. The following screenshot shows a work 
in progress model entirely done with this method and you can see how effective the 
raised detail on the pillars is when rendered. No other texturing has been added to 
this scene apart from a single photo.
Roads
Roads are often in the foreground in visuals, but think: does anyone really want 
to see how great your tarmac modeling skills are? So, hopefully you'll be able to 
obscure most of your road and footpath areas with foliage, people, or cars later. 
However, when modeling, we need to take a couple of really easy steps that add a 
great deal of realism to our roads and paths. No one will notice when you do it but 
they certainly will if you leave those details out! The following are some features of 
roads you may not have thought about before:
•	
Pavements are always raised above roads
•	
Roads usually have curb stones
•	
Paved areas usually have edging stones

Chapter 4
[ 135 ]
Realistic roads and pavements
You are now going to lower the roads in your scene and add a curb or edging 
feature, which can then be textured later on. Begin with the following steps:
1.	 Trace around the edge of the road or pavement using the Pencil and 
Arc tools.
2.	 Select the edge and use the Offset tool to create edging (curbstones, paths, 
verges, and so on).
3.	 Use Push-Pull to drop the road level down the blue axis.
4.	 Put a chamfer on the curb only if you are going for close-up 
photoreal images.
The following screenshot is an example of these elements in practice:

Modeling for Visualization
[ 136 ]
Landscaping with sandbox – watch your 
polygon count
If you have a CAD plan with proposed levels, you can easily draw around some 
contours and use the sandbox tools to create landscaped areas. The only thing to 
bear in mind when using the sandbox tools for visualization projects is that the more 
detail you put into the contours, the more polygons you get in the 3D mesh. So use a 
few straight lines to approximate the contours.
The same goes for creating a mesh from scratch using the From Scratch feature of the 
sandbox tools. Limit the amount of squares as best as you can. SketchUp and your 
renderer will create a smooth curved surface between the mesh edges anyway.
Modeling for realistic highlights in 
interior scenes
Here is one final section on a very important trick for interior and close-up scenes. 
If you are modeling your scene aiming at photorealistic presentation, you need to 
read this bit for instant added realism!
What's the problem with sharp edges?
If you model the basic shape of the box, as shown in the following screenshot, and 
do not add some natural imperfections to the edges, you'll obtain something flat and 
lifeless as the following screenshot, no matter how good your rendering skills are:

Chapter 4
[ 137 ]
In real life, light reflects at corners and edges because they are always slightly 
rounded or chamfered. Even the edge of a knife has some imperfections if you look 
closely enough. So, if you're modeling anything for a close-up view, you need to add 
in this edge detail. In the following screenshot, you can see the same box with some 
tiny chamfers at the edges. Can you see the difference in realism? The small highlight 
along the edge gives you a sense of material and surface properties.
If an object is further away from the camera, you don't need to worry about it 
because the extra detail will be lost in the final image. The highlight would just 
fall between the pixels. It is also not necessary for non-photoreal visuals because 
there are no highlights at all.
The RoundCorner plugin
Of course, you can go ahead and start creating the rounded edges with the Arc and 
Push-Pull tools. You will quickly learn that it takes a lot of time to add these small 
details to all edges. However, thanks to the amazing SketchUcation Plugin Store, 
you can just download a Ruby extension that does it all for you: the RoundCorner 
plugin by the user Fredo.
Search for RoundCorner Fredo6 in the Plugin Store (see Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, 
for an introduction to the plugin system). You first need to download a current 
version of LibFredo and then the actual plugin. The installation is fully automatic, 
thanks to the SketchUcation tools, but you should also download and read the PDF 
manual. The functions of this plugin are as follows:
•	
Round corner (for fillets): Enter the radius and number of segments
•	
Sharp corner: This function is the same as round corner but with a sharp 
corner where edges intersect
•	
Bevel (for chamfers): Enter the edge offset

Modeling for Visualization
[ 138 ]
Remember to click outside your geometry when you have finished selecting your 
corners. The following is a screenshot of the plugin in action:
Always save before you use any plugin just in case SketchUp 
decides to throw a curveball.
Preparing for photorealistic rendering
In the discussion of materials and front- and back-face orientation of polygons, 
we have already touched on some limitations you may encounter when using 
external renderers. SketchUp is designed for quick and sketchy projects and uses 
OpenGL for its visuals. Photorealistic renderers use a number of techniques that 
have other requirements for their input.
The following are some of the most common conflicts between SketchUp and 
third-party renderers that you should look out for when preparing scenes for export:
•	
Polygon orientation: As mentioned earlier, not all renderers can handle the 
display of back-facing polygons. Even if they are able to render the reverse 
side of a face, it will certainly cause issues when you assign an emitting 
material to the face to simulate light. Verify the orientation of all polygons 
in your model before you export.

Chapter 4
[ 139 ]
•	
Two-sided polygons: SketchUp can assign different materials to the front 
and the back of a polygon. This is not common in computer graphics and 
most renderers will only allow you to use a single material for both sides. 
To avoid any issues try not to assign materials to the polygons directly. 
Use the default material for polygons and assign the final material to 
groups and component instances. This will also help you when you 
have to reassign materials in your render application after the export.
•	
Follow-Me components: The Follow-Me feature changes the orientation of 
a component based on the current camera location. If your renderer doesn't 
offer a similar feature on its own, you are most likely not able to reproduce 
this effect. For stills, this should not be a problem because the exported scene 
will be a snapshot with the right orientation of your components. But if you 
want to render an animation or create several views of the same scene, you 
will see some of your entourage reduced to flat billboards or lines. Replace 
2D Face-Me components before the export with 3D objects to avoid this issue.
•	
Automatic openings: In the Window and doors section, we retraced the 
outline of the window to make sure there is an opening in the wall for the 
window component. While the automatic creation of openings is very handy 
in SketchUp, you can't be sure that it will translate well to your external 
renderer. If your exporter supports this feature out of the box, you are good 
without the extra manual work. Just make sure to test it first!
•	
Material assignments: One major argument for the use of external renderers 
is the variety of real-world materials you can use in your image. You can 
show surface texture and light reflections just as in reality. But how do you 
change these materials after you have assigned them in SketchUp? Can you 
just give an object a new material or do you have to replace the definition for 
all other elements in the scene at once?
•	
Transparency: In SketchUp, you can make any material transparent just by 
changing the Opacity value in the properties. Photorealistic renderers use 
different material types for opaque, translucent, and transparent materials. 
To achieve proper transparency, you have to assign the right type of material 
to your windows.
•	
Clean geometry: Using SketchUp, you can create impressive designs very 
quickly. You don't have to care about the proper length of elements because 
you can always hide a wall that is a bit too long behind something else. With 
physically based renderers—especially those that are radiosity-based—the 
paper-thin geometries used in SketchUp can cause problems for the lighting 
calculation. The results are artifacts such as light bleeding in your final 
render (light that seeps in at the corners of a room).

Modeling for Visualization
[ 140 ]
The only way to avoid these issues is to model the geometry precisely and 
sometimes even with their real physical extents; walls should be built with 
two polygons (one for each side) and should properly stop where they meet 
with another wall or building element. The following screenshot illustrates 
the intersections of two walls, on the left, in a hurried and messy way, and 
on the right, with a clean connection and physical extension to all parts:
Luckily, most renderers today are fairly robust against this type of artifacts 
but a clean model is still something to strive for.
•	
Instancing and proxies: Thanks to components, you can quickly generate a 
large number of polygons in your scene and if your renderer allows you to 
substitute a simple _LR component on the fly with a complex 3D object, this 
count can go much higher during the rendering process. You also want to 
make your plants and people look realistic, so your renderer has to be able to 
handle all this complexity with reasonable speed. While you are preparing 
your model in SketchUp, you can cheat with some low-polygon placeholders 
but once you go for the final render, all that detailed geometry needs to be 
processed all at once. Make sure your renderer doesn't meet its limits too early.
•	
Scene structure: While this is not necessarily a cause for inconsistencies, 
it is good if your exporter converts the groups and components to a 
corresponding hierarchy in your renderer. If you are using the Outliner 
window a lot, chances are that you are so used to it that you will miss the 
option to navigate your scene via groups and subgroups.

Chapter 4
[ 141 ]
Summary
Congratulations! You have now learned most of the extra skills you need to model 
for architectural visualization. Using these methods in various ways throughout the 
modeling stage will ensure that you have a scene ready for rendering. You will have 
saved bags of time by not modeling what you don't see, and you will have saved 
even more by thinking about the level of detail required.
You have learned how to use an amazing feature (components) to model things 
once and then utilize them many times. And you've seen how grabbing and 
cleaning models from the 3D Warehouse can enrich your scene through hardly any 
effort on your part. Furthermore, if you follow the good practices in this chapter, 
you will not suffer from a slow computer and you will always know just where 
your components are.
You are now ready to texture your model, which is the topic of our next chapter.


Applying Textures and 
Materials for Photorealistic 
Rendering
This chapter is mostly concerned with applying materials and textures for added 
realism in SketchUp or other rendering software. If you're aiming for artistic 
styles such as pencil or watercolor, it is often better to use an untextured model. 
In this case, skip this chapter for now and go to Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way.
We are now going to work through the various texturing processes together. 
Texturing is the process of applying color patterns (usually taken from photographic 
images) to 3D surfaces to add more realism or simulate more detail. You will set up 
great-looking textures one by one until your whole scene looks realistic.
In this chapter, you will learn the following:
•	
When and why to use textures
•	
The process overview chart
•	
Using SketchUp's own textures
•	
Extracting great textures from your own photos
•	
Using Match Photo to generate real-life textures
•	
How to create seamless tiling textures
•	
Applying, manipulating, scaling, and editing materials
•	
Creating, storing, and sharing custom material libraries
•	
Image formats, size, and compression
•	
Tweaking textured models for realism using GIMP
The methods you are going to learn are highly effective and, at the same time, 
they are the most robust and versatile methods possible.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 144 ]
Deciding to use textures
At first, you need to decide if you should be be texturing at all. As you can see 
from other examples, investing time in texturing does not always equal better 
visuals. You can go for a simple native SketchUp output, watercolor style, or other 
non-photorealistic rendering (NPR) styles, which will be less time consuming and, 
perhaps, provide you with a better outcome. If this is the case, you can just skip over 
this chapter for now and go straight to Chapter 7, Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp.
So, what are the benefits of texturing? If it is done well, texturing can:
•	
Reduce the amount of detail you need to model
•	
Allow you to use lower render settings to get the same realism
•	
Increase the rendering speed (this is especially important for animations)
•	
Create almost photoreal visuals in SketchUp without the need for rendering
These benefits are most pronounced wherever movement is involved, for example, 
in animations or demonstrations of real-time walk-throughs. This is because 
photo textures have shadows, highlights, secondary light bounce, and all the 
other elements of realistic lighting already built in. The real world and your 
camera are the rendering engines of photo textures!
The texturing process flow chart
The process that we suggest you follow is shown in the following flow chart. 
It shows how you can start with any of the basic modeling techniques you 
learned about in the previous chapter to end up with a superbly textured scene.
Model Origin
Match Photo
From
photo
from
CAD
drawing
From
sketch
or by
eye
Base textures from
photo
Add additional photos
to faces if required
Add photos
to faces
Add tileable textures
Move / Stretch / Rotate
Open in GIMP and enhance

Chapter 5
[ 145 ]
In this chart, you can see the modeling techniques (discussed in Chapter 4, Modeling 
for Visualization), Match Photo and From photo. They already provide photo 
images for textures. For any other surface that needs textures, you have to 
provide additional images (Add additional photos to faces if required). Smaller 
polygons, or surfaces where generic materials will do, can be textured with tileable 
textures (Add tileable textures). To make these fit your model, you may have to 
adjust the position and size of the texture (Move/Stretch/Rotate). Finally, you can 
add specific details to your generic textures to make them look more realistic 
(Open in GIMP and enhance).
The mistake that most newbies make is applying stock tileable textures and then 
stop there. This sometimes makes for dull and often unrealistic images. Also, the 
same basic textures that come bundled with SketchUp keep cropping up!
Rule of thumb
If, after texturing, your model doesn't look like a photograph in 
SketchUp, it won't in your renderer either. If you get texturing right 
in SketchUp, the renderer will merely add soft shadows and more 
realistic illumination and antialiasing (soft edges), turning a great 
model into an exceptional render.
Beginning with basic photo textures
You're going to start by applying base textures from which you will build upon later. 
It's like applying an undercoat when decorating, or if you're an artist, it's like laying 
down a watercolor wash of some basic color. You can add these base textures using 
your own (or others') photographs, which will add a level of unparalleled realism to 
your renders or SketchUp output.
There are four ways to create these initial textures:
•	
From Match Photo
•	
From the textures already present in a model created from a photo 
(this method is described in Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization)
•	
Using seamless textures
•	
Using Google Street View
Let's look at these individually in more detail now.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 146 ]
Starting with Match Photo textures
If you've set up your scene using the Match Photo functionality (see Chapter 3, 
Composing the Scene), you already have a great basis for your texturing process. 
You can now project the photograph onto your model, like shining a projector 
onto the wall.
1.	 Click on the Match Photo scene tab.
2.	 Select the geometry you want to project onto.
3.	 In the Match Photo settings window, press the Project textures from 
photo button.
4.	 Orbit the model to see your textured creation!
Here is the Match Photo model you saw in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene. Sang 
has used it to create an extension to his house (he wishes he'd had a slightly 
larger budget).
You've now got a model that is already partly textured and ready for additional 
textures if necessary. Go ahead and do this in the next section.

Chapter 5
[ 147 ]
Using textures from the photo modeling 
process
In Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization, you learned how to model from an image. 
This resulted in a textured model shown in the previous screenshot. Similar to what 
we discovered with Match Photo, you now already have a partially textured model. 
The back of the model is still blank, but this might be OK if your scene is set up for 
viewpoints from just one side. If you require additional textures on the back, for 
example because you're going to animate the scene, you can add more textures 
using the methods presented in the next section.
Using basic seamless textures
You will learn all about seamless textures in a moment. For now, if you have started 
your model from scratch or from a CAD drawing, you can use SketchUp's textures to 
cover the model in roughly the right materials. You can also just use color fills with 
a similar hue to your desired material. Do this also to fill in the gaps if you've used 
either of these two methods.
The closest you may have come to texturing is using the materials pallet 
(paint bucket) and the textures that come with SketchUp. This is absolutely OK. 
The basic textures provided in SketchUp are very good and provide an easy starting 
point. A word of warning though: many people can spot these textures a mile off, 
because SketchUp is so popular. So, at the very least, you should modify them a 
little, as you'll see later in this chapter (the final box in the process diagram).
Applying SketchUp's own textures
Applying SketchUp's own textures is very simple. SketchUp comes with many 
repeatable textures. To apply these, perform the following steps:
1.	 If necessary, double-click to edit the component or group.
2.	 Click on the Paint Bucket tool icon.
3.	 Select a texture material from the materials pallet.
4.	 Click on the face to apply the texture.
The face will show the basic texture.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 148 ]
Scaling textures
You now need to make sure that the scale and orientation are correct:
1.	 Click the In Model button in the materials pallet.
2.	 Click on the texture you just applied to your face.
3.	 Click on the Edit tab.
4.	 Here, you can change the scale of the texture by clicking on either of the two 
dimension boxes shown in the following screenshot. Change the values until 
the texture looks correctly sized on screen.

Chapter 5
[ 149 ]
Coloring textures
On the Edit tab of the Materials pallet, you can also find several ways to change 
the color of your texture. On a Mac, these options are available via the icons at the 
top of the materials browser window. Changing these will only modify the texture 
within your model, not the actual texture library. So, go ahead and experiment with 
the settings!
Setting
Use
Color wheel
Click the mouse anywhere on the colored wheel to 
change the hue of the texture, and use the slider for 
brightness value.
Hue, Lightness, and Saturation
These are the three different ways to achieve more 
exact colors. These can be edited using the three 
sliders or by inputting numbers if you really need to!
Hue, Saturation, and Brightness
Red, Green, and Blue levels
Match the color of an object 
in SketchUp
Click on this icon and then select a basic color from an 
object within SketchUp.
Match the color on screen
This icon is the same as the preceding one but you can 
click anywhere on your computer screen. This is an 
excellent feature if you're copying a photo or matching 
a model to an existing scene.
Colorize checkbox
Use this if you have a particular hue that you wish 
to use on the texture. It ensures that all the colors 
throughout the texture are locked to the hue you have 
selected (such as a grayscale image using your hue 
instead of gray).
You have just applied SketchUp's own textures to your model. Often, it becomes 
necessary to scale the texture because it doesn't look quite right. Bricks and paving 
are more or less the same size but may vary from country to country. Timber textures 
can have many different sizes to simulate different wood grains. Also, coloring the 
same textures slightly gives us the scope for many more materials using the same 
basic textures.
When you type a number into either of the scale boxes, the texture resizes at the 
same time on screen. The x and y dimensions of a texture are linked to keep the 
texture in its original aspect ratio (the ratio of the image sizes). If you want to edit 
these values individually, just click on the chain-shaped icon next to the dimension 
values first.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 150 ]
Using Google Street View
Using photos directly from Google Street View is a new and amazing way to texture 
models. Use it to find buildings or building features similar to the ones you're 
modeling and then load the images straight into your SketchUp model. Here's an 
example of a roughly textured model using just Street View images. It needs a lot 
more work if you're going to use it in the foreground, but it could conceivably be 
good enough at a distance or in a quick-moving animation. It normally takes just 5 
minutes to create texture models using Google Street View.
Traveling the world for real textures
For this exercise, you need an active Internet connection, because SketchUp will be 
accessing Google Maps.
1.	 Draw a rectangle, push-pull it, and click on the front face to select it.
2.	 Right-click and select Add Photo Texture.
3.	 A window opens and connects you to Google Maps. You can now type in 
an address in the textbox of the browser window. Type an address near the 
location of your project.
4.	 Use the mouse to place the little yellow man in a street. If Street View images 
are available, these streets will turn blue.
5.	 In the top window, navigate around using the arrows on the road until you 
find a house with a garage.

Chapter 5
[ 151 ]
6.	 Double-click on the side of the house or garage to zoom in. You will have a 
view like the one shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 When you have zoomed in enough, click on the Select Region button.
8.	 Move the blue pins around to enclose the area you wish to capture. 
I'm grabbing the front of someone's garage.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 152 ]
9.	 When you're done, click on Grab (or Cancel to reselect a better view).
10.	 Your SketchUp model updates with the texture!
Google has done all 3D artists a massive favor. All the buildings in the world are 
available to you as long as Google sends a photo car along the road. To put it in 
perspective, you can browse the biggest buildings texture store in the world!
Use this method to quickly grab textures for elements of your design that are 
standard features on many buildings. If there's anything particularly new or complex 
in what you are creating, you can spend a little more time modeling it from scratch.
Advanced texturing techniques
You've now got a partly textured scene (using one or more of the discussed 
methods), which is ready for detailed texturing. You will already be able to see 
whether your scene works as it is or whether some changes need to be introduced 
to make the composition work. Go ahead and make any changes at this stage before 
you spend too long on texturing. The following two sections will explain these 
texturing methods in much more detail:
•	
Single image-based texturing
•	
Seamless (tileable) texturing
You will learn how to manipulate the textures you've already got, enhance them, 
and add new ones.
Applying whole photographs as textures
I think that, by now, you have an idea why SketchUp is so revolutionary for 
architectural visualization. You don't need to rely on texture creators any more, 
because you can just use your own photos in Match Photo, create seamless textures, 
or utilize Google Street View to pop the real world into your models. You can now 
further capitalize on this by using any photograph to texture your model.
You've already learned all the skills that you need to do this in the previous chapters. 
Use these same techniques now to cover any blank face with realistic textures from 
photographs.

Chapter 5
[ 153 ]
Where to find texture photos
Ask yourself whether the building you are creating has any building materials, 
cladding, or features that are not already used in other buildings. If they have been 
used before in an existing building, you don't have to model them from scratch. 
Somewhere on the Internet or in your neighborhood, there will be a photo you can use.
Here are some examples of places to look online:
•	
In Flickr, you can use the Advanced Search option to search by geographical 
location and limit your search to images under the Creative Commons license 
with the options for commercial use and modification. You can use these 
images in your model without restrictions. Also, try www.flickr.com/map 
to zoom in to the location of your model.
•	
You can also use Google Images. Again, respect the license and copyright 
of any image you find.
•	
You can refer to the gallery sections of manufacturers' websites such as 
Krono for wood flooring (http://kronooriginal.esignserver2.com/
gallery.do). Some of these might even offer you a CAD service, where 
you can download textures and 3D models of their products to use in 
your models.
•	
You can use "royalty-free" photos from image broker websites such as 
www.Istockphoto.com, www.BigStockPhoto.com, or www.gettyimages.com 
(there are plenty!). The price to pay for the rights to use the image may 
be justified for sites and objects that you would otherwise not be able to get.
•	
You can refer to the architectural websites such as http://architizer.com 
or www.archdaily.com. It may be a bit time consuming to track down the 
photographers and negotiate usage rights for these pictures, though.
However, don't limit yourself to the Web. Some of the best texture images will be 
your own. Even taking photos with your smartphone will often give you better 
textures than what you can get online. Here are some tips for your own photo hunt:
•	
Take the images square on. This will reduce the obstruction of details 
on large objects and reduce perspective distortion on small areas.
•	
Step as far back as possible and use a zoom lens. This too reduces 
obstruction by overhangs and distortion of vertical lines.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 154 ]
•	
Avoid sunlight and shadows. Try to take your pictures on an overcast day 
where shadows will not be prominent on the buildings. Shadows that are 
present on the texture image stay fixed and do not change with the sun in 
your model. Only in some cases, such as plaster details on a façade, the 
shadows are welcome to give added depth.
•	
If you take pictures of an existing site context, try to do all the shots at the 
same time. The weather, sun, and shadows should be consistent throughout 
all your images in the model.
•	
Avoid the need for a flash. The flash will illuminate your picture only in close 
proximity to the camera, but distant areas will be visibly darker.
Go through all your old photos to find those that feature buildings and 
other areas of texture. Copy them into a textures folder somewhere on 
your computer for ready access whenever you might need them. When 
you have some spare time, go through them and crop and straighten the 
texture portions with GIMP. There is more on this in the later sections.
Setting up a fake room
Here's an example of how to utilize images in your scene. When rendering a 
building with large windows, all we need to do is set up a billboard image of 
a room behind the window, such as the one shown in the following image. 
Someone on Flickr took the photo for me. Thank you!

Chapter 5
[ 155 ]
However, what if you're making an animated flythrough and the camera passes by 
the window slowly? The image behind the window won't move in the right way. 
The answer is to mock up a quick Match Photo room. Have a go yourself!
1.	 Start with a new model.
2.	 Find a suitable picture of a room.
3.	 Start Match Photo as you did earlier and select the photo.
4.	 As it's a concave room rather than a convex outside of a building, 
select the Inside grid style, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Set up Match Photo as you did in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, but use the 
back and right-hand side or the left-hand side walls.
6.	 Draw a rectangle to cover the back wall of the room and push-pull it towards 
you until it fills the screen.
7.	 Delete the face filling the screen.
8.	 Triple-click the geometry to select all the remaining faces.
9.	 Right-click and select reverse faces.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 156 ]
10.	 Click on Project Textures from Photo. You should have something like the 
following example:
11.	 Scale as necessary to get a more appropriate room size if you have 
discrepancies in your Match Photo. As you can see in the following 
screenshot, my Match Photo created a super-long room:

Chapter 5
[ 157 ]
12.	 Add in any extra colors or textures if you need to spruce the room up a little 
using the Paint Bucket tool.
13.	 Now, save the scene and remember the filename.
14.	 In your building model, insert the room as a component behind each 
window and flip it if necessary, depending on where you'll be viewing it 
from, as shown in the following screenshot:
You now have a room behind each window that will behave more or less correctly 
on camera! The reason for all this is that when you have a moving camera in an 
animation, things farther away from the camera appear to move slower than the 
foreground. So, if you have set up a room with just a flat image behind the window, 
it will look all wrong. 

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 158 ]
This method allows you to quickly make a photorealistic room, which behaves right 
with a moving camera, without the hassle of modeling everything in there.
Night scenes
These fake rooms are great for night scenes where the room interiors 
are much more visible in contrast to the dark outdoors. Set up a light 
in the room (find out how in Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering) and 
see the result.
Creating balsa wood film scenery props
You're going to work out this next part of the process yourself. I have been raving 
for most of the book about the revolutionary way in which SketchUp allows you to 
handle digital images, but you'll only ever really benefit from this if you throw your 
existing workflow out of the window and embrace the SketchUp one.
Based on what you've learned so far, surf the Internet or explore your own image 
collection. What's the biggest thing you've modeled or need to model that you can 
get rid of and replace with a simple image?
1.	 Find a picture depicting an object for your model or scene.
2.	 Start a new SketchUp model.

Chapter 5
[ 159 ]
3.	 Import the image (File | Import) and draw around the area you want to 
keep with the pencil tool.
4.	 Create a billboard 2D cutout or a Face-Me component with it like the 
following one (but maybe lose the leopard skin… ).

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 160 ]
5.	 Alternatively, create a quick Match Photo scene like you did with the room.
6.	 Draw in some rough geometry to match the object's geometry.

Chapter 5
[ 161 ]
7.	 Project the textures.
8.	 Remove any unused image parts from the scene.
9.	 Save the scene as a component.
10.	 Insert the new component into your full-model scene.
The final output of the image is shown in the following screenshot:
Using, finding, and creating tileable 
textures
In this section, you will learn all about beautifying your scene further with tileable 
textures. These methods can be used in combination with all of the other methods 
you've learned so far. The following section applies to any texture, whether it is 
tileable or not.
Manipulating textures
Most of the time, you will want textures to match your geometry fairly exactly, such 
as when applying brick to a wall close-up. We want mortar joints to line up with the 
edges. Once you have sorted out the basic scale of the texture, you can now rotate, 
move, and scale it with the mouse.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 162 ]
Exact texture placement
You learned the method of manipulating the photograph of a house in 
Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization, using pushpins. We will now look at 
the other ways of doing this. 
1.	 Select a face with the texture already applied.
2.	 Right-click and navigate to Texture | Position.
3.	 Click and hold one of the pins and move the mouse as follows:
°°
Use the Red pin to move
°°
Use the Blue pin to scale the texture
°°
Use the Green pin to scale or rotate
°°
Use the Yellow pin to distort the texture (for perspective correction)

Chapter 5
[ 163 ]
You can see the four differently colored pins in the following screenshot:
4.	 Play around with these. At any time, you can reset to where you started 
or undo what you just did by right-clicking on the texture and selecting 
Reset or Undo.
The different colored pins do slightly different things and can be used to manipulate 
the texture to fit correctly onto the geometry. You can do this with any texture, 
whether it came from a photo or a tileable texture. Editing a texture in this way 
only affects the face you're working with.
Now, notice the other features listed in the right-click menu:
The Flip option enables us to flip the texture left/right or up/down. The Rotate 
option enables us to rotate the texture at 90, 180, or 270 degrees. These two are 
easy to understand, but what does Fixed Pins do?

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 164 ]
The free pins mode
If you untick the Fixed Pins menu item, you will notice that all the differently 
colored pins are replaced by yellow pins. This is the free pins mode, and it lets 
you stretch the material at each pin wherever you want it. This is very useful because 
you're not constrained by the transformations described earlier. Each pin behaves in 
the same way. It's like an elastic sheet stretched between four posts.
Again, play around with this a little, because it will set you in good stead for what 
we're going to do later on.
Now you know how to apply, edit, and colorize the textures that you found bundled 
with SketchUp. Once you've created some textures yourself, as explained in the next 
section, you'll be able to use them in just the way you intended!
Creating your own seamless textures
Learning how to create your own texture materials for use in SketchUp is one of the 
most useful skills you can learn. Here, we are presenting two methods using GIMP 
(the GNU Image Manipulation Program) or Photoshop. First, you will learn how to 
prepare an image for use as a texture, and then we will look at two methods to make 
them tileable (in other words, seamlessly repeatable). You'll pick up the first method 
in minutes and use it all the time.
Correcting perspective in GIMP
Often, your source photos will not be taken square on to the object. This is not a big 
problem. Just perform the following steps to remove the distortion from the image. 
The steps are illustrated using GIMP, but you should find the same features in other 
image editing software such as Adobe Photoshop.
Keystone correction cameras
Some digital cameras have an automatic feature called "white board 
capture" built in (such as the Casio Exilim range). This is a fantastic 
way of skipping the step of correcting perspective and will save you 
a lot of time if you're using textures regularly. It works with any 
rectangular surface. Some smartphones also provide a feature like 
this, or at least, there is an app for it...

Chapter 5
[ 165 ]
Perform the following steps for correcting perspective in GIMP:
1.	 Start with a photo taken orthogonal to the surface (with as little distortion 
as possible).
2.	 With the rectangular selection tool, select the area to be used as a texture. 
A square is the easiest.
3.	 Select Perspective Tool, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Drag one of the corners out until you feel the distortion has been corrected.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 166 ]
5.	 Release the left-mouse button to see what you have done. You can see the 
straightened version in the following screenshot:
6.	 Repeat as necessary. Use the dotted line of your selection as a guide.
7.	 When you are done, click on Transform in the perspective tool dialog 
box to apply the effect permanently.
8.	 You now have a perspective corrected area of texture. Use the Crop tool 
to crop the texture within the area you corrected.
You selected a square area so that you could see where the edges of the area were. 
Using the Perspective Tool, you corrected the perspective distortion in the photo to 
make sure that the image lined up with the edges of the selection box. This is a 
trial-and-error process, and during it, the image remains malleable for as long as 
you need. When you are happy, just press the Transform button to fix the changes. 
Even then, you can still go back to the original by selecting Edit | Undo.
You did all of this simply because textures are always applied to flat surfaces, so they 
have to be near-enough flat images of the material. Now that you have done this 
preparation, you can go ahead and turn it into a seamless texture!
Tiling via an automatic filter
This method is great for textures with little distinguishable details such as 
the following:
•	
Grass, leaves, or other ground cover
•	
Water and sky
•	
Concrete and asphalt

Chapter 5
[ 167 ]
It is not so great for repeating regular textures such as brick, roof slates, 
or ceramic tiles. I'm using a dry stone wall photo in this example workflow:
1.	 Open your photo in GIMP.
2.	 Click the Crop tool.
3.	 Set the cropping options to Fixed and Aspect Ratio.
4.	 Type in 1:1 for the aspect ratio.
5.	 Drag a box over the photo. Notice that you've fixed it to be a square box, 
as you can see in the screenshot.
6.	 When you're happy, hit Enter.
7.	 Choose Filters | Map | Make Seamless.
8.	 Open Image | Scale Image.
9.	 Enter a value for the image size (1024 pixels or less) and select Cubic.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 168 ]
10.	 Click on Scale.
11.	 Save a copy by navigating to File | Save a Copy.
Here is the image with the filter applied to it:
You applied the Make Seamless filter to your texture image. This will allow it to tile 
in SketchUp without you seeing the edge between the tiles. You reduced the size of 
the image before you saved it because SketchUp can only handle sizes of 1024 x 1024 
pixels max with the default settings. More discussion on the image sizes will follow 
later on in this chapter.
Tiling method two
If you still want to create a better texture from the outset, there's a second method. 
It takes a little longer (or a lot longer to get it perfect), but the results are cleaner.
1.	 Open your original straightened texture in GIMP.
2.	 Crop a square, as you did earlier, but make sure that the pixel size is an 
even number!

Chapter 5
[ 169 ]
3.	 Open the Layers pallet by navigating to Windows | Dockable Dialogs | 
Layers.
4.	 Click on the Duplicate Layer icon (at the bottom).
5.	 Right-click on the new layer and select Edit Layer Attributes.
6.	 Change the layer name to Texture.
7.	 You now have a Texture layer, which you will modify, and a base layer, 
which you will use as a reference.
8.	 Click the Texture layer in the Layer pallet to select it.
9.	 Navigate to Layer | Transform | Offset.
10.	 Click on the Offset by x/2, y/2 button and select Wrap around. 
Then, click on Offset.
The idea now is to paint over the edges that have been wrapped into the middle.
1.	 Click on the Clone tool.
2.	 Turn off the visibility for the Texture layer (the eye icon).
3.	 Select the base image layer in the Layer pallet.
4.	 Hold down Ctrl (Cmd on the Mac) and click somewhere on the base image.
5.	 Turn on the visibility on the Texture layer, and select it in the Layer pallet.
6.	 Start painting. Areas of the base image will clone onto the texture image. 
Keep the Texture layer at the top to see your changes.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 170 ]
7.	 Select a fuzzy brush for this and increase the size if it makes it easier. 
You can see my settings in the following screenshot. The dotted circle 
is the brush I'm using.
If you prefer, you can Ctrl + click inside the texture image instead and use parts of 
that to clone over the middle area.
This method has much more flexibility than the previous method and can yield 
more pleasing results with a little practice. However, don't get too bogged down 
with getting this perfect. Using a two-layer approach allows you to sample (clone) 
from the original image to paint over the offset image. Folding the image in on itself 
using an offset of x/2 and y/2 ensures that the image will tile seamlessly.
Let's now apply this texture to a scene and save it to your own texture library.

Chapter 5
[ 171 ]
Importing a texture into SketchUp
You're now ready to use this modified image in SketchUp to create a material. 
Once you've done this, you can use it like a regular SketchUp material.
1.	 In the Materials pallet, click on the Create Material icon (top-right corner). 
On Mac, right-click on an empty space in the pallet and select New Texture.
2.	 Type in a material name (Windows only).
3.	 Select the folder icon in the Texture section of the dialog (Windows only).
4.	 Navigate to your image file and click on Open.
5.	 On Mac, you can now enter a good name for the material (it defaults to the 
filename) and a rough size for your texture. This should correspond to the area 
that the picture represents in real life. On Windows, you will be returned to the 
material properties dialog, and you can set the name and size there.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 172 ]
6.	 Click on OK to confirm the creation of the new texture material.
7.	 Your new material should appear in the In Model list of materials.
8.	 To return to the edit dialog, select the new material icon and click on the Edit 
tab (Windows) or right-click and select Edit from the context menu (Mac).
9.	 Create a rectangle of 1 m x 1 m using the Rectangle tool.
10.	 Select your material and apply it to the surface.
Don't worry if the texture doesn't look perfect or if you can see the 
pattern repeating itself on the surface. This can be edited when we get 
to the later steps of texturing (see the diagram at the beginning of the 
chapter). The important thing at this stage is to cover large areas of our 
model with realistic photo textures as fast as we can.
11.	 You'll be able to see if the scale is right. Adjust the texture size in the edit dialog 
by typing the desired value into the Width textbox (a horizontal double-arrow 
icon on Windows) until the scale looks OK (see the following screenshot). 
You can see that the texture on the rectangle gets updated as you type.
12.	 You can modify the x and y scales separately by clicking on the chain 
symbol first.

Chapter 5
[ 173 ]
Saving a material to a library
Congratulations! You've now created a new material in SketchUp. It's an 
achievement that will make SketchUp texturing much easier and more versatile 
for you from now on. Once you've done it a few times, you will realize it's not that 
hard at all. Using these methods, you can create a library of real-world textures for 
lively architectural visuals.
Now, the last thing that we need to do is save the texture and make it easily 
accessible for later use. You can even share it with others. Unfortunately, you 
can only save individual textures on Windows. On a Mac, you have to copy the 
whole list of materials to save each to a new file. Here is how to save a single 
texture on Windows:
1.	 Right-click on your material icon and click on Save As.
2.	 Navigate to where your SketchUp program is stored 
(C:\Program Files (x86)\SketchUp\SketchUp 2014\).
3.	 Find the Materials folder.
4.	 Create a folder called My Materials or something similar 
(see the following screenshot).
5.	 Type in a name for the material and click on Save.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 174 ]
Because you created the new folder in the default SketchUp 2014\Materials folder, 
it will be listed in the materials pallet as a new collection. Just open the materials 
browser and navigate to Materials | My Materials to find the material you just saved. 
You can use this process to extend your standard collection of SketchUp materials.
To save your texture on a Mac, you first have to create a copy of the current material 
collection or start a new one:
1.	 From the List drop-down box below the materials icons, choose New… 
or Duplicate….
2.	 Enter the name for your new collection, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Make sure that you are in the new collection by selecting a different 
list first and then return to the newly created one. The new collection 
will now be empty.
4.	 Continue creating new materials in the same way as described earlier.
Whenever you quit SketchUp, the materials will be saved as new *.skm files in the 
folder that corresponds to the new collection. The new folders will be located in your 
personal SketchUp support folder, ~/Library/Application Support/SketchUp 
2014/SketchUp/Materials.

Chapter 5
[ 175 ]
Quick recap on textures
You just created a texture from your own photo or from the images you downloaded, 
inserted it into SketchUp, and saved it into a new dedicated library. This is the 
bedrock of texturing! If you used the first method, you will notice that once you have 
applied the new material to your model, you may see a repeating pattern. When 
covering large areas, this doesn't look too great. In some cases, the repeating pattern 
may be obscured and not so obvious. If this is not enough, you can edit out the 
repetitive image elements by tweaking the textured faces in GIMP later.
You're now all set up. Everything in your model has basic textures applied to it, 
and what doesn't need a texture just has a color applied to it.
Advanced image considerations
So far, I haven't mentioned image file types such as JPEG or PNG, because it hasn't 
mattered to the fundamentals of texturing. However, there are some tricks that 
make a huge difference to the quality and size of your SketchUp files, and therefore, 
the speed at which you can model and render your scenes. We are going to quickly 
discuss the salient points and then come up with a method that will allow you to 
benefit from the various options you have.
Texture size
As you may already know, digital images are made up of pixels. Pixels are dots 
(picture elements) of color, and each image is made up of a grid of these dots. 
So, for example, a small computer screen has around 786,000 pixels in a rectangular 
grid measuring 1024 by 768 pixels. A digital camera might take pictures of 
8 megapixels or 3264 x 2448 pixels.
In SketchUp, the maximum size for a texture image is limited to 1024 x 1024 pixels 
by default. If you select a larger image as texture, it is reduced in size to fit to this 
maximum size. This is a historic value from the time when computer and graphics 
card memory was more limited than today. Nevertheless, it still allows for a decent 
texture quality given that most surfaces will only cover a few hundred pixels or less 
in the final rendered image.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 176 ]
For large elements close to the camera, you may want to increase this value. 
You can find a corresponding setting by navigating to System Preferences | 
OpenGL. The Use maximum texture size option is not set by default. If you 
add a check mark here, you can use textures up to 4096 x 4096 pixels.
Still, don't go crazy and import all your textures in 4096 x 4096 from now on. 
Use sizes above 1024 x 1024 pixels only for the elements that are close up and 
important in your image frame. This will keep your SketchUp file size in check 
and enable you to work faster.
File type
Secondly, file type matters a lot. JPEG files are much smaller on your hard drive 
than the corresponding PNG files, because they use a lossy compression algorithm. 
This process removes details that are not important for the human visual perception. 
Unfortunately, this happens every time the file is saved, so JPEG (or JPG) is not a 
good format to use for images you want to edit.
PNG, on the other hand, can retain an identical copy of the image and still achieve a 
reasonable compression rate. It is a good choice if you want to modify your textures 
later but still are concerned about your overall file size in SketchUp. Regardless of 
the file type you choose to store your files on your hard drive, once they are loaded 
into the scene, they will still take up all the memory of the uncompressed image. So, 
make sure that you have a good graphics card with plenty of onboard memory.

Chapter 5
[ 177 ]
Compression
When saving an image in the JPG format, you will be presented with the 
following box:
Moving the Quality slider will change the quality of the image from very 
compressed (poor quality but low file size) to hardly compressed (very good quality 
and large file size). The trick is to get a balance between low file size and image 
clarity. You will see a significant reduction in the file size with a quality setting 
of 80-85, while the image will not show any obvious degradation. I usually don't 
compress my images more than this, because the gain in file size is not worth the 
sacrifice in image details.
You have to experiment a bit and also adjust the setting based on the image 
content. An image with large expanses of similar colors (sand dunes, for example) 
will compress much better than a picture of a palm tree with many feathered leaves.
Balancing size and compression
The following image shows a stone wall texture that has been compressed too 
much. Can you see the blurred and jaggy artifacts the compression has introduced? 
The overall idea of the stone wall is still there, but individual stones and gaps are 
washed out and show little surface details. 

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 178 ]
This is what saving JPG at low-quality settings does to an image. This is OK for 
distant objects, but not for close-up ones. So, what do we do?
Here's the deal: save three versions of your texture images with the following 
sizes and quality settings:
Image format
Reuse/resave
Uses
PNG at large size (up to 4096 x 
4096 if you want to achieve the 
best results)
This can be reused 
and resaved 
repeatedly without 
the loss of quality
This is used on 
all close-up surfaces 
where the texture 
will be further altered 
using Edit Texture 
Image in SketchUp 
(explained later)
JPG at large size (1024 x 1024) 
and adequate compression 
(say, 80 quality)
This cannot be 
resaved
This is used on all 
close-up surfaces that 
will stay as they are
JPG at low size and high 
compression (say, 512 x 512 
at 50 quality)
This cannot be 
resaved
This is used on surfaces 
far from the camera
This way, we have all the bases covered. Here's the workflow:
1.	 Save the high-resolution image in PNG format and import it 
into SketchUp.
2.	 Open the image in GIMP and select Image | Scale Image to reduce the 
resolution to 1024 x 1024.

Chapter 5
[ 179 ]
3.	 Click on File | Save as Copy in GIMP and save the image as a JPG 
with a quality setting of 80 or 85. Name it the same as the PNG, 
except add a _LR or _MED to the end of the filename.
4.	 In GIMP, go to Image | Scale Image again and set the image size 
to 512 x 512 or even 256 x 256.
5.	 Click on Save As and reduce the Quality slider to 50. Append _ULR or _SML 
to the name.
Import the second and third image into SketchUp as new materials, but keep 
the texture size the same so that it matches the hi-res version. You should be 
able to replace the image texture without the need to scale the texture once it 
has been applied.
Now, you have a high-resolution texture for close-up details, a medium texture 
for general use, and a low-resolution version for distant objects with a small memory 
footprint. Here is the dry wall model again with our own hi-res texture applied to it. 
Much better!
By the way, there is no point in using the medium- and low-resolution texture in 
the same model. Once the material/texture is used in the scene, it will not be loaded 
again and again each time it is used. So, a good way to start with texturing is to use 
your low-resolution texture for all the surfaces and only load the medium-quality 
texture if you see that the quality is not enough. Use the high-quality texture for 
all the surfaces that you are going to edit further with the steps mentioned in the 
following section.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 180 ]
Modifying textures for added realism
Once a surface has a texture applied to it using any of the methods we've looked 
at, it can be edited with an image-editing software. This is handled from within 
SketchUp, so you don't need to mess around exporting and importing images.
Telling SketchUp to link to an image editor
Before you try to modify textures using an image-editing software, you need to 
tell SketchUp which program to use.
1.	 Open the Preferences window (SketchUp | Preferences or 
Window | Preferences).
2.	 Select Applications.
3.	 Click on the Choose button.
4.	 On Windows, navigate to the directory where GIMP is installed; this is 
usually C:\Program Files\GIMP 2\bin. On a Mac, choose Gimp.app 
from the Applications folder.
5.	 Click on Open to apply the selection.
The GIMP default installation location on Windows is shown in the 
following screenshot:
You have now set up SketchUp to open GIMP each time you need to edit a texture 
image. You can pick any image editing software you are comfortable with, such as 
Photoshop or Picasa.

Chapter 5
[ 181 ]
Making unique textures for surfaces
Before you can open an entire surface texture in GIMP, turn it into a texture that is 
unique to the face of the texture, or you will end up modifying the texture on all 
surfaces in the model:
1.	 Right-click on a surface and select Make Unique Texture.
2.	 Right-click again and navigate to Texture | Edit Texture Image.
3.	 GIMP opens up with the texture that is ready for editing!
You just created a separate texture image for one particular surface in the model. 
This creates an image that will cover the entire surface and detects any cropping and 
holes such as window openings. If you don't create a unique texture first, GIMP will 
open the tiled texture image for editing. This means that any changes you make will 
be seen on all the instances of this texture throughout the model.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 182 ]
Editing textures in GIMP
Now, the textured image of the entire face that you selected is open in GIMP. 
You can modify whatever you wish. When you save the changes to the image 
and go back into SketchUp, the texture will be updated. You may have to use the 
Export or Overwrite menu option to create an image in the original file format if 
you add new layers or channels to the image while you are editing.
As you can see from the following texture I opened, the image here is only 
178 x 337 pixels. This is a little too small to do high-quality editing with it. Although 
the picture already shows features specific to this wall (such as the frames around 
the windows), you can see the poor quality of the texture. So, instead, I'm going to go 
back to SketchUp, apply a standard brick pattern, and create a new unique texture 
from the standard brick image.

Chapter 5
[ 183 ]
As you can see in the following screenshot, I now have a larger image of 1071 x 2048 
pixels to play with. This is much better! This is because each SketchUp brick texture 
tile is 250 x 250 pixels, which covers about 1 square meter of wall. When we create 
a unique texture specific to a surface, SketchUp repeats this tile until it fills the 
whole wall area.
Adding some muck and variation
Hats off to the SketchUp folks for creating such a clean texture, but in real life, 
we wouldn't expect it to be so uniform. You're going to apply some variation 
with GIMP now.
1.	 Create a new layer by selecting Layer | New Layer.
2.	 This will create a transparent layer over the top of the original one. You can 
now modify this without being afraid of spoiling the original texture layer.
3.	 If you can't see the Layer pallet, press Ctrl + L (Cmd + L on the Mac).
4.	 Click on the new layer to select it.
5.	 Select Fill Bucket and select a texture or gradient fill.
6.	 Click in the image window to fill the entire layer with the gradient color.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 184 ]
7.	 Now, navigate to Filters | Render | Clouds. Experiment with the options. 
You should see a pattern like the one shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Navigate to Colors | Auto | Equalize to stretch the range of contrast 
(see the preceding screenshot).
9.	 Now, take the Opacity slider of the layer down to 10 (in the Layers pallet).
By adding a light translucent layer with a random cloud pattern, you have now 
added some simple variation to the texture. You can do this for all your textured 
surfaces one by one or just the ones closer to the camera. At this point, you can also 
add more detail, such as hanging flowers, to the texture.

Chapter 5
[ 185 ]
Adding extra elements to a texture
Perform the following steps to add extra elements to a texture:
1.	 Open an image that contains extra elements.
2.	 Draw a selection around the area, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Select Edit | Copy.
4.	 Go to your original texture image and select Edit | Paste.
5.	 In the Layers pallet, right-click on Floating Selection and then select 
To New Layer.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 186 ]
6.	 Use the Move tool and the Scale tool to get the pasted image element in 
position as demonstrated in the following screenshot:
7.	 Select the new layer in the Layers pallet.
8.	 Right-click and select Add Layer Mask.
9.	 Click on the mask to select it.
10.	 Select the paintbrush and paint out all the background bits you don't need, 
as you can see in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 187 ]
There is more about layer masks in Chapter 9, Postproduction in GIMP, 
where you will get to grips with GIMP in much more detail.
11.	 Click on File | Save a Copy to save a master copy somewhere as a 
GIMP *.xcf file. The XCF file format is GIMP's native format that 
preserves all layer information for future editing.
12.	 Choose the menu Image | Flatten Image.
13.	 Finally select File | Export or File | Overwrite to update the texture 
image in SketchUp.
14.	 Your textured face will update with the changes you made. You can see the 
result in the following screenshot:
You have used layers a lot to create your image composition, but all this will be 
lost when you save and go back to SketchUp because the image is saved as a JPG 
or PNG, which can't save layers. Saving a copy of the file in the native application 
format before you flatten the image can be a real time saver. Saving it as a GIMP 
(*.xcf) or Photoshop (*.psd) file will retain all the layer info, and it won't lose any 
detail either, so you can come back to it and make edits as many times as you like.

Applying Textures and Materials for Photorealistic Rendering
[ 188 ]
Adding extra detail
Now, it's your turn. See how much difference you can make by adding little details 
where it matters. Try adding lintels to your windows by taking the texture from an 
existing photo, like the one shown in the following screenshot:
In the preceding image, you can see the brick pattern of a lintel that is used in the 
following image in a different scenario. Would you have noticed that the lintel is 
from another building?

Chapter 5
[ 189 ]
Knowing when to call it quits
I've been known to spend days texturing and then, finally deciding that I didn't like 
what I'd done anyway. I replaced the hand-crafted image with a tiled texture, and it 
was adequate. So, don't get drawn into games such as adding cats behind a window. 
Refer to your original scene setup drawings to identify areas that can benefit from 
more details and ignore parts of the scene that are peripheral in your camera shots 
or too far away to show any details.
Summary
I think you are now fully clued up in the art of SketchUp texturing. As you've seen, 
SketchUp has some amazing tools to help you along the way. Now that you've made 
the best use of textures, you can rest assured that your model will render beautifully.
In this chapter on texturing, we discussed when it is appropriate to use textures. 
Sometimes, it's best just to leave this stage out completely and go for an NPR look 
(see Chapter 7, Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp). We also discussed tileable 
textures and a couple of ways to make your own textures. Don't forget to keep 
taking photos and keep a library for future use.
We used Match Photo to greatly speed up the texturing process and make use 
of digital photos wherever you want. Finally, we looked at ways to tweak texture 
images in GIMP to add realism. This is all accessible easily with SketchUp linked 
to GIMP.
We also discussed lots of other stuff, all of which combines to give you the 
wherewithal to create quick, great-looking textured models ready to render 
or print straight from SketchUp. You can now go to the next chapter on entourage, 
which is a weird name for people, cars, and trees…, or you can go straight to 
Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering.


Entourage the SketchUp Way
When pitching a great design to a client, your pitch will stand or fall, based on the 
presentation of architectural visuals. However, your visuals will stand or fall with 
the quality of the entourage, that is, additional elements such as furniture, plants, 
and people that add lifelike variation to the image. In fact, a promising design can 
be marred by bad entourage. As entourage is not specific to a project, you can build 
up a library of entourage components in SketchUp and choose suitable elements to 
add to your scene.
Entourage of professional quality is hard to create. Obtaining in-focus photos 
of trees, with the right light and background, and then clipping around them 
to remove all the background elements can take forever. That's why, quality 
entourage has its price.
In this chapter, you will find out ways to find or create entourage that you 
will be happy with. If you don't have the money to spend, you'll learn how to 
create your own entourage. We will look at some of the best resources you can 
use to do so quickly and easily. You'll also learn how to use this entourage within 
your SketchUp workflow.
In this chapter, you will learn the following:
•	
Where to find high-quality, free photoreal furniture models
•	
How to overcome problems with foliage
•	
How to create 2D people to use repeatedly
•	
Where to find good plant entourage and how to generate it
•	
Where to use entourage in your workflow to obtain the best results

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 192 ]
The notice hierarchy
The notice hierarchy is a term I think I've made up on the spot. But, wherever it comes 
from, it's not a bad way to describe something you've probably experienced: If 
you walk into a room, there are certain things you'll notice first. If these things are 
missing, you'll notice something else first, and so on. Here's my take on the order of 
the "notice hierarchy":
•	
People
•	
Animals
•	
Furniture
•	
Lights
•	
Carpet
•	
Pictures
This might not be entirely accurate, and the order may vary from person to 
person. What's interesting though is that you can choose exactly where the 
viewer (the client) looks for his first impression. We all know that first 
impressions count, right?
So, what would you like your multibillionaire client to see first when showing 
them their new apartment development?
•	
A smiling, relaxed young couple
•	
A toaster
It's all about transporting the viewer into the image you've created. So, when you 
show people inhabiting the space in the same way in which the client would wish 
to, you've put the client into the scene. Neither men nor women, rich or poor think 
nostalgically about the great bread toasting they did this morning.
Supporting the scene
Actually, there's an even more important consideration. No matter how good your 
rendering is or how good an impression your entourage makes, if there's a single 
piece of really bad entourage in the scene, it gets noticed first. So, the very first goal 
of using entourage is to not ruin your scene!

Chapter 6
[ 193 ]
Entourage elements have their own style and quality. Therefore, sometimes, the 
best advice is to leave it out. Some of the best visuals show a building on an open 
background, like the one by the SketchUp user, REVI21ON, shown in the following 
image. The rich texturing provides variety and a sense of scale all on its own. Any 
entourage you'd want to place in this scene would have to match up with the superb 
detailing of the building itself. Would you want to spoil it with entourage?
If you make sure that you always use entourage sparingly, you are more likely to 
spend some time on finding good quality entourage to fill the spot.
Be the marketing exec
You are a salesperson, and the most effective architectural visuals are sales 
documents. If you treat them as such, you will never go wrong. Think about this 
for a minute and internalize what it means. You need to pull out all the stops to 
create the vision of your client's dream space. The easiest way you do this is not 
by getting every minute detail of the building right, but with well-selected and 
well-placed entourage. Entourage brings life to your scene.
In the rest of this chapter, we will go through how to use entourage to help you 
make this impact.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 194 ]
Choosing entourage
Let's evaluate your choices at this stage. I suppose there's little difference between all 
these options in the final visual, but obviously, some types of entourage will suit you 
more than others. However, be warned; it's easy to drift aimlessly on the Internet 
trying one thing after another. To help you, I've included a quick reference table so 
that you can compare the relative merits of each option side by side.
At which stage do I introduce entourage?
There are three options here, as illustrated in the first column of the following table:
Design stage
Difficulty to 
use
Quantity 
available
Formats
SketchUp
Easy
High
SKP, 3DS, 
DWG/DXF
Renderer
Medium
Medium
3DS, OBJ
Postproduction
Difficult
High
Images
Broadly speaking, the level of difficulty of introducing entourage will increase 
further along the production process you are in. So, as already discussed in 
Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, it is best to set up at least entourage place markers 
in SketchUp right at the start. The disadvantage of introducing detailed entourage 
(high polygon and detailed textures) into SketchUp is that it tends to slow the 
program down to a snail's pace. The way to get around this is discussed in this 
chapter when we look at swapping high/low detail entourage.
Many visualization artists leave entourage to the last moment, even introducing it in 
the postprocessing stage in Photoshop or GIMP. Traditionally, it used to be difficult 
to set up a 2D billboard-styled entourage in modeling or CAD software. This is not 
the case with SketchUp. So, there is really no need to learn all the skills required 
to do this successfully in GIMP or Photoshop. If you already have the skills and a 
library of images, you might still like to do it this way. Postproduction, however, 
is the last stage in the digital production pipeline, and so, it is your last chance to 
fix anything that might have gone wrong with a rendering. You can save your 
entire image with a well-placed car or tree.

Chapter 6
[ 195 ]
What I suggest is that you introduce entourage at the SketchUp and rendering 
software stages. The two work so seamlessly together that you will be able to keep 
both programs open, using the best features of each to populate your scene. While 
most entourage can be introduced in SketchUp and taken directly to your renderer, 
you will achieve the best results with objects that are in the renderer's native file 
format and are introduced into the SketchUp scene on the fly during the export. 
We will introduce this workflow for Thea Render in Chapter 8, Photorealistic 
Rendering, and set up a library of replacement components.
What's my acquisition strategy?
An acquisition strategy is the posh way of saying "be consistent". Unlike me, 
who has a bit of everything on my computer, in lots of different file formats 
and visual styles, software for creating this or that is spread over several hard 
drives so that I can never find it. It pays to decide the best way of acquiring 
entourage for you and then sticking to it. The broad choices are to buy it, 
find it on the Internet, or make it yourself.
Quality
Suits your 
workflow
Money
Time
Buy
Medium/
High
Not always
High
Low
Find
Low/High
Not always
Low
Medium
Make
Medium/Low
Yes
Medium
High
So, how much time or money do you have to spend? What quality do you expect? 
It might always seem wise to buy entourage, and this is true to the extent that 
you will have more time to work on a design. This will be quite significant the next 
time a deadline approaches. However, even entourage that is bought doesn't provide 
everything, and you might have to adapt it to your workflow. On the other hand, 
you can get exactly what you want by searching a little and spending some time on 
making it yourself.
For example, trees are usually sold as either 2D images for postproduction or 
high-polygon 3D objects. You might prefer 2D face-me cutouts. Making entourage, 
as you will see from the tutorial on 2D people further on, is not so difficult for some 
types of entourage. You can also use software such as tree generators or character 
creation software to make it easier for you. Other objects, such as vehicles are best 
left to the experts.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 196 ]
2D or not 2D, that is the question
The following is a table showing what type of entourage is available for each 
category: people, trees, vehicles, furniture, backgrounds (such as city scenes), 
and skies. For each of these, there are pros and cons for 2D or 3D based on the 
availability, quality of the outcome, and ease of use. In addition, there are the types 
of output to consider. When aiming for stills, then 2D will usually be sufficient. 
2D isn't resource hungry (unlike high-polygon 3D trees), and actually, it is more 
photorealistic than 3D when the entourage is made from photos. You'll learn how to 
make photo-based 2D entourage in this chapter. For animation, the decision is more 
difficult. Sometimes, a 2D entourage will look, well, just like a cardboard cutout:
Availability
Suitable for 
animation
Cost
Software to help
2D
3D
2D
3D
2D
3D
2D
3D
People
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Med
High
GIMP, 
Photoshop
Poser, 
Daz Studio, 
Makehuman
Plants and 
trees
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Med
Med
RPtreemaker
Vue, 
NGPlant
Vehicles
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
Low
N/A
N/A
Furniture
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
N/A
Low
N/A
N/A
Backgrounds
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Low
High
Vue Easel/
Esprit
Vue, Bryce
Skies
Yes
No
Yes
N/A
Med
N/A
Photosphere
N/A
We will show you how to use a sky image as a background in Chapter 8, Photorealistic 
rendering, and use a (free) city model for our tutorial in Chapter 10, Animations. 
The other groups of entourage are discussed in the following sections.
Furniture
When creating interior views, the furniture you choose is of paramount importance 
in establishing the look and feel of the image. While people are not used to discerning 
the build quality of architecture, they are very well equipped to judge good or bad 
furnishings. This is because everyone buys furniture, and everyone spends most of 
their lives inside. So, when you look at an interior visual, most of the impact will be 
created by the furniture, not the room itself, as you can see in the following image:

Chapter 6
[ 197 ]
This fact gives rise to the continuing need for good 3D models of furniture, much of 
it branded. Since design houses want their designs to show up in interior visuals, 
they often find a way to provide free models to us. It's just a matter of finding them.
Before SketchUp came along, most visualizers used 3D Studio (later 3D Max) to 
create architectural visuals. So, there are years worth of content around the world in 
the old 3D Studio format, *.3DS. Guess what? Lots of it is good stuff; it is free, and 
you can insert it directly into your renderer.
Go easy. Some of the best interior renders I've seen show an empty 
room with just one visually interesting chair in it and great lighting.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 198 ]
Manufacturers' websites
Some manufacturers of designer furniture understand that they need to offer 
high-quality 3D models of their products to motivate architects to add them to 
their visuals and hopefully, add them later to their finished buildings. With the 
increasing popularity of SketchUp, some companies also started offering SketchUp 
files. Generally, these files are converted from a high-quality source and are very 
detailed (read very high poly) and can slow down your workflow significantly. 
These files are very good to produce photorealistic renderings but may need to 
be simplified for an acceptable performance in SketchUp.
A few manufacturers with a downloadable collection are:
•	
www.hermanmiller.com
•	
www.fritzhansen.com
•	
www.sanitec-kolo.com
The 3D Warehouse
There are bags of SketchUp furniture to choose from in the 3D Warehouse, 
and the amount of good quality gear is going up all the time. However, not 
all of the stuff there is suitable for high-quality SketchUp-based output and 
photorealistic output. If you're going to export your scene to a renderer, make 
sure that you check out the section on cleaning up 3D Warehouse components 
in Chapter 4, Modeling for Visualization.
List of websites
Once you've done your own search, try these great free sites, too. Remember to 
save, catalogue, and organize your downloads; otherwise, you will find it impossible 
to locate it later when you need it, with file names such as 1234asdf4qwe.zip being 
commonplace; don't say I didn't warn you!
Try the following websites for furniture models:
•	
Archive3D.net
•	
Turbosquid.com
•	
Flyingarchitecture.com
•	
3Delicious.net
•	
Resources.blogscopia.com

Chapter 6
[ 199 ]
To further explore what is there on the Internet, free or paid, you can go to the list of 
links at www.3Dlinks.com and navigate to 3D OBJECTS | Commercial 3D Objects 
or 3D OBJECTS | Free 3D Objects.
People cutouts
We're going to learn how to make 2D face-me people that can be used both in 
photorealist and non-photorealistic rendering. With this method, you can build 
up a stock of people that you can use, no matter what the required output is. 
The following are the applications for this type of entourage:
•	
Black and white with sketchy edges
•	
Colored with sketchy edges
•	
Textured within SketchUp
•	
Photoreal rendered
The following pictures of the same man correspond to these four output types. 
At first, here is a black-and-white sketch. The lines are not too crisp and have a 
bit of hand-drawn quality:

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 200 ]
The next image shows the same jogger in a cartoon-style rendering. The lines in this 
picture are a bit sharper, but the first impression is created by the colored cloth and 
body shape:
One further step is shown in the next image where the jogger's cloth and body parts 
are created with a photographic texture. Note the realism that this further detailing 
adds to the person:

Chapter 6
[ 201 ]
Finally, you can see a photorealistic rendering of the street. It looks like the jogger 
is really running along the street, thanks to the quality of the textures and the 
shadows that a tree casts on his legs:
So, you can see that this entourage works with every type of output. There are 
many ways of creating entourage, but this is possibly the most versatile way and 
offers the following benefits:
•	
Works with any rendering software
•	
No transparency to mess up the renderer
•	
Correct scale, no resizing needed
•	
Casts shadows
•	
Inserted within SketchUp, not within the renderer or as a postprocess
•	
Easy to make with any skill level
Creating 2D people components
To create a high-quality 2D component of a person, follow these steps:
1.	 Search for a high-quality, high-resolution picture of a person with a 
good contrast to the background.
2.	 Open the image in GIMP.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 202 ]
3.	 Navigate to Filters | Enhance | Unsharp Mask... if it is necessary to enhance 
the sharpness of the image.
4.	 Crop the image near the person using the Crop tool to take away any excess 
area of the image. Do this by dragging a box around the person; then, press 
Enter when you are done.
5.	 Save it as a PNG image. This is a non-lossy format that is suitable for 
repeated editing (see Chapter 5, Applying Textures and Materials for 
Photorealistic Rendering).
6.	 In SketchUp, navigate to File | Import and choose All Supported Image 
Types in the drop-down box.
7.	 Select the image (make sure that the Use as image checkbox is selected).
8.	 Click on Open and place the image into SketchUp.
Scaling the person
The image you just imported needs to be set to the correct size for a person. 
This can be easily done with the Tape Measure tool:
1.	 Select the Tape Measure tool and measure the distance between the 
bottom of the feet and the top of the head.
2.	 Now, type the approximate height of the person. Just take a guess.
3.	 Click on Yes in the following pop-up dialog to confirm that you want 
to resize the model.
Tracing the outline
In the next step, we will create the outline of the person as a SketchUp polygon:
1.	 Switch the view mode by navigating to Camera | Parallel Projection and 
then click on the Top View button (or navigate to Camera | Standard 
Views | Top). You should see the image flat on your screen.
2.	 Zoom in using the scroll wheel of the mouse.
3.	 Select the Pencil tool.

Chapter 6
[ 203 ]
4.	 Click on the edge of the person and trace around the silhouette.
5.	 Make sure that on face in image shows each time before you click 
(see in the preceding image).
6.	 You will find it best to get the lines well within the edge of the person, 
so no background shows on the cutout.
When you are done, you will now have a completed outline, like the one shown 
in the following image:

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 204 ]
Applying the photo texture
Finally, we add the image texture to the polygon and remove the background:
1.	 Select the cutout, and right-click and select Reverse face to get the white 
face to the top if necessary.
2.	 Select the image, right-click on it, and select Explode. The photo is now 
projected onto the cutout person.
3.	 Erase the background.
Checking for halos
A halo is the glow that you see around some entourage, making it look fake. 
It appears when there is some light background left in the cutout and the 
component is placed in front of a dark object.
1.	 Turn off the edges by navigating to View | Edge Styles. Uncheck both 
Profiles and Edges.
2.	 Export a 2D image, open it, and check for a black line around the edge 
of the person.
3.	 Change the background to black by navigating to Window | Styles | Edit | 
Background Settings. Click on Background and change the color to black, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 205 ]
4.	 Export the image again and now check around the edges for bright lines.
5.	 If any edges need adjusting, turn the edges back on and redraw those 
lines to cut away the bright or dark pixels.
You've just created a 2D person cutout, which you can use as a face-me component 
in SketchUp. The photo you used has been projected onto the cutout so that it's 
good enough for photorealistic rendering.
Now, click on the Hidden Line view button, and you'll notice that there's no 
detail apart from the outline. There's still a little work to do if you want to use 
this entourage for non-photorealistic visuals.
Drawing the innards
You can now add some detail on the inside of the person, such as the edges of clothing, 
hands, neck, and hair. Once you have done this, your entourage can be used for any of 
the SketchUp styles. The following is the basic plan to get you started:
1.	 Using the same method that you used earlier, trace in some internal details.
2.	 Create a copy of the cutout person.
3.	 On the copy, fill in blocks of color using the Paint bucket tool.
You'll now have two versions of the same person. The one on the left-hand side 
can be used for photoreal visuals, and the one on the right-hand side can be used for 
artistic or sketchy styles, including the methods in Chapter 7, Non-photoreal Visuals 
with SketchUp.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 206 ]
Creating the face-me component
With the coloring and texturing complete, you now have to convert the polygon 
into a SketchUp component:
1.	 Triple-click on the first copy you made.
2.	 Create a component and label it Man running_PR.
3.	 Select Always Face Camera.
4.	 Select Set Origin and place the origin where the feet touch the ground, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Place the red axis along the lower horizontal edge of the cutout and click.
6.	 Place the green axis perpendicular to the cutout plane, so that the blue axis 
lines up with the center of the person (see the preceding image).
7.	 Click on the Create button to create the component.
8.	 Right-click on the new component and select Save As.
9.	 Browse to your component library and save the new component as 
Man running_PR.skp.
10.	 Repeat the preceding steps with your second copy, but call it 
Man running_NPR.skp.

Chapter 6
[ 207 ]
To switch between the versions, just right-click and select Reload, then select 
the _PR or _NPR version, and click on Open.
You made a component from the 2D cutout and told SketchUp where the axis 
should go to place the person upright into a scene. This means that when inserting 
the component in future, it will always appear with the middle of the feet placed at 
the cursor. Even more importantly, as a Face-Me component rotates to follow the 
camera, you've told SketchUp where the center of rotation in the component is. 
You have labeled your components with a suffix so that you can easily swap 
between them, depending on what output you plan to produce.
3D people and the uncanny valley
In human aesthetics, the "uncanny valley" refers to the negative emotional response 
that almost-human features can cause. It means that we sympathize more with 
an anthropomorphic, but a clearly mechanic "face", like that of the Pixar character 
Wall-E, than we do with an artificial face that tries too hard to imitate human 
features but is slightly off in details such as the hair or skin tone. Our brain is 
programmed to spot minute details in facial expressions and body language, and 
when our perception registers that something is off, it triggers an emotional warning.
In the field of computer graphics, this effect can be found quite frequently. A 
character in a video game may move "a bit stiff" or the hair on a 3D person model 
may look too compact to be real. Even in big movie productions, directors will more 
likely scan the face of an actor with a 3D scanner and motion tracking to get the 
expressions right, rather than relying on a completely computer-generated character.
For architectural visualization, this means that we have to be extra careful when 
using 3D entourage for people. Using 2D cutouts from photographs, you can create 
convincingly realistic people that look real, because they are real in the picture. 
You only need to choose photos that match the lighting conditions in the 3D scene, 
and it will be hard to see the difference. If you use 3D character models, you don't 
need to worry about the lighting, but everything else should be perfect or the only 
non-photoreal element in your rendering will be your people entourage.
A (cheap) alternative to super-realistic 3D models is an abstract representation of 
human figures in the image. A translucent silhouette can convey the sense of scale 
and proportions just as well as a 3D model, without the need for top-quality skin 
texture and clothing. Try this option to see if it fits your presentation style and your 
client's taste. If it doesn't work for your project, you can always replace the simple 
cutout with a whiz-bang 3D component.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 208 ]
Vegetation
We have already looked briefly at vegetation in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, 
and talked about how important it is for the effectiveness of a visual. Hopefully, 
you have already included some great vegetation in your scene by cutting 
2D billboards from photos. However, for some applications, especially when 
aiming for an animated output, you might need some other vegetation.
Non-photoreal sketchy trees
In non-photoreal scenes, cartoon-style trees look great. You can create these easily 
yourself by starting with a tree photo and tracing around it as you've just done 
with the person.
The following image is an example of a sketchy tree. Have a go at making one now 
from a photo. Then, follow the earlier steps to create a face-me component:

Chapter 6
[ 209 ]
Want an automatic veggie maker?
RPTree Maker from Render Plus allows you to generate 2D trees from within 
SketchUp and place them into the model. It saves a PNG with alpha mask on 
a 2D face-me component. The alpha mask is a black–and-white image of the 
tree showing SketchUp, and other software, where to clip the image. You can 
download a free 30-day trial version of RPTree Maker from the Render Plus 
website (www.renderplus.com).
Vue from e-on software (www.e-onsoftware.com) has to be the top choice for 
computer-generated vegetation. The foliage engine within Vue creates an infinite 
variety of different random trees and shrubs at the click of a button. Depending on 
how much you spend, you can gain greater control over this, and even create your 
own species. For any outdoor scene with a large amount of foliage, it is well worth 
looking at Vue, as its render engine is built specifically for handling the massive 
polygon count created by lots of 3D vegetation. Vue is regularly used in movies to 
simulate forests and even entire ecosystems.
For Vue Version 10 and younger, there is also a SketchUp exporter plugin available. 
This simplifies the export of SketchUp scenes for rendering in Vue.
Vehicles
Many people are fascinated by cars, boats, and planes. So, there is always a large 
amount of hobbyists who have taken it upon themselves to model their favorite 
vehicle in SketchUp. These models end up in the 3D Warehouse, where even more 
enthusiasts modify them and upload them again. So, you should be OK finding any 
vehicles you may need. If you need a specific brand and model, you can use one of 
the commercial collections. As always, a quick Google search will get you started.
One problem with the 3D Warehouse models is that each author has his own style 
of modeling. If you need 30 different cars for a road scene and each of these has 
different materials and textures assigned to them, you're going to have a nightmare 
when you want to change and modify them. To avoid this, build yourself a library 
of good-quality models with a matching style. Sometimes, these are given away 
for free by some of the commercial model libraries. Alternatively, spend some 
time in SketchUp, reducing the unnecessary materials or polygons from the 
downloaded components.

Entourage the SketchUp Way
[ 210 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you looked at the challenges and solutions for using entourage 
that will enhance and not detract from the visual appeal in your scenes.
Specifically, we covered where to find entourage and what to look for in 
high-quality entourage. We discussed when to choose 2D or 3D entourage for best 
effect and how to create your own high-quality 2D entourage, which will work for 
all types of image output. Finally, you learned to decide when to buy entourage, 
when to make your own, and when to scrounge around on the Internet for free stuff!
We also discussed at what stage in the workflow you should use entourage, and 
we came to the conclusion that in most cases, inserting stuff either in SketchUp or 
the rendering application is preferable to the postprocessing stage.
Now that you've learned enough to get your scene populated with entourage, you 
can get on to the real fun of creating the visualization images. This is the topic 
of the next chapter.

Non-photoreal Visuals 
with SketchUp
In architectural visualizations, non-photoreal images are images that maintain the 
characteristics of the processes that created them. A simple form is a 2D or 3D line 
drawn straight out of a CAD application. More advanced images use 2D graphic 
techniques to increase the realism of the scene, just like architects used to do in the 
past with their hand-drawn perspectives.
As the name suggests, SketchUp does sketchy styles extremely well. You can get 
pleasing visuals straight out of the box by hitting a few buttons, and you can take 
things further by exporting an image to an image processor such as GIMP. In this 
chapter, you will learn how to do both of these. In particular, you will learn:
•	
How to produce images in SketchUp's own sketchy styles
•	
How to create a watercolor style output (the Dennis Technique)
•	
How to simulate the effect of black-and-white pencil drawings

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 212 ]
In the process, you will also learn about the tools that will help you experiment 
with your own styles. The Dennis Technique is illustrated in the following image 
by Dennis Nikolaev, to give you an idea of what is possible with the tools presented 
in this chapter.
SketchUp's native output
Let's get started immediately with some sketchy output. SketchUp has some 
fabulous built-in sketchy styles that you can always fall back on when you 
don't have the time or inclination to do anything more adventurous. Just because 
they're quick and easy to use doesn't mean they're not great. Other CAD software 
developers would kill to get automatic output this good.
Keep a settings diary
Often when you discover a great look in SketchUp, the perfect 
combination of styles, shadow, face, and background settings, you 
never remember how to recreate it the next time. So, why not keep a 
list at the back of your desk diary or even start a SketchUp notebook 
especially for this purpose?
All you need to know to get a great-looking sketchy output from SketchUp is how to 
access, and maybe modify, the built-in styles. These styles completely control how 
you view every aspect of what you see on screen:
•	
Background color or image
•	
Overlay or watermark

Chapter 7
[ 213 ]
•	
Sky and ground
•	
Line thickness and texture
•	
Line jitter, extensions, and endpoints
•	
Face style and opacity
All these settings are covered in detail in the online help of SketchUp. You can access 
it by navigating to Help | Knowledge Center.
Editing SketchUp's built-in styles
For the purpose of this book on visualization, you're going to look at what you 
specifically need to know to create architectural presentation drawings. You can 
then experiment to find out the rest if you want to.
1.	 Make a start by opening any SketchUp model.
2.	 Go to Window | Styles. This opens the Styles pallet.
3.	 In the Styles pallet, go to Assorted Styles | Brush Strokes on Canvas.
4.	 The view of your model changes to reflect the style you selected.
5.	 To modify this style, for example, click on the Wireframe Face Style button, 
as shown in the following screenshot, or choose from the menu View | Face 
Style | Wireframe:

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 214 ]
6.	 This only changes the view temporarily. Now, click on the In Model icon in 
the Styles pallet.
7.	 The style thumbnail in the top-left corner of the window is shown with 
a circular arrow to indicate that you changed the settings of the style. 
On Windows, you can also hover the cursor over the thumbnail to see 
a pop-up notice.
8.	 While you're watching it, click on the thumbnail to update the in-model 
style with the current style settings.
When you clicked on the thumbnail icon, your update to the style was saved in the 
model. However, don't worry; this won't affect the original style in the system style 
pallet that will be available in every new SketchUp file you create. If you do wish to 
save your new modified style for use in other models, you can do so as follows:
1.	 Right-click on the style icon in the In Model collection.
2.	 Select Save As from the context menu.
3.	 Pick a location and save the style as a *.style file.

Chapter 7
[ 215 ]
Why is this important? Well, every scene has a style associated with it by default. 
So, when you change the drawing style in SketchUp and then create a new scene, 
it will always display your modified style. You can even use scenes to switch 
between drawing styles. You can also disable the option to save the style with 
the scene in the Scenes pallet.
However, all that is saved with the scene is the name of the style, not the actual 
settings. You have to update the style, as shown in the preceding steps, to apply 
any temporary changes to the style itself so that they can be recalled when you 
return to the scene.
Get some style!
So, why don't you experiment a bit with styles now? Start with a simple model 
you drew, or download one from the 3D Warehouse. Now, set up five scenes with 
different views and styles. Experiment with the settings in each of the scenes you've 
set up. Then, save your changes to a new style if you like the result. Feel free and 
experiment, because when you reload SketchUp, you will not have ruined any of 
the default styles.
Saving 2D images in SketchUp
Whenever you save a 2D image, I'd recommend that you create a scene tab. If you 
have one set up already, but you changed the shadows or view in any way and want 
to keep the changes for your output, right-click on the tab now and select Update. 
This means that if you need to save the image for this view again, you can use the 
scene to return to the exact same setup. The camera angle and other view settings 
will be restored whenever you click on the scene tab.
1.	 Maximize the SketchUp window (top-right corner of the window).
2.	 Set up your scene with styles, shadow settings, camera angle, and field of 
view (you learned about these in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene).
3.	 Go to View | Animation | Add Scene.
4.	 Go to the Styles pallet, click on In Model, and then click on Update Style 
with Changes.
5.	 Select the menu entry File | Export | 2D Graphic.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 216 ]
If you have the Pro version of SketchUp, you will be able to export 
images in the following scalable CAD and Vector 2D file formats: 
AutoCAD (DXF, DWG); Portable Document Format (PDF) and; 
Encapsulated PostScript (EPS). Some of these are a must when 
working with CAD or illustration software.
6.	 Select PNG if you plan to work further on the image or don't want to lose 
detail; select JPEG if you need a low file size and don't plan to modify the 
image further.
7.	 Click on Options and set the Width to 3000 pixels. The vertical 
dimension will change automatically to match the aspect ratio of your 
main SketchUp window. On Mac, you have the option to set the image's 
Height independently, but not on Windows.
8.	 Click on Anti-Alias if you'd like softened edges. Usually, you will want 
this box ticked.
Screen limitations to be aware of
As SketchUp exports what you see on screen, the size of the exported 
image depends on the shape of your SketchUp window. So, if your 
window is roughly a square, the image will come out roughly like a 
square when you export it. When you maximize your screen, it will 
come out roughly like the shape of your monitor. However, even then, 
it is affected by how many toolbars you have at the sides and top. In 
short, if you want an output with repeatable size, you need to keep 
your workspace setup consistent.
This is a basic overview of how to generate sketchy styled output from within 
SketchUp. However, as a pro architectural visualizer, you will need something 
more polished. In the rest of this chapter, you will find out how to combine several 
of SketchUp's styles within GIMP to give even better results. This process is known 
as a non-photoreal (NPR) visualization technique.
The Dennis Technique
The Dennis Technique is the quickest and most fun of all NPR techniques developed 
so far for SketchUp. The skills you'll learn here will allow you to experiment and 
develop your own particular preferred style or technique.

Chapter 7
[ 217 ]
The method gained a huge following after the architect, Dennis Nikolaev, posted the 
following image for review in the gallery section of the SketchUp Pro user forum. To 
great clamor, he agreed to provide us with a run-through of his method, and having 
done this, he proceeded to mentor and encourage those of us who were trying to 
copy it. The Dennis Technique was born in a 400+ post thread!
It turns out that the big trick, or secret if you like, behind the Dennis Technique is 
speed. You need to be quick in everything you do: quick, rough mouse movements, 
quick decisions on whether you like what you see or want to erase it. The whole 
process should take no more than half an hour once you're used to it, and this lack 
of time investment will make you willing to be bold and use flourishes you wouldn't 
usually consider. "Getting it right" is not the idea here. In fact, it spoils it. You can see 
why by looking at this close-up of Dennis' original:

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 218 ]
This close-up shows the roughness, which actually provides the desirability of the 
image. It is as if watercolor has been applied to a hand-drawn pen and ink drawing. 
Follow the steps here exactly so that you gain an idea of why each step is required. 
When you've done it like this once, you can add your own embellishments.
Setting up the Dennis Technique in SketchUp
The following picture shows a dwelling in SketchUp. I've taken this one from the 
3D Warehouse. It might be easier for you to do the same rather than using your 
pride and joy project, simply because you'll be defacing it beyond recognition, 
and this can be quite upsetting! Choose a really simple model like this one.
First, you will set up three scenes, which you will export to GIMP later. Each scene 
has its own style setting that describes the visual appearance. They are:
•	
Color Wash
•	
Lines and shadows
•	
Lines only
Before we start, maximize the window so that you keep the window size consistent 
between the image exports. Also, make sure not to move the camera between the 
scenes. Compose your scene if you have not done so already.

Chapter 7
[ 219 ]
Creating the Color Wash image
The first scene and style to create is the Color Wash:
1.	 If you have selected any style other than the default one, go to the 
Styles pallet now and select the Default Styles collection.
2.	 Select the Shaded with Textures style.
3.	 In the Styles pallet, press the Create new Style button (the one with + in it) 
and call it Color Wash.
4.	 Go to the Edge section on the Edit tab and turn off the display of Edges 
and Profiles.
5.	 Still on the Edit tab, click on the Background Settings button.
6.	 Turn the Sky option off. Set the Background option to blue, and turn the 
Ground option on.
7.	 Click on the thumbnail image at the top-left corner of the style manager 
to update the style (Pro version only).
8.	 Turn shadows on and experiment with time and date settings until you 
like the result.
9.	 Go to View | Animation | Add Scene. This fixes the camera, style, 
and shadow settings of the new scene.
10.	 You may get a message like the following one. Click on Save as new style 
and hit Update Scene. SketchUp recognizes that you modified the style 
settings and makes you aware of the possible consequences. Saving a new 
style is a quick way to avoid any issues.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 220 ]
You should have something like the following screenshot: just colors and textures, 
but no lines. We'll call this the Color Wash scene.
Lines only
The next style we need is the opposite: no colors or shadows, only lines:
1.	 In the Styles manager, select a sketchy style with a white background. 
I've used the Sketchy Charcoal style here.

Chapter 7
[ 221 ]
2.	 Make sure shadows are turned off.
3.	 Now, create a new scene tab. Call this Lines Only.
Lines and shadows
The final style that we need combines lines with a shaded view:
1.	 Turn shadows back on and create the final scene.
2.	 Call the scene Lines and Shadows.
3.	 You can mess around with some of the edge settings here if you like.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 222 ]
Optional selection layer
Optionally, you can now also create a flat colored image, which 
you will just use for masking and selecting areas of color in GIMP. 
Use the Shadow Settings dialog box with the settings shown here.
Uncheck the Antialiasing box in the image Save options when you export 
this image. This is useful when you get more advanced with GIMP, as 
you can select areas of color to work on. You might want to do this to 
simulate real watercolor, where you would apply one color at a time.
Exporting the scene tabs
You have just set up three scenes to save different style settings. It's now time to 
export these scenes to 2D images.
1.	 First, save your SketchUp model. This means you can come back to it 
and re-export the images if you need to.
2.	 Go to File | Export | 2D Graphic.

Chapter 7
[ 223 ]
3.	 Select PNG as the file format from the drop-down list.
4.	 Click on the Options button.
5.	 Type 3000 into the Width field (see the preceding screenshot); the height 
will adjust automatically.
6.	 Click on OK to close the options window.
7.	 Type in a filename and click on Save.
8.	 Repeat the preceding steps for each of the three views you just set up. 
I suggest you use the filenames ColorWash, LinesShadows, and 
LinesOnly. Do not change the size of your SketchUp window to 
create images of equal size!
You now have the three views set up. They will be opened in the GIMP image 
editor. You should have this downloaded and installed already from Chapter 2, 
Collecting a Toolset. If you prefer, you can use Photoshop, but you have to translate 
the instructions to match the Photoshop tools. The fourth optional view is there just 
to help you select areas of color easily.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 224 ]
Setting up scenes (page tabs) first rather than just manually exporting views is 
important. This will allow you to come back and make changes to your model and 
re-export the images at exactly the same camera angle, shadow setting, and style 
setting as you did earlier. You made sure that the style settings would not change by 
clicking on refresh in the Styles pallet. Putting a flat blue color in the background 
allows you to select and replace the sky with an image in GIMP.
Keep the screen the same
Annoyingly, sometimes SketchUp exports images exactly as they are 
on screen. So, you might save a file, change or maximize the size of the 
SketchUp window, and find that it saves a completely different view. 
To combat this, use the same computer and always maximize the 
SketchUp program window before saving an image.
Now, on with Dennis' magic formula!
Setting up GIMP for the Dennis Technique
You should have ColorWash, LinesShadows, and LinesOnly PNG images, 
all of the same size.
1.	 Once you have opened GIMP, go to File | Open. Select the ColorWash 
image and click on Open.
2.	 If the Layers pallet is not visible already, open it now by navigating to 
Window | Layers, Channels, Paths, Undo.
3.	 The image now appears as the Background layer in GIMP.
4.	 Now, select File | Open as Layers.
5.	 Hold down Ctrl, select the other two images, and click on Open.
All three images will now be open in GIMP as layers. Your screen should look 
roughly like mine. If you need to rearrange your layers, you can click-and-drag 
them with the mouse.

Chapter 7
[ 225 ]
At first we will remove the blue colored background from the ColorWash image 
to make space for sky image:
1.	 Click on the ColorWash layer in the Layers pallet; then, click on the 
Duplicate Layer button at the bottom. This will create a copy of the 
Background layer.
2.	 Click on the eye icons for the other layers to hide them so that you can 
see the new layer.
3.	 Select this new layer by clicking on it in the Layers pallet.
4.	 Let's call this layer ColorWash1.png.
5.	 Right-click on the new layer and select Add Alpha Channel.
6.	 Select the Fuzzy Select tool (aka Magic Wand) from the main tools pallet 
and change the Threshold value to 1. Click anywhere inside the blue sky 
area to select it.
7.	 Hit Delete.
8.	 The sky is now transparent (checker board pattern) and ready for you to 
insert a sky image behind it. Go to Select | None to reset the selection area.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 226 ]
Now, you need to simulate the inaccurate random characteristics of paint and pen.
1.	 Go to Filters | Distorts | Ripple.
2.	 Alter the settings as shown in the following screenshot:
If your image has repeating textures, these won't look too good. So, try 
using the Oilify filter instead of or in addition to the Ripple filter. All 
we are trying to do here is introduce some variation. You can experiment 
with many of the filters to achieve your own version of this effect.
3.	 Click on the LinesOnly layer and make it visible again.
4.	 Change the Layer Mode value of the LinesOnly layer to Multiply. 
You should now have something like this:

Chapter 7
[ 227 ]
If you're new to GIMP, then please give yourself plenty of time to get used to it. 
You'll find it worth it in the end. So far, you have opened your images as layers 
in GIMP. Layers work like see-through sheets on an overhead projector or tracing 
paper if you prefer this analogy. We stack them on top of each other and mask bits 
out from each, so that the final image we get is a composite of all three. The layer 
stack you've got so far is shown here. The LinesOnly layer has been set to Multiply, 
which will project only the lines (dark pixels) onto the ColorWash layer below.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 228 ]
Using layer masks in GIMP
Layer masks are a key feature of pro image software and the main reason we're 
using GIMP. A layer mask is a black-and-white image associated with an image 
layer. Wherever you paint black on the layer mask, you will be able to see through 
the layer. Wherever there is white, you will not be able to see through it. This is 
a nondestructive way of creating "holes" in a layer, where the layer below will 
show through. There's some more information on using layer masks in 
Chapter 9, Postproduction in GIMP.
Using layer masks for the Dennis effect
You're going to use layer masks now to create "holes" in the LinesShadows layer. 
This will allow the painted area to show through from the layers below. You'll be 
able to see how it all works by performing the following steps. Don't worry! 
There is not much to it and you will get to grips with it really quickly.
1.	 Click on the eye icon on the LinesShadows layer to switch it back on.
2.	 Right-click on this layer and select Add Layer Mask.
3.	 Select White: Full Opacity and click on Add.
4.	 Select the mask (the white rectangle that has appeared beside the layer).
5.	 Click on the Paintbrush icon.
6.	 Select a large rough brush. Don't select anything too round or smooth. 
I like the Galaxy, Big brush that comes with GIMP.
7.	 Hold down Ctrl and use the scroll wheel of your mouse to zoom in a little 
on the center of the drawing.
8.	 Quickly and roughly, paint over the most important areas with full opacity. 
Wherever you paint (in black) on the mask layer, the color of the layers 
below it will show through the LinesShadows layer, because the black areas 
on the mask layer are converted to transparent areas of the image layer.
9.	 In the Paintbrush pallet, change the Opacity to around 50 percent.
10.	 Paint in some more areas.
11.	 Reduce it further to 20 percent and paint over any larger areas of color to 
simulate a watercolor wash effect. Go over some areas more than once to 
build up color.
Here's the image so far. It doesn't look great, but then it doesn't have to! You don't 
need a lot of skill for the Dennis Technique. That's why it's so popular.

Chapter 7
[ 229 ]
In the following screenshot, you can see the rough brush strokes I've made to 
produce it. The black areas are the focal point where I used 100-percent opacity. 
In the various shades of gray you can see where I have used the 50-percent or 
20-percent opacity brushes.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 230 ]
Now, I'm feeling the pain with you here. I'm just following the method as I write, 
so you're not getting a dressed-up version. I'm no artist either, just a CAD guy, 
maybe like you are. If I can do it, then you can do it, too.
You've been punching holes in the sketchy black-and-white top layer to allow 
the paint through from the layers below. Doing this quickly tends to give the best 
watercolor sketch effect that we're after. It also saves loads of time. Bear in mind 
that you're not actually deleting anything here. You can simply go back with a white 
brush on the mask layer and reinstate whatever you like, or neaten it up if that's 
what you want. We've also left lots of uncolored areas in there to give the pencil 
sketch feel. If in doubt, look at Dennis' originals earlier in the chapter.
Dennis Nikolaev's tutorial page
True to the generosity he showed back in 2005/2006 when he first 
showed us his "little graphic trick", Dennis has also set up a tutorial on 
sketchucation.com. You can find it at http://sketchucation.
com/resources/tutorials/48-advanced/200-dennis-
technique or search for Dennis Technique in the forum's search box.
Using a sky image in GIMP
The Web is full of stunning sky photos, and you have, no doubt, your own amazing 
holiday shots. Just grab the one you like, and follow these steps to insert it into your 
composition. Or why not just point your camera upwards on a sunny day?
1.	 In GIMP, go to File | Open and select the sky image.
2.	 This will open a new GIMP image window. Working in this has no effect 
on any other image you may be working on, although they share the same 
pallets and option windows.
3.	 Use Image | Scale Image to resize the sky to match your scene's images. 
It doesn't matter if you have to distort the sky a bit; it won't be visible in 
the end.

Chapter 7
[ 231 ]
4.	 Go to Filters | Artistic | Oilify and increase Mask size and Exponent 
until you get an oil-paint effect similar to this:
5.	 Now go to Select | Select All.
6.	 Use Edit | Copy to copy the whole image into your clipboard.
7.	 Switch back to your Dennis window.
8.	 Just in case you're still editing a layer mask, click on any layer icon in 
the layer pallet to deselect the mask.
9.	 Now, select the menu Edit | Paste. The sky image will be copied into 
your composite image as a Floating Selection (Pasted Layer).
10.	 Right-click on this floating selection and select To New Layer from the 
options to convert the floating selection to a proper image layer.
11.	 Change the name from Pasted Layer to Sky Image or similar.
12.	 Move the new layer just below the ColorWash1.png layer in the Layer pallet.
13.	 Select the bottom layer (Background or ColorWash.png), and use the 
Fuzzy Select tool to select the sky area again.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 232 ]
14.	 Go back to the top layer, click on the mask, and roughly paint in some sky as 
you did earlier. The selection you just made will limit all the brush strokes to 
the sky area so you won't be changing your existing building mask.
You inserted a sky image into the main scene and turned it into a layer. This was put 
just below the color wash layer, which had the sky deleted earlier. So, only the sky 
area shows through this layer. You then used the magic wand on the original sky 
area to create a selection to protect other areas of the image from changes.
Creating a vignette layer
The idea of the vignette layer goes back to the early days of photography when the 
artists would blur the edges of the image during the process of developing the print. 
As a composition tool, it helps you focus the eye into the image and take away edge 
distractions. The idea here is to start with a completely white mask and gradually 
reveal only the areas you really need to see. It's very minimalist, but that's what 
sketchy visuals are!
1.	 Create a new layer at the top of the stack and select White as the 
Layer Fill Type.

Chapter 7
[ 233 ]
2.	 Create a layer mask as you did earlier.
3.	 With a large brush and opacity at 20 percent, just reveal the largest extent of 
what you need to see. Leave a good white border around the edges.
4.	 Go over the inner areas you want to highlight again.
5.	 With a 40-percent opacity brush, half the size of the first one, uncover some 
of the focal areas bit by bit—but be sparing.
6.	 Change your brush to a white one with full opacity, and paint out all the 
areas that are irrelevant or distracting.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 234 ]
Modifying the final composition with new 
SketchUp output
My final image is shown here. It's not great, mostly because the textures weren't 
great in the first place, but it is much better than before. Repeating mechanical 
textures, like the ones shown in the following image, look really fake in the Dennis 
Technique. I also don't feel the lines are sketchy enough, and I may have been too 
heavy-handed with the main colored area. So, what can I do about it? Lots!
Using layer masks has allowed you to apply lots of effects to the final image while 
not damaging the underlying layers. So, you can just go in and swap them with some 
better ones! You can also go back to any of the layer masks and reveal more or less 
of each layer, neatening things up as you feel the need. Nothing is ever lost.
Modifying the Dennis Technique
This can be challenging because it's open ended. However, you're up to it. 
So experiment!
1.	 Go back to your SketchUp model and try out another sketchy-lines style. 
Choose a really scruffy one if you can find it, and modify some settings 
yourself, too.

Chapter 7
[ 235 ]
2.	 Re-export this image as a PNG file to use as a new LinesOnly layer.
3.	 In GIMP, insert the layer as you did earlier, and move it next to the original 
one in the Layer pallet, but turn off the old layer using the eye icon. How 
does it look?
4.	 Now, change some colors and textures in SketchUp and export a new 
ColorWash image.
5.	 Replace the ColorWash layer with the new one and reapply the Oilify 
filter or Ripple filter if you want to.
6.	 Modify some of the layer masks, too, and see what you get.
7.	 Save the results of each change as an image and print them next to each 
other. Write notes next to each image so that you can get the effect again 
next time.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 236 ]
Here's my final image, and you can see the layer stack I ended up with in the following 
screenshot. Remember, only the layers with an eye next to them contributed to the 
final image. You can see the original LinesOnly and ColorWash layers, which I have 
switched off. Also, I went for a combination of two pencil styles in the end.

Chapter 7
[ 237 ]
Richard's sketchy pencil technique
By now, you have probably learned all you need to know about creating 
non-photoreal artistic compositions using SketchUp and GIMP. All the skills 
are contained in the Dennis Technique you've just mastered. However, let's look 
at a pencil-only method that takes these techniques still a little further. This method 
relies just as little on artistic judgment and skill, because most of the pencil look is 
created automatically. It's developed from a technique that we named the Richard 
Method because of Richard Jeffrey who first proposed it on the original SketchUp 
forum during the Dennis thread. Here is Richard's wonderful pencil image:
Setting up the Pencil Sketch Technique in 
SketchUp
To prepare for the Pencil Sketch Technique, you have to create scenes and styles 
in SketchUp corresponding to the following images. They can be based on any 
black-and-white sketchy line style from the Styles pallet. 

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 238 ]
All the settings listed below can be modified via the Edit tab on the Styles pallet:
The Heavy Construction Lines style consists of the following:
•	
Large line extensions
•	
Low detail slider
•	
No shadows

Chapter 7
[ 239 ]
The Light Construction Lines style, similar to Heavy Construction Lines 
but with some exceptions:
•	
Higher detail slider
•	
No shadows
These first two styles are created using the Level of Detail slider with high values 
for the Extension option, as you can see in the preceding screenshot.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 240 ]
The Outline style:
•	
Use an unmodified sketchy-lines style
•	
No shadows
The Pencil Shading style:
•	
Select the monochrome face style
•	
Shadows on
•	
Turn edges off

Chapter 7
[ 241 ]
Finally, the Dirty Hands style:
•	
Same as the previous style
•	
Except with sketchy edges switched on
Setting up the Pencil Sketch Technique 
in GIMP
Now that you have set up all the styles, it's time to export the images as you 
did earlier. Then, switch to GIMP and continue with the following steps:
1.	 Open all images as layers in GIMP as you did with the Dennis Technique.
2.	 Select the layer with light construction lines.
3.	 Go to Layer | Transform | Offset.
4.	 Move the layer slightly by a few pixels (see the following screenshot) 
to give the lines a construction-line feel.
5.	 Alternatively, you can use Filters | Distorts | Lense Distortion on 
this layer.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 242 ]
6.	 Arrange the layers, and change the mode and opacity as shown in the 
following screenshot:
In this layer stack, you set up layers to simulate the different pencil marks you 
would expect to see in a pencil drawing:
•	
The Light Construct.png layer simulates the many faint construction 
lines done at the beginning of a sketch. They are offset or distorted slightly 
to give the idea that they were drawn over a second time
•	
The Heavy Construct.png layer is the same, but has fewer lines and a 
heavier line weight (opacity)

Chapter 7
[ 243 ]
Creating pencil shading in GIMP
We will now be working on the outline, pencil shading, and Dirty Hands layers to 
create the final image. So, let's get started on these.
1.	 Select the pencil shading layer (shading.png).
2.	 Select the Select by Color tool from the main tools pallet.
3.	 Set the Threshold option to 1.
4.	 Go to Filters | Blur | Motion blur.
5.	 Set the Length to 10-20 and Angle to however you like it to simulate the 
direction of your pencil strokes.
The content of the layer is blurred in the direction you specified.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 244 ]
6.	 Select the layer in the Layers pallet. Select the move tool and move it back 
approximately within the sketchy lines (use the arrow keys for small steps).
7.	 Select Colors | Brightness-Contrast; then, increase the brightness and 
contrast a little until it looks like pencil shading.
8.	 Set the Layer Mode to Hard light or Grain extract as preferred.
9.	 Now, mask out any areas where you don't want this shading to be, 
like you did in the Dennis method. You can see me doing this here 
to take away the shading from the windows:
Adding some grunge – the Dirty Hands layer
Just as the Dennis technique had a magic step, so does Richard's. The following 
might not seem like much, but it makes all the difference. Master this, and no one 
will be able to tell that it's not genuinely hand drawn.
1.	 Import your Dirty Hands image in GIMP as a layer if you didn't do it with 
the other images.
2.	 Move it to the top of the layer stack and select it.
3.	 Go to Filters | Render | Clouds | Difference Clouds.
4.	 Use the default settings and click on OK.
5.	 Go to Filters | Noise | RGB noise.
6.	 Leave the settings at the default values and click on OK.

Chapter 7
[ 245 ]
7.	 Roughly, mask and erase anywhere you don't want any smudging. 
You can see this in the following screenshot (all the hatched areas are 
masked/erased).
8.	 Set the layer opacity to 15-20.
Finishing touches
Your image is almost complete. The following final steps will add some filtering to 
enhance the appearance of the paper-drawn sketch:
1.	 As with the Dennis Technique, add a vignette layer to finish the composition.
2.	 Save a copy in GIMP's XCF format to allow you to edit it further some other 
time if desired. This format retains all the layers and masks.
3.	 Choose Image | Flatten Image. This will remove the layers and masks, 
and you are left with an image with a single layer.
4.	 Use Filters | Artistic | Apply Canvas to create a paper-grain effect.

Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp
[ 246 ]
5.	 Choose a depth setting to suit your taste. You can see here how the paper-grain 
effect shows the smudged graphite just like when you do it by hand.
6.	 Save this final image as a PNG file. Here's the completed image:

Chapter 7
[ 247 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you have learned all the basics you need to create artistic visual 
styles using GIMP. You have learned how to use layers to build up a composite 
image from SketchUp output and how to use filters to modify SketchUp's native 
styles. You created and edited layer masks to avoid erasing original image data. 
You finally used the Dennis Technique to produce fast sketchy watercolor art and 
the Richard Technique to create eerily realistic pencil art.
These methods will become the staple of your visual output, simply because 
they're quick and easy to achieve, yet the client can be seriously impressed with 
it. These styles are sketchy and loose, ideally suited for presenting early design 
concepts. In the next chapter, you can take your designs further and produce 
photorealistic visuals.


Photorealistic Rendering
In this chapter, you will learn how to render photorealistic architectural visuals with 
SketchUp and Thea Render. You will already be familiar with the basic process from 
Chapter 1, Quick Start Tutorial. This chapter goes into a little more detail, giving you 
the why, as well as the how. This is what we are going to cover in the chapter:
•	
Why you should learn and use an external renderer
•	
What to expect from photorealistic renderings
•	
How to use the Thea for SketchUp plugin
•	
How to insert high-quality 3D entourage into your SketchUp model
•	
How to assign photorealistic materials and advanced lighting
•	
How to create renderings with multiple channels for postprocessing
Why use an external renderer?
If you have followed the chapters in this book so far and also did some exercises 
on your own, you should by now be fairly comfortable with producing artistic 
and convincing presentations. So, you may ask yourself why you should spend 
time and money on learning another rendering program that just shows the same 
thing that SketchUp does.
There are several features that an external renderer (also called a render engine) 
can add to SketchUp. Here is a short overview of computer graphic technologies 
and terms to help you understand the workflows you are about to learn. Perhaps, 
you already know about the points discussed in the following sections and just 
cannot put a name to the various features. In this case, this Computer Graphics 
Primer is a small aid to help you talk the talk.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 250 ]
Geometry
One simple improvement is that pure render engines do offer a much higher limit 
for polygons in a scene than an interactive editor such as SketchUp can handle. 
Therefore, your final image can contain geometry with a much higher level of 
detail than the SketchUp scene you are editing. At the end of this chapter, we will 
introduce proxy components, a way to use simplified components as a placeholder 
for detailed library objects.
Materials
In SketchUp, a material is a combination of color, texture, and transparency. 
The simplest materials only use the color information, and this is often enough 
for illustrations or conceptual drawings. If you want to make objects look realistic, 
you need to add a few more properties that physical materials have. Photorealistic 
renderers, therefore, have more options to define materials and even special material 
types such as opaque and transparent materials.
Most common are the specularity and roughness settings. Specularity defines 
the amount to which highlights from light sources are reflected off a surface. 
A highly specular material will show strong highlights along the edges and 
where a light source is mirrored on a flat surface. Roughness characterizes the 
shape of these highlights: Little or no roughness will give the highlights a sharp 
edge. With increasing roughness, the boundaries of the highlights will become 
more and more blurred.
You have already seen how much the appearance of an object in SketchUp can 
improve by applying an image texture. With Thea, you can reuse the textures you 
have applied in SketchUp and have them transferred identically into the Thea 
rendering. In fact, you need to apply a texture in SketchUp to define the texture 
coordinates that Thea relies on for the mapping. With these coordinates in place, 
you can use other texture-based effects to improve the appearance of the object.
We already mentioned the term bump mapping. This is a method to give a 3D 
surface additional depth and detail by modifying the surface characteristics based on 
an image. It is frequently used to simulate small surface irregularities on a smooth 
surface such as the bumps of an orange skin or in a close-up of a plastered wall. 
For more complex patterns, often the same image as the one used in the image map 
is used for the bump map. The end effect is that a brick wall will look as if there 
were real grooves between the bricks. In the following screenshot, you can see a 
flat texture without bump mapping (in the left-hand side) and the same material 
rendered with a strong bump mapping enabled (in the middle):

Chapter 8
[ 251 ]
Bump mapping is only the illusion of structure on a flat surface. To create real 
geometric details based on images, a technique called Displacement Mapping 
(DM) is used. With DM, the renderer will subdivide a surface into tiny elements 
and then move these up and down a bit based on the image texture. This creates 
real 3D details without the need to model them in SketchUp. You can see an example 
of displacement mapping on the right-hand side in the preceding image. Note the 
displacement at the edge of the surface. Also note that even the surface of the bricks 
is a bit displaced, which causes ragged shadow lines.
Unfortunately, displacement mapping is also very resource intensive to render. 
Use it selectively in your scene and only for surfaces that are close-up, where you 
will be able to see the additional level of detail.
The options mentioned earlier are standard in advanced render engines these 
days and can be applied to opaque materials. A more recent addition is subsurface 
scattering (SSS), which simulates the light scatter close to the surface of translucent 
objects. It is important for a realistic impression of marble or wax, for example. 
Another physical effect of transparent objects is light refraction or caustics. A rippled 
water surface or a ball made of solid glass will cause light passing through it to 
refract and create lighting patterns on the floor.
To account for these phenomena, a sophisticated render engine will provide 
dedicated types of material for transparent and translucent objects. These will 
have more options than the basic opaque type and allow you to control the optical 
effects in the image. To learn more about these properties, consult the manual for 
your render application and visit the material-specific online forums.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 252 ]
Lighting
SketchUp is also very limited in the lighting settings. You can set the time of day 
for shadow calculations, but this does not influence the brightness of the scene or 
produce realistic penumbras. To overcome these limits, advanced renderers use a 
number of algorithms, which are collectively known as global illumination (GI). 
To calculate the lighting, these algorithms consider not only the light directly 
received from light sources, but also the quantity that is reflected off other objects.
Daylight
Natural lighting is especially important for architectural visualization, because 
most of the objects will be displayed under daylight. A good physical sky model 
is necessary to create the right impression of morning or evening light. Renderers 
that have SketchUp plugins typically use the information about the daylight setup 
that you define in the shadow settings. So, you will get the same sun position and 
shadows in your final rendering as in your SketchUp preview.
An alternative method to create a naturally lit environment is image-based 
lighting (IBL). This technique is used in the movie industry to capture the lighting 
environment of a scene to match it later in computer-generated images. The lighting 
is saved in a panoramic high dynamic range (HDR) image. When this image is used 
as a texture for a sky dome, it recreates the lighting environment that was present 
when the image was captured.
To learn more about HDR images (including how to take your own), 
visit http://hdrlabs.com/news/index.php. In their Galleries 
section, you can also find a nice selection of HDR images for testing.
Artificial lighting
An option to create artificial light sources for architectural lighting is also not 
available in SketchUp. Commonly used are point lights with an omnidirectional 
distribution and spotlights that limit their output to an opening angle. Both types 
are usually only logical points in space and are not represented by any geometry. 
To work with them in SketchUp, some kind of placeholder geometry is necessary.

Chapter 8
[ 253 ]
Large luminous surfaces, such as a fluorescent tube, can be created with an area light 
type or a special emitter material property that can be applied to a surface. For light 
fittings with complex light distribution, some renderers have the option to apply 
an IES file to a light source. IES is short for IESNA LM-63, a file format defined by 
the Illumination Engineering Society to represent the distribution of physical light 
fittings in lighting analysis and rendering applications. In exterior scenes, a few 
well-placed point lights and spotlights can achieve a big effect. The appearance of 
interiors can benefit from the added accuracy provided by IES distribution files.
More information on IES files is available at 
www.helios32.com/resources.htm#Formats.
Advanced features
In addition to the ones mentioned earlier, professional rendering applications 
will provide a number of other features that are useful for a productive workflow 
and data interchange with other applications. An important aspect is the 
preservation of additional image information from the rendering process. 
Commonly used in postprocessing are depth and transparency information. 
Both can be saved and exported as a grayscale image and hence, transferred 
into an image-editing application.
You can see that there is much to be gained from using an external rendering engine, 
and the results are well worth the effort to follow the rest of this chapter.
Setting up for photoreal rendering
After this overview of computer graphic technologies, it is now time to look 
at the Thea user interface before we start exploring the features in a test scene. 
For this chapter, you need Thea Render and the Thea for SketchUp plugin installed 
(the free demo version will do for testing). As a licensed user you can also 
download sample materials from the Resources section of the website 
(http://www.thearender.com/) and have access to the Materials & Texture 
forum where other users exchange and discuss their own materials. Check the 
download and installation instructions in Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, if you 
don't have it already on your system.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 254 ]
Rendering process
The following are the steps of the SketchUp and Thea rendering process. 
This process will work for other renderers, too, and is a good way of structuring 
your workflow, because you achieve great results in little time. For example, why 
find out a material hasn't mapped at the right scale only after an hour-long render? 
With the following process, you will find that out in a few minutes with a quick 
test render.
•	
Step 1: Preparing the SketchUp model
•	
Step 2: Performing an initial test render
•	
Step 3: Assigning materials
•	
Step 4: Defining lighting
•	
Step 5: Inserting extra entourage
•	
Step 6: Production rendering
•	
Step 7: Postproduction rendering
We are going to look at each of these steps in detail using a small test room 
and an atrium scene. The test room is a variation of the famous Cornell Box, 
a well-established test setup to evaluate rendering algorithms. You can also 
use any scene that you have set up yourself in SketchUp.
Thea for SketchUp interface
The main interface for working with Thea in SketchUp is the Thea for SketchUp 
plugin. The plugin gives you access to all features that are necessary to set up and 
render a scene out of SketchUp. This is beneficial for a quick workflow, because you 
don't have to switch between SketchUp and the Thea Studio application during the 
setup of your scene.
The Thea plugin is accessible by navigating to Plugins | Thea Render. It is split 
into two main windows: the Thea Tool window and the Thea Rendering Window. 
There is also a toolbar with two buttons to enable each of these windows.
The Thea Tool window
We will use the buttons and controls of the tool window to set up the camera options 
and add materials and other elements that will be specially treated during the export 
(such as lights). The window is structured in four panels (or tabs) that you can see in 
the following image:

Chapter 8
[ 255 ]
When the Thea Tool is active, you will also see a red frame displayed in the 
SketchUp 3D window that shows the field of view for the current Thea camera. 
This either frames the area that will be rendered or indicates that the camera 
view is wider than the SketchUp window via arrows to the left and right.
You will also notice that the SketchUp cursor changes when you have the Thea Tool 
window open. Depending on the current tool in use, there are a number of different 
cursor shapes. The default is a small cross and is used to select SketchUp materials 
for the material assignment.
The Thea Rendering Window
The main window is the place where you can set up, control, and view the rendering 
process itself. The window has a large area at the top where the rendered image is 
displayed. Below is a row of buttons to save and refresh rendered images and to 
start, pause, and stop the current render. 

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 256 ]
You can see a screenshot of the rendering window with an open scene in the 
following image:
At the bottom of the window, you will find the control elements for the rendering 
and display of images and the advanced scene options. This section is organized in 
tabs, and we will discuss the contents of the relevant tabs in the following sections.

Chapter 8
[ 257 ]
Step 1 – Preparing the SketchUp model
To follow the steps in the book, you can download the Cornell Box SketchUp 
file from www.packtpub.com/support. In this demo scene, the model is already 
prepared for 3D rendering, and there are scenes set up to follow the steps below. 
If you imported our test box from the 3D Warehouse (search for Cornell Box) 
or used your own SketchUp model, you should do some preparations before 
you can start rendering:
1.	 Create a copy of your SketchUp file just for rendering. You will create new 
scenes and content dedicated to the rendering process, and you can save 
all this in a dedicated SketchUp file.
2.	 Remove unused content. Check the model for hidden geometry, unused 
and obsolete scene tabs and layers, and especially materials. Purge the 
material list.
3.	 Identify the important materials in the scene, especially those that are 
used for windows and nearby large objects.
4.	 Double-check the orientation of surfaces that you want to convert to 
emitting surfaces or to which you want to apply a displacement map.
5.	 Create and save important camera viewpoints in scene tabs.
Step 2 – Performing an initial test render
You are now going to do a test render to see how the model looks like when 
rendered in another renderer. You can use this first test to identify areas that 
need more modeling or parts where you should add textures to make them 
more interesting.
1.	 In SketchUp, select the view you want to render. If you use the Cornell scene 
from the Packt Publishing website, select the Step 2 scene . If you imported 
the Cornell box from the 3D Warehouse, select one side of the box and hide it 
so that you can see the objects inside.
2.	 Open the Thea Tool window by navigating to Plugins | Thea Render | 
Thea Tool.
3.	 Check that the resolution on the camera tab is set to 800 x 600 pixels, and the 
aspect ratio is set to 4:3. These are the defaults.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 258 ]
4.	 Open the Thea render window by navigating to Plugins | Thea Render | 
Thea Rendering Window.
5.	 In the settings area of the Thea window, select Adaptive (BSD) as the render 
mode. Then, check that the Preset selection is set to 00. Exterior Preview.
6.	 Click on the Start button.
Your scene will render, and you should see the progress in the image area of the 
window. The rendering should complete in less than a minute (depending on your 
computer performance, of course). The final image will look something like the 
following image:

Chapter 8
[ 259 ]
Review the rendered image, and pay attention to the following aspects:
•	
Check that all the textures are in place correctly. Make a note of where 
the textures are missing or distorted. (Note that there are no textures 
in our scene yet.)
•	
Look out for the quality of the geometry details, especially on rounded 
corners and smooth surfaces such as the teapot and sphere in our scene.
•	
Search for areas in the image that look unnaturally "empty". You should 
consider adding further geometry or a surface texture to make these areas 
more visually interesting.
•	
Also, look at the distribution of the objects in your scene. Remember that 
this is a 2D representation of your room that should look well balanced 
without the knowledge of the 3D model behind it.
If you have found any issues with your scene, you should now go back into 
SketchUp and make some corrections. This is the export-check loop, which you 
may have to repeat a few times. The more you get used to SketchUp and your 
rendering application, the less you will need to do this. However, for now, 
there is a lot to learn by performing this exercise, so the time is well spent.
Common import bugs and how to rectify them
The most common import bugs will be seen here at this first stage. Textures do 
not always scale or map correctly. This is the case with many rendering apps. 
The following table shows some common problems, likely causes of the problem, 
and how to deal with them:
Problem
Usually happens when…
Solution
Textures appear 
skewed or incorrectly 
scaled in a few isolated 
places.
You've stretched photos 
over a surface using 
the texture features in 
SketchUp.
In SketchUp, select the face, 
then right-click on the face 
and select Make Unique 
Texture.
The image is 
completely dark.
You may not have exported 
the sun from SketchUp, and 
there are no other lights in 
the scene.
In SketchUp, ensure that the 
Shadows setting is on. In 
the Environment tab in the 
Thea main window, verify 
that Use Sun and Use Sky 
are both checked.
The scene renders 
completely blank.
There may be a face in 
the way of the camera 
that didn't show up in the 
SketchUp view.
In SketchUp, remove or hide 
the face that could be in the 
way, or change the view just 
for the test render.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 260 ]
Clay rendering
Our small test scene does not offer much variety and detail that you need to look out 
for. Check out the following image for a test rendering of a fully modeled building. 
This scene was the winning entry for the SketchUp Design Your Dwelling competition 
in 2012 by Drew Wilgus. It has been downloaded from the 3D Warehouse, and no 
further modifications have been done for the render. You can get it by searching for 
Crissy Airfield House in the 3D Warehouse.
The image is a composite of a normal rendering (on the left-hand side) and a clay 
render (on the right-hand side). This is a special render setting where all material 
colors are ignored, and you can see only the 3D geometry. This helps you check 
your lighting setup, identify the detailing of the model and to decide if you need 
to add more of it or can do the rest with textures.
You just exported your 3D scene from SketchUp, imported it into Thea, and created 
an image from the scene—all with one click. It came in with the light set up exactly as 
it was in SketchUp. You performed a test render with basic settings and small image 
size to show up the errors in texture import and the overall appearance of the scene. 
These settings ensured fast render times for a quick evaluation of what we need to see.
You will have noticed that the lighting in our Cornell box scene is not great, and 
most of the scene is in shadow. This is because we used a daylight environment to 
render our scene, which is essentially an interior room. We will correct this in the 
next step when we assign Thea materials to the surfaces.

Chapter 8
[ 261 ]
Step 3 – Assigning materials
You have seen earlier that Thea will use and import SketchUp colors and texture 
images in the test renders. Luckily, most outdoor materials have a matte appearance 
that can be well represented with the default material properties. So, all you need to 
do to achieve a realistic rendering is to tweak the materials that are already set up 
from SketchUp.
For indoor scenes, you will want to replace most of the materials with special optical 
characteristics that are not available in SketchUp. These are:
•	
Transparent Materials: These include windows, solid glass objects, 
and clear liquids. Windows and water surfaces are the most common 
in architectural renderings.
•	
Translucent Materials: These include frosted glass and some natural stone 
such as marble. They also include thin fabrics and liquids such as milk. 
You will find these materials mostly in interior scenes.
•	
Polished Metals: These include chrome, gold, silver, stainless steel, 
copper and so on. Metals do reflect light in a different way due to 
their surface structure, so we need a special material class for them.
•	
Specular materials: These include many types of shiny or glossy plastic, 
materials with coatings, and lacquered and varnished surfaces.
•	
Light emitting objects: These special type is used to represent bright 
and illuminated objects like a pendent light or a TV screen.
Thea has presets for the above material types, so assigning a suitable advanced 
material is straightforward in most cases.
Applying predefined materials
You have already set up your scene with some lighting, SketchUp colors, 
and texturing. It is now time to make the best of Thea's material libraries 
in your scene. Let's have a go at this using a metallic material for the teapot.
1.	 Make sure the Thea Tool window is open. You should see the frame 
indicating the camera window in your SketchUp window.
2.	 Click on the Material tab in the Thea Tool window.
3.	 Note that the cursor has changed to a crosshair with the Thea logo 
attached to it (unfortunately, this has not been shown in our screenshots).

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 262 ]
4.	 Click on the teapot (just a single click!).
5.	 See how the drop-down menu in the Material tab has changed to display 
the teapot material. At the moment, the preview window is empty, and 
the material type selector below is set to Default.
6.	 Change the material type to Colored Metal.

Chapter 8
[ 263 ]
7.	 At the bottom of the panel, click on the Edit in Mat-Lab button. The Thea 
Material Lab window opens. You can see the appearance of the material in 
the Preview panel. This is a combination of the basic colored metal and the 
color you gave the object in SketchUp.
8.	 If you want to change the material and use a predefined material 
from the Thea library, use the browser on the left-hand side to locate 
a suitable material. We will use the standard material Metals | Copper Deco.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 264 ]
9.	 Just drag the material icon of your choice from the browser into the preview 
window. The preview will update to show a view of the selected material.
10.	 Finally, click on the icon called Accept on the left-hand side of the window to 
apply the Thea material to the SketchUp material. This change will apply to 
all objects that use the same material in the scene.
11.	 The Material Lab window closes, and you can see the preview image in the 
Thea Tool window now.
You can go through the other materials like this. Keep in mind that complex 
materials with displacement mapping and so on will increase the render time. 
To check how your scene is getting along, do a quick test render as explained in 
step 2. We assume that the walls of our box are standard rough materials, so there 
is no need to refine these. To complete our settings, we just assign the Thick Glass 
type to the material sphere and the Plastic type to the material cube. Feel free to 
adjust the Reflectivity of the plastic material to give it a bit more sparkle.
When exporting plain colored materials from SketchUp, texturing 
coordinates (also called UV-coordinates) are not exported. So, when 
you come to map a new material onto this color, the texture scale will 
be wrong. To solve this, apply a texture-based material in SketchUp 
(any will do, as long as it uses a texture image rather than a simple 
color) before you apply the textured material in Thea.
Light-emitting materials
So far, we are still using the sun to illuminate your scene through a missing wall. 
What we need is a light source, and Thea's Emitter material can provide just that.
1.	 Select the area light material (either via the drop-down or by clicking on 
the small square at the ceiling in the SketchUp scene).
2.	 Select the Emitter material type.
3.	 The options for the Emitter material type will show in the lower half of 
the window.

Chapter 8
[ 265 ]
4.	 Set the Power setting to 5000.0 and Lumens. This is a very crude 
approximation for the light output you can get from a ceiling light like ours.
5.	 The other options can keep their default value. Just make sure that the 
Passive option remains unchecked or the emitter will not illuminate our 
scene. Also, keep the Visible option checked for this scene.
We have now placed a light source in our scene to illuminate the objects from the 
ceiling. Let's adjust our render settings to make use of this new light.
1.	 In the Thea Main window, select the Environment tab.
2.	 In the Environment section, disable Use Sun and Use Sky.
3.	 Switch to the Rendering tab, and set the render presets to 10. Interior Preview.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 266 ]
4.	 Start the render again. When the render is finished, you will see a dark image 
with only the ceiling light clearly visible.
5.	 Switch to the Display tab.
6.	 Adjust the settings to the following values:
°°
ISO: 1600
°°
Shutter: 60
°°
f-number: 2.8
The objects should now be clearly visible again. If you used a different scene, you 
may have to adjust the values until your image is bright enough to see.

Chapter 8
[ 267 ]
One-sided materials
If you look closely at the image and the reflection in the teapot, you will find that there 
is still a black hole where the front wall of the box should be. Remember that we hid 
the wall to be able to look into the cube. To solve this issue, you can make materials 
invisible from one side to look through a wall while it is still present in the scene.
1.	 Select the Step 3 scene in the SketchUp example file for this chapter (only if 
you downloaded it from www.packtpub.com/support). This will unhide the 
missing wall and set up a section plane so that you can look into the scene.
2.	 Select the front material in the Thea Tool window. This is applied to the 
inside of the camera-facing wall of the box. We can use the Default material 
like we did for the other walls, so there is no need to select another type.
3.	 Click on the Edit in Mat-Lab button.
4.	 In the Material Lab window, select the General icon in the panel below 
the Preview panel. In the panel at the bottom of the stack, you will now see 
the General options of the material, as shown in the following screenshot:

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 268 ]
5.	 Uncheck the Two-Sided option.
6.	 Click on Accept to accept the changes to the material and return to SketchUp.
Importing Thea materials to SketchUp
You may have noticed during your tests that Thea materials that rely on textures 
do not apply with the right scale to surfaces that do not have a texture on them in 
SketchUp. This is because the necessary UV-texture coordinates are missing on the 
surface. UV coordinates are used to map a bitmap image onto a 3D surface. To create 
these, you need to apply a textured material in SketchUp. You could choose any 
material and just replace it with the Thea material, but this would not give you a 
correct preview of the scale and rotation of the texture in SketchUp.
To generate a suitable textured material in SketchUp, you can import materials 
from Thea.
1.	 In the Thea Tool window, select the Tools tab.
2.	 Press the Convert Thea material(s) to SKM button.
3.	 A file browser will open in the Thea Materials data folder. Browse to the 
material you want to convert. We will use the Materials/Floors and 
Tiles/Ceramic Tiles Lime.mat.thea file.
4.	 Click on the Open button, and a new file browser will open up, asking you 
for the directory to save the converted material as a SketchUp *.skm file. 
You only need to give the directory path, as the filename will be taken 
from the *.mat.thea file.
5.	 Choose the folder and confirm with the Select Folder button. 
A new SketchUp material will be created.
6.	 Apply the new material to a surface.
7.	 Adjust the scale and orientation of the material by right-clicking 
and selecting Texture | Position.
SketchUp textures have a default size. High-resolution texture images, such as 
those available at www.thearender.com, will need to be scaled in SketchUp to 
have the correct size. On the other side, you don't have to manually assign a Thea 
material, because the correct material will be selected based on the material's name.

Chapter 8
[ 269 ]
With a translated material applied to the floor, your rendering should now look like 
the following image:
Summary on materials
For most outdoor scenes, the only materials you will need to change are the 
windows, water, and metals. The rest of the time, the colors and textures you 
set up in SketchUp will render fine just as they are. This is because most outdoor 
materials are matt, not shiny or reflective.
This is just about all you need to know to get great-looking architectural 
visualizations using SketchUp with Thea. You will use Thea (or any external 
renderer) simply to create more realistic light, shadows, and reflections, where 
SketchUp can't do this. If you have started from the beginning of the book and 
worked through, you have now learned 90 percent of what you need to create 
great photoreal renders.
Step 4 – Defining lighting
In this step, we will introduce light sources into the scene to create a pleasing and 
balanced lighting environment for the space.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 270 ]
Preparing the test scene
To have a larger space to play with, we will use an atrium scene for this setup. 
Again, you can download the SketchUp file from the book's website or search 
for ACME Gold in the 3D Warehouse.
1.	 Start SketchUp with an empty scene and delete the default 2D person.
2.	 Import the ACME Gold atrium building from the 3D Warehouse and 
place it at the origin.
3.	 Rotate the building by 90 degrees counterclockwise to align it with 
the y axis and have the glazed atrium point towards North. This will 
give us better shadows for daytime studies.
4.	 Place the camera inside on the second floor level. Use the western corridor 
because the eastern side is more detailed.
5.	 Remove the blue tint from the SketchUp material for the atrium windows 
and set the Thea material to Thin Glass in the Thea Tool window.
6.	 Feel free to apply Thea materials to the materials used in this scene. 
You should also create a new material to separate the material for the 
glass balustrades from the window material.
7.	 You should set the geolocation on your scene to somewhere on the northern 
hemisphere, where you can get low sun angles during winter and high 
sun angles during summer. (We will use the location Halle in Germany 
to prepare for our IBL section, later in this chapter. You can see the setup 
so far in the following screenshot.)

Chapter 8
[ 271 ]
Using daylight
The easy-to-use light sources in Thea are the physical sun and sky that are created 
from the shadow settings in SketchUp. We will start our lighting studies with these 
daylight settings.
Testing the sun and sky with clay render
We will use the clay render setting introduced in step 2 to do our lighting tests. 
With a clay render, we can focus on the light alone without being distracted by 
other issues. As the model will have a light-grey, matt surface, you will be able 
to see exactly where and how strongly, the light is falling. It will also speed up 
the render significantly by having only simple materials ("clay") to render.
1.	 Enable Shadows in SketchUp and adjust the daytime settings to create an 
interesting shadow on the wall.
2.	 In the Thea Tools window, set the camera resolution to something like 
800 px and the aspect ratio to match your scene. We will use 16 x 9 to get 
a nice wide view.
3.	 Open the Thea Rendering Window and choose the Rendering tab.
4.	 Set the render mode to Adaptive (BSD). Now, you will see the detailed 
Adaptive (BSD) Settings in the central panel.
5.	 Use a preview preset for this render. Although we are inside, 
we choose 00. Exterior Preview, because we have a large atrium 
that is almost like an outside space.
6.	 Check the Clay Render option below the presets.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 272 ]
7.	 Start the rendering process.
Your image should be finished in a few moments. This clay render allows 
you to see how the light and shadows are distributed in the space.
For the preceding image, you chose the Clay Render preset, which converted all the 
basic materials to a matt grey. This is very render-efficient, because the render engine 
does not have to calculate reflection or highlights. Thea keeps the transparency of 
glass during clay rendering, so you assigned a glass material to the atrium windows 
before the render. Other renderers might convert even glass to an opaque gray. 
In this case, you have to temporarily hide the windows for a clay render.

Chapter 8
[ 273 ]
You can now make changes to the time of day and date back in the SketchUp 
shadow settings. This will alter the sun angle and shadows in the scene. Use the 
SketchUp shadows as a preview for what you will get from a Thea rendering. If you 
feel that the amount of light needs adjusting, you can also alter the exposure in the 
image by going to Thea Rendering Window and selecting the Display tab.
Adjusting the daylight settings in Thea
When you change the time of day or season for your shadow settings, you will notice 
that not only the position of the shadows changes but also the total amount of light 
in the scene. Thea has a sophisticated method to calculate the intensity of the sky 
and sun based on the sun's position in the sky and your scene's location on the 
globe. This will give you a very natural daylight environment for your scene.
Sometimes, you may wish for a more emotional setting, though. For these special 
requirements, you can manually set the properties of the sun and sky in the 
Thea Rendering window.
1.	 Open the Thea Rendering window and select the Environment tab.
2.	 In the Environment panel to the left, select to edit settings for the sun.
3.	 The central panel will now show the Manual Sun option. The values in the 
text boxes are linked to the SketchUp shadow settings. When you change the 
time of day in SketchUp, you can see the values for the sun angle and power 
update in the Thea window.
4.	 Check the box next to Enable to allow manual overrides of the 
calculated values.
5.	 Change the Emmitance from Default to Color. A color selector will 
appear next to it.
6.	 Click on the selector button and pick a light-orange color in the SketchUp 
color selector.
7.	 Enable the Soft shadow setting and set the radius to a value between 50-150 
meters. The lower the value, the more blurry the shadow edges will be.
With these settings, you should get a dramatic sunset image like the following 
image, although the shadows are still correct for the middle of the day. Note that any 
coloring you introduce through the use of colored light sources can't be undone by 
postprocessing. 

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 274 ]
If you want to keep your options open, you should only use white light sources 
during the rendering and use postprocessing to add color tints.
You can also manually adjust the sky settings in a similar way, but the values used 
to configure the appearance of the sky are much more technical and require a good 
amount of knowledge to be used effectively. Luckily, there is a better way to add an 
impressive sky to our scene, as we will see in the next section.
Image-based lighting
We already introduced Image-based lighting (IBL) in our technology overview. 
It is now time to put this technique to practice. In particular, we will use a process 
called Smart IBL, which uses optimized images to reduce render times.
To learn more about Smart IBL (sIBL), you can visit 
www.hdrlabs.com/sibl/index.html.

Chapter 8
[ 275 ]
For our tests, you need to download one or more HDR images from 
http://www.hdrlabs.com/sibl/archive.html. We will use the Stadium 
Center image by Christian Bloch in our example, because it does match the 
size of our building.
1.	 Download the zip archive for your image and extract it on your 
hard drive. You should find several files in the archive, among which 
are the following:
°°
Stadium_Center_3k.hdr (large file, high-resolution HDR)
°°
Stadium_Center_8k.jpg (large file, very high-resolution JPEG)
°°
Stadium_Center_Env.hdr (small file, low-resolution HDR)
2.	 Open the Thea Rendering window with the Environment tab.
3.	 Select IBL from the Edit settings drop-down menu in the Environment 
panel. The center panel will show a list with four checkbox options and 
a file browser.
4.	 Select the first option in the list called Illumination. Note that the 
Use Sky option on the left-hand side is disabled when you use this option.
5.	 Use the file browser to select the low-resolution Stadium_Center_Env.hdr 
file.
6.	 Click on the round Environment Preview button next to the Edit settings 
menu in the Environment panel on the left-hand side. A pop-up window 
will come up that shows the HDR image mapped to the sky dome.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 276 ]
7.	 You will see your current sun's location overlaid as a yellow dot on top of 
the image. In the HDR, the brightest area indicates the sun. Use the Rotation 
setting to roughly align the image with the sun in our scene. We have to 
rotate our image by 180 degrees to align it with the real sun.
8.	 You can do finer adjustments by tuning the time of day and date in the 
SketchUp shadow settings.
9.	 Enable the Background option and select the Stadium_Center_8k.jpg 
image. Apply the same rotation to this image as you did earlier.
10.	 Enable the Reflection option and select the Stadium_Center_3k.hdr image. 
Again, use the same rotation angle. (For this scene, the reflection map is in 
fact optional, but it is a good practice to include it in your IBL setup).
11.	 You can enable the Refraction option as well using the Stadium_Center_3k.
hdr image, but in our scene, this will have little effect.
12.	 With all the images in place, you can now start a new test render. 
You can also disable the clay render option to see how your material 
will look like in the new light.

Chapter 8
[ 277 ]
How Smart IBL works
The images you selected for your various options have a dedicated purpose. 
The lighting in the scene is provided by the low-resolution HDR image. As it 
provides ambient lighting, it does not have to be very accurate. However, this 
low-resolution image would not look good as the background for our scene, 
so we use a very high-resolution JPEG image instead. You can see the clouds 
through the atrium windows. In scenes where you can see the surroundings, 
the added details of the large image are important.
Finally, we also set up a reflection (and refraction) map using another HDR file. 
It is more important for reflections to be precise, so we use a medium resolution 
image for this.
On top of all this, we still keep the sun from our daylight settings to produce clearly 
defined shadows. The low-resolution environment image would not be suitable for 
this. To match the orientation of the image with our sun settings, we had to adjust 
the rotation of all our IBL images.
Saving the sky settings
You have spent quite some time on setting up your lighting. It would be a shame to 
have to do it all over again the next time you want to render an image. In the Thea 
Tool window, you can find an option to save all your scene settings that are not 
stored with any SketchUp objects.
1.	 Open the Thea Tool window and select the Camera tab.
2.	 At the bottom of the window, you can see the Scene Settings panel.
3.	 When you want to save your settings, just hit the Save button, and the options 
you used to render your image will be stored with the SketchUp scene.
4.	 To load the settings, first select the scene in the drop-down menu and then 
click on the Load button. The settings are not updated automatically when 
you change the scene.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 278 ]
Create new scenes for your render settings in SketchUp; 
then save and reopen the SketchUp file. The Thea Tool 
window does not update the list of available scenes 
automatically when you add a new scene in SketchUp.
Artificial lighting
As you have seen, you can get a really nice render using SketchUp's sun and 
sky settings without changing much in Thea. SketchUp passes all the necessary 
environment info on to Thea. However, what about the indoor scenes with artificial 
lighting? We are going to take the same scene and add some components in 
SketchUp that are exported as light sources to Thea.
Creating Spotlights in SketchUp
You will be using SketchUp to set up and edit the lights. Thea lights are treated in 
SketchUp like any other component. They do have a bit of extra information, but 
this is only important for the exporter plugin. You can use all the usual tools such 
as the Move tool to move a copy to set up the lights in your scene. You can also hide 
all unnecessary geometry to help you place the lights more easily.
1.	 Open your scene in SketchUp. You can use a new file just for the artificial 
lighting setup.
2.	 Open the Thea Tool menu and select the Light tab.
3.	 At the bottom of the window, there are three buttons to create a point light, 
spotlight or an IES light. Click on the Spotlight button to create a new light 
in the scene.
4.	 Pick the point in the scene where the light should go. The actual light will be 
a bit offset from the point, so you can click directly on a surface.
5.	 Move the cursor down along the blue axis. This defines the direction of the 
spot light and its initial intensity. If you move further down, the light will 
be brighter.
6.	 You can insert more than one light using the spotlight tool. Every time you 
place a new spotlight, a new component definition will be created.
7.	 Alternatively, use the SketchUp copy and paste function to make a copy 
of the existing spotlight. Copies made in SketchUp will share the same 
definition, so any change made to one copy will apply to all instances.

Chapter 8
[ 279 ]
In the following image, you can see two spotlights placed under a stair landing. 
Note the small lines used to mark the middle of the beams. These were used to 
place the component in the scene.
You set up a spotlight in SketchUp with default settings. You then moved the cursor 
down along the blue axis to show the spotlight where to point. The further you move 
the cursor before you click, the greater the light power.
Rendering artificial light
Notice that the sun and sky still are present in the scene, and these still need to be 
"switched off" for the rendering. Do this now as follows:
1.	 Open the Thea Rendering window and select the Environment tab.
2.	 In the Environment panel, uncheck both Use Sky and Use Sun.
3.	 If you have any IBL settings left from previous experiments, uncheck 
these options, too.
4.	 Select the Display tab.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 280 ]
5.	 Set the values in the left column to the following:
°°
ISO: 1600 or 3200
°°
Shutter: 125 or 60
°°
f-number: 2.8
These values set the characteristics of a virtual camera and film to calculate 
the brightness of the rendered image, based on the available light sources. 
They can also be adjusted after the rendering.
6.	 Select the Rendering tab.
7.	 Keep the render mode at Adaptive (BSD) and set the preset option to 10. 
Interior Preview.
8.	 If you have many materials in the scene, you should also set the option 
to create a clay render.
You should get an image like the one shown above. There are two lights present in 
this scene, and no light is coming from the sun or the sky. That's why we changed 
the rendering preset from exterior to interior, because all the light in the scene will 
come from within. The clay render will again help you focus on a balanced light 
distribution while you are positioning lights in your scene.

Chapter 8
[ 281 ]
Changing the light parameters
If you notice that your lights are too dark or too bright, you can change their settings 
in SketchUp using the Thea tool.
1.	 Back in SketchUp, open the Thea Tool window on the Light tab.
2.	 Hover over one of the spotlight components in the scene and check the 
status bar and tooltip.
3.	 Click on the spotlight. The Thea Tool window will change to show 
the settings specific to this spotlight's definition. Remember that the 
settings may be shared by other instances in your scene.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 282 ]
4.	 Under Emmitance, you will find the Power option. Increase or decrease this 
value according to your needs.
5.	 You can change the Attenuation option, but a physically correct light will 
obey the Inverse Square law. You should have no need to change this.
6.	 The spotlight type also has specific options available in the Spot light 
options panel. They are as follows:
°°
Hot Spot is the area under the spotlight where the core of the light 
beam is going to be. This value should always be smaller than the 
Fall Off value.
°°
Fall Off indicates the angle to which the light will gradually 
diminish. A larger value for the Fall Off will produce a wider fade 
from the core beam.
7.	 You now have a basic idea of the light power you need. Use the preceding 
options to set up a spotlight suitable for your needs.
8.	 Copy this light throughout your scene wherever you need lights with 
identical settings (for example, the downlights along the wall). The copies 
will share a common set of options and change all at once whenever you 
modify one of the instances.
When you are done with your setup, rerender your scene. In the following image, 
you can see the scene with the same spotlight copied multiple times and adjusted 
as necessary:

Chapter 8
[ 283 ]
Creating a virtual light switch
Create new layers in SketchUp and assign the individual groups 
of spotlights to these layers. Using the layer visibility, you can 
now switch the groups of lights on and off.
Point lights
Point lights can be set up in the same way as spotlights, except that they don't have 
direction, hotspot and falloff settings. They are useful where you need a bit of diffuse 
lighting that illuminates the whole room. Try adding some more lights in SketchUp, 
both spotlights and point lights, and altering the settings in SketchUp. Do a test 
render to see what effect these settings have. This is the best way to learn, remember, 
and get a feel of the light settings that are required in a particular scene.
Adding light-emitting materials
To finish off the lighting in this scene, we need some larger ceiling lights. In order to 
simulate this, you're going to create some simple rectangles in SketchUp and set up 
a light-emitting material in Thea. We have already discussed light emitting materials 
in step 3.
1.	 In SketchUp, draw a rectangle where you want a ceiling light. Make it 
approximately 1200 mm long and 200-300 mm wide to keep it within the 
industry's standard dimensions. 
2.	 Make sure that the bright (front) face is facing down.
3.	 Create a new SketchUp material and apply it to the rectangle.
4.	 Make a component of the rectangle and copy it to several locations near 
the ceiling.
5.	 Using the Materials tab from the Thea Tool window, assign the 
Emitter type to this material and set its output to 10000-20000 lumens 
(you have to experiment a bit to find the correct value for your scene).
6.	 Hide all the other lights. This is best done with a layer dedicated to lighting.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 284 ]
7.	 Now, create a Clay Render like the following one. It should show only the 
ceiling lights.
You have disabled all the spotlights so that you could check the level of lighting 
from the rectangular overhead lights. You changed the material so that the rectangles 
act as light-emitting materials. Notice how uniformly the light is spread from a large 
rectangular light source, just as you would have from normal strip lights.
You can now enable all the other lights you disabled earlier and do a final clay 
render again with all the lights on.
The final indoor render
You are now ready to render a preview image and the final image of your artificially 
lit indoor scene. As the scene is complex with many light sources and reflective 
materials, we are going to use the Unbiased (TR1) render mode. There are no 
options for this render mode, so all you need to do is select your image resolution 
via the Thea Tool window and hit the Start button.

Chapter 8
[ 285 ]
The following image is the final image that we get after about 50 passes. It's now 
ready to go on to postprocessing in GIMP. This is the subject of the next chapter.
Step 5 – Inserting extra entourage
More and more 3D content is now being produced or converted into the .skp 
format. So, you might already have downloaded and inserted everything you need 
for your scene directly in SketchUp. However, sometimes, you want to insert your 
3D entourage models only into the rendering application and not into SketchUp, 
especially if you are dealing with high-poly models.
The Thea Browser provides a feature that allows you to add high-poly 3D 
content from your Thea library into a SketchUp scene without using up resources. 
To follow these steps, you need some 3D objects installed in your Thea library. 
You can get some free sample content from http://www.thearender.com/cms/
index.php/resources/free-samples.html.
1.	 Open the Thea Browser by navigating to Thea Render | Thea Browser.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 286 ]
2.	 A file browser will open in the Thea data folder. Navigate to Thea folders | 
Models | Free Samples | Sample Xfrog Library (or another location 
with your 3D library files). You can see the open browser window in the 
following image:
3.	 To select a model from your Thea library, double-click on its image on the 
right-hand side of the browser. In our example, we use a tree model with 
the name, Peach Tree 3.5m.mod.thea.
4.	 You can now place a component instance in our model. This instance will 
represent the tree in the SketchUp scene. The components are only displayed 
as wireframe boxes, so they don't take many resources to draw.

Chapter 8
[ 287 ]
This is a good way to insert high-quality 3D entourage such as plants into a scene. 
You can easily create dozens of tree instances without slowing down the SketchUp 
interaction. When the SketchUp scene is exported to Thea, each instance will be 
replaced with the library model, which can have a few million polygons each. 
You can even scale the components in your scene, and the 3D model in Thea will 
be resized accordingly.
To create a more detailed representation of your Thea model in the 
scene, you can save a SketchUp file with the same name as the Thea 
library file in the same folder (in our example, this would be Peach 
Tree 3.5m.mod.skp). Now, when you select the Thea file in the 
browser, the .skp file will be loaded as a component instance into 
the scene. You can add as much detail to the .skp file as you need 
to get a good representation of the 3D model.
In older versions of the plugin (before v1.3), you will find this feature in the 
Thea Tool window on the Tools tab under External model. You don't have 
a visual browser, though.
Step 6 – Production rendering
Before you start your long running final rendering process, you should do a test 
render to see what you will get from hours of rendering. You should do a test 
rendering for each new scene that shows a new part of your model or contains 
proxy components that are not well represented in the SketchUp 3D scene window.
Test production render
You are ready to do a "dress rehearsal" of your final render just to smooth out any 
other issues and make final changes. This will be a version of your final render, but 
at a lower resolution and with lower quality settings.
If you have created a dedicated file for your daylighting scene, open this now:
1.	 Open the Thea Tool window and check that the camera resolution is 
still set to 800px.
2.	 Select the correct aspect ratio for your scene.
3.	 Open the Thea Rendering Window and select the Rendering tab.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 288 ]
4.	 Use the Adaptive (BSD) render mode and set the preset to 02. Exterior 
Medium. This will use the biased rendering engine with enhanced 
quality setting.
5.	 Start the render process and allow it to render out to the end.
This will produce a test render with better indirect lighting and material 
appearances. It will take noticeably longer than the standard preview rendering, 
but it should still finish within a reasonable time to give you a quick feedback before 
the final render. You can go and get yourself a cup of tea while your computer is 
doing the work.
Reducing the render time
When you get back from making tea and the render process is still less than half way 
through (the progress bar shows you how much of the image is complete), you might 
want to press the red stop button and simplify some materials in order to reduce the 
render time.
If you have used many displacement maps or lots of translucent surfaces, ask 
yourself if you really need them. You could change these materials to basic materials 
or use a bump map instead. Bear in mind that however long the test render took, the 
production render will take much longer than this. So, the primary focus of your test 
production render is to check that your full render won't take days to complete.
Also, you can now make other small changes if you need to. When you are happy 
with the test image and it is rendering quickly enough, go to the next step to give it 
the full works with a high resolution production rendering!
The final render
For the lighting setup for most of this chapter, you have been using only sun and sky 
or IBL. This would apply for the majority of outdoor scenes. For this kind of scene, 
Adaptive (BSD) with exterior presets or Unbiased (TR1) is a good render setting. 
You only need to use Unbiased (TR2) when you have caustic refractions in your 
scene, for example, from a swimming pool.
On a practical level, Adaptive (BSD) will finish sooner, while the unbiased modes 
usually do not come to an end within a realistic time. You have to stop the process 
when your rendering has achieved sufficient quality. There are also some advanced 
features, which are only available for one or the other mode.

Chapter 8
[ 289 ]
It is time for our final render:
1.	 Use the Thea Tool window to increase the camera resolution to 1600 
or 3200px.
2.	 Choose Adaptive (BSD) as the render mode.
3.	 Use the 03. Exterior High preset.
4.	 In Threads at the far right, select MAX. This means your computer will 
be entirely busy with rendering. If you want to use your computer for 
something else during the rendering, reduce the value by one or two threads.
5.	 Switch to the Channels tab and enable Depth and Alpha under 
Common channels. We will discuss these in the next section.
6.	 Click on the Start button and wait for the rendering to finish.
You will notice that the image starts out in 1:1 scale in the preview window. 
Depending on your window size, you will only see the center part of the image. 
During the first passes, the image looks pretty crude. Once the ray tracing starts, 
you will see the center completed first, so you can see the quality of the final 
image before it is complete.
Saving the final image
1.	 If you used an unbiased render mode, click on the stop render button 
when your image has achieved a good enough quality.
2.	 In the Display tab of the Thea Rendering window, you can now apply 
some adjustments, for example, to make the image brighter.
3.	 Click on the Save Image button. You will see a file browser where you 
can specify the image path and filename:

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 290 ]
4.	 At the bottom of the window, you will find the option for the file type. 
Next to PNG, there are also options to save the image as HDRI (*.hdr) 
or Thea Image (*.img.thea) file.
5.	 Save one copy of the image as a PNG image.
6.	 Then, save it again as Thea Image (*.img.thea).
You saved your final image as a PNG file to use it in GIMP and other 2D-graphic 
applications. The PNG file format is lossless, but it is still only a low dynamic 
range format. This means that it cannot hold all the information that Thea has 
produced while rendering the image. A high dynamic range format such as HDRI 
and the native Thea Image format can store all this and make it available for later 
adjustments. After a long render, you should always save the image in the Thea 
Image format. You never know if you will need it later.
The following is the final daylight render:
Step 7 – Postproduction rendering
You are almost done. Remember that you enabled two additional channels—depth 
and alpha—for the final rendering. These special render channels will allow you 
to do all sorts of postprocessing wizardry in GIMP, which is the subject of the 
next chapter.

Chapter 8
[ 291 ]
Depth render
The first image that we will save is a depth render. It represents the z-information 
of the image, that is, the distance of a point to the camera.
1.	 Switch back to the Channels tab.
2.	 Under Currently visible, set the Channel option to Depth, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
3.	 Adjust the Max Z (m) option until you can just about see the farthest corner 
of the atrium. For my viewpoint, this is at 65 meters.
4.	 Save the image as a PNG file.

Photorealistic Rendering
[ 292 ]
Alpha (mask) render
A mask render is a black-and-white representation of all the outlines of objects in the 
scene. The render will show whatever is present in the scene as white and the rest as 
black. This is especially useful when you need to replace the background of a scene 
or the outdoor view through windows. You will do this in Chapter 9, Postproduction in 
GIMP. To create the mask render, we have enabled the alpha channel in Thea. 
This works just the same way. The only difference is that the alpha channel shows 
the transparency of objects.
1.	 Under Currently visible, set the Channel option to Alpha.
2.	 There are no options to adjust for the alpha channel, so just save the 
image as a PNG file.
As you can see in the following image, the alpha channel is not very spectacular for 
this scene. You just see the skylights of the atrium, because these are the only areas 
where the background HDR image is visible. You can also see that the windows 
are not fully transparent, because they are shown in a shade of gray and are not 
completely black.

Chapter 8
[ 293 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to take the scene you have set up in SketchUp and 
give it photorealistic lighting. For daylight scenes, this is as easy as hitting the Start 
Render button in the Thea plugin, because SketchUp has information on both the sky 
and sun for lighting. You also learned how to tweak SketchUp materials in Thea to 
add realistic highlights and surface properties.
You learned a few more advanced techniques that you can build on, in particular, 
how to edit materials in the Thea Materials Lab and how to fix incorrect texture 
mapping. You also used artificial lights and image-based lighting for your scene and 
verified the light levels with clay rendering. Finally, you used a test render to test all 
your settings before the final rendering for which you also created and saved depth 
and alpha channel images.
Now, it is time to go and experiment with your own scenes to put these techniques 
into practice. Why not make some great renderings of your previous SketchUp 
projects so that you can show them off and put them in a portfolio? Keep this book 
handy and dip into it as and when you need it; don't forget the great help forums at 
www.thearender.com and www.sketchucation.com, where you will be given advice.
If you want to look into other rendering software, I've listed the 
ones most commonly used with SketchUp in Appendix, Choosing 
Rendering Software, along with their main features based on this 
book's suggested workflow.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to further enhance your renderings by using 
postprocessing techniques in GIMP.


Postproduction in GIMP
In the last chapter, you created a photoreal rendering of your interior and exterior 
architectural models. That's a big achievement! However, whatever you do, don't 
stop there! There are some important things you need to do to your image before 
it's worthy of your portfolio.
In this chapter, you're going to learn some tricks in GIMP, which pro 3D visualizers 
use. You can follow these steps even if you have Photoshop, but you will have to 
translate the instructions per the Photoshop tools. In this chapter, you'll find out 
how GIMP can help you:
•	
Modify levels to give ultra realistic lighting
•	
Produce a vignette that draws the eye to your scene
•	
Add bloom to add a glow to the highlights
•	
Blur foreground or background to simulate the camera depth of field
•	
Add lighting effects in GIMP
•	
Composite several images to insert your model into real life scenes
It's a lot to cover, so let's get going. You can use some of the scenes you've already 
created in the earlier chapters. Create a new copy of your rendered image for each 
of the techniques you want to try out, so you can apply the modifications to a fresh 
copy each time without mixing the effects. In Part 1 – tweaks and lighting levels of 
this chapter, we will look at ways to improve a single image. In Part 2 – compositing 
multiple images of this chapter, we will combine our rendering with other image 
material to create a complete scene. To follow our examples, you will obviously 
need to install GIMP. Refer to Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset, for download and 
install instructions.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 296 ]
Part 1 – tweaks and lighting levels
The rendered output from unbiased render engines is superb! When you click on 
Start, it fires rays at the scene and recaptures them in the (virtual) camera. So, it's 
really just a digital camera with simulated digital light. What does this mean to you 
and me? Well, apart from the great results, the light levels (saturation and white 
balance, among others) aren't always right straight out of the box. This is where 
GIMP comes in.
Here's the piano scene. Note the imperfections that detract from realism:
•	
Light shades are dull and washed out
•	
No clear contrast between light and dark areas
•	
Daylight quality is somewhat unrealistic
Often when you've done a render, you will not be entirely pleased with the result, 
but you just don't know why. This is usually related to something called color 
levels. To be accurate, color levels is just the name of the tool used to adjust the 
color distribution of an image. We will use it to change how the red, green, and 
blue values (levels) encoded in the original image are mapped to the output values 
of the modified image. Let's have a go at adjusting levels in GIMP, so that you can 
see how the RGB levels can be used to improve your image.

Chapter 9
[ 297 ]
Adjusting levels automatically
There are several ways to fix the levels in a rendered image. Some of these are easy, 
and you should try these first. After that, you can look at the more involved ways of 
doing it, which can yield even better results.
1.	 Open your rendered PNG image in GIMP.
2.	 For a quick level fix, go to Colors | Auto | Equalize.
3.	 You will see five other automatic-level operations on the menu. If Equalize 
doesn't do it for your image, click on Undo under Edit, and try some of the 
others on the menu:
°°
White Balance: This corrects photos that have impure white or 
black colors

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 298 ]
°°
Color Enhance: This makes colors appear more vivid without 
changing the brightness
°°
Normalize: This scans the image and stretches the brightness 
values across the full spectrum to make the darkest part black 
and the lightest part white
°°
Stretch Contrast: This is the same as Normalize, but does this 
for each color channel independently, so you may find that the 
colors have changed
°°
Stretch HSV: This is not frequently used, as the resulting effect can 
be a bit random
4.	 Alternatively, if you have access to other image editing software designed 
for quick digital photo correction, try some of the autofix settings on those 
(for example, Photoshop Elements or Picasa). They tend to be very effective 
and hassle free.
5.	 The last, and possibly the best, way of tweaking levels is to open the Levels 
dialog and click on the Auto button. Do this by going to Color | Levels….
You just discovered color operations in GIMP and tried out a few automatic 
color-level tools to see what they did to your image. A lot of these settings may not 
actually create a better image, but they are available on the color menu for you to try 
out and see if they can improve the appearance of the render. Often they won't work 
because the image has more than one problem. Remember to make use of the Undo 
History option as you experiment. You will find it on the Layers, Channels, Paths, 
Undo pallet in the Windows menu.
Adjusting levels manually
You're now going to learn one of the most powerful and versatile image editing 
techniques available. Once you begin using this method, you will not need any 
one-click preset and will be able to tweak the lighting exactly how you want it. 
This is worth learning as it will give your images that extra edge.
Using the Levels dialog
At first, you are going to adjust all the color channels at once:
1.	 Once you have your image open in GIMP, go to Colors | Levels
2.	 The Levels dialog box will open and you will see something like this:

Chapter 9
[ 299 ]
3.	 The graph, called a Histogram, shows the color values in the image (or layer) 
from black (left) to white (right). As you can see from this histogram, all the 
detail in the image is seen in the middle of the graph. The very light and dark 
areas of the graph aren't being used at all. This makes for a very washed out, 
low-contrast image. You can see part of the image here:

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 300 ]
4.	 Click on the black triangle at the bottom-left corner of the histogram and drag 
it to the right until you hit the base of what looks like a mountain range.
5.	 Do the same with the white triangle to the right. The previous screenshot 
shows you where I've placed mine in the histogram.
6.	 Click on OK.
7.	 You will now have corrected the contrast in the image. Can you see how 
much clearer this image is?
8.	 Reopen the Levels dialog and note the change in the histogram. It will look 
a bit like this one:

Chapter 9
[ 301 ]
You just took the color-level information contained in the image and stretched the 
most used part to fit the entire value range. Note how the mountain range now fits 
the entire area. The brightness range of your image now spans between 0 and 255, 
whereas before, the image was confined to something between 14 and 188 (see the 
first histogram). By dragging the white and black arrows, you told GIMP to stretch 
the existing values over the available range, enhancing the contrast.
Adjusting the brightness balance
With the Levels dialog, you can also adjust the brightness of the image, as follows:
1.	 While you're still in the Levels dialog, click on the middle arrow and 
drag it to the left. The image preview becomes lighter.
2.	 Now drag it to the right. The preview image becomes darker.
3.	 Move it to where you're happiest and click on OK.
The middle arrow controls the gamma value. This tells GIMP whether to favor the 
light or dark values of the histogram. This is the correct way to brighten the image 
because none of the actual image information is lost. If you close and reopen the 
Levels dialog, you will see that the histogram has not changed in any way.
Correcting individual color channels
Now comes the really good bit. You will know that digital images are split up into 
red, green, and blue channels (RGB for short). Using the Levels dialog, you can edit 
each of these channels separately in exactly the same way as before. This will allow 
you to balance out the light levels perfectly and get rid of unrealistic color tints, 
or even introduce some for your own purposes:
•	
Red: This gives interiors warmer color temperature.
•	
Green: Increase this for leafy outdoor scenes. However, this makes 
interiors look unnatural!
•	
Blue: Increase this for realistic natural-looking light.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 302 ]
Note the drop-down menu above the histogram that says Channel: Value. This means 
the histogram is taking the combined value of all three channels. If you click on the 
drop-down menu, you can select any of the three color channels to edit separately. 
Do this now and use the three arrows for each color separately. Once you have used 
all three colors, go over them again until you are happy with the result. Then, before 
you finish, go back to Value and give the whole ensemble a final tweak.
Removing unwanted image noise
Now, let's look at the final render from Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering, made with 
the unbiased render engine (TR1 or TR2). If you look carefully, or zoom in to a small 
area of the image, you will see a speckled effect.

Chapter 9
[ 303 ]
Grainy images like the preceding one are characteristic of progressive render systems, 
such as the unbiased engine in Thea and other renderers. It can add an appealing 
film grain effect, a bit like the crackle on an old vinyl record. However, too much 
crackle won't allow you to enjoy the performance. If you master the noise-removal 
technique shown here, you will save bags of render time because you don't need 
to wait for so many render passes.
1.	 Take a render from the unbiased engine and open it in GIMP.
2.	 Duplicate the layer by clicking on the button at the bottom of the Layers pallet.
3.	 Select the new copy of the layer.
4.	 Use Filters | Blur | Gaussian Blur. Try a small radius of say 2-4 pixels.
5.	 Use the layer's Opacity slider (see the preceding screenshot) to adjust the 
effect of this layer on the original image (shown as follows). It's a trade-off 
between less noise and more detail. Here is the same area again with the 
Gaussian Blur radius set to 3, and the layer opacity set to 75 percent.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 304 ]
6.	 Create a layer mask if you want to block out areas you don't wish to apply 
the effect to (go back and check Chapter 7, Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp, 
if you can't remember how to do this).
7.	 When you're done, select the upper layer and go to Layers | Merge Down.
8.	 This makes the change permanent and puts everything back to one layer, 
ready for you to carry out other image edits.
You created a slightly blurred copy of the image and overlaid the original with it. 
You then adjusted the opacity of the blurred layer, so that the effect of the layer on 
the final image would be reduced. This way you can fine-tune the effect.
Getting rid of noise is never perfect. Either you will lose detail or have an image with 
sharp details but also a lot of noise. Of course, the alternative is to use an unbiased 
render engine in Thea or render for a longer time. Finally, you can also try the Depth 
of Field effect, which we'll cover later, to introduce some intentional blurriness to the 
image. An additional benefit of this is the reduction of image noise.
Keep sharp lines with Selective Gaussian Blur
A downside of the Gaussian Blur filter is that it also blurs the edges of 
objects in the picture. If this is a problem for your image, try Selective 
Gaussian Blur instead by going to Filters | Blur. This filter has an 
additional setting for color differences (Max. delta), that is, it blurs 
only similar colors together but keeps the contrast at edges as is.
Using the G'MIC plugin
A more involved alternative to the quick fix you've just learned is to try 
downloading and installing the G'MIC plugin for GIMP. You can find it at 
http://gmic.sourceforge.net/gimp.shtml (It is also part of the gimp-extensions 
packages mentioned in Chapter 2, Collecting a Toolset.). The dialog box for the tool 
within GIMP is shown here:

Chapter 9
[ 305 ]
Here's the G'MIC version of our image after applying the PhotoComiX smoothing 
filter with the settings shown in the preceding screenshot. Note that on Mac, you will 
find this filter under the filter group Testing.
If you're up for it, download and install the plugin now using the instructions on the 
website. Open your image in GIMP and try some of the filters and settings until you 
get a great result.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 306 ]
If you have some money to spend on image correction software, 
Neat Image by ABSoft is hard to beat, with exceptional quality 
output, speed, and ease of use. You can get a free trial of this 
software at http://www.neatimage.com.
Adding light bloom
On bright days, the sun puts a halo of light around bright objects in direct sunlight. 
You can achieve this effect easily in GIMP. This is a good way to soften an image, 
making it more dreamlike.
To add a soft glow to the edge of lights, take your final render from Chapter 8, 
Photorealistic Rendering, and follow these steps. Let's start with this small area 
of the final render:
1.	 Open the image and create a copy of the image layer in GIMP.
2.	 Use Gaussian Blur on the copy with a radius of 5-10 pixels. This depends 
on the size of your rendering.

Chapter 9
[ 307 ]
3.	 Now, increase the brightness and contrast of the layer using 
Colors | Brightness-Contrast, so you have something like this image:
4.	 Set the layer to Hard light or Lighten only and adjust the Layer Opacity 
to get the effect you want.
5.	 Go to Layer | Merge Down to fix the effect and allow further work on 
the image.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 308 ]
Here is the enhanced image. You can see how the light blooms out, rather than having 
a sharp edge like before.
To see the effect more pronounced, take a look at the following image rendered in 
Modo (a 3D modeling and rendering tool). Rendering and texturing was done by 
Ahmed Alireza and modeling by Branko Jovanovic.

Chapter 9
[ 309 ]
You created a copy of the image over the top of the original one. You blurred and 
increased the brightness of the copy to get a halo effect. Setting the upper layer to 
Hard light changed the contrast of the layer below. Merging the two layers allows 
us to create some of the other effects more easily.
Now that you have learned how to create a glow manually, you can go back to your 
original image and try Filters | Artistic | Softglow and compare the two results. 
The Softglow filter can apply these changes automatically, but now you have two 
methods to achieve this effect: a quick fix for the whole image and a manual one, 
so that you can control the effect in different parts of the image using masks.
Simulating depth of field
Depth of field is an effect created by the aperture settings in a camera. It basically 
means that the center or focus of your image is sharp, while the near foreground and 
far background are blurred. Photographers use this effect to focus your attention on 
the foreground of an image. Applied as a post process to rendered images, it adds 
photographic realism.
Renderers, strictly speaking, do not have an aperture and so all the depth of field 
effects are artificially generated. In Thea, you can use the Darkroom tools to apply 
and modify a depth of field effect after the render. Other renderers may not have 
this feature or you may want to apply it selectively to an area of the image. So, here 
is how you can create a depth of field effect using GIMP.
For this exercise, you need to install the GIMP plugin, Focus Blur. Check if your 
GIMP installer already came with this plugin. You will find it under the GIMP menu 
entry Filters | Blur | Focus Blur. If you cannot find it there, the best way to install 
it on Windows is the GIMP extensions project at https://code.google.com/p/
gimp-extensions/. This is a Windows program that installs a number of plugins for 
GIMP on your system, including Focus Blur. On Mac, there is no easy way to install 
only the plugin, so your best option is to use a GIMP installer that already includes 
it. The installer at http://gimp.lisanet.de/Website/Download.html contains 
this plugin.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 310 ]
The following are three images that illustrate this concept:
1.	 First is the rendered image itself. Notice all of it is in focus; you can clearly 
see the brick pattern on each box.
2.	 Here is the depth rendered image. You learned how to produce this in 
Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering.

Chapter 9
[ 311 ]
3.	 This is the final image after the effect was applied in GIMP. You can tell the 
focus is on the box in the center because the other two boxes are blurred.
Creating depth of field using a depth render
At the end of Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering, we created a depth render image. 
It should look something like the following one. Bright areas are closer to the camera, 
and darker shades are further away, although for our process it does not matter 
which shade is used to indicate distance.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 312 ]
In the following steps, we will use the grayscale information of the depth render 
image to blur the areas of the main render image selectively, which will create a 
simulated depth of field effect.
1.	 Open the main (color) rendering from Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering, 
in GIMP.
2.	 Go to File | Open as Layer.
3.	 Select the depth render image and click on OK. You should now have your 
color rendering as the background layer and the depth map on top.
4.	 Click on the rectangle for the foreground color in the main tool pallet. 
This will take you to the Change Foreground Color dialog box.
5.	 Click on the Eye Dropper tool (circled in the following screenshot).
6.	 Make sure the depth render layer is selected, and now move the Eye 
Dropper tool over the image.
7.	 Hold down the left mouse button and watch the V value change (circled 
in the preceding screenshot). It moves between 0 and 100 as you move it 
around over the depth map, depending on the gray value under the cursor.
8.	 The values you are reading are a percentage of how far away something is 
from the camera. Write down the value you get when you pass over the area 
that you want to focus on.
9.	 That's all you need from this dialog. We don't need to set anything here, 
so just click on Cancel to close the window.

Chapter 9
[ 313 ]
10.	 Turn off the depth render layer (use the eye icon), so that you can see the 
main image.
11.	 Select the main image layer so that the filter works on that layer.
12.	 Access the plugin by going to Focus Blur under Filters | Blur.
13.	 Select Gaussian to change the radius setting to control the amount of blur 
required (depending on your preference and image size).
14.	 You can see the effect in the preview image. Move around using the sliders 
to see more of the image.
15.	 Select Use Depth map and then select the depth render layer from the 
list box.
16.	 In the Focal depth box, enter the value you wrote down previously.
17.	 Use the preview to check if your area of interest is in focus. If it is blurry, 
try using 100 minus your original value for the focal depth. You can also 
move the slider until your focus area is sharp enough.
18.	 Click on OK to apply the effect.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 314 ]
You can do this for any percentage value (1-100) to blur different areas of the image. 
You can see in my image (the following one) that the balustrade has been blurred 
and the stairs in the background are sharp.
Apply some of the blur effect to the depth map image first; 
this occasionally gives a better effect.
Lighting effects
What about some of the lighting effects you can add at the postprocessing stage? Let's 
not leave those out. Some exceptional artists can render a scene with just plain ambient 
light and then add all the other lighting using image editing software afterwards. 
Although you may not always use it, you may want to learn how to as part of your 
toolbox. For example, you may wish to put some shining dots to indicate ceiling lights.
Adding light effects in GIMP
We will add some bright point lights with radial lens flare to the image. This 
technique is often applied in night scenes and for street lighting.
1.	 Open your artificially lit render from Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering.
2.	 Go to Supernova under Filters | Light and Shadow.
3.	 Click on the magnifying glass icon to zoom in with the preview image.

Chapter 9
[ 315 ]
4.	 Click on a spot where you want the center of a new light to be.
5.	 Adjust Color, Radius, and Spokes, as you can see in the following screenshot:
6.	 Blue is used to create the impression of a different color temperature for 
the new light points, as if these were halogen spots between compact 
fluorescent downlights.
7.	 I've set Radius and Spokes at 5 and 100, respectively, for the light you 
can see on the right of the preview image. However, I've reduced the 
values for the current light because it's at a shallow angle to the camera.
8.	 Repeat the preceding steps for each light bulb.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 316 ]
Here is the image with several of these supernova effects applied:
Discovering weird and wonderful lighting filters
GIMP has some great, some not so great, and some plain "far out" lighting effects 
that you have just got to sample for yourself to believe. They are found under 
Filters | Light and Shadow. Try some of these out on your image and see the 
effects you can get. You may find that some are so good that you can leave out 
some lights during the rendering and just add them in GIMP on your next project.
Using a vignette layer to finish the image
When you are happy with your image, all that is left to do is to draw the viewer's 
eye further into the image. This final process is the vignette, which is a posh word 
for a dark border. You have already learned all the skills you need for this in 
Chapter 7, Non-photoreal Visuals with SketchUp. It was slightly different in that 
case because you used a white border to let the image fade out at the edges. With 
photoreal images, you will darken the edges slightly instead.
Fading out the edges with a vignette
To draw the eye to the areas of the image you wish to focus on, parts of it need 
to be lit more than others. The edges, especially, should be darker than the center. 
The following is an exaggerated image showing where the vignette could be used:

Chapter 9
[ 317 ]
1.	 Open your night-time rendering in GIMP.
2.	 Create a new layer. For Layer Fill Type, select Transparency. 
This is your vignette layer.
3.	 Select the Paintbrush tool.
4.	 Click on Foreground – Background (circled in the following screenshot) 
to get the colors back to black and white, if necessary.
5.	 Select a fuzzy circle brush and increase the scale to get a bigger one.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 318 ]
6.	 Start at the edges of the image and apply black paint all around.
7.	 Change the brush Opacity to 50 percent and gradually come in from the 
edge where you want slightly more light.
8.	 Repeat with the setting still at 50 percent to overlay your paintbrush strokes, 
as you can see from the exaggerated image.
9.	 You can use a 20 percent opacity brush if you need to fine-tune it.
10.	 Remember, work fast because you can change this at any time. Simply click 
the eraser and paint over the areas you need to alter. Set the eraser at 50 
percent if you need a less definite effect.
11.	 Because you've done this really roughly, use the Gaussian Blur filter on the 
vignette layer with a high radius value (20-100 pixels) to smoothen things 
out a little.
12.	 Now, lower the Layer Opacity until you have a more subtle effect 
(I've used 30 percent).
With these steps, you added a final flourish to help draw the viewer's eye to the 
picture. This was achieved with a simple darkened overlay. Using this process, 
you can expose or hide certain areas of the composition. Here is a side-by-side 
comparison of the two images:
 
This is the end of the part related to image enhancements. You have learned how to 
give your image that little extra touch that makes all the difference!

Chapter 9
[ 319 ]
Part 2 – compositing multiple images
In the second half of this chapter, we will explore compositing multiple images. You 
may have already learned a lot of the skills needed here in Chapter 7, Non-photoreal 
Visuals with SketchUp, so you're already half way there! The following few pages will 
equip you to stitch together finished images from different component parts.
Using a mask render for windows
You will repeatedly find this trick useful as you progress with your postprocessing 
skills. We will be going through just one application of this, but there are all sorts of 
other uses you will discover yourself. Remember in Chapter 8, Photorealistic Rendering, 
you created an image from the render's alpha channel. You'll put this to good use now.
1.	 Open your daylight scene from the last chapter in GIMP.
2.	 Go to File | Open as Layer, select the alpha channel image, and click on OK.
3.	 Repeat this with a sky image or even a holiday snap with a great-looking sky 
with some clouds.
4.	 Select the sky image layer and use Move to position the portion of the sky 
over the windows. You may need to resize the layer first by using Layer | 
Scale Layer.
5.	 Select the alpha channel render in the Layers pallet. Now, go to Select | All.
6.	 Go to Edit | Copy.
7.	 Right-click on the sky layer and select Add Layer Mask | Add and click 
on Add.
8.	 Now, click on the layer mask that just appeared in the Layers pallet.
9.	 Go to Edit | Paste.
10.	 Select the pasted item in the Layer pallet, then right-click and select Anchor.
You have now copied the alpha channel render into the layer mask 
associated with the sky layer. But it still looks wrong! That's because 
you need to invert the mask.
11.	 Select the mask, then click on Invert under Colors.
12.	 Now, set the sky layer to Multiply.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 320 ]
Here is the image and layer stack you should end up with:
You produced an alpha channel render in Thea, which was completely black. 
The only part that was left white was the portion visible through the windows. 
You assigned this image to the mask channel of a sky image, so that only the sky 
portion showed through. This sky layer was set to Multiply, so that both the sky 
and the reflection in the glass would show together.
This technique is great when you don't have a sky or background image in an 
indoor render. You just add it later in GIMP.
SketchUp window reflections without 
rendering
You can take your SketchUp image and instantly add sky reflections to your 
windows without rendering! Take a look at the following image. Apart from 
my badly applied brick texture, can you distinguish it from a render?

Chapter 9
[ 321 ]
I didn't think you would. So, follow these steps to learn the trick:
1.	 Open a SketchUp scene and zoom in to a window looking from a low angle, 
like the one shown in the following screenshot.
2.	 Export a colored view in your preferred style.
3.	 Using the same view, click on the shaded view button.
4.	 In the Styles pallet, turn off Display Edges and Profiles.
5.	 In the Shadow Settings pallet change Light to 0 and Dark to 100. You can 
see the results here:

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 322 ]
6.	 You will now have an image with flat colors like in the preceding one. 
Export this, making sure you haven't changed the view.
7.	 In GIMP, open the images as layers, as before.
8.	 Click on the flat colors image layer.
9.	 Select the Select by Color tool from the main tool pallet.
10.	 Click somewhere on the window. This will select only areas with the color 
of the window glazing.
11.	 Insert a sky image as before and create a layer mask for this new layer.
12.	 Select Selection and click on Add.
13.	 Adjust the opacity of the sky layer and mask out areas you don't need, 
like I've done with the lower sash of the window here.
You can now use this technique to selectively replace, enhance, or blur any part 
of your SketchUp scene. Use the Fuzzy Select tool (Magic Wand) or the Select by 
Color tool in combination with a SketchUp flat color layer to select areas of your 
image and blur, darken, lighten, sharpen, or delete areas of your main image. 
Now, reuse the same selection technique to overlay parts of your scene with other 
images or textures. How many uses for this technique can you find to enhance your 
image? Enhancing doesn't just mean cleaning up; this can also be used to grunge up 
or add variation to textured surfaces.

Chapter 9
[ 323 ]
Using paths to mask photos
If you have set up your scene using Match Photo, and want to insert a building into 
an existing image, you're going to need to do some masking in GIMP to separate 
the foreground and background from the render. You should be able to mask the 
outline of your building using a mask render, so that there is no problem inserting 
a background. The foreground may be trickier as you will see now.
I want to take this serene picture and insert a riverside hut. This is where I'm 
planning to retire once everyone knows how to use SketchUp!
Like all strapped-for-time architects, I'm simply going to download a design from the 
3D Warehouse. Here it is rendered on a plain background:

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 324 ]
I've rotated the view by eye in SketchUp to vaguely match the photo, using Alt + 
Tab (Cmd + Tab on Mac) to switch between applications. I couldn't use Match Photo 
because there are no right angles in the image. When I get it about right by trial and 
error, I can try to match the sun and shadows and export the image for rendering.
OK, so you are in GIMP now with both images open as layers, just like you 
did before.
1.	 Turn down the opacity on the hut layer and use the Move tool to place it 
(see the following screenshot).
2.	 Select the Scale Tool to size it. Hold Ctrl (Cmd on the Mac) to maintain the 
aspect ratio correct.
3.	 Select the background using the Select by Color Tool and hit Delete.
4.	 You now need to copy the photo layer and move it to the top of the layer stack 
(for the foreground elements).

Chapter 9
[ 325 ]
5.	 Click the Duplicate Layer button and move the new layer to the top of 
the list.
6.	 Right-click and click on Add under Add Layer Mask | Selection.
7.	 Go to Select | None.
8.	 Click on the Layer Mask. Then click on the little Double Arrow in the main 
layer pallet to swap from black to white.
9.	 Click on the Paintbrush tool and select a rough brush. Make sure the opacity 
is set to 100 percent.
10.	 Paint in bits of grass (or whatever you need in your image) into the 
foreground, as you can see here:
11.	 Turn off the hut layer.
12.	 Select the Paths Tool.

Postproduction in GIMP
[ 326 ]
13.	 Click around the tree and use Ctrl + scroll to zoom in.
14.	 When you've finished clicking all round the tree, right-click and then 
go to Select | From Path.
15.	 Click on Layer Mask.
16.	 Select the Bucket Fill Tool icon and fill the selection with white.
17.	 Turn on the hut layer, so you can see the result.
18.	 Use Burn Tool to darken the edges of your foreground objects if you need to.
19.	 Go to Select | None.
20.	 Use Colors | Brightness-Contrast on the hut layer to match the image better.
21.	 Save the image in GIMP (*.XCF) format if you plan to work on it some more 
later on.
22.	 Go to Image | Flatten Image and save it as the final PNG file. 
Here's the result:

Chapter 9
[ 327 ]
You just created what's called a clipping path around the area of the tree trunk that 
overlaid the hut. You then turned this path into a selection and filled the selection with 
white in the layer mask. This made the area of the layer visible again. This is the basic 
method of clipping and masking any foreground or background elements in your 
scene. Paths are very versatile, and it is worth reading more about paths on websites 
dedicated to GIMP or Photoshop. You can start with www.gimp.org/tutorials.
Summary
In this chapter, you have learned how to double your skills as a rendering artist. 
You have learned how to take renderings and native SketchUp images and add 
some seasoning. In particular, you will keep coming back to compositing photos 
and renderings into one image and tweaking levels to give realistic lighting. 
Creating the depth of field effects and adding reflection to windows can also 
be used in many scenes to make them look more realistic.
These are some of the main skills a 3D artist needs to get to grips with, and along 
the way, you picked up the skills to use these tools and methods in many other ways 
too. You have now graduated from SketchUp Architectural Visualization School! In 
the next chapter, you will learn how to storyboard and create flythrough animations.


Animations
In this chapter, you are going to learn the basic skills you need to produce animated 
walkthroughs and flyovers. SketchUp is an ideal piece of software to produce these 
types of animations. In fact, the film industry uses SketchUp as a previsualization 
tool. They work out the basic shots, camera angles, timing, and so on within 
SketchUp before they shoot it for real. And that's how we're going to use it too!
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
What to include in an animation
•	
How to create a simple walkthrough in SketchUp
•	
Using paths for a smooth flythrough
•	
Stitching animated sequences together into a video
•	
Photoreal animated renders
•	
Video compositing, file types, and compression settings
Using the same principles for stills and 
animation
Creating movie sequences for architectural visualization requires a slightly different 
but related mindset to still images. That's because an animated sequence shows more 
of the scene than what is visible in a single image. For example, you might see the 
back of a building, which you wouldn't have bothered modeling for a still image; 
however, now you have to model it. All the principles that you have already learned 
in Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, are applicable here. The following is a recap:
•	
If you can't see it, don't model it!
•	
If it's in the background, make it low poly or a 2D cutout
•	
Use interesting and unique camera angles

Animations
[ 330 ]
However, this time, all of these principles have to be kept in mind for a duration of 
30 seconds, 5 minutes, or even a feature length presentation, which is made up of 
many views of the model. This can quickly become an overwhelming premise. So, 
we need to break it down into bite-size chunks that are easy to handle. Just like you 
do every day with other design projects, you are now going to break down your 
animation into individual scenes, shot by shot.
Making a start – sketching it out
Even if you already have a fully detailed model that you can quite happily view 
from any angle, you need to start by making a plan of what you want to see in your 
animation. Well actually, that's not completely correct. Why would the client want to 
see what you want to see? So, from now on, we must start by considering the needs 
of the client or audience and only think in terms of their expectations.
Most of this thinking has also been covered in Chapter 6, Entourage the SketchUp Way, 
because it's entourage (people, cars, and trees) that tell the audience, "This could be 
you in this scene!" and "Wouldn't you enjoy this environment?"
Writing out the itinerary
If you were to visit the quaint English village of Bourton-on-the-Water, what would 
be the absolute "must-sees" of your trip? How do you plan out your itinerary? 
Whether you opt for a vacation trip or an animation sequence, there's a method of 
planning that's completely easy and foolproof. You can do this when you're on the 
train or eating your cornflakes:
1.	 Take a large sheet of paper (A3 size or 11 x 17 inches).
2.	 Start at the center of the page and write down a feature of the building 
you're planning to "sell" to your audience.
3.	 Rotate the page randomly and write another feature somewhere in a 
blank space.
4.	 Do this repeatedly.
5.	 Go completely crazy and write down whatever pops into your head 
(such as a dishwasher or great drainage or south facing).
6.	 When you have filled the page, collect them all up in a list.

Chapter 10
[ 331 ]
7.	 Put three columns down on the right-hand side, each labeled Quality, 
Desirability, and blank.
It doesn't matter if you spelled desirability wrong. That's the point of the 
exercise: no wrong answers. Don't worry about spelling or getting the best 
stuff down. Just get the flow going.
8.	 When you're done, give each point a rating anywhere between 1 to 5 in the 
Quality column for how good this part of this particular development is.
9.	 Now, do a valley fold (z-fold) to hide the first column.
10.	 In the Desirability column, give each item a rating between 1 and 5 for how 
desirable such a building feature is to your audience. You need to separate 
this rating from your particular building and your personal preferences. Rate 
it purely on how your audience would view this feature in any building.
11.	 When you're done, multiply the first and second column and put the total in 
the third column.
Unknowingly, you have just written the itinerary for your animation. Easy, wasn't 
it? Ok, you probably don't think you've achieved much, but you have. By using this 
method, you were forced to be dispassionate about your design or model. You were 
also forced to distinguish between features that you personally like and features that 
appeal to your intended audience (your clients). What you have in the third column 
is a definitive rating of the impact of each feature on your audience. Go ahead and 
label it Impact now to replace the blank heading there.
Generating the storyboard
You are now ready to sketch out the storyboard because you now know what to 
include in your animation and what to leave out. Take a pink marker and highlight 
everything that scores 20 or 25. These are your primary features. Take an orange 
marker and highlight elements with a score between 12 and 16, and take a yellow 
marker to highlight items that are rated at 9. Nines are just about tolerable.
What you now have is a color-coded scene allocation system. While deciding what 
to put into your animation, you should get as many of the pink marks in as many 
times as you can. You should get the oranges in the rest of the time. Also, you should 
use the yellows to pad the content out where necessary and give an overall context 
to the presentation. Anything you've not colored will actually detract from the 
presentation and stop people from buying the property. Don't model it, and try 
to avoid it in your presentation.

Animations
[ 332 ]
Dealing with detractions
As you've discovered, anything in your list that didn't get colored could easily detract 
your audience from the main features of your presentation. So, these areas should be 
minimized if possible, but what do you do if they are a central feature and have to be 
included for context (or honesty)? What, for example, about the electricity enclosure, 
the bin store, or the plant room? Here are a few ways to deal with this problem:
•	
Leave the noncritical areas blank and untextured, giving only the context 
but no details
•	
Cover or mask with entourage
•	
Leave areas unfocussed in the background
•	
Use viewing angles that obscure these features
Your efforts in minimizing bad features should be equal to those spent in promoting 
good ones. You should aim at showing the development in its best light and 
greatest potential.
The storyboard
Now that you have decided what needs to be included and what needs to be left 
out, decide how much time needs to be allocated to each feature, and what the 
camera views should be. Do the following steps on paper with sketches.
1.	 Split up your list into scenes, including wide views and close-up views.
2.	 Decide how long the whole animation should last. Add a couple of 
seconds for cutting later.
3.	 Decide if you are going to travel from one scene to the next, blend between 
scenes (in video editing software), or create a hard cut.
4.	 Work out how long to spend on each scene and each transition 
between scenes.
5.	 Create a rough sketch for the start of each scene.
6.	 Scan them into your computer.
The following steps shown are specific to Windows Movie Maker but 
are similar to all basic video editing applications (Adobe Premiere 
Elements, Final Cut Express, iMovie, or similar).
7.	 In Windows Movie Maker (or similar), import each picture.
8.	 In Import pictures, press and hold Ctrl to select more than one image, 
and then click on the Import button.

Chapter 10
[ 333 ]
9.	 The pictures will open in the Collections area.
10.	 Drag them one by one onto Storyboard in the sequence you want.
11.	 Click on Show Timeline.
12.	 Drag the edge of each image out to the correct length for the shot.
13.	 Click on Play on the preview viewer.
14.	 Keep adding scene sketches and edit the timing until you have achieved a 
smooth animation flow.
15.	 Add a voice track or music to the Audio channel if you want. To do this, 
you can:
1.	 Click on Import audio or music.
2.	 Navigate to the file and then click on Import.
3.	 Drag it onto the storyboard as before.
16.	 Remember to save the project.
You just storyboarded your whole animation so that you know exactly what you 
need to model and where it will show in the video. You did this in Movie Maker or 
similar, creating place markers so that you can easily import your movie clips later. 
This saves an enormous amount of time in the long run because you will only model, 
texture, animate, and render what you're going to see, not what will be left on the 
cutting room floor. If you already have your SketchUp scene completed, you can take 
screenshots from that instead of sketching out the scenes on paper.
When you are investing a lot of time into a project such as an 
animation, it's vital to get a second or third opinion early on. 
Use your rough movie sketch to talk it through with a colleague, 
tutor, or clued in friend. It's important to do this at this early 
stage before you spend a large amount of time on detailing and 
animating the scenes.
You're now at a stage where you can apply the techniques of Chapter 3, Composing 
the Scene, and compose each of your scenes.
Animating in SketchUp
Now comes the real fun bit! We're going to look at options to create animations out 
of SketchUp. And don't forget—whatever you animate in SketchUp can be turned 
into a render later. So, SketchUp is a previsualization tool for rendering as well as 
a visualization tool in itself.

Animations
[ 334 ]
Creating a simple walkthrough
To get a feel for the animation process, we will start with a basic scene:
1.	 Create the simple scene illustrated here in SketchUp. The tallest object is 
about 2 m (6.5 ft) in height.
2.	 Texture all the faces differently so that you can recognize where you 
are at any given point in time.
3.	 Now, go to Camera | Look Around.
4.	 Type in the height in the Eye Height field as 1.7 m and hit Enter 
(see the inset in the following screenshot):

Chapter 10
[ 335 ]
Your viewpoint will drop down to a height of 1.7 m, and the cursor will 
change to an eye symbol.
5.	 You can now look around the scene at a fixed position by holding down 
the left mouse button and moving the mouse.
6.	 This can be the start of your walkthrough. Go to View | Animation | 
Add Scene.
We're going to walk in between the boxes and look at the backside of the 
boxes that we can't see.
7.	 Go to Camera | Walk. The cursor changes to a footprints icon.
8.	 Click on the screen and hold down the left mouse button. Now, move 
the mouse up on the screen. You start to walk forward! Move the mouse 
from side-to-side to steer.
9.	 Walk in between the boxes.
10.	 Add another scene.
11.	 Use the Look Around function to turn on the spot and look directly at the 
box to the right. Add another scene.
12.	 To see how you've done, go to View | Animation | Play.
You set up a simple scene and told SketchUp you wanted to view it from the eye 
level. Using the SketchUp Walkthrough tools, you simulated a person walking 
through your SketchUp model. This, in itself, is a highly effective presentation tool. 
You used the Look Around tool to change your view without altering the eye height 
or camera position. It's important to use these tools to change views rather than your 
usual Pan and Orbit tools in order to maintain a consistent eye height. You then 
created scenes to act like key frames for the animation.
Use your laptop for real-time walkthroughs
The walkthrough tools you've seen right here are really useful 
for helping people visualize a design. There's nothing better than 
interacting with an environment and seeing it as you would in 
real life. Why not take your laptop to meetings and allow people 
to see your models first hand?

Animations
[ 336 ]
Animation settings
When you reviewed your animation, you will notice that the animation pauses on 
the first frame, then flies quickly in between the boxes, pauses again, and then rotates 
the camera around. Go to View | Animation | Settings to change the settings that 
control the speed of scene transitions and scene delays. Go there now for a look.
The animation settings dialog box looks like this:
You will see that there are very few settings here, and it's not possible to control 
individual scene timings. That's a pity in one way, but it does help keep everything 
simple. We will look at how to control individual scene timings using a plugin a little 
later in this chapter. Here's what each setting does:
Function
What it does
Uses
Enable scene 
transitions
This allows travel from one 
scene to the next scene
Uncheck this to operate as a 
slideshow without transitions
Transition time
This controls the time it takes 
to travel from one scene to 
the next scene (speed)
Enter a number (seconds)
Scene delay
This sets the time for which 
the animation pauses at 
each scene
Set it to zero to go directly 
from one transition to the 
next without pausing

Chapter 10
[ 337 ]
Getting the timing right
For now, you're going to add some intermediate steps to your walkthrough 
to smooth out the movement and also to slow things down a little.
1.	 Still in the settings dialog box, change the Scene Transitions field 
to 2 seconds.
2.	 Change the value in the Scene Delay field to 0.
3.	 Close the dialog box.
4.	 Click on Scene 1.
5.	 Walk halfway between Scene 1 and Scene 2.
6.	 Right-click on Scene 1 and select Add Scene. You will see Scene 4 appear 
between Scene 1 and Scene 2.
7.	 Play the animation again and note the difference.
8.	 Click on the new scene tab to go back to Scene 4 and now move your 
position or view direction, and then update Scene 4 (right-click on the 
scene tab and select Update).
9.	 Play the animation again and repeat until you get a smooth timing and 
transition between scenes.
10.	 Now, create further scenes as you walk around the back of the cylinder 
and back through to where you started.
11.	 Click on each scene tab to view, edit, and update, as necessary.
You just learned how to adjust animation properties and create a regularly paced 
animated walkthrough. You set up the scenes and were able to go back and tweak 
each one to get the desired effect. You will have noticed that the animation can still 
be a little jerky, and we still want to alter individual transition timings. Thankfully, 
there's a plugin for this, and we're going to look at that now.
Adding individual timing to scenes
As promised earlier, we will now look at a plugin that allows you to control the 
timings of each scene individually. Unfortunately, this plugin is not available 
via the plugins store, so you have to download and install it manually.
1.	 Download the scenes_transition_times.rb file from 
http://morisdov.googlepages.com. Don't get distracted by 
the other cool plugins on the site!
2.	 Drop the file in your Plugins folder and restart SketchUp.
3.	 Go to Plugins | Scenes Transition Times.

Animations
[ 338 ]
4.	 The plugin dialog shows a timing option for each scene in your file.
5.	 Type in values (in seconds) for each scene transition (the value -1.0 leaves 
the scene at the global default value set in the animation settings).
6.	 Play the animation again to see the difference.
7.	 Now, find the scene where you are turning your head to look at the box. 
Type in 4 as the transition time for this scene.
8.	 Play the animation again to see the difference.
You installed a plugin that allows scene transitions to be adjusted individually. 
You then increased the scene transition time to 4 seconds when you turn to look 
at the box beside you. You may have worked out that the value goes in the box 
relating to the scene after the one you need to edit.
Note that the animation is still jerky. This may be good enough for your current 
project, especially if you stitch together different scenes into a collage of moving 
views in your video editing software. You just cut out the dodgy transitions. 
However, for an altogether smoother animation, there are some further techniques 
that you can employ.

Chapter 10
[ 339 ]
The Flightpath animation
The usual way of creating a flyover presentation in rendering software such as 3D 
Studio Max is to create a travel path. The camera is then attached to this path and 
told how fast to travel along it, where to point, and when. This is exactly what you 
can do in SketchUp too. This method is usually preferable over the walkthrough 
you've already looked at because:
•	
The travel is smooth, not jerky
•	
The speed of travel is constant
•	
There is greater control over where you go and what you look at
•	
Scenes are created automatically
To prepare for the next step, you need to download and install the following plugins:
•	
The Flightpath.rb plugin by Rick Wilson from 
http://www.smustard.com/script/flightpath
•	
The BezierSpline plugin by Fredo6 from the SketchUcation Plugin Store.
Smooth transitions
You're going to simulate an aircraft flying between tall buildings. This will teach you 
all the advanced skills you need for your architectural video, although you might be 
working on a smaller scale with a single building or site. We are going to use a 3D 
Warehouse city rather than a specific project, so you can practice all you like and not 
worry about getting it right for a client.
1.	 Download the Rocane 2020 model from the 3D Warehouse. This is a highly 
detailed inner city model complete with bridge, sidewalk, and trees.

Animations
[ 340 ]
2.	 To speed up navigation, you can switch off the layers for trees and hide 
other elements. Keep only the roads and buildings.
3.	 Start by going to Plan View and switch to the monochrome view style. 
Also, turn off shadows. This will speed up manipulating and viewing 
the model and animation.
4.	 From your new Bezier Spline toolbar (View | Toolbars | BZ_Toolbar), 
select Catmul-Spline. This type is a bit easier to control because the curve 
goes through the control points.
5.	 Draw the path you want on the plan view by setting control points at roughly 
the same distance along the path, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Set the last control point, then right-click and select Done and Switch to 
Edition
7.	 Adjust the control points of the curve to make sure the path is not 
passing through any of the tall buildings.

Chapter 10
[ 341 ]
8.	 Double-click to finish your editing.
9.	 Orbit your view as you can see in the following screenshot, and then move 
the path up off the ground along the blue axis.
10.	 Now set the view style and shadows exactly as you want them.
11.	 Unhide anything you want to see in the animation.
12.	 Delete any existing scenes.
13.	 Save the model. This is important because you can't easily reverse the 
Flightpath operations.
14.	 Now, go to View | Animation | Settings and reduce the value in Scene 
Delay to 0.
15.	 Select the path.
16.	 Right-click and select Flightpath from the context menu.
17.	 Enter the speed you want for your camera in meters per second. 88 meters 
per second is around 60 miles per hour (the speed of a fast car). I'm going 
for 500 m/s.
18.	 Click on OK. The script will create new scenes for viewpoints distributed 
along the path. The camera will look along the path to the next viewpoint.
19.	 You can review your animation by navigating to View | Animation | Play.
20.	 Go to File | Export | Animation. In Windows, also select the Video option.
21.	 Keep the file format at Compressed with H.264 (*.mp4).

Animations
[ 342 ]
22.	 Click on the Options button. The export options dialog appears:
23.	 Set the value in the Resolution field to 480p SD. This corresponds to a 
frame size of 854 x 480.
If you want any other aspect ratio than 16:9, you first have to set 
Resolution to Custom.
24.	 Reduce the frame rate to 10 for a quick test animation.
25.	 Uncheck the Loop to starting scene option.
26.	 Click on OK to accept the options.
27.	 Set the filename and export the animation.
The animation will be exported as an MP4 movie file. If you need to make path 
adjustments after you view the animation, re-open your saved SketchUp file. 
Then, use the Bezier Curve tools to edit the path, followed by the Flightpath 
tool to create a new set of scenes.
You created a 3D curved path for the camera to follow. The Flightpath plugin creates 
scenes for each step in the path and sets the transition speed between scenes to keep 
the flight speed constant. You entered a speed in meters per second to control this. You 
now have a camera path converted to scenes, which you can edit individually. This is 
really great because you can fine-tune what the camera does every step of the way!

Chapter 10
[ 343 ]
Fine-tuning with CameraControls
Now it's your turn to add some real panache to finish off your flythrough! 
Install the camera plugin CameraControls.rb by Rick Wilson, available at 
http://www.smustard.com/script/CameraControls.
This plugin is a little more difficult to install because you need to create a new folder 
in your Plugins folder. The details are in the readme.txt file, which you get when 
you download it. This plugin gives you fine control over the camera's pan, roll, 
and tilt effects and allows you to set values for these at each step of the animation.
Currently the CameraControls.rb plugin only works for 
PC, not Mac. However, if you're a Mac user, you can still 
achieve these camera effects manually. The plugin is just 
there to give tighter control over the values.
Camera pan, roll, and tilt
Add camera effects to each scene along your path using the CameraControls 
plugin. Here are some examples of what you can do with pan, roll, and tilt. 
Remember to update each scene after your changes.
Effect
Example of effect
Method
Pan
Focus on a building as 
you go past it to simulate 
a passenger looking out 
of the window
Use the pan slider to 
keep the camera trained 
on a building through 
several scenes
Tilt
When you want to 
simulate lift as the car 
or motorcycle sets off or 
brakes
Increase or decrease the 
tilt value on one scene
Roll
When you want to 
bank to the side like 
an aircraft does
Add progressively 
higher values of the roll 
effect to adjacent scenes

Animations
[ 344 ]
Let's put it together
Now that you've got the skills to create animated scenes in SketchUp, it's time 
to put it all together. Using the skills you have learned, render out a couple more 
simple animated camera shots. Refer to Chapter 3, Composing the Scene, to get some 
more ideas on viewpoints and camera focal settings. I'm trying the following with 
our city scene:
•	
Travel along the bridge approaching the city:
•	
Top-down flyover emphasizing the height of buildings:
•	
Slow travel along a road looking up at the sky:

Chapter 10
[ 345 ]
•	
Some close up shots:
•	
Moving shadows or night shots:
•	
Free-fall spinning camera:
•	
Different SketchUp styles (Monochrome, Sketchy, Blueprint, and so on):
All this will then be mixed in with the main flythrough sequence. The beauty of 
this is that the audience gets a constantly fresh, changing perspective, rather than a 
monotonous flyover. These scenes are interspersed to create this variety. They're also 
used to mask over the bits of your flythrough that you don't particularly want to see.

Animations
[ 346 ]
Interesting details and viewpoints
So it's your turn now to grab the mouse, zoom in to the SketchUp model, and capture 
some really interesting viewpoints, camera angles, and perspectives. 
Make each of these no more than a couple of scenes long and restrict them to a 
few seconds each. The whole idea here is variety. Start with a saved copy of the 
model before you add the flythrough scenes. Save each mini animation as a 
separate .skp file for easy access later.

Chapter 10
[ 347 ]
Authoring video sequences
So you've got a bunch of clips. These may or may not relate to the storyboard you set 
up at the start—it doesn't matter. You're just practicing. What you need to do now is 
put your SketchUp animations together.
To combine the short clips we will use a video editing software. Most of them are 
similar in nature and you can use any one of them to reproduce the following steps:
1.	 Open Windows Movie Maker (or a similar program to edit video sequences).
2.	 Go to File | Import into Collections.
3.	 Drag the main flythrough clip onto the timeline.
You're now going to insert the short clips into the main flythrough.

Animations
[ 348 ]
4.	 Move the slider (see the next screenshot) to where you want to cut.
5.	 Click on the Cut button (circled in the next screenshot).
6.	 You can cut further on if you want to remove a section or leave it if you 
want to come back to where you left it.
7.	 Select the section and hit Delete.
8.	 Import one of your smaller clips and drag it into the space you created.
9.	 Adjust the start and end by clicking on and dragging the ends of the clip 
on the timeline.
Now that you've produced your low-resolution, quick mock-up and tweaked it 
to perfection, you're ready to go and render the final footage at a higher resolution 
in SketchUp, or photoreal in an external renderer. Thea imports the scene, sun, and 
camera movements exactly as they were in SketchUp, so you have done all the hard 
work already.

Chapter 10
[ 349 ]
High-resolution animation from SketchUp
If you're aiming for a SketchUp sketchy movie, you now need to export the full 
resolution animation:
1.	 Go back to SketchUp, make any last edits if needed, and save your file.
2.	 Go to Animation under File | Export.
3.	 Select a location to save your file.
4.	 Use the following export options:
°°
Use the file format *.mp4 compressed with H.264
°°
Set the resolution to 1080p Full HD
°°
Adjust the aspect ratio to 16:9 Wide
°°
Set the frame rate to 24 frames per second
°°
Do not loop back to the starting scene
5.	 Export the animation.
6.	 Review the final clip and repeat the preceding steps for all your animation 
scenes if you are satisfied with the quality.
Saving individual frames for an animation
When you use SketchUp to export directly to a compressed MP4 movie you rely 
on the quality of the built-in video encoder. In some cases, this may not be good 
enough and you have to export to individual image frames instead and use an 
external encoder such as VirtualDub to create the movie sequence. It is also a more 
robust and flexible method to create the animation. If the render you've left going 
overnight bombs out at the last frame or there is a power cut, you can still retrieve 
all the frames rendered up to that point. With a single animation file as export result 
you would have lost everything.
You can also check the progress of the animation immediately by opening 
the animation folder and taking a look at the frames as they are produced. 
You don't have to wait to the end of a four-hour render to discover that the 
lighting was wrong after all!

Animations
[ 350 ]
Animating with Thea
Thea does not export directly to a video, but produces the source frames as 
individual images. This will take up considerable space on your hard drive 
until you can convert them to a movie file. So try this first for one of the short clips 
you set up earlier. Also, the rendering of each frame will take much longer than that 
in SketchUp, so you don't want to use a sequence that will render for a week before 
you can see the results.
1.	 Prepare your scene for export to Thea as you learned in Chapter 8, 
Photorealistic Rendering.
2.	 Open the Thea Tool window and set up your export options.
In SketchUp, the render time is not affected too much by the 
resolution. In Thea, the render time for each image depends 
directly on the resolution. So choose the lowest resolution you 
can get away with. For a high-quality animation, this should be 
at least 1280 x 720 pixels (720p HD) at 25 frames per second.
3.	 Now open the Thea Rendering Window and select the Rendering tab.
4.	 For a walkthrough animation, select Adaptive (BSD) as the render 
mode and choose a render preset. The Medium, or even Basic, quality 
mode may be sufficient for an animation where you won't dwell too 
long on a single image.
5.	 Switch to the Animation tab.
6.	 Adjust the frame rate to 25 frames per second if necessary.

Chapter 10
[ 351 ]
7.	 Check the box next to Enable Lighting precision. You can use this option 
to speed up the lighting calculation for a walkthrough animation where no 
other objects move. A value less than 100% will reduce the calculation time, 
but may lead to inconsistent lighting between the frames. If you want really 
smooth lighting, you can also increase the value to up to 400%.
8.	 When you are done, click on Render Animation.
9.	 Select a directory for the frames and the base name and file format for 
the images. The images will be saved with a number corresponding 
to the frame (such as cityscene_0001.png).
10.	 The rendering will start. You can follow the render progress in more detail 
on the Console tab.
How long will my animation take to render?
The render time of a single frame times the frame rate times the 
number of seconds in the animation.
So, at 2 minutes per frame and 25 frames per second, a 5 second 
animation will render for 2 x 25 x 5 = 250 minutes. It is not 
unusual to allow the computer a day or two to render even a 
short animation.
You used Thea to automatically render the animation frames generated by SketchUp. 
The frames are saved as JPEG or PNG files in the folder, which you specified when 
exporting the animation. Other formats such as TIFF or HDRI and even additional 
channels are also possible, but you should only use these when you plan to 
perform the postprocessing of the individual frames in a professional video-editing 
application. The frame resolution and aspect ratio were set to HD video to ensure 
good quality on modern TVs and the Web. Of course, if you particularly need to go 
full High Definition (HD), you need to raise this to 1920 pixels wide x 1080 pixels 
high. Think carefully before you do this because it greatly increases render time.
You're now ready to stitch all this together into your final video.
Compositing in VirtualDub
VirtualDub basically creates animations from still images and has loads of other 
image filters too. In just a couple of steps, you are going to take the individual frames 
saved from Thea or SketchUp and turn them into an uncompressed AVI video.

Animations
[ 352 ]
Animation on the Mac
VirtualDub is a Windows-only application. To do the same job on a 
Mac, download the free app Zeitraffer from the Apple App Store. 
This small application let's you select a folder with numbered images 
and save them as a QuickTime or MPEG-4 video, with optional 
resizing and frame rate adjustment. That's all we need for this step.
Creating an animation from still images
Follow these steps to turn your images into a video:
1.	 To open VirtualDub, double-click on the VirtualDub.exe file (or shortcut).
2.	 In VirtualDub, go to File| Open Video File.
3.	 Navigate to the folder where you saved the image frames and click 
on the first image.
4.	 Click on Open. The images will be loaded in sequence.
5.	 Click on the Play button on the left to preview the animation.
6.	 Go to Video | Framerate and change the frame rate to 25 if 
necessary.
7.	 You should now have a 720p HD video at 25 frames per second. This 
will give you the most flexibility in what you want to use the video clip for.
8.	 If you're going to further edit the video or export it to an HD video for the 
Web, skip ahead to step 16 for editing levels.
9.	 If you want to resize the video, go to Video | Filters.
10.	 Click on the Add button.
11.	 Select resize from the menu and click on OK.
12.	 You can now resize for any standard you wish. For example, 720 x 480 
is the NTSC standard, so enter 720 as the width under New size 
(the height will be calculated automatically). Under Framing options, 
select Letterbox/crop to size and enter 720 in the first field and 480 in the 
second as the target size. This will resize each frame and add a black bar 
at the top and bottom to fill the screen.

Chapter 10
[ 353 ]
13.	 If the end use for this is a PAL TV screen (for example, for a DVD in the UK), 
use 768 as the new width and 768 and 576 as the target size.
14.	 Use the Show preview button to check the effect on the image. In our 
example, the image will show black bars at the top and bottom because 
the input aspect ratio of 16:9 is larger than that of the output format.
15.	 Click on OK.
16.	 To edit the levels just like you did with your still image in Chapter 9, 
Postproduction in GIMP, click on the Add button in the Filters dialog 
box again.
17.	 Select Levels from the menu and click on OK.
18.	 Click on Show preview.
19.	 Click on Sample video.... VirtualDub will analyze all images and show a 
histogram for the whole sequence.

Animations
[ 354 ]
20.	 Move the little arrows as you did in Chapter 9, Postproduction in GIMP, 
until you're happy with the preview image (see the following screenshot).
21.	 Click on OK.
22.	 Now go to File | Save as AVI. VirtualDub will take the individual 
frames, apply your filters, and export them as an AVI animation 
(see the next screenshot).

Chapter 10
[ 355 ]
VirtualDub has taken the individual frames and stitched them together into an 
AVI file. This can be played using a standard viewer on your computer or edited as 
part of your video sequence in Windows Movie Maker or similar. When you save 
the AVI animation, the file is not compressed, allowing you to use it in video editing 
software without losing further quality. If you had saved it straight from SketchUp 
as an AVI, it would have already been compressed and you would lose quality 
through further editing.
Creating the final video composition
You now have photoreal clips from Thea and/or non-photoreal clips from 
SketchUp, which need to be stitched together into your final presentation. 
You will have already created a Windows Movie Maker project (or similar) with 
SketchUp preview animations or scanned images. You now need to convert this into 
the final production. This is just a matter of replacing the sketches or low-resolution 
animations with your high-resolution clips, then exporting to the correct format. 
Just follow the steps outlined here. Remember to use only uncompressed AVI 
files for this, not MP4 files.
1.	 Open your project in your favorite video editing software.
2.	 Hover over a clip in the timeline or storyboard. Read the clip length.
3.	 Insert your new final production clip next to it and adjust it to match 
the length of the adjacent clip (if you trimmed it before).
4.	 Click on the low-resolution clip and hit Delete.
5.	 When you have replaced all the clips like this, you have a 
high-resolution version of your video presentation.
6.	 If you like, add scene transitions by dragging them into the slots 
in your storyboard view.
7.	 Export the final movie to your hard drive. If your video editing 
software supports it, you can export directly to a *.mp4 video. If not, 
just create a *.avi or *.mov video with the highest quality settings you 
have available. Make sure you have sufficient disk space!
You just used your rough storyboard video project as a skeleton to build up the 
final high-quality presentation video. By replacing each existing preview sketch, 
you made sure that the final video has the same timing and content as the preview. 
Then you created the final video file that can be viewed with a video player such 
as VLC.

Animations
[ 356 ]
Did you notice that the video you have exported has a huge file size? This may not 
be a problem if you burn it to DVD, but many clients will want to show this video 
online via streaming services such as YouTube. So what now? Let's use a video 
encoder to create a compressed version of the movie with a much smaller file size.
Compressing for online streaming 
services
The following steps will allow you to upload your video to YouTube and other 
video-sharing sites. The frame rate and video size you set earlier is the recommended 
size for HD videos on YouTube. The video you prepare for upload should be of very 
high quality and good resolution because the streaming service will use it as a master 
copy to generate the video streams that the users will see. This process will reduce 
the quality a bit so your uploaded video should be as good as it can be.
Creating an MP4 video with HandBrake
To create the MP4 video clip, use the AVI file from Movie Maker and convert it into 
the recommended format for YouTube:
1.	 Open the HandBrake application.
2.	 In the toolbar at the top, click on the Source button.
3.	 Select Open File.
4.	 Open the AVI file you just saved from your video editing software.
5.	 Under Destination, select a directory and filename for the 
compressed video. Set the filename extension to .mp4.
6.	 Under Output Settings, select Mp4 in the Container field and check 
the option for Web Optimized.
7.	 Select the Video tab in the lower half.

Chapter 10
[ 357 ]
8.	 Set the options there as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 Note that the x264 preset slider is in the left half of the range. 
This influences the encoding speed and the video quality. 
Faster speeds reduce the video quality.
10.	 Also, note the setting for Quality: Constant Quality. It is set to 20 and 
here a lower value means higher quality. The value of 20 is a good 
starting point. For some videos, you may have to decrease this value 
to 16 to reduce visual artifacts from the encoding process.
11.	 Click on the green Start button to start the encoding process.
12.	 When it's done, open the new file in a video player such as VLC to check 
the quality.

Animations
[ 358 ]
This file is now ready for upload to a web host such as YouTube or Vimeo. 
You can watch the video on their home page or just use their streaming server 
and embed a link to the video on your own website. After you have uploaded your 
video to YouTube, select the options you require and copy and paste the URL code 
from the Embed textbox into your website or blog as you can see here:
You just compressed your video to the MPEG-4 format with the H.264 compression 
codec and uploaded it to a streaming service website. This is immensely good news 
for the following reasons:
•	
H.264 allowed you to compress the video with little reduction in quality.
•	
MP4 is a web-optimized streaming format that can be viewed over 
the Internet.
•	
The video can be shared with anyone with an Internet connection. 
Just e-mail the YouTube link or the address of your website with the 
embedded video.

Chapter 10
[ 359 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to create flyovers and walkthroughs. You found 
out how to set up the camera to follow a path and tweak individual views along the 
path. You then discovered how to put clips together into an overall presentation. 
Some skills you picked up in this chapter were:
•	
Planning your animations the easy way
•	
Plugins you need to achieve smooth animations
•	
How to render photoreal frames for an animation
•	
How to best prepare videos for viewing on the Internet
All that knowledge will set you on the path to happily produce SketchUp animations 
for architectural visualizations. As you have seen, it's not hard to generate great 
results with SketchUp and a few other video-editing and conversion programs. 
Of course, if you find yourself creating animations regularly, you can take these 
skills and apply them to video compositing applications that are industry standard, 
such as After Effects or Nuke, or try an open source alternative such as Blender 3D.
Now that you know how to animate your projects, we will be looking at professional 
presentation of 2D still images with LayOut in the next chapter.


Presenting Visuals in LayOut
This chapter is all about presentation. Think about the types of visuals you've 
created so far: the many different media, styles, viewpoints, and angles on your 
building. Do these individual images speak for themselves? Do they individually 
have both context and focus? Usually, the answer to this will be "no", because it 
takes several images to create an overall impression and communicate your design 
intent. You may already be skilled at displaying visuals as posters, on websites or in 
presentations, but you may not yet have looked into LayOut. This chapter is a brief 
introduction to it.
In this chapter, you will discover how to:
•	
Display plans and elevations
•	
Import SketchUp models and rendered images
•	
Add dimensions and text
•	
Set up a CAD style border
•	
Create PowerPoint style presentations
•	
Print to scale and control line weights
LayOut comes with SketchUp Pro or you can try it free for eight hours when you 
install a trial version. The free trial should easily be long enough to try out the 
practice sections found in this chapter.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 362 ]
Getting started with LayOut
You will find that many things in LayOut remind you of SketchUp tools, so you 
should feel right at home. It's designed to interact closely with SketchUp. Some 
areas of LayOut, such as dimensioning, are an exciting development as they extend 
SketchUp's reach into the domain where CAD programs reside. The following 
screenshot is an overview of the available tools:
You will notice that some of the tools—such as the Circle tool—have a small triangle 
next to them. These buttons are used to access multiple similar tools such as Circle 
and Ellipse or Rectangle and Rounded in Rectangles. Just click on the triangle to see 
the available options.
Creating a custom page border
For our first steps in LayOut, let's customize one of the preinstalled page border 
templates and turn it into a customized architectural drawing sheet set. You can 
then save it and use it for future projects.
1.	 Open LayOut by double-clicking on the program icon.
2.	 When you start without an existing document, you first have to select 
a standard page size and template for your project. Click on the + icon 
next to Title block and select Simple, then select A3 Landscape 
(or Tabloid Landscape depending on your local convention) 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 363 ]
3.	 Click on Choose. The main LayOut window opens with the page that has a 
simple border in the main window.
4.	 On Windows, you will find the pallets arranged on the right-hand side of 
the main Window. On Mac, the pallets are independent of the main window 
but should show up on the right edge of your screen. Click on the title bars 
named Pages and Layers to expand the pages and layers pallet. You can see 
both the pallets in the following screenshot:

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 364 ]
5.	 Click on Cover Page or Inside Page in the Pages pallet to switch between the 
two in the main window. The template you selected earlier came with both 
these pages already set up. With the three buttons above the pages list, you 
can create a new page and duplicate or delete an existing page.
Unlike in SketchUp, where the pallets are often moved around or 
switched off, LayOut pallets are best left where they are. Each pallet 
can be expanded or collapsed simply by clicking on the title bar.
6.	 Use the scroll wheel of your mouse to pan and zoom in and out of the main 
window. Zoom in on the text on the bottom-right corner of the cover page.
7.	 Use the Select tool (arrow icon at the top-left corner of the screen) and 
double-click the title text. You will notice that you can't select and modify 
the text.
8.	 Look at the Layers pallet. The template has four existing layers. Notice you 
have a lock symbol next to three of the layers? This means items on that 
layer cannot be edited. It's a safety feature to stop you accidentally changing 
elements that you want to keep static.
9.	 Click on Cover Page in the Pages pallet to select the first page, then select 
the layer Cover Page in the Layers pallet and click on the lock symbol. 
The padlock symbol opens (see the next screenshot).

Chapter 11
[ 365 ]
10.	 You can now edit the title and any other existing element on the Cover Page 
layer. Do not modify any text between the <…> signs. These symbols identify 
Auto-Text fields and have a special meaning in Layout (see the Using 
Auto-Text section). Also don't forget to add a nice company logo.
11.	 When you are done with the changes to your border, click on the lock again 
to protect the elements on this layer against further accidental changes.
12.	 Repeat the changes on the page Inside Page with the layer On Every Inside 
Page. You can then duplicate this page with your personalized information 
for any new page you need in your project.
You selected a standard template to start your project. It already included a front 
page and an inside page. Both pages have different page borders set up on dedicated 
layers. This allows you to keep them locked, so their content is not changed 
accidentally. As you have seen, you can edit any of the text you want 
once the corresponding layer is unlocked.
Using Auto-Text
LayOut 2014 introduced a new feature called Auto-Text. With Auto-Text, you can 
place a keyword in your text field that gets replaced into context-specific text such 
as the page number or the date on which the document is saved. You can use this 
feature wherever you need dynamic text components (such as a page number) or 
want to use the same text consistently in several places (such as a project number or 
client information).

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 366 ]
When you start your LayOut document from an updated template, you will already 
find fields for general information such as client details. You can use the existing 
fields as a form of checklist for all the information that needs to be updated at the 
setup of a presentation document. You can also define your own fields.
1.	 Go to File | Document Setup....
2.	 Select the Auto-Text entry to the left.
3.	 Go through the list and update any general information about your project. 
Changing a value here will update it everywhere in the document where the 
Auto-Text field has been used.
4.	 To place an Auto-Text field in your document, position the cursor in the 
correct location in a text box.
5.	 Select the menu entry Text | Insert Auto-Text and select the desired field to 
place it on the page.
Now, it's a simple matter of changing the text you find in the Auto-Text fields to 
reflect your project. Also, add lines and rectangles to the title block or border to 
customize it. Make sure you are adding or removing elements on the correct layer 
for the page you're on by clicking on it in the Layers pallet. The current layer you're 
drawing on shows a pencil icon next to it.
Have a go at this now, and when you're finished, set the bottom three layers back to 
the locked state again. Then click on File | Save As Template... and enter the name 
of your new template. You can now choose this template whenever you start a new 
LayOut presentation.
Displaying SketchUp models in LayOut
Any view or scene in SketchUp can be viewed within LayOut. You don't need to 
export any images or files to do this. LayOut links to your SketchUp file directly, so 
every change you make to your model in SketchUp will be visible in LayOut. This 
is great because similar to animation storyboarding in the previous chapter, you can 
set up dummy views in LayOut based on a rough SketchUp model. Once set up, you 
know exactly what views you have to detail in SketchUp, and you can check your 
progress through LayOut. It's just like a page with windows into your model.
Preparing SketchUp scenes for LayOut
Before you jump right into LayOut, you should prepare your SketchUp model for 
the use in LayOut. Generally, you should set up the following scenes and styles 
corresponding to the views you want to show on your LayOut pages:

Chapter 11
[ 367 ]
•	
One or more Hero Shots: These are perspectives of the building that show 
dominant architectural features, perhaps even glorify them. You can use 
sketchy or artistic styles for these views, too.
•	
Traditional Elevations of the building facades: Use a parallel projection and 
clean line styles without line extensions or profiles. You can use a black and 
white style or shaded as you want but don't let the colors and textures detract 
you from the geometry.
•	
Sectional Views: Use a parallel projection and enable section cuts.
•	
Plan View: This is a top-down view with parallel projection and section cut. 
You may need several of these, one for each floor.
When you set up views and perspectives, keep in mind that the aspect ratio of your 
view in LayOut can be different from your SketchUp screen. Think where you want 
to use this view and what's the best size for it on the page, not in SketchUp.
You should use one style for one type of view and similar styles for views that will 
appear on the same page. This will keep the appearance of your LayOut project 
consistent. For some projects—especially those in early design stages—a convincing 
artistic style is more important than to convey all the details of the model.
For this chapter, we will use the Crissy Airfield House model from the 3D 
Warehouse as an example again. After you have imported the component from the 
3D Warehouse, rotate the model to align it with the global SketchUp coordinate 
system. This will make setting up the views easier.
Aligning the view to the model
Some models have more than four elevations or are rotated against the SketchUp 
coordinate system. If this is the case for your model, you can't just use the predefined 
Top, Left, and other views to show a building facade because these are aligned to the 
global coordinate system of the scene.
To align the view with the building facade, perform the following steps:
1.	 In SketchUp, select a face of the model that's parallel to the facade you 
want to show.
2.	 With the face selected, right-click on it and select Align View.
3.	 Go to Camera | Parallel Projection and then set up a scene (by navigating to 
View | Animation | Add Scene).
Go through your list of planned views and create scene tabs for each camera setup 
and corresponding style. When you have created all the scenes and styles, save the 
SketchUp file. You are now ready to return to LayOut.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 368 ]
Display a SketchUp 3D view
With suitable scenes set up in SketchUp, presenting the model in LayOut becomes 
very easy. To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 In LayOut, create a new layer called SketchUp Model and make it the active 
layer. Also, check that the layers used for your border elements are locked.
2.	 Select the Cover Page in the Pages pallet.
3.	 Go to File | Insert..., then navigate to your SketchUp model and click 
on Open.
4.	 A viewport appears on your page with a view of your SketchUp model 
shown in it. Don't worry if this is not the view you want for the front page.
5.	 Click on a corner of the viewport rectangle and stretch it to fill the page. 
Note that you can snap to the corners and edges of the border as you can 
see in the following screenshot:
6.	 The view will resize to fill the window.
7.	 Right-click on the window and navigate to Scenes | Hero Shot in the context 
menu (or whatever you named the view for your cover page).

Chapter 11
[ 369 ]
8.	 The view will update to show your hero shot.
9.	 If you find that the view is not quite right, double-click on the viewport. 
This activates the viewport for 3D editing.
10.	 You can now orbit, pan, and zoom the model just like in SketchUp. 
To switch between the view tools, right-click on the viewport and select 
Camera Tools from the context menu.
11.	 To end your view adjustments, hit the Esc key or click on the white area 
next to the viewport window.
You have just inserted your SketchUp model on a page in LayOut. You adjusted 
the view as you would in SketchUp, but now you can see exactly what it will look 
like on the page when it is printed out. This is a fundamentally different way of 
working compared to other 2D layout applications such as CorelDraw, Inkscape, 
or Pagemaker because the images on display remain a fully editable 3D model.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 370 ]
Adjusting the display style
Not only can you change the viewpoint, but you can also overwrite the scene style 
options in each LayOut window as follows:
1.	 Select the viewport you want to change.
2.	 Click on the header bar of the SketchUp Model pallet to open it.
3.	 Under the View tab, you will find the following options:
°°
Scene: Select one of the scenes you set up in SketchUp
°°
Standard View: Pick one of the default views (Top, Left, and so on)
°°
Ortho and Scale: When you use an orthographic (parallel) projection, 
LayOut will size the image to the given scale. Perspective views don't 
use this setting.
°°
Shadows: This enables the display of shadows and adjusts the 
time of day.
°°
Fog: This enables fog settings.

Chapter 11
[ 371 ]
4.	 Our view is on the north side of the building, so the shadow settings won't 
help us much. However, we can use a slightly colored fog to add a bit of 
drama to our image (see the previous screenshot).
5.	 Note that the Scene drop-down menu now has a (Modified) prefix. 
This indicates that you have made changes to the scene that was saved 
in the SketchUp file.
6.	 To return to your original settings, just select the original scene from the 
drop-down list.
Using SketchUp styles
Choosing a different style is just as you would do it in SketchUp:
1.	 Select the Styles tab at the top of the pallet.
2.	 Choose the style you want from the available SketchUp styles. Use the 
drop-down menu above the list (the small house icon) to select styles 
from another collection as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Also, note the Line Weight box at the bottom of the list. This defines the 
thickness of SketchUp edges in the viewport.
4.	 Again, use the Esc key or click on the area outside the viewport when you 
want to stop editing.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 372 ]
Creating multiple views in LayOut
You're now ready to set up the internal pages of your presentation. For a real 
project, you should plan carefully what to show. You already gained all the skills 
for planning your scenes at the start of Chapter 3, Composing the Scene. Now, let's 
create multiple views in LayOut:
1.	 Click on the SketchUp view you inserted into the cover page.
2.	 Then, go to Edit | Copy (or right-click on the view and select Copy from 
the context menu).
3.	 Select the Inside Page in the pages pallet, then right-click on Inside Page and 
select Duplicate. This keeps an empty copy as a template for further pages.
4.	 Right-click on the copy and select Rename. Give it a name that describes 
the content (for example, Elevations).
5.	 You can drag the new page above the template Inside Page.
6.	 With the new page selected, right-click on the main LayOut window and 
select Paste from the context menu. A copy of the view from the cover 
appears on the page.
7.	 Resize it using the corner grips. A little less than a quarter of the page 
should do.

Chapter 11
[ 373 ]
8.	 Right-click on the viewport and select Scene | East Elevation (East Elevation 
is one of the scenes I have set up in SketchUp).
9.	 Open the SketchUp Model pallet.
10.	 Notice that this view is set up as an Ortho projection with a given Current 
Scale of roughly 1:81.
11.	 Pick a scale of 1:100 from the drop-down menu. If you are more at home 
with imperial scales, you can also use 1/8" = 1'-0". The scene displayed 
in the viewport will shrink by a small amount.
12.	 Make sure that the option to Preserve Scale on Resize is checked for 
the viewport. You should now have a page and settings like those in the 
following screenshot:
13.	 The view cuts a bit of off the building at the left edge. To correct this, 
right-click on the viewport and select Edit 3D View. The outline of the 
viewport will change and you will see the mouse cursor change to the 
Orbit tool icon.
14.	 Right-click again on the viewport and select Camera Tools | Pan. 
The mouse cursor changes to the Hand icon.
15.	 Now, center the building in the viewport with the Pan tool.
16.	 Hit the Esc key to end the 3D view edit session.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 374 ]
Arranging the viewports
With the following steps, we create new viewports quickly and fill the page with 
views of the model:
1.	 Use copy and paste to create two new copies of this viewport: one to the 
right-hand side of the viewport (for the scene West Elevation) and one 
below the viewport (for North Elevation).
2.	 Resize the North Elevation viewport to span the whole page.
3.	 Right-click on each of the views and select the corresponding scene from 
the Scenes context menu.
4.	 Adjust the scale after you have selected a new scene. All viewports should 
be set to 1:100 (or 1/8" = 1'-0"). You can also right-click and access the 
viewport scale via the context menu.
5.	 Use Edit 3D View | Camera Tools | Pan again to align the east and west 
elevation vertically. You can draw a horizontal line first as a reference. 
Zoom in closer for finer adjustments.
6.	 Now is a good time to save your LayOut project. Go to File | Save As 
and choose a name and location related to your project.
7.	 Your finished page should look like this:

Chapter 11
[ 375 ]
You have set up an orthographic view and adjusted its size on the paper 
to a standard architectural scale. Copying this view made it easy to create 
equally sized viewports. The existing scenes in the SketchUp file allowed 
you to quickly change from one view to another so that all you needed to 
do was adjust the alignment of the views on the page.
Annotations in LayOut
Now that you have your views arranged, you need to give them a title so 
that your clients can understand what they are looking at. You could just use 
the Text tool and perhaps add few graphic lines like you can see in the page 
border, but LayOut has much better options to add standard elements such 
as drawing references: the scrapbook.
A scrapbook is a collection of drawing elements that you can add to your own 
project just by dragging it onto your page. You can then customize the element 
for your particular need, for example, by changing some text.
Using scrapbooks
LayOut already has a few scrapbooks with standard elements set up. 
We will use these to add drawing references to the viewports:
1.	 Before you add any new elements, create a new layer named 
Annotations.
2.	 Open the Scrapbook pallet.
3.	 Select TB-Simple | Drafting Symbols 1 from the drop-down list 
in the pallet.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 376 ]
4.	 Click-and-drag one of the drawing reference symbols from the list onto your 
page. You can see the available symbols in the following screenshot:.
5.	 The new symbol is a group of text and line elements. Double-click 
on the group to be able to edit the parts.
6.	 Double-click on the text Drawing Description and change it to 
East Elevation.
7.	 Change the Scale text to 1:100 (or 1/8"=1'-0" as appropriate).
8.	 Finally, change the reference number from 0 to 1.
9.	 Copy and paste the modified group. It will be inserted on top of the original.
10.	 Move the copy to the West Elevation viewport. Note that LayOut also uses 
inference snapping when you move an object vertically or horizontally.
11.	 Adjust the text and drawing reference for the new elevation.
12.	 Repeat for the North Elevation.
There, you're done. Scrapbook symbols give you a quick way to add decorative or 
annotative elements without having to draw them from scratch in each document.

Chapter 11
[ 377 ]
Editing scrapbooks
You may have noticed the small Edit… button in the top-right corner of 
the Scrapbook pallet. When you click on it, a new LayOut window will 
open with the list of symbols as a page. Scrapbooks are only LayOut 
documents that are saved in one of the paths defined in the Preferences 
| Folders | Scrapbooks setting.
Displaying SketchUp sections
There is currently no function to create building sections only in LayOut, so you 
need to create sectional views in SketchUp first. Once you add a scene with an 
active section plane to the SketchUp model, it will be available in LayOut as a 
scene in the viewport menu.
This process is not different from setting up any other view but we can do better. 
To create clean lines and solid fills for our section elements, we will use SketchUp to 
create lines that we can then import to LayOut as vector objects. These will always be 
rendered at maximum quality regardless of the setting of the main SketchUp view.
This technique has been presented by Nick Sonder at a SketchUp Bootcamp and 
documented in several videos on YouTube. If you want to see more about this 
and his incredibly detailed LayOut drawings, just search for Nick Sonder Process 
on YouTube.
Creating section line work
To prepare the line work, we need to go back to SketchUp and set up a section plane 
through our model:
1.	 Set up a scene in SketchUp that contains an active section plane and arrange 
an orthogonal view of the section cut. We are using a plan view of the 
building as example.
2.	 Set up a new viewport in your LayOut document with this scene as 
explained in the steps in the previous sections.
3.	 Go back to SketchUp and select the section plane.
4.	 Right-click on the section plane and select Create Group from Slice.
5.	 SketchUp will create a new group with lines for every face that is cut by the 
section plane.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 378 ]
6.	 You may have to disable the section plane now to be able to see the newly 
created group.
7.	 Select the new group now. Start editing the lines to fill solid elements such as 
walls with a surface, and remove details that you don't want to see in your 
LayOut presentation.
8.	 Finally, assign a dark or bright color to the group, whichever works better 
for the style of your section (we use a bright red for illustration). You can see 
the resulting geometry in the following screenshot, moved above the section 
plane for easy editing:
9.	 Select the section lines group, right-click on it, and select Copy.
10.	 Change back to the LayOut application and select the page with the 
viewport for your section view.
11.	 Create a new layer called SectionLines and make it active.
12.	 Lock the layer with your existing viewports (SketchUp Model in our case) 
to avoid any changes to the view setup.

Chapter 11
[ 379 ]
13.	 Now go to File | Paste.
14.	 The geometry you copied in SketchUp will be inserted as a new SketchUp 
model with its own viewport. You can apply the same modifications and 
transformations to this viewport that you can apply to an external SketchUp 
model, including perspective changes and scaling.
15.	 Adjust the scale of the new viewport to match your underlying view. 
You can see the result in the following screenshot:
16.	 Now, move the new view with the lines in place above the old (shaded) 
section view.
17.	 The last thing to do for this viewport is to set the render mode at the bottom 
right of the SketchUp Model pallet to Vector for a crisp outline of the lines 
and polygons.
Now, all this looks like a lot of work for a section that you can just as well get for 
free from a SketchUp scene with section planes enabled. The benefit is that the 
vector-rendered section lines will always come out crisp regardless of the quality 
of the other views. It will also help with dimensioning because you can snap the 
dimension lines precisely to the section geometry.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 380 ]
Dimensions
Adding dimensions is pretty much self-explanatory. Just click on the Dimensions 
button and snap to the end points of the building. In the following screenshot, 
a few horizontal dimensions have been placed in the drawing:
Use the Dimension, Text, and Label tools now on your drawing. They work just 
like the dimension tools in SketchUp or any other CAD program. You may find that 
sometimes the dimension displayed by LayOut is not correct. This is usually because 
the dimension line will snap to points in 3D space and LayOut calculates the 3D 
distance between the points and not the 2D distance that you expect. In that case, 
switch off the layer with your SketchUp viewports and snap the dimensions to the 
section lines we created in the previous section.
When your initial dimension line doesn't look quite right, use the options in the 
Dimension Style pallet to adjust the appearance. You can also move the position 
of the dimension line after you have placed it on the drawing.
Slideshows and presentations
LayOut is a cross between CAD, vector graphics software, and PowerPoint. 
If you set up multiple pages in LayOut, they can be viewed as a slideshow just like a 
presentation in PowerPoint (but without the scene animations you get in SketchUp) 
or printed as a portfolio of pictures.

Chapter 11
[ 381 ]
Creating a presentation
With the following simple steps, you can quickly create a slideshow presentation 
of your model:
1.	 Start a new file in LayOut by navigating to File | New.
2.	 Select a plain paper template in landscape format.
3.	 Add elements to the page that you want to see on every slide of 
your presentation, such as a logo or page counter. Use Auto-Text 
for page numbers.
4.	 Insert a SketchUp model on the first page as before.
5.	 In the Pages pallet, click on the Duplicate button.
6.	 Modify the viewport perspective or style, and add text or other elements.
7.	 Repeat the steps 5 and 6 for all of your slides.
8.	 To view your slides, go to View | Start Presentation.
9.	 You can use the left and right mouse buttons or the arrow keys on 
your computer to go forward and backwards between the slides.
10.	 While you show the presentation, you can also use the mouse to add 
notes and markup to your slides. When you finish the presentation, 
you will be asked if you want to save these markups to the file.
Adding further elements to enhance LayOut 
pages
By inserting background images, adding shapes, and controlling the view order 
of each element, you can build up interesting page layouts.
The order of elements is defined via the layer stack. Elements on the same layer 
can be arranged with the Arrange menu. Just select an element and go to 
Arrange | Bring Forward / Send Backward as you need.
For some SketchUp styles, LayOut automatically clips the background, which allows 
the elements on another layer to show through. You need to have the Background 
option in the SketchUp Model | Styles pallet deselected to make this work.
You can use LayOut to arrange several views of your SketchUp model, along with 
photos, renderings, or a non-photoreal output that you modified in GIMP. Each page 
can now be shown as a slide, or exported as a PDF or individual images.

Presenting Visuals in LayOut
[ 382 ]
Exporting and printing
You can export your whole project or only individual pages as PDF, JPEG, or PNG 
images. PDF is usually a good choice because it combines vector quality markup 
with raster images at varied resolutions. PNG or JPEG should only be used when 
PDF is not possible or when you want to edit the exported image further in GIMP.
Exporting a PDF document from LayOut
Before you export your document, set the render quality according to your needs 
and the intended use of the document. Always follow these steps just to make sure 
you have the right option selected:
1.	 To start the export, go to File | Export.
2.	 Make sure that your output format is set to PDF.
3.	 Click on the Options button.
4.	 The important option here is the Output Quality drop-down menu. 
It will affect the file size but also the resolution of the rendered SketchUp 
views. Choose Low or Medium if you are placing the PDF document on 
the web or sending it via e-mail and High if you want to print from it.
5.	 Pick a filename and location and click on the Save button.
6.	 Your PDF file will be created. If you export more than one page, 
you will get a single PDF document with multiple pages.
7.	 Depending on the Finish option (see the preceding screenshot), 
the PDF will open in your viewer once it has been created.

Chapter 11
[ 383 ]
Export to print
If you have a high-quality color printer in your office, you can print out your 
creations directly from LayOut. Before you do so, change the output quality to 
get the best results:
1.	 Go to File | Document Setup....
2.	 Select the Paper options.
3.	 Under Rendering Resolution, set the Output Quality drop-down 
menu to High.
4.	 Click on Close.
5.	 For each SketchUp viewport, you can also set the render method from 
Raster to Vector or Hybrid independently.
°°
Raster: This method renders the view exactly as in SketchUp 
using pixels.
°°
Vector: This method uses lines and color fills. It is better for lines or 
solid-colored surfaces, but it won't retain sketchy line styles or textures.
°°
Hybrid: This method is a bit of both, so it can produce the best image 
quality but takes longer to process.
6.	 Finally, you can go to File | Print and click on the Print button.
Summary
In this chapter, you have briefly experienced the capabilities of the LayOut 
application, which comes with SketchUp Pro. You can use it to set up drawings 
from a SketchUp model or compose a 2D collage out of various source images.
You've learned how to create custom drawing borders to give your documents 
a professional appearance and how to use SketchUp scenes and styles to show 
your 3D model on paper. You set the viewport scale of your SketchUp model to an 
accurate value and added text and dimensions. You also looked at the preparation 
of slideshows for output on a projector and how to arrange a mix of SketchUp views, 
renders, and other images.
I hope this chapter has given you a feel for LayOut and that you will continue to use it 
for your future projects. You are now fully equipped to ride on the crest of SketchUp's 
wave and produce and present powerful images on the screen and on paper.
In the next chapter, we will go beyond SketchUp and look at some current 
technologies to create animations quickly or prepare interactive 3D environments 
for your clients.


Interactive Visualization
So far, you have learned how to create visuals and animations from SketchUp or an 
external renderer. These fulfill more or less the role of the traditional architectural 
drawing. We even used GIMP to make our renderings look more like hand 
drawings! However, progress in computer graphics and processing speed has not 
only made photoreal rendering accessible to everyone, but it has also opened up new 
ways of storing and presenting the information that is embedded in a digital image.
In this chapter, we explore a few new technologies that will allow you to interact 
with your rendering or 3D environment in real time. In particular, we will look 
at the following options:
•	
The Relight feature that's built into Thea Studio
•	
LumenRT by e-on software (www.lumenrt.com)
You already have Thea Studio installed and can download a trial version of 
LumenRT from the website. Be warned that the download is almost 2 GB in 
size. The trial is fully featured for 14 days, but limited in the content that comes 
with the applications. You will also find that the output quality is limited, and there 
are notes and watermarks to indicate that you are not using a licensed product.
Lighting animation with Thea Relight
At first, we will take a look at a feature that is part of Thea Studio: Relight. 
With Relight, you can modify the distribution of light in your image after the 
rendering is complete. This means that you can create combinations of lighting 
levels and colors and even create an animation from a single, rendered image. 
The major benefit here is that the new settings can be applied immediately and 
don't require a new image to be rendered.

Interactive Visualization
[ 386 ]
Preparing the SketchUp scene
To work with Relight, we need a scene that contains a few light sources. We can 
return to our gallery scene from Chapter 1, Quick Start Tutorial, and simply add a 
few spotlights and a striplight using the Thea plugin. To illustrate the positions and 
directions of the spots, I have added a tracklight component from the 3D Warehouse. 
In the following screenshot, you can see the scene with the new elements:
In our example, the spotlights have the default values for the hotspot and falloff. 
Only the light intensity is set to 100 Watt for each light source. The striplight is 
created as a rectangle with a light-emitting material. The light intensity here is 
also set to 100 Watt. It is not important to find the perfect balance for the light 
fixtures now. Just give them enough power to have a noticeable effect on the 
scene. You should keep the light color to the default white, though.
You can download the SketchUp file of this scene from the download 
section of this book at www.packtpub.com/support.

Chapter 12
[ 387 ]
Exporting to Thea Studio
We want to open our scene in Thea Studio, so we have to export it to a *.scn.thea 
file first. To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Create a new folder on your hard drive to hold all of the files for the scene. 
Using a dedicated export folder keeps all the necessary files together.
2.	 In SketchUp, set up the view you want to export, save it as a scene, 
and make it your current view.
3.	 Open the Thea Tools window and set up the aspect ratio and resolution 
for your image. In the end, we will create an animation from this image, 
so don't go crazy with the resolution.
4.	 Disable the options for Use Sky and Use Sun. We only want the spots and 
area light in the scene.
5.	 Go to the Tools tab and click on the Export model as Thea Scene button.
6.	 Select the folder you just created and give your scene a name for the export, 
such as gallery_relight.scn.thea. The main scene file and associated files 
(such as our image textures) will be saved in the new folder.
7.	 Open the Thea Studio application. It should be enough to double-click on 
the gallery_relight.scn.thea file that was just created. Thea Studio will 
open with a 3D preview of the scene, as shown in the following screenshot:

Interactive Visualization
[ 388 ]
8.	 On the left-hand side of the screen, you will find a Scene outline of the 
objects. If you don't have the correct view displayed in the 3D window, 
search for your scene in this list under Cameras and double-click on it 
to set the right camera angle.
9.	 Below the 3D view, you find tabs for Viewport and Darkroom. Switch to 
the Darkroom tab now.
10.	 The lower part of the Darkroom screen shows the Display settings that you 
are familiar with from the SketchUp plugin. Adjust ISO (800), Shutter Speed 
(125), and f-number (2.8) for an interior scene with artificial lighting.
11.	 On the right-hand side of the screen, you see the Settings window with 
vertical tabs. Click on the Unbiased tab. The options for the unbiased 
render engine will be shown.
12.	 Under the Main settings, you will find the Relight option. Activate it.
13.	 Now, just hit the Start button to begin the render. You have to use the 
unbiased render method to produce an image that is usable for Relight.
Using Relight
Let the image render for a while. When it has reached a quality that you are 
happy with, you can stop the rendering process. The raw rendering will look 
like the example in the following screenshot:

Chapter 12
[ 389 ]
You will notice that overall it's not very well lit, and the spotlights create very visible 
patches on the wall. Don't worry; we can fix this in a second with Relight.
Switch to the Relight tab (next to the Display tab). You will see the Relight controls, 
below the image, as in the following screenshot:
The controls are arranged in the following three groups:
•	
Frame selection (horizontally at the top)
•	
Key frame buttons and other actions to the right
•	
A list of light sources in the scene at the bottom (one striplight source 
and three thea_spotlights sources in our case)
You can click on the Th/nails button in the second group to switch the display 
of light sources from a simple list to small thumbnails with each light's distribution. 
There is also a small rectangle with a light color and an indicator of the light 
intensity. So far, they are all white and set to 100. Using these controls, you can 
now adjust the impact that each light has on the final scene.
Go ahead and test a few variations. Change the intensity of each light or click on 
the white rectangle to change the color in a color-picker dialog box. Don't forget 
to click on Refresh after each change, or you won't see the main image updated.
Creating a Relight animation
When you have experimented with the effects of each light source, it's time to 
create an animation where we will fade each light in and out and finally settle 
for a balanced composite of all the lights:
1.	 Set the Frames value in the first group to 500. This will define the length 
of our animation (about 20 seconds at 25 frames per second).
2.	 The top scale now shows a shorter bright bar. This gives you the position 
of the lower frames window relative to the whole animation. Make sure 
it's positioned all the way to the left.

Interactive Visualization
[ 390 ]
3.	 In the Frames window, move the key frame indicator to frame 0.
4.	 Set all the lights to zero output and click on Refresh. Now, the image is 
completely dark.
5.	 Click on the Add button to add the first key frame for the animation.
6.	 Move the indicator to frame 50 and increase the light output of the 
striplight to 100. Don't forget to refresh to see the selected state.
7.	 Create another key frame.
8.	 Move on to frame 100 and add another key frame with all the lights 
dark again.
9.	 Repeat this for each light at a step of 50 frames. As you can see in the following 
screenshot, you can also change the color of the light during the animation:
10.	 At frame 400, you should have all your lights back at 0.
11.	 Now, add a last frame at the position 500 where the intensity of each light 
is well balanced in the scene. I think increasing the striplight to 300 and 
reducing the spots to 80 makes the image brighter and removes the visibility 
of the spots on the wall.

Chapter 12
[ 391 ]
12.	 Create a new folder to hold all the frames of the animation.
13.	 Now, click on the Save button and select to export the whole sequence.
14.	 Choose the new folder as the location and pick a filename. The images will 
be created with the frame number appended to the filename, for example, 
relight_animation0001.png.
Now, the animation frames will be created. Each frame will show a different fraction 
of the light so that the animation will look like a continuous dimming of each light. 
The main advantage of creating the frames using Relight is the time that is required 
to calculate all the images. It only takes a second or two for each frame depending 
on your image size and computer hardware.
After all the images have been done, you can use the tools we introduced in 
Chapter 10, Animations, to convert the images into a video clip. Since the whole 
scene is static except for the lights, you can easily slow down the frame rate of 
the animation without visible artifacts. You can do this to achieve a more compact 
animation file with slower rendering times.
Changing materials with Colimo
Thea has another feature that will surprise you: an interface to Colimo by Motiva 
(www.motivacg.com/en/colimo). With this software, you can exchange materials 
in an image after it has been rendered, just like you did with individual lights 
in Relight.
Before you render, you enable the option for materials to be editable in Colimo, 
then you render the image. At first, the image will have no colors or textures on 
the designated materials; however, when you export it to Colimo, you are able to 
assign colors, textures, and surface characteristics with immediate feedback.
This is not just a simple change to a specific color in the image that you could also 
manage with GIMP or Photoshop tools. The change gets applied to all areas of the 
image that were affected by the original material, such as reflections or refractions in 
a translucent object. You should go and check some of the YouTube videos that the 
developers have published to get an idea of its potential and how much time you can 
save when you want to test various combinations of materials in a scene.

Interactive Visualization
[ 392 ]
Immersive environment with LumenRT
In this section, we will look at a product that generates interactive 3D environments 
from a SketchUp scene. Thanks to the advances in computer graphics—and 
also to the success of video games—there are now a number of new software 
products available that can convert a SketchUp or CAD 3D model into a photoreal 
environment with textures and natural lighting. Some of these are even based on 
video game rendering systems (the game engine), while others are dedicated to 
high-quality visualizations.
LumenRT is published by e-on software, famous for its digital nature line of products 
to create and render natural environments and vegetation. LumenRT is available for 
Windows and Mac, and you can download a trial version and sample projects from 
www.lumenrt.com/download. Like all software that uses the advanced features of 
your graphics card to perform calculations, LumenRT requires a recent graphics 
card with current drivers. You can find the detailed requirements on its website.
Using the LumenRT plugin in SketchUp
When you install LumenRT, it will install a plugin for SketchUp on your system. 
When you restart SketchUp afterwards, you will find a new toolbar and submenu in 
the Plugins menu. The following screenshot shows the contents of the Plugins menu:
As you can see from the previous screenshot, there are three export options (Quick 
Export, Export Full Model, and Export Selected). The export to LumenRT also 
includes a conversion process called "baking" that can take a few minutes, especially 
if you have a complex and detailed model. During setup and for tests, you don't 
always want to wait so long. In that case, you can just use the Quick Export option, 
which produces lower quality exports within a shorter time.

Chapter 12
[ 393 ]
You can also find menu entries to Edit Materials and Add Lights (spotlights and 
point lights). These tools work like their counterparts in Thea or other rendering 
applications, where they create special material properties or entities that are not 
available in SketchUp. The installer has also copied a number of special LumenRT 
components into the SketchUp component library folder. You can access these via 
the standard SketchUp Components window.
As a test scene, we will use the Crissy Airfield scene from the 3D Warehouse again. 
I have removed the walkway and turned the model by 180 degrees to have the 
balconies facing south. This will give us nicer shadows in the scene. Again, you can 
download the modified scene from Packt Publishing's support website for this book.
Editing materials
When you have a scene modeled and textured in SketchUp, you can add 
further properties to the materials to make them look more realistic using 
the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Plugins | LumenRT 4 Studio | Edit Materials.
2.	 The LumenRT material editor window opens, which can be seen in the 
following screenshot:

Interactive Visualization
[ 394 ]
3.	 Select a material via the drop-down list or use the eyedropper button to pick 
a material from the SketchUp scene.
4.	 Set the appropriate material type and then assign the desired values for 
specularity, bump, and so on.
For typical opaque materials, material type Standard is used. The other available 
material types are Varnished, Metallic, Glass, and Water. They offer the usual 
advanced options for specularity and other values that you already know about. 
In the preceding screenshot, you can see that I have selected the material type 
Metallic for the Structural Steel material in SketchUp. The material type Water 
is special; it creates an animated water surface that produces caustic refraction 
patterns. LumenRT will also assign a specific material type if the material name 
contains keywords such as "glass" or "brick".
Adding digital nature components
To add more realism to the scene, you can add optimized components to the scene 
that get translated by LumenRT to highly detailed models of plants, vehicles, people, 
or animals. Some of these are even animated to perform certain movements or move 
with the wind. Be careful with the animated characters, though. Sometimes, the 
added realism is just enough to make the characters look even more artificial. 
To add components, perform the following steps:
1.	 To find the components, open the SketchUp Components window.
2.	 Click on the small house symbol and choose the LumenRT 4 
Studio collection.
3.	 The collection is organized into Animals, Characters, Plants, and Vehicles. 
Choose the Plants folder.
4.	 The trial installation of LumenRT only has a limited set of components. 
Pick one of the available plants and place it into the scene, just like any other 
SketchUp component. The following screenshot shows the Plants collection 
in the Components window:

Chapter 12
[ 395 ]
5.	 To add more variety, you can scale and rotate a component in the scene. 
The modifications will be picked up by LumenRT during the export and 
applied to the high-resolution model.
6.	 Add a few more plants to the scene to give it a bit of context (see the next 
screenshot for an example).

Interactive Visualization
[ 396 ]
Adding lights
You can add point lights and spotlights to your scene to add illumination for 
night-time renderings. Just select the Add LumenRT Point Light or Add LumenRT 
Spot Light option from the Add Lights submenu to place a new light in the scene. 
There are no options to set for the lights via the SketchUp interface.
If you already have components in your scene that mark the position of the lights, 
add the necessary lighting information to the component instances, as follows:
1.	 Select one of the components that you want to modify.
2.	 Now, navigate to Plugins | LumenRT 4 Studio | Add Lights | Point 
Light / Spot Light from Component. This option is not available when 
no component instance is selected.
3.	 During the export, the plugin will create a light source for each instance 
of this component in the scene.
The following screenshot shows our scene with several plant components 
surrounding the building:

Chapter 12
[ 397 ]
Exporting the scene
With the scene setup complete, create your first LiveCube using the following steps:
1.	 Go to Plugins | LumenRT 4 Studio | Export Full Model. The export dialog 
window appears (see the following screenshot).
2.	 Leave the Adjustable time of day option checked.
3.	 Under SKY and HORIZON, choose a preset environment for your scene. 
The trial version only offers one option, so we will leave it at the default.
4.	 The LIGHTING QUALITY field sets the options used to calculate the 
lighting environment during the baking phase. This option has a large impact 
on the rendering time, so for the first export, choose Draft or Standard.
5.	 Click on the spanner symbol to access further options for the scene export.
6.	 Choose Grass for the PEDESTAL option. The pedestal is an area that 
surrounds the model. You can think of it as the ground plane.
7.	 Smooth Motion defines how much interpolation is used for the calculation of 
a camera path from an animation that was set up in SketchUp. Higher values 
provide a smoother transition between the scenes.

Interactive Visualization
[ 398 ]
8.	 Leave the remaining options checked. They are mostly relevant for 
larger models.
9.	 Click on OK to close the Options window.
10.	 Back in the main export window, click on the large Start button to 
begin the export.
11.	 Check the SketchUp status bar for the progress of the export. It will give you 
the count of the processed entities and of how many still need to be exported.
After the export phase, the LumenRT baker application will start and begin to 
convert the exported geometry into a LiveCube. Depending on the settings of 
your lighting quality and the complexity of your model, this process can take 
anything from a few minutes to hours. With a quality setting of Standard and 
a model the size of our example, you should be done within 5 to 10 minutes.
The finished LiveCube will be saved in a new folder at the path 
Documents/e-on software/LumenRT 4 Studio/[scene name]. 
Should LumenRT crash during exploration, you can find the LiveCube 
in this folder and start it up again.
Navigating the LiveCube
When the LiveCube baking is done, it will open on the screen, and you can start 
exploring your photoreal environment. If you had an animation set up in SketchUp, 
it will be included in the LiveCube, and by default, it will start to loop through the 
animation path. Note that the following screenshot does not show a precalculated 
animation movie but a live rendering of camera movement through the scene:

Chapter 12
[ 399 ]
If you have any experience with first person video games, you should be able 
to navigate around the LiveCube with ease. The following are three different 
modes to move around the scene; you can switch between them via the function 
keys on your keyboard:
•	
Animation (F2): This mode is only available if you set up a key frame 
animation in SketchUp or LumenRT.
•	
Walk-Thru (F3): Click the left mouse button to move forward and move 
the mouse to indicate the direction. Your viewpoint will be fixed to 1.6 m 
above the ground, but you can walk up inclined surfaces or steps. 
PageUp and PageDown will help you move vertically.
•	
Fly-Thru (F4): In this mode, you can use the left, middle, and right mouse 
buttons to locate, zoom, and pan in the scene. The movement is similar to 
the navigation in a CAD application.
In the default setting, a small ribbon shows the mouse button and key functions related 
to the current mode. To activate an extended menu, press the F1 key. Experiment with 
the movement modes and explore your model in 3D. While you are moving through 
the scene, you can modify the shadow settings with the G and H keys. These will 
change the time of day, and so, the shadow, intensity, and color of the daylight.
LiveCube tools and settings
You will notice that LumenRT does not have any menu options or visible buttons. 
To access the available scene settings and tool options, press the Tab key. The main 
menu will appear at the left edge of the window. The following is a screenshot of 
the main menu:

Interactive Visualization
[ 400 ]
At the top of the column, you will find two icons—Load and Save—to load and 
save the LiveCube settings. Note that the settings file does not contain the whole 
LiveCube data but only the changeable options.
The next two icons are Undo and Redo and work as expected.
Exporting images
When you discover a stunning view of your project while walking around, 
you will obviously want to share it. To create a rendering for your current view 
of the LiveCube, perform the following steps:
1.	 Right-click on the Camera icon (only for the first image, to set the 
export options).
2.	 The Photo Options window opens, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Set Aspect Ratio, Resolution, and Quality as per your needs. Although 
creating an image is much faster than with a traditional renderer, it will still 
take several seconds for a large image of high quality to be saved to disk.
4.	 Set the destination folder with the folder location and image filename. 
Each new image will be created with the name given in the Save as field 
and a number appended to it (for example, Crissy LumenRT001.jpg).
5.	 Click on OK to close this window.
6.	 Now, left-click on the Camera icon. This will save a new image to the 
destination folder. Alternatively, you can also use the F6 key.
7.	 Move around in the scene a bit, and when you have found another good 
view, just left-click again; a new image will be saved in the same folder.

Chapter 12
[ 401 ]
Continue to walk through your scene and create as many new images as you like. 
You can map out all the angles and vantage points of your model and document 
any good locations in an image.
Note the options under When I click the Photo icon. You can 
save a new image to your hard drive and add the image to a 
Photo strip. This second option is an alternative way of creating 
a key frame animation.
Creating an animation
The simplest way of creating an animation is to set it up in SketchUp as a sequence 
of scenes. These will be imported as key frames into LumenRT, and you can have 
the animation sequence start as soon as you open the LiveCube. Once you are in 
the application, you will have more control over the key frames than in SketchUp. 
To edit or create a new clip, open up the Timeline Editor via the clapperboard 
symbol in the toolbar, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Timeline window is displayed below the current view of the scene. 
At the top, you'll find one tab for Movie Editor and one for each animation 
sequence (called "clip") that you have set up. You can create new clips with 
the + symbol next to the tabs.

Interactive Visualization
[ 402 ]
Editing an animation sequence
If you used the Photo strip option while creating the snapshots, you will also 
find a tab called Photo Strip that contains all the images that you took as key frames 
for the sequence. The images may not have been taken in order, or the time interval 
between them may not be conducive to a smooth animation. Either way, some 
editing is in order.
1.	 Click on the tab for your clip to show the sequence of images in the editor.
2.	 The orange bar at the top indicates the length of the sequence in seconds. 
The triangular marker above the line is your current position, while the 
square markers below indicate the position of each key frame.
3.	 You can move your position along the line by dragging the triangle along 
the time scale.
4.	 If you need to change the sequence of the images, just click on an image 
that is not in the right place and drag it across to the correct location.
5.	 Click on the key frame markers and drag them along to change the time 
between the previous or following key frame. LumenRT will try to keep 
a steady animation speed by inserting key frames based on the distance 
in camera positions. Larger steps will be assigned more time.
6.	 During the setup of your clip, new frames will be added at the end of 
the animation.
7.	 If you see that you are missing a frame, you can also insert a new frame 
by moving the current frame indicator to the desired position. You will 
see a small camera symbol appear between the two frame thumbnails. 
Click on this symbol to add an intermediate frame to the clip.
8.	 At any time, you can click on the triangular Start button to the left of the 
timeline to play back the animation.
Editing a movie
The first tab is called Movie Editor. It is very similar to the clip editor, but instead 
of key frames, it shows entire clips. Here, you can arrange the individual clips that 
you have created into a complete movie. You can also import static images and add 
transitions between the clips. In short, it is a simple version of Movie Maker built 
right into LumenRT.

Chapter 12
[ 403 ]
Exporting a video
So far, the animation sequence is only available within the LiveCube. To export 
the movie sequence, you just set it up as a standard video clip that everyone can play 
back. Click on the Play Movie button in the task bar to the left of the scene window. 
You will see the following movie export options:
You have preset standard video resolutions to choose from as well as frame rate and 
image quality. When you pick the video encoder, remember that you can always use 
HandBrake to convert the video from LumenRT to your desired format, for example, 
if you want to use H.264 compression.
Choose the destination and name for the video file and click on OK. The export of 
the movie will start, and a pop up window will show the current frame. You will 
notice immediately that it takes only seconds to calculate each frame. Nevertheless, 
if you are working on a particularly long animation, you should still consider a 
test animation with Quality set to Fast and a low resolution. It will finish within a 
fraction of the time, and you can review the entire project and make changes.
When the export has been completed, you can open up the movie in a video player 
to check the quality and overall appearance.

Interactive Visualization
[ 404 ]
Publishing the LiveCube
The last—and most compelling—feature of LumenRT is the ability to create a 
standalone application that enables everyone with a computer to navigate and 
explore the 3D scene without the need for any other installed software. To do this, 
you need LiveCube Publisher, which is a separate application from LumenRT that 
needs a dedicated license. The trial includes a time-limited version of the Publisher 
and also adds a watermark to the generated LiveCube. The following screenshot 
shows the options available for the export that define the appearance and behavior 
of the LiveCube:
1.	 To access the Publish Options window, press the Publish icon in the toolbar.
2.	 If you are using the trial version, you will get a nagging message to buy the 
full product license before the trial is over.
3.	 Most of the options cover branding of the final LiveCube, such as the choice 
and position of a logo or startup screen.
4.	 You can choose to generate a LiveCube for Windows, Mac OS X, or both.

Chapter 12
[ 405 ]
5.	 Define the location and filename of the finished LiveCube.
6.	 Click on the button for the Navigation settings.
7.	 Here, you can define under Startup navigation mode if the LiveCube will 
start with an animation (if available) or in the Walk-thru or Fly-thru mode.
8.	 The other options are good defaults. Always keep in mind that your clients 
may never have used a LiveCube before and need guidance on how to 
interact with the 3D environment.
9.	 Click on OK to close the Navigation settings window.
10.	 Finally, click on Publish LiveCube to generate the standalone version of 
your 3D scene.
11.	 Wait for the message that the process was successful.
Now, you can pick up your published LiveCube in the folder that you specified 
and distribute it to your clients. The files may be quite large, so you should have 
a good file sharing solution in place. Be sure to contact them later for feedback to 
learn more about the way your clients and colleagues interact with the 3D scene. 
This is a new technology, and we all have to learn how to use it to communicate 
our designs most effectively.
Summary
You have now seen—and hopefully experienced firsthand by following our 
examples—how important planning the right view and scene setup is for the 
impression you want to make. You learned simple and fast techniques for SketchUp 
and GIMP that can change the appearance of your rendered images dramatically.
You used Thea to render photoreal images from SketchUp scenes and created 
animations and LayOut presentations to present your project. In this last chapter, 
we have completed our tour of visualization technologies with a quick introduction 
to interactive 3D environments.
We hope you enjoyed the topics in this book and that you will be able to use this 
knowledge to create mesmerizing architectural visualizations for your project.


Choosing a Rendering 
Software
On your way to become a pro rendering artist, you will have to make the decision 
about which rendering application you are going to use. While most artists keep 
testing new software when it becomes available, they stick to one specific package 
for the majority of their work and invest significant time and money in education 
and upgrades. To give you some means of evaluation of the currently available 
technologies, we have provided this short list of criteria for rendering applications.
What should I look for in a renderer?
In general, you should look for the following features in a photorealistic 
rendering software:
•	
Rendering quality
•	
Integration with SketchUp
•	
Advanced materials and lighting
•	
Training and support
•	
Data exchange
•	
Other considerations

Choosing a Rendering Software
[ 408 ]
I've chosen these criteria—and their order—based on the general rendering and 
workflow requirements. You may find that you have other specific requirements 
that are not listed here. In this case, feel free to amend this overview according to 
your needs. Always remember that your individual workflow requires a matching 
solution that may not meet other criteria but is nevertheless the best option for you.
Rendering quality
Of course, the most important aspect of a rendered image is the final quality. 
You don't want to spend hours of setup and rendering time and then, just get 
a mediocre image rendered.
Many elements influence the rendering quality, but a good global illumination 
model has, by far, the biggest impact on the appearance of the scene. Unfortunately, 
this is also not an easy-to-spot element in an image, but a rather subtle quality to 
the distribution of indirect light. It's easy to miss good global illumination when it is 
done right, but you will notice it immediately when the indirect light is done wrong 
or missing altogether.
Ideally, it should also work out of the box without the need to study and understand 
all the features of the renderer. Unbiased rendering engines provide this at the cost 
of long rendering times. To achieve faster renderings (for example, for an animation), 
biased rendering engines are better but require a significant amount of learning 
before they produce images that are as good.
Interoperability with SketchUp
In general, you should look for a renderer that works within SketchUp and also 
generates a quick view of your scene without any additional steps. This allows you 
to set up a workflow with a quick feedback loop. For this, it is also important to 
know how secondary SketchUp features such as shadow settings or the component 
hierarchy are supported and how render-specific information is maintained in the 
SketchUp scene. After all, you don't want to repeat the same light and material setup 
each time you reopen a SketchUp file.

Appendix
[ 409 ]
Sometimes, an integrated renderer can be as much of a drawback as a benefit, 
because you can't carry on modeling when SketchUp is locked in a rendering cycle 
for hours! Also, an external renderer usually handles imports of other file formats 
better. So, what you should look out for is a standalone render application with a 
SketchUp plugin or one that supports SketchUp's native *.skp format really well. 
Most up-to-date plugins should work with SketchUp Maker, but some older versions 
may require a Pro license (usually for the *.obj export feature).
Training and support
The most effective learning material that you can find is a free demo version. 
Nothing gives you an idea about the workflow and features of a renderer better 
than actually using it. A demo version should allow you access to all the features, 
although you will find that frequently advanced features are disabled after a period 
of use. The longer you can use the software before you have to make a decision to 
buy it, the better.
Once you start rendering regularly, you will become more and more aware that 
rendering is more about time than quality. Once you have the quality settings sorted 
out (and you will), the amount of readily available content (materials, entourage, 
and render templates) that you can download and use in your own projects can 
become a significant factor so that you can produce renders quickly, efficiently, and 
on schedule. You should look for active user forums with many example materials 
and scenes but also for commercial 3D content providers and how their material can 
be used in your software. The dominant file formats in this market are *.3ds, *.max, 
and *.obj.
The time required to learn new software may also be an issue. User forums and 
online documentation can be of great help, but they require that you invest your 
own time to read and follow the threads and tutorials. Online or on-site training 
offers by experts can help you speed up the learning process and may be worth the 
investment for your company.

Choosing a Rendering Software
[ 410 ]
Other considerations
Once you are creating your own renderings, you will find that the final image is 
never the product of a single application; you use SketchUp to set up the scene, 
perhaps, with the help of a few specialist plugins. Third-party content may need to 
be converted before you can use it in SketchUp or directly in your renderer. You may 
use a specific HDRI environment in the project and need to edit the HDR images 
first. Then, you have several postproduction steps before the raw rendered image 
is finished. Connectivity to other supporting software is the key for a productive 
workflow and can very well decide the suitability of a renderer.
For your everyday work, you will also wish for good hardware support—and 
good hardware in the first place. Consumer graphics cards have reached an 
incredible level of complexity, and more and more developers of professional 
graphics applications try to utilize these resources to speed up the rendering 
process. This can give your workflow a great boost, and even give you instantaneous 
feedback. To achieve the best results, you have to choose both hardware and 
software carefully. There are competing technologies on the market, and your 
rendering requirements could dictate both hardware and software to use.
On the subject of hardware support, a network-rendering feature may also be of 
interest, especially when you consider the creation of animated content. After you have 
accomplished the scene setup on your workstation, the rendering of large images or 
individual frames of an animation can be distributed to powerful (but noisy) server 
systems to speed up the rendering process—if the rendering software supports it. 
Today, you can also find online services that offer network rendering in a cloud 
environment. These services save you the cost for rendering hardware and licenses.
Are you outgrowing Thea Render?
If you have used Thea to follow the examples in the book, you may wonder why 
you should choose a different rendering application when Thea can provide all 
of the features that you need to create photoreal renderings. In fact, there is no 
immediate need for you to use anything else, and this is exactly the reason why 
I picked Thea as the rendering software for this book. 

Appendix
[ 411 ]
With Thea Render you get the following features:
•	
It provides easy-rendering modes for beginners but lets you tweak the 
render settings to improve the rendering time or achieve advanced effects 
as you become more experienced
•	
At the beginning, you can download a number of high-quality materials 
from the website and experiment with the settings in the material lab when 
you have the need for more specialized materials
•	
You can use the existing sun and sky models to create realistic 
lighting conditions or use HDRI images for specific atmospheres
•	
There are advanced features (such as Relight or the Colimo 
interface) that can be useful for the presentation and evaluation 
of design options
•	
You have the choice of using it entirely from SketchUp or as a 
standalone product with Thea Studio
I think that with these features, Thea Render has the common requirements of 
a rendering application well covered. However, other features are not present, 
and if you consider projects that require some of the following functionality, 
you should look at other packages:
•	
Real-time rendering for interactive presentations
•	
Physics and particle animations (for example, weather or 
crowd animation)
•	
Advanced animation features such as inverse kinematics
The following table can serve as a quick reference guide for you and will answer 
some of your questions. It is not exhaustive, and our selection is more an overview 
of available technologies and features, than a representation of the current market 
in rendering software.

Choosing a Rendering Software
[ 412 ]
The following table guides you with the specifications of different rendering software:

Appendix
[ 413 ]


Index
Symbols
2D CAD site plan
starting with  77
2D component
creating, of person  201
2D component, of person
3D people  207
checking, for halos  204, 205
face-me component, creating  206, 207
innards, drawing  205
outline, tracing of person  202
person, scaling  202
photo texture, applying  204
uncanny valley  207
2D images
real geometry details, replacing with  111
saving, in SketchUp  215, 216
3D data
importing, from CAD  81
3D topographic mesh  65
3D Warehouse  42-44
3D Warehouse components
cautions  118
default materials  120
removing  119
4sketchupgo2school  16
*.scn.thea file
exporting, steps  387, 388
A
ABSoft  306
acquisition strategy  195
Adobe Photoshop  164
advanced image considerations
about  175
compression  177
compression, balancing  177-179
file type  176
size, balancing  177-179
texture size  175, 176
whole photographs, applying as 
textures  152
advanced texturing techniques
about  152
fake room, setting up  154-157
seamless (tileable) texturing  152
single image-based texturing  152
animated camera shots
rendering out  344, 345
animating, in SketchUp
about  333
animation settings  336
individual timing, adding to scene  337, 338
right timing, obtaining  337
simple walkthrough, creating  334, 335
animation
creating, from still images  352-355
individual frames, saving for  349
lighting, with Thea Relight  385
planning  330, 331
principles  329, 330
producing, for videos  55
animation, creating
animation sequence, editing  402
movie, editing  402
video, exporting  403
animation, lighting with Thea Relight
*.scn.thea file, exporting  387, 388
about  385

[ 416 ]
materials, modifying with Colimo  391
SketchUp scene, preparing  386
animation sequence
editing  402
animation settings dialog box  336
animations planning
significance  60
annotations, in LayOut  375
arch-viz scene
2D CAD site plan, starting with  77
real-world location, setting up  73, 74
setting up  63
site photo, using with Match Photo  66
sketch plan  76, 77
Sun's position, setting up  73, 74
terrain data, importing  63-66
artificial light
rendering  279, 280
artificial lighting  252, 253, 278
automatic veggie maker  209
Auto-Text feature
about  365
using  366
B
balsa wood film scenery props
creating  158-161
basic building shape
creating  98, 99
basic photo textures  145
basic seamless textures
using  147
benefits, texturing  144
bevel (for chamfers) function  137
BezierSpline plugin
URL  339
billboard elements
creating  91
Billboard scenery elements  89, 90
buildings
massing  82
modeling, CAD elevations used  101-103
modeling, eye used  107
modeling, from photograph  104-107
modeling, in SketchUp  101
modeling, measurements used  107
built-in styles, SketchUp
editing  213, 214
bump mapping  111, 250, 251
C
CAD
3D data, importing from  81
CAD elevations
about  101
used, for modeling buildings  101-103
CAD site plan
setting up  78-80
camera
setting up  84, 85
CameraControls plugin
about  343
used, for adding camera effects to 
scene  343
camera view
field, modifying  85
impression of height  85-87
saving  23
setting up, steps  22
challenging modeling tasks
curtain walls  133
doors, modeling  121-123
flashing details  125, 126
handling  120
masonry features  134
ridge tiles, modeling  127, 128
roads, modeling  134
roofs, modeling  124
windows, modeling  121-123
Circle tool  13
clay rendering  260
Cleanup  82
Colimo
materials, modifying with  391
color channels
adjusting  298-301
individual color channels, correcting  301
Color Wash image
creating  219

[ 417 ]
components
about  15, 114
creating  15
naming, reasons  118
usage, benefits  115
used, for increasing productivity  114
compositing, in VirtualDub
about  351
animation, creating from still images  
352-355
Computer Graphics Primer  249
conflicts, between SketchUp and third-party 
renderers
automatic openings  139
clean geometry  139, 140
Follow-Me components  139
instancing  140
material assignments  139
polygon orientation  138
proxies  140
scene structure  140
transparency  139
two-sided polygons  139
construction lines
using  107
context
massing  82
core concepts, SketchUp interface
groups  15
healing  15
inferencing  16
layers  16
splitting  15
visibility  16
custom page border
creating  362-365
cylinder
creating, with low polygon count  112
D
daylight
about  252
clay render, used for lighting tests  271, 272
using  271
Daylight Saving Time  74
daylight settings
adjusting, in Thea  273, 274
Dennis effect
layer masks, using for  228-230
Dennis Nikolaev
URL, for tutorial page  230
Dennis Technique
about  216, 218
GIMP, setting up for  224-227
modifying  234-236
setting up, in SketchUp  218
Dennis Technique, with SketchUp
Color Wash image, creating  219
Lines and Shadows scene tab  221
Lines Only scene tab  220
scene tabs, exporting  222-224
depth of field
creating, depth render used  311-313
simulating  309-311
depth render
about  291
used, for creating depth of field  311-313
detractions
dealing with  332
dimensioning  362
dimensions  380
Dirty Hands layer  244, 245
Displacement Mapping (DM)  251
DoubleCAD XT
URL  77
DraftSight
URL  77
drawing scale  76
drawing tools
about  13
Circle tool  13
Line tool  13
Polygon tool  13
Rectangle tool  13
dummy components
using  115

[ 418 ]
E
Edit tools
about  14
Move tool  14
Offset tool  14
Push/Pull tool  14
Rotate tool  14
Scale tool  14
elements
adding, to textures  185-187
entourage
about  191, 193
acquisition strategy  195
categories  196
inserting  285, 287
introducing stage  194
people cutouts, applications  199
scene, framing with  92
selecting  194
entourage placeholders
inserting  94
Eraser tool  12
exact texture placement
about  162, 163
free pins mode  164
Extension Manager
Ruby extension, installing via  46-48
Extension Warehouse
about  66
Ruby scripts, installing via  45, 46
external renderer
advanced features  253
features  250-253
need for  249
eye
used, for modeling buildings  107
F
face-me capability  111
fake room
setting up  154-157
fake room setup
balsa wood film scenery props, creating  
158-161
features, external renderer
geometry  250
lighting  252, 253
materials  250, 251
features, roads  134
features, Thea Render  50
features, Thea Studio  410
file structure
setting up, for project  98
final video composition
creating  355, 356
Flickr  153
Flightpath animation
about  339
CameraControls, adding  343
camera effects, adding to scene  343
smooth transitions  339-342
Flightpath.rb plugin
URL  339
flow chart, texturing process  144, 145
Focus Blur  309
Follow-Me feature  139
free pins mode, exact texture placement  164
From photo  145
From Scratch feature  136
functions, RoundCorner plugin
bevel (for chamfers)  137
round corner (for fillets)  137
sharp corner  137
furniture
3D Warehouse  198
manufacturers' websites  198
selecting, for interior views  196, 197
websites, for models  198, 199
G
geometry  250
Getting Started toolbar, SketchUp interface
about  11
drawing tools  13
Edit tools  14
Eraser tool  12
navigation tools  11
Select tool  12

[ 419 ]
GIMP
about  164
layer masks, using in  228
light effects, adding in  314, 315
pencil shading, creating in  243, 244
Pencil Sketch Technique, setting up  241, 
242
perspective, correcting  164-166
setting up, for Dennis Technique  224-227
sky image, using in  230, 231
textures, editing  182, 183
URL, for downloading  54
URL, for extensions project  309
URL, for tutorials  327
global illumination (GI)  252
G'MIC plugin
using  304, 305
GNU Image Manipulation Program. See  
GIMP
Google Earth  40, 63
Google Images  153
Google Maps
accessing, for textures  150-152
Google Street View
used, for creating texture models  150
groups  15, 115
H
halo  204
HandBrake
about  55, 57
URL  57
used, for creating MP4 video  356-358
harwoodpodcast  16
HDR images
URL  252
healing  15
Hero Shots  367
High Definition (HD)  351
high dynamic range (HDR)  252
High Polygon Count  93
high-resolution version
low-resolution, swapping with  99, 100
histogram  299
I
IES file
about  253
URL, for information  253
image
edges, fading out with vignette 
layer  316-318
image-based lighting (IBL)  252-276
image brightness
adjusting, Levels dialog used  301
image editor
SketchUp, linking to  180
image-processing studio, with GIMP
about  53
copy, grabbing of GIMP  54
professional-level image processor, 
need for  53, 54
immersive environment, with LumenRT
about  392
animation, creating  401
images, exporting  400, 401
LiveCube, navigating  398, 399
LiveCube, publishing  404, 405
scene, exporting  397, 398
imported CAD data
cleaning up  80, 81
individual color channels
correcting  301
individual frames
saving, for animation  349
individual timing
adding, to scenes  337, 338
inferencing  16
initial test render
clay rendering  260
common import bugs  259
performing  257, 259
installation, Ruby script  49
installation, Thea Studio  50
instances  114
interior scenes
realistic highlights, modeling for  136
IRender  90

[ 420 ]
J
JPEG  382
K
Krono  153
L
landscaped areas
creating, sandbox tools used  136
layer masks
about  228
using, for Dennis effect  228-230
using, in GIMP  228
layers  16
LayOut
about  41, 362
annotations  375
custom page border, creating  362-365
multiple views, creating in  372, 373
PDF document, exporting from  382
SketchUp models, displaying in  366
SketchUp scenes, preparing for  366, 367
tools  362
LayOut pages
elements, adding for enhancement  381
Levels dialog
used, for adjusting brightness of image  301
used, for adjusting color channels  298-301
library
material, saving to  173, 174
light bloom
adding, to image  306-309
light effects
adding, in GIMP  314, 315
light-emitting materials
about  264-266
adding, to scene  283, 284
light emitting objects  261
lighting
about  252
artificial lighting  252, 253, 278
daylight  252
daylight, using  271
defining  269
final indoor render  284
Image-based lighting (IBL)  274-276
light parameters, modifying  281, 282
sky settings, saving  277
test scene, preparing  270
lighting effects  314
lighting filters
discovering  316
lighting levels
about  296
adjusting, automatically  297, 298
adjusting, manually  298
light parameters
modifying  281, 282
Line tool  13
LiveCube
navigating  398, 399
publishing  404, 405
settings  399
tools  399
low polygon  108
low polygon count
cylinder, creating with  112
low polygon modeling
real geometry details, replacing with 2D 
images  111
segments, reducing in arc/circle  111-113
significance  109, 110
low polygon modeling techniques  108
low-resolution
swapping, with high-resolution 
version  99, 100
LumenRT plugin
about  385
immersive environment, creating with  392
URL  385
URL, for downloading  392
using, in SketchUp  392
LumenRT plugin, using in SketchUp
digital nature components, adding to scene  
394, 395
lights, adding  396
materials, editing  393, 394

[ 421 ]
M
main window, SketchUp interface
about  9
status bar  10
toolbars  9
Value Control Box (VCB)  10
manufacturers' websites, furniture  198
mask render
about  292
using, for windows  319, 320
masonry features  134
massing  82
Match Photo
about  63, 67, 145
site photo, using with  66
Match Photo image
3D drawing, in 2D photo  71, 72
perspective setup, testing  71, 72
photographs, considerations  67, 68
requisites  67
Match Photo scene
setting up  68-70
Match Photo textures
starting with  146
materials
about  250
assigning  261
editing  393, 394
light-emitting materials  264-266
modifying, with Colimo  391
one-sided materials  267, 268
predefined materials, applying  261-264
saving, to library  173, 174
summarizing  269
measurements
used, for modeling buildings  107
model
view, aligning to  367
modeling  60
Move tool  14
movie
editing  402
MP4 video
creating, with HandBrake  356-358
multiple images
compositing  319
multiple views
creating, in LayOut  372, 373
N
native output, SketchUp  212, 213
natural lighting  252
navigation tools
about  11
Orbit tool  11
Pan tool  12
Zoom Extents tool  12
Zoom tool  12
non-photorealistic rendering (NPR)  144, 199
non-photoreal visuals  133
notice hierarchy
about  192
scene, supporting  192, 193
O
Offset tool  14
old style Ruby scripts  48, 49
one-sided materials  267, 268
online streaming services
compressing for  356
Orbit tool  11
Outliner view
using  117
output quality
modifying  383
P
paint bucket tool  25
pallets, SketchUp interface
about  9
pallet windows  10, 11
pallet windows  10, 11
Pan tool  12
paper-drawn sketch
appearance, enhancing  245, 246
parallel projection  88
paths
used, for masking photos  323-327

[ 422 ]
PDF  382
PDF document
exporting, from LayOut  382
pencil shading
creating, in GIMP  243, 244
Pencil Sketch Technique
setting up, in GIMP  241, 242
setting up, in SketchUp  237-241
pen tablet  54
people cutouts  199-201
perspective foreshortening  68
perspective projection  88
Perspective Tool  165
PhotoComiX smoothing filter  305
photograph
buildings, modeling from  104-107
whole photographs, applying as 
textures  152
photo hunt
tips  153
photo modeling process
textures, using from  147
photorealistic rendering
preparing for  138
photorealistic rendering software
requisites features  407
photoreal rendering
about  199
setting up for  253
photoreal visuals  133
photos
masking, paths used  323-327
physical sky model  252
piano scene example
about  296
imperfections, distracting from realism  296
Plan View  367
Plugin Store  66
PNG  382
point lights  283
polished metals  261
Polygon tool  13
postproduction rendering
about  290
alpha (mask) render  292
depth render  253, 291
transparency  253
PowerPoint  380
presentation
creating  381
production rendering
about  287
final image, saving  289
final render  288, 289
render time, reducing  288
test production render  287
productivity
increasing, components used  114
professional-level image processor
need for  53, 54
progress window  79
project
file structure, setting up for  98
project file layout  98
Push/Pull tool  14
R
raw animated output, SketchUp  55
real geometry details
replacing, with 2D images  111
realistic highlights
modeling for  136
sharp edges, issues  136, 137
real-world location
setting up  73, 74
Rectangle tool  13
Relight animation
creating  389-391
Relight feature
about  385
using  388, 389
render engine. See  external renderer
rendering  8
rendering process  254
Render Plus  209
render time
reducing  288
requisites features, photorealistic 
rendering software
about  407
considerations  410

[ 423 ]
interoperability, with SketchUp  408
rendering quality  408
support  409
training  409
resources, texture photos
architectural websites  153
Flickr  153
Google Images  153
Krono  153
ridge tiles
about  127
modeling  127, 128
roads
about  134
edging feature, adding  135
features  134
lowering, in scene  135
roofs  124
room
modeling  17-20
Rotate tool  14
roughness setting  250
rough placeholders  93
round corner (for fillets) function  137
RoundCorner plugin
about  137
functions  137
RPTree Maker  209
Ruby API  45
Ruby extension
installing, via Extension Manager  46-48
Ruby plugins  45
Ruby script
installing  49
installing, via Extension Warehouse  45, 46
S
sandbox tools
about  66
used, for creating landscaped areas  136
Scale tool  14
scene
framing, with entourage  92
individual timing, adding to  337, 338
opening, in Thea Studio  387, 388
scene, framing with entourage
entourage placeholders, inserting  94
rough placeholders  93
specifity trap  93
test view, printing  94
scene tabs
exporting  222-224
scrapbooks
about  375
editing  376
using  375, 376
seamless textures
creating  164
material, saving to library  173, 174
perspective, correcting in GIMP  164- 166
texture, importing into SketchUp  171, 172
tiling method  168-170
tiling, via automatic filter  167, 168
Sectional Views  367
Selective Gaussian Blur  304
Select tool  12
sharp corner function  137
sharp edges
issues  136, 137
simple walkthrough
creating  334, 335
site photo
using, with Match Photo  66
site plan
elaborating  82
sketches
creating  332, 333
sketch plan  76, 77
SketchUcation Plugin Store  46
SketchUp
2D images, saving in  215, 216
about  7, 39, 63
animation, creating in  333
buildings, modeling  101
built-in styles, editing  213, 214
Dennis Technique, setting up in  218
Google Maps, accessing for textures  
150-152

[ 424 ]
high-resolution animation  349
linking, to image editor  180
LumenRT plugin, using in  392
native output  212, 213
Pencil Sketch Technique, setting up  237-241
raw animated output  55
resources, for skills improvement  16
spotlights, creating in  278, 279
texture, importing into  171, 172
textures, applying  147
Thea materials, importing to  268
URL, for downloading  41
URL, for quick reference cards  12
URL, for training videos  101
window reflections, without rendering  
320-322
SketchUp 3D view
displaying  368, 369
SketchUp 2014
edition, selecting  41
SketchUp, and Thea rendering process
extra entourage, inserting  285, 287
initial test render, performing  257-259
lighting, defining  269
materials, assigning  261
postproduction rendering  290
production rendering  287
SketchUp model, preparing  257
steps  254
SketchUp Concepts Guide page
URL  16
SketchUp interface
about  8
core concepts  15
Getting Started toolbar  11
main window  9
pallets  9
SketchUp materials
applying  24
enhancing  34-36
timber flooring material  25-27
SketchUp models
displaying, in LayOut  366
display style, adjusting  370, 371
preparing  257
SketchUp output
final composition, modifying with  234
SketchUp plugin
Thea, installing for  51
SketchUp Pro
about  41
additional 2D-export formats  42
additional 3D-export formats  42
additional import format  41
SketchUp scenes
preparing  386
preparing, for LayOut  366, 367
view, aligning to model  367
SketchUp sections
displaying  377
section line work, creating  377-379
SketchUp styles
using  371
SketchUp User's Guide page
URL  16
Sketchy Charcoal style  220
sketchy pencil technique  237
sky image
using, in GIMP  230, 231
sky settings
saving  277
Smart IBL (sIBL)
about  274
URL  274
working  277
smooth transitions, Flightpath animation  
339-342
specifity trap  93
specularity setting  250
specular materials  261
splitting  15
spotlights
about  386
creating, in SketchUp  278, 279
stage designers
visual tricks, for saving time  62
status bar  10
still images
animation, creating from  352-355
stills
principles  329, 330

[ 425 ]
storyboard
about  332
generating  331
striplight  386
Style Builder  41
subsurface scattering (SSS)  251
Sun's position
date, setting for shadows  75
setting up  73, 74
time, setting for shadows  75
sun view
setting up  23, 24
surfaces
unique textures, creating for  181
T
tape measure tool  107
terrain data
importing  63-66
test production render  287
texture models
creating, Google Street View used  150
texture photos
resources  153
textures
about  65
basic seamless textures, using  147
coloring  149
creating, ways  145
editing, in GIMP  182, 183
extra detail, adding  188
extra elements, adding to  185-187
importing, into SketchUp  171, 172
manipulating  161
modifying, for added realism  180
scaling  148
unique textures, creating for surfaces  181
using, from photo modeling process  147
variation, applying with GIMP  183, 184
whole photographs, applying as  152
texturing
benefits  144
texturing process
flow chart  144, 145
Thea
daylight settings, adjusting in  273, 274
installing, for SketchUp plugin  51
used, for animation  350, 351
Thea, for SketchUp interface
about  254
Thea Rendering Window  255
Thea Tool window  254
Thea materials
importing, to SketchUp  268
making available, in SketchUp  53
Thea Relight
animation, lighting with  385
Thea Render
about  8, 50
additional materials, downloading  51, 52
features  50
functionality  411
URL  50
Thea Rendering Window  255
Thea Studio
features  410
installing  50
scene, opening  387, 388
Thea Tool window  254
tileable textures
creating  161
finding  161
using  161
tiles
copying, steps  129-131
timber flooring material  25, 26
toolbars  9
Traditional Elevations  367
translucent materials  261
transparent materials  261
Trimble  40
Trimble SketchUp
3D Warehouse  42, 43, 44
about  40
Ruby plugins  45
using, options  40

[ 426 ]
U
unbiased rendering process  38
uncanny valley  207
unwanted image noise
removing  302-304
V
Value Control Box (VCB)  10, 85
vegetation
about  208
automatic veggie maker  209
non photoreal sketchy trees  208
vehicles  209
video
exporting  403
video sequences
authoring  347, 348
video sequences, authoring
animation, with Thea  350, 351
high-resolution animation, from SketchUp  
349
individual frames, saving for animation  
349
view
aligning, to model  367
setting up  21
viewpoints  346
viewports
about  368
arranging  374
vignette layer
creating  232, 233
used, for finishing image  316
Vimeo  55
VirtualDub
about  55, 56, 351
URL, for latest stable release  56
virtual light switch
creating  282
visibility  16
visuals
sketching  61, 62
Vue  209
W
Walkthrough tools  335
white board capture feature  164
window modeling
about  28-30
painting, with digital photos  31, 32
rendered image, saving  38
SketchUp materials, enhancing  34-36
test rendering, performing  33, 34
windows
mask render, using for  319, 320
Y
YouTube  55
Z
Zoom Extents tool  12
Zoom tool  12

 
Thank you for buying  
SketchUp 2014 for Architectural Visualization 
Second Edition
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Unity for Architectural 
Visualization
ISBN:  978-1-78355-906-0            Paperback: 144 pages
Transform your architectural design into an 
interactive real-time experience using Unity
1.	
Simple instructions to help you set up an 
interactive and real-time scene.
2.	
Excellent tips on making your presentations 
attractive by creating interactive designs.
3.	
Most important features of computer games 
covered, to develop compelling, interactive 
scenes for so-called "serious games".
Getting Started with Lumion 3D
ISBN: 978-1-84969-949-5            Paperback: 134 pages
Create a professional architectural visualization in 
minutes using Lumion 3D
1.	
A beginner's guide to architectural 
visualization.
2.	
Tips and tricks for modeling, texturing, 
and rendering using Lumion 3D.
3.	
Add a special touch to your images 
with Photoshop.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Kivy: Interactive Applications 
in Python
ISBN: 978-1-78328-159-6             Paperback: 138 pages
Create cross-platform UI/UX applications and 
games in Python
1.	
Use Kivy to implement apps and games in 
Python that run on multiple platforms.
2.	
Discover how to build a User Interface (UI) 
through the Kivy Language.
3.	
Glue the UI components with the logic of the 
applications through events and the powerful 
Kivy properties.
SketchBook Pro Digital Painting 
Essentials
ISBN: 978-1-84969-820-7            Paperback: 112 pages
Create stunning professional grade artwork using 
SketchBook Pro
1.	
Discover tricks and techniques that will help 
you make the most out of Sketchbook Pro.
2.	
Packed with practical examples that help 
you create expressive sketches ranging 
from cartoons to portraits.
3.	
A step-by-step guide packed with 
supporting imagery.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

