June 2013
Vol.24 Iss.06
News & Notes
Business News 
Business Tech
Combat Spearphishing
Personal Tech
3D Printing Is Here
TECH FOCUS ONTABLETS |  A Tablet Tutorial
GET THE MOST OUT OF
Here’s what you need 
to know in order to get 
started with Microsoft’s 
newest operating system.
Windows 8
At Home &
In The
Office


Volume 24   .   June 2013   .   Issue 6
On The Cover See pg. 11
Windows 8
Windows 8 is new and 
a little scary, but in 
many ways it’s just like 
any other iteration of 
Microsoft’s operating 
system: Once you learn 
the tricks—and once you 
get comfortable with the 
new interface and the 
other changes, you may 
find yourself wondering 
how you ever got along 
without it.
News & Notes
4
Technology News
6
Business News
8
Windows News & Views
Business Technology
49
Thwart Spearphishing 
56
Offsite Backup
Personal Technology
58
3D Printing
61
Who Owns Digital Assets?
Tech Support
68
The BSOD: It’s Still With Us
70
Advanced Volatile Threats
Contact Us
P.O.Box 82545
Lincoln, NE 68501
or
120 W. Harvest Drive
Lincoln, NE 68521
Advertising: (800) 247-4880
Fax: (402) 479-2104
Circulation: (800) 334-7458
Fax: (402) 479-2123
www.smartcomputing.com
email: feedback@smartcomputing.com
Tech Focus
© Copyright 2013 by Sandhills Publishing Company. Smart Computing is a registered trademark of Sandhills Publishing Company. All rights reserved. Reproduction of material appearing in Smart 
Computing is strictly prohibited without written permission. Printed in the U.S.A. GST # 123482788RT0001 Smart Computing USPS 005-665 (ISSN 1093-4170) is published monthly for $29 per year 
by Sandhills Publishing Company, 131 West Grand Drive, P.O. Box 82545, Lincoln, NE 68501. Subscriber Services: (800) 733-3809. Periodicals postage paid at Lincoln, NE. POSTMASTER: Send 
address changes to Smart Computing, P.O. Box 82545, Lincoln, NE 68501.
33  |  Tablets
Whether it’s at home or at the office, more and more of 
us are finding that today’s tablets can handle almost any-
thing we throw at them: From eBooks to e-learning, and 
from shopping to spreadsheets, a tablet has much to offer. 
We’ll show you what you can do with one of the new 
tabs, and talk a bit about how to resolve any issues you 
may encounter when using one.

Technology News
R.I.P. LIVE TV
According to Harris Interactive, more consumers are foregoing traditional live 
TV in favor of video-on-demand. 78% of Internet users have utilized VOD 
services or rented a TV show on DVD. 41% of the pool said they regularly use 
VOD services. DVRs and other time-shifting devices were popular with 37% 
of those surveyed. Streaming services, such as  Netflix (30%) and Hulu (22%), 
were also popular live TV alternatives. 62% also “binge view,” saying they have 
watched two or more episodes in quick succession, at least once.
GOOGLE VS. APPLE
According to comScore, the two biggest 
players in smartphones are battling 
for hearts and minds. One of every 
three people living in the U.S. owns 
either an Android or iOS smartphone; 
together they account for 90% of the 
U.S. market. Google Android users 
have 700,000 apps in the Google Play 
store and Apple’s iOS-based device us-
ers have over 775,000 apps to choose 
from. 16% of Android’s users are 18 
to 24 years old and 19% of iOS users 
are that age. 17% of Android users and 
23% of iOS users purchase goods or 
services using their devices. 
News & Notes
EXECS BRIGHT ON ECONOMY
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce recently released its Small Business 
Outlook Survey and has found that small business executives are generally 
optimistic about the economy. Of those polled, 70% said their organizations 
are moving in the right direction and 46% said their local economies were 
equally well positioned. Only 16% said that the U.S. economy is where it 
should be, but that’s up from the 13% who said the same in January. The sur-
vey also asked the business execs about some of the biggest threats to their 
organizations and both higher energy costs (77%) and the national debt and 
deficit (78%) were top of mind. 
4 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

TECHNOLOGY NEWS
MORE CUTTING THE CORD
Convergence Consulting Group reports that analysts underestimated the 
number of American pay TV subscribers who would cut the cord, so to 
speak, and focus on subscription-based streaming video services, over-the-
air TV, and Web-based video alternatives. In 2012, researchers expected 
there would be 930,000 cord cutters. The real number was closer to 1.08 
million. Convergence expects another 960,000 American subscribers to 
drop their service in 2013. If that happens, then 4.7 million households will 
have cut the cord since 2008. 
STREAMING MUSIC
MAKES WAVES
The NPD Group reports that free and 
subscription-based Internet streaming 
music services are gaining popularity 
when compared to traditional radio. In 
the 13-to-35 year old listener bracket, 
the NPD Group found that 23% of this 
group’s weekly music consumption 
came from one or more music stream-
ing service, which represents a 17% 
increase compared to last year. Another 
24% of the time was spent listening 
to AM/FM radio. 15% of the time was 
spent listening to digital files, 14% us-
ing on-demand music services, and 9% 
was spent listening to CDs. 
PCS, SMARTPHONES, & TABLETS, OH MY
Gartner is in the numbers business and one of their latest is a doozy: Worldwide 
PC, tablet, and mobile phone shipments will hit 2.4 billion units in 2013. That’s 9% 
higher than the number from 2012. The firm also reports that despite this staggering 
figure, PC shipments will make up a smaller portion, declining 7.6% compared to 
the units shipped in 2012. In 2013, Gartner expects a billion smartphones and 197 
million tablets to ship, which is up from 2012 by 32.5% and 69.8%, respectively. 
News & Notes
●For some, streaming music services such 
as Pandora are as popular as AM/FM radio.
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  5

News & Notes
Business News
LOTS OF NEW COWORKING SPACES
In the last year, growth in coworking has exploded. Deskmag indicates there 
are 83% more worldwide coworking spaces and a 117% increase in coworking 
members over the last 12 months. Even more impressive, three new cowork-
ing spaces opened daily in more than 81 countries. Overall, 109,000 people 
worked as members of coworking spaces last year, compared to only 50,000 the 
previous year. The United States has the most coworking spaces (781) and is well 
ahead of the European numbers, such as Germany (230) and Spain (199).
NEW INNOVATION CAFÉ
The Innovation Café in Kansas City has 
moved from the Crossroads to the heart 
of the Kansas City business district on 
111 W. 10th Street. The new work-
space brings with it a larger work area 
(increased from 5,500 to 13,000 square 
feet), private office options, a pool, a 
gym, and a coffee shop. All options 
are month-to-month, and a variety of 
plans are available. Those looking for 
a dedicated workstation ($159.99 per 
month) will enjoy 24-hour access, gym/
pool access, a two-drawer lockable file 
cabinet, a desk with office rolling chair, 
and a business address. A daily pass is 
also available for $10 per day.
SMALL BUSINESS EMPLOYMENT UP IN FEBRUARY
A recent study from Intuit found that small businesses created 15,000 new jobs in Febru-
ary. Additionally, small businesses had added a total of 75,000 new jobs since Febru-
ary 2012. Nonetheless, the small business numbers did not quite match up to the 15% 
increase in national employment. About 300,000 small business jobs would need to 
be created to meet the 15% national rate. The study also broke down the numbers at a 
state-by-state level and found no clear pattern in the data. Thirteen states showed small 
business employment increases, three were flat, and 18 had decreases. 
● B I G G E R , B E T T E R  S P A C E
Innovation Café moved to a 
much bigger space in Kansas 
City, which includes a pool and 
gym for members.
●Worldwide, there are 83% more cowork-
ing spaces available than last year.
●There was no clear pattern in
Intuit’s latest small business index.
6 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

BUSINESS NEWS
MOBILE DEVICES & SMALL 
BUSINESSES
SMBs are using mobile devices to in-
crease efficiency, according to CDW’s 
2012 Small Business Mobility Report. 
Of those surveyed, 75% said that mo-
bile devices were critical to the job, 
and 67% agreed that the company 
would lose competitive ground with-
out the mobile technology. Even more 
convincing, 94% said they believe 
that mobile devices make them more 
efficient. IT managers at small busi-
nesses also noted that 89% of the em-
ployees use personally owned mobile 
devices for work purposes. However, 
only 51% of the IT managers said 
that their companies had ways to 
manage and secure the personal 
devices.
SMALL BUSINESS-FRIENDLY STATES
Thumbtack recently surveyed nearly 8,000 small businesses around the country 
to determine the climate for starting and running an SMB. The various categories 
take into account Ease Of Starting A Business, Ease Of Hiring, Regulations, and 
Training & Networking Programs. The top-ranked state for 2013 was Utah, which 
received A ratings throughout most categories. Austin, Texas was the top-rated 
city. On the flip side, Rhode Island was rated as the state least friendly toward 
small business, and Newark, New Jersey was the lowest-rated city. One of the key 
findings of the study was that ease of obtaining health insurance was important, 
as one third of small business owners described the process as “very difficult.”
●Small businesses are rapidly embrac-
ing mobile technology.
● S M A L L  B U S I N E S S
E V E N T S
Small business events give you a chance 
to learn critical management skills and 
network with professionals in related fields. 
Don’t miss these upcoming opportunities. 
If you would like to see your event here, 
email editor@smartcomputing.com with 
the subject Small Business Event.
VETERAN ENTREPRENEUR TRAINING SYMPOSIUM
Reno, Nev. | June 10th-13th, 2013
www.veterantrainingsymposium.com
THE SMALL BUSINESS EXPO (DALLAS)
Dallas, Tex. | June 20, 2013
www.thesmallbusinessexpo.com/
CREATIVE FREELANCER CONFERENCE
San Francisco, Calif. | June 22-24, 2013
www.eiseverywhere.com
10TH ANNUAL ELITE SDVOSB NATIONAL
CONFERENCE
San Diego, Calif. | August 21-23, 2013
www.sdvobconference.com/
THE SMALL BUSINESS EXPO (BOSTON)
Boston, Mass. | October 17, 2013
www.thesmallbusinessexpo.com
THE SMALL BUSINESS EXPO (LOS ANGELES)
Los Angeles, Calif. | November 7th, 2013 
www.thesmallbusinessexpo.com
News & Notes
●Some states are better than others for 
small businesses.
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  7

Windows News
WINDOWS 8 GETS EMBEDDED
Microsoft recently announced three versions of Windows Embedded 8 Indus-
try, which is designed for use in kiosks, POS terminals, control panels, and 
other industry-specific devices. The embedded operating system allows the 
so-called “edge devices” to connect and work in unison with PCs on your 
network. Windows Embedded 8 Industry Pro is targeted at healthcare and 
manufacturing devices, as well as those who build ATMs. Windows Embedded 
8 Industry Pro (Retail) offers a specialized embedded functionality that’s ideal 
for POS terminals, kiosks, scanners, and other retail environments. Windows 
Embedded 8 Industry Enterprise offers a way to seamlessly integrate with PCs 
running Windows 8 Enterprise, including features for enhancing performance, 
extending security, and powering line-of-business applications.
WINDOWS BLUE
Microsoft has begun working on the 
next refresh of Windows, and it’s be-
ing codenamed internally as Win-
dows Blue. No details were given as 
far as changes Microsoft is planning 
for the next release. Rather, Microsoft 
indicated in its blog that the code-
name refers simply to the next wave 
of products. Just a few of the current 
Microsoft products include its Surface 
line of tablets, the Microsoft Phone 
8 devices, Windows software, and 
the Office productivity suite. There’s 
speculation that the official name of 
the release will be Windows 8.1, but 
as of press time, Microsoft hasn’t re-
vealed an official title for the release.
News & Notes
RUN COMMAND PROMPT IN WINDOWS 8
There are still a few things in Windows that work best when using Command Prompt, 
even in Windows 8. For example, the command ipconfig / all is an easy way to trouble-
shoot a network or Internet issue. To find the Command Prompt in Windows 8, right-
click the Start screen and click All Apps. Locate the Windows System section and click 
Command Prompt.
●Windows Embedded 8 Industry is now avail-
able for use in retail and other edge devices.
●It’s fairly easy to open the Command 
Prompt in Windows 8.
● T H E  F U T U R E  O F  W I N D O W S ?
Microsoft disclosed Windows Blue 
as the codename for the next 
release of its operating system.
8 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

GOVERNMENT
Grants.gov
House Committee On 
Small Business
smallbusiness.house.gov
Small Business and 
Self-Employed Tax Center
www.irs.gov/businesses
/small
Small Business 
Administration (SBA)
sba.gov
U.S. Copyright Office
copyright.gov 
U.S. Department of Labor
dol.gov
U.S. Senate Committee 
on Small Business & 
Entrepreneurship
sbc.senate.gov
The Entrepreneurial 
Mind
www.drjeffcornwall.com 
FORUMS
Small Business 
Administration 
Community
www.sba.gov
/community
The Small Business 
Community Forums
www.smallbusiness
forums.org
Small Business 
Ideas Forum
www.smallbusinessbrief
.com/forum 
The Young Entrepreneur
www.youngentrepreneur 
.com/forum
SCORE
www.score.org
(800) 634-0245
(703) 487-3612
1175 Herndon Pkwy 
STE 900
Herndon, VA 20170
Small Business 
Development Centers 
Network (SBDCNET)
www.sbdcnet.org
(800) 689-1912
501 W. Durango Blvd.
San Antonio, TX 78207
BLOGS
Signal vs. Noise
37signals.com/svn/posts 
Small Business Search 
Marketing
www.smallbusinesssem
.com
Small Biz Bee
smallbizbee.com
Small Business Trends
smallbiztrends.com
The Small Business Blog
www.sme-blog.com
ASSOCIATIONS & 
SUPPORT
Better Business Bureau
www.bbb.org
(703) 276-0100
4200 Wilson Blvd. 
STE 800
Arlington, VA 
22203-1838
Main Street Alliance (MSA)
mainstreetalliance.org
info@mainstreetalliance
.org
(603) 831-1835
3518 S. Edmunds St.
Seattle, WA 98118
National Federation of 
Independent Businesses 
(NFIB)
www.nfib.com 
(800) 634-2669
(615) 872-5800
53 Century Blvd.
STE 250
Nashville, TN 37214
National Small Business 
Association (NSBA)
nsba.biz
(202) 293-8830
1156 15th St., STE 1100
Washington, DC 20005
The Web has a trove of resources for SOHOs (small and home 
offices) and small businesses—if you know where to look. Find an 
association that can help you meet your goals; get information from the 
government about loans, grants, and taxes; and stay up-to-date with the 
best small business newsletters and blogs. If you have a pressing 
question, pose it on a forum to see what your peers have to say.
Small Business Resources
News & Notes
Smart Computing  /  June2013 9

H
aven’t the foggiest idea how to 
harness your entrepreneur-
ial spirit, pull yourself any-
where using bootstraps, or think in 
or out of a box? Starting and run-
ning your own business is tough, but 
fortunately for prospective and cur-
rent small business owners, SBDCs 
(Small Business Development Cen-
ters; asbdc-us.org) dispense with the 
clichés and offer training, counseling, 
and other assistance to help you craft 
your vision into a real-world success. 
Run A Small Business 
Pooling resources from federal, state, 
and local governments, as well as the 
private sector and the educational 
community, The Association of Small 
Business Development Centers is truly 
a joint venture with a vested interest in 
fostering small business growth. For an 
overview of what the SBDC can offer 
you and your small business, visit bit.ly
/dKYe2a. The SBA (Small Business Ad-
ministration; www.sba.gov) is partnered 
with SBDCs.
Help On Your Turf
You may be surprised to learn that 
there’s probably an SBDC branch 
nearby; there are locations in all 50 
states, in the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, and even in the U.S. ter-
ritories. There are 63 nationwide Lead 
Small Business Development Centers 
coordinating program services for ev-
ery sub-center and satellite location 
in each state. Centers are made up of 
directors, full-time staff members, and 
various part-time staff and volunteers. 
The best way to contact your near-
est SBDC is to visit the Association of 
Small Business De-
velopment Centers’ 
Web site (asbdc-us.
org), input your ZIP 
code into the Find Your 
Nearest Small Business De-
velopment Center text box, and then 
click Go. The results page will high-
light Lead Centers but rank centers in 
order of those closest to your location. 
Often, SBDCs partner with universities 
and colleges, and tend to be found on 
campuses across the country. On the 
search results page, you’ll also find 
a link to the local office’s Web page, 
email address, phone number, a fax 
number if available, and address. 
The Closest Thing 
To A Free Lunch
The services offered may vary by 
location, but all SBDCs offer many 
services free of charge. Some typi-
cal services you canexpect from 
your nearest SBDC include help with 
financial, marketing, production, or-
Small Business
Development Centers
Assistance For Entrepreneurs
Frequent Question
If you’re like many other 
people starting a small business, 
funding is at the top of your 
mind. A common question that 
entrepreneurs have for SBDCs is: 
“Am I eligible for grant money?” 
The answer depends on the 
nature of your business. Grants.
gov (www.grants.gov) will give you 
a clear picture of your options 
before your visit to a Small 
Business Development Center.
ganization, engineering, and techni-
cal problems and access to feasibility 
studies that can flesh out a fledgling 
business plan. Some SBDCs also of-
fer affordable training seminars to 
help with various aspects of running 
a business. You can also rest assured 
that your business with the SBDC 
will remain confidential. 
Women’s Business Centers
The SBA offers WBCs (Women’s 
Business Centers), which directly 
serve female entrepreneurs through 
nearly 100 educational centers na-
tionwide. This organization strives 
to assist women in overcoming the 
hurdles they face in today’s business 
environment by offering business 
management training and technical 
assistance to all women, with a special 
emphasis on economically or socially 
disadvantaged women. The services 
and training programs are also com-
monly offered in multiple languages 
to enable those who speak English as 
a second language or are still learn-
ing English. To find your nearest WBC, 
visit bit.ly/hs3st2.
Small Business, Big Payoff
Small business owners know that 
achieving success is about taking risks, 
innovating, and making tough deci-
sions day in and day out. Thanks to 
the services offered at the SBA, SBDCs, 
and WBCs, you’re not on your own. ●
News & Notes
10 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Windows 8: A New Look
You’ll Soon Be Comfortable With Microsoft’s New Interface
W
indows 8 doesn’t look 
like any Windows that 
came before it. At first 
glance, Windows 8 and its eye-
catching Start page are a radi-
cal departure from the Microsoft 
operating system interfaces that 
have remained largely unchanged 
since Windows 95. In this article, 
we’ll introduce you to Windows 
8’s (sort of) new typography-and-
tile-based UI (user interface), re-
ferred to as the Microsoft Design 
Language, and investigate some of 
the firm’s motivations for shaking 
things up in its latest release.
Windows 8 UI Heritage
Formerly called Metro (and 
temporarily Modern UI), the Mi-
crosoft Design Language may look 
fresh, but it’s no stranger to con-
sumers. 
Windows Phone 7 was the first 
full platform to adopt the minimal-
ist and experience-focused design 
philosophy and run with it, but 
Microsoft began sowing the UI’s 
seeds as far back as MSN 2.0 in 
1996 and later in Windows Media 
Center, the Zune personal media 
player, and most recently in the 
Xbox 360 video game console. 
Microsoft 
Design 
Language 
takes its emphasis on sans-serif 
typography from the International 
Typographic Style (also known as 
the Swiss Style), which is a series 
of design principles developed in 
Switzerland in the 1950s. Another 
major influence for Microsoft’s UI 
design team is public transporta-
eliminate any “frivolous” aspects 
of the UI, including visual ele-
ments and features that the team 
deems unnecessary. 
To give the Microsoft Design 
Language interface a more or-
ganic feel, the team paid special 
attention to the screen transitions 
that occur when you navigate the 
menus, settings, applications, and 
Web. For instance, to get from the 
Windows Phone 7 device’s Start 
screen to the apps list, you simply 
tion signs, which accounts for its 
former name, Metro. 
Design Principles
According to the Windows 
Team Blog, the Microsoft Design 
Language is based on a design 
philosophy that consists of sev-
eral rules for how to implement 
UI design. When architecting the 
Windows Phone 7 interface, the 
team used what it refers to as 
“fierce reduction,” which aims to 
OK, so you’re interested in buying a new PC or laptop, but the thought of learning how to use Windows 
8’s dramatically different user interface is giving you pause. Let us dispel your fears and show you why 
Windows 8 may just become your favorite operating system to date. 
Windows 8’s Start screen displays the tile-based interface that characterizes the new OS.
Cover Story
Smart Computing  /  June2013 11

swipe to the left. The screen tran-
sition for this action starts out very 
quickly as the Start screen slides 
to the left, but just before the tran-
sition has completed, the Start 
screen slows down and vanishes 
at a crawl. Although the transition 
from the Start screen to the apps 
list has not been completed, users 
can still begin scrolling through 
and selecting the app they want 
to launch. The slowing transition 
serves as a gentle reminder that 
the Start screen is still lingering 
off the screen to the left; to get it 
back, all you have to do is swipe 
to the right. 
 Another core tenet of the Mi-
crosoft Design Language is the 
refers to the scroll bars, window 
frames, and buttons that form the 
basic structural elements of the 
user interface. For Microsoft’s UI 
designers, chrome is a barrier be-
tween the user and the data he or 
she is seeking. 
Instead of tapping a button 
to access a weather app, for in-
stance, the Microsoft Design Lan-
guage UI gives you a flat square 
that actually displays the current 
weather. Only if you want an ex-
tended forecast or precipitation 
levels would you actually need 
to tap the icon to launch the app. 
Microsoft calls these data-dense 
icons Live Tiles, and they are a 
major feature of what you’ll find 
celebration of typography. Ac-
cording to Microsoft, type is not 
only one of the most basic ways 
to transmit information; it can 
also be attractive and appealing. 
For example, while playing mu-
sic, the Zune displays the artist, 
song, album, and duration as text 
that continuously scrolls on and 
off the screen, in large and small 
type, at varying thicknesses, dif-
ferent angles, and different speeds 
over a backdrop of album art and 
images of the artist. 
 One of Microsoft Design Lan-
guage’s most distinguishing fea-
tures is the severe lack of what 
designers call “chrome.” In the 
context of user interfaces, chrome 
The media player in Windows 8 has an interface that is very similar to 
that of the Zune software.
You can click and drag pinned applications to arrange them on your 
Windows 8 Desktop as you see fit.
Cover Story
12 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

new and different about Windows 
8’s Start menu interface. 
Something else that is imme-
diately apparent when you use 
Windows 8 is the essentially flat, 
two-dimensional nature of ev-
ery UI element. In Windows 7, 
the title bars, window frames, 
and Taskbar are transparent, and 
the icons feature a glass-like 
sheen. Furthermore, open and 
pinned programs on the Taskbar 
are lit, as though they exist on an 
actual desktop, complete with a 
lamp shining its light on the top 
edges of each one. In the Micro-
soft Design Language-based Win-
dows 8, shadows, lighting, and 
reflections that surround icons 
about helping people play games, 
look at photos, listen to music, 
learn, communicate, or work 
more quickly and more efficient-
ly, regardless of whether they’re 
novice users or power users. 
Computer interfaces were origi-
nally designed to look like a series of 
file folders and window panes on a 
virtual Desktop, which helped peo-
ple visualize how the different UI 
elements were related and how they 
were used. Now that we’ve been us-
ing computers for more than two de-
cades, Microsoft argues, there’s no 
need for the UI elements to mimic 
real-world objects. According to Mi-
crosoft, we live in a digital world,  so 
we should be celebrating that.
have been eliminated. As a result, 
the UI feels very different (and in 
some ways, very plain) compared 
to the user interfaces in previ-
ous versions of Windows, Apple’s 
iOS, and Google’s Android. 
It’s All About You
If you’re familiar with the sev-
eral popular Apple iOS devices 
currently available, you’ll notice 
that many of Microsoft Design 
Language’s defining attributes are 
utterly contrary to those of Apple’s 
iOS UI. If it ain’t broke, why fix 
it? According to Microsoft, the 
Microsoft Design Language is 
not merely change for the sake of 
change. Rather, the new UI is all 
The Zune software also shows elements of the Microsoft Design 
Language.
Windows Phone 7 was an early showcase of a fully tile-based inter-
face.
Cover Story
Smart Computing  /  June2013 13

The Choice Is Yours
Although Windows 8’s Start menu 
UI is dramatically different than 
Windows 7 and previous iterations, 
the firm hasn’t slammed the door 
on the Desktop user interface you 
know (and possibly love). Windows 
8 lets you click the Desktop tile 
to minimize the new Start screen 
and revert to the icon-laden and 
Taskbar-underlined Desktop with 
which we’re more familiar. To 
jump back into the Start menu, just 
click in the lower-left corner of the 
screen.
To make dismissing the Start 
screen even easier, click and 
drag the Desktop tile on the Start 
screen to the upper-left corner of 
the screen. Now, you can jump 
into Desktop mode, as Microsoft 
calls it, by pressing ENTER key. ●
You can still access the familiar Windows Desktop in Windows 8; just click in the lower-left 
corner of the screen.
Can’t Get Enough Of The New
Microsoft Design Language?
Although it’s a dramatic departure, most of 
Windows 8’s users adapt to the new style rather 
quickly. If you find yourself longing for more, 
Microsoft’s innovative user interface is on full 
display in both smartphones and tablets. 
Windows Phone 8 is the latest version of Micro-
soft’s smartphone OS and you can get your hands 
on it with the Nokia Lumia 920 (www.nokia.
com). This smartphone brings the tile-and typography-based UI to a very pocketable form factor. But don’t 
let its size fool you; this is a very powerful device. Live tiles that give you what you need to know without 
even having to launch the app seem like they were built for users on-the-go. 
Microsoft’s Surface tablet is available in your choice of Surface RT or Surface Pro (www.microsoft.com/
Surface). The latter runs the same version of Windows 8 you’ll find on desktop PCs, but the former runs 
a slimmed down version, similar to Google’s Android and Apple’s iOS. Both units include the Microsoft 
Design Language-based Start screen described above. The Surface adds a touchscreen to the Windows 8 
experience, which makes it even easier to access the content and apps you want, fast. Plus, running Win8 
on multiple devices means you’ll get used to it even more quickly; in no time at all, you’ll be an expert.
Cover Story
14 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Disabling the Lock Screen lets you log in and begin using your Windows 8-based PC, tablet, or laptop more quickly. However, doing so defeats 
one of Windows 8’s security measures, so be sure you’re willing to sacrifice some security for a little convenience.
Make Windows 8 Your Own
How To Set Up & Personalize Your New OS
O
ne of the first things you are 
going to want to do once 
you land on Windows 8’s 
dynamic Start screen is click the 
Store tile, browse around, and 
download some new apps. You’ll 
likely find a number of apps you 
know and love from your smart-
phone or tablet, so once they’re 
installed, rearrange their tiles on 
the Start screen, launch them, 
and sign in. Import some photos, 
of the screen to reveal the Charms 
bar. Then click Settings, Change 
PC Settings, and then navigate 
between the Lock Screen, Start 
Screen, 
and 
Account 
Picture 
menus at the top of the screen to 
change the look of each. Later in 
this article, we’ll show you how 
to disable the Lock Screen, but if 
you keep it active, you can add 
a handful of apps to it from this 
screen.
videos, and sign into your social 
networks. Once the Live Tiles be-
gin pushing the latest weather, 
images, social network posts, and 
emails to your Start screen, you’ll 
wonder how you ever lived with-
out them.
Windows 8 Personalized
To tweak the look of your Win-
dows 8 experience, hover your 
mouse over the lower-right corner 
You’ve removed the shrink wrap, loaded the disc into your optical drive, and installed Windows 8. Now 
what? This article will take you through a handful of procedures that will help make Windows 8 more ac-
cessible, user-friendly, and fun to use. 
Cover Story
Smart Computing  /  June2013 15

Disable The Lock Screen
To access the PC, click anywhere on 
the Lock Screen and drag upward. To 
disable this feature, launch the Group 
Policy Editor by pressing the Windows 
Key and the “R” key simultaneously. In 
the Run text field, type gpedit.msc and 
click OK. Once in the Local Group 
Policy Editor, double-click Computer 
Configuration, Administrative Tem-
plates, Control Panel, Personalization 
and then click the Do Not Display 
The Lock Screen setting to highlight it 
in the right pane of the window. Next, 
double-click the setting, click the En-
abled radio button, click OK, and then 
close the Local Group Policy Editor. 
Now, whenever your system starts up 
or wakes, you’ll immediately be able 
to log in with your username and pass-
word. 
a shortcut to make shutting the system 
down easier, if you like. Start by click-
ing the Desktop tile, right-click a blank 
spot on the screen and click New, 
and then click Shortcut. In the Loca-
tion text box, type shutdown.exe –s –t 
00, and then click Next. The shortcut 
name should appear on the following 
screen where you can change it if you 
want. Click Finish. 
Tell IE To Open Links
On The Desktop
By default, if you click a Web link 
from the Windows 8 Start screen, it 
will launch Internet Explorer in a tile-
based mode, which hides navigation 
buttons on the Address bar. To see the 
Address bar in this mode, you need to 
hover your mouse near the bottom of 
the page. 
Make The Desktop Tile
More Prominent
The tile-based UI referred to as the 
Microsoft Design Language (formerly 
Metro and Modern UI) works well for 
some things but not as well for others. 
To make sure you can get to the fa-
miliar Desktop quickly, click and drag 
the Desktop tile from its current posi-
tion to the top of the leftmost column 
of tiles. Now, you can quickly access 
Windows 8’s Desktop Mode just by 
pressing the ENTER key.
Create A Shutdown 
Shortcut
In order to shut down your Windows 
8 PC, you must hover your mouse over 
the lower-right corner of the screen to 
expose the charms bar, click Settings, 
and then click Power. You can create 
The Do Not Display The Lock Screen options dialog box gives you a lot 
of information about what disabling it will do. 
Move the Desktop tile to the top-left corner of the Start Screen for 
faster access.
Cover Story
16 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

To be able to see both the naviga-
tion buttons and Address bar every 
time you launch IE, start typing con-
trol panel from the Start screen. This 
launches Windows 8’s handy Search 
feature and displays a list of items 
that match your query. Click Control 
Panel  from the list of displayed apps. 
Click View Network And Status under 
Network And Internet, and then click 
Internet Options from the lower-left 
corner of the Control Panel. Click the 
Programs tab, then highlight Always In 
Internet Explorer On The Desktop from 
the Choose How You Open Links sec-
tion of the Internet Properties dialog 
box. Click OK to complete the opera-
tion.
It’s true, you can tweak away most 
of what makes Windows 8 different 
from Windows 7. But before you do, 
spend some time using the new OS 
as it was meant to be used. You might 
be surprised to find that you actually 
come to prefer the way the new sys-
tem works. ●
If you want to see navigation buttons and the Address bar for every Web page you launch, 
you have to tweak the Internet Properties dialog box. 
No Touchscreen? No Worries
Windows 8 is optimized for a touchscreen interface, and having a touchscreen on your PC, laptop, or tablet definitely 
adds to the experience. But if you don’t have a touchscreen, you can still approximate that sort of tactile, fingertapping 
interface—by using a mouse, of all things.
Microsoft’s Arc Touch Mouse + Windows 8
Microsoft’s Touch Mouse is like no other you’ve ever seen. It’s sleek and flexible—literally flexible: Just press down on 
the arc and flatten the device to turn it off. 
But what really sets the Arc Touch Mouse apart is 
its functionality. Scroll by sliding your finger up 
and down the center strip; flick objects (pages, 
etc.) by quickly brushing up or down with your fin-
gertip. Tap the top or bottom of the strip to page up 
or down. Double-tap the middle (a move called a 
“middle-click”) to do different things, depending 
on which application you’re running. Double-tap 
and hold to accomplish other app-specific tasks, 
such as panning or auto-scrolling.
Not the same as a touchscreen, but pretty handy 
nonetheless.
Cover Story
Smart Computing  /  June2013 17

Windows 8 In The Small Office
How Your Business Can Benefit From An Upgrade
U
pgrading to the latest ver-
sion of Windows is a task no 
business should take lightly. 
Compared to Windows 7, the new 
Windows 8 release adds features, 
streamlines processes, and boots 
even more quickly. But Microsoft’s 
latest OS (operating system) also of-
fers several business-centric extras 
that are designed to simplify those 
day-to-day tasks and improve your 
operational efficiency. In this article, 
we’ll explore some of what makes 
Windows 8 the best OS for business. 
Windows Gets 
Touchy-Feely
Almost overnight, tablets made 
the transition from consumer-fo-
cused devices to essential business 
tools. Sadly, the tablet’s inability to 
run traditional desktop software has 
kept many organizations from em-
bracing them. Microsoft developed 
Windows 8 with touch interfaces 
in mind, and organizations that re-
quire certain business applications 
incompatible with Google’s Android 
or Apple’s iOS now have a tablet al-
ternative in Windows 8.
A Better BitLocker 
Although Windows 7 Ultimate 
and Enterprise editions include Bit-
Locker, Microsoft’s automatic drive 
and file encryption utility, Windows 
8 Pro’s version has a few new tricks 
up its sleeve. BitLocker provisioning 
is a feature that lets system admin-
istrators encrypt the partition upon 
which they plan to install Windows 
8 even before they begin the instal-
lation process. 
In Windows 8 Pro, users can also 
encrypt just the used disk space, in-
stead of the whole drive, which can 
dramatically improve the speed of 
encrypting and unencrypting data. 
The new version also lets standard 
users (or non-administrators) change 
BitLocker PINs and passwords on 
operating system volumes and data 
volumes, respectively. In another 
bid to reduce calls to the help desk, 
the new Network Unlock feature 
lets a BitLocker system automati-
cally unlock the system volume dur-
ing boot, as long as the computer is 
connected to the wired network. 
The conventional wisdom regarding when a business should upgrade to the latest version of an operat-
ing system is right before the previous OS becomes obsolete. With Windows 8, however, there are several 
reasons your business might want to consider making the jump right now. 
Processes that appear darker in Windows 8’s new Task Manager 
are more active than those with lighter backgrounds.
Task Manager Plus
Windows 8 ships with an en-
hanced Task Manager, a utility with 
which the IT folks at your organiza-
tion are probably very familiar. This 
utility displays the currently running 
applications and processes; lists the 
services and their current statuses; 
reports detailed performance infor-
mation for the CPU, memory, and 
network; and shows users currently 
logged on. Press CTRL-SHIFT-ESC to 
access the Win8 Task Manager.
In Windows 8, the Windows Task 
Manager hides the tabs and only 
shows the Applications tab by de-
fault. The Processes tab displays 
Cover Story
18 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

heavy usage with darker shades 
of yellow; idle processes are pale 
yellow. The Performance tab displays 
graphs for CPU, Memory, Disk, Eth-
ernet, and wireless network (such as 
Bluetooth or Wi-Fi), if available. 
System administrators in your or-
ganization will appreciate the new 
Startup tab, which lists the startup 
applications, the status of each ap-
plication, and more.
Stay Unplugged Longer
For notebook and tablet users, 
you can never have too much bat-
tery life. That’s why Microsoft has 
attempted to increase the amount 
of time you can run your Win-
dows 8-based tablet, such as the 
Surface and Surface Pro (www.mi-
crosoft.com/Surface). The Toshiba 
Satellite S855D-S5148 (www.toshiba 
.com) is a notebook that lasts lon-
ger thanks to Windows 8 under 
the hood. 
Business Bonuses
Win8 offers dozens of other ben-
efits for businesses; a few that you’ll 
appreciate include: enhanced sup-
port for multiple monitors; native 
support for mounting ISO (Interna-
tional Organization for Standardiza-
tion) images; improved language 
support and the ability to switch 
languages on the fly; better support 
for remote desktops; and enhanced 
If you want your OS to do more for 
your business, then migrating to Win-
dows 8 is worth considering. ●
security through support for picture 
passwords, Microsoft account sign-
on, and new Group Policy settings. 
The Performance tab of the new Task Manager looks considerably different than the Windows 
7 equivalent.
With Windows 8, you’ll see improved battery life.
Remote Desktop Connection makes a comeback in Windows 8.
Cover Story
Smart Computing  /  June2013 19

The Windows 8 Store is your one-stop apps shop in Microsoft’s latest operating system.
Windows Shopping
Software For Sale At The Windows Store
M
icrosoft is doing a number 
of things differently in Win-
dows 8, compared to previ-
ous versions of the firm’s operating 
system software. One of the most 
important new features is the Win-
dows Store, which is a software mar-
ketplace that provides you with ac-
cess to apps made just for Windows. 
Most of the apps feature UI elements 
similar to those used in Windows 8’s 
Start menu, including the familiar 
tile-based visual design formerly re-
ferred to as Metro.
Apps On Your PC
Although the Windows Store will 
strike you as remarkably similar to 
the Windows Phone Marketplace, 
Google Play, and Apple App Store, 
it differs in that it will offer apps for 
Windows 8-based tablets (such as 
the Surface RT and Surface Pro) and
for notebooks and PCs. Most of these 
apps share signature Windows 8 in-
terface elements, including the use 
of live tiles, complementary colors, 
and text of varying size and thick-
ness. These apps are designed with 
touch-based interfaces in mind, but 
everything you’ll find on the Win-
dows 8 Store also supports mouse 
and keyboard use. 
App Alternatives
The Windows 8 Store is a big 
part of the Windows 8 experience, 
but traditional PC software still has 
a place on your Windows 8 ma-
chine. Although Microsoft says the 
Windows Store only offers apps that 
count, but if you want to make a 
purchase, you’ll need to be signed 
in. To access the Windows Store, 
just click the Store tile from the Start 
screen.
The Windows Store looks very 
similar to the Windows 8 Start 
screen itself, consisting of large tiles 
for individual apps and colored tiles 
for various app categories. The app 
tiles you see here feature the title 
and logo for the app, in addition to 
the cost and its current rating (on a 
scale of five stars). As we went to 
share the Start screen’s design aes-
thetic, it does include listings for 
more traditional desktop software, 
including Microsoft Office and 
more. These listings won’t let Win-
dows Store shoppers purchase these 
titles directly; instead, the store 
will provide a link to a Web source 
from which users can purchase and 
download the software. 
Start Shopping Now
You can sign into your Microsoft 
Account or stick with a local ac-
In previous versions of Windows, you could buy software at brick-and-mortar outlets or download it from 
the Web. Windows 8 users now have a third option. 
Cover Story
20 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

the apps that make or break Microsoft’s 
strategy. As we went to press, most of 
the multi-platform apps you might al-
ready enjoy on your iOS-based iPhone 
or Android-based smartphone are also 
available for your Windows 8 desk-
top PC, thanks to the Windows Store. 
Whether these single-function utilities 
are truly compelling in a desktop envi-
ronment is still an open question, but 
one which Microsoft hopes will be an-
swered affirmatively. ●
press, the large tile in the upper-
left corner of the screen was titled 
Spotlight. Here you’ll find a handful 
of featured apps and a row of cat-
egories to the right, including Top 
Paid, Top Free, and New Releases. 
Click each category to see a list of 
apps. Back on the Store’s main page, 
scrolling down cycles the app cat-
egories toward the left edge of the 
screen. Categories include Games, 
Social, Entertainment, Photo, Music 
& Video, Sports, Books & Reference, 
News & Weather, Business, Educa-
tion, and more.
Much like the app stores for Apple 
and Google’s platforms, there are nu-
merous free apps available in every 
category. Most apps in the store cost 
very little, between $1.49 and $4.99 
each. If you’d like to get a taste but 
aren’t ready to shell out any money, 
the store offers time- and feature-
limited trials, in-app purchases, and 
ad-subsidized apps. 
To download an app, just click 
one of the tiles to view a star rating, 
an overview with screen shots, a 
Details page that lists updates, and 
a Reviews page where you can get 
others’ impressions of the app. At 
the bottom of the page are other im-
portant facts, such as permissions, 
download size, age rating, and pub-
lisher. When you’re ready to install 
the app, just click the Install button.
Occasionally the apps you’ve in-
stalled will get updates, and a notifi-
cation in the top right-corner of the 
screen will clue you in. Click it and 
then click Install All to bring them 
up-to-date.
Is Your PC Ready?
Windows 8 is an operating system 
that pins its hopes on consumers’ love 
of smartphones and tablets. The UI, 
the visual elements, and now the Win-
dows Store are all inspired by a mo-
bile-centric form of computing, com-
munication, and entertainment. But 
the Windows Store itself isn’t going to 
make the difference for anyone; it’ll be 
But Is It Safe?
Security should be top-of-mind whenever you download something to 
your computer. If the Windows Store is using Apple and Google’s “store” 
model for selling apps, then it’s only natural to ask about the safety of the 
apps on the Windows Store. 
Microsoft is following Apple’s “curated” model, which means that the apps 
are tested and approved by Microsoft before they appear on the Store. 
Apps you find here have all been rated for age appropriateness (you can 
use parental controls to restrict access to certain content), screened for 
malicious code, and vetted to make sure they do what they purport to do. 
Among other things, the Overview page displays a basic description of the app’s function, 
some sample screen shots, and the app’s star rating.
Cover Story
Smart Computing  /  June2013 21

Tablet
Laptop
Portability
Less than an inch thick
✓
All-day battery life
✓
Convertible styles
Detachable 
and wireless 
keyboard
Office Productivity
Email, video chat, and 
instant messaging
✓
✓
Full size screen & key-
board
✓
Efficiently create, edit, 
and  multitask
✓
Entertainment
Watch, play, and listen 
to multimedia
✓
✓
Smooth HD playback
✓
Wireless multimedia 
streaming
✓
✓
Large screen (18”+)
Powerful Extras
Wakes up in a flash
✓
Speed boost when you 
need it
With an Intel 
Core i5 or i7 
processor
Built in security to keep  
files and identity safe
Selecting Your Next Computer 
From Tablet To Ultrabook™
Choose The On-The-Go Solution That’s Right For You
Confused about what computer is best for you? This chart breaks down the functional differences among tablet, 
laptop, all-in-one and Ultrabook™ options. As you can see, an Ultrabook™ provides you with the best of all possible 
worlds, as you’ll enjoy best features of a laptop combined with the sleek design and portability of a tablet. Of course, 
you might want the PC for only a few specific uses, so check our chart to find out what’s best for you.
What 
Are Your 
Needs?
All-in-one
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
With an Intel 
Core i5 or i7 
processor
Ultrabook™
✓
✓
Detachable, flip, 
slider, and swivel
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
22 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Less Clutter, Better Performance
New AIO Computers Are Ready With Touch Control
online wherever the PC is located. 
Many models also come with built-in 
webcams and microphones, making 
your new AIO perfect for video chats 
with friends and family. Lenovo’s 
C440, for instance, has a 720p web-
cam, a 21.5-inch HD screen, and 
built-in speakers, so everyone can 
see and hear the people on the other 
end of the call. With this AIO, there’s 
no longer any need to huddle around 
a tiny laptop screen.
The wireless capabilities and capa-
cious storage make it easy to upload 
photos and videos to social networks 
and to email attachments to friends, 
while Intel’s Quick Sync video lets 
you convert video and images much 
more quickly than you could with 
your last PC. ●
H
ere are a few of the reasons 
why you’ll want to consider an 
AIO (all-in-one) computer as 
your next PC upgrade.
A Home Centerpiece
An AIO is ideal for families that 
want one computer that the whole 
family can use. The one-cable design 
(just a power cable, as all the hard-
ware is built into the monitor) give 
the PC a sleek, attractive look that 
provides you with the aesthetic free-
dom to place the AIO in any room.
You’ll also like that AIOs are as 
adept at streaming TV as playing in-
teractive games, tracking household 
expenses, and browsing the Web—
so the entire family can share the 
computer. You can choose between 
screen sizes as small as 18.5 inches 
(great for a kitchen) and as large as 
27 inches (perfect for living room en-
tertainment). For instance, the Dell 
Inspiron One 23 offers a 23-inch 
touchscreen display that supports 
Full HD (1,920 x 1,080) video qual-
ity, providing a large canvas for touch 
games and streaming TV.
A Home Office PC
The Intel® processors power-
ing today’s AIOs provide more than 
enough oomph to handle document 
creation and finance-related tasks. 
Models with Intel® Turbo Boost 2.0 
technology, such as Samsung’s Se-
ries 7 All In One, will automatically 
ramp up performance with demand-
ing applications such as graphics de-
sign and video-editing. The Samsung 
Series 7 All In One runs at 2.9GHz 
under most conditions and jumps up 
to 3.6GHz when programs demand 
more power. Those that need a way 
to show work off to clients and cus-
tomers will also enjoy the stunningly 
crisp images and bright colors dis-
played on an AIO’s HD screen.
Even though space it at a premium, 
AIOs also include connectivity and 
storage options to let you easily trans-
fer and store digital image and music 
collections in one central location. 
For example, the Acer Aspire AZS600 
offers 1TB of internal storage, as well 
as two USB 3.0 ports, four USB 2.0 
ports, and a DVD burner. 
A Social Tool
AIOs are built with wireless net-
working to ensure that you can get 
Computers that stay at your desk are often more speedy and responsive than their mobile counterparts. Even better, many 
of today’s AIOs provide touchscreen capabilities, so you’ll enjoy the versatility of a desktop computer with the intuitive con-
trols of a tablet, as well as a stylish, clutter-free design that saves space and fits beautifully into your home and office life.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 23

Hardware
Color Inkjet All-in-One Printer
Epson
® WorkForce
® WF-3520 
www.EPSON.com
The WorkForce WF-3520 is the hassle-free all-in-one that brings your business the World’s Fastest print speeds1,
plus automatic 2-sided printing / copying / scanning. It features a robust product design and a number of pro-
ductivity boosting features, including a 250-sheet paper capacity, so you’ll reload paper less often. Versatile 
paper handling capability includes a 30-sheet Auto Document Feeder, plus a rear paper feed to accommodate 
envelopes, labels, card stock and other specialty media. Use the 2.5” LCD with touch panel and built-in card 
slots to easily print, PC-free. And, get up to 40% lower printing costs vs. color lasers1. The WF-3520 even in-
cludes wired and wireless connectivity1 for easy networking.
t 4-in-1: print, copy, scan, fax
t Network Ready; Hi-Speed USB, Wireless (802.11 b/g/n) and Wired Ethernet (10/100 Mbps)
t Do more — automatic 2-sided printing plus a 30-page, duplex Auto Document Feeder to quickly copy, 
scan or fax stacks of 1- or 2-sided originals 
t World’s Fastest 2-sided print speeds — 1-sided 15 ISO ppm (black) and 9.3 ISO ppm (color)1; 2-sided 7.4 
ISO ppm (black) and 5.4 ISO ppm (color)1
t Monthly duty cycle up to 12,000 pages
t Maximum print resolution 5760 x 1440 optimized dpi
t Prints up to 8.5” x 44”
t Easy menu navigation - 2.5” LCD and touch panel
t 1200 x 2400 dpi scan resolution
t EPSON Connect - Print and scan from anywhere - convenient mobile printing from smartphones, tablets 
and more; also supports Apple AirPrint and Google Cloud Print
1 ISO ppm is based on ISO/IEC 24734. Black and color print speeds are determined in 
default, letter-size, single-side mode, in accordance with ISO/IEC 24734. Black and color 
2-sided print speeds are determined in letter-size, 2-sided mode, in accordance with ISO/
IEC 24734. Actual print times will vary based on system configuration, software, and page 
complexity. See www.epson.com/printspeed for details, including complete ISO reports. 
Epson
® Workforce
® WF-3520
Model: C11CC33201
Staples Item: 954265
24 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Hardware
Notebook
IdeaPad
® U310
www.Lenovo.com
Ultra responsive. Ultra sleek. Ultrabook™. Inspired by Intel. Now you won’t sacrifice power for beauty - experience the joy 
of performance that keeps up with you. 
The IdeaPad U310 Touch is a thin and light Ultrabook™ that comes with a 10-point multi-touch display and a range of ultra 
responsive technologies for a simplified user experience while on the go.
t 3rd gen Intel® Core™ i5-3337U Processor plus Turbo Boost Technology. Enjoy an automatic burst of speed when you 
need it with Intel® Turbo Boost Technology 2.0
t Windows 8
t 4GB DDR3 Installed Memory
t 500GB HDD Storage & 24GB SSD Cache
t 13.3” HD LED backlight (1366 × 768) display with 10-point multi-touch, 16:9 aspect ratio
t Integrated Intel®4000 HD graphics
t Instant Resume - Wake up your PC from Sleep mode in just over a second
t Stereo Speakers with Dolby Home Theatre v4 audio certification for immersive sound
t Enjoy greater accuracy with the 10-point multi-touch display optimized for the new Windows 8 interface
t Long Life Battery for extened use on the move; up to 6hrs
t AccuType keyboard with individual rounded keys for comforatable and accurate typing 
IdeaPad U310
Model:59365302
Staples Item: 141488
Smart Computing  /  June2013 25

Hardware
Delivers business imaging quality and versatile solutions
Canon PIXMA MX922 Inkjet All-in-One Printer 
www.usa.canon.com
Bring superior quality and many wireless capabilities to your 
home office with the PIXMA MX922. This printer has built-in 
WiFi® for printing and scanning virtually anywhere in your home. It also includes AirPrint, which lets you wire-
lessly print from your iPad, iPhone or iPod touch devices. Cloud3 printing capabilities, an integrated 35-sheet 
Duplex Auto Document Feeder and Dual Function Panel are just some of the features that can allow you to 
multi-task easily. The MX922 also has a new high-capacity 250-sheet plain paper cassette so you can focus on 
your work and not running out of paper! This can bring office efficiency to all-new levels and help reduce costs 
at the same time.
t 4-in-1: print, copy, scan, fax
t Network Ready; Ethernet, Wireless LAN (IEEE 802.11b/g/n), PictBridge (Wireless LAN), Bluetooth® v2.0 (Op-
tional) and USB 2.0 Hi-Speed connectivity
t Automatic Duplexing (2-sided printing)
t 9600 x 2400 maximum color dpi4 produces incredible quality and detail in both your business documents 
and photos
t Print a borderless, 4” x 6” photo in approximately 21 seconds
t My Image Garden software makes organizing and printing your photos fun and easy with great facial recogni-
tion, Fun Filters, Calendar Organization, Automatic Layout Suggestions and so much more!
t Easily copy, scan and fax multiple documents without having to load them one page at a time
t Full HD Movie Print software turns your favorite HD movie clips captured with compatible Canon EOS Digital 
SLR, PowerShot cameras or VIXIA camcorders into beautiful prints
t Quickly and easily scan your documents and papers from your printer or scanner. Evernote will make your 
documents searchable, so you can always find what you need at anytime, on any device.
t The EasyPhoto-Print app lets you wirelessly print and scan jpg and pdf files from compatible iPad, iPhone, iPod 
touch, and Android devices
t Plug the cable into your PC for a super-fast connection for your data transfers
Canon PIXMA MX922
Model: 6992B002
Staples Item: 153935    
26 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Hardware
Streamlined, elegant and featuring a tiltable Full HD1 
multi-touch display, this all-in-one computer is simple to 
use, fits anywhere, and looks great on your desk or a wall. 
Inside, the system is optimized for hands-on touch control. 
Multitask with multi-touch using the Aspire Z Series!
t The slim all-in-one design saves space and features an 
optimized tilt -- from 0 to 20 degrees.
t With its VESA mounting kit, you can also place this all-
in-one on the wall.
t The Aspire Z Series offers 10-point touch display,  or use 
the wireless keyboard and mouse.
t The Full HD visuals are stunning on the 23" screen, and 
the sound is excellent with Dolby® Home Theater® v4.
Social, simple, fun
Acer AZS600-UR308 Windows 8 Intel
® Core i3
www.ACER.com
Acer Aspire All in One
Model: AZS600-UR308
Staples item: 131075 
Dell Inspiron One
Model: io2330-3639Bk
Staples Item: 132452
Hardware
Keep everyone engaged and having fun with thrilling 
movies, games and videos on the Inspiron One 23 All-
in-One PC. Make your home entertainment experience 
riveting. Choose the speed of the 3rd Gen Intel® Core™ 
i7 processors paired with Windows® 8 Home operating 
system.
t Intel® Pentium® G20202.9 GHz 3MB Cache Processor
t 4GB Installed Memory (DDR3, 1600MHz)
t 500GB 7200RPM Hard Drive
t 58.4cm (23) Full HD display
t Windows® 8
Entertain and Inspire
Dell Inspiron One Touch Screen All in One 
www.dell.com
Product Shot
Must be hi-res
225ppi, CMYK
Smart Computing  /  June2013 27

Hardware
Experience rocking entertainment from the comfort of your 
home using the powerful HP ENVY dv7 Notebook PC. This 
desktop alternative makes gaming easy with a large display 
and numeric keypad. Plus, enjoy Beats Audio™. 
t Create home videos in stunning high-definition with the 
HP TrueVision webcam.  The TrueVision webcam will 
bring out the best in your surroundings. 
t 17.3-inch diagonal HD+ BrightView LED-backlit display 
(1600 x 900)
t Intel® core that features Turbo Boost Technology, making 
your games and movies run smoothly. 
t 750GB 5400RPM Hard Drive with HP ProtectSmart Hard 
Drive Protection
Performance and Entertainment
HP ENVY dv7-7240us Windows 8 Intel
® Core i5
www.HP.com
HP ENVY dv7-7240us
Model: C2H70UA#ABA
Staples Item: 985044
Hardware
The Lenovo C440 reshapes the affordable home computer 
into a smart space-saving All-in-One PC, uniquely com-
bining convenient family-friendly features with the perfor-
mance of an Intel® Pentium® Dual Core processor. Great 
for email, video playback and organizing photos, the C440 
also provides peace of mind with Lenovo Rescue System, 
making data backup and recovery simple.
t Intel® Pentium® Dual Core G2020 Processor
t 4GB DDR3 Installed Memory
t 1TB Hard Disk Drive
t Integrated DVD reader/writer drive
t Windows 8
All in One Computer
C440 21.5"
www.Lenovo.com
C440 AIO
Model:57312696
Staples Item: 140613
28 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Hardware
The Samsung Series 7 All in One is a Staples Windows 8 
Select PC representing the best in design, mobility and 
performance. The Series 7 is super-easy for the whole family 
to use and compliments any room in the house. With its 
multi-touch technology, as well as voice and hand gesture 
recognition, kids, parents and seniors will find it accessible 
and fun.
t Intel® Core™ i5-3470T 2.9GHz Cache Processor plus 
Turbo Boost Technology. Enjoy an automatic burst of 
speed when you need it with Intel® Turbo Boost Technol-
ogy 2.0
t 6GB 1600MHz DDR3 Installed Memory
t 1TB 5400RPM SATA2 Hard Drive
t 23" LED Full HD Display (1920 x 1080)
t Windows 8
Click.Touch.Gesture. You're in Control
Samsung Series 7 Touch Screen All in One Computer
www.samsung.com/us
Samsung Series 7 All in One
Model: DP700A3D-A01US
Staples Item: 990336 
Hardware
Ultra responsive. Ultra sleek. Ultrabook™. Inspired by Intel. 
Now you won’t sacrifice power for beauty - experience the 
joy of performance that keeps up with you. 
t 3rd Gen Intel® Core™ i5 – 3317U processor, 1.7 GHz, 
3MB L3 Cache; Enjoy an automatic burst of speed when 
you need it with Intel® Turbo Boost Technology 2.0
t 4GB 1333Mhz DDR3
t 500GB 5400RPM SATA Hard Drive plus 24GB SSD 
Cache
t 12.5" HD IPS Display with Touch Sensor
t Windows 8
t Stereo speakers with Dolby® Home Theatre® v4 audio
Convertible UltraBook
®
ThinkPad
® Twist
www.Lenovo.com
ThinkPad Twist
Model:33474HU
Staples Item: 985048
Smart Computing  /  June2013 29

Software
Ultimate Protection for you and your devices
Norton 360
TM Multi-Device 
www.norton.com
Provides a single, integrated 
solution that protects you 
from threats and your mobile 
devices from loss
Norton 360™ Multi-Device brings together powerful PC, Mac®, Android™, iPhone®, and iPad® protection to deliver a 
single, straightforward solution that protects you on the various devices you use.  With Norton 360 Multi-Device, there’s no 
need to cobble together separate protection products on your own. It lets you safely surf, shop, share, socialize, and bank 
online, no matter which device you use.
t EXCLUSIVE! Norton Protection System: Our five patented layers of protection detect and eliminate PC threats more 
quickly and accurately than other technologies.
t Network Defense Layer Protection: Stops online threats before they can reach your computer.
t NEW! Threat-Removal Layer: Targets and eliminates hard-to-remove threats less sophisticated products often miss. 
t NEW! Scam Insight: Reviews a website’s reputation and lets you know if it is safe to enter your personal information, so 
you can be confident it won’t be stolen by cybercriminals.
t EXCLUSIVE! Norton Management: Cloud-based controls let you install, manage, fix, update, and renew Norton 360™ 
Multi-Device on all of your devices over the Internet with a few simple clicks. 
t EXCLUSIVE! Parental Controls Management: Lets you access Norton Online Family through Norton 360. 
t Norton Identity Safe: Remembers, secures, and automatically enters your user names and passwords for you.
t Automatic Backup: Backs up your photos, music, and other important files only when you’re not using your PC, so it 
won’t get in your way and you don’t have to remember to do it.
t PC Tuneup: Fixes common computer problems, frees up memory, removes unnecessary files, and cleans up your hard drive.
$40 off
instantly at register for 
Staples Rewards Members
Norton 360 
Model: 21264472
Staples Item: 957446

Software
With Quicken Premier, you can see changes in assets, liabilities, and 
net worth with one click, so you can maximize your portfolio and 
make more informed investment choices. Plus, Quicken downloads 
your income and expenses from your bank(s), brokerages, and other 
financial institutions, so you don't have to enter transactions manually.
t Quicken automatically tracks and categorizes your expenses like 
groceries, entertainment, and more, so you don’t have to edit them 
manually. 
t Step-by-step guidance helps you get up and running on Quicken 
fast.
t We identify your top-performing investments and compare your 
portfolio to the market, so you can make smart decisions on buying 
or selling.
Free Mobile app
Quicken Premier 2013 Manage Your Investments
www.Quicken.com
Quicken Premier 2013 
Model: 419335
Staples item: 953841
Software
Microsoft has redesigned Office 365 to reflect where, when, 
and how you work, so you'll be able to communicate and 
collaborate anywhere--using the trusted, powerful tools 
provided by Office.
t SkyDrive is your own personal cloud where you can 
store all the documents, photos, videos and other impor-
tant files you need.  
t Utilize the built-in videoconferencing features of Office 
365 to remotely teleconference from your desk.  
t Use Digital Notebook to capture, organize and share 
data encountered while web browsing.
t Compatible with Windows 8 and touchscreens making it 
ideal for your new Windows 8 tablet.  
Mobility Meets Productivity
Office 365 Access Your Work From Anywhere
www.MICROSOFT.com
Microsoft Office 365
Model: 6GQ-00024
Staples item: 122565
Smart Computing  /  June2013 31

Software
Award-winning protection against all Internet threats: Kaspersky’s inno-
vative hybrid approach to protection combines the real-time efficiency 
of the cloud with security technologies on your PC to deliver a more 
effective response to today’s threats.
t Safe Money adds even stronger security for online banking, shopping
t Automatic Exploit Prevention: Even if your PCs applications haven’t 
been updated with the latest fixes
t Safeguards your digital identity & privacy
t Scheduled backup protects your photos, music, and financial data
t Encrypted vaults securely store valuable files
t Easy, central security management of multiple PCs
t PC clean-up tools keep your system running smoothly
t Award Winning Parental Control
The Ultimate Proctection
Kaspersky PURE 3.0 Total Security
www.kaspersky.com
Kaspersky PURE 3.0 Total Security
Model: P7DC7K2FJQ6UZUB
Staples Item: 167670
Software
Security is a fundamental requirement in today’s connected 
world. Security threats are becoming more common and 
more sophisticated, and are moving beyond the PC to other 
devices. McAfee All Access is a single product that protects 
all the PCs, Macs, tablets, and smartphones you own.
t Easy to use set up; the cloud-based console lets you 
manage and monitor all your devices from wherever you 
connect.
t Free technical support for the life of the product from 
McAfee experts via phone, Internet chat, and remote 
access.
t Misplaced your phone? You can use the track feature or 
make it scream to locate it. 
McAfee All Access 2013
Unlimited Protection For all the devices you own
www.McAfee.com
McAfee All Access 2013 
Model: AAI13EMB1RAA
Staples item: 957360
32 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Focus
Is There A Place For
A Tablet In Your Business?
Looking For True Mobile Productivity? Try A Tablet
Tablets offer you the ultimate in mobile productivity. The slim devices are 
generally available in screen sizes between 7 and 10 inches, giving you much 
more real estate than you’d have on a smartphone. And they provide the power 
necessary to perform basic business tasks, such as email and word processing.
the full version to enjoy touch-enhanced versions of 
Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and OneNote.
Cloud storage. Cloud storage services make it pos-
sible for you to use the tablet’s Internet connection to 
remotely sync with the files you use on your office PC. 
With tablets that run Windows, you’ll be able to save 
files to a SkyDrive account that provides 7GB of free 
storage space where you can securely keep up to 7000 
digital photos or 20,000 Office documents. With a tab-
let that runs a version of Android, you’ll enjoy 5GB of 
free storage space. Lots of other cloud storage services 
are available too, including such popular tools as Box 
(www.box.com), Dropbox (www.dropbox.com), Ap-
ple’s iCloud (www.apple.com), and SugarSync (www.
SugarSync.com).
Online backup. With an online backup service, your 
files will be automatically backed up every day or ev-
ery week. Some backup services, such as Carbonite 
(www.carbonite.com), constantly work in the back-
ground so that changed files are updated whenever the 
computer is connected to the Internet. Carbonite’s ser-
W
ith all of that tab power at your fingertips, you 
might not need to carry a bulky laptop with 
you on that next business trip. Here’s why 
you might want to consider purchasing a work tablet.
Productivity
With a tablet, you’ll have quick access to your im-
portant files and tasks. For example, most tablets send 
out an audio alert or on-screen notification when you 
receive a new email; this is much faster than using a 
laptop to constantly check your email. Tablet apps pro-
vide you with quick access to your most important data 
and files. For example, tablets that run Android (such 
as the Samsung Galaxy Tab II, Lenovo’s IdeaTab S Se-
ries and A Series, or the Acer Iconia lineup) can utilize 
Google Docs to let you open all kinds of word process-
ing documents, spreadsheets, and presentations. Tab-
lets that run Windows RT or Windows Pro (such as the 
Microsoft Surface, the ASUS Vivo Tab, or Samsung’s 
ATIV Smart PC lineup) often come with a trial version 
of Microsoft Office 2013, so you’ll just need to pay for 
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  33

Tech Focus
connect the tablet to an HDTV or projector. Just invest 
in a mobile office suite that can play back your presen-
tation format, and you have all you’ll need to show off 
your products and services to potential clients. Sam-
sung’s Galaxy Note 10.1 even comes with an AllShare 
Play app that lets you wirelessly stream videos, images, 
and music onto other Samsung devices running the 
app. The AllShare Play app also comes with a Remote 
Device Access feature that lets the Galaxy Note 10.1 
tablet remotely access files stored on connected Sam-
sung PCs. 
Cameras. A number of new tablets provide you 
with front-facing cameras that allow you to use the 
tablet with videoconferencing software, so you can 
have virtual face-to-face meetings with clients or with 
co-workers back at the office. There are wide variety 
of apps for Android and Windows tablets, including 
Skype (www.skype.com) and Fring (www.fring.com). 
Android tablet users can also use Google Talk to video-
conference with someone who’s installed Google Talk 
on his PC or Android-based tablet or smartphone. Of 
course, in addition to using the same video chat pro-
gram, the person with whom you want to video chat 
vice also only backs up data that has been changed, to 
help keep your PC working quickly during the backup 
process. Another key feature of online backup services 
is the ability to restore your files when they are lost or if 
your PC crashes. For example, Carbonite keeps copies 
of deleted files for up to 30 days, so you can recover 
files and folders that were accidentally deleted.
Some online backup services are capable of creat-
ing a complete backup of your PC’s operating system 
and software to quickly recover from a crash, and may 
also offer mobile apps to give you access to files you’ve 
backed up on your mobile devices. For example, many 
such services offer apps for most devices that will let 
you browse, view, or share any of the files stored on 
your office or home PC. Just log in, access your secure 
account, and select View Files.
In short, tablets are capable of delivering much of 
the same productivity as your laptop—but in a size that 
you can take anywhere.
Presentations & Meetings
Many tablets also feature HDMI (High-Definition 
Multimedia Interface) outputs, to let you conveniently 
The Samsung Galaxy Tab 2 runs Android and can use Google Docs 
to help you create, share, and collaborate on documents.
The ASUS Vivo Tab lineup can run Windows 8 and provides you 
access to SkyDrive’s cloud storage.
34 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Focus
a digital video and music collection on removable me-
dia. A big benefit of a tablet with a micro SD or USB 
port is that the external storage usually provides you 
with much more storage than that provided by the tab-
let’s built-in memory, so you’ll be able to travel with a 
greater amount of media than you could with a tablet 
that did not offer external storage connectivity.
Of course, mobile web access also lets you stream 
music and videos for entertainment on the road, and 
you’ll also be able to access social networking sites 
and downloadable games while traveling.
The Web Where You Want It
You can invest in a tablet with built-in cellular data 
connectivity or a personal hotspot (which converts a 
cellular data signal into a Wi-Fi connection) to enjoy 
online access wherever you go. In the car, your kids 
could game online with a portable gaming system dur-
ing a long road trip, while at a tradeshow, your private 
network can be used to send sensitive data back to the 
home office. It’s the best of both worlds.
must also have a front-facing camera on his tablet or 
smartphone, or be using a PC with a Web cam.
Entertainment
When you’re not working, you can use the tablet’s 
built-in eReader and video playback capabilities to un-
wind. With the tablet’s Internet connection, you’ll be 
able to access online video streaming (through such 
services as Netflix; www.netflix.com) and Internet ra-
dio websites to enjoy a wide range of multimedia en-
tertainment. For example, the ASUS TF700T is a tablet 
that provides you with a full HD video quality of 1,920 
x 1,200, so all videos will be displayed in superb de-
tail. The TF700T’s Super IPS+ (in-plane switching plus) 
screen is also engineered with a 600nit backlight that 
delivers vibrant color, even when the screen is in sun-
light. To protect the screen, ASUS built the display with 
Corning’s Gorilla Glass 2, which provides some seri-
ous impact resistance.
You can also store your favorite media on the tablet’s 
built-in memory or on external storage. Lenovo’s Ide-
aTab Lynx K3011 comes with both Micro SD (Secure 
Digital) and Micro USB ports, so you’ll be able to keep 
The Microsoft Surface tablet comes with a keyboard and kickstand.
The A Series of Lenovo’s IdeaTab offers an extremely portable and 
easily tucked-away 7-inch display.
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  35

Tech Focus
Q:
Why would I need a tablet with a memory card 
slot?
A: 
The memory card slot lets you expand your tab-
let’s storage capacity. It also gives you an easy 
way to transfer files.
Q:
What kind of battery life can I expect from a 
tablet?
A: 
Most tablets offer a battery life anywhere from 
10 to 12 hours. Most laptop batteries won’t last 
quite that long.
Q:
Is there a way I can sync my work email with 
my tablet?
A: 
Yes. Most tablets can sync with popular busi-
ness email clients, such as Microsoft Outlook. 
Talk with your IT expert or network administrator 
about how to securely access your work email on 
your tablet.
A Tablet FAQ & More
Check out our quick FAQ covering the most com-
mon questions folks have about tablets in business. 
Need even more info? In the following pages, we’ll 
discuss how your tablet can connect to a wireless 
network, common troubleshooting tips, and popular 
data storage options.
Q:
Why would I want a tablet with a front-facing 
camera?
A: 
The front-facing camera allows you to telecon-
ference face-to-face using the tablet. 
Q:
What can I do with a tablet’s Bluetooth con-
nection?
A: 
A Bluetooth connection lets you wirelessly 
transfer data between your tablet and other 
Bluetooth devices, such as a smartphone; you can 
also stream audio to Bluetooth-enabled headsets and 
speakers.
The 10.1-inch Acer Iconia comes with rear-facing and front-facing 
cameras, as well as a standard USB port that simplifies file-copying.
The Samsung Galaxy Note 10.1 lets you take handwritten notes 
with a pressure-sensitive stylus.
36 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Focus
Connect Your Tablet To A 
Wireless Network
Wi-Fi: The Fastest Way To The Internet
Most tablets can only connect to the Internet through Wi-Fi, so it’s essential 
that you know how to access and change the Wi-Fi settings on your tablet. In 
this article, we’ll take you step-by-step through the Wi-Fi connection process. 
matically connect to the network when it’s in range. To 
do so, navigate to Wi-Fi Settings and select Add Net-
work. Enter the network name, sometimes referred to 
as the SSID (Service Set Identifier), and select Save. If 
you want your tablet to stop automatically connecting 
to a network, open the Wi-Fi Settings screen, touch the 
network name, and select Forget from the dialog box.
N
ote that instructions for some models may vary 
slightly from our guidelines because of small 
differences among interfaces and operating sys-
tems. If in doubt, access Settings, locate a Wi-Fi or wire-
less networks area, and select your wireless network.
Android Tablets
To access the Wi-Fi settings on a tablet that runs An-
droid, you can either touch the Settings icon on the 
Home screen or open up the App screen and select 
Settings. Next, touch Wireless & Networks and select 
Wi-Fi. If your tablet runs Android 4.0 or above, you’ll 
also need to slide the Wi-Fi switch to the On position. 
Click Wi-Fi Settings and your tablet will then scan the 
area for available wireless networks. If you see a lock 
icon next to the name, you’ll need to know the security 
credentials to connect to it. To connect to a specific net-
work, touch the network name, and if prompted, enter 
the password for the network.
You can also add a Wi-Fi network to your device’s 
list so that it will remember the credentials and auto-
In Android, you’ll find the Wi-Fi settings under Wireless & Net-
works.
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  37

Tech Focus
iOS
With iOS, click the Settings app and select Wi-Fi. If 
Wi-Fi is turned off, touch the On/Off icon to switch it to 
the On position. Your iPad will then scan for available 
networks and display them under Choose A Network. 
Touch the name of your preferred connection, and if it’s 
password-protected, enter the password. You’ll know if 
a Wi-Fi network is password-protected when a padlock 
icon appears next to the network’s name. When the 
iPad is connected, the Wi-Fi icon next to the network 
name will turn blue. In the Wi-Fi menu, you’ll be able 
to see the signal strength of the various networks.
Windows 8
Start by locating the network icon on the Windows 
8 taskbar. Left-click the network icon, which will bring 
up a list of the available Wi-Fi networks, and you’ll be 
able to select your preferred Wi-Fi connection. A signal 
indicator will be displayed next to all the options, so 
you’ll be able to select the one that will provide the 
best quality. Once you select a network, you’ll see an 
option that allows you to use this connection automati-
cally whenever its in range. Place a checkmark in the 
box only if you trust the network, i.e., if it’s your home 
or office location. Click the Connect button and you’ll 
likely see a message asking you to provide the security 
key. Enter the authentication info and click Next. The 
last prompt will ask if you want to turn on device shar-
ing with other computers on the network. Again, only 
select this option if you trust the Wi-Fi connection. You 
should now be connected to the Wi-Fi network. ●
On the iPad, simply access Settings and touch the Wi-Fi tab.
Windows 8 tablets provide a couple of security checks to ensure 
that you don’t accidentally share private information.
What Can You Do 
With A Wi-Fi Connection?
M
ost tablets include access to 
a number of Web services, 
including webmail clients, video-
streaming services, and online stor-
age apps. With a Wi-Fi connection 
to the Internet, here’s just a small 
sample of what you’ll be able to do 
with your tablet.
t
4FOEBOESFDFJWFFNBJM
t
#SPXTFUIF8FC
t
3FDFJWFOFXTBOE
weather updates
t
-PDBUFOFBSCZBUUSBDUJPOT
t
6QMPBEBOEEPXOMPBE
documents, work files, 
and images
t
4USFBNNPWJFTBOENVTJD
t
%PXOMPBEOFXBQQT
t
7JEFPDIBUXJUIGBNJMZ

           and friends
t
1MBZNVMUJQMBZFSHBNFT
38 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Focus
Tablet Trouble
Solve Common Problems With Your Tab
If you’re experiencing problems with your tablet, we can help. Here, we’ll
examine a few common problems and provide you with some solutions
that will help you resolve your issues.
Unresponsive Apps
Tablet apps can lock up, just like the programs on 
your PC. To force a frozen application to quit on an 
iPad, hold down the Sleep/Wake button until the red 
slider appears. Then, hold down the Home button 
D
espite the size differences, tablets are essen-
tially small computers. And like PCs, they 
will occasionally suffer from issues caused 
by poor memory management, system errors, and 
file corruption. 
Sluggish Tablet
The easiest way to resolve performance prob-
lems is to reboot the tablet. Note that this is dif-
ferent than simply pressing the Power button and 
putting the tablet into a sleep mode. With an An-
droid-based tablet, you’ll typically need to hold 
the Power button until the Shutdown menu ap-
pears. Select Power Off, and once the tablet has 
shut down, press the Power button to restart the 
tablet. iPad owners can hold the Sleep/Wake but-
ton until a red slider appears that you can slide 
to turn off the iPad. If all else fails, open the back 
panel and remove the battery. Those with a Win-
dows Surface tablet can open the Settings charm, 
tap Power, and click Restart.
Try rebooting your tablet when it seems slow.
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  39

Tech Focus
include cordless phones, baby monitors, and Blue-
tooth devices. An entire room may be included in a 
dropout area, depending on the walls. Problematic 
materials include brick, metal, solid stone, and mir-
rors. Fortunately, tablets are portable devices, so it’s 
usually easy to find another place to use it.
Shorter Battery Life Than Expected
Many of today’s tablets provide wireless connec-
tivity for Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and GPS. When the wire-
less connections are constantly left on, your tablet 
will use up its battery more quickly. When you’re 
not using a wireless technology, it’s smart to turn off 
the feature. You’ll be able to quickly turn it on again 
when you need it. Another common battery hog is the 
brightness level of your screen. In normal lighting, the 
tablet probably doesn’t need to operate at the highest 
brightness level. You can access the tablet’s Settings 
to set your brightness level, and we’ll note that many 
new tablets feature automatic brightness controls (by 
using the camera to analyze the room lighting), so 
you won’t have to adjust it. ●
for six to 10 seconds. Open apps should be forced to 
quit, and the iPad should bring you back to the Home 
screen. Windows Surface owners can swipe in from 
the left edge, select the app, and drag it from the list 
to the bottom of the screen. 
With an Android-based tablet that operates under 
version 3.2 or earlier, you can tap the Menu button, 
select Settings, choose Applications, and tap Man-
age Applications. Under the Running tab, you’ll see 
a list of the open apps on your tablet. Select the one 
you wish to close and touch the Force Stop button. If 
your tablet runs Android 4.0 or above, close an app 
by bringing up the multitasking pane and swiping the 
app to the left or right.
Wi-Fi Dropouts
If Wi-Fi dropouts only occur in one room or one 
location in the room, you may simply need to use the 
tablet somewhere else. The quality of your Wi-Fi signal 
can be affected by a number of different things. First, 
you may be experiencing interference with a neigh-
bor’s Wi-Fi signal, which typically uses the 2.4GHz 
frequency. Other devices that can cause interference 
With a tablet running Android 4.0, you’ll be able to close apps by 
pressing the app and swiping it off the screen.
To save battery life, turn off your Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and GPS when 
not in use.
40 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Focus
Tablet Data 
Storage 101
Know Your Options
One of the key concerns for any computer user is storage capacity: the 
amount of free space you have to install programs and store personal files. 
In that sense, tablets are no different than any other computer. Here, we’ll 
examine the different types of storage available for tablets. 
Tablets that come with a docking station often add 
connectivity for memory cards via the docking unit.
USB
Tablets with USB ports allow you to transfer your 
music, movies, and digital images to and from the 
tablet using a USB flash drive. (Note that many cur-
S
tart by checking to see what storage options are  
available with your tablet to see what will work 
best for you.
Internal Storage
A tablet’s internal storage holds the OS as well as 
any apps you install. Models differ in terms of amount 
of storage, but you’ll typically find that most of today’s 
models are available in 16GB, 32GB, and 64GB op-
tions. Microsoft’s Surface Pro is available with either 
64GB or 128GB of internal memory.
Media Cards
To expand your tablet’s storage space, you might be 
able to insert a memory card. Tablets that come with 
memory card slots typically support SD or Micro SD 
card formats. SD cards can offer anywhere from 4GB 
to 64GB of memory, while Micro SD card sizes can 
reach 32GB. The ASUS Vivo Tab 10.1, for example, 
comes with a 32GB hard drive and is expandable to 
64GB of storage space via the Micro SD card slot. 
Tablets with Micro SD card slots provide you with an easy way to 
expand storage space.
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  41

Tech Focus
Drive as a built-in cloud option. Keep in mind that  
there are also lots of third-party options, so you’re 
not limited to what comes with your tablet. ●
rent tablets come with a Mini- or Micro-USB port, 
so you may need to invest in an adapter cable that 
will allow you to connect with your current USB 
storage devices.) If your tablet doesn’t offer any 
USB ports, check to see if it can work with a dock-
ing unit that would provide you with the necessary 
USB connectivity. The ASUS TF600 tablet’s dock-
ing station, for instance, provides a full-size USB 
2.0 port, while extending the tablet’s battery life 
by 7 hours.
Cloud Storage
If your tablet doesn’t offer a USB or memory card 
slot to expand its storage, you can always utilize 
the cloud. Online storage services let you access 
and copy files from your tablet whenever you’re 
connected to the Internet. Typically, your tablet 
will come with one or more cloud storage services 
built in, so you’ll be able to start backing up files 
right away. For example, Microsoft Surface owners 
can upload content to Microsoft’s SkyDrive, while 
iPad owners can remotely access files via iCloud. 
Those with an Android tablet will have Google 
This mobile keyboard dock for the ASUS TF600 also gives you a 
full-size USB port.
The SkyDrive app from Microsoft provides you with up to 7GB of 
free cloud storage.
How Much Can It Store?
H
ere’s what some additional storage can do 
for you.
Capacity
10MP
Images
(at 2.2MB 
each)
3 Minute 
Songs
(at 32MB 
each)
Minutes Of 
1080p AVC 
HD Video (at 
900MB per
minute)
4GB
1,861
128
4.55
8GB
3,723
256
9.1
16GB
7,447
512
18.2
32GB
14,894
1,024
36.4
64GB
29,789
2,048
72.8
or
or
42 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Hardware
Gear up for the outdoors with the Lenovo® IdeaTab™ 
A2107. The 7" form factor makes it easy to carry around 
and the roll cage protects against bumps and jolts. What’s 
more, the online GPS support along with WiFi connectivity 
keeps you connected.
t 7.0" TN 1024x600 resolution, 4-point multi-touch, Bright 
350 nit display
t 8GB eMMC Storage
t Android™ 4 Ice Cream Sandwich Operating System
t MTK6575 Cortex A9 1.0GHz Processor
t 512MB memory
t Up to 10 hours of browsing over WiFi
Tablet
IdeaTab A2107
www.Lenovo.com
IdeaTab A2107
Model:59346799
Staples Item: 101560
Hardware
A laptop in tablet form, Surface Pro brings together the best of Micro-
soft in one awesome new device.
t Precision crafted and made with VaporMg, Surface to be tough yet 
elegant
t Windows 8 Pro and 1-month trial of Office 365 for new customers
t BitLocker encrypts your hard drive’s data, helping to keep your 
stuff safe. 
t 16:9 widescreen/ClearType full HD display with 1080p resolution. 
t A microSDXC card slot lets you add up to 64 GB of extra storage.
t Front and rear-facing 720p HD video cameras
t Stream as much as you like on your PC, tablet, Windows Phone 
and Xbox 360
A laptop in tablet form
Microsoft Surface Pro Enjoy fast, powerful performance
www.microsoft.com
Surface Pro, 64GB
Model: 9SR-00001
Staples Item: 147834
Smart Computing  /  June2013 43

Hardware
The Samsung ATIV runs the programs you need on a Windows® 
8 operating system — in a sleek, lightweight form. A magnetic 
keyboard, S Pen™ functionality and touch screen let you con-
nect with your PC as never before.
t Intel® Atom™ Z2760 1.8 GHz 1MB L2 Cache Processor
t 64GB Solid State Drive
t 2GB DDR2L System Memory
t 11.6" HD Gloss LED Touchscreen Display with SuperBright™ 
Plus Technology (1366 x 768)
t Genuine Windows® 8 (32-bit) Operating System
t HD SoundAlive Audio with 1.6W Stereo Speaker (0.8W x 2)
t 802.11 a/b/g/n, Bluetooth v4.0
t 11.97" L x 3.52" W x 0.39" H, 1.68 lbs
Runs like a PC but Travels like a tablet!
Samsung ATIV Touch Screen Smart PC 500T
www.samsung.com/us
Samsung  ATIV Touch Screen
Model: XE500T1C-A04US
Staples Item: 990648
Hardware
Introducing Lenovo IdeaPad Yoga 13, the revolutionary lap-
top that offers a touch screen experience of a tablet along 
with the productivity and efficiency of an Ultrabook™. 
t Powerful 3rd generation Intel® Core™ i5-3337U 1.8GHz 
(up to 2.7GHz) 3MB L3 Cache Processor 
t 4GB DDR3 memory
t 128GB SSD storage
t 13.3" HD+ (1600 x 900) IPS display with wide viewing 
angle; 10-point capacitive multi-touch
t Equipped with Windows 8, perfect for productivity and 
play
t OneKey® Rescue for fast recovery and protection
t Ultraportable design – .67” thick and 3.3 lbs.
Touch Screen Convertible Laptop 
Yoga 13 (i5 Processor) 
www.Lenovo.com
Yoga 13
Model:59359567
Staples Item: 141486
44 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Hardware
The HP Envy X2 is a Staples Windows 8 Select PC representing 
the best in design, mobility and performance. The X2 sports and 
thin aluminum body that quickly switches from a notebook to 
a tablet and back again with its full size keyboard attachment, 
adapting to your needs with ease.
t Intel® Atom™ Z2760 Cache Processor
t On-board 2GB 533MHz LPDDR2 SDRAM
t 64GB solid-state drive
t HD Anti-glare LED-backlit IPS Display (1366 x 768)
t Windows 8
Convertible Touch Screen Laptop
HP ENVY x2 11-g010nr 11.6"
www.HP.com
HP ENVY x2 11-g010nr 
Model: C2K61UA#ABA
Staples Item: 120527
Hardware
The Kindle Fire HD contains a polarizing filter and anti-glare technology 
for rich color and deep contrast from any viewing angle.  It also delivers 
exclusive Dolby audio and dual-driver stereo speakers for immersive, 
virtual surround sound.
t 7" 10 point capacitive touch high definition color display; 1280x800 
resolution, video playback at 720p
t 1.2 Ghz OMAP4460 dual-core processor
t Over 22 million movies, TV shows, songs, magazines, books, audio-
books, and popular apps and games
t Dual-band Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n
t USB 2.0 (micro-B connector) port for connection to a PC or Macin-
tosh computer
t 3.5 mm stereo jack and integrated stereo speakers with exclusive 
Dolby audio engine
Beautiful high-definition color display
Kindle Fire HD 16GB The perfect family tablet
www.kindlefire.com
Kindle Fire HD 16GB
Model: 53-000405
Staples Item: 984029
Smart Computing  /  June2013 45

Business Technology
Some powerful business tools are floating in the sea of smartphone apps. Each month, we’ll highlight 
some of the best ones for Windows Phone, iOS and Android platform users. (Unless otherwise noted, 
Windows Phone apps are available in the Windows Phone Apps & Games Store, Android apps in Google 
Play, and iOS apps in Apple’s App Store.)
Mobile Marketplace
Business Apps For Android & Windows Phone & iOS
My Car Locator
Ever forget where you parked? 
Then this app will be perfect for 
you. When you park your car, just 
launch the app and tap the Park icon 
to store the coordinates of your car’s 
current location. When making your 
way back, you can view a satellite 
or standard-view map. You can also 
tap the Find Me icon to place an 
icon over your phone’s current lo-
cation in relation to the car. Other 
features we like include the ability 
to store notes about your parking 
spot; switch between feet, meters, 
and yards; zoom in and out on the 
map; and record the amount of time 
you’ve been parked. 
Android
Super Backup
We talk a lot about the risks in-
volved in the BYOD (bring your own 
device) phenomenon, but one of the 
most frightening facets is that few 
businesses back up smartphone data 
on a consistent basis. A backup util-
ity such as Super Backup can ensure 
that your corporate data never gets 
lost. This app can perform backup 
and restore operations on your apps, 
contacts, SMS messages, call logs, 
bookmarks, and calendars. You can 
also schedule automatic backups, 
view the date and time of the pre-
vious backup, and store backups 
either in internal memory or on an 
SD card. 
Android
Hotels.com
If you encounter an unexpected 
change of plans while on the road, 
don’t panic: Use the Hotels.com 
app to book a room at an afford-
able rate. The Tonight’s Local Deals 
feature is perfect for those last-
minute surprises. The app features 
thousands of rooms from Hilton, 
Marriott, Best Western, Sheraton, 
Radisson, Holiday Inn, and others. 
You can browse guest reviews, and 
search by hotel star ratings, price, 
and special offers. You can also take 
advantage of the WelcomeRewards 
program, which lets you earn free 
nights and get discounted rates at 
your favorite hotels. 
Android
46 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Business Technology
iExit
This simple app uses your phone’s 
GPS radio and cellular data connec-
tion to help you determine the points 
of interest available at each exit on 
the Interstate. The app uses handy 
easily-recognizable icons to signify 
upcoming gas stations, restaurants, 
rest areas, lodging, and more. The 
app also displays icons that indi-
cate nearby establishments that are 
truck-, RV-, and family-friendly. The 
app also display deals and promo-
tions that you can take advantage of 
while on the road. We also like that 
you can filter the results for specific 
things, such as a Wal-Mart, Star-
bucks, or ATM.
Red Laser
Smart shoppers know that price 
checking with a smartphone can 
help uncover those truly great deals. 
Red Laser is an app that lets you 
scan the barcodes (UPC and QR 
codes) of products on the shelves 
of brick-and-mortar retailers to get 
the best prices around. This app lets 
you compare the prices at online 
retailers, but also crosschecks them 
against prices at other local retail-
ers. The app also lets you view store 
hours, maps, and related products, 
such as accessories and alternative 
products. It even lets you scan and 
store your loyalty cards for quick ref-
erence.
Desktop Connect
There are quite a few remote Desk-
top viewers on the App Store, but 
Desktop Connect from Antecea, Inc. 
is unique in a number of ways. First of 
all, you can download and install the 
Easy Connect client to your computers 
to get Desktop Connect to work with 
Windows, Mac OSX (including Lion), 
and Linux-based computers, making it 
ideal for anyone who works with com-
puters on more than one platform. The 
app also lets you view websites that 
utilize Adobe Flash, launch applica-
tions and view files, perform remote 
technical support,  and more. You can 
also navigate interfaces using com-
mon touchscreen gestures. 
iOS
iOS
iOS
Smart Computing  /  June 2013  47

Business Technology
Viber
Communicating is your phone’s 
primary occupation, but with the 
VoIP app Viber, it can do much 
more. This app uses your Wi-Fi con-
nection to let you call, text, and 
send photos to other Viber users 
worldwide. If you’re on a metered 
plan, this can save you a significant 
amount of money; apparently more 
than 175 million Viber users agree. 
Calls feature crystal-clear HD sound 
quality, and you can participate in 
group conversations with up to 40 
Viber users at a time, pin conversa-
tions to your home screen, and get 
notifications, even from the lock 
screen.
Windows Phone
UC Browser
Your Windows Phone comes 
with a very functional browser, 
but UC Browser expands your 
Web-browsing capabilities in 
a couple of useful ways. First 
of all, it lets you tap an icon to 
save a website for offline view-
ing. This is particularly useful 
for reading articles, watching 
videos, and more while in-flight. 
It also lets you quickly switch 
between mobile and desktop 
Website views. Other features 
include customizable themes, 
lock screen wallpapers, support 
for tabbed browsing, and QR 
code scanning. 
Windows Phone
App Of The Month
Birthdays Diary
This app is as simple as it sounds; 
it lets you input birthdays and other 
important dates into your calendar, 
and then gives you reminders so you 
never forget a significant occasion. 
The app can scan your Facebook 
account and automatically add any 
birthdays for the people on your 
friends list. Birthdays Diary features 
customizable live tiles that let you 
view upcoming birthdays, today’s 
birthdays, and more. When you tap 
on one of the birthday reminder 
tiles, there are direct links to post to 
the person’s Facebook wall and visit 
his or her profile page. 
Windows Phone
48 June 2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

legitimate attachments or sites you 
may regularly visit. 
The good news is that a majority of 
these attacks are clumsy, filled with 
misspellings, and loaded with im-
probable threats and even more im-
probable promises. No, the FBI does 
not need your Facebook login to 
make sure you’re adhering to the let-
ter of the law, Bill Gates is not shar-
ing his fortune with you via email, 
and the Crown Prince of Qatar is not 
a long-lost relative looking to offer 
you a share of the royal inheritance. 
As long as you pay close attention to 
a few telltale signs, these attacks are 
often easy to spot and avoid. 
An Irresistible Lure
Spearphishing attacks, however, 
are by definition much more diffi-
cult to suss out. Spearphishing refers 
to a phishing attempt that uses infor-
mation, often detailed and personal, 
to target a specific individual or or-
ganization. These targeted attacks 
A
ll malware has the potential 
to be devastating to your 
digital identity, threaten your 
intellectual property, and wreak 
havoc on your computer and files. 
Traditional phishing attacks, which 
we discuss quite frequently in the 
pages of this magazine, typically 
involve emails or text messages 
that attempt to weasel out your 
usernames, passwords, credit card 
details, and other personal informa-
tion in order to steal your identity, 
extort money, and generally ruin 
your weekend. Many phishing at-
tacks include malicious attachments 
that, when clicked, can infect your 
computer with malware designed 
to let cybercriminals take over your 
computer, record your keystrokes, 
or otherwise compromise your pri-
vacy. Some even include hyperlinks 
to websites that can remotely infect 
your system. In these latter two cas-
es, both the attachments and web-
site URLs are disguised to look like 
differ from typical phishing attacks 
largely in that they are much harder 
to detect. As a result, they tend to be 
much more successful. For instance, 
a typical spearphishing email will 
address its recipient by name. The 
body of the communication, also 
typically an email or text message, 
will include details about the recipi-
ent’s employer or current position, 
or the email may mention other in-
dividuals or organizations that the 
recipient knows and with whom he 
does business. 
Although spearphishing attacks 
are more likely to fool you into 
opening a malware attachment 
or surrendering your information 
freely, they are (luckily) much less 
common than normal phishing at-
tacks. The reason for their relative 
rarity is simple: In order to pull off a 
convincing spearphishing scam, the 
cybercriminal is required to spend a 
fair amount of time crafting a well-
targeted attack. 
Thwart Spearphishing
The Subtler (& More Dangerous) Form Of Phishing
Business Technology
Smart Computing  /  June2013 49

Another effective tactic is to begin 
reading return URLs backward, from 
right to left, starting with the second 
period. For instance, www.wells-
fargo.com is most likely a legitimate 
address, whereas www.wellsfargo-
com9876543.ru is probably a spoof 
site designed to install malware on 
your system or capture your sensi-
tive information. Also, learn that the 
blue underlined text that you usu-
ally associate as a URL may be an 
untrustworthy site dressed as one 
you know and trust. Cybercriminals 
can simply color underlined text 
blue and use it to hide a URL that is 
very different than what’s displayed. 
Get into the habit of hovering your 
pointer over URLs to see the popup 
that displays the underlying hyper-
link. When they differ, even slightly, 
this should be a red flag; don’t click.  
Everyone should learn how email 
and URL spoofing works and looks. 
In the former, the header of an email 
has been altered to disguise its true 
Start Here
Although spearphishing attacks 
are much more sophisticated than 
the more common phishing scams, 
it is still possible to avoid the snare if 
you know what to look for. To begin 
with, everyone with access to the 
corporate or office network needs 
some basic email safety training, 
even if only informally. 
First of all, everyone needs to be 
learn to be skeptical of every file at-
tachment  that comes to his or her 
inbox. Currently, spearphishing cy-
bercriminals appear to be favoring 
the PDF (Portable Document For-
mat) file type as a way to disguise 
ZIP files that contain malware. In 
short, never open a PDF sent from 
someone you don’t know. Even if 
you recognize the sender, if the file 
he or she sent you was unsolicited, 
it wouldn’t hurt to compose a new 
email message (don’t just hit Reply) 
and verify that the file you just re-
ceived is legitimate. 
origin. When you’re skeptical of an 
email’s origins, don’t reply to it. If the 
email only appears to be from fam-
ily, a trusted friend, or a colleague,  
replying to it can verify your address 
as a valid target for a cybercriminal 
who has managed to gain access to 
that person’s account. Try contacting 
the person outside of email to verify 
the legitimacy of the communica-
tion. Give him or her a call or send 
a text. If you must use email, apply a 
little social engineering of your own 
to determine if the person (or auto-
mated spambot) on the other end is 
really who you think: Ask a question 
that only this person could answer. 
Remember that spearphishers are 
very good at obtaining information, 
so if you ask something as generic as 
the date of his birthday, chances are 
that the cybercriminal will be able 
to reply accurately. Ask about that 
restaurant you both liked or request 
a quick recap of a conversation you 
recently had. 
Business Technology
This is good advice. Follow it for every attachment you encounter.
When you hover your pointer over a hyperlink, the destination URL will 
appear. If the two URLs differ, don’t click. 
50 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Finally, there are rarely circum-
stances in which anyone, even 
someone from IT or HR, can justifi-
ably ask you to divulge your pass-
word or other personal/sensitive 
information  via email or text mes-
sage. If the communication really is 
from the person he or she purports 
to be, a quick call can verify that the 
request is authentic. 
Your Best Defense
These tips are a good place to 
start, but even the most vigilant 
workforce can’t be expected to re-
sist repeated sophisticated attacks 
alone. Technology is key to effec-
tively thwarting spearphishing. 
The first thing an organization 
concerned 
about 
spearphishing 
needs to do is make sure that ev-
erything that enters the network is 
filtered. This includes email and all 
other forms of electronic commu-
nication, including those that take 
place on mobile devices. One of the 
ers should be flagged as potentially 
dangerous. 
Begin analyzing everything within 
the network, using a combination of 
anti-malware, antivirus, and firewall 
software. Be proactive and stay cur-
rent on all updates. 
Spearphishing attacks are dan-
gerous because they’re so targeted. 
Thwarting them is mainly a matter 
of reducing the size of your target. ●
Business Technology
To avoid social engineering tactics, make your social networking site’s privacy settings as restrictive as possible. 
Stop Social Engineers In Their Tracks
T
he process of obtaining passwords, usernames, and other identity-
threatening data through deception is referred to as social engineer-
ing. Coincidentally, one of the best ways to keep from being taken 
in by a scammer using these techniques is to rein in the data you 
make publicly available on your social networking sites. Make sure 
your profile is viewable only by people you know and trust; block all 
others. If possible, make your profile unsearchable except by people 
who are already on your friends list. This alone can’t stop a dedicated 
scammer who has access to a friend’s account, but it can thwart many 
of the more passive attacks. 
best ways to prevent email spoofing 
is to make sure there is some form of 
authentication taking place. 
Next, closely monitor all out-
bound traffic. Software and hosted 
services can track every digital com-
munication to ensure that each one 
was initiated by an authorized em-
ployee. Any outbound traffic that 
appears automated or looks like it 
was generated by unauthorized us-
Smart Computing  /  June2013 51

number of prints that the unit is rated 
to produce over a given period of 
time. It’s certainly possible to go over 
that number, but the manufacturer 
believes that you put the machine 
as risk if you do so. The recom-
mended duty cycle is number of 
prints the manufacturer thinks will 
provide optimal performance with-
out any wear-induced failures for the 
lifetime of the warranty. Both num-
bers are provided to give you an idea 
of how robust the device is, when 
compared to other printers from that 
manufacturer’s lineup.
Generally, the recommended duty 
cycle is much lower than the maxi-
mum duty cycle, because the maxi-
mum number is only meant to be 
reached on occasion. For example, a 
printer with a maximum monthly duty 
cycle of 10,000 pages might have a 
recommended duty cycle as low as 
1,000 to 2,000 pages.
The speed of a car is a popular 
analogy often used to help define the 
duty cycle of a printer. For instance, 
O
ffice printers typically list a 
monthly or maximum duty 
cycle, which is the number 
of prints it’s engineered to reliably 
produce over a given period of time. 
If you’re looking to invest in a high-
volume printer for your home or of-
fice, you should certainly look into the 
listed duty cycle, as a printer pushed 
too hard is more likely to break down. 
Typically, duty cycle specs are listed 
more prominently on laser printers 
than on inkjets, because laser print-
ers are designed for heavy-duty print-
ing environments. We’ll explain what 
duty cycle really means and how it 
can affect the overall lifespan of your 
printer.
Maximum vs. 
Recommended
Printers are mechanical devices 
and will wear out or break down more 
quickly the more they are used. In 
most cases, you’ll see both maximum
and recommended duty cycles. The 
maximum duty cycle is the greatest 
a car capable of reaching 120 miles 
an hour likely won’t last long if you 
drove it at that speed every weekday 
for eight hours a day. Similarly, a la-
ser printer that pushes 20,000 pages 
a month (let’s say 20,000 is its maxi-
mum duty cycle) will likely display 
some type of problem much sooner 
than if you were to print 5,000 pages 
a month on the same model. 
Select A Model That
Matches Your Volume
To get optimal results from your 
printer while ensuring a long lifes-
pan, it’s best if you select a printer 
that’s capable of producing a rec-
ommended monthly volume that’s 
slightly greater than what you or your 
office currently creates. (Note that 
some printers list only a maximum 
monthly duty cycle. Most experts be-
lieve that 10% of the maximum month-
ly duty cycle is a realistic number of 
prints that you can expect a printer to 
handle over the course of a month.)
If your print volume is well above the 
Printer Duty Cycles
What You Need To Know Before You Get A New Laser Printer
Business Technology
Laser printer specs almost always list a monthly duty cycle.
Some printer manufacturers list recommended and maximum
duty cycles.
52 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

printers’s OPC (optical photoconduc-
tor) drum, fuser, and laser beam.
How Much Do You Print?
Before you invest in a printer, 
you’ll need to determine how much 
you and your employees print per 
month. One way to track this is by 
seeing how many reams of paper 
you go through in a week. Of course, 
some weeks may require more print-
ing than others, so you may want to 
monitor the number of printouts over 
a whole month to ensure that you 
have a reliable estimate. If the printer 
paper is also used for a separate copy 
machine, you might want to ask your 
staff to keep a running total of the 
pages they print for a few weeks. If 
the machine you are considering is a 
multifunction printer, you may even 
model you’re considering, you may 
need to opt for one with greater duty 
cycle. Another option would be to in-
vest in two printers and have half of 
your employees print to one, while the 
rest print to the other.
What Duty Cycle Includes
If you’ve used printers for a while, 
you’ll know that a 10,000 page 
monthly duty cycle isn’t meant to 
cover every part of your printer. 
Consumables for inkjets may last for 
hundreds of prints, at best. Many la-
ser printer toner cartridges can sup-
port yields up to 20,000, but that 
still means you’ll need to replace 
the toner cartridge several times dur-
ing the useful lifespan of the printer. 
The duty cycle just helps estimate the 
expected lifetime of such things as the 
ask them to include copies to see if 
the new printer can replace both the 
old printer and your current copy 
machine. Once you’ve got all the to-
tals, you can add them together to get 
an idea of your monthly duty cycle 
needs.
Low Duty Cycles
Duty cycle numbers for sub-$200 
laser printers are quite a bit lower than 
their $400-$600 brethren. And some 
affordable inkjets may not provide 
monthly duty cycles numbers at all. If 
your office produces a high volume of 
prints, it’s best to invest in a printer that 
offers the reliability typically found in 
the higher-priced models. Otherwise, 
you could be left without the ability to 
print at an inopportune time. ●
Business Technology
Before you invest in a printer, you’ll need to determine how much 
you and your employees print per month. 
Models with a high duty cycle are built with more substantial parts that 
are meant to last longer.
The printer’s duty cycle doesn’t include consumables such as toner 
cartridges.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 53

anyone can upload an app into the 
Google Play store (though apps 
that are found to have violated the 
Google Play Developer policies 
will be removed) and users can also 
download apps that aren’t available 
on the Google Play store. On the flip 
side, Apple iOS is a closed platform 
where the apps must be validated 
by Apple and people are limited to 
downloading the apps provided in 
the iOS App Store.
That said, it’s not impossible for vi-
ruses to find their way onto devices 
with (supposedly) closed app plat-
forms. For example, a virus could 
be planted into your tablet or smart-
phone’s built-in Web browser that 
would allow a hacker to access all 
of the information stored on your 
mobile device, including your email 
address book and contact phone 
numbers. A hacker could then uti-
lize the stolen information to send 
spam email and text messages to the 
people in your contact list, which 
U
ntil recently, mobile devices 
weren’t a top target for cyber-
criminals and hackers. But as 
the PC market slows and the tablet/
smartphone market grows, malware 
creators are shifting their focus onto 
our portable electronics. One re-
cent example is the BadNews virus, 
which found its way into 32 apps on 
the Google Play store and was down-
loaded millions of times. BadNews 
sends fake news messages to your 
mobile device and ask you to install 
other applications, which then send 
your phone number and ID to the 
virus’s command and control center. 
We’ll examine why mobile devices 
are becoming a top target and how 
you can protect your mobile devices 
from viruses.
Mobile Platforms
One of the reasons that the Bad-
News virus was able to reach into 
so many apps was that Google’s 
Android is an open platform where 
can further transmit the mobile virus 
to your friends and colleagues.
General Security Tips
The United States’ IC3 (Internet 
Crime Complaint Center) recently 
provided a number of safety tips that 
will help you to protect the data you 
save in your phone. One of IC3’s 
key tips was to review the permis-
sions allowed for the current apps 
on your smartphone. To control your 
app permissions in iOS, tap Settings 
and select Privacy. Here, you’ll find 
a list of the various things that apps 
can access on your phone, including 
Location Services, Contacts, Calen-
dars, Reminders, Photos, and Blue-
tooth. Tap the category to see which 
apps have requested and have been 
granted access to the data. If you see 
anything out of the ordinary, switch 
the permission’s setting to Off. Those 
with an Android smartphone can tap 
either Menu, Settings, Applications, 
and Manage Applications; or Menu, 
Hacking Into Your Pocket
Smartphones Are The Newest Malware Targets
Business Technology
With iOS devices, turn the Passcode Lock on for better protection.
You can lock your Android-based device behind a pattern, a numeric 
PIN, or a password.
54 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Some smartphones come with 
built-in data encryption, so things 
like your email and attachments can 
be stored behind a passcode. Third-
party apps can also access encryp-
tion tools to protect the cached data 
and information you enter into the 
app. For iOS, you’ll need to create 
and use a passcode to use encryp-
tion. To do so, tap Settings, choose 
General, and touch Passcode Lock. 
Press Turn Passcode On and enter the 
passcode twice. Once it’s set, scroll 
down to the bottom of the screen 
and ensure that Data Protection Is 
Enabled is displayed. Android users 
can do the same by setting a PIN or 
password on the lock screen. Touch 
the Settings icon, select Personal, 
tap Security, touch Encryption, and 
select Encrypt Phone. Tap Encrypt 
Phone, enter your lock screen PIN 
or password, and select Continue. 
Then, tap Encrypt Phone and the de-
vice will begin the encryption pro-
cess. Keep your Android smartphone 
Settings, and App to view a permis-
sion list. Most mobile platforms also 
require apps to list which permis-
sions they require, so you can view 
what types of operations the app will 
try to access before you download.
The IC3 experts also recommend 
that you avoid connecting to un-
known Wi-Fi networks, as it’s pos-
sible that these networks are in fact 
rogue access points are designed to 
capture the information you enter 
on your smartphone. Rogue access 
points can be found in many places 
where you’d find real access points, 
including hotels, coffee shops, and 
malls. And cybercriminals only need 
a mobile phone capable of sharing 
its connection as an access point 
to create a rogue router. Then, the 
hacker can use an app built into his 
own smartphone to capture your 
usernames, passwords, and other 
data. Of course, you should also 
avoid clicking on links or download-
ing software from unknown sources.
on a charger during this process, as it 
can quickly drain your battery.
Mobile Security App
Anti-malware software is avail-
able for most smartphones to pro-
vide protection against viruses and 
spyware. Mobile security programs, 
such as Norton Mobile Security, will 
scan apps that you download and 
block any malicious software from 
installing on your device. Secure 
Web browsing is another common 
feature that helps prevent viruses 
from infecting your phone from in-
fected websites. Mobile security 
developers typically provide a few 
extras that help to further protect 
your phone. For example, some mo-
bile security suites offer the ability 
to block text message spam, which 
may include a link to a malicious 
URL. You may even be able to create 
lists of approved or blocked contacts 
to control who can reach your mo-
bile devices. ●
Business Technology
Norton Mobile Security will scan downloads for viruses before the files 
are installed to your phone.
Mobile security software can block malicious websites from access-
ing your smartphone.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 55

storage) device, or a storage server. 
Typically, you’ll want to set up your 
data recovery software so that it au-
tomatically transfers the critical files 
to your backup location on a regu-
lar basis, such as every hour or at 8 
p.m. each day. Data recovery utili-
ties let you decide which folders are 
backed up and how often. 
Windows has included some form 
of backup utility with every edition 
since Windows XP, and it works well 
for periodic backups to a local serv-
er or NAS. You can typically find the 
backup utility built into Windows 
through Control Panel. You could 
also enter backup in the Search field 
and select the Backup utility from 
the Start menu’s window. If you have  
B
acking up your business com-
puters can mean the differ-
ence between keeping and 
losing your business in the event of 
a data disaster. If one of your com-
puters crashes or is stolen, you can 
lose valuable work time recovering 
financial records, customer data, and 
other critical information—and if you 
don’t have a backup, the data may 
never be recovered. Here are some 
things to consider about backups.
Local & Offsite
With local onsite backup, you 
can use data recovery and backup 
software to back up the key files 
from your computer to an external 
hard drive, NAS (network-attached 
Windows 8, look for tools called 
File History and Refresh.
If you have critical files that you sim-
ply can’t afford to lose, you may want 
to back up on a regular basis to a cloud 
storage provider, such as Carbonite 
(www.carbonite.com). “If the building 
burns down, has a flood, or somebody 
breaks in and steals your equipment, 
you’re hosed. Backups have to be off-
site,” says David Friend, CEO of Car-
bonite. Online backup services store 
your data on their secure servers, so 
you won’t need to worry about protect-
ing your data backups in the office. For 
example, in Carbonite’s secure data 
center, Friend says, “Everything is en-
crypted before it leaves your PC and is 
stored on highly redundant arrays, and 
Safeguard Your Data
Back Up Critical Business Information
Business Technology
56 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

files from a smartphone or laptop. 
This makes it possible to provide 
copies of important documents to  
clients and customers simply by 
nobody gets into the data centers with-
out an escort, even me.”
Another benefit of an offsite back-
up is the ability to remotely access 
accessing your online storage ac-
count and sharing the file. Friend says 
one Carbonite customer emailed 
him this personal story: “I was stand-
ing at the train station when a client 
called and needed a copy of the con-
tract urgently. It was on my computer 
at the office, but the computer was 
turned off. I thought about going to 
the office, but then I remembered ‘I 
have Carbonite.’ I had never tried the 
iPhone app before, but in a couple 
of minutes, I located the contract 
and emailed it to the client.”
What Should 
You Back Up?
In four words? Anything of any 
importance. You’ll want to regular-
ly back up any mission-critical files 
that you use in the office, includ-
ing word processing documents, 
spreadsheets, emails, point-of-sale 
files, accounting data, graphics, 
promotional images, video, and 
CRM (customer relationship man-
agement) files. You may also want 
to back up the complete contents 
of a server or work PC, in case 
there are any files that may not be 
located in the folders that are typi-
cally backed up. ●
Business Technology
Some cloud-based services such as Carbonite can continually back up 
your critical files, so that your backup files are always up to date.
Mobile apps such as this one from Carbonite, allow you to securely 
access backed-up files from an iPhone.
Your Odds Of Losing Data
T
he top four causes of data loss are disk crashes, viruses, acci-
dental deletions, and equipment loss or theft. How likely is it 
that your business will lose data? It’s certainly not a rarity, so it’s 
best to have a plan in place to mitigate that risk. Approximately 10 
to 15% of customers with online backup services end up restoring 
data each year. With the odds about one in eight that you’ll expe-
rience some sort of data loss in the near future, it’s a good idea to 
invest in a reliable backup strategy as soon as possible.
Carbonite’s Online Backup Service
Carbonite offers backup solutions designed specifically for small 
businesses. These services are offered for use on an unlimited number 
of PCs and NAS devices for one flat price, so you won’t need to buy a 
new license for each new employee. For $229 per year (the Business 
plan), you’ll have 250GB of storage space, while $599 per year (the 
Business Premier plan) will provide you with 500BGB of backup stor-
age. The Business Premier plan also supports backup for an unlimited 
number of Microsoft Windows servers. All plans come with automatic 
file and folder backup, continual incremental backups, easy file 
recovery, and access to the files from any computer.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 57

Polecat in only 18 months. How did 
they do it? They printed large chunks 
of it. (Innovation is nothing new for 
the company, of course; Lockheed 
Martin had previously designed the 
U2 spyplane, the SR71 Blackbird, 
and the F117 stealth fighter. The fact 
that the company “printed” large 
sections of a 90 ft., 4 ton airplane 
should have surprised no one.)
And the move to 3D printing in 
an industrial context continues to 
this day. This past year, Ford Motor 
showed off its new cars at the At-
lanta auto show; many of the key 
parts of its new vehicles were proto-
typed on 3D printers. The technique 
allowed engineers to have parts in 
hand in as little as a week after they 
had finished designing the part, in-
stead of the three or four months it 
had taken previously.
Of course, Ford’s 3D printer cre-
ates large (and small) parts out of 
powdered aluminum and costs 
about $300,000; a little bit out of 
reach for most of us. However, 3D 
printing on a smaller scale is in fact 
becoming available to the masses, 
T
he idea of a 3D printer certain-
ly sounds like the stuff of sci-
ence fiction: A “replicator” that 
can produce copies of actual 3D 
objects? Seriously? Like in Star Trek?
Well, yes, actually; kind of like 
that.
And it’s been going on for years. 
Back in 2005, a German company 
called Nanoident became the first to 
produce photo and biometric sen-
sors by using a then-new technol-
ogy called 3D prototyping to print 
their products, eventually bringing 
the cost of a fingerprint sensor down 
to about $2 or $3. (Of course, the 
company went under a few years 
later, which just goes to show that 
it doesn’t pay to be too far ahead of 
the curve.)
In July of 2009, aerospace giant 
Lockheed Martin was looking for 
a way to speed up the design and 
production of a self-funded 90 ft. 
unmanned drone aircraft called the 
P-175 Polecat. The airplane weighed 
well over four tons and, in spite of 
its size and complexity, the compa-
ny was able to design and produce 
that is, to you and me. For some-
where between $500 and $2000, 
you can have a 3D printer of your 
own. OK, that’s still a chunk of 
change, but it’s about what early 
small-office laser printers cost when 
they arrived on the scene. And, just 
as with those laser printers, you can 
expect prices to continue to fall 
even as convenience and utility im-
prove. Either way, the truly amazing 
thing is that you can now have in 
your home or office technology that 
not very long ago would have cost 
you tens of thousands of dollars—if 
it was available at all.
How much will you spend? And 
what will  you be able to produce? 
Well, that depends on which type 
of printer you’re thinking about, but 
in general, home and small-office 
printers all work similarly.
How It Works
There are a couple of different 
types of 3D printers out there, but 
almost all of them begin with a digi-
tal file akin to (or generated by) a 
CAD/CAM file: a very detailed digi-
3D Printing Arrives
Print Yourself A Guitar. Or A Vase. Or Who Knows What?
Personal Technology
58 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Personal Technology
Large sections of Lockheed Martin’s 90 ft., 4 ton Polecat drone were 
printed using 3D printing techniques.
Cubify’s Wi-Fi-enabled Cube 3D Printer is available on Staples’ website 
and eventually at selected Staples stores.
Staples To Offer 3D Printers
A
mong the first places you’ll be able to find a consumer-level 3D 
printer is at Staples.com and in some Staples stores.
“Staples is known for carrying the latest technology and 3D print-
ers are the most recent example of our commitment to offering every 
product your business needs to succeed,” Staples executive vice presi-
dent of merchandising Mike Edwards noted in a recent release.
Staples will be offering the second-generation Cube 3D Printer on 
Staples.com and at selected stores this summer for $1,299.99.
The compact Cube 3D Printer prints in both ABS plastic and in 
compostable PLA. It’s Wi-Fi-enabled, compatible with Mac or Win-
dows, and comes with 25 free, professionally designed 3D templates. 
Additional templates are available online, and of course you can also 
create your own. The compact printer—available in several colors—is 
aimed at designers, small businesses, students, and children. It prints 
in 16 colors, two of which are glow-in-the-dark. After all, Halloween 
is coming.
tal drawing of an object. A comput-
er (either on your desktop or, in the 
case of some of the industrial-quality 
printers, built into the printer) reads 
that file, translating the object’s de-
sign into commands it can issue to 
the printer.
At this point, 3D printing tech-
nologies can diverge: More afford-
able home or small-business print-
ers may not work exactly like their 
industrial brethren, but much of the 
technique is similar, even though 
the size and some of the materials 
may differ.
The typical home or small busi-
ness 3D printer uses spools of ABS 
plastic or a similar material as its 
manufacturing medium, which it 
heats up, extruding the now-lique-
fied plastic through something very 
much like the printhead you might 
find on an inkjet printer. That print-
head rides on bars or a carriage 
known as a “gantry,” and it can move 
in such a way as to be able to cover 
the entire “build plate”—a stage on 
which your object will be created. 
(Not surprisingly, less sophisticated 
printers have smaller build plates 
and less maneuverable gantries than 
do fancier models. More expensive 
Smart Computing  /  June2013 59

(or the gantry and printhead rise) in 
order to make room for the object’s 
increased height. It may take hun-
dreds (or even thousands) of these 
very thin layers, but eventually—
through a sometimes painfully slow 
but very rewarding process known 
as “additive manufacturing”—the 
object emerges.
This approach, in which spools of 
filament are fed into the printer, is 
known as “fused filament fabrica-
tion,” and it is the technique used 
by the vast majority of current-day 
home and small business printers.
printers may use powdered metal, 
liquefied resin, or other materials 
as their printing medium; they can 
also be much larger, and they may 
use lasers to melt (or in some cases, 
to harden) the medium with which 
they’re working.
The printhead on a consumer-
level 3D printer travels around the 
build plate, putting down a layer of 
(melted) plastic filament. When it 
finishes the first layer, it returns to 
its exact starting point and creates 
another layer on top of the first; as 
it adds layers, the build plate lowers 
Now It’s Mainstream
While they used to be novelty 
items, small 3D printers are now 
showing up at stores near you. With 
them, you can create actual 3D 
objects, items that until now, you 
could only draw (or pay a manufac-
turer to create). All you need in or-
der to print out the object or device 
that will change your life—and per-
haps other lives, too—is some de-
sign software (much of which is free 
or included with the printer) and a 
wide-open imagination. ●
Personal Technology
The approach known as “fused filament fabrication”
is the technique used by the vast majority of current-day
home and small business printers.
Derek Manson, of New Zealand’s one.61 product development and 
consulting firm, created this 3D printed guitar.
A closeup of the Cube 3D printer’s printhead and its creation. The Cube 
can print objects up to 5.5 x 5.5 x 5.5 inches.
60 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Personal Technology
W
hen you buy something 
physical, for instance a 
toaster, you’re free to turn around 
and sell it to someone else, 
anytime you want.  When you 
buy something that exists solely 
as bits of ones and zeros, as you 
do whenever you buy a digital 
eBook from Amazon or an MP3 
from iTunes, do you actually own 
the file or just a license to read or 
listen to it? If it’s the former then 
should you be able to sell the file 
when you’re no longer interested 
in reading or listening, just like 
you can when toasted bread has 
lost its flavor for you? 
In this article, we’ll explore 
some of the complicated factors 
involved in the reselling of digital 
files, how the courts have ruled in 
favor or against the practice, and 
what impact Amazon and Apple’s 
recent patent applications may 
have on the fate of your digital 
media libraries.
What The Law Says
As things stand now, there’s not 
much legal precedence for how to 
handle reselling digital media. Pro-
ponents of the ability to resell digital 
media often point to the doctrine of 
“first sale,” which states that when a 
copyright holder makes legal copies 
of copyrighted materials, those who 
purchase the copy are allowed to 
sell or otherwise dispose of it, with-
out the copyright holder’s specific 
consent.
This doctrine played a major role 
in the recent court case involving 
a student who had purchased and 
imported textbooks from his native 
Thailand, and resold them in the 
United States for profit. Because 
the textbooks were printed in the 
U.S., legally, and then exported, the 
court ruled that the student had not 
violated the textbook publisher’s 
copyright. As you might imagine, 
publishers are not pleased with this 
ruling.
What does have a significant 
amount of legal precedence is the 
fact that the unauthorized duplica-
tion of digital music files over the In-
ternet infringes a copyright owner’s 
exclusive right to reproduce. Your 
digital copy of Led Zeppelin’s Physi-
cal Graffiti  is essentially a license 
to listen to the music, and make 
copies under fair use, meaning for 
your own purposes (often relating to 
backup, education, or journalism), 
but not for distribution or sale. 
But if you’re ready to give up that 
eBook, MP3, or digital movie, there’s 
a strong sense that you should have 
the right to resell, donate, or other-
wise dispose of the copy you legally 
obtained. On the basis of the first 
sale doctrine, it seems like a no-
brainer. 
But it’s just not that simple. In the 
case of the imported textbooks, the 
ruling is harder to apply to digital 
media because the books are physi-
cal products, things not easily repro-
duced. With digital media, anyone 
Selling Digital Assets
Don’t Put Up The Yard Sale Signs Just Yet
Two of the biggest players in digital media may decide whether you can sell your digital eBooks, MP3s, movies, and TV shows. 
Smart Computing  /  June2013 61

Personal Technology
built on widespread, unauthorized 
copying of sound recordings owned 
by Plaintiff and others.”
A federal judge recently ruled in 
favor of Capitol Records, agreeing 
that the first sale doctrine doesn’t 
apply because of how ReDigi’s sys-
tem works: Technically, it generates 
a copy of the digital file its users are 
selling, and even the file that users 
purchase is yet another copy gener-
ated from the one residing on Re-
Digi’s servers. 
The Apple & Amazon
Approach
Apple & Amazon, arguably two 
companies with the most skin in 
the digital media game, have both 
recently applied for patents  that 
outline 
digital 
media 
reselling 
schemes. 
Apple’s patent describes a system 
that would allow consumers to loan 
or sell the music, movies, or TV 
shows they’ve purchased in iTunes 
by passing their rights of ownership 
with even the most rudimentary 
equipment can create an exact copy 
of any file. 
With good reason, eBook pub-
lishers, movie studios, and the re-
cording industry’s copyright hold-
ers see the reselling of digital files 
as a direct threat to their business. 
But what if the people reselling the 
media in question lost access to the 
files once the transaction had com-
pleted? 
That’s exactly what Boston-based 
ReDigi is attempting to do. The 
company lets users offer their le-
gally obtained digital music files for 
sale. Once sold, ReDigi’s software 
automatically seeks out and de-
stroys the files (and presumably any 
“fair use” copies) on the seller’s sys-
tems and devices. Before and after 
the transaction, ReDigi contends, 
just one file exists. 
Capitol Records took ReDigi to 
court, calling the company “...a 
clearinghouse for copyright in-
fringement and a business model 
along to new owners. In this sys-
tem, no files move; the new owner 
can simply download a copy of the 
file for free.
Amazon’s patent describes a sys-
tem that would work very similarly 
to the way Amazon Kindle users  
currently loan eBooks, the prima-
ry difference being that the resold 
media would be permanently dis-
abled on the original purchaser’s 
device(s). 
Both system would require DRM 
(Digital Rights Management) soft-
ware to work. Users, however, may 
be wary of both schemes, given that 
DRM has been used in the past to 
restrict fair use copying of media. 
Don’t expect these patents to be-
come viable services anytime soon. 
In fact, some observers believe that 
Amazon and Apple may have no 
intention of offering such a service, 
and are just patenting the rights-
sharing technology to proactively 
stymie other organizations from 
creating a similar service. ●
ReDigi calls itself “The World’s First Pre-Owned Digital Marketplace.” 
Copyright holders call it something else entirely. 
Amazon’s Terms Of Use document gets very specific with regard to 
what you can and cannot do with your purchases. 
Personal Technology
62 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Personal Technology
The Hype Machine
http://Hypem.com
If you love new music, you’ll want 
to check out The Hype Machine, as 
you’ll find a large collection of music 
reviews, see interactive music charts, 
and find out what’s popular on the 
Internet right now. The website ag-
gregates music blogs to make it easy 
to see which bands people are talk-
ing about, and you can filter by genre 
and artist to narrow the options. 
The site offers an ecelectic mix of 
mainstream artists and underground 
bands, and you’ll be able to listen to 
music posted by the blogs. You can 
“love” a song to save it to your list, 
where you’ll find links to download 
an official version from Amazon or 
iTunes. 
MenuPages
www.menupages.com
With MenuPages, you’ll find de-
tailed menus for tons of restaurants 
in eight United States locations: 
New York, Los Angeles, San Francis-
co, Philadelphia, Boston, Chicago, 
Washington D.C., and South Florida. 
You’ll also be able to sort by neigh-
borhood, price range, and cuisine. 
The site can quickly help you find a 
nearby restaurant that’s offering what 
you’re hungry for. The menus are 
constantly updated, and MenuPages 
covers more than 40,000 restaurants 
in the eight markets. You can even 
search for nearby takeout, if you’re 
not in the mood to travel or eat out. 
You can create a My MenuPages sec-
tion, so you’ll always have your fa-
vorite menus on hand.
Yelp
www.yelp.com
You’ve probably heard of or seen 
the Yelp app for mobile devices; it’s 
a great resource for finding nearby 
food, shopping, nightlife, and other 
services. The website offers more of 
the same, but on a bigger screen. 
Just create an account (free) and Yelp 
w
w
w
.
w
o
n
d
e
r
h
o
w
t
o
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
w
o
n
d
e
r
h
o
w
t
o
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
w
o
n
d
e
r
h
o
w
t
o
.
c
o
m
t
w
o
rl
d
w
id
e
w
eb
t
fi
n
di
t
o
nl
in
e
t
w
o
rl
d
w
id
e
w
e
b
t
fin
d
it
o
nl
in
e
t
w
or
l
d
wi
d
e
w
e
b
t
fi
nd
it
o
nl
in
e
t
w
or
ld
wi
d
e
w
e
b
t
fin
d
it
o
nl
in
e
t
w
or
ld
w
id
e
w
e
b
t
fin
d
it
o
nl
in
e
t
w
or
ld
wi
de
w
e
b
t
fin
d
it
o
nl
in
e
t
w
w
w
.
y
e
l
p
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
y
e
l
p
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
y
e
l
p
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
m
e
n
u
p
a
g
e
s
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
m
e
n
u
p
a
g
e
s
.
c
o
m
t
w
w
w
.
m
e
n
u
p
a
g
e
s
.
c
o
m
t
Find It Online
Kickstarter
www.kickstarter.com
Kickstarter’s popularity has skyrocketed recently, thanks to the Veronica Mars 
campaign, in which the creators raised funds to make a movie out of the cult TV 
show. This is an example of how Kickstarter can be used to fund films, games, 
music, and other art with the help of everyday people. Kickerstarter lets creators 
set a funding goal and deadline, with funding being all or nothing, so those who 
donate won’t lose anything if the goals aren’t met. If they are, funders are often 
rewarded with extras, such as free copies of an album, for the finished project. 
The website indicates that 44% of its crowdfunding projects have reached goal.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 63

Personal Technology
will allow you to interact with other 
members, as well as to receive spe-
cial offers—though you can use most 
of the website without needing a 
profile. The best aspect of Yelp is that 
it’s one of the most utilized websites 
for reviews, so you’ll be likely to find 
detailed reviews of wherever you’re 
going before you decide on a restau-
rant, business, or service. 
WonderHowTo
www.wonderhowto.com
Launched in 2008, WonderHowTo 
began as a website where you could 
find video tutorials, but soon after its 
creation, WonderHowTo began al-
lowing members to contribute their 
own articles. At press time, the site 
offers more than 170,000 how-to vid-
eos and text articles covering 35 cat-
egories and 424 sub-categories. The 
website also offers a Worlds section 
where you can meet up with others 
who submit content, so you can ask 
a question, share what you’ve done, 
and post how-to articles for experts 
to review. On the splash page, you’ll 
find the latest how-to topics, which 
makes for some fun perusing.
Uncrate
http://uncrate.com
This website is designed as a buy-
er’s guide aimed at men looking for 
the next great thing—but plenty of 
women will enjoy the content, as 
well. Uncrate posts new reviews on 
clothing, technology, furniture, and 
other recently released products. 
Just some of the key categories in-
clude Gear, Style, Rides, Tech, Body, 
Space, Movies, Boost, and Travel. 
There’s also a Stash tool where you 
can save products that pique your in-
terest. Uncrate has over 1.5 million 
monthly readers and has covered 
more than 9,000 items. Uncrate also 
recently released an app where you 
can view the reviews and save items 
for convenient access to your favorite 
products.
www.menupages.com
www.wonderhowto.com
www.uncrate.com
64 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Support
Q:
What is geotagging and how 
can I use it?
A:
It can be easy to forget exactly 
where a picture was taken. 
Geotagging is a feature found on 
some digital cameras and memory 
cards that lets the device save the 
geographic location when you snap 
a photo or video. It’s ideal for redis-
covering the location of that remote 
picturesque lake or remembering 
where that family portrait was taken. 
As an added bonus, a number of 
online services can take the geotag 
information and overlay the images 
onto maps. Like a virtual scrapbook, 
your mapped photos can present a 
visual story of your journey. Typi-
cally, the GPS unit inside the geotag-
ging device will record the latitude, 
longitude, altitude, and time and 
date you took the photo.
Q:
What’s the best way to pipe 
music throughout multiple 
rooms?
A:
Whole home or office audio 
is a great way to create a fun, 
elegant, or relaxing atmosphere.  You 
can enhance the mood of a party 
with music in every room or incor-
porate a PA to page employees in a 
specific office. Traditionally, whole 
home audio has been impractical 
due to the long sets of wire necessary 
to reach each room, construction re-
quired to install and hide wires and 
speakers, and the use of expensive 
home-theater equipment to support 
multi-room audio. But with mod-
ern wireless music systems, you can 
simply plug a speaker into a wall 
outlet—which connects wirelessly 
to a transmitter connected to your 
audio sources—to drastically reduce 
the complications of streaming au-
dio to every corner in your home. 
These whole home audio packages 
are offered in various speaker con-
figurations, so you can select a setup 
that suits where you want to hear 
audio around your house or office. 
Many new systems let you switch 
between multiple sources of audio, 
so you won’t have to negotiate with 
colleagues (or the kids) over music 
choices, because they can control 
what’s playing in a given room.
Q:
What’s the difference be-
tween the various surround 
sound standards?
A:
When you select a set of 
surround 
sound 
speakers, 
you’ll need to decide on the num-
ber of speakers, normally labeled as 
2.0, 5.1, or 7.1. The first digit is the 
number of speakers; for example, 
receivers and HTBs (Home Theater 
in a Box) that support 7.1 surround 
sound could send audio to one cen-
ter, two front, two side, and two rear 
speakers. The second digit represents 
whether or not the receiver supports 
a subwoofer, which is a speaker de-
signed solely to produce the deep, 
rumbling bass audio. A 5.1 system 
is the most popular, because that’s 
what most movies are encoded in. 
Tips From The Help Desk
Common Tech Questions
A geotagged image will retain information about where you took the 
photo.
Wireless whole home audio systems make setup a breeze.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 65

Tech Support
ber of speakers. As a general rule, 
you’ll get what you pay for with a 
speaker set, though we recommend 
that you listen to the speakers in a 
store before purchase. That’s because 
physically larger speakers aren’t 
guaranteed to produce better sound 
than smaller speakers. For example, 
a high-quality bookshelf speaker 
may deliver crisper, more vibrant au-
dio than you might get from a large 
floorstanding model.
Q:
I see many new inkjet print-
ers offer AIO (all-in-one) ca-
pabilities. At home, I mostly just 
need to print out documents and 
Another option is a sound bar, which 
is a single slim, horizontal speaker 
that creates virtual sound fields to 
simulate directional audio.
Q:
Will a surround sound setup 
with more speakers provide 
better sound? 
A:
Systems with more speak-
ers aren’t necessarily better, 
because a smaller set may feature 
speakers that sound richer and more 
true than an arrangement with more 
speakers, but it’s likely that surround 
sound will seem more realistic when 
you’re encircled by the greater num-
photos, so why should I invest in a 
AIO printer?
A:
There are lots of good rea-
sons  to select an AIO printer 
over a traditional inkjet. For ex-
ample, do you ever have a project 
at home that requires copies of old 
documents or photos? Do you ever 
need to scan documents to your PC 
or fax pages to businesses? Without 
an AIO printer, you’d need to run out 
to a print shop to accomplish such 
tasks. Another bonus is that these 
features add only a small cost to 
the printer, so you’re really not pay-
ing much more for an AIO than you 
Systems with more speakers aren’t necessarily better, because a smaller 
set may feature speakers that sound richer and more true than an ar-
rangement with more speakers.
Two speakers will provide you with stereo sound.
With 5.1 surround sound, you’ll have five speakers and one subwoofer.
66 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Support
refers to this type of energy usage. In 
particular, most power adapters con-
tinuously draw power, even when 
no devices are connected, and can 
account for as much as 15% of your 
household power. To reduce energy 
wasted by phantom power, you can 
invest in a surge protector that lets 
you cut power to the connected de-
vices. Most new energy-conserving 
surge protectors also come with a 
few always-on outlets for devices 
that require uninterrupted power, 
such as clocks, landline phones, and 
DVRs. 
Q:
What is image stabiliza-
tion, and how will it help my 
photos?
would for a traditional inkjet. Near-
ly all new inkjet AIO printers also 
let you produce lab-quality photo 
prints. Most models let you print a 
variety of paper sizes and types, ide-
al for people looking to create their 
own invitations, business cards, or 
digital scrapbooks, and because you 
can scan and directly copy material, 
you can store digital copies on your 
PC or make duplicates.
Q:
What is “phantom power,” 
and how can I avoid it?
A:
TVs, 
computers, 
mobile 
phones, and other electronics 
often use power even when they are 
switched off, and “phantom power” 
A:
There are several factors—
such as low light, long shutter 
speeds, or using an extreme zoom—
that can cause even the steadiest 
photographer to capture blurry im-
ages. To combat the problem, many 
cameras include some form of image 
stabilization, which senses move-
ment when you take a photo and 
adjusts the image to compensate. 
Image stabilization is offered in both 
optical and digital flavors, and the 
optical style is typically superior to 
its digital counterpart. Optical image 
stabilization relies on shifting the 
camera’s image sensor to adjust for 
movement, while digital image sta-
bilization switches the camera’s set-
tings to better control motion blur. ●
Many cameras include some form of image stabilization,
which senses movement . . . and adjusts the image to compensate.
Chargers use the most phantom power.
Advanced devices with image stabilization often feature miniature 
gyroscopes.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 67

Tech Support
a BSOD may signify a serious issue, 
including damaged drivers, incom-
patible hardware devices, and fail-
ing or failed hardware. To help you 
troubleshoot the BSOD, we’ll show 
you how to translate BSOD error 
messages, identify the cause of your 
problem, and provide a few point-
ers to resolve issues that make your 
computer blue.
Error Research
Although the typical BSOD error 
message, such as PAGE_FAULT_
IN_NONPAGED AREA or STOP: 
0x0000000A, doesn’t seem very 
helpful, the text on the BSOD ac-
tually does provide valuable in-
formation 
about 
the 
problem. 
Chances are, if you enter the error 
message into a search engine or the
Microsoft Knowledge Base (support.
microsoft.com), you’ll find a few 
possible causes and solutions that 
are specific to the error. Make cer-
tain you write down the error mes-
sage details that are displayed after 
T
raditionally, the color blue 
is thought to have a calming 
effect, but when it comes to 
error messages, blue has come to 
symbolize the most frightening of 
Windows errors. This is a problem 
that occurs when Windows (it’s 
seen less frequently in Windows 
7 and Windows 8 than in previ-
ous editions) has encountered an 
error that causes the OS (operat-
ing system) to become temporarily
unstable or unresponsive. To pro-
tect the OS from damage, Windows 
responds by stopping every task on 
your PC and indicating the problem 
with a long error message.
Besides the unexpected appear-
ance of a bright blue screen, the so-
called BSOD (blue screen of death) 
tends to cause panic because the 
cryptic text in the error message 
(typically something along the lines 
of STOP: 0x0000008e) seems to do 
little to explain the source of the 
trouble. It’s important to decipher 
the error message, nonetheless, as 
the stop message. The BSOD also 
displays a description of the error in 
all uppercase letters, such as DRIV-
ER_IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL.
The description indicates what pro-
cess the OS was attempting to run 
when the error occurred. Occasion-
ally, the BSOD may also indicate the 
specific file, driver, or memory loca-
tion that caused the problem.
If your research indicates a vari-
ety of possible issues, consider what 
changes you most recently made 
to the PC. For example, if you re-
cently added new memory, it may 
not match up with the type or speed 
of the other RAM (random-access 
memory) in your PC. Remove any 
new hardware and, if possible, rein-
stall the old hardware to see if the 
BSOD reoccurs. If you haven’t added 
any new hardware, recently-updat-
ed drivers are another usual suspect. 
For instance, a STOP: 0x0000000A 
IRQL_NOT_ LESS_OR_EQUAL er-
ror message is generally caused by 
faulty device drivers, a problem with 
It’s Big, It’s Blue, It’s Bad
Find Answers In The BSOD’s Cryptic Error Message
Make certain you write down the stop error message and error
description (listed in all-capital letters) displayed on the BSOD.
The Microsoft Knowledge Base can help you narrow down the problem.
68 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Support
possible BSOD cause was installed. 
Those with Windows 8 can open Sys-
tem Restore by pointing the cursor at 
the upper-right corner of the screen, 
moving the mouse pointer down, and 
clicking Search. Type recovery in the 
search box, click Settings, and click 
Recovery. Click Open System Restore 
and follow the prompts to fix the PC.
Too Hot!
The blue screen tends to occur more 
often when your components are 
overheating, as the hardware, includ-
ing the motherboard  itself, may shut 
down when a given temperature limit 
is reached. Take some time to ensure 
that all of the fans inside the desktop 
or notebook computer are moving air. 
Vents are typically on the sides or back 
of the case, and over time, dust can 
build up in the vents, which will trap 
some of the heat inside the PC. That 
can increase the temperature of all 
components inside the case and may 
cause some parts to overheat. You can 
use a can of compressed air to blow 
your BIOS (Basic Input/Output Sys-
tem), or incompatible hardware.
Go Back In Time
By default, Windows 7 and Win-
dows 8 have System Restore enabled, 
so it’s likely you’ll have a Restore Point 
available if you run into a problem. 
Let’s say that you’ve recently installed 
SP1 (Service Pack 1) for Windows 7—
but after the update, you experienced 
the BSOD. And when you try to unin-
stall the Service Pack, Windows indi-
cates that an error (likely the one that 
caused the BSOD) has prevented Win-
dows from removing the update.
In this sort of situation, System Re-
store may be one of the few ways for 
you to resolve the problem without re-
pairing or completely reinstalling Win-
dows—leading to the possible loss of 
any personal photos, documents, and 
music you didn’t back up. To utilize 
System Restore in Windows 7, click 
the Start button and enter System Re-
store in the search field. Follow the sys-
tem prompts to load a point before the 
the dust out of the vents. (Be careful not 
to blow the dust into the machine.)
Memory Check
Damaged memory is one of the 
most likely causes of a BSOD, espe-
cially when data stored in the RAM is 
corrupted. You can use the Windows 
Memory Diagnostics utility in Win-
dows 7 and Windows 8 to test the sys-
tem’s memory. To run the utility in Win-
dows 7, click the Start button and enter 
memory into the Start Search Bar. Un-
der Programs, select Windows Memo-
ry Diagnostics. At the dialog box, you 
can choose Restart Now And Check 
For Problems or Check For Problems 
The Next Time I Start My Computer. 
Either way, you’ll need to restart your 
PC to run the utility. For those running 
Windows 8, type control panel and 
select it from the Apps section. Click 
System And Security, choose Admin-
istrative Tools, and select Windows 
Memory Diagnostic. Choose Check 
For Problems The Next Time I Start My 
Computer. ●
If you think something you’ve recently installed has caused the BSOD, 
try performing a System Restore.
The Windows Memory Diagnostic can help identify problems with your 
PC’s RAM.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 69

Tech Support
through traditional malware barriers 
and protections to execute attacks on 
your system. In this article, we’ll in-
troduce you to this new attack vector, 
illustrate how it works, and even of-
fer some advice on how to thwart the 
seemingly unthwartable. 
How It Works
You might think that any malware 
capable of bypassing your PC’s multi-
tiered defenses is the malicious soft-
ware equivalent of Mission: Impossi-
ble’s Ethan Hunt—wearing disguises 
to fool guards and disabling security 
systems with impressive gadgets. But 
AVTs manage to get onto otherwise 
protected systems simply by tak-
Y
ou probably think you’re safe 
as long as you’re vigilant about 
running antivirus and anti-
malware software, keeping the fire-
wall turned on, staying current with 
virus definitions and system updates, 
deleting suspicious email attach-
ments, only downloading from trust-
ed sources, and sticking to websites 
you know. And why not? After all, 
in the pages of this magazine, we’re 
consistently reminding you that the 
best way to keep your PC infection-
free is to do all of the above. 
But there is a new threat in the 
cyber criminal’s arsenal: Called Ad-
vanced Volatile Threats, or AVTs for 
short, they’re capable of sneaking 
ing up residence in your PC’s RAM 
(Random Access Memory). Hence 
the word “volatile” in the software’s 
alias. Some security researchers say 
that AVT is just a new name for an 
old problem called “memory resi-
dent viruses,” the first of which actu-
ally appeared back in 1986.
Whatever you call them, this type 
of malware is becoming more of an 
issue. RAM is such an effective stag-
ing ground from which to launch at-
tacks because a vast majority of se-
curity software is designed to scan 
and protect your PC against mali-
cious code that plants itself in your 
computer’s non-volatile memory: your 
hard drives and SSDs. 
Your PC Under Fire
Cyber Criminals Turn To Advanced Volatile Threats 
70 June2013  /  www.smartcomputing.com

Tech Support
(and easier to use) tools available to 
a motivated cyber criminal. Granted 
these tools utilize conventional mal-
ware that is easier for modern secu-
rity software to detect, but there are 
enough computer users that are un-
protected that these attackers don’t 
need sophisticated tools like AVTs. 
Why contract out Ethan Hunt when 
you can just as easily use a hammer?
Furthermore, Triumfant believes 
that AVTs are largely the products 
of government-sponsored cyber es-
pionage, originating in China, Iran, 
and Russia. But don’t let out an au-
dible sigh of relief just yet. Although 
many these sophisticated attacks are 
designed to target sensitive informa-
tion of more strategic value than your 
Facebook login, that doesn’t mean 
they can’t be easily repurposed to 
do so. AVT developers aren’t inter-
ested in following the letter of the 
law, which means that they’re just as 
likely to market their creations to any 
buyer willing to pay cash, whether a 
government or a lone hacker. And, as 
To further exacerbate the problem 
for PC users, any trace of the AVT 
is removed from the PC whenever 
the virus-implanting application, a 
Web page running in a browser, for 
instance, is shut down. This makes 
tracing them, or even determining 
their purpose, extremely difficult for 
security experts. 
Keep Calm And...
Before you swear off computers 
once and for all, know that AVTs are 
not exactly common today. Accord-
ing to the researchers at  security firm 
Triumfant, only about 10% of the 
malware the company examines can 
be categorized as AVTs. 
Creating an AVT that is capable of 
pulling off a large scale attack also 
takes a fair amount of sophisticated 
coding on the cyber criminal’s part. If 
a data thief wants to break into your 
email account, online banking ac-
count, social media sites, and obtain 
other private personal data from you, 
there are dozens of less sophisticated 
they become more and more com-
mon, more conventional cybercrimi-
nals will reverse-engineer AVTs to 
create their own malware that serves 
virtually any purpose. This is why it 
pays to know about the threats now.
What You Can Do
A vast majority of the currently 
available security software isn’t capa-
ble of scanning memory for threats, 
but vendors are in the process of 
changing that. Be on the lookout for 
security software that is capable of 
protecting your system against AVTs 
or memory-resident viruses. Con-
sidering all of the above, it seems 
futile, but you really are safest when 
you practice safe computing behav-
ior. Continue avoiding questionable 
websites; deleting unknown email 
attachments; keeping your OS and 
software updated; and running fire-
wall, antivirus, and anti-malware 
programs. It also wouldn't hurt to 
add a full reboot into your scanning 
and updating routine. ●
As it turns out, volatile memory, otherwise known as your PC’s RAM, is 
a good hiding place for malware. 
Rebooting your system is enough to wipe an AVT clean. However, its 
lasting effects may not be as easily dealt with.
Smart Computing  /  June2013 71


