Smart Material Systems and MEMS:
Design and Development Methodologies
Vijay K. Varadan
University of Arkansas, USA
K. J. Vinoy
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
S. Gopalakrishnan
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Copyright  2006
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England
Telephone (+44) 1243 779777
Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham
Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19
8SQ, England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (+44) 1243 770620.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product
names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The
Publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on
the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Other Wiley Editorial Ofﬁces
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 6045 Freemont Blvd, Mississauga, ONT, L5R 4J3
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Materials science of membranes for gas and vapor separation/[edited by]
Yuri Yampolski, Ingo Pinnau, Benny Freeman.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-85345-0 (acid-free paper)
ISBN-10: 0-470-85345-X (acid-free paper)
1. Membrane separation.
2. Gas separation membranes.
3. Pervaporation.
4. Polymers–Transport properties. I. Yampol’skii, Yu. P. (Yuri P.) II.
TP248.25.M46M38 2006
6600.2842–dc22
2005034536
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN-13
978-0-470-09361-0 (HB)
ISBN-10
0-470-09361-7 (HB)
Typeset in 9/11 pt Times by Thomson Digital
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Antony Rowe, Chippenham, Wiltshire
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry
in which at least two trees are planted for each one used for paper production.

Contents
Preface
xi
About the Authors
xiii
PART 1: FUNDAMENTALS
1
1 Introduction to Smart Systems
3
1.1 Components of a smart system
3
1.1.1 ‘Smartness’
6
1.1.2 Sensors, actuators, transducers
7
1.1.3 Micro electromechanical systems (MEMS)
7
1.1.4 Control algorithms
9
1.1.5 Modeling approaches
10
1.1.6 Effects of scaling
10
1.1.7 Optimization schemes
10
1.2 Evolution of smart materials and structures
11
1.3 Application areas for smart systems
13
1.4 Organization of the book
13
References
15
2 Processing of Smart Materials
17
2.1 Introduction
17
2.2 Semiconductors and their processing
17
2.2.1 Silicon crystal growth from the melt
19
2.2.2 Epitaxial growth of semiconductors
20
2.3 Metals and metallization techniques
21
2.4 Ceramics
22
2.4.1 Bulk ceramics
22
2.4.2 Thick ﬁlms
23
2.4.3 Thin ﬁlms
25
2.5 Silicon micromachining techniques
26
2.6 Polymers and their synthesis
26
2.6.1 Classiﬁcation of polymers
27
2.6.2 Methods of polymerization
28
2.7 UV radiation curing of polymers
31
2.7.1 Relationship between wavelength and radiation energy
31
2.7.2 Mechanisms of UV curing
32
2.7.3 Basic kinetics of photopolymerization
33

2.8 Deposition techniques for polymer thin ﬁlms
35
2.9 Properties and synthesis of carbon nanotubes
35
References
40
PART 2: DESIGN PRINCIPLES
43
3 Sensors for Smart Systems
45
3.1 Introduction
45
3.2 Conductometric sensors
45
3.3 Capacitive sensors
46
3.4 Piezoelectric sensors
48
3.5 Magnetostrictive sensors
48
3.6 Piezoresistive sensors
50
3.7 Optical sensors
51
3.8 Resonant sensors
53
3.9 Semiconductor-based sensors
53
3.10 Acoustic sensors
57
3.11 Polymeric sensors
58
3.12 Carbon nanotube sensors
59
References
61
4 Actuators for Smart Systems
63
4.1 Introduction
63
4.2 Electrostatic transducers
64
4.3 Electromagnetic transducers
68
4.4 Electrodynamic transducers
70
4.5 Piezoelectric transducers
73
4.6 Electrostrictive transducers
74
4.7 Magnetostrictive transducers
78
4.8 Electrothermal actuators
80
4.9 Comparison of actuation schemes
82
References
83
5 Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
85
5.1 Introduction
85
5.2 Piezoelectric sensors
85
5.3 MEMS IDT-based accelerometers
88
5.4 Fiber-optic gyroscopes
92
5.5 Piezoresistive pressure sensors
94
5.6 SAW-based wireless strain sensors
96
5.7 SAW-based chemical sensors
97
5.8 Microﬂuidic systems
100
References
102
PART 3: MODELING TECHNIQUES
103
6 Introductory Concepts in Modeling
105
6.1 Introduction to the theory of elasticity
105
6.1.1 Description of motion
105
6.1.2 Strain
107
vi
Contents

6.1.3 Strain–displacement relationship
109
6.1.4 Governing equations of motion
113
6.1.5 Constitutive relations
114
6.1.6 Solution procedures in the linear theory of elasticity
117
6.1.7 Plane problems in elasticity
119
6.2 Theory of laminated composites
120
6.2.1 Introduction
120
6.2.2 Micromechanical analysis of a lamina
121
6.2.3 Stress–strain relations for a lamina
123
6.2.4 Analysis of a laminate
126
6.3 Introduction to wave propagation in structures
128
6.3.1 Fourier analysis
129
6.3.2 Wave characteristics in 1-D waveguides
134
References
144
7 Introduction to the Finite Element Method
145
7.1 Introduction
145
7.2 Variational principles
147
7.2.1 Work and complimentary work
147
7.2.2 Strain energy, complimentary strain energy and kinetic energy
148
7.2.3 Weighted residual technique
149
7.3 Energy functionals and variational operator
151
7.3.1 Variational symbol
153
7.4 Weak form of the governing differential equation
153
7.5 Some basic energy theorems
154
7.5.1 Concept of virtual work
154
7.5.2 Principle of virtual work (PVW)
154
7.5.3 Principle of minimum potential energy (PMPE)
155
7.5.4 Rayleigh–Ritz method
156
7.5.5 Hamilton’s principle (HP)
156
7.6 Finite element method
158
7.6.1 Shape functions
159
7.6.2 Derivation of the ﬁnite element equation
162
7.6.3 Isoparametric formulation and numerical integration
164
7.6.4 Numerical integration and Gauss quadrature
167
7.6.5 Mass and damping matrix formulation
168
7.7 Computational aspects in the ﬁnite element method
171
7.7.1 Factors governing the speed of the FE solution
172
7.7.2 Equation solution in static analysis
173
7.7.3 Equation solution in dynamic analysis
174
7.8 Superconvergent ﬁnite element formulation
178
7.8.1 Superconvergent deep rod ﬁnite element
179
7.9 Spectral ﬁnite element formulation
182
References
184
8 Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
187
8.1 Introduction
187
8.2 Finite element modeling of a 3-D composite laminate with
189
embedded piezoelectric sensors and actuators
8.2.1 Constitutive model
189
8.2.2 Finite element modeling
191
Contents
vii

8.2.3 2-D Isoparametric plane stress smart composite ﬁnite element
192
8.2.4 Numerical example
194
8.3 Superconvergent smart thin-walled box beam element
196
8.3.1 Governing equation for a thin-walled smart composite beam
196
8.3.2 Finite element formulation
199
8.3.3 Formulation of consistent mass matrix
201
8.3.4 Numerical experiments
202
8.4 Modeling of magnetostrictive sensors and actuators
204
8.4.1 Constitutive model for a magnetostrictive material (Terfenol-D)
204
8.4.2 Finite element modeling of composite structures with embedded
magnetostrictive patches
205
8.4.3 Numerical examples
209
8.4.4 Modeling of piezo ﬁbre composite (PFC) sensors/actuators
212
8.5 Modeling of micro electromechanical systems
215
8.5.1 Analytical model for capacitive thin-ﬁlm sensors
216
8.5.2 Numerical example
218
8.6 Modeling of carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
219
8.6.1 Spectral ﬁnite element modeling of an MWCNT
222
References
229
9 Active Control Techniques
231
9.1 Introduction
231
9.2 Mathematical models for control theory
232
9.2.1 Transfer function
232
9.2.2 State-space modeling
234
9.3 Stability of control system
237
9.4 Design concepts and methodology
239
9.4.1 PD, PI and PID controllers
239
9.4.2 Eigenstructure assignment technique
240
9.5 Modal order reduction
241
9.5.1 Review of available modal order reduction techniques
242
9.6 Active control of vibration and waves due to broadband excitation
246
9.6.1 Available strategies for vibration and wave control
247
9.6.2 Active spectral ﬁnite element model (ASEM) for broadband wave control
248
References
253
PART 4: FABRICATION METHODS AND APPLICATIONS
255
10 Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
257
10.1 Introduction
257
10.2 Fabrication processes for silicon MEMS
257
10.2.1 Lithography
257
10.2.2 Resists and mask formation
258
10.2.3 Lift-off technique
259
10.2.4 Etching techniques
260
10.2.5 Wafer bonding for MEMS
261
10.3 Deposition techniques for thin ﬁlms in MEMS
263
10.3.1 Metallization techniques
264
10.3.2 Thermal oxidation for silicon dioxide
265
10.3.3 CVD of dielectrics
266
viii
Contents

10.3.4 Polysilicon ﬁlm deposition
268
10.3.5 Deposition of ceramic thin ﬁlms
268
10.4 Bulk micromachining for silicon-based MEMS
268
10.4.1 Wet etching for bulk micromachining
269
10.4.2 Etch-stop techniques
269
10.4.3 Dry etching for micromachining
271
10.5 Silicon surface micromachining
271
10.5.1 Material systems in sacriﬁcial layer technology
273
10.6 Processing by both bulk and surface micromachining
274
10.7 LIGA process
274
References
278
11 Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
281
11.1 Introduction
281
11.2 Microstereolithography
282
11.2.1 Overview of stereolithography
282
11.2.2 Introduction to microstereolithography
284
11.2.3 MSL by scanning methods
285
11.2.4 Projection-type methods of MSL
287
11.3 Micromolding of polymeric 3-D structures
289
11.3.1 Micro-injection molding
290
11.3.2 Micro-photomolding
291
11.3.3 Micro hot-embossing
291
11.3.4 Micro transfer-molding
291
11.3.5 Micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC)
292
11.4 Incorporation of metals and ceramics by polymeric processes
293
11.4.1 Burnout and sintering
293
11.4.2 Jet molding
293
11.4.3 Fabrication of ceramic structures with MSL
294
11.4.4 Powder injection molding
295
11.4.5 Fabrication of metallic 3-D microstructures
296
11.4.6 Metal–polymer microstructures
300
11.5 Combined silicon and polymer structures
300
11.5.1 Architecture combination by MSL
300
11.5.2 MSL integrated with thick-ﬁlm lithography
301
11.5.3 AMANDA process
301
References
302
12 Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
307
12.1 Integration of MEMS and microelectronics
307
12.1.1 CMOS ﬁrst process
307
12.1.2 MEMS ﬁrst process
307
12.1.3 Intermediate process
308
12.1.4 Multichip module
308
12.2 MEMS packaging
310
12.2.1 Objectives in packaging
311
12.2.2 Special issues in MEMS packaging
313
12.2.3 Types of MEMS packages
314
12.3 Packaging techniques
315
12.3.1 Flip-chip assembly
315
12.3.2 Ball-grid array
316
Contents
ix

12.3.3 Embedded overlay
316
12.3.4 Wafer-level packaging
317
12.4 Reliability and key failure mechanisms
319
12.5 Issues in packaging of microsystems
321
References
322
13 Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
325
13.1 Introduction
325
13.2 PVDF transducers
325
13.2.1 PVDF-based transducer for structural health monitoring
325
13.2.2 PVDF ﬁlm for a hydrophone
328
13.3 SAW accelerometer
332
13.4 Chemical and biosensors
336
13.4.1 SAW-based smart tongue
337
13.4.2 CNT-based glucose sensor
339
13.5 Polymeric fabrication of a microﬂuidic system
342
References
344
14 Structural Health Monitoring Applications
347
14.1 Introduction
347
14.2 Structural health monitoring of composite wing-type structures using
magnetostrictive sensors/actuators
349
14.2.1 Experimental study of a through-width delaminated beam specimen
350
14.2.2 Three-dimensional ﬁnite element modeling and analysis
352
14.2.3 Composite beam with single smart patch
353
14.2.4 Composite beam with two smart patches
355
14.2.5 Two-dimensional wing-type plate structure
357
14.3 Assesment of damage severity and health monitoring using PZT sensors/actuators
358
14.4 Actuation of DCB specimen under Mode-II dynamic loading
364
14.5 Wireless MEMS–IDT microsensors for health monitoring of structures and systems
365
14.5.1 Description of technology
367
14.5.2 Wireless-telemetry systems
368
References
374
15 Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
377
15.1 Introduction
377
15.2 Active vibration control in a thin-walled box beam
377
15.2.1 Test article and experimental set-up
378
15.2.2 DSP-based vibration controller card
378
15.2.3 Closed-loop feedback vibration control using a PI controller
380
15.2.4 Multi-modal control of vibration in a box beam using eigenstructure assignment
383
15.3 Active noise control of structure-borne vibration and noise in a helicopter cabin
385
15.3.1 Active strut system
387
15.3.2 Numerical simulations
387
References
394
Index
397
x
Contents

Preface
‘Smart technology’ is a term extensively used in all
branches of science and engineering due to its immense
potential in application areas of very high signiﬁcance to
mankind. This technology has already been used in
addressing several remaining challenges in aerospace,
automotive, civil, mechanical, biomedical and commu-
nication engineering disciplines. This has been made
possible by a series of innovations in developing materi-
als which exhibit features such as electromechanical/
magnetomechanical coupling. In other words, these
materials could be used to convert one form of energy
(say electrical) to another (mechanical, e.g. force, vibra-
tion, displacement, etc.). Furthermore, this phenomenon
is found to be reciprocal, paving the way for fabricating
both sensors and actuators with the same materials. Such
a system will also include a control mechanism that
responds to the signals from the sensors and determines
the responses of the actuators accordingly.
Researchers the world over have devised various ways
to embed these components in order to introduce ‘smart-
ness’ in a system. Originally introduced in larger systems
in the bulk form, this science is increasingly leaning
towards miniaturization with the popularization of micro
electromechanical systems (MEMS). One of the reasons
for this is the stringent lightweight constraints imposed
on the system design. Although there have been sporadic
efforts on various facets of the technology, to the best of
these authors’ knowledge, there is currently no single
book dealing with diverse aspects such as design, mod-
eling and fabrication of both bulk sensors and actuators
and MEMS.
The use of MEMS in smart systems is so intensely
intertwined that these technologies are often treated as
two ‘faces of the same coin’. The engineering of smart
systems and MEMS are areas for multidisciplinary
research, already laden with myriad technological issues
of their own. Hence, the books presently available in the
literature tend to separate the basic smart concepts,
design and modeling of sensors and actuators and
MEMS design and fabrication. Evidently, the books
presently available do not address modeling of smart
systems as a whole. With smart systems technology
branching towards several newer disciplines, it is essen-
tial and timely to consolidate the technological advances
in selected areas.
In this present book, it is proposed to give a uniﬁed
treatment of the above concepts ‘under a single umbrella’.
This book can be used as a reference material/textbook for
a graduate level course on Smart Structures and MEMS. It
should also be very useful to practicing researchers in all
branches of science and engineering and interested in
possible applications where they can use this technology.
The book will present uniﬁed schemes for the design and
modeling of smart systems, address their fabrication and
cover challenges that may be encountered in typical
application areas.
Material for this book has been taken from several
advanced short courses presented by the authors in
various meetings throughout the world. Valuable com-
ments from the participants of these courses have helped
in evolving the contents of this text and are greatly
appreciated. We are also indebted to various researchers
for their valuable contributions cited in this book. We
would like to indicate that this text is a compilation of the
work of many people. We cannot be held responsible for
the designs and development methods that have been
published but are still under further research investiga-
tion. It is also difﬁcult to always give proper credit to
those who are the originators of new concepts and the
inventors of new methods. We hope that there are not too
many such errors and will appreciate it if readers could
bring the errors that they discover to our attention. We
are also grateful to the publisher’s staff for their support,
encouragement and willingness to give prompt assistance
during this book project.
There are many people to whom we owe our sincere
thanks for helping us to prepare this book. However,
space dictates that only a few of them can receive

formal acknowledgement. However, this should not be
taken as a disparagement of those whose contributions
remain anonymous. Our foremost appreciation goes to
Dr V.K. Aatre, Former Scientiﬁc Advisor to the Defence
Minister, Defence Research and Development Organi-
zation (DRDO), India and to Dr S. Pillai, Chief Con-
troller of Research and Development, DRDO, for their
encouragement and support along the way. In addition,
we wish to thank many of our colleagues and students,
including K.A. Jose, A. Mehta, B. Zhu, Y. Sha, H. Yoon,
J. Xie, T. Ji, J. Kim, R. Mahapatra, D.P. Ghosh, C.V.S.
Sastry, A. Chakraboty, M. Mitra, S. Jose, O. Jayan and
A. Roy for their contributions in preparing the manu-
script for this book. We are very grateful to the staff
of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK, for their
helpful efforts and cheerful professionalism during this
project.
Vijay K. Varadan
K. J. Vinoy
S. Gopalakrishnan
xii
Preface

About the Authors
Vijay K. Varadan currently holds the 21st Century
Endowed Chair in Nano- and Biotechnologies and Medi-
cine and is Distinguished Professor of Electrical Engi-
neering and Distinguished Professor of Biomedical
Engineering (College of Engineering) and Neurosurgery
(College of Medicine) at the University of Arkansas,
USA. He is also the Director of the Institute for Nano-,
Micro- and Neuroelectronics, Sensors and Systems and
the Director of the High-Density Electronics Center. He
has concentrated on the design and development of
various electronic, acoustic and structural composites,
smart materials, structures and devices, including sen-
sors, transducers, Micro Electromechanical Systems
(MEMS), plus the synthesis and large-scale fabrication
of carbon nanotubes, Nano Electromechanical Systems
(NEMS), microwave, acoustic and ultrasonic wave
absorbers and ﬁlters. He has developed neurostimulators,
wireless microsensors and systems for the sensing and
control of Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, glucose in the
blood and Alzhiemer’s disease. He is also currently
developing both silicon- and organic-based wireless
sensor
systems
with
radio
frequency
identiﬁcation
(RFID) for human gait analysis and sleep disorders and
various neurological disorders. He is an editor of the
Journal of Wave–Material Interaction and the Editor-
in-Chief of the Journal of Smart Materials and Struc-
tures, as well as being an Associate Editor of the Journal
of Microlithography, Microfabrication and Microsys-
tems. In addition, he also serves on the editorial board
of the International Journal of Computational Methods.
He has published more than 500 journal papers and 11
books. He holds 12 patents pertinent to conducting poly-
mers, smart structures, smart antennas, phase shifters,
carbon nanotubes, implantable devices for Parkinson’s
patients, MEMS accelerometers and gyroscopes.
K. J. Vinoy is an Assistant Professor in the Depart-
ment of Electrical Communication Engineering at the
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. He received
an M.Tech degree in Electronics from the Cochin Univer-
sity of Science and Technology, India and a Ph.D. degree
in
Engineering
Science
and
Mechanics
from
the
Pennsylvania State University, USA, in 1993 and 2002,
respectively. From 1994 to 1998, he worked at the
National Aerospace Laboratories, Bangalore, India. Fol-
lowing this, he was a research assistant at the Center
for the Engineering of Electronic and Acoustic Materials
and Devices (CEEAMD) at the Pennsylvania State
University from 1999 to 2002. He continued there to
carry out postdoctoral research from 2002 to August
2003. His research interests include several aspects of
microwave engineering, RF-MEMS and smart material
systems. He has published over 50 papers in technical
journals and conference proceedings. His other publi-
cations include two books, namely Radar Absorbing
Materials: From Theory to Design and Characterization,
and RF-MEMS and their Applications. He also holds one
US patent.
S. Gopalakrishnan received his Master’s Degree in
Engineering Mechanics from the Indian Institute of
Technology, Madras, Chennai, India and his Ph.D. degree
from the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Purdue
University, USA. He joined the Department of Aerospace
Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
India in November 1997 as Assistant Professor and is
currently an Associate Professor in the same department.
His areas of interest include structural dynamics, wave
propagation, computational mechanics, smart structures,
MEMS and nanocomposite structures. He is a Fellow of
the Indian National Academy of Engineering and a
recipient
of
the
‘Satish
Dhawan
Young
Scientist
Award’ for outstanding contributions in Aerospace
Sciences from the Government of Karnataka, India. He
serves on the editorial board of three prime international
computational mechanics journals and has published 70
papers in international journals and 45 conference
papers.

Part 1
Fundamentals
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

1
Introduction to Smart Systems
1.1 COMPONENTS OF A SMART SYSTEM
The area of smart material systems has evolved from the
unending quest of mankind to mimic mechanical systems
of natural origin. The indispensable common objective in
all such initiatives has been to develop technologies to
produce non-biological systems that would achieve opti-
mum functionality widely observed in biological systems
through emulation of their adaptive capabilities and
integrated design.
Smart materials are usually attached or embedded into
structural systems to enable these structures to sense
disturbances, process the information and evoke reaction
at the actuators, possibly to negate the effect of the
original disturbance. Thus, smart materials respond to
environmental stimuli and for that reason are also called
responsive materials. Since these smart material systems
should mimic naturally occurring systems, the general
requirements expected in these nonliving systems that
integrate the functions sensing, actuation, logic and
control include:
 A high degree of reliability, efﬁciency and sustain-
ability of whole systems
 High security of infrastructures, even in extreme
ambience
 Full integration of all functions of the system
 Continuous health and integrity monitoring
 Damage detection and self recovery
 Intelligent operational management system.
As one would notice, the materials involved in imple-
menting this technology are not necessarily novel, but the
smart systems technology has been accelerating at a
tremendous pace in recent years. This has indeed been
inspired by several innovative concepts developed around
the world. The prime movers for this technology have
been the military and aerospace industries. Some of the
‘proof-of-concept’ programs have addressed structural
health monitoring, vibration suppression, shape control
and multifunctional structural aspects for spacecraft,
launch vehicles, aircraft and rotorcraft. These demonstra-
tions have focused on showing potential system-level
performance improvements using smart technologies in
realistic aerospace systems. Civil engineering structures,
including bridges, runways and buildings, that incorpo-
rate this technology have also been demonstrated. Smart
system design envisages the integration of the conven-
tional ﬁelds of mechanical engineering, electrical engi-
neering and computer science/information technology at
the design stage of a product or a system.
The concept of ‘self-healing materials’ has received
wide attention in recent years. For example, self-heal-
ing plastics may use materials that have the ability to
heal cracks as and when these occur. Shape memory
alloys (SMAs) in composites can stop propagating
cracks by imposing compressive forces, resulting
from stress-induced phase transformation. SMAs have
also been used in spectacle frames to repair bends.
Current research aims at developing adaptive, ‘self-
repairing materials’ and structures that can arrest
dynamic crack propagation, heal cracks, restore struc-
tural integrity and stiffness and reconﬁgure themselves
to serve even more functions.
Before we head any further with this discussion, some
clariﬁcations regarding the terminology is called for.
Several of these (e.g. smart, adaptive, intelligent and
active) are sometimes used almost interchangeably to
represent the type of materials and structures described
above. Before we formally deﬁne a smart system, we
would like to quote (Webster’s) dictionary meanings of
these terms [1]:
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

 Active:
producing or involving action or move-
ment.
 Adaptive:
showing or having a capacity for or ten-
dency toward adaptation.
 Smart:
making one smart; mentally alert; bright,
knowledgeable.
 Intelligent: having or indicating a high or satisfactory
degree of intelligence and mental capa-
city; revealing or reﬂecting good judg-
ment or sound thought; skillful.
 Material:
the elements, constituents or substances
of which something is composed or can
be made.
 Structure:
the aggregate of elements of an entity in
their relationships to each other.
 System:
a group of devices or artiﬁcial objects or
an organization forming a network espe-
cially for distributing something or ser-
ving a common purpose.
In the present context, a smart material is one whose
electrical, mechanical or acoustic properties or their
structure, composition or functions change in a speciﬁed
manner in response to some stimulus from the environ-
ment. This response should be repetitive. However, the
means by which the objectives are met could be many.
Recall that dimensions of most materials change when
heated; but then what distinguishes a smart material from
the rest? This is one in which we design the material so
that such changes occur in a speciﬁc manner. In addition,
some other objective can also be accomplished based on
it. Hence, the main objective in the area of smart
materials is to identify materials which would respond
to external stimuli that most materials are unresponsive
to. Furthermore, one would want to maximize such
response, at least one or two orders of magnitude better
than the rest of the materials.
Being responsive to external stimuli is probably not
sufﬁcient to call a material smart. To deﬁne this more
precisely, a structure or material system may be consid-
ered smart if it somehow evaluates the external stimuli
and take some action based on them. This action may be
to neutralize the effects of the external stimuli or to
perform a function (completely different). This deﬁnition
requires the system to have sensor(s), a feedback con-
troller and actuator(s). The selection of sensors may be
based on the type of stimuli expected, the controller may
consist of information processing and storage units,
while the actuator may depend on the type of function
expected of the system. Materials or material systems
that can be ‘programmed’ (possibly by tailoring their
composition) to behave in a certain way in response to an
external stimulus may be called smart. These systems
should:
 monitor environmental and internal conditions
 process the sensed data according to an internal
algorithm
 decide whether to act based on the conditions(s)
monitored
 implement the required action (if warranted)
 repeat the steps continuously.
As
with
any
other
engineering
problem,
systems
designed with the above objectives should also have a
high degree of reliability, efﬁciency and sustainability
[2]. It should be possible to integrate such a system to
existing platforms by replacing ‘dumb’ counterparts with
little or no modiﬁcations to the rest of the platform. Thus,
the technology areas that require urgent attention have
been in developing new sensing and actuation materials
and devices, and control techniques. In addition, another
area that holds immense potential is in self-detection,
self-diagnostic, self-corrective and self-controlled func-
tions of smart material systems [2].
Some examples of smart system components are given
in Table 1.1. These materials are usually embedded in
systems to impart smartness. As this list indicates, most
materials involved in smart systems are not new, while
the smart system technology in itself is new. Smart
systems are the result of a design philosophy that
emphasizes predictive, adaptive and repetitive system
responses. The improvements in the technology and
widespread availability of cost-effective digital signal
processors (DSPs) and microcontroller chips have a
major inﬂuence on the accelerated growth in the smart
systems market.
Brief descriptions of the materials included in Table 1.1
are given in the following.
Piezoelectric materials These are ceramics or poly-
mers which can produce a linear change of shape in
response to an applied electric ﬁeld. The application of
the ﬁeld causes the material to expand or contract
almost instantly. These materials have already found
several uses in actuators in various diverse ﬁelds of
science and technology. The converse effect has
also been observed, which has led to their use as
sensors.
Electrostrictive materials These materials can also
change their dimensions signiﬁcantly on the application
of an electric ﬁeld; the effect is reciprocal as well.
Although the changes thus obtained are not linear in
4
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

either direction, these materials have also found wide-
spread application in medical and engineering ﬁelds.
Magnetostrictive materials These are quite similar to
electrostrictive materials, except for the fact that they
respond to magnetic ﬁelds. The most widely used
magnetostrictive material is TERFENOL-D, which is
made from the rarest of the rare earth elements, i.e.
terbium. This material is highly non-linear and has the
capability to produce large strains, which in turn can
produce large ‘block forces’. These materials are also
used in similar applications to those of electrostrictive
materials.
Rheological materials While the materials described
above are all solids, rheological materials are in the
liquid phase. These can change state instantly through
the application of an electric or magnetic charge. These
ﬂuids may ﬁnd applications in brakes, shock absorbers
and dampers for vehicle seats.
Thermoresponsive materials Shape memory alloys
(SMAs) are another widely used type of smart materials,
which change shape in response to changes in tempera-
ture. Once fabricated into a speciﬁed shape, these mate-
rials can retain/regain their shape at certain operating
temperatures. They are therefore useful in thermostats
and in parts of automotive and air vehicles.
Electrochromic materials Electrochromism is the abil-
ity of a material to change its optical properties (e.g.
color) when a voltage is applied across it. These are used
as antistatic layers, electrochrome layers in liquid crystal
displays (LCDs) and cathodes in lithium batteries.
Fullerenes These are spherically caged molecules with
carbon atoms at the corner of a polyhedral structure
consisting of pentagons and hexagons. These are usually
embedded in polymeric matrices for use in smart systems.
Biomimetic materials Most physical materials avail-
able contrast sharply with those in the natural world
where animals and plants have the clear ability to adapt
to their environment in real time. Some of the interesting
features of the natural world include the ability of plants
to adapt their shape in real time (for example, to allow
leaf surfaces to follow the direction of sunlight) and
limping (essentially a real-time change in the load path
through the structure to avoid overload of a damaged
region). The materials and structures involved in natural
systems have the capability to sense their environment,
process this data and respond instantly. It is widely
accepted that living systems have much to teach us on
the design of future man-made materials. The ﬁeld of
biomimetic materials explores the possibility of engi-
neering material properties based on biological materials
and structures.
Smart gels These are gels that can shrink or swell by
several orders of magnitude (even by a factor of 1000).
Some of these can also be programed to absorb or release
ﬂuids in response to a chemical or physical stimulus.
These gels are used in areas such as food, drug delivery
and chemical processing.
In addition to having sensing and/or actuation proper-
ties, smart materials should also have further favorable
characteristics [2]:
Table 1.1
Examples of materials used in smart systems.
Development stage
Material type
Examples
Widely commercialized
Shape memory alloys
NITINOL
Polymers:
piezoelectric
PZT-5A, 5H
electrostrictive
PMN-PT
Early commercialization
Magnetostrictive materials
Terfenol-D
or under development
Fiber-optic sensor systems
—
Conductive polymers
—
Chromogenic materials and systems:
thermochromic
—
electrochromic
—
Controllable ﬂuids:
Electrorheological
—
Magnetorheological
—
Early research and development
Biomimetic polymers and gels
—
Fullerenes and carbon nanotubes
Introduction to Smart Systems
5

 Technical properties (e.g. mechanical, behavioral,
thermal, electrical).
 Technological properties (e.g. manufacturing, form-
ing, welding abilities, thermal processing).
 Economic aspects (e.g. raw material and production
costs, availability).
 Environmental characteristics (e.g. toxicity, pollution,
possibility of reuse or recycling).
Similar to a smart material, a smart structure would
also require sensors, actuators and a controller, as
shown in the schematic given in Figure 1.1. However,
unlike smart material systems, the number of possible
environmental stimuli monitored in this context is very
limited and may include vibrations, cracks, etc. One
distinctive feature of smart structures is that actuators
and sensors can be embedded at discrete locations
inside the structure. One such example where this can
be done is the laminated composite structure. Further-
more, in many applications the behavior of the entire
structure itself is coupled with the surrounding med-
ium. These factors necessitate a coupled modeling
approach to analyze smart structures. The functions
and descriptions of the various components of a smart
structure are summarized in Table 1.2.
1.1.1 ‘Smartness’
As described above, a smart system is one that can assess
a situation, determine if any responses are required and
then perform these responses. In this context, ‘smartness’
may be characterized by self-adaptability, self-sensing,
memory and decision making. Both active and passive
systems have been used in this context. Usually, active
sensors and actuators have been favored in designing
smart structures. This is based on the requirement to
generate the power required to perform responses. In
recent years, the concept of passive smartness has come
to the fore. Some characteristics of passive smartness
are that it is pervasive and continuous in the structure,
and there is no need for external intervention, and in
addition, there is no requirement for a power source. This
has a particular relevance to large-scale civil engineering
infrastructures. Passive smartness can be derived from
Structure
Control system
Sensors
Actuators
(PZT, PVDF, Fiber
optics, etc.)
(SMAS, PZT,
Magneto strictive, etc.)
Figure 1.1
Building blocks of a typical smart system.
Table 1.2
Purposes of the various components of a smart structure (adapted from Akhras [2].
Unit
Equivalent in biological
Purpose
Description
systems
Sensor
Tactile sensing
Data acquisition
Collect the required raw data
needed for appropriate
sensing and monitoring
Data bus 1
Sensory nerves
Data transmission
Forward the raw data to the local
and/or central command
and control units
Control system
Brain
Command and
control unit
Manage and control the whole
system by analyzing the data,
reaching the appropriate
conclusion and determining
the actions required
Data bus 2
Motor nerves
Data instructions
Transmit the decisions and the
associated instructions to the
members of the structure
Actuator
Muscles
Action devices
Take the action by triggering the
controlling devices/units
6
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

the unique intrinsic properties of the material used to
build the structure. One common example is an SMA
embedded in aerospace composites. Such structures are
designed to prevent crack propagation.
We will now try to deﬁne smartness by borrowing
some deﬁnitions from the observations of the Research
Theory and Development – Smart Adaptive Systems
(RTD – SAS) Technology Committee and the EUropean
Network on Intelligent TEchnologies (EUNITE) for
Smart Adaptive Systems in the context of artiﬁcial
intelligence, that ‘smart’ implies that intelligent techni-
ques must be involved in the adaptation of a system for it
to be considered a ‘smart adaptive system’ [3]. Accord-
ing to this, the accepted formal deﬁnition of ‘adaptive’
has three-levels of meanings, as follows:
(1) Adaptation to a changing environment
(2) Adaptation to a similar setting without explicitly
being ‘ported’ to it
(3) Adaptation to a new/unknown application.
In the ﬁrst case, the system must adapt itself to a drifting
(over time, space, etc.) environment, applying its intelli-
gence to recognize the changes and react accordingly.
This is probably the easiest concept of adaptation for
which examples abound, e.g. control of non-stationary
systems (drifting temperature).
In the second case, the emphasis is more on the change
of the environment itself rather than on a drift of some
features of the environment. Examples include systems
that must be ported from one situation to another without
explicitly changing any of their main parameters.
Another example could be aerospace structures built to
prevent crack formations and civil engineering structures
that can withstand earthquakes.
The third level is the most futuristic one, but several of
its research objectives have been addressed. For example,
in the ‘machine-learning’ ﬁeld, starting from very little
information on the problem, it is now possible to build a
system through incremental learning. Although this may
be the ultimate aim of most smart systems, such a level of
smartness has not been observed in any man-made
system.
1.1.2 Sensors, actuators, transducers
As discussed previously, smart systems should respond to
internal (intrinsic) and environmental (extrinsic) stimuli.
To do this, they should have sensors and actuators
embedded in them. Let’s ﬁrst look at the dictionary
meaning of these terms (Merriam Webster’s Dictionary
online [1]:
 Transducer A device that is actuated by power from
one system and supplies power, usually in another
form, to a second system.
 Sensor A device that responds to a physical stimulus
(as heat, light, sound, pressure, magnetism or a
particular motion) and transmits a resulting impulse
(as for measurement or operating a control).
 Actuator One that actuates, e.g. a mechanical device
for moving or controlling something.
Some of these devices commonly encountered in the
context of smart systems are listed in Table 1.3.
1.1.3 Micro electromechanical systems (MEMS)
The emphasis here is to reduce the overall size of the
system. Miniaturization can result in faster devices with
improved thermal management. Energy and materials
requirements during fabrication can be reduced signiﬁ-
cantly, thereby resulting in cost/performance advantages.
Arrays of devices are possible within a small space. This
has the potential for improved ‘redundancy’. Another
important advantage of miniaturization is the possibility
of integration with electronics, thereby simplifying sys-
tems and reducing the power requirements. Microfabri-
cation employed for realizing such devices has improved
reproducibility. The devices thus produced will have
Table 1.3
Some examples of sensors and actuators used in smart systems.
Device
Physical quantity
Example
Technology
Sensor
Acceleration
Accelerometer
PZT MEMS
Angular rate
Gyroscope
Fiber optic
Position
LVDT
Electromagnetic
Transducer
Crack detection
Ultrasonic transducer
PZT
Actuator
Movement
Thermal
Shape memory alloy
Introduction to Smart Systems
7

increased selectivity and sensitivity, a wider dynamic
range and improved accuracy and reliability.
Smart micro electromechanical systems (MEMS) refer
to collections of microsensors and actuators which can
sense their environments and have the ability to react to
changes in such environments with the use of a micro-
circuit control. They include, in addition to conventional
microelectronics packaging, integrating antenna struc-
tures for command signals into micro electromechanical
structures for desired sensing and actuating functions.
These systems may also need micro-power supply,
micro-relay and micro-signal processing units. Micro-
components make the systems faster, more reliable,
cheaper and capable of incorporating more complex
functions.
At the beginning of the 1990s, micro electromechani-
cal systems (MEMS) emerged with advancements made
in the development of integrated circuit (IC) fabrication
processes, by which sensors, actuators and control func-
tions are co-fabricated in silicon. Since then, remarkable
progress has been achieved in MEMS under strong
capital promotions from both government and industries.
In addition to the commercialization of some less-
integrated MEMS devices, such as micro-accelerometers,
inkjet printer heads, micro-mirrors for projection, etc.,
the concepts and feasibility of more complex MEMS
devices have been proposed and demonstrated for appli-
cations in such varied ﬁelds as microﬂuidics, aerospace,
biomedical, chemical analysis, wireless communications,
data storage, display, optics, etc. [4,5]. Some branches of
MEMS, appearing as micro-optoelectromechanical sys-
tems (MOEMS), micro-total analysis systems (mTAS),
etc., have attracted a great deal of research interests since
their potential applications market. By the end of the
1990s, most of the MEMS devices with various sensing
or actuating mechanisms were fabricated by using silicon
bulk
micromachining,
surface
micromachining
and
LIGA1 processes [6,7]. Three-dimensional microfabrica-
tion processes incorporating more materials have been
recently presented for MEMS when some speciﬁc appli-
cation requirements (e.g. biomedical devices) and micro-
actuators with higher output powers were called for
[4,8,9].
Micromachining has become the fundamental technol-
ogy for fabrication of MEMS devices and, in particular,
miniaturized
sensors
and
actuators.
Silicon
micro-
machining is the most mature of the micromachining
technologies and allows for the fabrication of MEMS that
have dimensions in the sub-millimeter range. It refers to
fashioning microscopic mechanical parts out of a silicon
substrate or on a silicon substrate, making the structures
three-dimensional and bringing new principles to the
designers. By employing materials such as crystalline
silicon, polycrystalline silicon and silicon nitride, etc., a
variety of mechanical microstructures, including beams,
diaphragms, grooves, oriﬁces, springs, gears, suspensions
and a great diversity of other complex mechanical
structures, has been conceived.
Silicon micromachining has been the key factor for the
fast progress of MEMS in the last decade of the 20th
Century. This refers to the fashioning of microscopic
mechanical parts out of silicon substrates and, more
recently, other materials. It is used to fabricate such
features as clamped beams, membranes, cantilevers,
grooves, oriﬁces, springs, gears, suspensions, etc. These
can be assembled to create a variety of sensors. Bulk
micromachining is the most commonly used method but
it is being replaced by surface micromachining which
offers
the
attractive
possibility
of
integrating
the
machined device with microelectronics which can be
patterned and assembled on the same wafer. Thus,
power supply circuitry and signal processing using
ASICs (Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits) can be
incorporated. It is the efﬁciency of creating several such
complete packages using existing technology that makes
this an attractive approach.
Micro devices can also be fabricated by using stereo
lithography of polymeric multifunctional structures.
Stereo lithography is a ‘poor man’s’ LIGA for fabricating
high-aspect-ratio MEMS devices in UV-curable semi-
conducting polymers. With proper doping, a semicon-
ducting polymer structure can be synthesized. By using
stereo lithography, it is now possible to make three-
dimensional microstructures of high aspect ratio. Ikuta
and
Hirowatari
[10]
demonstrated
that
a
three-
dimensional microstructure of polymers and metal is
feasible by using a process named the IH Process, also
known as Integrated Harden Polymer Stereo Lithogra-
phy. Using a UV light source, an XYZ-stage, a shutter,
lens and microcomputer, they have shown that micro
devices, such as spring, verious valve and electrostatic
microactuators, can be fabricated. In the case of difﬁculty
with the polymeric materials, some of these devices can
be micromachined in silicon and the system architecture
can be obtained by photoforming or hybrid processing
[11–13]. Photoforming or photofabrication employs an
optical method, such as stereo lithography, a photo mask
layering process and the IH process which involves
1LIGA – German acronyn for Lithographie, Galvanoformung,
Abformung (lithography, galvanoforming, molding).
8
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

solidiﬁcation of the photochemical resin by light expo-
sure. Takagi and Nakajima [14] proposed new concepts
of ‘combined architecture’ and ‘glue mechanism’ by
using the photoforming process to fabricate complicated
structures by combining components, each of them made
by its best fabrication process. Batch processing of such
hybrid silicon and polymer devices thus seems feasible.
The combined architecture may also result in sheets of
smart skins with integrated sensors and actuators at the
mm to mm scale. For some applications (say airfoil
surfaces), the smart skin substrate has to be ﬂexible to
conform to the airfoil shape and at the same time it has to
be compatible with the IC processing for sensor and
smart electronics integration. It has been proposed by
Carraway [15] that polyimide is an excellent material for
use as the skin because of its ﬂexibility and IC processing
compatibility. The control loop between the sensors and
actuators employs multifunctional materials which pro-
vide electrical functionality at selected locations using
conductive polymers and electrodes that are connected to
on-site antennas communicating with a central antenna.
A related and difﬁcult problem, and one which has been
largely unaddressed is the method for telemetry of the
data. In some applications, stresses and strains to which
the structure is subjected to may pose a problem for
conventional cabling. In others, environmental effects
may affect system performance. Advances in conformal
antenna technology coupled with MEMS sensors/actua-
tors appear to be an efﬁcient solution. The integration of
micromachining and microelectronics on one chip results
in so-called smart sensors. In the latter, small sensor
signals are ampliﬁed, conditioned and transformed into a
standard output format. They may include a micro
controller, digital signal processor, application speciﬁc
integrated circuit (ASIC), self test, self-calibration and
bus interface circuits simplifying their use and making
them more accurate and reliable.
Many basic MEMS devices have a diaphragm, micro-
bridge or cantilever structure. Special processing steps,
commonly known as micromachining, are needed to
fabricate these. For a given application, it may be
necessary to have integrated MEMS employing one or
more of the basic structures. These three structures
provide some feasible designs for microsensors and
actuators that eventually perform the desired task in
most smart structures. However, the main issues with
respect to implementing these structures are the choice of
materials and the micromachining technologies to fabri-
cate such devices.
To address the ﬁrst issue, we note that in all of the
three structures proposed the sensing and actuation occur
as a result of exciting a piezoelectric layer by the
application of an electric ﬁeld. This excitation brings
about sensing and actuation in the form of expansion in
the diaphragm, or in the free-standing beam in the
microbridge structure, or in the cantilever beam. In the
former two cases, the expansion translates into upward
curvature in the diaphragm or in the free-standing beam,
hence resulting in a net vertical displacement from the
unexcited equilibrium conﬁguration. In the cantilever
case, however, upon the application of an electric ﬁeld
the actuation occurs by a vertical upward movement of
the cantilever tip. Evidently, in all three designs the
material system structure of the active part (diaphragm,
free-standing beam or cantilever beam) in the microac-
tuator must comprise at least one piezoelectric layer as
well as conducting electrodes for the application of an
electric ﬁeld across this layer. Piezoelectric force is used
for actuation for many of the applications mentioned
above. Micromachining is employed to fabricate the
membranes, cantilever beams and resonant structures.
1.1.4 Control algorithms
As mentioned earlier, a smart system consists of a
sensor, an actuator and a control system. The desired
operations on a smart system are performed by an
actuator by taking the instructions given by the control
systems. These instructions are given to the actuator
using a suitable control law that is driven by a set of
control algorithms. The main objective of the control
system is to inject a control force onto the system to
perform the desired operation. These control forces can
be injected into the system by using the coupling
characteristics of smart materials. That is, for example,
if we use a PZT actuator, in the absence of any
mechanical disturbance, the passing of a voltage on
the actuator causes the smart system to expand (or
contract). These strains can be converted into forces to
perform the desired operations such as vibration reduc-
tions in structural systems, shape control of aerofoil
cross-sections in an aircraft, etc. The control algorithms
necessarily direct the type of operations that a system
has to perform to get the desired results.
The control law that drives a smart system could be
‘open-loop’ or ‘closed-loop’. In an open-loop system, the
system is injected with a known parameter (for example,
a known voltage in the case of a PZT actuator or a known
value of AC current in the case of a magnetostrictive
actuator) to generate the control forces for meeting the
target application. Such a control system is not suitable in
the real-world, wherein the uncertainties are so much that
Introduction to Smart Systems
9

it is not always possible to quantify the value of the
parameter that is required to meet the control objective.
As opposed to the open-loop control, closed-loop control
to a great extent can work better in a non-deterministic
framework. The closed-loop control can be of two cate-
gories, namely the ‘feed forward’ and ‘feed back’, wherein
the later is more easily realizable and hence extensively
used in real-world application.
A closed-loop control system can be designed in many
ways. The most common design essentially takes the
sensed response and feeds it back to the actuator to
obtain the desired control objective. The responses that
are fed back to the actuator in structural applications
could be displacements, velocities or accelerations. Such
a controller design is called a Proportional, Proportional-
Integral (PI) or Proportional-Integral-Differential (PID)
controller.
1.1.5 Modeling approaches
The development of mathematical model for analysis
depends on the following:
 The size of the smart system – Macro or micro
system.
 The type of applications, such as vibration control,
structural health monitoring etc.
 The constitutive behavior of the smart material,
namely linear or non-linear.
 The frequency content of the input loading, that is,
low-frequency or high-frequency loading.
 Small-deformation and large-deformation problems.
The most common method of modeling the macro
structure is by the well-established Finite Element
Method (FEM). This method can also handle effectively
the material and geometrical non-linearities. However,
FEM is limited to problems wherein the frequency
content of input excitation is band-limited. However for
problems involving, say, the structural health monitoring
of smart laminated composite structures, one has to inject
a pulse having a very high frequency content (of the
order of kHz and higher) to detect the presence of small
damages. This problem essentially transforms from a
dynamics to a wave-propagation problem. For such
problems, FEM is unsuitable from a computational view-
point due to the limitation that the element size should be
of the order of the wavelengths. In such situations, one
can use wave-based Spectral Element Modeling (SEM).
The main disadvantage with SEM, however, is that it is
not as versatile as FEM in modeling arbitrary geometries.
Hence, one has to judiciously choose the type of model-
ing to suit the problem on hand.
Modeling of a microsystem can also be handled by
FEM. Many researchers have designed many new MEMS
by using FEM. Modeling through techniques such as
FEM are based on a continuum analysis. However, one
has to clearly understand that beyond a certain size of the
system, the continuum analysis assumption breaks down.
In most MEMS devices that are reported in the literature,
the sizes are such that the continuum assumption does
hold and hence one can still use FEM to model these
devices.
1.1.6 Effects of scaling
For the modeling of nano-scale devices, one has to bring
in the effect of scale. Nano-scale devices are of the order
of 10–100 nanometers in size. In most cases, at these
sizes the continuum assumptions break down. A classic
example is the analysis of single-wall or multi-wall
carbon nanotubes. Analysis of such systems can be
performed either by molecular dynamic modeling or
quasi-continuum modeling, although there are a few
reports that state that the results of continuum modeling
are reasonable.
The effects of scale become more profound when these
nanotubes are embedded in, say, composites. It is well
known that these nanotubes have enormous stiffness and
hence can resist the deformation signiﬁcantly. This
cannot be effectively captured if one resorts to single-
scale modeling. Therefore, one should adopt a multi-
scale modeling approach. That is, in a small region of the
nanotubes, one has to adopt a nano-scale modeling
approach, such as a molecular dynamics model, and
‘lump’ the effects of this onto a macro-model of the
composites. Multi-scale modeling is an open area of
research worldwide and many researchers are working
towards breaking the size barrier and to come up with an
effective way of incorporating the effects of scale on the
modeling technique.
1.1.7 Optimization schemes
Optimization schemes forms an essential part in the
modeling of a smart system. These schemes are neces-
sary whenever constraints arise in designing a smart
system. Most of the smart sensors/actuators are very
expensive and these have to be located judiciously on
the system, keeping cost in mind and at the same time
maximizeing the efﬁciency of the system by meeting the
required control objective.
10
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

For all optimization problems, an objective function is
required. For example, for the placement of sensors and
actuators in a structure, the main objective is to increase
the sensitivity of the sensors. This sensitivity can be
increased if it can effectively measure higher strains (and
hence the stresses). Thus, the objective function for this
problem will be to locate regions of higher strains and
minimum stress gradients.
There are two major optimization schemes that are
reported in the literature. One is the gradient-based
optimization, where the assumption is made that the
optimal solution to the problem lies in a space
wherein the gradient of a variable (such as displace-
ment, strains, stress, etc.) is minimum. This is the most
common approach. The second approach is based on
a genetic algorithm, wherein all probable solutions
are assumed and eliminated by using the concept of
Darwin’s Theory of Evolution, namely ‘survival of the
ﬁttest’.
1.2 EVOLUTION OF SMART MATERIALS
AND STRUCTURES
The ﬁeld of smart materials and structures is interdisci-
plinary between science and technology and combines
the knowledge of physics, mathematics, chemistry, com-
puter sciences, with material, electrical and mechanical
engineering. It implements human creativity and innova-
tive ideas to serve human society for such tasks as
making a safer car, a more comfortable airplane, a self-
repair water pipe, etc. Smart structures can help us to
control the environment better and to increase the energy
efﬁciency of devices.
Smart structures are usually systems containing
multifunctional components that can perform sensing,
control and actuation. Key materials used to construct
these structures are called smart materials. The ‘smart-
ness’ of these is gauged by their responsiveness (large
change in amplitude) and agility (speed of response).
Materials used in these applications may include
single-phase or functional composite materials, and
smart structures.
Single-phase materials used in this context have
one or more large anomalies associated with phase-
transition phenomena. Functional composites are gen-
erally designed to use nonfunctional materials to
enhance functional materials or to combine several
functional materials to make a multifunctional compo-
site. Examples include donor-doped BaTiO3 ceramics
that are typically used for sensing temperature.
A magnetic probe is a multifunctional composite in
which a magnetostrictive material is integrated with a
piezoelectric material to produce a large magnetoelectric
effect. The magnetostrictive material will produce shape
deformation under a magnetic ﬁeld, and this shape
deformation produces a stress on the piezoelectric mate-
rial which generates electric charge.
As mentioned earlier, smart structures involve sen-
sors, actuators and a control system. Apart from the use
of better functional materials as sensors and actuators,
an important part of a ‘smarter’ structure is to develop
an optimized control algorithm that could guide the
actuators to perform required functions after sensing
changes.
Active damping is one of the most studied areas
using smart structures. A number of active damping
schemes with guaranteed stability have been developed
by using collocated actuators and sensors (i.e. physi-
cally located at the same place and energetically con-
jugated,
such
as
force
and
displacement).
These
schemes are categorized on the basis of feedback type
in the control procedure, i.e. velocity, displacement or
acceleration.
Although several natural materials (such as piezoelec-
tric, electrostrictive and magnetostrictive materials) are
classiﬁed as smart materials, these usually have limited
amplitude responses and must be operated in a limited
temperature range. Chemical and mechanical methods
may be used to tailor their properties for a particular
smart structure design.
The shape memory effect in materials was ﬁrst
observed in the 1930s by Arne Olander while working
with an alloy of gold and cadmium. This Au–Cd alloy
was plastically deformed when cold but returned to its
original conﬁguration when heated. The shape memory
properties of nickel–titanium alloys were discovered in
the early 1960s. Although pure nickel–titanium has
very low ductility in the martensitic phase, the proper-
ties can be modiﬁed signiﬁcantly by the addition of
a small amount of a third element. These groups of
alloys are known as NitinolTM (Nickel–Titanium-
Naval-Ordnance-Laboratories). Ni–Ti SMAs are less
expensive, easier to work with and less hazardous
than previous SMAs.
Commercial products based on SMAs began to appear
in the 1970s. Initial applications for these materials were
in static devices such as pipe ﬁttings. Later SMA devices
have also been used in sensors and actuators. In order to
perform well in these devices, the SMA must experience
a cycle of heating, cooling and deformation within a
short time span.
Introduction to Smart Systems
11

Ferroelectric SMAs offer the possibility of introdu-
cing strain magnetically. This effect was discovered in
the 1990s on SMAs with high magnetocrystalline
anisotropy and high magnetic moment (e.g. Ni2MnGa).
These materials produce strain of up to 6 % at room
temperature.
The piezoelectric effect was initially observed by
Pierre and Jacques Curie in 1880. They discovered a
connection between the macroscopic piezoelectric phe-
nomena and the crystallographic structure in crystals of
sugar and Rochelle salt. The reverse effect of materials
producing strain when subjected to an electric ﬁeld was
ﬁrst mathematically deduced from fundamental thermo-
dynamic principles by Lippmann in 1881. Several natu-
rally occurring materials were shown to display these
effects. Nickel sonar transducers using this effect came to
be used in the World War I.
This application triggered intense research and devel-
opment into a variety of piezoelectric (ceramic) formula-
tions and shapes. Since then, several sonar transducers,
circuits, systems and materials have been reported. The
second generation of piezoelectric applications was
developed during World War II. It was discovered that
certain ceramic materials, known as ‘ferroelectrics’,
showed dielectric constants up to 100 times larger than
common-cut crystals and exhibited similar improvements
in piezoelectric properties. Soon, the barium titanate and
lead zirconate titanate families of piezoceramics were
developed. Some of these began to be used in structural
health monitoring and vibration damping. Polymeric
materials, such as poly (vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF),
have also been shown to exhibit similar characteristics.
Intense research is still going on to produce useful and
reasonably priced actuators, which are low in power
consumption and high in reliability and environmental
ruggedness.
The electrostrictive effect is similar to piezoelectri-
city and converts the electrical pulse into a mechanical
output;
yet
electrostriction
is
caused
by
electric
polarization and has a quadratic dependence. The
main difference between electrostrictive and piezoelec-
tric materials is that the former doesn’t show sponta-
neous polarization and hence no hysteresis, even at
very high frequencies. Electrostriction occurs in all
materials, but the induced strain is usually too small
to be utilized practically. Electrostrictive ceramics,
based on a class of materials known as ‘relaxor
ferroelectrics’, show strains comparable to those of
piezoelectric
materials
(strain
 0.1 %)
and
have
already
found
application
in
many
commercial
systems. New materials such as carbon nanotubes
have also been shown to have signiﬁcant electrostric-
tive properties.
The magnetostrictive effect was ﬁrst reported in iron
in the 1840s by James P. Joule. The inverse effect was
discovered later by Villari. Other materials, such as
cobalt and nickel, also showed small strains. Some of
the ﬁrst sonars were built on this principle. Large-scale
commercialization of this effect began with the discovery
of ‘giant’ magnetostriction in rare-earth alloys during the
1960s. These showed 0.2–0.7 % strain, which is two
orders of magnitude higher than nickel. An alloy of
these materials, ‘Terfenol-D’ (named after its constitu-
ents, terbium, iron and dysprosium, and place of inven-
tion, the Naval Ordnance Laboratory (NOL) exhibits
relatively large strains (0.16–0.24 %) at room tempera-
ture and at relatively small applied ﬁelds. Terfenol-D has
now become the leading magnetostrictive material for
engineering use. The development of polymer matrix
Terfenol-D particulate composites has further overcome
some of the limitations of ‘pure’ Terfenol-D.
‘Field-responsive’ ﬂuids were also known to exist
since the 19th Century. The effective viscosity of some
pure insulating liquids was found to increase when an
electric ﬁeld is applied. This phenomenon, originally
termed the ‘electro-viscous effect’, later came to be
called the electro-rheological (ER) effect. These materi-
als usually consist of suspensions of solid semiconduct-
ing materials (e.g. gelatin) in low-viscosity insulating oils
(e.g. silicone oil).
In
some
ER
compositions,
both
Coulomb
and
viscous damping can be achieved so that a vibration
damper can be fabricated. The limitations of most ER
ﬂuids include the relative low yield stress and its
temperature-dependence, the sensitivity of ER ﬂuids to
impurities (which may alter the polarization mechan-
isms) and the need for high-voltage power supplies
(which are relatively expensive).
The magnetorheological (MR) effect was discovered
by J. Rabinow in the late 1940s. However, due to
some difﬁculties in using MR ﬂuids in actual appli-
cations, these have not yet become popular. One of
the difﬁculties was the low ‘quality’ of the early MR
ﬂuids which caused the inability of the particles to
remain suspended in the carrier liquid. Recently, MR
ﬂuids have found new potential in engineering appli-
cations (e.g. vibration control), due to their higher
yield stress and the lower voltage requirement (com-
pared to ER ﬂuids). These have also been commercially
exploited for an active suspension system for auto-
mobiles
and
controllable
ﬂuid
brakes
for
ﬁtness
equipment.
12
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

1.3 APPLICATION AREAS FOR SMART
SYSTEMS
Developments in the areas of smart materials and struc-
tural systems have centered around the natural human
instinct of ‘mimicking nature’. Although the technology
is yet far from this goal, several systems with consumer,
aerospace and military applications have been produced
in recent years. As one can imagine, new possibilities
emerge as time goes by. Hence, readers are cautioned
that the items described below should not be construed as
representing an exhaustive list.
Reduction of vibrations in sporting goods. To increase
the users’ comfort, several new smart sporting goods
(e.g. tennis rackets, golf clubs, baseball bats, skis, etc.)
are available on the market.
Noise control in vehicles. Composites of piezoelectric
ceramic ﬁbers are used reduce noise in vehicles, shaking
in helicopter rotor blades or vibrations in air conditioner
fans and automobile dashboards.
Aerospace
applications.
Demonstrated
aerospace
applications of smart structures include the spatial high
accuracy position encoding and control system (SHAPE-
CONS) and Frangibolt (used to deploy solar arrays,
antennas and satellites from a launch vehicle) in the
Clementine mission.
In addition, several military applications have been
envisaged for smart materials and structures. In the
battleﬁeld, soldiers may wear clothing made of special
tactile material that can detect signals from the human
body to determine bullet wounds. This information can
then be used to analyze the nature of the wound, decide
on the urgency to react and possibly take some action to
stabilize the situation.
There are several potential locations for the use of
smart materials and structures in aircraft. Ground, marine
or space smart vehicles will be a feature of future military
operations. These manned or unmanned carriage systems,
equippedwithsensors,actuatorsandsophisticatedcontrols,
can improve surveillance and target identiﬁcation and
improve battleﬁeld awareness. These smart vehicles
could even be constructed using stealth technologies for
their own protection. The B-2 stealth bomber or the F-117
stealth ﬁghter are good examples of this technology.
Smart systems are also needed for the quick and reliable
identiﬁcation of space or underwater stealth targets. Smart
systems may also be used to improve the performance of
otherwise ‘dumb’ systems. Examples of applications in
many diverse areas are presented in Table 1.4.
In the future, it may even be possible to develop
structures that are smart enough to communicate directly
with the human brain using MEMS-based devices. Smart
noses, tongues, etc. have already been developed by
various groups. Newer sensors may even extend human
sensing capabilities, such as by enabling us to detoct
more scents, hear beyond our normal frequency range,
and see what we cannot normally see (using IR). There is
also signiﬁcant scope for developing newer capabilities
in the domain of smart structures. It can be expected that
we will see further smarter materials and structures being
developed in the near future.
1.4 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
This book is divided into ﬁfteen chapters, describing
fundamentals, design principles, modeling techniques,
fabrication methods and applications of smart material
systems and MEMS. The ﬁrst two chapters of the
book deal with the fundamental concepts of smart
systems and their constituent components. Preliminary
concepts of these materials will be introduced, along with
important characteristics expected of them, in Chapter 2.
In the second part of the book, the design principles
for sensors and actuators are discussed in detail. Here,
we ﬁrst begin with the design philosophy behind some
commonly available sensors, such as accelerometers,
gyroscopes, pressure sensors and chemical and biosen-
sors. The design issues of bulk sensors made from
piezoelectric, magnetostrictive and ferroelectric materi-
als are also given in Chapter 3. This is followed
(Chapter 4) by the basic design principles of several
actuators. Chapter 5 is devoted to examples describing
the design principles of sensors and actuators, wherein
the
principles
behind
developing
components
with
SMAs, piezoelectric, electrostrictive and magnetostric-
tive materials are given.
Chapters 6–9 dwell on a detailed account of modeling
of smart systems. First, the theory of elasticity and
composites are introduced, which serve as prerequisites
for the advanced techniques that follow. Next, the com-
plete theory and application of ﬁnite element (FE)
modeling is given, including an introduction to varia-
tional methods, various element formulations and equa-
tion solutions for both discretized statics and dynamics
equations of motion in Chapter 7. Following this, the
basic concepts of wave propagation and spectral ﬁnite
element modeling is introduced, which are used to study
wave propagation in isotropic and composite structures.
This is followed, in Chapter 8, by the modeling of smart
sensors and actuators, where the approach is demon-
strated by using a number of examples. The last chapter
Introduction to Smart Systems
13

Table 1.4
Applications of smart systems in various areas.
Application
System
Use
Machine tools
Piezoceramic transducers
To control ‘chatter’ and thereby improve
precisioln and increase productivity
Photolithography
Vibration control during the process
using piezoceramic transducers
In the manufacture of smaller
microelectronic circuits
Process control
Shape memory alloys
For shape control, e.g. in aerodynamic
surfaces
Health Monitoring
Fiber-optic sensors
To monitor the ‘health’ of ﬁber-
reinforced ceramics and metal–matrix
composites and in structural
composites
Consumer electronics
Piezoceramic and MEMS accelerometers
and rotation-rate sensors; quartz,
piezoceramic and ﬁber-optic gyros;
piezoceramic transducers
For shake-stabilization of hand-held
video cameras
Helicopters and
aircraft
Piezoceramic stack actuators; PZT
and MEMS accelerometers;
magnetostrictive mounts
Vibration and twist control of
helicopter rotor blades and
adaptive control of
aircraft control surfaces
Piezoceramic pick-ups and error
sensors; PZT audio resonators and
analog voice coils; digital signal
processor chips
Active noise control
Submarines
Piezoceramic actuators
Acoustic signature suppression of
submarine hulls
Automotive
Electrochromics (sol–gel, sputtered
and vacuum-evaporated oxides;
solution-phase reversible organic redox
systems); suspended particles;
dispersed liquid crystals; reversible
electrodeposition
Chromogenic mirrors and windows
Piezo yaw-axis rotation sensors
(antiskid, antilock braking); ceramic
ultrasonic ‘radar’ (collision avoidance,
parking assist); MEMS accelerometers
(air bag controls); electronic stability
controls (four-wheel independent
auto braking)
Piezopolymer IR sensors; rain
monitors; occupant identiﬁcation;
HVAC sensors; air pollution sensors
(CO and NOx)
Smart comfort control systems
In Buildings
IR, vision and ﬁber-optic
sensors and communications
systems
For improved safety, security and energy
control systems; smart windows to
reduce heating, ventilation and air
conditioning costs
14
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

in this part (Chapter 9) deals with control techniques
required for smart actuation.
Next, we present a complete ‘bird’s eye view’ of the
various fabrication techniques used for both bulk and
microsensors and actuators. Building on the fundamental
concepts from the earlier chapters, details of the bulk and
surface micromachining concepts for the silicon-based
processing of MEMS sensors and actuators are presented
in Chapter 10. The techniques used to fabricate polymer-
based systems, such as microstereolithography and
micromolding, are also included in Chapter 11, opening
up new opportunities, especially with regard to 3-dimen-
sional microstructures. Due to their delicate nature, these
microstructures are required to be packaged and inte-
grated with the electronics. Chapter 12 is devoted
entirely to these aspects. In addition, several examples
of sensors and actuators fabricated by the above routes
are included in Chapter 13.
The last two chapters of this book deal with some
practical applications where smart technologies includ-
ing microsystems are used to solve some real-world
problems. Implementation issues in structural, vibration
and noise-control applications are described in Chapters
14 and 15.
REFERENCES
1. Merrium
Websters
Dictionary:
[Website:
http://www.
m-w.com/cgi-bin/mwwod.pl
2. G. Akhras, ‘Smart materials and smart systems for the future’,
Canadian Military Journal, 1(3), 25–31 (Autumn 2000).
3. EUNITE: [Website: http://www.eunite.org/eunite.index.htm
4. H. Fujita, ‘Future of actuators and microsystems’, Sensors
and Actuators, A56, 105–111 (1996).
5. H. Fujita, ‘Microactuators and micromachines’, Proceedings
of the IEEE, 86, 1721–1732 (1998).
6. G.T.A. Kovacs, N.I. Maluf and K.E. Petersen, ‘Bulk micro-
machining of silicon’, Proceedings of the IEEE, 86 1536–
1551 (1998).
7. J.M. Bustillo, R.T. Howe and R.S. Muller, ‘Surface micro-
machining for microelectromechanical systems’, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 86, 1552–1574 (1998).
8. V.K. Varadan, X. Jiang. and V.V. Varadan, Microstereolitho-
graphy and other Fabrication Techniques for 3D MEMS,
John Wiley & Sons (2001).
9. G. Thornell and S. Johansson, ‘Microprocessing at the
ﬁngertips’, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineer-
ing, 8, 251–262 (1998).
10. K. Ikuta and K. Hirowatari, ‘Real three-dimensional micro-
fabrication using stereolithography and metal modling’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE: MEMS’93, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 42–47 (1993).
11. V.K. Varadan (Ed.), Smart Electronics: SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 2448, Bellingham, WA, USA (1995).
12. J. Tani and M. Esashi (Eds), Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Symposium on Microsystems, Intelligent Materials
and Robots, Tohoku University, Japan (1995).
13. V.K. Varadan, and V.V. Varadan, ‘Three-dimensional poly-
meric and ceramic MEMS and their applications’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 2722, 156–164 (1996).
14. T. Tatagi and N. Nakajima, ‘Photoforming applied to ﬁne
machining’, in Proceedings of the IEEE: MEMS’93, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 173–178 (1993).
15. D.L. Carraway, ‘The use of silicon microsensors in smart skins
for aerodynamic research’ in Proceedings of the International
Congress on Instrumentation in Aerospace Simulation Facil-
ities, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 413–422 (1991).
Table 1.4
(Continued )
Application
System
Use
Biomechanical and
biomedical systems
Shape memory alloys and polymer
gels
To develop artiﬁcial muscles; active
control of in vivo drug-delivery
devices (insulin pumps)
Piezoceramic and other ultrasonic
sensors and actuators
Catheter guide wires; surgical tools;
imaging devices
Computer industry
Piezoceramic and MEMS
accelerometers and rotation rate
sensors; quartz, piezoceramic and
ﬁber-optic gyros
For smart read/write head micropositioners
in next-generation data storage devices
bimorph-type piezo-positioner and
asperity-detector arms
For high-density disk drives
Piezo-accelerometers to provide
error-anticipating signals
To correct for head-motion-related
read/write errors
Introduction to Smart Systems
15

2
Processing of Smart Materials
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Smart microsystems are a collection of microsensors and
actuators which can sense their environment and have the
ability to react to changes in that environment with the
use of a microcircuit control. The system may also need
micro-power supply and microelectronics for signal
processing. These components make the system efﬁcient,
faster, more reliable, cheaper, less power consuming and
capable of incorporating more complex functions. Yet,
the critical functional components of smart systems are
sensors and actuators. A number of novel materials have
been developed in recent years for use in these compo-
nents.
Silicon-based micro-fabrication has been the key
factor for the rapid developments in MEMS. During
the 1980s, micro electromechanical systems (MEMS)
spun off from the developments in integrated circuit
(IC) fabrication processes, enabling co-fabrication of
sensors, actuators and control functions on silicon chips.
Since then, remarkable research advances have been made
in this area. Presently, most MEMS devices are fabri-
cated by bulk micromachining, surface micromachining,
and LIGA processes on silicon wafers [1–3]. Three-
dimensional micro-fabrication processes, incorporating
layers of more materials, were recently reported for
MEMS in some speciﬁc application areas (e.g. biome-
dical devices) and micro-actuators with higher output
powers [4–9]. Many micro devices are also fabricated by
using semiconductor processing technologies or stereo
lithography on the polymeric multifunctional structures
[10,11]. The combined architecture may also result in
sheets of ‘smart skins’ with integrated sensors and
actuators at the mm to mm scale. For example, in airfoil
surfaces, the smart skin substrate has to be ﬂexible enough
to conform to the airfoil shape and at the same time
compatible with the IC processing procedure for sensor
and smart electronics integration.
A knowledge of the relevant properties of materials is
essential in establishing their role in various devices.
MEMS materials include metals, semiconductors, cera-
mics, polymers and composites. Some of the common
materials which are used are listed in Table 2.1. In
several MEMS devices, substrates are primarily used
for mechanical support only. In many others, these
facilitate IC compatibility. Thin ﬁlm materials can have
several roles in micro systems. For example, they could
form structural or sacriﬁcial layers in surface microma-
chined components. Dielectric thin ﬁlms are usually
polymeric, ceramic or silicon-based materials. In general,
these thin ﬁlm materials can have multiple functions. For
example, ‘poly-silicon’ and metal ﬁlms are used as
conductors (layouts/electrodes), as well as structural
layers. Sometimes, the same material may have opposing
functions in different devices. For example, SiO2 is
usually used as a sacriﬁcial material but it is also used
as a structural or etch stop layer in other cases. Some of
these terminologies will be deﬁned later in this chapter,
while the chapter in general focuses on introducing some
well-known processing approaches for these materials.
2.2 SEMICONDUCTORS AND THEIR
PROCESSING
Semiconductor substrates are essential starting points in
the fabrication of MEMS-based smart microsystems.
Their electrical properties are essential in ‘building’ the
necessary electronics, while their mechanical properties
allow fabrication of several structural components. Semi-
conductors are commonly inorganic materials, often
made from elements in the fourth column (Group IV)
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

of the Periodic Table. The most important among these
elements is silicon, since this can be modiﬁed in several
ways to change its electrical, mechanical and optical
properties. The use of silicon in solid-state electronics
and microelectronics has shown a spectacular growth
since the early 1970s. Other semiconductor materials,
from Group IV elements in the Periodic Table, are
germanium and carbon (diamond). Semiconductor mate-
rials can also be made from a combination of elements
from either Group III and Group Vor Group II and Group
VI. Examples of these ‘compound semiconductors’ are
gallium arsenide and zinc telluride.
The name ‘semiconductor’ is given to these materials
because at certain regimes of temperatures they are able
to exhibit good electrical conduction properties, while
outside of these temperature regimes they behave as
insulators. The crystal structures of semiconductors are
explained based on the cubic crystalline system. In the
diamond lattice, each atom has four nearest neighbors. In
GaAs, one of the two arrays is composed entirely of Ga
atoms, while the other array is composed of As atoms.
This particular class of the diamond structure is called
the zinc blende structure. In both elemental and com-
pound semiconductors, there is an average of four
valence electrons per atom. Each atom is thus held in
the crystal by four covalent bonds with two electrons
participating in each bond. In a ‘perfect’ semiconductor
crystal at a temperature of absolute zero, the number of
available electrons would exactly ﬁll the inner atomic
shells and the covalent bonds. At temperatures above
absolute zero, some of these electrons gain enough
thermal energy to break loose from these covalent
bonds and become free electrons. The latter are respon-
sible for electrical conduction across the semiconductor
crystal. The physical properties of some selected semi-
conductor crystals are given in Table 2.2.
By themselves, these semiconductors are of little use
in electronics and are usually doped with donor and
acceptor impurities for the fabrication of active com-
ponents and circuits. Semiconductor materials are said
to be ‘doped’ when traces of impurities are added to
them. These doped semiconductors are referred to as
extrinsic semiconductors, in contrast to intrinsic (undoped)
semiconductor materials. Diffusion and ion implanta-
tion are the two key processes used to introduce con-
trolled amounts of dopants into semiconductors. These
two processes are used to selectively dope the semicon-
ductor substrate to produce either an n-type or a p-type
region.
Table 2.1
Materials used in MEMS
and microelectronics.
Functional class
Type of material
Example
Substrate
Semiconductor
Si, GaAs,
InP
Ceramic
MgO, alumina,
sapphire
Plastic
Plexiglass
Glass
—
Thin ﬁlms
Dielectric
SiO2, Si3N4,
PMMA
Metal
Al, Au, Ag, Pd,
Pt, Cu, Ti;
alloys
Functional
PZT, STO, BST
ceramic
Semiconductor
Si
Poly-silicon
—
Packages
Plastic
—
Ceramic
—
Metal
—
Table 2.2
Typical physical properties of some common semiconductors.
Property
Crystalline silicon
Poly-silicon
Germanium
GaAs
Density (kg/m3)
2330
2320
5350
5316
Melting point (C)
1410
—
937
1238
Electrical conductivity (103  S/cm)
4  103
1
3  105
105
Energy band gap (eV)
1.1
1.1
0.67
1.35
Thermal conductivity (W/m/K)
168
150
60
370
Dielectric constant
11.7
—
16.3
12
Young’s modulus (GPa)
190
161
—
—
18
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Apart from being the most important material for
microelectronics and integrated circuit technology, sili-
con and its compounds and their technologies are the
‘cornerstones’ for MEMS and nanofabrication. For this
reason, we will be concentrating on silicon and using it to
demonstrate the general properties of semiconductor mate-
rials. Table 2.3 lists the relevant mechanical, electrical and
thermal properties of single-crystalline silicon. It may be
recalled that silicon has several sensory properties. For
example, it exhibits piezo resistivity, thermal variation and
optical properties. In addition, silicon also has excellent
mechanical properties. For example, Si has a better yield
strength than steel, a lower density than aluminum, a better
hardness than steel, and a Young’s modulus approaching
that of steel.
2.2.1 Silicon crystal growth from the melt
To demonstrate the methods of growing semiconductors,
we will consider the crystal growth of silicon in detail
ﬁrst. Basically, the technique used for silicon crystal
growth from the melt is the Czochralski technique.
This starts from a pure form of sand (SiO2), known as
quartzite, which is placed in a furnace with different
carbon-releasing materials, such as coal and coke. Sev-
eral reactions then take place inside the furnace and the
net reaction that results in silicon is as follows:
SiC þ SiO2 ! Si þ SiO ðgasÞ þ CO ðgasÞ
ð2:1Þ
The silicon so-produced is known as metallurgical-grade
silicon (MGS) which contains up to 2 % of impurities.
Subsequently, the silicon is treated with hydrogen chloride
to form trichlorosilane (SiHCl3):
Si þ 3HCl ! SiHCl3 ðgasÞ þ H2 ðgasÞ
ð2:2Þ
SiHCl3 is a liquid at room temperature. Fractional
distillation of the SiHCl3 removes the impurities and the
puriﬁed liquid is reduced in a hydrogen atmosphere to
yield electronic-grade silicon (EGS) by the following
reaction:
SiHCl3 þ H2 ! Si þ 3HCl
ð2:3Þ
EGS is a polycrystalline material of remarkably high
purity and is used as the raw material for preparing high-
quality Si wafers. The Czochralski technique employs
the apparatus shown in Figure 2.1. To grow a crystal,
the EGS is placed in the crucible and the furnace is heated
above the melting temperature of silicon. An appropriately
oriented seed crystal (e.g. [100]) is suspended over the
crucible in a seed holder. The seed is then lowered into
the melt. Part of it melts but the tip of the remaining
seed crystal still touches the liquid surface. The seed is
next gently withdrawn, and progressive freezing at the
Table 2.3
Electrical, mechanical and thermal
properties of crystalline silicon.
Property
Parameter
Value
Electrical
Minority-
30–300 ms
carrier lifetime
Resistivity
0:005–50  cm
(B-doped)
Resistivity
1–50  cm
(P-doped)
Resistivity
0:005–10  cm
(Sb-doped)
Mechanical
Density
2.3 gm/cm3
Dislocations
< 500/cm2
Yield strength
7  109 N/m2
Young’s modulus
1:9  1011 N/m2
Thermal
Thermal
1.57 W/cm C
conductivity
Thermal
2:33  106/C
expansion
Figure 2.1
Schematic of the Czochralski crystal puller: CW,
clockwise; CCW, counter-clockwise.
Processing of Smart Materials
19

solid–liquid interface yields a large single crystal. Absolute
control of temperatures and pull rate is required for high-
quality crystals. A typical pull rate is a few millimeters per
minute.
High-resistivity silicon can only be produced by
using the ﬂoat-zone crystal growth method, which does
not use a crucible during crystal growth. However, the
Czochralski method does use a quartz crucible during
crystal growth and oxygen from the crucible unintention-
ally dopes the material. The oxygen dopant behaves
as an n-type impurity and impedes high resistivity. The
ﬂoat-zone method is usually carried out in an inert gaseous
atmosphere, keeping a polycrystalline rod and a seed
crystal vertically face-to-face. Both are partially melted
by high-frequency inductive heating at the (molten-zone)
liquid phase. This molten zone is gradually moved
upwards while rotating the seed crystal until the entire
polycrystalline rod has been converted in to a single
crystal. This process has the advantage that there is no
physical contact with the crucible. This method is difﬁ-
cult to carry out for producing large wafer sizes and is
thus less used.
After a crystal is grown, the seed is removed from the
other end of the ingot, which is then left to solidify. Next,
the surface is ground so that the diameter of the material
is deﬁned. After this, one or more ﬂat regions are ground
along the length of the ingot to mark the speciﬁc crystal
orientation of the ingot and the ‘conductivity type’ of the
material (Figure 2.2). Finally, the ingot is sliced by a
diamond saw into wafers. Such slicing determines four
wafer parameters, i.e. surface orientation, thickness,
taper (which is deﬁned as the variation in wafer thickness
from one end to another) and bow (i.e. surface curvature
of the wafer, measured from the center of the wafer to its
edge).
2.2.2 Epitaxial growth of semiconductors
In many situations, it may not be feasible to start with a
silicon substrate to build a smart system. Instead, one
could start with other possibilities and grow silicon ﬁlms
on the substrate by epitaxial deposition to ‘build the
necessary electronics’. The method for growing a silicon
layer on a substrate wafer is known as an epitaxial
process where the substrate wafer acts as the seed crystal.
Epitaxial processes are different from crystal growth
from the melt in that the epitaxial layer can be grown
at a temperature much lower than the melting point.
Among various epitaxial processes, vapor phase epitaxy
(VPE) is the most common.
A schematic of the VPE apparatus is given in Figure 2.3,
and shows a horizontal susceptor made from graphite
blocks. The susceptor mechanically supports the wafer
and being an induction-heated reactor it also serves as
the source of thermal energy for the reaction.
Several silicon sources can be used, e.g. silicon tetra-
chloride (SiCl4), dichlorosilane (SiH2Cl2), trichlorosilane
(SiHCl3) and silane (SiH4). The typical reaction tempera-
ture for silicon tetrachloride is 1200 C. The overall
reaction, in the case of silicon tetrachloride, is reduction
by hydrogen, as follows:
SiCl4 ðgasÞ þ 2H2 ðgasÞ ! Si ðsolidÞ þ 4HCl ðgasÞ
ð2:4Þ
A competing reaction which occurs simultaneously is:
SiCl4 ðgasÞ þ Si ðsolidÞ ! 2SiCl2 ðgasÞ
ð2:5Þ
In Equation (2.4), silicon is deposited on the wafer,
whereas in Equation (2.5) silicon is removed (etched).
Therefore, if the concentration of SiCl4 is excessive,
etching rather than growth of silicon will take place.
An alternative epitaxial process for silicon layer growth
is molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) which is an epitaxial
process involving the reaction of a thermal beam of silicon
atoms with a silicon wafer surface under ultra-high vacuum
conditions (1010 torr). MBE can achieve precise con-
trol in both chemical composition and impurity proﬁles
when introduced intentionally. Single-crystal multilayer
p-type
[111]
p-type
[100]
n-type
[100]
n-type
[111]
Primary flat  
(in all types)
Secondary flat
90°
45°
180°
Figure 2.2
Crystal orientation and dopant types in commercial
silicon wafers.
Gas flow
RF heating
To vent
Gas inlets
Wafers
Susceptor
Figure 2.3
Schematic of the vapour phase epitaxy process used
to produce silicon layers.
20
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

structures with dimensions of the order of atomic
layers can be made by using MBE. The solid source
materials are placed in evaporation cells to provide an
angular distribution of atoms or molecules in a beam.
The substrate is heated to the necessary temperature
and is often continuously rotated to improve the growth
homogeneity.
2.3 METALS AND METALLIZATION
TECHNIQUES
Metals are used in MEMS and microelectronics due to
their good conductivities, both thermal and electrical.
Metals are somewhat strong and ductile at room tem-
perature and maintain good strength, even at elevated
temperatures. Hence, they could also be used to form
useful structures.
While thin metal ﬁlms have been used in IC chips for a
long time (primarily due to their electrical conductiv-
ities), thick metal ﬁlm structures are required for some
MEMS devices [12]. Thick metal ﬁlms are generally
used as structural materials in MEMS devices or as mold
inserts for polymers in ceramic micromolding. Micro-
electroplating and photoforming are used to build such
thick metal structures [13,14]. Nickel, copper and gold
can be electroplated to form these thick ﬁlms, while
three-dimensional stainless steel micro-parts can be fab-
ricated by a process known as photoforming [8]. However,
in most instances a layer of metal is ﬁrst deposited by a
process known as metallization.
Metallization is a process whereby metal ﬁlms are
formed on the surface of a substrate. These metallic ﬁlms
are used for interconnections, ohmic contacts, etc.
Hence, their continuity, uniformity and surface properties
are critical in the device performance. Metal ﬁlms can be
formed by using various methods, with the most impor-
tant being physical vapor deposition (PVD). The latter is
performed under vacuum by using either an evaporation
or sputtering technique. In these, physical mechanisms,
such as evaporation or impact, are used as the means of
deposition – unlike in CVD where a chemical reaction is
taking place under ‘favorable conditions’. In evaporation,
atoms are removed from the source by thermal energy
while in sputtering, the impact of gaseous ions is the
cause of such removal.
The evaporation rate is a function of the vapor pressure
of the metal. Hence, metals that have a low melting
point (e.g. 660 C for aluminum) are easily evaporated,
whereas refractory metals require much higher tempera-
tures (e.g. 3422 C for tungsten) and can cause damage to
polymeric or plastic samples. In general, evaporated
ﬁlms are highly disordered and have large residual
stresses; thus, only thin layers of the metal can be
evaporated. The chemical purity of the evaporated ﬁlms
depends on the level of impurities in the source and
contamination of the source from the heater, crucible or
support materials and are also due to residual gases
within the chamber [14]. In addition, the deposition
process is relatively slow – at a few nanometers per
second.
Sputtering is a physical phenomenon involving the
acceleration of ions via a potential gradient and the
bombardment of a ‘target’ or cathode. Through momen-
tum transfer, atoms near the surface of the target metal
become volatile and are transported as a vapor to a
substrate. A ﬁlm grows at the surface of the substrate
via deposition. Sputtered ﬁlms tend to have better uni-
formity than evaporated ones and the high-energy plasma
overcomes the temperature limitations of evaporation.
Most elements from the Periodic Table can be sputtered,
as well as inorganic and organic compounds. Refractory
materials can be sputtered with ease. In addition, materi-
als from more than one target can be sputtered at the
same time. This process is referred to as ‘co-sputtering’
and can be used to form ‘compound thin ﬁlms’ on the
substrate. The sputtering process can, however, be used
to deposit ﬁlms with the same stoichiometric composi-
tion as the source and hence allows the utilization of
alloys as targets [14]. Sputtered thin ﬁlms have better
adhesion to the substrate and a greater number of grain
orientations than evaporated ﬁlms.
The structures of sputtered ﬁlms are mainly amor-
phous and their stress and mechanical properties are
sensitive to speciﬁc sputtering conditions. Some atoms
of the inert gas can be trapped in the ﬁlm, hence causing
anomalies in the mechanical and structural characteris-
tics. Therefore, the exact properties of a thin ﬁlm vary
according to the precise conditions under which it was
grown. The deposition rate is proportional to the square
of the current density and is inversely proportional to the
spacing between the electrodes.
Metallo-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)
is a relatively low temperature (200–800 C) process for
the epitaxial growth of metals on semiconductor sub-
strates. Metallo-organics are compounds where each
atom of the element is bound to one or many carbon
atoms of various hydrocarbon groups. For precise control
of the deposition, high-purity materials and very accurate
controls are necessary [15]. However, due to the high
cost, this approach is used only where high-quality metal
ﬁlms are required.
Processing of Smart Materials
21

In addition to several elemental metals, various alloys
have also been developed for MEMS. CoNiMn thin ﬁlms
have been used as permanent magnet materials for
magnetic actuation. NiFe permalloy thick ﬁlms have
been electroplated on silicon substrates for magnetic
MEMS devices, such as micromotors, micro-actuators,
microsensors and integrated power converters [14]. TiNi
shape memory alloy (SMA) ﬁlms have been sputtered
onto various substrates in order to produce several well-
known SMA actuators [16]. Similarly, TbFe and SmFe
thin ﬁlms have also been used for magnetostrictive
actuation [17].
2.4 CERAMICS
Ceramics are another major class of materials widely
used in smart systems. These generally have better
hardness and high-temperature strength. The thick cera-
mic ﬁlm and three-dimensional (3D) ceramic structures
are also necessary for MEMS for special applications.
Both crystalline as well as non-crystalline materials are
used in the context of MEMS. For example, ceramic
pressure microsensors have been developed for pressure
measurement in high-temperature environments [16],
silicon carbide MEMS for harsh environments [18], etc.
In addition to these structural ceramics, some functional
ceramics, such as ZnO and PZT, have also been incor-
porated into smart systems.
New functional microsensors, micro-actuators and
MEMS can be realized by combining ferroelectric thin
ﬁlms, having prominent sensing properties such as pyro-
electric, piezoelectric and electro-optic effects, with
micro devices and microstructures. There are several
such ferroelectric materials including oxides and non-
oxides and their selection depends on a speciﬁc applica-
tion. Generally, ferroelectric oxides are superior to ferro-
electric non-oxides for MEMS applications. One useful
ferroelectric thin ﬁlm studied for microsensors and
RF-MEMS is barium strontium titanate [19]. Hence, as
a typical example, we will concentrate on this material
and its preparation method in this section.
Barium strontium titanate (BST) is of interest in
bypass capacitors, dynamic random access memories
and phase shifters for communication systems and adap-
tive antennas because of its high dielectric constant. The
latter can be as high as 2500 at room temperature. For
RF-MEMS applications, the loss tangent of such materials
should be very low. The loss tangent of BST can be
reduced to 0.005 by adding a small percentage (1–4 %)
of Fe, Ni and Mn to the material mixture [20–22]. The
(Ba–Sr)TiO3 series, (Pb–Sr)TiO3 and (Pb–Ca)TiO3 mate-
rials and similar titanates, having their Curie temperatures
in the vicinity of room temperature, are well suited for
MEMS phase shifter applications. The relative phase shift
is obtained from the variation of the dielectric constant
with DC biasing ﬁelds.
Ferroelectric thin ﬁlms of BST have usually been
fabricated by conventional methods, such as RF sputter-
ing [23], laser ablation [24], MOCVD [25] and hydro-
thermal treatment [25]. Even though sputtering is widely
used for the deposition of thin ﬁlms, it has the potential
for ﬁlm degradation by neutral and negative-ion bom-
bardment during ﬁlm growth. For BST, this ‘re-sputtering’
can lead to ‘off-stoichiometric’ ﬁlms and degradation of
its electrical properties. In a recent study, Cukauskas et al.
[26] have shown that inverted cylindrical magnetron
(ICM) RF sputtering is superior for BST. This fabrication
set-up is discussed in the next section.
2.4.1 Bulk ceramics
As a high dielectric constant and low loss tangent are the
prime characteristics of ceramic materials such as barium
strontium titanate (BST), a ceramic composite of this
material is usually fabricated as the bulk material. It is
known that the Curie temperature of BST can be changed
by adjusting the Ba:Sr ratio. Sol–gel processing is
sometimes adopted to prepare Ba1xSrxTiO3 for four
values of x, i.e. 0.2, 0.4, 0.5 and 0.6. The sol-gel method
offers advantages over other fabrication technique for better
mixing of the precursors, homogeneity, purity of phase,
stoichiometry control, ease of processing and controlling
composition. The sol–gel technique is one of the most
promising synthesis methods and is now being exten-
sively used for the preparation of metal oxides in ‘bulk’,
‘thin ﬁlm’ and ‘single crystal’ forms. The advantage of
the sol–gel method is that metal oxides can easily be
doped accurately to change their stoichiometric compo-
sition because the precursors are mixed at the ‘molecular
level’ [27].
Titanium tetraisopropoxide (Ti(O–C3H7)4) and cata-
lyst are mixed in the appropriate molar ratio with
methoxyethanol solvent and reﬂuxed for 2 h at 80 C.
Separate solutions of Ba and Sr are prepared by dissol-
ving the 2,4-pentadionate salts of Ba and Sr in methox-
yethanol.
Mild
heating
is
required
for
complete
dissolution of the salts. The metal salt solution is then
slowly transferred to the titania sol and the solution is
reﬂuxed for another 6 h. The sol is then hydrolyzed to
22
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

4 M concentration in water. It is important to note that
direct addition of water leads to precipitation in the sol.
Therefore, a mixture of water/solvent has to be prepared
and then added to the sol drop-by-drop. The resultant sol
is reﬂuxed for 2 h to complete the hydrolysis. This sol
was kept in an oven at 90 C to obtain the xerogel and
then heated at 800 C for 30 min in air to obtain the BST
powder. If necessary, the latter can be mixed at an
appropriate wt % with metal oxides e.g. Al2O3 and
MgO, in an ethanol slurry. Then, 3 wt % of a binder
(e.g. an acrylic polymer) is added to the slurry and the
mixture ball-milled using a zirconia grinding medium.
Ball-milling is performed for 24 h and the material is
then air-dried and properly sieved to avoid any agglom-
eration. The ﬁnal powder is pressed at a pressure of
8 tonnes in a suitable sized mold. The composites are
then ﬁred under air, initially at 300 C for 2 h and ﬁnally
at 1250 C for 5 h. The heating and cooling rate of the
furnace is typically 1 C/min. The structure of the
Ba1xSrxTiO3 is determined by using X-ray diffraction
(XRD) so that a pure phase of the BST can be analyzed.
The dielectric constants were measured at 1 MHz at room
temperature by a two-probe method using an impedance
analyzer (HP 4192A).
Metal oxides are used to fabricate composites of
Ba1xSrxTiO3 in order to vary its electronic properties.
Investigations, carried out by varying the weight ratio of
BST from 90 to 40 % in its composites with Al2O3 and
MgO, indicate that the dielectric constant decreases
with increasing metal oxide content. The dielectric
constant of a BST composite with MgO is observed to
be higher than its composite with Al2O3. It is assumed
that the addition of metal oxides plays an important
role in affecting the grain boundaries of Ba1xSrxTiO3,
which leads to an increase in dielectric loss. The com-
posite of Ba1xSrxTiO3 with alumina offers a low dielec-
tric constant and low loss in comparison to MgO and
hence is usually preferred for low-loss applications. It is
concluded from these measurements that if we select a
weight of metal oxide less than 10 %, then the loss tangent
and the dielectric constant can be ‘tailored’ for the desired
range [21].
2.4.2 Thick ﬁlms
Tape casting is a basic fabrication process which can
produce materials that are the backbone of the electronics
industries where the major products are capacitor dielec-
trics, thick and thin ﬁlm substrates, multilayer circuitry
(ceramic packing) and piezoelectric devices. Particles
can be formed into dense, uniformly packed ‘green-
ware’ by various techniques, such as sedimentation, slip
casting, (doctor-blade) tape casting and electrophoretic
deposition. Tape casting is used to form sheets– thin, ﬂat
ceramic pieces that have large surface areas and low
thickness. Therefore, tape casting is a very specialized
ceramic fabrication technique.
The doctor-blade process basically consists of sus-
pending ﬁnely divided inorganic powders in aqueous or
non-aqueous liquid systems composed of solvents, plas-
ticizers and binders to form a slurry that is then cast onto
a moving carrier surface. For a given stacking sequence,
the strength is controlled by critical micro-cracks, whose
severity is very sensitive to casting parameters such as
the particle size of the powder, the organic used and
the temperature proﬁle. In this forming method, a large
volume of binder (up to 50%) has to be added to the
ceramic powder to achieve rheological properties appro-
priate for processing. This large volume of binder has to
be removed before the ﬁnal sintering can take place.
There is usually a difference in ﬁring shrinkage between
the casting direction and the cross-casting direction for
the tape.
Titanium tetraisopropoxide (Ti(O–C3H7)4) (1 mol) and
triethanolamine (TEA) (molar ratio of 1 with respect to
Ti(O–C3H7)4) were mixed in appropriate molar ratios
with methoxyethanol solvent (100 ml) and reﬂuxed for
2 h at 80 C. Separate solutions of 0.65 mol of Ba and
0.35 mol of Sr were prepared by dissolving the 2,4-
pentadionate salts of Ba and Sr in methoxyethanol to
achieve x ¼ 0:35. Mild heating was required for com-
plete dissolution of the salts. The metal salt solution was
then slowly transferred to the titania sol, and the solution
reﬂuxed for another 6 h. The sol was then hydrolyzed
with a particular concentration of water (molar ratio of 2
with respect to Ti(O–C3H7)4). A water/solvent mixture
has to be prepared and then added to the sol drop-by-drop
to avoid precipitation. The resultant sol was reﬂuxed for
another 6 h to allow complete hydrolysis. This sol was
then kept in an oven at 90 C for 6–7 days in order to
obtain the xerogel. Finally, the xerogel was calcined at
900 C for 30 min in air.
BST powder can also be prepared by a ‘conven-
tional’ method. In this approach, oxides of barium,
strontium and titanate were used at appropriate molar
ratios for achieving a value of x of 0.35. These oxides
were mixed with 100 ml of ethyl alcohol in a plastic
container and ball-milled for 24 h with zirconia balls.
The slurry from the container was transferred into
a beaker and dried in an oven at 80 C for 2 days in
Processing of Smart Materials
23

air. The dried powder was calcined at 900 C for
30 min.
A tape-casting technique is used to fabricate ceramic
multilayered BST tape. BST powder obtained by one of
the above methods was mixed with 10 wt% of ethanol
and 10 wt% of methyl ethyl ketone (MEK); 1 wt% of ﬁsh
oil was then added to the mixture. Calvert et al. [28] have
reported that ﬁsh oil is far superior than triglycerides due
to the polymeric structure induced by oxidation. The
mixture is ball-milled in a plastic jar with a zirconia
medium for 24 h. ‘Santicizer’ (4 wt%), used as a plasti-
cizer, was added to the resultant slurry, followed by
4 wt% of Carbowax 400 (poly(ethylene glycol)) along
with 0.73 wt% of cyclohexanone. ‘Acryloid’ (13.9 wt%)
was added to the slurry as a binder. The slurry was ball-
milled for another 24 h and then tape-cast and ‘de-aired’.
The tape-cast BST was punched and stacked to produce
multiple layers. The tapes were then pressed at a pressure
of 35 MPa and a temperature of 70 C for 15 min. A
schematic of this process is shown in Figure 2.4
Ceramic
Powder
Solvent
Deflocculant
Ball-mill
for 24 h
Slurry-1
Plasticizer
Binder
Cyclohexane
Ball-mill for 24 h
Slurry-2
Tape casting
‘De-air’
Tape-cast sheet
Lamination at
0 and 90°
Organic removal
process
Sintering
Multilayed tape-cast BST 
⊥
||
Figure 2.4
Flow chart for thick ﬁlm fabrication using the doctor-blade process.
24
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

2.4.3 Thin ﬁlms
Thin ﬁlms of ceramic materials can be fabricated by
using several different approaches. In this section, we
will ﬁrst describe RF sputtering. Due to its similarity
with the thick ﬁlm and bulk processing techniques
described above, the sol–gel process for thin ﬁlms is
also presented here.
2.4.3.1 Inverted cylindrical magnetron (ICM)
RF sputtering
Figure 2.5 illustrates the ICM sputter gun set-up [26].
This consists of a water-cooled copper cathode, which
houses the hollow cylindrical BST target, surrounded by
a ring magnet concentric with the target. A stainless steel
thermal shield is mounted to shield the magnet from the
thermal radiation coming from the heated table. The
anode is recessed in the hollow-cathode space. The latter
aids in collecting electrons and negative ions, hence
minimizing ‘re-sputtering’ the growing ﬁlm. Outside
the deposition chamber, a copper ground wire is attached
between the anode and the stainless steel chamber. A DC
bias voltage could be applied to the anode to alter the
plasma characteristics in the cathode/anode space. The
sputter gas enters the cathode region through the space
surrounding the table.
By using the above set-up, Cukauskas et al. [26] were
able to deposit BST ﬁlms at temperatures ranging from
550 to 800 C. The substrate temperature was maintained
by two quartz lamps, a type-K thermocouple and a
temperature controller. The ﬁlms were deposited at
135 W to a ﬁlm thickness of 7000 A

and cooled to
room temperature at 1 atm of oxygen before removing
them from the deposition unit. This was then followed by
annealing the ﬁlms in 1 atm of ﬂowing oxygen at a
temperature of 780 C for 8 h in a tube furnace.
2.4.3.2 Sol–gel processing technique
The sputtering techniques described above and other
methods, such as laser ablation, MOCVD and hydro-
thermal treatment, require much work, time and high
costs of instrumentations, which lead to a high cost for
the ﬁnal product. However, large areas of homogenous
ﬁlms can be obtained by relatively low temperature heat
treatment. The sol–gel method is a technique for produ-
cing inorganic thin ﬁlms without processing in vacuum,
and offers high purity and ensures homogeneity of the
components at the ‘molecular level’ [29].
In the sol–gel method, the precursor solution of barium
strontium titanates is prepared from barium 2-ethyl hex-
anoate, strontium 2-ethyl hexanoate and titanium tetraiso-
propoxide (TTIP). Methyl alcohol is used as a solvent,
along with acetyl acetonate. A known amount of barium
precursor is dissolved in 30 ml of methyl alcohol and
reﬂuxed at a temperature of about 80 C for 5 h. Strontium
2-ethyl hexanoate is added to this solution and reﬂuxed for
a further 5 h to obtain a yellow-colored solution. Acetyla-
cetonate is added to the solution as a chelating agent, which
prevents any precipitation. This solution is stirred and
reﬂuxed for another 3 h. Separately, a solution of titanium
isopropoxide (TTIP) is prepared in 20ml of methyl alco-
hol; this solution is added to the barium strontium solution
drop-by-drop and ﬁnally reﬂuxed for 4 h at 80 C. Water is
added to the BST solution drop-by-drop in order to initiate
hydrolysis. This solution is reﬂuxed for another 6 h with
vigorous stirring under a nitrogen atmosphere.
For thin-ﬁlm deposition and characterization, one
could use a substrate such as platinized silicon or a
ceramic. The substrate is immersed in methanol and
dried by nitrogen gas to remove any dust particles. The
precursor solution is coated on the substrate by spin
coating. The latter is carried out by using a spinner
rotated at a rate of 3100 rpm for 30 s. After coating on
the substrate, the ﬁlms are kept on a hot plate for 15 min
to dry and pyrolyze the organics. This process can be
repeated to produce multilayer ﬁlms if needed. In such
cases repeated heating after every spin coat is required in
order to successfully ‘burn off’ the organics trapped in
the ﬁlms. This improves the crystallinity and leads to a
dense sample after multiple coating. To obtain thicker
ﬁlms, many depositions are required. The ﬁlms are then
annealed at 700 C for 1 h in air. The annealing tempera-
ture and duration has a signiﬁcant effect in the ﬁlm
orientation and properties [30,31].
Figure 2.5
Schematic of the ICM sputter gun set-up [26].
Processing of Smart Materials
25

2.5 SILICON MICROMACHINING
TECHNIQUES
Micromachining is the fundamental technology for the
fabrication of micro electromechanical (MEMS) devices,
in particular, miniaturized sensors and actuators having
dimensions in the sub-millimeter range. Silicon micro-
machining is the most mature of the micromachining
technologies. This process refers to the fashioning of
microscopic mechanical parts out of a silicon substrate
or on a silicon substrate, thus making the structures
three dimensional and hence bringing in new avenues to
designers. By employing materials such as crystalline
silicon, polycrystalline silicon and silicon nitride, a variety of
mechanical microstructures, including beams, diaphragms,
grooves, oriﬁces, springs, gears, suspensions and numerous
other complex mechanical structures, have been fabricated
[32–36].
Silicon micromachining has been a key factor for
the vast progress of MEMS towards the end of the
20th Century. Silicon micromachining comprises two
technologies: bulk micromachining, in which structures
are etched into a silicon substrate, and surface micro-
machining in which the micromechanical layers are formed
from layers and ﬁlms deposited on the surface. Yet another
but less common method, i.e. LIGA 3D micro-fabrication,
has been used for the fabrication of high-aspect ratio and
three dimensional microstructures for MEMS.
Bulk micromachining, which originated in the 1960s,
has matured as the principal silicon micromachining
technology and has since been used in the successful
fabrication of many microstructures. Presently, bulk
micromachining is employed to fabricate the majority
of commercial devices – pressure sensors, silicon valves
and acceleration sensors. The term ‘bulk micromachin-
ing’ arises from the fact that this type of micromachining
is used to realize micromechanical structures within the
bulk of a single-crystal silicon wafer by selectively
removing the wafer material. The microstructures fabri-
cated by using bulk micromachining may vary in thick-
ness from sub-microns to the full thickness of a wafer
(200 to 500 mm), with the lateral size ranging from microns
to the full diameter of a wafer (usually 75 to 200 mm).
The bulk micromachining technique allows selective
removal of signiﬁcant amounts of silicon from a substrate
to form membranes on one side of the wafer, a variety
of trenches, holes or other structures. In addition to an
etch process, bulk micromachining often requires wafer
bonding and buried-oxide-layer technologies [37]. How-
ever the use of the latter in bulk micromachining is still
in its infancy. In recent years, a vertical-walled bulk
micromachining techniques, known as single crystal
reactive etching and metallization (SCREAM) which is
a combination of anisotropic and isotropic plasma etching,
has also been used [36].
Since the beginning of the 1980s, signiﬁcant interest
has been directed towards micromechanical structures
fabricated by a technique called surface micromachining.
This approach does not shape the bulk silicon, but instead
builds structures on the surface of the silicon by depositing
thin ﬁlms of ‘sacriﬁcial layers’ and ‘structural layers’ and
by eventually removing the sacriﬁcial layers to release the
mechanical structures. More details on the processing steps
involved in the fabrication of MEMS components using
these techniques will be discussed in Chapter 10. The
dimensions of these surface-micromachined structures
can be several orders of magnitude smaller than bulk-
micromachined structures. The resulting ‘2½-dimensional’
structures are mainly located on the surface of the silicon
wafer and exist as a thin ﬁlm–hence the ‘half dimension’.
The main advantage of surface-micromachined structures
is their easy integration with IC components, since the
same wafer surface can also be processed for IC elements.
Surface micromachining can therefore be used to build
monolithic MEMS devices.
2.6 POLYMERS AND THEIR SYNTHESIS
Polymers are very large molecules (macromolecules)
made up of a number of small molecules. These small
molecules which connect with each other to build up the
polymer are referred to as monomers and the reaction by
which they connect together is called polymerization.
Recently, a considerable effort is being focused on the
use of polymers in microelectronics and micro electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS). Features that make them
particularly attractive are moldability, conformability,
ease in deposition in the form of thin and thick ﬁlms,
semiconducting and even metallic behavior in selected
polymers, a choice of widely different molecular struc-
tures and the possibility of piezoelectric and pyroelectric
effects in the polymer side-chain.
For several MEMS devices, the polymers need to have
conductive and possibly piezoelectric or ferroelectric
properties. For these polymers to be used for polymeric
MEMS, they should have the following:

 Strong interfacial adhesion between the various poly-
mer layers.

 Suitable elastic moduli to support the deformation
required in MEMS.
26
Smart Material Systems and MEMS


 Excellent overall dimension stability.

 Long-term environmental stability.
In addition, their processing should help attachment of
nanoceramics and/or conductive phases and formation of
a uniform coating layer. Furthermore, many of these
polymers provide a large strain under an electric ﬁeld
and thus can be used as actuators for MEMS-based
devices such as micro pumps.
Polymer processing techniques include photopolymer-
ization, electrochemical polymerization and vacuum
polymerization, either stimulated by electron bombard-
ment or initiated by ultraviolet irradiation, or microwave-
assisted polymerization. These methods are also widely
used for processing and curing thin and thick polymer
ﬁlms on silicon-based electronic components.
Two types of polymers are employed for microma-
chining polymeric MEMS devices: structural polymers
and sacriﬁcial polymers. The structural polymer is
usually a UV-curable polymer with a urethane acrylate,
epoxy acrylate or acryloxysilane as the main ingredient.
Its low viscosity allows easy processing through auto-
matic equipment or by manual methods without the need
to add solvents or heat to reduce the viscosity. It also
complies with all volatile organic compound (VOC)
regulations. It has excellent ﬂexibility and resistance to
fungus, solvents, water and chemicals. The structural
polymer may be used as a backbone structure for build-
ing the multifunctional polymer described below.
It should be pointed out here that the above structural
polymers can also be used to construct sensing and
actuating components for MEMS. Polymer strain gauges
and capacitors can serve as sensing elements for piezo-
resistive and capacitive microsensors [38]. Another impor-
tant point is that as the wafer polymer micro-fabrication
process is being developed for polymer micro devices, the
batch fabrication of polymereric MEMS will not be a
serious concern.
The sacriﬁcial polymer is an acrylic resin containing
50 % silica and is modiﬁed by adding crystal violet, as
given in Varadan and Varadan [38]. This composition is
UV-curable and can be dissolved with 2 mol/l of caustic
soda at 80 C. In principle, this process is similar to the
surface micromachining technique used for silicon
devices. However, the process yields 3D structures.
Since only limited sensing and actuation mechanisms
can be obtained using structural polymers by themselves,
a large variety of functional polymers have been used for
MEMS [39]. Some of these functional polymers are listed
in Table 2.4. Such polymers used in smart systems may
contain several functional groups. A ‘Functional group’ is
deﬁned as the atom or group of atoms that deﬁnes the
structure of a particular family of organic compounds and,
at the same time, determines their properties. Some
examples of functional groups are the double bond in
alkenes, triple bond in alkynes, the amino (–NH2) group,
the carboxyl (–COOH) group, the hydroxyl (–OH) group,
etc. ‘Functionality’ can be deﬁned as the number of such
functional groups per molecule of the compound.
Many polymers used in MEMS are biocompatible and
are thus useful for many medical devices. Applications of
these include implanted medical delivery systems, che-
mical and biological instruments, ﬂuid delivery in
engines, pump coolants and refrigerants for local cooling
of electronic components.
Functional polymer-solid powder composites with
magnetic and magnetostrictive properties have also
been developed for micro devices. For example, the
polymer-bonded Terfenol-D composites showed excel-
lent magnetostrictivity, useful for micro-actuation [41].
The polyimide-based ferrite magnetic composites have
been used as polymer magnets for magnetic micro-
actuators [42].
In addition to being used as sensing and actuating
materials, polymers have also been used for electronics
materials. Polymer transistors have been developed.
Therefore, integrating polymer sensors, actuators and
electronics into polymeric MEMS will be practical for
some special applications.
2.6.1 Classiﬁcation of polymers
Polymers can be classiﬁed, based on their structure (linear,
branched or cross-linked), by the method of synthesis,
physical properties (thermoplastic or thermoset) and by
end-use (plastic, elastomer, ﬁber or liquid resin).
A linear polymer is made up of identical units
arranged in a linear sequence. This type of polymer has
only two functional groups. Branched polymers are those
Table 2.4
Functional polymers for MEMS.
Polymer
Functional
Application
property
PVDF
Piezoelectricity
Sensor/actuator
Polypyrrole
Conductivity
Sensor/actuator/
electric/connection
Fluorosilicone
Electrostrictivity
Actuator [40]
Silicone
Electrostrictivity
Actuator [40]
Polyurethane
Electrostrictivity
Actuator [40]
Processing of Smart Materials
27

in which there are many side-chains of lined monomers
attached to the main polymer chain at various points.
These side-chains could be either short or long (Figure 2.6).
When polymer molecules are linked with each other
at points, other than their ends, to form a network, the
polymers are said to be cross-linked (Figure 2.7). Cross-
linked polymers are insoluble in all solvents, even at
elevated temperatures.
Based on their physical properties, polymers may be
classiﬁed as either thermoplastic or thermoset. A poly-
mer is said to be a thermoplastic if it softens (ﬂows)
when it is squeezed, or pulled, by a load, usually at a high
temperature, and hardens on cooling. This process of
reshaping and cooling can be repeated several times.
High-density polyethylene (HDPE) or low-density poly-
ethylene (LDPE), poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) and nylon are
some examples of thermoplastic polymers.
Thermoset polymers, on the other hand, can ﬂow easily
and can be molded when initially produced. Once they are
molded in to their shape, usually by applying heat and
pressure, these materials become very hard. This process
of the polymer becoming an infusible and insoluble mass
is called ‘curing’. Reheating such a thermosetting polymer
just results in the degradation of the polymer and will
distort the object made. Epoxy and phenol formaldehyde
are some examples of thermosetting polymers.
Depending upon their ﬁnal use, polymers can be
classiﬁed as plastic, elastomer, ﬁber or liquid resin.
When a polymer is formed into hard and tough articles
by the application of heat and pressure, then it is used as
a plastic. When a polymer is vulcanized into rubbery
materials, which show good strength and elongation, it is
used as an elastomer. Fibers are polymers drawn into
long ﬁlament-like materials, whose lengths are at least
100 times their diameters. When the polymer is used in
the liquid form, such as in sealants or adhesives, they are
called liquid resins.
2.6.2 Methods of polymerization
There are basically two methods by which polymers can
be synthesized, namely ‘addition’ or ‘chain’ polymeriza-
tion and ‘condensation’ or ‘step-growth’ polymerization.
When molecules just add on to form the polymer, the
process is called ‘addition’ or ‘chain’ polymerization. The
monomer in this case retains its structural identity, even
after it is converted into the polymer, i.e. the chemical
repeat unit in the polymer is the same as the monomer.
When molecules react with each other (with the elimina-
tion of small molecules such as water, methane, etc.),
instead of simply adding together, the process is called
step-growth polymerization. In this case, the chemical
repeat unit is different from the monomer.
2.6.2.1 Addition polymerization
Compounds containing a reactive double bond usually
undergo addition polymerization, also called chain poly-
merization. In this type of polymerization process, a
low-molecular-weight monomer molecule with a double
bond breaks the double bond so that the resulting free
valencies will be able to bond to other similar molecules
to form the polymer. This polymerization takes place in
three steps, namely, initiation, propagation and termina-
tion. This can be induced by a free-radical, ionic or
coordination mechanism. Depending on the mechanism,
there are therefore three types of chain polymerization,
namely, free radical, ionic (cationic and anionic) and
coordination polymerization. The coordination polymer-
ization mechanism is excluded in this present discussion
due to its specialized nature.
2.6.2.2 Free-radical polymerization
There are three steps in polymerization: initiation, pro-
pagation and termination. In this type of polymerization,
the initiation is brought about by the free radicals
produced by the decomposition of initiators, where the
latter break down to form free radicals. Each component
has an unpaired (lone) electron and is called a free
Figure 2.6
The various kinds of branching in polymers:
(a) short; (b) long; (c) star.
Figure 2.7
Illustration of cross-linking in polymers.
28
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

radical. This radical adds to a molecule of the monomer
and in doing so generates another free radical. This
radical adds to another molecule of the monomer to
generate a still larger radical, which in turn adds to yet
another molecule of monomer, and the process continues.
The decomposition of the initiator to form these free
radicals can be induced by heat, light energy or catalysts.
Peroxides, many azo compounds, hydroperoxides and
peracids are the most commonly used initiators. The
latter can also be decomposed by UV light. The rate of
decomposition in this case depends mainly on the inten-
sity and wavelength of radiation and not so much on the
temperature. A polymerization reaction initiated by UV
light falls under the category of photoinitiated polymer-
ization. The reaction in such a case may be expressed as
follows
PI þ hn ! R
0
ð2:6Þ
where PI represents the photoinitiator, and R
0 is the
reactive intermediate from the UV cleavage of PI.
UV curing is therefore based on photoinitiated
polymerization which is mediated by photoinitiators.
These photoinitiators are required to absorb light in the
UV–visible spectral range, generally 250–550 nm, and
convert this light energy into chemical energy in the
form of reactive intermediates, such as free radicals
and reactive cations, which subsequently initiates the
polymerization.
During the propagation step, the radical site on the
ﬁrst monomer unit reacts with the double bond of a
‘fresh’ monomer molecule, which results in the linking
up of the second monomer unit to the ﬁrst and the
transfer of the free radical onto the second monomer
molecule. This process, involving the attack on a fresh
monomer molecule, which in turn keeps adding to the
growing chain, is called propagation. The chain keeps
propagating as far as the monomer is available. This step
can also end when the free-radical site is ‘killed’ by some
impurities or by the termination process.
The propagation step can be represented as follows:
M
1 þ M ! M
2
ð2:7Þ
where
M
represents
the
monomer
molecule,
and
M
1 . . . M
n represent reactive molecules.
The last step in the polymerization reaction is called
termination. In this step, any further addition of the mono-
mer units to the growing chain is stopped and the growth
of the polymer chain is inhibited. The decomposition of
the initiator results in the formation of a large number of
free radicals. Depending on factors such as temperature,
time and monomer and initiator concentrations, there exists
a chance when the growing chains collide against each
other. This can occur in two ways:

 Termination by combination – the chain terminates by
the simple formation of a bond between two radicals.

 Termination by disproportionation – a proton is trans-
ferred and a double bond is formed.
These reactions can be represented as follows:
M
x þ M
y ! Mxþy ðcombinationÞ
ð2:8Þ
M
x þ M
y ! Mx þ My ðdisproportionationÞ
ð2:9Þ
where Mxþy is the stable polymer molecule containing x þ y
monomer units, while Mx and My are also stable polymer
molecules with x and y monomer units, respectively.
Some common monomers that can be polymerized by
using free-radical polymerization are listed in Table 2.5.
2.6.2.3 Cationic polymerization
Ionic polymerization involves the breaking down of the
p-electron pair of the monomer. This is not done by free
radicals but by either a positive or negative ion. If the
active site has a positive charge (i.e. a carbonium ion),
then it is called cationic polymerization. Monomers
which have an electron-donating group are the most
suitable for cationic polymerization, for example, alkyl
vinyl ethers, vinyl acetals, isobutylene, etc.
Initiation in this case can be achieved by using proto-
nic acids and Lewis acids. The latter usually require a
‘co-catalyst’ such as water or methyl alcohol. Here, a
proton is introduced into the monomer. This proton pulls
the p-electron pair towards it and this is how the positive
Table 2.5
Examples of monomers polymerized
by using free-radical polymerization.
Monomer
Structure
Ethylene
CH2=CH2
Butadiene
CH2=CH–CH=CH2
Styrene
CH2=CH–C6H5
Vinyl chloride
CH2=CH–Cl
Vinylidene chloride
CH2–CCl2
Acrylic acid
CH2=CH–COOH
Methyl methacrylate
CH2–C(CH3)COOCH3
Processing of Smart Materials
29

charge moves to the other end of the monomer, hence
resulting in the formation of a carbonium ion:
C þ XH 
*
)

 H

X

C
ðion-pair formationÞ
ð2:10Þ
H

X

C þ M ! H M

X

C
ðinitiationÞ
ð2:11Þ
where C is the catalyst, XC the co-catalyst and M the
monomer.
Propagation of the cationic polymerization reaction
occurs as the carbonium ion attacks the p-electron pair of
the second monomer molecule. The positive charge is
then transferred to the farther end of the second mono-
mer, and thus a chain reaction is started:
HM

X

CþM! HMM

X

C
ðpropagationÞ ð2:12Þ
Termination can occur by anion–cation recombination,
resulting in an ester group. Termination can also occur by
splitting of the anion. This occurs by reaction with trace
amounts of water:
HMn M

X

C þ M ! HMnM þ H

X

C
ðterminationÞ
ð2:13Þ
HMn M

X

C ! HMnM þ H

X

C
ðchain transfer to monomerÞ
ð2:14Þ
2.6.2.4 Anionic polymerization
If the active site has a negative charge (i.e. a carbanion),
then the process is called anionic polymerization. Mono-
mers capable of undergoing anionic polymerization are
isoprene, styrene and butadiene.
Initiation takes place in the same way as in cationic
polymerization, except that here a carbanion is formed.
The general initiators used in this case are the alkyl
and aryl derivatives of alkali metals such as triphenyl
methyl potassium and ethyl sodium. Propagation then
proceeds with the transfer of the negative charge to
the end of the monomer molecule. Termination is not
always a spontaneous process, and unless some impu-
rities are present or some strongly ionic substances
are added, termination does not occur. So, if an inert
solvent is used and if impurities are avoided, the reac-
tion proceeds up until all of the monomer is consumed.
Once this is achieved, the carbanions at the end of the
chain still remain active and are considered as ‘living’;
polymers synthesized by using this method are known
as ‘living polymers’. This technique is useful for pro-
ducing block copolymers.
IA ! I

A

ðion- pair formationÞ ð2:15Þ
A

I

þ M ! A M

I

ðinitiationÞ
ð2:16Þ
A M

I

þ M ! AM M

I

ðpropagationÞ ð2:17Þ
AMn M

I

þ HA ! AMnMH þ A

I

ðterminationÞ
ð2:18Þ
where IA is the initiator and HA is a protonating agent,
2.6.2.5 Step-growth polymerization
Step polymerizations are carried out by the stepwise
reaction between the functional groups of the monomers.
In such polymerizations, the size of the polymer chains
increases at a relatively slow rate from monomer to
dimer, trimer, tetramer, pentamer and so on:
Monomer þ Monomer
(Dimer)
Dimer þ Monomer
(Trimer)
Dimer þ Dimer
(Tetramer)
Trimer þ Dimer
(Pentamer)
Trimer þ Trimer
(Hexamer)
Any two molecular species can react with each other
throughout the course of the polymerization until, even-
tually, large polymer molecules consisting of large num-
bers of monomer molecules have been formed. These
reactions take place when monomers containing more than
two reactive functional groups react. Typical condensation
polymers include polyamides, polyesters, polyurethanes,
polycarbonates, polysulﬁdes, phenol formaldehyde, urea
formaldehyde and melamine formaldehyde.
When a pair of bifunctional monomers (dicarboxylic
acid/diamine or dialcohol/dihalide) undergoes polycon-
densation, it is called an AA–BB-type polycondensation:
nAA þ nBB ! A½ AB2n1B þ byproduct
ð2:19Þ
When a single bifunctional monomer undergoes
self-condensation, it is known as an A-B type polycon-
densation.
nAB ! B½ ABn1A þ byproduct
ð2:20Þ
30
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

If in the AA–BB type of polycondensation, one of the
monomers has a functionality of three or more, it forms a
3D network. Figure 2.8 illustrates the formation of net-
works in polymers with a functionality of three or higher,
while Table 2.6 shows some examples of functionality in
monomer compounds.
Some of the common monomers that can be polymer-
ized by using step-growth polymerization are listed in
Table 2.7.
2.7 UV RADIATION CURING
OF POLYMERS
Radiation curing refers to radiation as an energy source
to induce the rapid conversion of specially formulated
100 % reactive liquids into solids by polymerizing and
cross-linking functional monomers and oligomers (usually
liquid) into a cross-linked polymer network (usually
solid) [43].
The radiation energy could be from electron beams,
X-rays, g-rays, plasmas, microwaves and, more commonly,
ultraviolet (UV) light. UV radiation curing has also been
extensively used in MEMS, photoresist patterning and
building ﬂexible polymer structures (both planar and
three-dimensional) (UV-LIGA, microstereolithography,
etc.). Advantages of using radiation curing include the
following:
. It has a high processing speed and hence a high
productivity.
. The processes are very convenient and economical,
plus since most comprise ‘one pack compositions’,
they can be dispensed automatically.
. There is very low heat generation and so heat-sensitive
substrates can be used.
. Lower energy and space requirements than conven-
tional curing systems.
. Since the organic emission levels are very low, this
treatment is ‘eco-friendly’.
. Low capital costs, especially if UV is used as the
curing ‘stimulant’.
2.7.1 Relationship between wavelength
and radiation energy
Typical average energies from the homolytic cleavage of
selected chemical bonds in organic molecules are shown
in Table 2.8 [44]. The radiation wavelengths that can
potentially break these bonds are given by Planck’s theory.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) 
Figure 2.8
Illustration of the formation of networks in polymers with a functionality greater than two: (a,b) functional groups are at
the ends of the line segments; (c) a chain of a trifunctional polymer; (d) a network of a tetrafunctional polymer.
Table 2.6
Functionality of some monomer compounds.
Compound
Chemical formula
Functional
Number of
Functionality
group
functional groups
Ethyl alcohol
CH3CH2OH
–OH
1
Monofunctional
Hexamethylene
H2NCH2(CH2)4CH2NH2
–NH2
2
Bifunctional
diamine
Maleic acid
HOOCCH2CH(OH)COOH
–COOH, –OH
3
Trifunctional
Gallic acid
HOOCC6H2(OH)3
–COOH, –OH
4
Tetrafunctional
Processing of Smart Materials
31

Planck developed his theory of ‘black-body radiation’
on the basis of a postulate that radiation possessed
particulate properties and that the particles, or photons,
of radiation of a speciﬁc frequency, n, had associated
with them a ﬁxed energy, e, given by the relationship
e ¼ hn, where h is known as the Planck constant
(6:626 076  1034 J s) and n ¼ c=l, in which c is the
speed of light (3  108 m/s) and l is the wavelength.
Figure 2.9 illustrates the relevant ranges in the electro-
magnetic spectrum. This shows that photons at wave-
lengths within the UV range possess enough energy to
break the bonds listed in the table and these undergo
rearrangements to form polymer networks [45].
2.7.2 Mechanisms of UV curing
UV curing is based on photoinitiated polymerization,
which is mediated by photoinitiators. These absorb
UV light and convert the (light) energy into chemical
energy in the form of reactive intermediates, such as
free radicals and reactive cations, which subsequently
initiate the polymerization. Typical photopolymer for-
mulations contain a photoinitiator system, monomers
and oligomers (or a polymer or polymers) to provide
speciﬁc physical and/or processing properties. They
may also contain a variety of additives to modify the
physical properties of the light-sensitive compositions
or the ﬁnal properties of the cured photopolymers.
The photopolymerization reactions fall into two cate-
gories, i.e. radical photopolymerization and cationic
Table 2.7
Some of the polymers that can be
prepared by using step-growth polymerization.
Polymer
Chemical formula
Nylon 6
NH
C
O
(CH2)5
n
Polycarbonate
O
C
CH3
CH3
C
O
n
Poly(butylene
(CH2)4 O
C
O
C
O
n
terephthalate)
Table 2.8
Energies and corresponding wavelengths
for the homolytic ﬁssion of typical chemical bonds [44].
Bond
Energy kcal/mol
l (nm)
C=C
160
179
C–C
85
336
C–H
95–100
286–301
C–O
80–100
286–357
C–Cl
60–86
332–477
C–Br
45–70
408–636
O–O
35
817
O–H
85–115
249–336
200          300         400           500           600         700             800          900 
10–6    10–4   10–2   10    102    104   106   108   1010    1012
Cosmic
rays  
Gamma
rays
X-rays 
Infrared
rays  
‘Hertzian’
waves 
Radio
waves 
Vacuum UV
Far UV 
Near UV 
Range for UV curing 
Visible
Near IR 
Figure 2.9
The electromagnetic spectrum (wavelengths in nanometers) [11].
32
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

photopolymerization. Generally, acrylates are associated
with free-radical polymerization while epoxies are typi-
cal of cationic curing. The most commonly used reactive
monomeric materials are low-molecular-weight unsatu-
rated acrylate or methacrylate monomers that can be
made to cross-link with the use of a radical-generating
photoinitiator. The practical applications of cationic-
initiated cross-linking of monomeric materials with
epoxy and/or vinyl ether functionalities have signiﬁ-
cantly increased with the development of new UV-
sensitive, high-efﬁciency photoinitiators which generate
cationic species (e.g. strong acids). Table 2.9 gives a
comparison of the characteristics of cationic and free-
radical curing, showing their relative merits and demer-
its. In this table, moisture inhibition refers to the ability
of a formulation to cure in the presence of atmospheric
moisture, while post-irradiance cure refers to curing
taking place after the light source has been removed.
For free-radical curing in air, surface curing lags behind
bulk curing, which is known as ‘oxygen inhibition’. This
lag results from competition at the surface between
oxygen molecules and free radicals for the monomer
sites. A through cure of cationic systems is recommended
since free radicals have a limited lifetime.
Once the photoinitiator (PI) absorbs light, it is raised to
an electronically excited state, PI*. The lifetimes of the
PI* states are short, generally less than 106 s. During
this time, the PI* state may be affected by the one of the
following possibilities: (i) it may decay back to the PI
state with the emission of light and/or heat; (ii) it may
attain a (further) excited state following quenching by
oxygen, monomer or other quenching agents; (iii) it
may disintegrate by a chemical reaction, yielding the
initiator species, R0 [46].
The rate of initiation (Ri) is expressed as the rate of
formation of PI*, which corresponds to the number of
photons absorbed by the PI per unit time:
Ri ¼ Iabs Ff
ð2:21Þ
where the term Iabs corresponds to the intensity of light
absorbed by the PI, F is the fraction of PI* that yields
initiator species, and f is the fraction of initiator which
initiates polymerization. Iabs is related to the incident
light intensity (I0), the number of photons incident to the
system per unit time and area and the absorbance (A) of
the PI, according to the Beer-Lambert law:
Iabs ¼ I0ð1  10AÞ
where A ¼ e d c
ð2:22Þ
where d is the pathlength of light (or ﬁlm thickness), e is the
molar absorptivity of the PI and c is the PI concentration.
It is desirable that the rate of initiation, Ri, be uniform
throughout the system and to be high enough for efﬁcient
utilization of the light energy. For example, internal
stresses arising from non-uniform cross-linking adversely
affect adhesion to the substrate and mechanical properties,
such as tensile strength. From Equation (2.22), one can
also see that the non-uniformity of the absorption increases
with the absorbance A. Therefore, the appropriate PI
concentration, molar absorptivity of PI and the value of
absorbance of the system are very important in order to
optimize a monomer system for UV curing [46].
2.7.3 Basic kinetics of photopolymerization
Since the rate of polymerization is an important parameter
in characterizing polymer curing, the curing proﬁle can be
predicted from this. The kinetics of photopolymerization
presented below should prove helpful in understanding
how to calculate the rate of polymerization.
2.7.3.1 Radical photopolymerization
Radical photopolymerization is a chain reaction which
proceeds according to the following steps:
PI þ hn ! R
ð2:23Þ
R
 þ M !
ki
RM
1
Photoinitiation
ð2:24Þ
RM
1 þ M !
kp
RM
2; etc:
Propagation
ð2:25Þ
RM
n1 þ M !
kp
RM
n
Propagation
ð2:26Þ
RM
n þ RM
m !
kt
RMmþn
Termination
ð2:27Þ
Table 2.9
Comparison of free-radical curing versus
cationic curing [45].
Property
Free-radical
Cationic
curing
curing
Cure speed
Faster
Slower
Oxygen inhibition
Yes
No
Adhesion
‘Problems’
Excellent
Toxicity
Skin irritation
Acceptable
Moisture inhibition
No
Yes
Post-irradiation cure
No
Yes
Formulation latitude
Good
Limited
Through cure
Fair
Good
Viscosity
Higher
Lower
Cost
Moderate
Higher
Processing of Smart Materials
33

where PI represents the photoinitiator, RMmþn is the
stable polymer molecule and ki, kp and kt are the rate
constants for initiation, propagation and termination,
respectively.
The rate of photochemical initiation is expressed as
follows:
Ri ¼ 2FIabs
ð2:28Þ
where Iabs is the intensity of absorbed light in moles of
light quanta per liter and second and F, referred to as the
quantum yield for initiation, is the number of propagating
chains initiated per light photon absorbed. The factor of
‘2’ indicates that two radicals are produced per molecule
undergoing photolysis. The maximum value of F is 1 for
all photoinitiated polymerizations.
Monomers are consumed by the initiation reaction, as
well as by propagation reactions. The rate of change in
monomer concentration by polymerization is expressed
as follows:
 d½M
dt
¼ Ri þ Rp
ð2:29Þ
where Ri and Rp are the rates of initiation and propaga-
tion, respectively. For a process producing high-molecular-
weight polymers, the number of monomers reacting in the
initiation step is far less than that in the propagation step.
Thus, Equation (2.29) can be simpliﬁed as follows:
 d½M
dt
¼ Rp
ð2:30Þ
Assume that the rate constants for all of the propaga-
tion steps are the same, the polymerization rate can be
expressed by the following:
Rp ¼ kp½M½M

ð2:31Þ
where [M] is the monomers concentration and [M
] is the
total concentration of all chain radicals.
The polymerization rate cannot be directly obtained
from Equation (2.31) since it is difﬁcult to measure the
radical concentrations quantitatively, which are very low
( 108 M). In order to eliminate [M
] from Equation
(2.31), we use a steady-state assumption that the con-
centration of radicals increases initially but then reaches
a constant steady-state value within a very short time.
This means that the rates of initiation, Ri, and termina-
tion, Rt, of the radicals are equal, or:
Ri ¼ Rt ¼ 2kt½M
2
ð2:32Þ
where the factor of ‘2’ in the above equation represents
the fact that the radicals are ‘destroyed’ in pairs. By
rearranging Equation (2.32), the concentration of the
radicals is given by:
½M
 ¼
Ri
2kt

1=2
ð2:33Þ
and then by substituting Equation (2.33) into Equation
(2.31), we obtains:
Rp ¼ kp½M
Ri
2kt

1=2
ð2:34Þ
A combination of Equations (2.28) and (2.34) then
yields:
Rp ¼ kp½M FIabs
kt

1=2
ð2:35Þ
and by using Equation (2.22), the expression for Rp
becomes:
Rp ¼ kp½M FI0ð1  10edcÞ
kt

1=2
ð2:36Þ
2.7.3.2 Cationic photopolymerization
The process of cationic photopolymerization can be
generalized as follows:
PI þ hn ! HþX
ð2:37Þ
HþX þ M!
ki
HMþ
1 X
Photoinitiation ð2:38Þ
HMþ
1 X þ M!
kp
HMþ
2 X;etc: Propagation ð2:39Þ
HMþ
n1X þ M!
kp
HMþ
n X
Propagation
ð2:40Þ
HMþ
n X !
kt
HMnX
Termination
ð2:41Þ
The reaction rates for initiation, propagation and termi-
nation are expressed as follows:
Ri ¼ FIabs
ð2:42Þ
Rp ¼ kp½HMþX½M
ð2:43Þ
Rt ¼ kt½HMþX
ð2:44Þ
where [HMþX] is the total concentration of the reactive
centers. Supposing that the steady-state assumption is
34
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

also valid for cationic photopolymerization, one can get
the following:
½HMþX ¼ FIabs
kt
ð2:45Þ
A combination of Equations (2.43) and (2.45) yields:
Rp ¼ kpFIabs½M
kt
ð2:46Þ
This is the rate of polymerization for cationic photo-
polymerization. Rp can also be expressed in terms of I0,
which is as follows:
Rp ¼ kp½M FI0ð1  10edcÞ
kt
ð2:47Þ
2.8 DEPOSITION TECHNIQUES FOR
POLYMER THIN FILMS
A brief list of the polymeric materials commonly used
in the context of various microsystems is presented in
Table 2.10. Polypyrrole is one candidate for a sorbent
thin-ﬁlm material. Chemical oxidation as a means of
depositing these conducting polymers onto host mem-
branes has been shown to be useful [47]. In this method,
the host PVDF ﬁlm is ‘pre-wet’ in a 50 % ethanol solution
and then dipped into the monomer (pyrrole) solution. The
‘superﬁcial’ solution is ‘blot dried’ with ﬁlter paper. This
coated material is then dipped in an oxidant solution (e.g.
ferric chloride hexahydrate) for chemical polymerization.
A similar approach has been reported by de Lacy Costello
et al. [48], where ferric nitrate solution was used for
polymerization.
To deposit polymer thin ﬁlms without affecting their
chemical integrity and physico-chemical properties, the
pulsed laser deposition technique has been recently used
[49]. A patterned deposition is possible by incorporating
an x–y positioning stage in this approach. These authors
[49] have deposited a ﬂuoroalcoholpolysiloxane (SXFA)
polymer under vacuum onto piezoelectric substrates in
this way. In yet another instance, UV-induced graft
copolymerization with 4-vinylpyridine has been used
for surface modiﬁcation of PVDF for the electroless
deposition of nickel [50]. This method enhanced the
adhesion of nickel to the PVDF by interfacial charge-
transfer interactions between the grafted polymer chains
and the deposited metals, the spatial distribution of the
grafted chains into the metal matrix and the covalent
‘tethering’ of the grafted chains on the PVDF surface.
Processing techniques involved in the fabrication of
polymer MEMS are described in Chapter 11.
2.9 PROPERTIES AND SYNTHESIS
OF CARBON NANOTUBES
Over the last few years there has been an increasing trend
to further miniaturize the sensors/actuators from the
micro to the nano scale. This is due to some outstanding
properties that these nano-scale materials can offer over
conventional bulk materials. One such nano-scale mate-
rial is the carbon nanotube (CNT). From their unique
electronic properties and thermal conductivities higher
than diamond to mechanical properties where the stiff-
ness, strength and resilience exceed any current material,
carbon nanotubes offer tremendous opportunities for the
development of fundamentally new material systems. In
particular, the exceptional mechanical properties of car-
bon nanotubes, combined with their low density, offer
much scope for the development of nanotube-reinforced
composite materials. The potential for nanocomposites,
reinforced with carbon nanotubes, having extraordinary
speciﬁc stiffness and strength properties, represent tremen-
dous opportunities for applications in the 21st Century.
The research towards exploring the various special
properties of carbon began in the mid-1980s, when
Smalley and coworkers discovered the fullerenes [51],
which are cage-like structures of carbon atoms having
hexagonal and pentagonal faces. The ﬁrst closed convex
structure formed is the C60 ‘buckyball’ structure. The
other forms of carbon-based materials that can exist in
different forms are ‘Diamond’ and the ‘graphite’ sheets.
In 1991, Iijima [52] discovered yet another form of
carbon-based material, which he named as ‘carbon nano-
tubes’. All of these forms are shown in Figure 2.10.
CNTs, due to their superior properties, have immense
potential for use in many structural applications. A single
layer of CNTs can achieve 50 times the tensile strength
of conventional steel [53], while the mass density of
CNTs is only 1/6 that of steel. These properties highlight
the promising role of CNTs in applications involving
nanomaterials and nanodevices. Theoretically, the tensile
modulus and strength of a graphene layer can reach up to
1 TPa and 200 GPa, respectively.
In addition to the exceptional mechanical properties
associated with carbon nanotubes, they also possess
superior thermal and electric properties. They are ther-
mally stable up to 2800 C in vacuum, have a thermal
Processing of Smart Materials
35

Table 2.10
Polymeric materials commonly used in various microsystems.
Polymer
Acronym
Chemical formula
General properties
Polyethylene
PE
CH2
CH2 n
Excellent chemical resistance, low cost, good electrical insulation
properties, clarity of thin ﬁlms, easy processability
Poly(vinyl chloride)
PVC
CH
CH2
n
Cl
Excellent electrical insulation over a range of frequencies,
good ﬁre-retardant properties, resistance to weathering
Poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)
PVDF
C
CH2
n
F
F
Piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties,
excellent resistance to ‘harsh’ environments
Polytetraﬂuoroethylene
PTFE
C
C
n
F
F
F
F
High heat resistance, high resistance to chemical agents and
solvents, high ‘anti-adhesiveness’, high dielectric properties,
low friction coefﬁcient non-toxic.
Poly(vinyl acetate)
PVAC
CH
O
CH2
C
O
CH3
n
Good adhesive properties.
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
PVAL
CH
OH
CH2
n
Good adhesive properties, water absorption, heat resistance,
electrical insulation
Polyamide
Nylon 6
NH
C
O
(CH2)5
n
Very good abrasion resistance, excellent resistance
to hydrocarbons
Polystyrene
PS
CH
CH2
n
Optical properties (transparency),
ease of coloring and processing
Polybutyleneterephthalate
PBT
(CH2)4 O
C
O
C
O
n
Good dimensional stability in water, high mechanical strength,
low water absorption

Poly(ether ether ketone)
PEEK
O
C
O
n
Hydrolysis resistance, good resistance to acids
Polycarbonate
PC
O
C
CH3
CH3
C
O
n
High impact strength, low moisture absorption, good heat resistance,
good rigidity and electrical properties, high light transmission,
high creep resistance
Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PMMA
C
C
CH3
CH2
O
O
CH3
n
Excellent weatherability, combination of stiffness, density and
moderate toughness, elasticity, optical properties
Polyimide
PI
C
N
C
C
N
C
O
O
O
O
n
Elasticity
Silicone rubber
Si
CH3
CH3
O
n
Elasticity
Polysulfone
PSU
SO2
n
Good for molding
Polypyrrole
PPy
N
n
Electroactive, conducting
Polydimethylsiloxane
PDMS
Si
CH3
CH3
O
n
Elasticity and biomedical compatibility
Polyaniline
PANI
NH
n
Electroactive, conducting

conductivity about twice as high as diamond and an
electric-current-carrying capacity 1000 times higher than
copper wire. These exceptional properties have been inves-
tigated for devices such as ﬁeld-emission displays, scan-
ning probe microscopy tips and microelectronic devices.
The size, mechanical strength and electrical properties
of nanotubes are highly dependent on the atomic archi-
tecture. It has been reported that armchair nanotubes
exhibit better ductility and electrical conductivity than
zigzag nanotubes. Schematics of these two forms are
CNTs shown in Figure 2.11 exist in two different forms.
A single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) has a hol-
low structure formed by covalently bonded carbon atoms
and can be imagined as a rectangular graphene sheet
rolled from one side of its longest edge to form a
cylindrical tube. Hemispherical caps seal both ends of
the tube as shown in Figure 2.10. For multi-walled
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), a number of graphene
layers are co-axially rolled together to form a cylindrical
tube (Figure 2.11). The spacing between the graphene
layers is about 0.34 nm. In other words, an MWCNT is
thought to be made up of nested shells of cylinders with
weak interlayer interactions. These values have been
widely used to interpret the mechanical properties of
single-walled and multi-walled nanotubes. The typical
dimensions of SWCNTs are shown in Table 2.11.
It has also been observed that the majority of carbon
nanotubes exhibit chirality [54] (Figure 2.12). In other
words, the been hexagonal carbon orientation with
respect to the tubular axis could be different for different
carbon nanotubes. The properties of CNTs depend lar-
gely on their diameters and chirality. Carbon nanotubes
have extraordinary mechanical, thermal and electrical
properties due to their unique carbon structure, as well
as their nano-size scale [55]. Wong et al. [56] reported
the average Young’s modulus value of MWCNTs, deter-
mined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) measure-
ments, to be 1.28  0.59 TPa, which is the largest of
any known material. Wildo¨er et al. used scanning tunnel-
ing microscopy (STM) to measure the conductivities of
individual carbon nanotubes and found that these depend
on the chiral angle and diameter [55].
Figure 2.10
Different forms of carbon-based materials. Reprinted from Composites Part B Engineering, vol 35 (2), pp. 95–101,
Copyright 2004, with permission from Elsevier
Figure 2.11
Different forms of carbon nanotubes: (a) arm-
chair; (b) zig-zag. Reprinted from Composite Science &
Technology, 61, 1899–1912, Copyright 2001, with permission
from Elsevier
Table 2.11
Key geometric parameters of
single-walled carbon nanotubes.
Parameter
Range of values
Thickness
0.0066–0.34 nm
Diameter
0.40–100 nm
Length
1 nm–1 mm
38
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The features (size, single- or multi-walled, helicity,
etc.) of carbon nanotubes are also determined by the
method of preparation. There are several methods for the
synthesis of carbon nanotubes. Arc discharge and laser
vaporization of a graphite electrode in the presence of
metal catalysts were the earliest methods used to synthe-
size CNTs [57]. However, both of these methods require
reaction temperatures higher than 3000 C, which is
incompatible with modern IC fabrication. Another lim-
itation is the high production cost due to the complex
equipment required and the low deposition rate [58]. In
recent years, pyrolysis of hydrocarbon (e.g. acetylene,
methane, etc.) vapors over transition metals incorporated
on a catalyst support has attracted much research interest
because of the simplicity of the equipment and reprodu-
cibility of the product in comparison with other methods.
Another method to produce high-quality carbon nano-
tubes is the use of microwave CVD. Compared with the
conventional thermal ﬁlament CVD method, microwave
CVD has much faster heating and cooling times and
higher yields of nanotubes. By optimization, this approach
is expected to result in up to 90% yields and a large-scale
production capability [59]. Techniques for the puriﬁcation
and functionalization of nanotubes for nanocomposites
and MEMS have also been developed [59].
Carbon nanotubes are regarded as promising ﬁller
materials for a new generation of high-performance
nanocomposites because of their exceptionally high
Young’s modulus [60], bending strength and low density.
The use of physical bonding and chemical bonding
represent two approaches for preparing composites of
nanotubes. In the former method, the CNTs are added to
a solvent, e.g. chloroform, toluene, ethanol, etc. and a
high-power ultrasonic probe is used to disperse the
system. Then, the dispersed nanotubes are blended with
the host material. Composite ﬁlms can be deposited by
drop- and spin-coating on various substrates. In this
method, the carbon nanotubes are only physically bonded
to the host material. Because of the pure carbon compo-
sition and their stable structures, carbon nanotubes are
insoluble in all organic solvents. This makes it extremely
difﬁcult to explore their properties and applications.
Furthermore, because the high surface energies make
carbon nanotubes easy to agglomerate (due to their nano-
size dimensions, composite processing is still limited to
bench-top levels and has been hampered by the high
viscosities of available matrix materials, lack of good
dispersion techniques and excessive porosity [61].
To overcome this problem, chemical modiﬁcation by
functionalization of the carbon nanotube surface has
been pursued [62]. It has been reported that functiona-
lized nanotubes can form stable and uniform colloidal
dispersions with some solvents. This can be explained by
the electrostatic repulsion resulting from the functional
groups attached to the surfaces of the nanotubes. Thus,
well-dispersed colloidal systems are required for in situ
polymerization. The functional groups attached to the
surfaces of the nanotubes are able to react with functional
monomers to form a chemically bonded UV-curable
polymer. The ‘functionalization yield’ can be enhanced
by using a phase-transfer catalyst at room temperature
[63]. A UV-curable polymer with chemically bonded
nanotubes can be synthesized by a three-step in situ
polymerization. Since UV curing is one of the preferred
methods of MEMS fabrication, especially by microster-
olithography, those materials are likely to have many
Armchair
Zig-Zag
ma2
na1
Chiral vector
a1
a2
Figure 2.12
Schematic showing the formation of a carbon nanotube from a rolled graphite sheet. Reprinted from Composite
Science & Technology, 61, 1899–1912, Copyright 2001 with permission from Elsevier
Processing of Smart Materials
39

potential applications. Design modeling and fabrication
of CNT based microsystems will be presented in later
chapters.
REFERENCES
1. G.T.A. Kovacs, N.I. Maluf and K.E. Petersen, ‘Bulk micro-
machining of silicon’ Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1536–
1551 (1998).
2. J.M. Bustillo, R.T. Howe and R.S. Muller, ‘Surface micro-
machining for microelectromechanical systems’, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 86, 1552–1574 (1998).
3. H. Guckel, ‘High-aspect-ratio micromachining via deep X-ray
lithography’, Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1586–1593 (1998).
4. Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides, ‘Soft lithography’, Angewandte
Chemie, International Edition, 37, 550–575 (1998).
5. V.K.Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘Three dimensional poly-
meric and ceramic MEMS and their applications’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 2722, 156–164 (1996).
6. K. Ikuta and K. Hirowatari, ‘Real three dimensional micro-
fabrication using stereo lithography and metal molding’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE: MEMS’93, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 42–47, (1993).
7. T. Katagi and N. Nakajima, ‘Photoforming applied to ﬁne
machining’, in Proceedings of the IEEE: MEMS’93, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 173–178, (1993).
8. C.S. Taylor, P. Cherkas, H. Hampton, J.J. Frantzen, B.O.
Shah, W.B. Tiffany, L. Nanis, P. Booker, A. Salahieh and R.
Hansen, ‘A spatial forming – a three dimensional printing
process’, in Proceedings of the IEEE: MEMS’94, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 203–208 (1994).
9. G. Thornell and S. Johansson, ‘Microprocessing at the
ﬁngertips’, Journal of Micromechanical and Microengineer-
ing, 8, 251–262 (1998).
10. J.W. Gardner, V.K. Varadan and O.O. Awadelkarim, Micro-
sensors MEMS and Smart Devices, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
London, UK (2002).
11. V.K. Varadan, X. Jiang and V.V. Varadan, Microstereolitho-
graphy and other Fabrication Techniques for 3D MEMS,
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, London, UK (2001).
12. L.E. Larson, ‘Microwave MEMS technology for next-gen-
eration wireless communications’, IEEE MTT-S Interna-
tional Symposium Digest, 3, 1073–1076 (1999).
13. L.T. Romankiw, ‘A path: from electroplating through litho-
graphic masks in electronics to LIGA in MEMS’, Electro-
chimica Acta, 42, 2985–3005 (1997).
14. C.H. Ahn and M.G. Allen, ‘Micromachined planar inductors
on silicon wafers for MEMS applications’, IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Electronics, 45, 866–876 (1998).
15. H.O. Pierson, Handbook of Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CVD): Principles, Technology and Applications, 2nd Edn,
Noyles Publications, New York, NY, USA (1999).
16. A. Ohta, S. Bhansali, I. Kishimoto and A. Umeda, ‘Devel-
opment of TiNi shape memory alloy ﬁlm deposited by
sputtering from separate Ti and Ni targets’, Proceedings of
SPIE, 3512, 138–145 (1998).
17. T. Honda, K.I. Arai and M. Yamaguchi, ‘Basic properties of
magnetostrictive actuators using Tb–Fe and Sm–Fe thin
ﬁlms’, IEICE Transactions on Electronics, E80-C, 232–238
(1997).
18. L.C. Chin, V.V. Varadan and V.K. Varadan, ‘Hybrid ﬁnite
element formulation for periodic piezoelectric arrays sub-
jected to ﬂuid loading’, International Journal of Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 37, 2987–3003 (1994).
19. V.K. Varadan, K.J. Vinoy and K.A. Jose, RF MEMS and their
Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, London, UK (2002).
20. V.K. Varadan, F. Selmi and V.V. Varadan, ‘Voltage tunable
dielectric ceramics which exhibit low dielectric constants
and applications thereof to antenna structure’, US Patent,
5 557 286 (1996).
21. S.B. Herner, F.A. Selmi, V.V. Varadan and V.K. Varadan,
‘The effect of various dopants on the dielectric properties of
barium strontium titanate’, Materials Letters, 15, 317–324
(1993).
22. V.K. Varadan, D.K. Ghodgaonkar, V.V. Varadan, J.F. Kelly
and P. Glikerdas, ‘Ceramic phase shifters for electronically
steerable antenna systems’, Microwave Journal, 38, 116–
127 (1992).
23. J.H. Won, H. Paek, Y.S Huang, K.K. Kim and Y.S. Cho,
‘Phase formation and characteristics of RF sputtering of
barium strontium titanate thin ﬁlms on various bottom
layers’, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electro-
nics, 6, 161–164 (1995).
24. S. Saha and S.B. Krapanidhi, ‘Study of the electrical
properties of pulsed laser ablated (BaO.5SrO.5) TiO3 thin
ﬁlms’, Materials Science and Engineering: Solid-State
Materials for Advanced Technologies, B57, 135–146 (1999).
25. I. Levin, R.D. Leapman and D.L. Kaiser, ‘Microstructure
and chemistry of non-stoichiometric (Ba,Sr) TiO3’, thin
ﬁlms deposited by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition’,
Journal of Materials Research, 15, 1433–1436 (2000).
26. E.J. Cukauskas, S.W. Kirchoefer and J.M. Pond, ‘Low-loss
BaO.5SrO.5TiO3 thin ﬁlms by inverted magnetron sputter-
ing’, Journal of Applied Physics, 88, 2830–2835, (2000).
27. M. Sedlar, M. Sayer and L. Weaver, ‘Sol–gel processing
and properties of cerium doped barium strontium titanate
thin ﬁlms’, Journal of Sol–Gel Science and Technology, 5,
201–210 (1995).
28. P.D. Calvert, E.S. Tormey and R.L. Pober, ‘Fish oil and
triglycerides as dispersants for alumina’, American Cera-
mics Society Bulletin, 65, 669–672 (1986).
29. A. Nazeri, M. Khan and T. Kidd, ‘Strontium barium titanate
thin ﬁlms by Sol–Gel processing’, Journal of Materials
Science: Letters, 14, 1085–1088 (1995).
30. S.B. Majumdar, M. Jain, A. Matinez, R.S. Katiyar, F.W. van
Keuls and F.A. Miranda, ‘Sol–Gel derived grain oriented
barium strontium titanate thin ﬁlms for phase shifter appli-
cations’, Journal of Applied Physics, 90, 896–903 (2001).
31. C.L. Canedy, S. Aggarwal, H. Li, T. Venkatesan, R. Ramesh,
F.W. van Keuls, R.R. Romanofsky and F.A. Miranda,
40
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

‘Structural and dielectric properties of epitaxial Ba1x
SrxTiO3=Bi4Ti3O12=ZrO2 heterostructures grown on sili-
con’, Journal of Applied Physics, 77, 1523–1525 (2000).
32. S. Middelhoek and S.A. Audet, Silicon Sensors, Academic
Press, London, UK (1989).
33. K. E. Peterson, ‘Silicon as a mechanical material’, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 70, 420–457 (1982).
34. J. Bryzek, K. Petersen and W. McCulley, ‘Micromachines on
the march’, IEEE Spectrum, 31(5), 20–31 (May 1994).
35. L.-S. Fan, Y.-C Tai and R.S. Muller, ‘Integrated movable
micromechanical structures for sensors and actuators’, IEEE
Transactions: Electron Devices, 35, 724–730 (1988).
36. K.A. Shaw, Z.L. Zhang and N.C. MacDonald, ‘SCREAM 1:
a single mask, single-crystal silicon process for microelec-
tromechanical structures’, in Proceedings of the IEEE:
MEMS’93, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 155–160 (1993).
37. W.H. Ko, J.T. Suminto and G.J. Yeh, ‘Bonding techniques
for microsensors’, Studies in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, 20, 41–61 (1985).
38. V.K. Varadan, and V.V. Varadan, ‘Three-dimensional poly-
meric and ceramic MEMS and their applicatiions’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 2722, 156–164 (1996).
39. D.L. Carraway, ‘The use of silicon microsensors in smart
skins for aerodynamic research’, in Proceedings of the
International Congress on Instrumentation in Aerospace
Simulation Facilities, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp.
413–422 (1991).
40. R. Pelrine, R. Kornbluh, J. Joseph and S. Chiba, ‘Electro-
striction of polymer ﬁlms for microactuators’, in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE: MEMS’97, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
pp. 238–243 (1997).
41. L. Ruiz de Angulo, J.S. Abell and I.R. Harris, ‘Magnetos-
trictive properties of polymer bonded Terfenol-D’, Journal of
MagnetismandMagneticMaterials,157–158,508–509(1996).
42. L.K. Lagorce and M.G. Allen, ‘Micromachined polymer
magnets’, in Proceedings of ISAF’96, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 85–90 (1996).
43. J.P. Fouassier, Photoinitiation, Photopolymerization and
Photocuring: Fundamentals and Applications, Hanser/
Gardener, Munich, Germany (1995).
44. J. Kagan, Organic Photochemistry: Principles and Applica-
tions, Academic Press, London, UK (1993).
45. C.L. Haertling, ‘Patterned ceramics for multilayer packaging
using ultraviolet curable pastes’, M.Sc. Thesis, Pennsylvania
State University, State College, PA, USA (1989).
46. S.P. Pappas (Ed.), Radiation Curing: science and Technol-
ogy, Plenum Press, New York, NY, USA (1992).
47. J. Mansouri and R.P. Burford, ‘Characterization of PVDF–
PPy composite membranes’, Polymer, 38, 6055–6069 (1997).
48. B.P.J. de Lacy Costello, P. Evans, N. Guernion, N.M.
Ratcliffe, P.S. Sivanand and G.C. Teare, ‘The synthesis of
a number of 3-alkyl and 3-carboxy substituted pyrroles; their
chemical polymerization onto poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)
membranes and their use as gas sensitive resistors’, Synthetic
Metals, 114, 181–188 (2000).
49. A. Pique´, R.C.Y. Auyeung, J.L. Stepnowski, D.W. Weir, C.B.
Arnold, R.A. McGill and D.B. Chrisey, ‘Laser processing of
polymer thin ﬁlms for chemical sensor applications’, Surface
and Coatings Technology, 163–164, 293–299 (2003).
50. G.H. Yang, C. Lim, Y.P. Tan, Y. Zhang, E.T. Kang and K.G.
Neoh, ‘Electroless deposition of nickel on ﬂuoropolymers
modiﬁed by surface graft copolymerization’, European
Polymer Journal, 38, 2153–2160 (2002).
51. H.W. Kroto, J.R. Heath, S.C. O’Brien, R.F. Curl and R.E.
Smalley, ‘C60: Buckminsterfullerene’, Nature (London),
318, 162–163 (1985).
52. S. Iijima, ‘Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon’, Nature
(London), 354, 56–58 (1991).
53. M.F. Yu, O. Lourie, M.J. Dyer, K. Moloni, T.F. Kelly and
R.S. Ruo, ‘Strength and breaking mechanism of multiwalled
carbon nanotubes under tensile load’, Science, 287, 637–640
(2000).
54. M.S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and R. Saito, ‘Physics of
carbon nanotubes’, Carbon, 33, 883–891 (1995).
55. J.W.G. Wildo¨er, L.C. Venema, A.G. Rinzler, R.E. Smalley
and C. Dekker, ‘Electronic structure of atomically resolved
carbon nanotubes’, Nature (London), 391, 59–62 (1998).
56. E.W. Wong, P.E. Sheehan and C.M. Lieber, ‘Nanobeam
mechanics: elasticity, strength, and toughness of nanorods
and nanotubes’, Science, 277, 1971–1974 (1997).
57. V. Ivanov, J.B. Nagy, P. Lambin, A. Lucas, X.B. Zhang, X.F.
Zhang, D. Bernaerts, G.V. Tendeloo, S. Amelinckx and J.V.
Landuyt, ‘The study of carbon nanotubes produced by a
catalytic method’, Chemical Physics Letters, 223, 329–335
(1994).
58. V.K. Varadan and J. Xie, ‘Large scale manufacturing of
functionalized carbon nanotubes and their applications to
EMI shielding, microfuel cells, batteries and structural
components’, US Patent, pending (2002).
59. J. Xie, N. Zhang, M. Guers and V.K. Varadan, ‘Ultraviolet-
curable polymer composites with chemically bonded carbon
nanotubes for microelectromechanical system applications’,
Smart Materials and Structures, 11, 575–580 (2002).
60. M.M.J. Treacy, T.W. Ebbesen and J.M. Gibson, ‘Exception-
ally high Young’s modulus observed for individual carbon
nanotubes’, Nature (London), 381, 678–680 (1996).
61. E.V. Barrera, ‘Key methods for developing single-wall
nanotube composites’, Journal of the Minerals, Metals
and Materials Society, 52, 38–42 (2000).
62. M.S.P. Shaffer, X. Fan and A.H. Windle, ‘Dispersion and
packing of carbon nanotubes’, Carbon, 36, 1603–1612
(1998).
63. N. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Guers and V.K. Varadan, ‘Functiona-
lization of carbon nanotubes by potassium permanganate
with the help of a phase transfer catalyst’, Smart Materials
and Structures, 11, 962–965 (2002).
Processing of Smart Materials
41

Part 2
Design Principles
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

3
Sensors for Smart Systems
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Various microsensing and micro-actuation mechanisms
have been developed for diverse smart system applica-
tions [1,2], including chemical sensors, gas sensors,
optical sensors, biosensors, thermal sensors, mechanical
sensors, etc. Some of the major sensing mechanisms for
mechanical
microsensors
are
introduced
in
this
chapter.
First, let’s consider some terminology regarding sensor
performance. The transfer function of a sensor is the
functional relationship between the physical input signal
and electrical output signal. The sensitivity is a relation-
ship indicating how much output one obtains per unit
input. The sensitivity is usually taken as the ratio
between a change in the electrical signal corresponding
to a change in the physical signal. Hence, the sensitivity
of the sensor is generally deﬁned as the slope of the
output characteristic curve. Furthermore, in some sen-
sors, the sensitivity is deﬁned as the input parameter
change required to produce a standardized output change.
The span or dynamic range is speciﬁed as the range
over which other performance characteristics described
in the data sheets are expected to apply. The accuracy of
a sensor is the largest expected error between actual and
ideal output signals. Accuracy is often expressed as the
percentage of the full range output.
Often, the relationship between input and output is
assumed to be linear over the working range. The error is
the maximum deviation from a linear transfer function
over the speciﬁed dynamic range, while the resolution of
a sensor is deﬁned as the minimum detectable signal
ﬂuctuation. The stability of a sensor is its ability to give
the same output when measuring a constant input,
measured over a period of time. The change that occurs
is referred to as drift.
All sensors have a ﬁnite response time when subjected
to an instantaneous change in the physical signal. In
addition, many sensors have decay times, which repre-
sent the time after a step change in physical signal that
the sensor output takes to decay to its original value. The
reciprocals of these times correspond to the upper and
lower cutoff frequencies, respectively. The bandwidth of
a sensor is the frequency range between these two
frequencies.
We now proceed to describe various sensor principles
applicable to smart systems.
3.2 CONDUCTOMETRIC SENSORS
When pressure is applied on a section of a conductor its
dimension changes, causing a change in its resistance.
This change, although it is usually very small in magni-
tude, can be detected by using a resistance bridge circuit,
and the detected output is the differential voltage which
is proportional to the applied pressure. Conventional
examples of such resistive (conductometric) sensors
include ﬁlm resistors, strain gauges, metal alloys and
polycrystalline semiconductors.
A very popular example of such a sensor is the strain
gauge shown in Figure 3.1. When pressure is applied to
the structure attached to the strain gauge, the lengths of
the metal strips increase and their widths decrease. Both
of these changes cause an increase in the resistance.
Although this change in resistance is usually too small to
measure directly, it can be determined with reasonable
sensitivity by including the strain gauge as an arm of a
Wheatstone bridge. The bridge is excited with a stabi-
lized DC supply, and the output is ‘zeroed’ at the null
point of measurement by additional conditioning electro-
nics. As stress is applied to the bonded strain gauge(s),
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

the resistive changes caused by this unbalances the
bridge and this results in a signal output.
Strain gauges have been in use for several years as
pressure sensors, load cells, torque sensors and position
sensors. With the popularization of micromachining tech-
nologies, their small-sized counterparts have also been
developed. In these, usually a bulk micromachined silicon
diaphragm is patterned with micro-sized strain gauges.
3.3 CAPACITIVE SENSORS
Capacitive sensors consist of a pair of electrodes
arranged in such a way that one of the electrodes
moves when the input variable (pressure, acceleration
or rate) is applied. While the simplest conﬁguration
consists of capacitors with two parallel plate electrodes,
capacitors with interdigitated ﬁngers (Figure 3.2) have
gained wide acceptance as inertial sensors, as they allow
for larger linear sensing ranges.
In a parallel plate capacitor, the capacitance C is given
by:
C ¼ eA
d
ð3:1Þ
where e is the permittivity of the gap, A is the area of the
electrodes and d is the separation between the electrodes.
For a circular diaphragm sensor, the capacitance under
deﬂection is as follows:
C ¼
ð ð
e
d  wðrÞ rdrdy
ð3:2Þ
Output
Earth
Output
Earth
R1
R2
R3
R4
Wheatctone
bridge circuit
End loops
Grid
Alignment
marks
End loops
Solder tabs
Backing and
encapsulation
Active
grid length
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1
(a) Schematic of a typical strain gauge. (b) Schematic of the Wheatstone bridge circuit used in connection with a strain
gauge to measure change in resistance.
46
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

where w(r) is the deﬂection of the diaphragm given by:
wðrÞ ¼ Pa4
64D 1 
r
a
 2

2
ð3:3Þ
in which r is the radial distance from the center of the
diaphragm, a is the diaphragm radius and P is the applied
pressure. The ﬂexural rigidity, D, is given by:
D ¼
Eh3
12ð1  n2Þ
ð3:4Þ
where E, h and n are the Young’s modulus, thickness and
Poisson’s ratio of the diaphragm, respectively.
Capacitive sensing utilizes the capacitance change
induced by the deformation of the diaphragm to convert
the sensory information (pressure, force, etc.) into
electrical signals (such as changes in oscillation frequ-
ency, time, charge and voltage). A schematic of a typical
capacitive microsensor is given in Figure 3.2(a), showing
an electrode on the ﬂexible diaphragm and another on the
substrate constructing he sensing capacitor. Capacitive
microsensors can be used for measuring pressure, force,
acceleration, ﬂow rate, displacement, position, orienta-
tion measurement, etc.
In capacitive microsensors, the capacitance change is
not usually linear with respect to diaphragm deformation.
The small capacitance (generally 1–3 pF) requires the
measurement circuit to be integrated on the chip. How-
ever, capacitive sensing has been found to have potential
for higher performance than piezoresistive sensing in
applications requiring high sensitivity, low pressure
ranges and high stability [2]. Comb-type electrostatic
sensing is made possible by micromachining technolo-
gies. In this case, the area between the plates is made to
vary as the overlap between the ‘ﬁngers’ change. Hence,
this type of sensor has a much broader linear range than
the parallel-plate type.
Two modiﬁcations have been suggested to increase
the linearity of the sensing arrangement shown in
Figure 3.2(a). These are the contact mode sensor and
the use of bossed diaphragms, as indicated in Figure 3.3
[3]. In the former, the capacitance is proportional to the
contact area and hence is linear with respect to the
applied pressure at the expense of decreased sensitivity.
In the latter, the shape of the center boss does not distort
appreciably when pressure is applied, while in the non-
uniform bossed diaphragm, the thicker center portion
contributes to most of the capacitance but is stiffer than
the outer area.
Figure 3.2
Two arrangements for capacitive sensing: (a) parallel plate; (b) comb structure.
Cut-away view
Cross-section
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3
Comparison of deﬂection shape in (a) normal and
(b) bossed diaphragms [3]. W.P. Eaton and JH Smith, Micro-
machined pressure sensors- Review and recent developments,
Smart Materials & Structures, vol. 6, 1997 # IOP
Sensors for Smart Systems
47

3.4 PIEZOELECTRIC SENSORS
These sensors are based on the piezoelectric effect
observed in some materials. In this, an electrical charge
change is generated when a mechanical stress is applied
across the face of a piezoelectric ﬁlm. The converse
effect is also observed in such materials. Piezoelectricity
is attributed to an asymmetry in the unit cell and the
resultant generation of electric polarization dipoles due
to the mechanical distortion. Examples of such materials
include lead zirconate titanate (more popularly known by
the acronym PZT), lead metaniobate, lead titanate and
their modiﬁcations. Above the Curie temperature, a
phase change occurs in these materials as their crystal
structures change from piezoelectric to non-piezoelectric.
For a piezoelectric disk of thickness t, the voltage (V )
generated across the electrode disk (Figure 3.4), when
subjected to a stress (T), is given by:
V ¼ gtT
ð3:5Þ
where g is the piezoelectric voltage coefﬁcient, deﬁned as
the ratio of the ﬁeld developed to the applied mechanical
stress.
The piezoelectric substrate forms an important ele-
ment which inﬂuences the performance of the sensor.
The relationship between the dipole moment and the
mechanical deformation is expressed by the following
constitutive relationships:
s ¼ cS  eE
ð3:6Þ
and:
D ¼ e0E þ eS
ð3:7Þ
where s is the mechanical stress, S is the strain, E is the
electric ﬁeld, D is the ﬂux density, c is the elastic
constant, e is the piezoelectric constant and e0 is the
permittivity of free space. It may be noticed that in the
absence of piezoelectricity these relationships reduce to
Hooke’s law and the constitutive relationship for dielec-
tric materials, respectively.
The effectiveness of a piezoelectric material is best
expressed in terms of its electromechanical coupling
coefﬁcient, K2. By deﬁnition, this is related to other
material parameters used in the above constitutive equa-
tions by the following:
K2 ¼ e2
ce
ð3:8Þ
Piezoelectric devices have several advantages over other
sensing mechanisms. Since this sensor generates its own
voltage, it does not require power for operation. Therefore,
for applications where power consumption is a signiﬁcant
constraint, piezoelectric devices can be used. Furthermore,
the piezoelectric effect is scalable to small devices and
several micro-fabricated sensors have been reported in the
literature, e.g. Lee et al. [4]. One disadvantage of piezo-
electric sensing is that it is sensitive only to time-varying
signals and hence static quantities such as weight cannot
be measured by using this approach.
While bulk ceramic substrates have been in use for this
application for a long time now, their micro-sized coun-
terparts with a ceramic thin ﬁlm deposited on another
substrate material have also been developed recently.
Piezoelectric sensing is widely used in pressure and
force
sensors,
accelerometers,
hydrophones,
micro-
phones, etc. A schematic of a micromachined piezo-
electric force sensor is shown in Figure 3.5.
3.5 MAGNETOSTRICTIVE SENSORS
Certain ferromagnetic materials show deformation when
subjected to a magnetic ﬁeld. This phenomenon, com-
monly known as magnetostriction, is reversible and is
also called the ‘Joule and Villari effects’. In their
demagnetized forms, domains in a ferromagnetic mate-
rial are randomly oriented. However, when a magnetic
ﬁeld is applied these domains become oriented along the
direction of the ﬁeld. This orientation results in micro-
scopic forces between these domains, hence resulting in
deformation of the material. By reciprocity, mechanical
deformation can cause orientation of the domains, so
resulting in induction at the macroscopic level [5]. The
elongation is quadratically related to the induced mag-
netic ﬁeld and hence is strongly non-linear.
Apartfromtheferroelectricbar,amagnetostrictivetrans-
ducer consists of a coil and a magnet [5] (Figure 3.6(a)).
It is now possible to translate this electrical equivalent
circuit to a electromechanical circuit, as shown in
Figure
3.6(b).
This
has
electrical
and
mechanical
Electrodes 
Piezoelectric 
disk
Figure 3.4
A typical structure for a piezoelectric sensing
device.
48
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

components connected to an electromechanical transfor-
mer. The ratio of the ‘turns’ of this transformer is decided
by the amount of coupling. The electromechanical cou-
pling coefﬁcient is deﬁned as the ratio of the energy
stored in the mechanical circuit to the total input energy.
The electromechanical coupling for the magnetostric-
tive transducer shown in Figure 3.6(a) relates the induced
voltage V at the terminals of the coil with the rate of
change in displacement at the free end of the bar:
V ¼ gEN
Rm
_x
ð3:9Þ
where g is the magnetostrictive strain modulus, E is the
Young’s modulus of the material, Rm is the total ‘reluc-
tance’ of the magnetic circuit and N is the number of turns
in the coil. The ratio on the right-hand side of Equation
(3.9) represents the electromechanical coupling.
Ferrites, and metallic alloys such as ‘Permalloy’ (45 %
Ni þ 55 % Fe), ‘Alfer’ (13 % Al þ 87 % Fe) and ‘Alcofer’
(12 % Al þ 2 % Co þ 86 % Fe), are some of the common
materials used in magnetostrictive transducers. These
materials can also be deposited as thin ﬁlms, thus
making it possible to fabricate micro-actuators and
sensors by using them. In addition, amorphous thin
ﬁlms, such as TbFe2, Tb0.3Dy0.7Fe2 and DyFe2, have
been reported in the literature [6]. The realization of such
thin ﬁlms is more process-dependent than their bulk
counterparts, as the preparation conditions affect the
homogeneity and growth process of the ﬁlms, as well
as their stoichiometry.
Figure 3.5
Schematic of a micromachined piezoelectric force sensor [4]. C. Lee, T. Itoh, and T. Suga, ‘‘Micromachined
piezoelectric force sensors based on PZT thin ﬁlms,’’ IEEE Trans Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics & Freq. Control, vol. 43, # 1996 IEEE
(a) Schematic 
(b) Equivalent circuit 
Radial 
magnetic 
field
Ring 
magnet 
(moving)
Strain pulse 
Figure 3.6
Schematics of (a) a magnetostrictive transducer
and (b) the equivalent electromechanical circuit [5].
Sensors for Smart Systems
49

3.6 PIEZORESISTIVE SENSORS
Apart from the electronic and mechanical properties of
silicon, discussed in Chapter 2, piezoresistivity is another
of its important characteristics which has resulted in the
widespread utilization of this material for sensors. The
piezoresistive effect, ﬁrst reported by Smith [7] in 1954,
in silicon, produces an approximately two orders of
magnitude larger resistance change than that due to the
dimension change under an applied stress in a typical
conductor. For example, if the material is elongated
0.1 % by stretching, the typical metallic resistors used
for strain gauges would change by about 0.2 %, but the
resistance of silicon would change by about 10 %. Piezo-
resistive sensors fabricated on micromachined dia-
phragms (Figure 3.7) dominate pressure, acceleration
and force sensing applications. For small deﬂections of
thin diaphragms, the change in resistance is linear with
the applied pressure [3]. Silicon obeys the Hooke’s law
up to 1 % strain, much higher a range than most metals
alloys.
The key processes involved in the fabrication of these
sensors include wet etching, ion implantation and anodic
bonding. Wet etching (discussed in Chapter 10, Section
10.4) is required to form the diaphragm. Strain gauges
are formed on the single crystal silicon by ion implanta-
tion. Recall that by this process, the majority of carriers
are injected into the intrinsic material, thereby increasing
its conductivity ‘selectively’. The uniformity and con-
centration of doping can be better controlled by ion
implantation than by other methods, such as diffusion.
Anodic bonding (for details, see Chapter 10, Section
10.2.5) can be used to attach the silicon wafer to Pyrex
glass for improved ruggedness. Since these are com-
monly used batch processing methods used in the IC
industry, the resulting sensors are of low cost.
A typical structure for a piezoresistive microsensor is
shown in Figure 3.7. Notice that the resistor is built on a
silicon diaphragm. The deﬂection of the diaphragm leads
to the dimensional change of the resistors, hence result-
ing in the resistance changing due to the piezoresistive
effect in silicon.
R
R ¼ ð1 þ 2nÞ l
l þ r
r
ð3:10Þ
where R is the change of the resistance, R is the
original resistance, n is the Poison ratio, l is the length
change of the resistor, l is the original length of the
resistor and r and r represent the resistivity change and
resistivity of the resistor, respectively. It is easily found
that the resistance of the resistors used for these types of
piezoresistive microsensors is proportional to the exter-
nal pressure when the resistivity change is ignored, since
the dimensional change is proportional to the applied
pressure. Typically, four piezoresistors are connected into
a Wheatstone bridge conﬁguration to reduce temperature
errors (Figure 3.8).
Another piezoresistive-type microsensor is shown in
Figure 3.9, where a semiconductor polymer foil is
formed on inter-digitated transducer (IDT) electrodes.
If a voltage is applied to the electrodes and there is no
pressure applied, the resistance is at the level of mega-
ohms (Mohm). When a force is applied, the resistance
decreases due to the current that ﬂows across the ‘shunt-
ing’ polymer foil [9]. Here, the sensing resistance is
inversely proportional to the applied pressure.
Piezoresistors 
Silicon Diaphragm 
Figure 3.7
A typical structure for a piezoresistive sensing
device.
Substrate
1µm
Oxide
Metal
line
Passivation
P+-polysilicon
interconnection
Piezo-
resistor Polysilicon
membrane
Figure 3.8
A schematic and illustration of a micromachined sensor using the piezoresistive properties of a polysilicon membrane
[8]. T. Lisec, M. Kreutzer, and B. Wagner, ‘‘Surface micromachined piezoresistive pressure sensors with step-type bent and ﬂat
membrane structures,’’ IEEE Trans. Electron. Dev., vol. 43, # 1996 IEEE
50
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The performance of piezoresistive microsensors varies
with temperature and pressure. The sensitivities of the
sensors decrease as the temperature increases, while any
residual stress generated during the fabrication will also
inﬂuence the sensitivities of the sensors. A non-linear
deﬂection of the diaphragm occurs when the high pres-
sure induced a deﬂection which is over 10 % of the
diaphragm thickness.
3.7 OPTICAL SENSORS
Optical sensors are based on measuring either the inten-
sity change in one or more light beams or phase changes
in the light beams caused by their interaction or inter-
ference. Thus, optical sensors can be grouped as either
intensity sensors or interferometric sensors. The techni-
ques used in the case of intensity sensors include light
scattering (both Rayleigh and Raman), spectral transmis-
sion changes (i.e. simple attenuation of transmitted light
due to absorption), microbending or radiative losses,
reﬂectance changes and changes in the modal properties
of the ﬁber [10]. Interferometric sensors, on the other
hand, are based on the magneto-optic, the laser-Doppler
or the Sagnac effects.
The simplest optical sensor is a photodetector. In a
reverse-biased P–N junction detector, electron–hole pairs
generated by the incident optical energy increases the
carrier density. PIN and avalanche-type photodiodes are
also used in several applications.
Interferometric techniques, such as Mach–Zehnder
interferometry and Fabri–Pe´rot interferometry, can be
used in conjunction with diaphragms to sense pressure,
force and related quantities. The deﬂection of the dia-
phragm varies linearly with the applied pressure. Some
optical sensors are based on measuring quantum-well
spectrum deformation.
Temperature sensors based on Fabri–Pe´rot interfero-
metry can measure the change in optical pathlength of a
short piece of material whose thermal expansion coefﬁ-
cient and refractive index as a function of temperature
are known. When improved selectivity is needed, multi-
ple wavelengths can be used to null secondary effects,
such as strain or pressure, in the material being mea-
sured. Materials used in such sensors include glass,
calcite or zinc selenide (ZnSe).
In a ﬁber-optic interferometer (Figure 3.10), the inter-
ference occurs at the partially reﬂecting surface of the
ﬁber and an external mirror. The size of the sensitive
element based on this principle can be as small as
diameter of the ﬁber. A low-coherence optical source is
usually used in this system. The prime advantage of
this interferometer is its simple conﬁguration.
The radiation of the laser diode is coupled into the
ﬁber and propagates partially through the coupler
towards the mirror. At the tip of the ﬁber, a part of the
radiation is internally reﬂected and the other part goes
out, gets reﬂected by the mirror and is picked up again by
the ﬁber. These two optical beams interfere with each
other and as a result the intensity of the optical radiation
at the photodetector is periodically changed, depend-
ing on the distance x0 between the ﬁber and mirror.
The displacement of the mirror by l=2 changes the path-
length difference of the interfering rays by 2p, resulting
in one period variation of the radiation intensity at the
photodetector.
Generally, the intensities of the interfering rays are
different. In such a case, 100 % ‘visibility’ of the inter-
ference cannot be achieved, even at a zero pathlength
difference of the interfering rays. The detected signal
intensity is given by the following
I ¼ I1 þ I2 þ 2g
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
I1I2
p
cos j
ð3:11Þ
v
d
Substrate
Semiconducting 
polymer
Interdigital
electrodes
Figure 3.9
Illustration of a piezoresistive sensing device combining inter-digitated transducers (IDTs) and a semiconducting
polymer [9].
Sensors for Smart Systems
51

where j is the phase difference of the interfering rays, I1
and I2 are the intensities of the two rays and g is the
degree of coherence of the beam.
In a ﬁber optic Fabry–Pe´rot interferometer;
I1 ¼ R1I0
ð3:12Þ
and:
I2 ¼ ð1  R1Þ2RI0
ð3:13Þ
where I0 is the intensity of the laser diode radiation
coupled into the ﬁber, R1 is the reﬂectivity of the end face
of the ﬁber and R is the reﬂectivity of the external mirror.
Thus, when the distance between the interferometer
mirrors equals x0, the light intensity detected by the
photodetector is:
I ¼ I0

R1 þ ð1  R1Þ2R þ 2ð1  R1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R1R2
p
 ðsin y
y

cos
4p
l


x0

ð3:14Þ
where:
y ¼ p l
lc
in which l and lc are the path difference and coherence
length of two rays in a non-coherent system. When the
distance between the ﬁber and mirror is smaller than the
coherence length, interference occurs and the intensity of
the light in the interferometer changes with the mirror
displacements. The ‘visibility’ of interference increases
when the distance between the mirror and ﬁber is
decreased.
Another possibility is to use ﬁber Bragg grating (FBG)
devices, e.g. for temperature sensing. The challenge here
is to fabricate a device that responds only to temperature.
In one reported example, two identical FBGs have been
interferometrically monitored [11]. By incorporating
these in a bimetallic beam, the temperature was reliably
measured independent of other effects, with  1 % line-
arity achieved over the range 25 to 65 	C, and with a
possible resolution of  0.006 	C. Germanium–silica
ﬁbers, fabricated as a ﬁber Bragg grating [12], can be
used for higher temperatures up to 650 	C.
Two types of optical rotation sensors have been
developed based on the Sagnac effect; i.e. the ring laser
gyroscope and the ﬁber-optic gyroscope. When two light
beams propagate in opposite directions around a com-
mon path, they experience a relative phase shift, depend-
ing upon the rotation rate of the plane of the path. The
actual direction is obtained by integrating the output. In
the case of the ring laser gyroscope, this phase change
produces a change in the oscillation frequency of a laser
that is integral to the path. In the case of the ﬁber-optic
gyroscope, the phase difference is detected by ‘interfer-
ing’ the two beams outside the path. The ﬁber-optic
gyroscope is a simpler device and can achieve the
required performance at a lower cost than with ring
laser or mechanical gyroscope technology.
The ﬁber-optic gyroscope consists of a loop of a
single-mode optical ﬁber and related coupler compo-
nents, a semiconductor laser and signal-processing elec-
tronics. The coupler components are generally fabricated
in proton-exchanged LiNbO3 integrated-optic circuits
due to their ability to modulate the light beam for
improved detection.
Photodetector
Laser diode
Uout
Fiber optic
coupler
Optical
fiber
Mirror
Figure 3.10
Schematic of a ﬁber-optic interferometric sensor.
52
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

As seen from the above, nearly all physical quantities of
relevance to smart systems may be measured by using
optical sensors. These include temperature, pressure, ﬂow,
displacement, velocity, acceleration, etc. Optical sensors
usually have high sensitivity, fast response, low noise and
high reliability. They are also free of electromagnetic
interference. However, the main disadvantages are the
cost involved in accurately aligning and calibrating the
sensors and issues associated with temperature sensitivity.
3.8 RESONANT SENSORS
Resonant sensors are based on measuring the resonant
frequency of the mechanical vibration of beams or dia-
phragms. The applied strain causes changes in the resonant
frequency (similar to a guitar string), enabling measure-
ment of input variables such as pressure, acceleration, rate
and temperature. Resonant frequency pickup can use any
of the sensing technologies discussed previously. Resonant
sensing is easily understood based on the change in the
natural frequency of a string with the tensile force. In a
resonant microsensor developed based on this principle,
the strain caused by pressure on the diaphragm leads to
variation of its natural frequency. By picking up the natural
frequency variation of the resonator, the physical informa-
tion which caused the strain will be sensed.
As an example, the natural resonant frequency of a
ﬂexure resonator with both ends ﬁxed can be obtained
from the following [13]:
f ¼ 4:732h
2pl2
E
12r ½1 þ 0:2366ðl=hÞ2e1=2
	

ð3:15Þ
where f is the natural frequency of the fundamental
oscillating mode, l the resonator length, h the resonator
thickness, E the Young’s modulus, r the density of the
diaphragm material and e the strain generated inside the
resonator structure. Comparing resonant sensing with
piezoresistive sensing, the resonator acts as a kind of strain
gauge – the resonant strain gauge – which relates the strain
with the resonant frequency. Therefore, the gauge factor of
the above resonant strain gauge can be determined as:
kgf ¼ 1
2
0:2366ðl=hÞ2
1 þ 0:2366ðl=hÞ2e
"
#
ð3:16Þ
and:
f
f
¼ kgfe
ð3:17Þ
If the strain is 100 ppm, for a 1.2mm long, 20 mm wide and
5 mm thick resonator strain gauge, the gauge factor can be
as high as 3000, while the piezoresistive strain gauge
factor is only about 2. Since the gauge factor relates
directly to the sensitivity of the sensor, resonant sensing
can be used to obtain high-sensitive micro sensors. How-
ever, as resonant sensing usually requires a more complex
sensor structure than piezoresistive sensing, resonant strain
gauges need to be encapsulated from the ﬂuid [14].
The resonant microbeam system shown in Figure 3.11
acts as a sensitive strain gauge [15]. In Figure 3.11(b), when
the pressure P1 exceeds P2, the diaphragm bends down-
ward,
increasing
the
resonance
frequency
of
the
microbeam, represented by the line in the middle of the
ﬁgure. In Figure 3.11(c), an upward acceleration deﬂects
the proof mass downward, hence causing a frequency
increase. The microbeam is sealed in an integral vacuum
enclosure to prevent gas damping (Figure 3.11(a)). Changes
in the stress state of the diaphragm cause changes in the
tension in the embedded structure, which in turn result in
changes in its resonant frequency. The structure is usually
driven into resonance by electrostatic excitation by applied
AC voltages and the resonant frequency is sensed by
piezoresistive sensing. For open-loop tests, the beam elec-
trode is driven by an external oscillator at the test frequency.
The differential ampliﬁer ampliﬁes the AC signal from the
piezoresistive sense resistor. For closed-loop operation, an
automatic gain control (AGC) circuit is used to maintain a
constant amplitude and prevent ‘over driving’ the beam.
Open-loop tests disable the AGC, measure the gain = (Vout/
Vin) versus frequency and drive amplitude. Closed-loop
tests enable the AGC, connect the beam drive and measure
frequency versus strain and temperature.
Capacitive sensing may also be employed in a similar
arrangement. Alternately, the structure can be optically
excited by a laser and sensed by a photodetector. Resonant
sensors have better sensitivity than simple piezoresisitive
sensors. It may also be noted that the output is frequency,
and hence is inherently more immune to noise than analog
signals in the case of piezoresistive or capacitive sensors.
3.9 SEMICONDUCTOR-BASED SENSORS
There are several sensor conﬁgurations making use of the
interesting properties of semiconductor devices. In the
following example, a ﬁeld effect transistor (FET) is
modiﬁed with its gate electrode suspended with micro-
machined beams. Changes in the positions of the beams,
caused by the measurand quantity, affect the FET output
and can be used as a sensing mechanism.
Sensors for Smart Systems
53

First, we will discuss an accelerometer consisting of
a proof mass suspended over an FET, with the gate
electrode of the device attached to the suspended
structure. The anchors of the ‘meander’ support are
elevated to suspend the beam above the gate region
(Figure
3.12).
This
arrangement
provides
a
gap
between the gate and the insulator layer, thus keeping
the threshold voltage for the FET constant [16]. The
meander beams attached to this system are conﬁgured
such that the electrode moves in the direction shown in
Figure 3.12.
This motion of the gate electrode changes the transis-
tor drain current without affecting the current density
through the channel. The sensitivity S of this device is
given by the following:
S ¼ dID
dW
ðA=mÞ
ð3:18Þ
where dID is the change in drain current and dW is the
change in the depth to which the gate is overlapping the
channel.
Vacuum
cover
enclosur
Drive
line
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Contacts for
sense lines
Resonant
microbeam
Silicon
diaphragm
Silicon Proof mass
Silicon flexure
P1
P2
Vin
Va
V +
V –
VT
Beam
Top
Substrate
IDC
Sense resistor
Detector
AGC amplifier
Counter out
Vout
Beam
drive
Voltage-controlled
attenuator
Differental
amplifier
Figure 3.11
Resonant microbeam system (a) showing cross-sectional views of the polysilicon beam attached to a silicon diaphragm
(b) or silicon ﬂexure (c), along with (d) a schematic of the related microbeam test circuit [15]. Reprinted from Sensors Actuators A,
35, Zook J D, Burns D W, Guckel H, Sniegowski J J, Engelstad R L and Feng Z, Characteristics of polysilicon resonant microbeams,
pp. 51–59, Copyright 1992, with permission from Elsevier
54
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

For a typical n-channel FET, the drain current is given
by:
ID ¼ CgmW
2L
½2ðVGSVTÞVDSV2
DS
for VDS <VGSVT
ð3:19Þ
and:
ID ¼ CgmW
2L
ðVGS  VTÞ2
for VDS  VGS  VT
ð3:20Þ
where VGS and VDS are the gate-to-source and drain-to-
source voltages, VT is the threshold voltage at which the
channel begins to conduct, Cg is the gate capacitance per
unit gate area, m is the majority carrier mobility for the
channel and W and L are the width and length of the
channel, respectively. These equations show a linear
relationship between the drain current and the channel
width W.
The threshold voltage for the FET is as follows:
VT ¼ VFB  QD
Ci

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2qeNDðVbi  VBSÞ
p
Ci
ð3:21Þ
where QD is the dose of the n-type impurity, ND is
the doping concentration, e is the dielectric constant of
the semiconductor and VFB, Vbi and VBS are the ﬂat-band
voltage, built-in potential of the channel junction and
substrate bias, respectively; Ci is the capacitance of
the gate, which is a series combination of the capacitance
due to the air gap and that due to the insulator layer.
For very thin insulator layers, this capacitance can be
approximated to that due to air alone. Thus, the conﬁg-
uration presented here results in a linear relationship
for the device current to the mechanical motion. Further-
more, the lateral motion permits larger amplitudes of
variation. The inertial force of the mass causes the
lateral movement when the device can be used as an
accelerometer.
Substrate 
Structural layer 
Gate electrode
Insulator
Channel
Source 
Drain
(b)
(a)
Meander beam 
Insulator 
Drain 
Source
Anchor 
Direction of
vibration 
Polymer 
Structural layer 
Gate electrode 
Channel 
Source 
Drain 
Gate
L
W
Gate/anchor
Figure 3.12
Schematics of a movable-gate ﬁeld effect transistor: (a) top view; (b) cross-sectional view.
Sensors for Smart Systems
55

Table 3.1
Structures of Love, SAW, SH–SAW, SH–APM and FPW devices and comparison of their operation [17,18]. M. Hoummady,
A. Campitelli and W. Wlodarski, ‘‘Acoustic wave sensors: design, sensing mechanisms and applications,’’ Smart Mater. Struct. 6 1997, # IOP
Device type
Substrate
Typical
Structure
Particle displacement
Transverse component
Sensing
frequency
relative to wave
relative to sensing
medium/
propagation
surface
quantity
Love
ST-quartz
95–130 MHz
Transverse
Parallel
Ice, liquid
Rayleigh SAW
ST-quartz
80 MHz–1 GHz
Transverse parallel
Normal
Strain, gas
SH–SAW
LiTaO3
90–150 MHz
Transverse
Parallel
Gas, liquid
SH–APM
ST-quartz
160 MHz
Transverse
Parallel
Gas, liquid,
chemical
Lamb/FPW
SixNy=ZnO
1–6 MHz
Transverse parallel
Normal
Gas, liquid

3.10 ACOUSTIC SENSORS
Acoustic sensors operate by converting electrical energy
in to acoustic waves, the propagation characteristics of
which could be inﬂuenced by the physical parameter
being measured, and then converting this back to
electrical energy for further processing. Various conﬁg-
urations of acoustic wave devices are possible for sensor
applications. The important characteristics of some of
these devices are summarized in Table 3.1. The type of
acoustic wave generated in a piezoelectric material
depends mainly on the substrate material properties, the
crystal cut and the structure of the electrodes utilized to
transform the electrical energy into mechanical energy.
A Rayleigh wave has both a surface-normal compo-
nent and a surface-parallel component in the direction of
propagation. The wave velocity is determined by the
substrate material and the crystal cut. Most surface
acoustic wave (SAW) devices operate under this mode
and will be discussed further below. The energies of the
SAW are conﬁned to a zone close to the surface a few
wavelengths thick [19]. Love waves are guided acoustic
modes which propagate in a thin layer deposited on a
substrate. The acoustic energy is concentrated in this
guiding layer and results in a high-mass sensitivity. This
wave mode is typically employed in gases, biochemical
or viscosity sensors.
The selection of a different crystal cut can yield shear
horizontal (SH) surface waves instead of Rayleigh
waves. The particle displacements of this wave are
transverse to the wave propagation direction and parallel
to the plane of the surface. The frequency of operation is
determined by the inter-digitated transducer (IDT) ﬁnger
spacing and the shear horizontal wave velocity for the
particular substrate material. These have shown consid-
erable promise in applications such as sensors in liquid
media and biosensors [20–22]. In general, SH–SAWs are
sensitive to mass loading, viscosity, conductivity and
permittivity of the adjacent liquid.
The conﬁguration of SH–APM devices is similar to
the Rayleigh SAW devices, but the wafer is thinner,
typically a few acoustic wavelengths. SH waves excited
by the transducer propagate in the bulk of the substrate,
at an angle to the surface. These waves reﬂect between
the plate surfaces as they travel in the plate between
the input and output transducers. The frequency of
operation is determined by the thickness of the plate
and the design of the transducer. SH–APM devices are
mainly used in liquid sensing and offer the advantage of
using the back surface of the plate as the sensing active
area.
Lamb waves, also known as ﬂexural plate waves
(FPWs), are elastic waves that propagate in plates of
ﬁnite thickness and are used for the health monitoring
of structures and for ﬂow sensors: as the ﬂuid passes
through a channel above the acoustic path, it affects the
properties of the acoustic waves propagating on the
substrate.
Surface acoustic wave (SAW)-based sensors form
an important part of the sensor family and in recent
years have seen diverse applications ranging from gas
and vapor detection to strain measurement [19]. SAW
devices were ﬁrst used in radar and communication
equipment as ﬁlters and delay lines and were recently
found to have several applications in sensors for various
physical
variables,
including
temperature,
pressure,
force, electric ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld, as well as che-
mical compounds. A SAW device consists of a piezo-
electric wafer, IDTs and reﬂectors on its surface. The
IDT is the ‘cornerstone’ of SAW technology, converting
the electrical energy into mechanical energy, and vice
versa, and hence are used for exciting as well as detecting
the SAW.
An IDT consists of two metal comb-shaped electrodes
placed on a piezoelectric substrate (Figure 3.13). An
electric ﬁeld, created by the voltage applied to the
electrodes, induces dynamic strains in the piezoelectric
substrate,
which
in
turn
launches
elastic
waves.
These waves contain, among others, the Rayleigh
waves which run perpendicular to the electrodes with
velocity VR.
If a harmonic voltage, v ¼ v0 exp ( jot), is applied to
the electrodes, the stress induced by a ﬁnger pair travels
along the surface of the crystal in both directions. To
ensure constructive interference and in-phase stress, the
distance between two neighboring ﬁngers should be
equal to half the elastic wavelength, lR.
d ¼ lR=2
ð3:22Þ
v
d
Figure 3.13
Finger spacings and (d) and their role in determi-
nation of the acoustic wavelength (n) in an inter-digitated
transducer [23].
Sensors for Smart Systems
57

The associated frequency is known as the synchronous
frequency and is given by the following:
f0 ¼ VR=lR
ð3:23Þ
At this frequency, the transducer efﬁciency in converting
electrical energy to acoustical, or vice versa, is max-
imized. The width of each electrode ﬁnger is generally
chosen as half the period. Its length determines the
acoustic beamwidth and hence is not as signiﬁcant in
this preliminary design. The number of pairs of ﬁngers
are however critical in choosing the device bandwidth.
The impulse response of the basic IDT is a rectangle.
The Fourier transform of a rectangle is a sinc function
whose bandwidth in the frequency domain is propor-
tional to the length of the rectangular window in the
space domain. As a result, a narrow bandwidth requires
the IDT to have a large number of ﬁngers. A schematic of
a SAW device with IDTs´ metallized onto the surface is
shown in Figure 3.14 [23].
The exact calculation of the piezoelectric ﬁeld driven
by the inter-digital transducer is rather elaborate [19]. For
simplicity, analysis of the IDT is carried out by means of
numerical models. The frequency response of a single
IDT can be simpliﬁed by the delta-function model [19].
The SAW velocity on the substrate depends on its density
and elastic and piezoelectric constants. The principle of
SAW sensors is based on the fact that the SAW traveling
time between the IDTs changes with variation in the
physical variables.
Acoustic sensors offer a rugged and relatively inex-
pensive platform for the development of wide-ranging
sensing applications. A unique feature of acoustic sen-
sors is their direct response to a number of physical and
chemical parameters, such as surface mass, stress, strain,
liquid density, viscosity, dielectric and conductivity pro-
perties [24]. Furthermore, the anisotropic nature of piezo-
electric crystals allows for various angles of cut, with
each cut having unique properties. Applications, such
as, for example, a SAW-based accelerometer utilize a
quartz crystal with an ST-cut, which has an effective
zero temperature coefﬁcient [25], with a negligible
frequency
shift
through
changes
in
temperature.
Again, depending on the orientation of the crystal cut,
various SAW sensors with different acoustic modes may
be constructed, with a mode ideally suited towards a
particular application. Other attributes include very low
internal loss, uniform material density and elastic con-
stants and advantageous mechanical properties [26].
The principal means of detection of the physical
property change involves the transduction mechanism
of a SAW acoustic transducer, which involves transfer
of signals from the mechanical (acoustic wave) to the
electrical domain [19]. Small perturbations affecting
the acoustic wave would manifest themselves as large
changes when converted to the electromagnetic (EM)
domain because of the difference in velocity between
the two waves. Given that the velocity of propagation of
the SAW on a piezoelectric substrate is 3488 m=s and the
AC voltage is applied to the IDT at a synchronous
frequency of 1 MHz, the SAW wavelength is given by
l ¼ v=f ¼ 3:488  103 m. The EM wavelength in this
case is lc ¼ c=f, where c ¼ ð3  108 m=sÞ is the velocity
of light. Thus, lc ¼ 30 m, and the ratio of the wave-
lengths ðl=lcÞ ¼ 1:1  105.
3.11 POLYMERIC SENSORS
Several well-known sensing mechanisms have been dis-
cussed so far in this chapter. This and the next section
will dwell on two material systems that have not been
explored to their fullest potential.
The advancement of silicon-based micro systems is
intimately intertwined with developments in silicon
semiconductor processing technology. Accordingly, var-
ious processing approaches have been established for the
integration of silicon-based micro systems with standard
complimentary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) pro-
cessing. For precision devices, and for devices requiring
To source
To detector
Uniform
finger spacing
IDTs’ center-to-center separation
M
W
λR
Constant finger overlap
Figure 3.14
Schematic of a SAW device with IDTs metallized onto the surface [23].
58
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

integrated electronics, silicon is presently unrivaled.
However, it is not necessarily the best material for all
applications. For example, structures fabricated on this is
limited to 2-D or very limited 3-D systems, unpackaged
silicon devices are incompatible with many chemical and
biological substances and fabrication requires sophisti-
cated, expensive equipment operated in a clean-room
environment. These often limit the low-cost potential of
silicon-based micro systems. Polymer-based micro sys-
tems are rapidly gaining momentum due to their potential
for conformability and other special characteristics not
available with silicon. In general, polymer-based devices
may not be as small or as complex as those with silicon.
However, polymers are often ﬂexible, chemically and
biologically compatible, available in many varieties and
can be fabricated in truly 3-D shapes. Most of these
materials and their fabrication processes are inexpensive.
Perhaps one of the most important advantages of sensors
using polymeric materials, in the context of smart systems,
is their potential for being distributed over a large area.
Polymer sensors are particularly advantageous in
‘moderate-performance’ devices which are low cost or
disposable [27]. Unlike many silicon devices that are
often packaged inside polymers, sensors built with poly-
mers can even be ‘self-packaged’. Active polymer com-
ponents
can
take
advantage
of
several
functional
polymers to increase their functionality. Polymer sensors
may be divided into two categories. The ﬁrst uses the
piezoelectric properties observed in some functional
polymers while the second uses the change in conduc-
tivity of some other polymers when exposed to changing
environmental conditions.
Since the discovery of strong piezoelectricity in poly
(vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF) in 1969, piezoelectric poly-
mers have been extensively investigated for various
applications [28]. There are some unique features of
piezoelectric polymers that make them attractive for
use as sensing elements, including their relatively low
acoustic impedance, broadband acoustic performance,
ﬂexible form and availability in large area ﬁlms, and
ability to be dissolved and coated onto various substrates.
In the successful applications of piezoelectric polymer
technology, these characteristics have prevailed over
their inherent disadvantages of relatively weak piezo-
electric properties, large dielectric and elastic losses,
and low dielectric constants. In addition to its piezo-
electric properties, PVDF also offers pyroelectric proper-
ties [17].
PVDF is a semicrystalline high-molecular-weight poly-
mer formed by the linking together of simple 1,1-diﬂuor-
oethylene (VDF) molecules. Under precisely controlled
reaction conditions, a molecular structure of PVDF with a
90 % head-to-tail arrangement (i.e. CH2–CF2–(CH2–
CF2)n–CH2–CF2) [29] can be obtained. PVDF is approxi-
mately half crystalline and half amorphous. The most
common polymorph form of PVDF, the a-phase, is pro-
duced by crystallization from the melt or solution. The
a-phase can be transformed into the polar form, the b-
phase, by mechanically stretching or rolling at elevated
temperatures. Since all of the dipole moments become
perpendicular to the chain axes, microscopically, each
crystallite has a net dipole moment and is piezoelectric.
However, on the macroscopic scale, there is no polariza-
tion within the polymer due to the random orientation of
the dipole moments of the crystallites. In order to render
the PVDF ﬁlm piezoelectric, poling is required, which
involves the application of an electric ﬁeld. This step
preferentially aligns the dipoles of the crystallites in the
direction of the applied electric ﬁeld and thus produces a
net polarization. In the copolymer (P(VDF–TrFE)), the
increased number of the relatively large ﬂuorine atoms
prevents the formation the of tgþ tg-conformation. This
extends the polymer chains to crystallize directly into the
b-phase. The copolymer also needs a ﬁnal poling step to
make it fully piezoelectric. The two main poling techni-
ques are conventional two-electrode poling (also referred
to as thermal poling) and corona poling. A listing of the
properties of poled PVDF and its copolymer P(VDF–
TrFE) is provided in Table 3.2 [30].
Several standard processes are available for the deposi-
tion of polymer thin ﬁlms. Some ﬁlms which are used
for gas sensing employing SAW devices are listed in
Table 3.3. These could be deposited on a substrate by
deposition methods such as spin coating, dip coating and
in situ polymerization.
3.12 CARBON NANOTUBE SENSORS
After carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were ﬁrst discovered by
Iijima in 1991 [31], several researchers have reported
excellent mechanical, electrical and thermal properties
for these materials, both theoretically and experimen-
tally. In recent years, such nanotubes have been intro-
duced into microelectronics and micro electromechanical
systems (MEMS). These nanotubes are also regarded as
promising materials for nanotechnology and nano elec-
tromechanical systems (NEMS).
Fundamentally, CNTs can be considered as rolled-up
cylinders of graphite sheets of sp2-bonded carbon atoms
with diameters less than 100 nm. The length of an
individual carbon nanotube could typically vary from
Sensors for Smart Systems
59

tens of nanometers to several microns. Caps have always
been observed at both ends of these cylinders, which
could be hemispheres of a fullerene, such as C60. Carbon
nanotubes can be divided into two categories, i.e. single-
walled nanotubes (SWNTs) and multi-walled nanotubes
(MWNTs), according to the number of grahene layers.
Some properties of CNTs, such as conductivity varia-
tion and the electrostrictive effect, have been used in
implementing sensors using them. The design of such
sensors follow the principles discussed earlier in this
chapter. In the following, we present a somewhat differ-
ent approach that makes use of the variation in electro-
magnetic properties of a transmission line coated with a
layer of a CNT [32]. Based upon the change in this
electrical property in composite thin ﬁlms of carbon
naotubes (as the vapor concentration varies), monitoring
of the reﬂection phase at radio frequencies has been
proposed for real-time wireless sensing applications. The
reﬂection phase of electromagnetic waves reﬂected from
a load was determined by load impedance. For this
purpose, composite thin ﬁlms with funtionalized carbon
nanotubes (f-CNTs) were coated onto an interdigital
coplanar waveguide, as shown in Figure 3.15, and the
phase change of the reﬂected waves due to the presence
of an organic gas was evaluated.
Table 3.2
Comparison of typical properties of PVDF and P(VDF–TrFE) [30].
Property
PVDF
P(VDF–TrFE)
Coupling coefﬁcient
k31
0.12
0.20
kt
0.14
0.25–0.29
Piezoelectric strain constant (1012 m=V or C/N)
d31
23
11
d33
33
38
Piezoelectric stress constant (103 V m=N)
g31
216
162
g33
330
542
Pyroelectric coefﬁcient, P (106 C=(m2 K)
30
40
Young’s modulus, Y (109 N=m2)
2–4
3–5
Relative permittivity, e=e0
12–13
7–8
Mass density, r (103 kg=m)
1.78
1.82
Speed of sound, c (103 m=s)
2.2
2.4
Acoustic impedance, Z (MRa)
3.92
4.37
Loss tangent, tan de (at 1 kHz)
0.02
0.015
Temperature range (	C)
40 to 80
40 to 115
Table 3.3
Typical examples of polymer thin ﬁlms
used in gas sensors.
Measurand
Coating
Hydrogen
Palladium
SO2
Triethanolamine
NO2
Lead phthalocyanine
Toluene
Polydimethylsiloxane
Water vapor/humidity
Polymide, SiO2,
cellulose acetate
H2S
WO3
CO
Metal phthalocyanine
CO2
Polyethyleneimine
CH4
Metal phthalocyanine
NH3
Platinum
Power 
divider
Gas sensor 
(CNT/PMMA)
Reference load
(NiCr thin film)
RF signal
Figure 3.15
Schematic of a sensor based on the phase changes
in a transmission line coated with a carbon nanotube composite.
60
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

When a reﬂected wave exists on a ‘lossless’ transmis-
sion line terminated with a load impedance, ZL ¼ a þ jb,
the voltage across T the line is given by the following:
V ¼ Vþejbz þ Vejbz
ð3:24Þ
where V þ and V  are the amplitude constants of the
incident and reﬂected waves, respectively, and b is the
phase constant for the ‘lossless’ line. The voltage reﬂec-
tion coefﬁcient, GL, is described by the ratio of V  to V þ
as follows [33].
GL ¼ V
Vþ ¼ ZL  ZC
ZL þ ZC
ð3:25Þ
and the voltage at any point on the transmission line
(z < 0) is given by the following:
V ¼ Vþ

ejbz þ jGLje jðyþbzÞ

ð3:26Þ
where:
GL ¼ jGLjeiy
ð3:27Þ
and:
jGLj ¼
½ða2  Z2
c Þ þ b2 þ 4b2Z2
c
½ða þ Z2
c Þ þ b22
(
)½
ð3:28Þ
plus:
y ¼ tan1
2bZc
ða2  Zc2Þ þ b2


ð3:29Þ
where Zc is the characteristic impedance of the transmis-
sion line.
According to Equation (3.29), the phase of the
reﬂected waves in a transmission line is determined by
load impedance. Typical changes in the phase of the
reﬂected waves with respect to the load impedance of a
transmission line are illustrated in Figure 3.16. As long
as the imaginary part of the load impedance (b) is low,
the reﬂected wave phase exhibits a large phase shift with
a small change in the real part of the load impedance
(a) near the characteristic impedance. The basic sche-
matic of phase monitoring in this newly designed sensor
employs a variable resistor with a small imaginary
impedance as a load terminating a coplanar waveguide
(Figure 3.15).
REFERENCES
1. S. Fatikow and U. Rembold, Microsystem Technology and
Microrobobics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany (1997).
2. P. Rai-Choudhury (Ed.), Handbook of Microlithography,
Micromachining and Microfabrication, Vol. 2, Microma-
chining and Microfabrication, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press, Bellingham, WA, USA (1997).
z1
z2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
60
55
50
45
40
Real part of impedance (ohm)
S11 Phase (degrees)
1
2
Figure 3.16
Relationship of the reﬂection (S11) phase to the real and imaginary parts of the load impedance (ZL ¼ a þ jb), with
z1 ¼ a þ j1 and z2 ¼ a þ j2.
Sensors for Smart Systems
61

3. W.P. Eaton and J.H. Smith, ‘Micromachined pressure
sensors – review and recent developments’, Smart Materials
and Structures, 6, 530–539 (1997).
4. C. Lee, T. Itoh and T. Suga, ‘Micromachined piezoelectric
force sensors based on PZT thin ﬁlms’, IEEE Transactions:
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, 43,
pp. 553–559 (1996).
5. M. Rossi, Acoustics and Electroacoustics, Artech House,
Norwood, MA, USA (1988).
6. C. Body, G. Reyne and G. Meunier, ‘Modeling of magne-
tostrictive thin ﬁlms: application to a micromembrane’,
Journal de Physique (France), Part III, 7, 67–85 (1997).
7. C.S. Smith, ‘Piezoresistance effect in germanium and
silicon’, Physical Review, 94, 42–49 (1954).
8. T. Lisec, M. Kreutzer and B. Wagner, ‘Surface microma-
chined piezoresistive pressure sensors with step-type bent
and ﬂat membrane structures’, IEEE Transactions on Elec-
tronics Developments, 43, 1547–1552 (1996).
9. M. Witte and H. Gu, ‘Force and position sensing resistors: an
emerging technology’, in Proceedings of the International
Conference on New Actuators, VDI/VDE – Technologie-
zentrum Informationstechnik, Berlin, Germany, pp. 168–170
(1992).
10. Website: [http://www.wtec.org/loyola/opto/c6_s3.htm].
11. Y.J. Rao and D.A. Jackson, ‘Prototype ﬁbre-optic-based
ﬁzeau medical pressure and temperature sensor system using
coherence reading’, Measurement Science and Technology,
5, 741–746, (1994).
12. W.W. Morey, G. Meltz and J.M. Weiss, ‘Recent advances
in ﬁber-grating sensors for utility industry applications’,
Proceedings of SPIE, 2594, 90–98, (1996).
13. K. Ikeda, H. Kuwayama, T. Kobayashi, T. Watanabe,
T. Nishikawa, T. Yoshida and K. Harada, ‘Silicon pressure
sensor integrates resonant strain gauge on a diaphragm’,
Sensors and Actuators, A21–23, 146–150 (1990).
14. K. Harada, K. Ikeda, H. Kuwayama and H. Murayama,
‘Various applications of a resonant pressure sensor chip
based on 3-D micromachining’, Sensors and Actuators, A73,
261–266 (1999).
15. J.D. Zook, D.W. Burns, H. Guckel, J.J. Sniegowski, R.L.
Engelstad and Z. Feng, ‘Characteristics of polysilicon
resonant
microbeams’, Sensors
and
Actuators,
A35,
51–59 (1992).
16. X. Wang and P.K. Ajmera, ‘Laterally movable gate ﬁeld
effect transistor for microsensors and microactuators’, US
Patent 6 204 544 (2001).
17. M.J. Vellekoop, ‘Acoustic wave sensors and their technol-
ogy’, Ultrasonics, 36, 7–14 (1998).
18. M. Hoummady, A. Campitelli and W. Wlodarski, ‘Acoustic
wave sensors: design, sensing mechanisms and applica-
tions’, Smart Materials and Structures, 6, 647–657 (1997).
19. C. Campbell, Surface Acoustic Wave Devices and their
Signal Processing Applications, Academic Press, London,
UK (1998).
20. N. Nakamura, M. Kazumi and H. Shimizu, ‘SH-type and
Rayleigh type surface waves on rotated Y-cut LiTaO3’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 819–822, (1977).
21. S. Shiokawa and T. Moriizumi, ‘Design of an SAW sensor in
a liquid’, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 27(Suppl. 1),
142–144 (1988).
22. J. Kondoh, Y. Matsui and S. Shiokawa, ‘New bio sensor
using a shear horizontal surface acoustic wave device’,
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 32, 2376–2379
(1993).
23. V.K.Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘Microsensors, actuators,
MEMS and electronics for smart structures’, in Handbook
of
Microlithography,
Micromachining
and
Microfabri-
cation, Vol. 2, Micromachining and Microfabrication,
P. Rai-Choudhury (Ed.), SPIE Optical Engineering Press,
Bellingham, WA, USA, pp. 617–688 (1997).
24. J.W. Grate, S.J. Martin and R.M. White, ‘Acoustic wave
microsensors, Part 1’, Analytical Chemistry, 65, 940–948
(1993).
25. V.K. Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘IDT, SAW and MEMS
Sensors for measuring deﬂection, acceleration and ice
detection of aircraft’, Proceedings of SPIE, 3046, 209–
219 (1996).
26. J.W. Grate, S.J. Martin and R.M. White, ‘Acoustic wave
microsensors, Part 1I’, Analytical Chemistry, 65, 987–996
(1993).
27. V.K. Varadan, X. Jiang and V.V. Varadan, Microstereolitho-
graphy and other Fabrication Techniques for 3D MEMS,
John Wiley & Sons, London, UK (2001).
28. Y. Roh, V.K. Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘Characterization of
all of the elastic, dielectric and piezoelectric constants of
uniaxially oriented poled PVDF ﬁlms’, IEEE Transactions:
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, 49,
836–847 (2002).
29. Pennwalt Corporation, KYNARTM Piezo Film Technical
Manual, Technical Brochure 10-M-11-83-M, Pennwalt Cor-
poration, King of Prussia, PA, USA (1983).
30. Website: http://www.msiusa.com/piezo_download_listing.
htm#PART1-INT.pdf].
31. S. Iijima, ‘Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon’, Nature
(London), 354, 56–58, (1991).
32. H. Yoon, B. Philip, J.K. Abraham, T. Ji and V.K. Varadan,
‘Nanowire sensor array for wireless detection and identiﬁca-
tion of bio-hazards’, Proceedings of SPIE, 5763, 326–332
(2005).
33. R.E. Collin, Foundations for Microwave Engineering,
McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA (1992).
62
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

4
Actuators for Smart Systems
4.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, the basic principles of common electro-
mechanical actuators are brieﬂy discussed. The energy
conversion schemes presented here include piezoelectric,
electrostrictive, magnetostrictive, electrostatic, electro-
magnetic, electrodynamic and electrothermal. Most of
the schemes are reciprocal and hence these devices are
generally referred to as transducers. Although some of
these schemes are not quite amenable for smart micro-
mechanical systems, they do have the potential for being
used in such systems in the foreseeable future.
One important step in the design of these mechanical
systems is obtaining their electrical equivalent circuits
from analytical models. This remains the main focus of
this chapter. However, relevant examples of fabricated
prototypes from the published literature are also included
wherever necessary. In what follows we extensively
make use of electromechanical analogies to arrive at
electrical
equivalent
circuits
of
transducers.
These
equivalent circuits are neither unique nor exact, but
would serve as an easily understood tool in trasnducer
design. The use of these electrical equivalent circuits
would also facilitate use of the vast resources available
for modern optimization programs for electrical circuit
design into transducer designs.
A list of useful electromechanical analogies is given in
Table 4.1 [1]. These are known as mobility analogies.
These analogies become useful when one needs to
replace mechanical components with electrical compo-
nents which behave similarly, forming the equivalent
circuit. As a simple example, the development of an
electrical equivalent circuit of a mechanical transmission
line component is discussed here [1]. The variables in
such a system are force and velocity. The input and
output variables of a section of a ‘lossless’ transmission
line can be conveniently related by an ABCD matrix
form as follows:
_x1
F1


¼
cos bx
jZ0 sin bx
j
Z0
sin bx
cos bx
"
#
_x2
F2


ð4:1Þ
where:
Z0 ¼
1
A
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rE
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
C1
M1
r
ð4:2Þ
and:
b ¼ o
vp
ð4:3Þ
and:
vp ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E
r
s
¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ClMl
p
ð4:4Þ
In these equations, A is the cross-sectional area of the
mechanical transmission line, E its Young’s modulus and
r the density; Cl and Ml are the compliance and mass per
unit length of the line, respectively. Now, looking at the
electromechanical analogies in Johnson [1], the expres-
sion for an equivalent electrical circuit can be obtained in
the same form as Equation (4.1) above:
V1
I1


¼
cos bx
jZ0sin bx
j
Z0
sin bx
cos bx
"
#
V2
I2


ð4:5Þ
In Equation (4.5), the quantities in the components of the
matrix are also represented by equivalent electrical
parameters as follows:
Z0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃm
e
r
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
L1
C1
r
ð4:6Þ
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

vp ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
me
p
¼
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
L1C1
p
ð4:7Þ
In Equations (4.6) and (4.7) Ll and Cl represent the
inductance and capacitance per unit length of the line,
respectively.
Apart from the above mobility analogy, a direct
analogy is also followed at times to obtain the equiva-
lence between electrical and mechanical circuits. These
result from the similarity of integro-differential equa-
tions governing the electrical and mechanical compo-
nents [2]. A brief list of these analogies is presented
in Table 4.2. A brief description of the operational
principles of some of the common transduction mecha-
nisms used in electromechanical systems is provided
below.
4.2 ELECTROSTATIC TRANSDUCERS
Electrostatic actuation is the most common type of
electromechanical energy conversion scheme in micro-
mechanical systems. This is a typical example of an
energy storage transducer. Such transducers store
energy when either mechanical or electrical work is
done on them [3]. Assuming that the device is lossless,
this stored energy is conserved and later converted
to the other form of energy. The structure of this type
of
transducer
commonly
consists
of
a
capacitor
arrangement, where one of the plates is movable by
the application of a bias voltage. This produces dis-
placement, a mechanical form of energy. A schematic
of a practical electrostatic transducer is shown in
Figure 4.1. The transfer matrix for this transducer
can be derived following [2].
Table 4.1
Electromechanical mobility analogies [1].
Feature
Mechanical parameter
Electrical parameter
Variable
Velocity, angular velocity
Voltage
Force, torque
Current
Lumped network element
Damping
Conductance
Compliance
Inductance
Mass, mass moment of inertia
Capacitance
Transmission line
Compliance/unit length
Inductance/unit length
Mass/unit length
Capacitance/unit length
Characteristic mobility
Characteristic impedance
Immitance
Mobility
Impedance
Impedance
Admittance
Clamped point
Short circuit
Free point
Open circuit
Source immitance
Force
Current
Velocity
Voltage
Table 4.2
Direct analogy of electrical and mechanical
domains [2].
Mechanical quantity
Electrical quantity
Force
Voltage
Velocity
Current
Displacement
Charge
Momentum
Magnetic ﬂux linkage
Mass
Inductance
Compliance
Capacitance
Viscous damping
Resistance
Displacement, Xf
F0
Flexural spring
C0(∞)
i0
RL
ve
v0
R0
Fe
+
+
–
–
Fixed
electrode
Air gap
electrode
surface
(area, A0)
Rigid mass m
Figure 4.1
Schematic of a practical electrostatic transducer.
H.A.C. Tilmans, ‘‘Equivalent circuit representation of electro-
mechanical transducers: I. Lumped parameter systems’’, J.
Micromech. Microeng., vol. 6, 1996 # IOP
64
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

We use the electromechanical force in a simple (ﬁxed)
parallel plate capacitor:
F ¼ 1
2 v2 eA
x2
ð4:8Þ
In more complicated systems, it is difﬁcult to calculate
this directly. Instead, we start with the basic energy
balance equation:
dWe þ dWm ¼ dWf
ð4:9Þ
This expression indicates that the force balance is
between the electrostatic and mechanical forces. Substi-
tuting for the appropriate values of work done:
VIdt þ Fdx ¼ d 1
2 CV2

	
ð4:10Þ
It may be noted that the capacitance of the arrangement
cannot be considered a constant. Furthermore, we can
eliminate I by the following:
I ¼ dQ
dt ¼ dðCVÞ
dt
¼ C dV
dt þ V dC
dt
ð4:11Þ
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is for a ﬁxed
capacitor, while the second term results from the physical
motion of the movable plate. Obviously, this is zero for a
ﬁxed plate capacitor.
Substituting this in Equation (4.10):
VCdV þ V2dC þ Fdx ¼ CVdV þ 1
2 V2dC
ð4:12Þ
Fdx ¼  1
2 V2dC
ð4:13Þ
F ¼  1
2 V2 dC
dx
ð4:14Þ
Observe that dC=dx is negative for a parallel plate
capacitor. Furthermore, the force depends on the square
of the voltage and hence does not depend on its polarity
or rate of change:
VCdV þ V2dC þ Fdx ¼ CVdV þ 1
2 V2dC
ð4:15Þ
When both plates of the capacitor are ﬁxed, there is no
mechanical motion, and hence no work is done:
VCdV þ 0 þ 0 ¼ CVdV þ 0
ð4:16Þ
and so the term CVdV represents the energy stored!!
By cancelling this term from Equation (4.15), we
obtain the energy transfer caused entirely by motion:
V2dC þ Fdx ¼ 1
2 V2dC
ð4:17Þ
By comparing Equations (4.17) and (4.13), we see that
the electrical source contributes twice as much energy as
the mechanical source.
Based on the simpliﬁed schematic of the transducer
shown in Figure 4.2, constitutive equations can be
derived; the state variables of this are the displacement
xt and charge qt. Since all variables are dependent on
time, these are omitted here for convenience. The elec-
trical energy contained in the transducer is given by the
following:
We ¼ Weðqt; xtÞ ¼
q2
t
2CðxtÞ ¼ q2
t ðd þ xtÞ
2e0Ae
ð4:18Þ
We use CðxtÞ ¼ e0Ae=ðd þ xtÞ and d, the spacing of the
plates when uncharged.
The total differential of We is:
dWe ¼
@We
@qt

	
xt ¼ constant
dqt þ
@We
@xt

	
qt ¼ constant
dxt
ð4:19Þ
In thermodynamic equilibrium, the energy put into the
transducer through the electric and mechanical ports is
given by:
dWe ¼ vt dqt þ Ft dxt
ð4:20Þ
d
Gap
Movable
plate
Fixed plate
qc
vt
+
–
Ft
xt
Figure 4.2
Schematic of a simpliﬁed case for an electrostatic
transducer [2]. H.A.C. Tilmans, ‘‘Equivalent circuit representa-
tion of electromechanical transducers: I. Lumped parameter
systems,’’ J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 6, 1996 # IOP
Actuators for Smart Systems
65

Equating the terms on the right-hand sides of Equations
(4.19) and (4.20), we get:
vt ðqt; xtÞ  @Weðqt; xtÞ
@qt




xt ¼ constant
¼ qtðd þ xtÞ
e0Ae
ð4:21Þ
Ftðqt; xtÞ  @Weðqt; xtÞ
@xt




qt ¼ constant
¼
q2
t
2e0Ae
ð4:22Þ
The above equations deﬁne the terminal voltage and
the force as being the effort variables at the res-
pective ports. The equilibrium values are given by
the partial derivatives of We with respect to the cor-
responding state variable. Note that Ft is the externally
applied force necessary to achieve equilibrium. Its
magnitude is equal to the electrostatic Coulomb force
between plates of a charged capacitor (opposite in
direction).
This force has a quadratic dependence with charge. To
make it linear, we assume small signal state variables.
So:
xt ¼ x0 þ xðtÞ
ð4:23Þ
qt ¼ q0 þ qðtÞ
ð4:24Þ
There Equation (4.23) becomes:
vðq; xÞ ¼ @vt
@qt




0
q þ @vt
@xt




0
x ¼ ðd þ x0Þ
e0Ae
q þ q0
e0Ae
x
¼ 1
C0
q þ v0
x0
x
ð4:25Þ
while similarly, Equation (4.24) becomes:
Fðq; xÞ ¼ @Ft
@qt




0
q þ @Ft
@xt




0
x ¼ q0
e0Ae
q þ 0x ¼ v0
x0
q þ 0x
ð4:26Þ
Note that bias signals are independent of time since they
deﬁne static equilibrium. It is rather easy to show that the
plate illustrated in Figure 4.3(a) is not in equilibrium. To
keep the plate in place we need to provide an external
force. This requires a spring constant term, correspond-
ing to the mechanical energy at the spring, added to
Equation (4.18):
Wem ¼ Wemðqt;xtÞ ¼
q2
t
2cðxtÞ þ 1
2 kðxt  xrÞ2
¼ q2
t ðd þ xtÞ
2e0Ae
þ 1
2 kðxt  xrÞ2
ð4:27Þ
This
changes
Equations
(4.24)
and
(4.26)
to
the
following [2]:
Ftðqt;xtÞ  @Wemðqt;xtÞ
@xt




qt ¼ constant
¼
q2
t
2e0Ae
þ kxt
ð4:28Þ
Fðq; xÞ ¼ @Ft
@qt 0
q þ @Ft
@xt








0
x ¼ q0
e0Ae
q þ kx ¼ v0
x0
q þ kx
ð4:29Þ
Note that Equations (4.25) and (4.29) express voltage and
force in terms of displacement and charge. It is usually
required to have voltage and displacement as the
independent variables. This makes:
qðv; xÞ ¼ e0Ae
d þ x0
v 
q0
d þ x0
x
¼ e0Ae
d þ x0
v  e0Aev0
ðd þ x0Þ2 x
ð4:30Þ
d
Gap
Moving
plate
Fixed plate
q0 + q
v0 + v
F0 + F
x0 + x
+
+
+
+
+
–
k
–
–
–
–
l
V
l  ′
V  ′
F ′
F  
M  ′
M 
C0
1/K ∗
1/K ∗ 1/K
1:G
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3
Schematic (a) and equivalent circuit (b) of an
electrostatic actuator with a spring attached to the movable plate
for stability [2]. H.A.C. Tilmans, ‘‘Equivalent circuit representa-
tion of electromechanical transducers: I. Lumped parameter
systems,’’ J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 6, 1996 # IOP
66
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Fðv; xÞ ¼
q0
d þ x0
v þ
k 
q2
0
e0Aeðd þ x0Þ

	
x
¼
e0Aev0
ðd þ x0Þ2 v þ
k  e0Aev2
0
ðd þ x0Þ3
 
!
x
ð4:31Þ
Note that the system is in equilibrium as long as the
second term on the right-hand side of Equation (4.31) is
negative.
k < k 0;
where
k 0 ¼
e0Aev2
0
ðd þ x0Þ3
The matrix form of Equations (4.25) and (4.31) is:
v
F


¼
d þ x0
e0Ae
q0
e0Ae
q0
e0Ae
k
2
664
3
775
q
x


ð4:32Þ
The static capacitance and transduction factor are:
C0 ¼ e0Ae
d þ x0
; G ¼
q0
d þ x0
Therefore, Equation (4.32) becomes [2]:
v
F


¼
1
C0
G
C0
G
C0
k
2
64
3
75 q
x


ð4:33Þ
The 2 	 2 matrix in Equation (4.33) is the constitutive
matrix for the electrostatic transducer. The coupling
factor K is an important characteristic of an electrome-
chanical transducer. This gives the electromechanical
energy conversion for a lossless transducer:
K ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
G2
kC0
s
ð4:34Þ
It may be noticed that a stable equilibrium state exists for
0 < K < 1. The typical values for K are between 0.05
and 0.25.
Transduction may also be expressed in such a way as
to connect between electrical variables (on the left-hand
side) and mechanical variables (on the right-hand side).
The transfer matrix relates force and velocity with
voltage and current.
We start with rewriting the second part of Equation
(4.33) with q on the left-hand side and taking the time
derivative for current:
I ¼ jo C0
G F  kC0
G U
ð4:35Þ
We assume time-harmonic variations in the force and
substitute velocity for the time derivative of displacement.
Substituting this into the ﬁrst part of Equation (4.33):
v ¼ 1
C0
C0
G F  kC0
G x

	
þ G
C0
x
¼ 1
G F þ
G2
C0
 k

	 U
joG
ð4:36Þ
v
I
" #
¼
1
G
1
joG
G2
C0
 k

	
jo C0
G
 kC0
G
2
6664
3
7775
F
U
"
#
ð4:37Þ
This 2 	 2 matrix is known as the transfer matrix. This
transfer can be split as follows to conveniently express
the equivalent circuit for the transducer [2]:
1
G
1
joG
G2
C0
 k

	
jo C0
G
 kC0
G
2
6664
3
7775 ¼
1
0
joC0
1
"
#
	
1
G
0
0
G
2
64
3
75
1
1
jo
G2
C0
 k

	
0
1
2
64
3
75
ð4:38Þ
This network is an exact representation for the transfer
matrix. This, however, may not be a unique way of
expressing an equivalent circuit for this transducer.
As noted earlier, the spring is represented in the circuit
by a capacitor. The corresponding ‘impedance’ of the
spring (¼ force/velocity) is k=jo. The spring has a
negative stiffness, as follows:
k0 ¼  G2
C0
¼  e0Aev2
0
ðd þ x0Þ3 ¼ K2k
ð4:39Þ
This is a result of the electromechanical coupling, lead-
ing to a lowering of the overall dynamic spring constant.
Actuators for Smart Systems
67

If we combine the two springs, the combined spring
constant is:
k
 ¼ kð1  K2Þ
ð4:40Þ
Recall that the system is mechanically stable as long
as this spring constant is positive, i.e. K < 1. If the
coupling K is zero (K ¼ 0), k
 ¼ k. Therefore, k
is the measured stiffness when the electrical port
is short-circuited and k is the stiffness when it is
open-circuited.
A similar approach may be followed to obtain the
equivalent circuit for an in-plane electrostatic actuator of
the comb type, as shown in Figure 4.4.
Fabrication of micro-sized devices with an elec-
trostatic actuation scheme is relatively easy as it is
usually independent of the properties of the material
systems. Therefore, the electrostatic actuation scheme
is the most preferred one for micro-actuators. Both
parallel-plate and comb drive mechanisms are popular
in these devices.
4.3 ELECTROMAGNETIC TRANSDUCERS
The magnetic counterpart of a moving plate capacitor is
a moving coil inductor. This is yet another energy-storing
transducer, the difference in this case being that the
forms of energy are magnetic and mechanical. A simpli-
ﬁed illustration of such a transducer is shown in
Figure 4.5 [4]. When a current i ﬂows through the
coil, the magnetic ﬂux is ft. Neglecting non-idealities
such
as
electrical
capacitance
and
resistance,
and
mechanical mass and friction, the constitutive relation-
ships for this device can be derived for the current and
+
–
C01
v1
c
i1
+
–
C02
v2
i2
(b)
(a)
Fixed plate
Movable plate
(mass m)
Folded beam
spring constant k / 2)
anchor
anchor
Ground plane
Comb 1
Comb 2
Fm
v0
v2(t)
v1(t)
i2(t)
i1(t)
x
+
–
+
+
–
–
1:G1
G2:1
1/k
m
u
Figure 4.4
Schematic (a) and equivalent circuit (b) of a comb-type electrostatic resonator. CTA Nguyen and RT Howe, CMOS
micromechanical resonator oscillator, IEEE Electron Devices Meeting, # 1993 IEEE
Ft
vt
Movable plate
Yoke 
Coil 
+
Vi
–
qi
φt
d
Figure 4.5
Schematic of an electromagnetic transducer.
68
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

force, in terms of displacement and ﬂux linkage [3]. The
conversion of energy takes place due to interactions
between these electrical and mechanical quantities in
such a circuit.
In the transducer shown in Figure 4.5, the ﬁxed
armature has N turns of winding, while the armature
and the moving part are made of ferromagnetic materials.
The magnetic ﬂux in the core (ft) is related to the
current through the coil by:
ft ¼ LðxtÞ_it
ð4:41Þ
The magnetic energy stored in the transducer when an
input is applied to it is given by:
WM ¼ 1
2 LðxtÞ_i2
ð4:42Þ
where LðxtÞ is the inductance of the driving coil when the
moving coil is at x ¼ xt. Therefore:
LðxtÞ ¼ NmAe
d þ xt
ð4:43Þ
where N is the number of turns, m is the permeability and
Ae is the effective area of the movable plate.
By substituting Equation (4.43) into Equation (4.41):
WM ¼ 1
2
f2
t
LðxtÞ ¼ f2
t ðd þ xtÞ
2N2mAe
ð4:44Þ
This shows that WM is a function of ft and xt. Therefore
we can write:
dWM ¼ @WM
@ft




xt ¼ constant
dft þ @WM
@xt




ft ¼ constant
dxt ¼ itdft þ Ftdxt
ð4:45Þ
From this, we can get
itðft; xtÞ ¼ @WMðft; xtÞ
@ft
¼ ftðd þ xtÞ
N2mAe
ð4:46Þ
Ftðft; xtÞ ¼ @WMðft; xtÞ
@xt
¼
f2
t
N2mAe
ð4:47Þ
Note that the force-to-ﬂux relationship here is quadratic.
To linearize this, we assume small signal conditions:
xt ¼ x0 þ xðtÞ
ð4:48Þ
ft ¼ f0 þ fðtÞ
ð4:49Þ
Therefore:
iðf; xÞ ¼ @it
@ft




x ¼ 0
f þ @it
@xt




f ¼ 0
x ¼ d þ x0
N2mAe
f þ
f0
N2mAe
x
ð4:50Þ
Similarly:
Fðf; xÞ ¼ @Ft
@ft




x ¼ 0
f þ @Ft
@xt




f ¼ 0
x ¼
f0
N2mAe
f þ 0x
ð4:51Þ
These are the constitutive relationships for the transdu-
cer. As discussed in the case of the electrostatic transdu-
cer, an additional element is required to keep the plate in
a stable equilibrium. The spring element for this purpose
is attached to the movable plate, as shown in Figure 4.5.
The modiﬁed energy-balance equation is:
W0
M ¼ W0
Mðft; xtÞ ¼
f2
t
2LðxtÞ þ 1
2 kðxt  xrÞ2
ð4:52Þ
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of the above equa-
tion is the energy stored in the coil due to the current ﬂow
while the second term accounts for the energy stored
in the spring. The rest position of the spring is denoted
by xt.
Ftðft; xtÞ ¼ @W0
Mðft; xtÞ
@xt




ft ¼ constant
¼
f2
t
2N2mAe
þ kxt
ð4:53Þ
Based on the constitutive relationship (Equation (4.46)),
this becomes:
Fðf; xÞ ¼ @Ft
@ft




0
q þ @Ft
@xt




0
x ¼
f0
N2mAe
f þ kx
ð4:54Þ
The other constitutive relationship can be rewritten as:
iðf; xÞ ¼ f
L0
þ i0x
x0
ð4:55Þ
Actuators for Smart Systems
69

with:
L0 ¼ mN2Ae
d þ x0
;
i0 ¼
f0
mN2Ae
and where i0 is the bias current; f0 ¼ L0i0.
Fðf; xÞ ¼ i0f
x0
þ kx
ð4:56Þ
The constitutive matrix can be written in the form:
i
F


¼
1
L0
C
L0
C
L0
k
2
664
3
775
f
x


ð4:57Þ
where:
C ¼ N2mAe
d þ x0
i0
This may also be rearranged to obtain theC transfer
matrix. Rewriting the second part in Equation (4.57):
f ¼ L0
C F  L0k
C x
ð4:58Þ
V ¼ df
dt ¼ L0
C
dF
dt  L0k
C
dx
dt
ð4:59Þ
Assuming time-harmonic inputs and writing F in the
form Ae jot:
V ¼ L0
C joF  L0k
C v
ð4:60Þ
From the constitutive relationship:
i ¼ f
L0
þ C
L0
x ¼ 1
C F þ
C
L0
 k
C

	
x
¼ 1
C F 
1
joC
k  C2
L0

	
v
ð4:61Þ
Therefore:
i
V


¼
1
C
1
joC
k  C2
L0

	
joL0
C
L0k
C
2
664
3
775
F
v


ð4:62Þ
In order to obtain an equivalent circuit, this transfer
matrix may be split into several sub-matrices:
1
C
1
joC
k  C2
L0

	
joL0
C
L0k
C
2
6664
3
7775 ¼
0
1
1
0
"
#
1
0
joL0
1
"
#
	
1
C
0
0
C
2
64
3
75
1
1
jo
C2
L0
 k

	
0
1
2
64
3
75
ð4:63Þ
The matrices on the right-hand side of Equation (4.63)
represent a gyrator, a shunt capacitor, a transformer and a
series impedance, as shown in Figure 4.6.
Miniaturization of electromagnetic actuators requires the
fabrication of magnetic thin ﬁlms and current-carrying
coils. Although few attempts have been made in this
direction, the overall sizes of the devices developed so far
are not very small. Coupled with this is the difﬁculty in
isolating the magnetic ﬁeld between adjacent devices,
which makes fabrication of integrated micro devices
rather challenging.
4.4 ELECTRODYNAMIC TRANSDUCERS
These are one of the most common types of electro-
mechanical actuation schemes. The primary component
is a current-carrying moving coil such as the one com-
monly used in loudspeakers. A schematic of such an
actuator is shown, in Figure 4.7. For simplicity in
analysis, a small segment of the coil is shown, along
with the directions of the ﬁeld quantities in Figure 4.8.
The element of length dl, carrying a current i, is further
characterized by its velocity v and induction B. By
Lenz’s law for the electromotive force e:
de ¼ ðv 	 BÞdl
ð4:64Þ
v
F
V
i
L0
1:Ψ
k*=k – Ψ2/Lo
–
Figure 4.6
Equivalent circuit of the electromagnetic transdu-
cer shown in Figure 4.5.
70
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The magnetic force is given by Laplace’s law:
dFmag ¼ idl 	 B
ð4:65Þ
In this analysis, ﬂux linkages and displacement may be
taken as the state variables. Although these are functions
of time in the dynamic analysis, for the sake of conve-
nience, this dependence is omitted here.
The energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld is given by:
Wm ¼ 1
2 L0i2
ð4:66Þ
where L0 is the series inductance of the coil. The emf
induced in the coil is:
e ¼ Bl_xt þ _lt
ð4:67Þ
where B is the magnetic ﬂux due to the biasing magnet.
The second term on the right-hand side of the above
equation denotes the dynamically induced emf, due to
changes in ﬂux linkages.
i ¼ 1
L0
ð
edt ¼ Blxt þ lt
L0
ð4:68Þ
Therefore:
Wm ¼ 1
2
ðBlxt þ ltÞ2
L0
ð4:69Þ
Taking the total derivative:
dWm ¼ @Wm
@lt




xt ¼ constant
dlt þ @Wm
@xt




lt ¼ constant
dxt ð4:70Þ
Figure 4.7
Schematic for an electrodynamic actuator. Reproduced by permission from M. Rossi, Acoustics and Electroacoustics,
Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1988, # 1988 by Artech House, Inc
Figure 4.8
Field directions for a section of the coil shown in
Figure 4.7. Reproduced by permission from M. Rossi, Acoustics
and Electroacoustics, Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1988,
# 1988 by Artech House, Inc
Actuators for Smart Systems
71

for a transducer in thermodynamic equilibrium, the
energy put into the transducer through the electrical
and mechanical ports is given by:
dWm ¼ itdlt þ Fdxt
ð4:71Þ
Therefore:
itðlt; xtÞ ¼ @Wm
@lt




xt ¼ constant
¼ B0lxt þ lt
L0
ð4:72Þ
Ftðlt; xtÞ ¼ @Wm
@xt




lt ¼ constant
¼ B0l B0lxt þ lt
ð
Þ
L0
¼ B0l
ð
Þ2xt
L0
þ B0llt
L0
ð4:73Þ
Small signal variations in the effort and state variables
are obtained by deﬁning a bias point (x0, l0):
iðl; xÞ ¼ @it
@lt




0
l þ @it
@xt




0
x ¼ l
L0
þ B0lx
L0
ð4:74Þ
Fðl; xÞ ¼ @Ft
@lt




0
l þ @Ft
@xt




0
x ¼ B0ll
L0
þ B0l
ð
Þ2x
L0
ð4:75Þ
These are the constitutive relationships for an electro-
dynamic transducer. Recall that the model of the trans-
ducer shown in Figure 4.7 is not stable since there is no
mechanism to hold in place the movable plate. A
mechanical spring with a spring constant k may be
attached to the plate to introduce stability.
With this, the energy equation needs to be modiﬁed as
follows:
Wm ¼ 1
2
ðBlxt þ ltÞ2
L0
þ 1
2 kðxt  xrÞ2
ð4:76Þ
where xr denotes the rest position of the plate. The above
constitutive relationships for iðl; tÞ is not affected by
this. However, the relationship for Fðl; tÞ should be
modiﬁed as:
Ftðlt; xtÞ ¼ @Wmðlt; xtÞ
@xt




lt ¼ constant
¼ ðB0lÞ2xt
L0
þ B0llt
L0
þ 2kðxt  xrÞ
ð4:77Þ
Fðl; xÞ ¼ @Ftðlt; xtÞ
@lt




0
l þ @Ftðlt; xtÞ
@xt




0
x ¼ B0ll
L0
þ ðB0lÞ2x
L0
þ kx
ð4:78Þ
The constitutive matrix may therefore be formed as:
iðtÞ
FðtÞ
"
#
¼
1
L0
C
L0
C
L0
k þ C2
L0
2
66664
3
77775
lðtÞ
xðtÞ
"
#
ð4:79Þ
In the above matrix, Cð¼ B0lÞ is the transduction factor.
To obtain the transfer matrix, we proceed by rearranging
the equations:
FðtÞ ¼ C
L0
lðtÞ þ
K þ C2
L0

	
xðtÞ
ð4:80Þ
Therefore:
lðtÞ ¼ L0
C FðtÞ  k
C
L0 þ C2
k

	
xðtÞ
ð4:81Þ
The voltage induced, vðtÞ ¼ _lðtÞ. Therefore:
vðtÞ ¼ joL0
C FðtÞ  k
C
L0 þ C2
k

	
uðtÞ
ð4:82Þ
where uðtÞ denotes velocity. In addition:
iðtÞ ¼ lðtÞ
L0
þ C
L0
xðtÞ
ð4:83Þ
iðtÞ ¼ 1
L0
L0
C FðtÞ  k
C
L0 þ C2
k

	
xðtÞ


þ C
L0
xðtÞ
¼ 1
C FðtÞ 
k
joC vðtÞ
ð4:84Þ
The transduction equation in the matrix form is as
follows:
iðtÞ
vðtÞ
"
#
¼
1
C
k
joC
joL0
C
k
joC
L0  C2
k

	
2
6664
3
7775
FðtÞ
uðtÞ
"
#
ð4:85Þ
72
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The transfer matrix may be modiﬁed as follows to obtain
the equivalent circuit (Figure 4.9):
1
C
k
joC
joL0
C
k
joC
L0  C2
k

	
2
6664
3
7775 ¼
1
0
joL0
1
"
#
	
1
C
0
0
C
2
4
3
5
1
jk
o
0
1
2
4
3
5
ð4:86Þ
As mentioned earlier, a very common form of elec-
trodynamic transducer is found in loudspeakers. How-
ever, due to the requirements of the coil and magnetic
ﬁeld, they are not so popular at the micro-scale. Electro-
dynamic micromotors have been successfully fabricated
in reasonably smaller sizes (7 mm 	 15 mm 	 0:4 mm)
[5]. The resonant frequency of such a system is given as:
f0 ¼ 1
2p
BJZm
rs

	½
ð4:87Þ
where Zm is the utilization factor of the rotor, r is the
density of the material of the wire, J is the current density
and s is the maximum displacement of the rotor.
As with the electromagnetic actuation schemes dis-
cussed previously, these devices also require fabrication
of small-sized magnets and current-carrying coils. In this
case, however, the coil is also movable. This remains a
fabrication challenge, as miniaturized components are
required for MEMS applications.
4.5 PIEZOELECTRIC TRANSDUCERS
When subjected to mechanical stress, certain anisotropic
crystalline materials generate charge. This phenomenon,
discovered in 1880 by Jaques and Pierre Curie, is known as
piezoelectricity. This effect is widely used in ultrasonic
transducers. Lead zirconate titanates (PZTs) are the
most common ceramic materials used in piezoelectric
transducers. These crystals contain several randomly
oriented domains, if no electric potential is applied during
the fabrication process of the material. This results in
small changes in the dipole moment of such a material
when a mechanical stress is applied. However, if the
material is subjected to an electric ﬁeld during the cooling-
down process of its fabrication, these domains would be
aligned in the direction of the ﬁeld. When an external
stress is applied to such a material, the crystal lattices get
distorted, causing changes in the domains and a variation
in the charge distribution within the material. The converse
effect of producing strain is caused when these domains
change shape by the application of an electric ﬁeld.
The direction of vibration of the piezoelectric material
depends on the dimensions of the slab. If l  b and h,
the slab will vibrate along the length direction. On the
other hand, if l and b  h, the slab will vibrate in the
thickness direction. Hence, for the thin slab shown in
Figure 4.10(a) the vibrations are in the thickness direc-
tion. The piezoelectric vibrations are given by:
v ¼ bs
33h
bl q þ h33w
ð4:88Þ
F ¼ CD
33Qbl
tan Qh w þ h33q
ð4:89Þ
where CD
33 is the elastic stiffness of the piezoelectric
material at constant electric displacement, h33 is the
piezoelectric strain constant and Q is the phase constant.
By deﬁning the static capacitance C0, the transfer
factor G and the spring constant k as follows:
C0 ¼ bl
bs
33h ;
G ¼ h33
bl
bs
33h ;
k ¼ CD
33bl
h
v
F'
1/k
L0
u 
i 
Ψ
Figure 4.9
Equivalent circuit for an electrodynamic transducer.
v
F
1/k*
C0
i
u
1:Γ
v
jX
I
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10
Schematic (a) and equivalent circuit (b) of a
piezoelectric transducer.
Actuators for Smart Systems
73

we can simplify the above expressions for v and F
and write the constitutive matrix in the following
form:
v
F


¼
1
C0
G
C0
G
C0
kwh
vD
t
tan wh
vD
t
2
6666664
3
7777775
q
x


ð4:90Þ
Furthermore, the transfer matrix can be obtained as:
v
i
 
¼
1
G
1
joG
kwh
vD
t
tan wh
vD
t
 G2
C0
0
B
B
@
1
C
C
A
joC0
G
 kwh
vD
t
tan wh
vD
t
C0
G
2
66666666666664
3
77777777777775
F
u


ð4:91Þ
The transfer matrix may be split as follows to obtain a
convenent electrical equivalent circuit for the transducer
(Figure 4.10(b)):
1
G
1
joG
kwh
vD
t
tan wh
vD
t
 G2
C0
0
B
B
@
1
C
C
A
joC0
G
 kwh
vD
t
tan wh
vD
t
C0
G
2
666666666664
3
777777777775
¼
1
0
joC0
1
"
#
	
1
G
0
0
G
2
4
3
5
1
1
joX
0
1
2
64
3
75
ð4:92Þ
where:
1
X ¼
kwh
vD
t
tan wh
vD
t
 G2
C0
0
B
B
@
1
C
C
A
PZT thin ﬁlms have been developed using standard
thin-ﬁlm deposition techniques such as sputtering and
physical or chemical vapor deposition. Their use in
sensors and actuators is inherently limited by the quality
and ‘repeatability’ of the thin ﬁlms obtained by using
these techniques. Compared to bulk-material processing
techniques, the thin ﬁlm performance is severely ham-
pered by the properties of the surface where the ﬁlm is
deposited [6]. Non-ferroelectric AlN thin ﬁlms have also
been explored for sensor applications where voltage
output is required. However, PZT thin ﬁlms are still
preferred in actuators. Compared to other electromecha-
nical conversion schemes, these require a low voltage
input but generally have a low electromechanical con-
version efﬁciency.
4.6 ELECTROSTRICTIVE TRANSDUCERS
Electrostriction is the phenomenon of mechanical defor-
mation of a material due to an applied electric ﬁeld. This
is a fundamental phenomenon which is present to varying
degrees in all materials and occurs due to the presence of
polarizable atoms and molecules. An applied electric
ﬁeld can distort the charge distribution within the mate-
rial, resulting in modiﬁcations to bond length, bond angle
or electron distribution functions, which in turn affects
the macroscopic dimensions of the material.
Lead magnesium niobate (PMN) is an electrostrictive
ceramic which exhibits an order of magnitude more
strain than most piezoceramics for the same electric
ﬁeld strength.
To develop an equivalent circuit [3,7], we start with the
basic laws of electromagnetism that should be obeyed.
The electric ﬁeld displacement due to an applied ﬁeld is
given by:
D ¼ eE þ P
ð4:93Þ
A planar slab with electrodes on either side would exhibit
a zero electric ﬁeld when the electrodes are shorted
together and if ‘fringing ﬁelds’ are neglected.
An isolated specimen containing no free charges must
exhibit a zero electric displacement ﬁeld if the fringing
ﬁelds are neglected. The generalized model of electro-
striction under stress-free conditions is:
P ¼ P0 þ e0ðe  1Þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ aE2
p
E
ð4:94Þ
where P0 is the remnant polarization, e is the relative
permittivity of the dielectric material and a is the satu-
ration parameter. For large values of a, the polarization
74
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

saturates at modest ﬁeld strengths. Therefore:
D ¼ eE þ P0 þ e0ðe  1ÞE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ aE2
p
ð4:95Þ
For non-zero stress in the thickness direction of the
slab:
E3 ¼ a1D3 þ a2D2
3 þ a3D3T3
ð4:96Þ
and:
s3 ¼ b1T3 þ b2D2
3
ð4:97Þ
where the subscript ‘3’ represents the thickness direction;
E3 is the electric ﬁeld, D3 is the electric displacement
ﬁeld, s3 is the strain and T3 is the stress. In addition a1,
a2, a3, b1, and b2 are constants resulting from series
expansions, where b1 is the compliance and b2 is equi-
valent to the electrostriction constant denoted by Q.
Recalling that the permittivity of electrostrictive mate-
rials such as PMN is of the order of 2000:
D  P0 þ
e0eE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ aE2
p
ð4:98Þ
Solving for E:
E3 ¼
D3  P0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
e2
0E2  aðD3  P0Þ2
q
ð4:99Þ
with the restriction that D3  P0 < ð0:99e0e=paÞ. Gen-
eralizing this one-dimensional nonlinear model to three
dimensions:
E1 ¼
D1  Pð1Þ
0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðe0eT
11Þ2  aðeT
11Þ2w
q
 2Q33T1D1  2Q13T2D1
 2Q13T3D1  4Q44T6D2  4Q44T5D3
ð4:100Þ
E2 ¼
D2  Pð2Þ
0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðe0eT
22Þ2  aðeT
22Þ2w
q
 4Q44T6D1
 2Q33T2D2  2Q13T3D2  2Q13T1D2
 4Q44T4D3
ð4:101Þ
E3 ¼
D3  Pð2Þ
0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðe0eT
33Þ2  aðeT
33Þ2w
q
 4Q44T5D1
 4Q44T4D2  2Q33T3D3  2Q13T1D3
 2Q13T2D3
ð4:102Þ
s1 ¼ sD
11T1 þ sD
12T2 þ sD
13T2 þ Q33D2
1 þ Q13D2
2
þ Q13D2
3
ð4:103Þ
s2 ¼ sD
12T1 þ sD
11T2 þ sD
13T3 þ Q13D2
1 þ Q33D2
2
þ Q13D2
3
ð4:104Þ
s3 ¼ sD
13T1 þ sD
13T2 þ sD
33T3 þ Q13D2
1 þ Q13D2
2
þ Q33D2
3
ð4:105Þ
s4 ¼ sD
44T4 þ 4Q44D2D3
ð4:106Þ
s5 ¼ sD
44T5 þ 4Q44D1D3
ð4:107Þ
s6 ¼ sD
66T6 þ 4Q44D1D2
ð4:108Þ
where Pð1Þ
0 , Pð2Þ
0
and Pð3Þ
0
are components of the remnant
polarization vector P0 and w ¼ P3
j¼1 ½ðDj  PðjÞ
0 Þ=eT
jj
2.
For permanently poled ferroelectrics, only two physically
independent permitivities, eT
11 and eT
33; exist and Pð1Þ
0
¼
Pð2Þ
0
¼ 0 and Pð3Þ
0
¼ P0 –- thus eT
11 ¼ eT
22.
It should be noted that sD
66 is not an independent elastic
constant, and is related to other elastic constants accord-
ing to the following:
sD
66 ¼
2ðsD
11  sD
12Þ ðpiezoelectricceramics; biasedPMNÞ
sD
44
ðunbiasedPMNÞ

Components (1) to (3) are each subject to a limitation of
the ﬁeld strength of the form:
X
3
j ¼ 1

ðDj  PðjÞ
0 Þ=eT
jj
2 < 0:99e0=
ﬃﬃﬃa
p
ð4:109Þ
A bar with electrodes on its ends, poled along its
length and lying along the z-direction may be considered
to obtain the model for a typical electrostrictive transdu-
cer. Solving the three-dimensional equations for E3 and
s3, subject to the following conditions:
T1 ¼ T2 ¼ T4 ¼ T5 ¼ T6 ¼ 0
and:
D1 ¼ D2 ¼ 0
Actuators for Smart Systems
75

we get:
E3 ¼
D3  P0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
e2
0E2  aðD3  P0Þ2
q
 2b2T3D3
ð4:110Þ
and:
s3 ¼ b1T3 þ b2D2
3
ð4:111Þ
where b1 ¼ sD
33 and b2 ¼ Q33. The equivalent circuit for
this bar may be obtained by linearizing the theory for the
expansion of the bar. To do this, the displacement ﬁeld
may be written as:
D ¼ Q0
A þ q
A
ð4:112Þ
where q is the ﬁrst-order charge and Q0 is the ﬁxed
charge on the electrodes, each of area A, arising either
from a ﬁxed polarization P0, or a bias voltage V0, or a
combination of both.
The strain is written in the form s ¼ sð0Þ þ sð1Þ where
sð0Þ is a ﬁxed strain and sð1Þ is the ﬁrst-order strain.
Similarly,
the
electric
ﬁeld
is
expressed
as
E ¼ Eð0Þ þ Eð1Þ.
To obtain the functional dependence about Q0, the
voltage and force are taken as the effort variables, the
charge (q) and displacement (x) are taken as the state
variables and the current (i) and velocity (u) are taken as
the ﬂow variables.
The ‘actuation’ of the transducer is assumed to consist
of stacks of active material, where each element of
each stack acts electrically in parallel but mechanically
in series. Each stack contains ne elements and several
such stacks are combined appropriately to drive the
transducer face. There are ms such mechanically parallel
stacks.
The voltage due to the ﬁrst order charge q is:
v1 ¼ q
C1
ð4:113Þ
where C1 is the blocked capacitance given by:
C1 ¼ msne
Gd
and d is the plate separation. In the above expression, G is:
G ¼
ðe0eT
33Þ2
A ðe0eT
33Þ2  aðQ0=4  P0Þ0
h
i3=2
þ 4 b2
b1
Q2
0
A3
The voltage due to the ﬁxed charge Q0 is:
v2 ¼ x
dne
2b2Q0d
b1A
 V0

	
ð4:114Þ
A capacitive term C0 is deﬁned as follows:
C0 ¼
neQ0
ð2b2Q0d=b1AÞ  V0
ð4:115Þ
The transduction factor N is deﬁned as:
N ¼ C1
C0
Q0
d
ð4:116Þ
Therefore:
v2 ¼ xN
C1
ð4:117Þ
where x is the displacement. Hence, the total voltage is
given by the following:
v ¼ v1 þ v2 ¼ q
C1
þ xN
C1
ð4:118Þ
To derive the force equation, we need to combine the
electrostatic and electrostrictive forces. The electrostric-
tive forces are:
F1 ¼ 2b2Q0
b1AZe
;
F2 ¼ qV0
dZe
The opposing force due to the loading mass, i.e. the
motional resistance of the material, is:
F3 ¼ u joLM þ RM þ
1
joCM


¼ u joM þ ms
Ze
rM þ
msA
joZeb1d


ð4:119Þ
where LMð¼ MÞ is the total motional mass which, includes
the loading mass, rM is the motional resistance of a single
element, o is the angular frequency and u is the velocity.
By assuming time-harmonic motion:
F3 ¼ jox joM þ ms
Ze
rM þ
msA
joZeb1d


¼ joxZM ð4:120Þ
76
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

where x is the displacement and ZM is the motional
impedance. Hence, the effective force is:
F ¼ F1 þ F2 þ F3 ¼ Nq
C1
 joZMx
ð4:121Þ
In the matrix form, the constitutive relationship for the
transducer is:
v
F
"
#
¼
1
C1
N
C1
N
C1
joZM
2
664
3
775
q
x
"
#
ð4:122Þ
This relationship shows that the total strain in a material
is the sum of the elastic strain and the polarization-
induced strain. By rearranging, we obtain the transfer
matrix relationship in following form:
v
i
" #
¼
1
N
N
joC1
þ C1ZM
N
joC1
N
joC1ZM
N
2
664
3
775
F
u
"
#
ð4:123Þ
This transfer matrix may be split conveniently as
follows:
1
N
N
joC1
þ C1ZM
N
joC1
N
joC1ZM
N
2
6664
3
7775 ¼
1
0
joC
1
"
#
1
1
joC1
0
1
2
64
3
75
	
1
N
0
0
N
2
4
3
5 1
ZM
0
1
"
#
ð4:124Þ
This
results
in
the
equivalent
circuit
shown
in
Figure 4.11. In this model, the total impedance ZM is:
ZM ¼ joM þ RM þ 1=joCM
where CM; the total motional capacitance is given by:
CM ¼ Zeb1d
msA ;
In addition, LM is the total motional inductance (¼ effec-
tive mass, M), RM is the total motional resistance (¼
msrM=Ze), rM is the motional resistance for a single
element, C1 is the total capacitance (¼ msZe=Gd) and
N
is
the
electromechanical
transformation
ratio
(¼ ðC1=C0Þ ðQ0=d)).
The coupling coefﬁcient k is calculated in terms of the
circuit capacitances:
k2 ¼
b1
d2GA
2b2Q0d
b1A
 V0

2
ð4:125Þ
The phenomenon of electrostriction is very similar
to piezoelectricity. One of the fundamental difference
between the two, however, is the closeness of the transi-
tion temperature of the material to the operating tem-
peratures. This accounts for the improved strain and
hysteresis properties for electrostrictive materials. How-
ever, a larger number of coefﬁcients are required to
model electromechanical coupling for electrostriction.
The polarization in piezoelectric materials is sponta-
neous, while that in electrostrictive materials is ﬁeld-
induced. The properties of electrostrictive materials are
more temperature-dependent, with the operating tem-
perature ranges for these materials being narrower than
those of piezoelectrics [8].
Material compositions based on lead magnesium
niobate (Pb(Mg0.33,Nb0.67)O3 or PMN) are commonly
used in electrostrictive transducers. Their properties
have been studied extensively [9]. However, practical
thin-ﬁlm transducers using this approach are yet to be
realized. However, polymeric thin-ﬁlm materials with
compliant graphite electrodes have been shown to have
excellent electrostrictive properties [10]. These mater-
ials are capable of efﬁcient and fast responses with
high strains, good actuation pressures (up to 1.9 MPa)
and high speciﬁc energy densities. In this case, the
electrostriction phenomenon is not due to molecular
dipole realignment [11]. In these silicone ﬁlm actuators,
the strain results from external forces caused by electro-
static attraction of their graphite compliant electrodes.
Although their mechanism is electrostatics-based, these
actuators have been shown to produce a much larger
effective actuation pressure than conventional air-gap
electrostatics with similar electric ﬁelds.
CM
LM
RM
1:N
–C
C1
F
Figure 4.11
Equivalent circuit of an electrostricitve transducer.
Actuators for Smart Systems
77

4.7 MAGNETOSTRICTIVE TRANSDUCERS
While the characteristic property of electrostrictive
materials is the production of strain on the application
of an electric ﬁeld, in magnetostrictive materials
mechanical strain is produced by the application of a
magnetic ﬁeld. In addition, like ordinary materials,
strains may also originate from applied stresses. Their
magnetization changes are due to applied mechanical
stresses as well as applied magnetic ﬁelds. Mathema-
tically, these relationships may be summarized as
follows:
S ¼ SðT; HÞ
ð4:126Þ
B ¼ BðT; HÞ
ð4:127Þ
Therefore:
dSi¼ @Si
@Tj




H
dTj þ @Si
@Hk




T
dHk
ð4:128Þ
dBi¼ @Bm
@Tj




H
dTj þ @Bm
@Hk




T
dHk
ð4:129Þ
In these equations, i ¼ (1,. . .6) denote the components of
the engineering strains, while m ¼ 1,2 and 3. The elastic
compliances at constant H are:
@Si
@Tj




H
¼ s H
ij
ð4:130Þ
while the magnetic permeabilities at constant T are:
@Bm
@Hk




T
¼ m T
mk
ð4:131Þ
For small variations in dT and dH, the constitutive
relationships may be linearized as follows:
Si ¼ SH
ij Tj þ dkiHk
ði ¼ 1; . . . 6Þ
ð4:132Þ
Bm ¼ dmjTt þ mT
mkHk
ðm ¼ 1; 2; 3Þ
ð4:133Þ
where dmi (¼ dim) are the magnetostrictive constants.
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
2
6666666664
3
7777777775
¼
s11H
s12H
s13H
0
0
0
s12H
s11H
s13H
0
0
0
s13H
s13H
s33H
0
0
0
0
0
0
s44H
0
0
0
0
0
0
s55H
0
0
0
0
0
0
s66H
2
6666666664
3
7777777775
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
2
6666666664
3
7777777775
þ
0
0
d31
0
0
d31
0
0
d33
0
d15
0
d15
0
0
0
0
0
2
6666666664
3
7777777775
H1
H2
H3
2
64
3
75
ð4:134Þ
B1
B2
B3
2
64
3
75 ¼
0
0
0
0
d15
0
0
0
0
d15
0
0
d31
d31
d33
0
0
0
2
64
3
75
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
2
666666664
3
777777775
þ
m11
T
0
0
0
m22
T
0
0
0
m33
T
2
64
3
75
H1
H2
H3
2
64
3
75 ð4:135Þ
Assuming linear relationships between B and H and
between S and H, the internal energy may be written as
follows:
U ¼ 1
2 SiTi þ 1
2 Hm Bm
¼ 1
2 TisijTj þ 1
2 TidmiHm þ 1
2 Hm dmiTi þ 1
2 Hm mmkHk
¼ Ue þ 2Ume þ Um
ð4:136Þ
Here, Ue and Um are the pure elastic magnetic energies
and Ume is the magnetoelastic energy of the system.
These quantities may be used to arrive at an important
ﬁgure of merit, called the magnetomechanical coupling
coefﬁcient, k, as:
k ¼
Ume
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ue Um
p
ð4:137Þ
Usually magnetostrictive materials operate in the long-
itudinal mode. This reduces the stresses strains, and
magnetic ﬁeld components in the direction with subscript
78
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

‘3’, while all others are zero. These conditions simplify
the magnetomechanical coupling coefﬁcient to:
k2
33 ¼
d2
33
mT
33sH
33
ð4:138Þ
After the subscript ‘3’ is dropped, Equations (4.132) and
(4.133) then become:
S ¼ sHT þ dH
ð4:139Þ
B ¼ dT þ mTH
ð4:140Þ
By rearranging to change the variables, we then obtain:
T ¼ 1
sB S  lB
ð4:141Þ
H ¼ lS þ 1
mS B
ð4:142Þ
where the constant l is given by:
l ¼
d
mTsB
ð4:143Þ
By assuming sinusoidal variation (with angular fre-
quency o) for all quantities, the strain along the rod
under ‘quasi-static’ conditions is related to the phase
velocities on the rod by:
S ¼ v2  v1
jolr
ð4:144Þ
From Equation (4.141), the force on the rod is given by:
F ¼ TAr ¼  Ar
sB
v2  v1
jolr
þ lArB
ð4:145Þ
The magnetizing ﬁeld from a thin solenoid with N turns
and lr  r is given by:
H ¼ NI
lr
ð4:146Þ
By substituting Equations (4.146) and (4.142) into Equa-
tion (4.145), we obtain:
F ¼  v2  v1
joCH þ lArN
sHlr
I
ð4:147Þ
where:
CH ¼ sHlr
Ar
;
CB ¼ sBlr
Ar
By Faraday’s law, the induction through a solenoid can
be related to the voltage across the terminals by:
B ¼
V
joNAr
ð4:148Þ
By substituting Equation (4.148) into Equation (4.142),
we obtain:
NI
lr
¼ l v2  v1
jolr
þ
V
joNArmS
ð4:149Þ
Rewriting Equation (4.149), we obtain:
V ¼ joLSI þ dArN
sHlr
ðv2  v1Þ
ð4:150Þ
where the clamped and free inductances of the magnetiz-
ing coil are:
LS ¼ mSN2Ar
lr
and
LT ¼ mTN2Ar
lr
By rearranging Equations (4.147) and (4.150), we can
obtain the transfer matrix as follows:
V
I
"
#
¼
joLS
G
1
joCHG
1
G
LS
CHG þ dG
l
2
6664
3
7775
F
u
"
#
ð4:151Þ
where:
G ¼ lArN
sHlr
Correspondingly, the equivalent circuit takes the form
shown in Figure 4.12.
v
F'
1/k
L0
u 
i 
Ψ
Figure 4.12
Equivalent circuit of a magnetostrictive transducer.
Actuators for Smart Systems
79

4.8 ELECTROTHERMAL ACTUATORS
In electrothermal actuators, heat is applied to a ‘bimorph’
beam, the expansion of which is used to generate the
mechanical moment required for the actuation. Large
deﬂections and greater energy densities are achievable
with this scheme. However, electrothermal transducers
are generally very slow. Several conﬁgurations have been
reported in the literature for this kind of actuator. In
general, these consist of two transduction mechanisms –
the ﬁrst an irreversible electrothermal process and the
second, a reversible thermomechanical transduction. The
conﬁguration of an audio frequency ﬁlter with such an
actuator is shown in Figure 4.13 [12]. This consists of a
thermally isolated thin diaphragm, fabricated by ‘back-
side etching’, and a pair of metal resistors for the actuator
(heater) and sensor, patterned by a ‘liftoff’ process.
Several other conﬁgurations of micromachined ther-
mal actuators have also been reported in the literature
[13,14].
In Huang and Lee [14], for example, the difference in
electrical resistances of a wide and a narrow arm in a
bimorph structure (Figure 4.14) is used to generate the
necessary deﬂection. This difference causes variation in
the heat produced and hence thermal expansion of the
two arms. In Figure 4.14, in-plane motion is made
possible by the asymmetrical thermal expansion of the
microstructure having different cross-sections for its
arms. As an electric current is fed through the ‘anchors’,
the higher current density in the ‘hot arm’ generates heat
and causes it to expand more than the ‘cold arm’. Since
the arms are joined at the free end, the actuator tip
moves laterally along an arc in the direction of the cold
arm.
This electrothermal transducer is irreversible, since
even though the electrical energy can produce mechan-
ical motion, energy transport in the opposite direction is
not possible. Hence, this cannot be modeled with a
reciprocal electrical network. The deﬂection of the
actuator can be derived to be:
u ¼
l2
6EIh
ðx1l  3x3Þ
ð4:152Þ
where Ih is the moment of inertia of the hot arm, E is the
Young’s modulus of the arm, x1 is the horizontal force in
the arm and x3 is the coupling force on it. The equivalent
force acting on this may be obtained as follows:
F ¼ 1
2L ðx1l  3x3Þ
ð4:153Þ
VIN
Vout = ls∆RS 
lH
RH
Rs
ls
Heater
Sensor
Micromachined
Diaphragm
Electrical heating
power (∆Vin)
Electrical signal
conversion (∆Vout)
Diaphragm/ sensor
temperature
(∆T to ∆Rs)
H(s) =
1
TS + 1
Figure 4.13
Principles of an electrothermal transducer [12].
K.H. Lee, H.J. Byun, H.K. Lee, I.J. Cho, J.U. Bu, and E. Yoon,
‘‘An audio frequency ﬁlter application of micromachined
thermally-isolated diaphragm structures,’’ 13th Annual Inter.
Confer. Micro Electro Mechanical Systems MEMS 2000, #
2000 IEEE
l
lf
lc
wc
wh
g
Anchors 
Cold arm 
Hot arm 
Flexure 
x = 0
x = l
x = l + g
x = 2l + g
x = l + g + lc
x
x + ∆x
h
tv
tn
t0
Si
Polysilicon
Air
Si3N4
SiO2
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.14
Schematics of a ‘biomorph’ electrothermal trans-
ducer: (a) top view; (b) equivalent one-dimensional coordinate
system; (c) cross-sectional view [14]. Q.A. Huang and N.K.S.
Lee, Analysis and design of polysilicon thermal ﬂexure actuator,
J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 9, 1999, # IOP
80
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Hence, the force acting is dependent on the temperature
changes which are produced due to different current
densities in these arms. The corresponding spring con-
stant is:
K ¼ 3EI
L3
ð4:154Þ
By choosing that the displacement yt and charge qt are
the state variables, the mechanical energy conﬁned in the
transducer is as follows:
WT ¼ 1
2 kqty2
t
ð4:155Þ
The total differential of WT is given by:
dWT ¼ dWT
dqt




yt ¼ constant
dqt þ dWT
dyt




qt ¼ constant
dyt ð4:156Þ
In thermodynamic equilibrium, the electrical energy
fed into the transducer is transferred to the mechani-
cal port, while the remaining energy is stored in the
transducer:
dWT ¼ vtdqt  Ftdyt
ð4:157Þ
Therefore:
Vtðqt; xtÞ ¼ dWT
dqt




yt ¼ constant
¼ 1
2y2
t
dkðqtÞ
dqt
ð4:158Þ
Ftðqt; xtÞ ¼ dWT
dyt




qt ¼ constant
¼ ytkqt
ð4:159Þ
It may, however, be pointed out that due to the non-linear
nature of these expressions, development of an equiva-
lent circuit in the form described elsewhere is not
possible for an electrothermal transducer.
Another thermoresponsive transducer is based on the
class of materials known as shape memory alloys
(SMAs), which includes certain alloys (Ni–Ti, Cu–Al–
Zn, etc.) that undergo large strains. These can recover
their initial conﬁgurations spontaneously or by heating
without any residual deformation. These properties of
SMAs are associated with a solid–solid phase transfor-
mation which can be thermal- or stress-induced. SMAs
are mainly used in medical sciences, electrical, aero-
space, civil and mechanical engineering.
Important properties of SMAs include the following:
 Compact powerful actuators with high work output
per volume.
 Large actuation displacement and recovery force.
 Medium operational voltage (below 40 V).
 Hysteresis may be put to use in large energy absorp-
tion and damping capacity.
 SMA-active elements transform into their original
parent phases/shapes, even after several years.
 Repeated absorption of large amounts of strain energy
and fatigue resistance under loading without any
permanent deformation.
 Possibility for obtaining a wide cyclic behavior by
varying the number and/or the characteristics of the
SMA components.
 Usable strain range of 70 %.
 Smooth operation of the transducer.
Based on the above, these materials are used in several
structural applications, such as in active and passive con-
trol structures, as smart material tags, in self-stressing and
self-healing structures and in structural health monitoring.
As mentioned previously, SMAs undergo a solid-to-
solid phase transition. Because of this, they can have two
different crystalline lattice structures, depending on both
the applied stress and the temperature. As result of this
solid-to-solid phase transition, SMAs show three special
properties: the shape memory effect (SME), the pseu-
doelastic effect and the ‘martensitic deformability’.
Martensite is the crystallographic description of the
low-temperature phase of an SMA, formed during cool-
ing. The martensitic crystalline structure is thermodyna-
mically
more
stable
below
a
certain
transition
temperature. Martensite evolves from austenite crystals
in various directions and can therefore have many dif-
ferent lattice arrangements, depending on the local stress
ﬁeld. In addition, the structure can appear as twinned or
‘de-twinned’. In this phase, the SMA can be deformed
easily due to the mobility of the twinned boundaries. A
plateau stress is present in the stress–strain curve of the
SMA in the martensite phase.
Typically, a phase transition is induced by a change in
temperature. The temperature at which the SMA starts to
transform into the martensite phase is the ‘martensite
start-temperature’. This transformation is completed
when the temperature falls below the ‘martensite ﬁnish-
temperature’. However, the transformation of austenite to
martensite can also be induced at higher temperatures
during loading; this is known as ‘strain induced marten-
site’ (SIM).
Actuators for Smart Systems
81

The second crystalline lattice structure is austenite,
which is the strong, high-temperature phase of an
SMA. The molecular arrangement of the austenite
structure is cubic and because of this symmetrical
structure the alloy shows a high modulus of elasticity.
This austenitic structure has the characteristic stress–
strain curve of typical metals and is much stronger than
the martensitic structure. The austenite phase starts to
form out of the martensite phase at the ‘austenite start-
temperature’. This transformation is completed when
the temperature rises above the ‘austenite ﬁnish-
temperature’. However, above this temperature, the
SMA element can still be in the martensitic phase
due to an applied load (SIM). The speciﬁc transforma-
tion temperatures can vary signiﬁcantly with the che-
mical composition of the SMA.
Heating of an SMA to induce the phase change can
be achieved by actually providing heat. External heat-
ing elements are usually bulky, not very efﬁcient and
may cause internal stresses. Usually, resistive heating
is used to deform the SMA by passing an electric
current through it. The time needed for complete
shape recovery is directly related to the time required
to heat the element to above a certain temperature. The
time needed to relax depends on the cooling rate of the
material. This cooling process cannot be accelerated
very easily, but the transformation back to the marten-
site state can also be induced by means of an applied
stress or strain. The response time of an SMA can be
minimized by reducing the actuator size and maximiz-
ing the heat transfer. The latter can be achieved with a
moving liquid, or by making the contact surface as
large as possible.
Sun and Sun [15] used a thermomechanical approach
to develop a constitutive relationship for the bending of a
composite beam with continuous SMA ﬁbers embedded
eccentric to the neutral axis. These authors concluded
that SMAs can be successfully used for active structural
vibration control.
Table 4.3 lists the properties of a representative shape
memory alloy, i.e. Ni–Ti.
4.9 COMPARISON OF ACTUATION
SCHEMES
A brief comparison of some of the electromechani-
cal transducers discussed previously is presented in
Table 4.4. Due to its simplicity, electrostatic actuation
is the most preferred, especially in micro devices. The
Table 4.3
Properties of an Ni–Ti shape memory alloy.
Property
Value
Density (g/cm3)
6.45–6.7
Maximum energy density (J/m3)
106–107
Ultimate tensile strength (MPa)
 1900
Poisson ratio
0.33
Shape memory effect (%)
 8
Elongation at failure (%)
 50
Response speed (time to heat/cool) (Hz)
 10
Power supply (typical) (V, A)
< 40 V;  several kA
Operational temperature range (C)
< 250
Transition temperature (C)
200 to þ110
Properties that change between two phases
Phase
———————————————————
Property
Austenite
Martensite
Yield strength (MPa)
195–690
70–140
Young’s modulus (GPa)
90–100
28–41
Coefﬁcient of thermal expansion (C1)
10–11 	 106
6:7 	 106
Thermal conductivity (W/(mC))
18
8.5–9.0
82
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

control signal here is voltage, which is easy to mani-
pulate in electrical circuits. However, these devices
require greater environmental protection as electrostatic
ﬁelds are prone to attract dust, which could affect the
performance of associated complimentary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) circuits. Electromagnetic and
electrodynamic actuators are based on Lorentz force
effects. The current-carrying coil is stationary in the
former case, while in the latter it is moving. These are
ideally suited when large currents are possible, even if
with lower voltages. However, they are prone to pro-
blems with power dissipation, but are tolerant to dust
and humidity.
Actuators based on piezoelectricity, magnetostriction
and electrostriction depend on changes in strain produced
by an applied electric or magnetic ﬁeld in some special
materials used. The achievable strain is at a maximum for
electrostrictive materials but the force generated is at a
maximum in magnetostrictive materials. Both electro-
strictive and piezoelectric materials deform with the
application of an electric ﬁeld, but while the relationship
between the force produced and applied ﬁeld is linear in
piezoelectrics, it is quadratic in electrostrictive materials.
Most of these transduction schemes are non-linear. That
is, the transfer function between electrical (voltage or
current) and mechanical (force or displacement) is not
linear. Such non-linearities distort the ‘sensed signal’, and
may cause loss of ‘ﬁdelity’. One approach to overcome this
difﬁculty is to restrict the signal to very small variations
about a DC bias. It is fairly reasonable to assume that the
responses to these small signal variations are linear.
REFERENCES
1. R.A. Johnson, Mechanical Filters in Electronics, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA (1983).
2. H.A.C. Tilmans, ‘Equivalent circuit representation of elec-
tromechanical transducers: I. Lumped parameter systems’,
Journal of Micromechanical and Microengineering, 6, 157–
176 (1996).
3. S.H. Crandall, D.C. Karnopp, E.F. Kurtz, Jr and D.C.
Pridmore-Brown, Dynamics of Mechanical and Electrome-
chanical Systems, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA
(1968).
4. M. Rossi, Acoustics and Electroacoustics, Artech House,
Norwood, MA, USA (1988).
5. T.
Frank,
‘Two-axis
electrodynamic
micropositioning
devices’, Journal of Micromechanical and Microengineer-
ing, 8, 114–118 (1998).
6. P. Muralt, ‘PZT thin ﬁlms for microsensors and actu-
ators: Where do we stand?’ IEEE Transactions: Ultra-
sonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, 47, 903–
915 (2000).
7. J.C. Piquette and S.E. Forsythe, ‘Generalized material
model for lead magnesium niobate (PMN) and an asso-
ciated
electromechanical
equivalent
circuit’,
Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 104, 2763–2772,
(1998).
8. J. Chen and T.R. Gururaja, ‘DC-biased electrostrictive
materials and transducers for medical imaging’ in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, pp. 1651–1658 (1997).
9. S. M. Pilgrim, ‘Electrostrictive ceramics for low-frequency
active transducers’, IEEE Transactions: Ultrasonics, Ferro-
electrics and Frequency Control, 47, 861–876 (2000).
10. R.E. Pelrine, R.D. Kornbluh and J.P. Joseph, ‘Electrostric-
tion of polymer dielectrics with compliant electrodes as a
means of actuation’, Sensors and Actuators: Physical, A64,
77–85 (1998).
11. R. Heydt, R. Kornbluh, R. Pelrine and V. Mason, ‘Design
and performance of an electrostrictive-polymer-ﬁlm acoustic
actuator’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 215, 297–311,
(1998).
12. K.H. Lee, H.J. Byun, H.K. Lee, I.J. Cho, J.U. Bu and E.
Yoon, ‘An audio frequency ﬁlter application of microma-
chined thermally isolated diaphragm structures’, in Proceed-
ings of the 13th Annual International Conference on Micro
Table 4.4
Comparison of the properties of electromechanical transducers [16]. Reproduced with
permission of IEE.
Actuator
Fractional stroke (%)
Maximum energy density (J/cm3)
Efﬁciency
Speed
Electrostatic
32
0.004
High
Fast
Electromagnetic
50
0.025
Low
Fast
Piezoelectric
0.2
0.035
High
Very fast
Magnetostrictive
0.2
0.07
Low
Very fast
Electrostrictive
4
0.032
High
Fast
Thermal
50
25.5
Low
Slow
Actuators for Smart Systems
83

Electromechanical Systems: MEMS’ 2000, IEEE, Piscat-
away, NJ, USA, pp. 142–147 (2000).
13. W. Riethmuller and W. Benecke, ‘Thermally excited silicon
microactuators’, IEEE Transactions: Electron Devices, 35,
758–763 (1988).
14. Q.A. Huang and N.K.S. Lee, ‘Analysis and design of
polysilicon thermal ﬂexure actuator’, Journal of Microme-
chanical and Microengineering, 9, 64–70, (1999).
15. G. Sun and C.T. Sun, ‘Bending of shape-memory alloy-
reinforced composite beam’, Journal of Materials Science,
30, 5750–5754 (1995).
16. D. Wood, J.S. Burdess and A.J. Harris, ‘Actuators and their
mechanisms in microengineering’, in Proceedings of the
Colloquium on Actuator Technology: Current Practice and
New Developments, No. 110, IEE, London, UK, pp. 7/1–7/3
(1996).
84
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

5
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The principles of several sensors and actuators have been
discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. Several of these devices
are employed in numerous applications in civil, military,
aerospace and biological areas, as will be demonstrated
in Part 4 of this text. This chapter is intended to provide
the basic understanding of the design of some of these
sensors and actuators. Examples of sensors presented
here include the piezoelectric and piezoresistive types. A
chemical sensor based on the surface accoustic wave
(SAW) principles is described. A ﬁber-optic gyroscope
represents the optical segment of sensors in this chapter.
In addition, the design of microvalves and pumps required
in several biomedical applications is also included here.
5.2 PIEZOELECTRIC SENSORS
Lead zirconate titanate (commonly known by the acro-
nym PZT) is arguably the most widely used component
in smart systems. The importance of this material comes
from the fact that it exhibits signiﬁcant piezoelectric
properties. Piezoelectricity refers to the phenomenon in
which forces applied to a slab of a material result in the
generation of electrical charges on the surfaces of the
slab. This is due to the distribution of electric charges in
the unit cell of a crystal when force is applied.
In these crystals, the force applied along one axis of the
crystal leads to the appearance of positive and negative
charges on opposite sides of the crystal along another axis.
The strain induced by the force leads to a physical dis-
placement of the charge within the unit cell. This polariza-
tion of the crystal leads to an accumulation of charge:
Q ¼ dF
ð5:1Þ
In the above equation, the piezoelectric coefﬁcient d is a
3  3 matrix. In general, forces in the x,y,z directions
contribute to charges produced in any of the x,y,z direc-
tions. Values of the piezoelectric coefﬁcients of these
materials are usually made available by the manufacturer.
Typical values of the piezoelectric charge coefﬁcients are
1–100 pC/N. Some of the other properties of PZT are
listed in Table 5.1. Once the charge is known, the voltage
across the plate of the piezoelectric material can be
determined by:
V ¼ Q=C
ð5:2Þ
where the parallel plate capacitance of this conﬁguration
is:
C ¼ e0erA
d
ð5:3Þ
Thus, in order to produce a larger voltage one can resort
to reducing the area of the sensor. However, it must be
cautioned that piezoelectrics are not generally good
dielectrics. These materials have substantial leakage
losses. In other words, the charge across a pair of
electrodes may vanish over time. Therefore, there is a
time constant for retention of voltage on the piezoelectric
after the application of a force. This time constant
depends on the capacitance of the element, and the
leakage resistance. Typical time constants are of order
of 1 s. Because of this effect, piezoelectrics are not used
for static measurements such as weight.
The reversible effect is used in piezoelectric actua-
tors. Application of a voltage across such a material
results in dimensional changes in the crystal. The
coefﬁcients involved are exactly the same as in
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

Equation (5.1). The change in length per unit applied
voltage is given by:
dL
V ¼
FL
EA


d11FL
e0erA

 ¼ e0er
Ed11
ð5:4Þ
The strain in the above expression depends only on the
piezoelectric coefﬁcient, the dielectric constant and
Young’s modulus. Therefore, it may be inferred that
objects of a given piezoelectric material, irrespective of
their shape, would undergo the same fractional change in
length upon the application of a given voltage.
Most sensors using the piezoelectric effect require a
charge-amplifying preampliﬁer. A simple circuit for this
purpose is shown in Figure 5.1. Another recently devel-
oped material with sizeable piezoelectric properties is
poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF). This can usually be
treated during fabrication to have a good piezoelectric
coefﬁcient in the direction of interest. Being polymeric,
ﬁlms of this material can be made at low cost. A related
copolymer P(VDF–TrFE) also shows signiﬁcant piezo-
electric properties. The properties of PVDF and P(VDF–
TrFE) are given in Table 5.2. Both of these materials are
used in acoustic sensors because of their strong piezo-
electricity, low acoustic impedance (useful in underwater
applications, since there are only small mismatches with
those of water) and ﬂexibility (which permits applica-
tions on curved surfaces). Therefore, transducers with
wide operating bandwidths can be easily designed using
PVDF. This also results in improvements in the overall
performance of sensors such as hydrophones used for
sensing acoustic ﬁelds. As the sensor size decreases, it
becomes necessary to provide an ampliﬁer or buffer in
close proximity to overcome the sensitivity loss due to
interconnected capacitances. This calls for the concept of
sensors integrated with electronics. The discussion below
shows the integration of a sensor where an on-chip
MOSFET is implemented in which the sensor is placed
over the extended gate metal electrode of the MOSFET.
The MOSFET ampliﬁer takes care of the loss of the sensor
signal due to the ﬁnite capacitances of the cables that are
used to drive the signal to the signal processing unit.
A schematic of the device structure is shown in
Figure 5.2 [3]. This is fabricated using six levels of
photo masks. The device consists of a sensing part and
an amplifying part. A PVDF ﬁlm is used as the sensing
material and an n-channel MOSFET with an extended
aluminum gate is used as the electronic interface to the
PVDF sensor. The basic structure is fabricated using a
standard NMOS process. Transistors with large W/L
Table 5.1
Electromechanical properties of PZT.
Property
Value
Density (g/cm3)
7.7–8.1
Maximum energy density (J/m3)
102
Young’s modulus (GPa)
60–120
Tensile strength (MPa)
25 (dynamic);
75 (static)
Compressive strength (MPa)
520
Curie temperature (C)
160–350
Operational temperature range (C)
273 to 80
Inducible strain (1–2 kV/m) at (mm/m)
1–2
Response time
Very fast
(typically
kHz, up to
GHz)
Charge generating
sensor
Q
C
Vout
r
–
+
Figure 5.1
Schematic of a piezoelectric sensor which uses a
charge preampliﬁer.
Table 5.2
Properties of PZT, PVDF and P(VDF–TrFE)
[1,2]. F. S. Foster, K. A. Harasiewicz and M. D. Sherar,
‘‘A History of Medical and Biological Imaging with
Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) Transducers,’’ IEEE
Trans. Ultrasonics Ferroelectrics Freq. Control,
UFFC-47, # 2000 IEEE
Property
PZT-5A
PVDF
P(VDF
–TrFE)
Thickness mode
0.49
0.14
0.25–0.29
coupling coefﬁcient
Relative permittivity, er
1200
12–13
7–8
Density (g/cm3)
7.75
1.78
1.88
Acoustic impedance,
33.7
3.92
4.37
Z (MRa)
Maximum
365
80
115–145
temperature (C)
86
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

ratios are preferred in order to obtain a large transcon-
ductance, gm, and low noise. Hence, MOSFETs with
different W/L ratios are preferred for this application.
The operating principle of this device can be explained
as follows. The incident acoustic signal initiates the
charge redistribution on the surfaces of the PVDF ﬁlm
that, in turn, changes the charge on the gate of an n-type
MOSFET. The shift in gate voltage is used to modulate
the drain current in a common source conﬁguration. Since
the FET is an important component in these sensors, its
electrical characteristics are important in determining the
behavior of these sensors. They also help to determine the
operating point for the integrated sensors.
In a MOSFET, the drain current ID is produced when
electrons ﬂow from source to drain. So, the existence of
the channel is the cause of current ﬂow. If VGS is the gate-
source voltage of the MOSFET and VT the threshold
voltage, then the condition for a channel to exist is that
VGS > VT. With source and substrate terminals at ground
potential, the threshold voltage VT is given by [4]:
VT ¼ VT
mos þ VFB
ð5:5Þ
where VT
mos is the threshold voltage of the MOS
capacitor and VFB is the ﬂat band voltage:
The threshold voltage of the MOS capacitor VT mos is
given by:
VT mos ¼ 2fðbÞ þ Qb
Cox
ð5:6Þ
where F(b) is the bulk potential, Qb is the maximum
space charge density per unit area of the depletion region
and Cox is the gate oxide capacitance. From these
relations, it is evident that VT is a function of the material
properties of the gate conductor and insulation, the
thickness of the gate insulator, the channel doping and
the impurities at the silicon–insulator interface.
If Na is the acceptor atom concentration and Ni is the
intrinsic concentration, then the bulk potential F(b) is
given by:
fðbÞ ¼ KT
q ln Na
Ni


ð5:7Þ
If esi is the permittivity of the silicon substrate, then the
maximum space charge density Qb is given by:
Qb ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4esiqNafðbÞ
p
ð5:8Þ
The ﬂat band voltage VFB is given by:
VFB ¼ fms  Qfc
Cox
ð5:9Þ
where Fms is the work function at the metal–semicon-
ductor interface, Qfc is the surface charge state and Cox is
the gate oxide capacitance.
If Eg is the band gap energy and F(b) the bulk potential,
then the work function Fms is given by:
fms ¼ Eg
2q þ fðbÞ
ð5:10Þ
To operate the MOSFET as an ampliﬁer, it must be
biased at a point in the saturation region where the
transconductance is proportional to the applied gate
voltage but is independent of the drain voltage. For the
MOSFET to operate in the linear region, the drain source
voltage VDS < ðVGS  VTÞ. Then the drain source current
Ids is given by:
Ids ¼ WmnCox
2L
VGS  VT
ð
Þ2
ð5:11Þ
where L is the length, W the width and mn the surface
mobility of the carriers in the channel of the MOSFET.
Hence the length L, the width W and the gate insulator
thickness of the MOSFET are decided based on the above
equations. The channel length of these devices is
+
+
PVDF
SiO2
p-Si
Source
Gate
Drain
Figure 5.2
Schematic of the cross-section of PVDF–MOSFET hydrophone device [3].
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
87

designed as 10 mm. From the I–V characteristic curves,
the carrier mobility mn was obtained as about 600–
700 cm2/(Vs). The threshold voltages for both the devices
are within 0.5 to 0.3 V, which means the devices are
‘depletion-mode’ n-channel MOSFETs.
Since the resistance of the MOSFET is quite small and
the equivalent output impedance of the PVDF transducer
is simply a capacitor (C0), the ideal PVDF–MOSFET
structure may be modeled as shown in Figure 5.3. In the
equivalent circuit, Vg is the signal voltage reaching
the gate of the MOSFET (induced gate voltage), C0 is
the ‘clamped’ capacitance of the PVDF ﬁlm, Csub is the
extended gate electrode-to-substrate capacitance, Cgs and
Cgd are the gate-to-source and gate-to-drain capacitances,
respectively, gm is the transconductance and RD is the
resistance of the resistor connected to the drain of the
MOSFET.
From the equivalent circuit, it is easy to get:
Vg
VPVDF
¼
C0
C0 þ Csub þ Cgs þ Cgd 1 þ gmRD
ð
Þ
ð5:12Þ
where C0 is related to the thickness of the PVDF ﬁlm. In
the design shown here, the PVDF ﬁlm has a thickness of
110 mm. The values of Csub, Cgs and Cgd can be calcu-
lated from the structural and geometrical parameters of
the MOSFET (Table 5.3). Equation (5.12) shows that the
induced gate voltage can be improved by minimizing
Csub, Cgs and Cgd. When an acoustic signal reaches the
PVDF transducer, a small voltage is generated and
partially transmitted to the gate of the MOSFET. The
small variation of the gate voltage in turn induces the
voltage variation across RD. The voltage gain is:
V0
Vg
¼ gmRD ¼  WmnCg
L
VGS  VT
ð
ÞRD
ð5:13Þ
The sensitivity of the sensor with the electronics built in
can be obtained as:
V0
P1
¼
V0
Vg


Vg
VPVDF

 VPVDF
P1


ð5:14Þ
5.3 MEMS IDT-BASED ACCELEROMETERS
The
concept
and
design
principles
underlying
an
MEMS–IDT (inter-digitated transducer)-based acceler-
ometer are based on the use of surface acoustic waves
(SAWs). This unique concept is a departure from the
conventional comb-driven MEMS accelerometer design.
By designing the seismic mass of the accelerometer to
ﬂoat just above a high-frequency Rayleigh surface acous-
tic wave sensor, it is possible to realize the accuracy and
versatility required for the measurement of a wide range
of accelerations. Another unique feature of this device is
that because the SAW device operates at radiofrequen-
cies (RFs), it is easier to be able to connect the 1DT
device to a planar antenna and read the acceleration
remotely by wireless transmission and reception. This
unique combination of technologies results in a novel
accelerometer that can be remotely sensed by an RF
communication system, with the advantage of no power
requirements at the sensor site.
In the device described here, a conductive seismic
mass is placed close to the substrate (at a distance of less
than one acoustic wavelength). This serves to alter the
electrical boundary condition as discussed above. Pro-
gramable tapped delay lines have used the principle of air
gap coupling between the SAW substrate and a silicon
‘superstrate’ to form individual MOS capacitors. These
capacitors are then used to control the amount of RF
coupling from the input IDT on the SAW substrate to the
output terminal on the silicon chip [5]. This principle has
also been successfully implemented in the realization of
SAW ‘convolvers’ [6].
The seismic mass consists of a micromachined silicon
structure which incorporates reﬂectors and ﬂexible
beams. The working of the device is as follows. The
VPVDF
Csub
Cgs
RD
Cgd
gmVg
C0
Vg
G
D
S
Figure 5.3
Equivalent small-signal model of a PVDF–MOS-
FET device.
Table 5.3
Structural and geometrical parameters
of a fabricated MOSFET (all values in mm).
Parameter
Value
Field oxide thickness
1
Gate oxide thickness
30.0
Metal thickness
0.25
nþjunction depth
0.5
p-Type substrate thickness
250
SU-8 thickness
11
88
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

IDT generates a Rayleigh wave, and the array of reﬂec-
tors reﬂect this wave back to the IDT. The phase of the
reﬂected wave is dependent on the position of the
reﬂectors. If the positions of the reﬂectors are altered,
then the phase of the reﬂected wave is also changed. The
reﬂectors are part of the seismic mass. In response to
acceleration, the beam ﬂexes, so causing the reﬂectors to
move. This can be measured as a phase shift of the
reﬂected wave. By calibrating the phase shift measured
with respect to the acceleration, the device can be used as
an acceleration sensor. Alternatively, the measurement
can be done in the time-domain, in which case the delay
time of the reﬂection from the reﬂectors is used to sense
the acceleration. A schematic of an MEMS–IDT-based
accelerometer is shown in Figure 5.4. For waves propa-
gating in the piezoelectric medium, there are two sets of
equations, namely the mechanical equation of motion
and Maxwell’s equation for the electrical behavior. The
equation of motion is as follows:
r @2ui
@t2 ¼
X
3
j ¼ 1
@Tij
@xi
ð5:15Þ
where r is the density of the material, ui is the wave
displacement in the ith direction and Tij is the stress. This
equation is intercoupled by the constitutive relation:
Tij ¼
X
k
X
l
cE
ijkl Skl 
X
k
ekij Ek
ð5:16Þ
where cE
ijkl is the stiffness tensor for a constant electric
ﬁeld, i.e. if the electric ﬁeld (E) is held constant, this
tensor relates changes in Tij to changes in Skl. The electric
displacement (D) is determined by the ﬁeld E and the
permittivity tensor eij. In a piezoelectric material, the
electric displacement is also related to the strain:
Di ¼
X
j
eS
ij Ej þ
X
j
X
k
ekijSjk
ð5:17Þ
where eS
ij is the permittivity tensor for constant strain and
ekij is the coupling constant between the elastic and
electric ﬁelds.
The constitutive equations for piezoelectric materials
relating the stress T, strain S, electric ﬁeld E and electric
displacement D are given by Equations (5.15) and (5.16).
It can be seen that the electric ﬁeld and the electric ﬁeld
displacement are coupled in this set of equations. For a
non-piezoelectric material, ekij ¼ 0 and there is no cou-
pling between the elastic and electric ﬁelds. The sym-
metric strain tensor is given by:
Sij ¼ 1
2
@ui
@xj
þ @uj
@xi


ð5:18Þ
where u is the wave displacement.
The electromagnetic quasi-static approximation:
Ei ¼  @f
@xi
ð5:19Þ
rD ¼ 0
ð5:20Þ
for an electric potential f can be used here to make
further simpliﬁcations. The rotational part of the electric
ﬁeld due to the existence of a moving magnetic ﬁeld is
neglected. This approximation (Equation (5.19)) is valid
as the acoustic velocity is small when compared to that of
the electromagnetic wave.
Contacts
Absorber
Beam
Polysilicon
seismic mass
IDT
LiNbO3 crystal
Figure 5.4
Schematic of an MEMS–IDT-based accelerometer.
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
89

By incorporating Equations (5.17)–(5.19) in Equation
(5.20) results in a system of four coupled equations
relating the electric potential with three components of
displacement in a piezoelectric crystal:
r @2ui
@t2 ¼
X
j
X
k
ekij
@2f
@xj@xk
þ
X
l
cE
ijkl
@2uk
@xj@xl
 
!
ð5:21Þ
X
i
X
j
eS
ij
@2f
@xi@xj

X
l
eijk
@2uj
@xi@xk
 
!
¼ 0:
ð5:22Þ
where i, j and k vary from 1 to 3. The problem of wave
propagation on anisotropic substrates can be solved by
the method of partial waves. Plane wave solutions of the
form:
um
j ¼ am
j eikbmx3eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:23Þ
fm ¼ am
4 eikbmx3eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:24Þ
are considered where j ¼ 1–3 and m ¼1–4. The coordi-
nate system is aligned to the substrate such that the
propagation is along x1 and the surface normal is in the
x3 direction. Therefore, the surface wave decays along the
x3 direction. In Equations (5.23) and (5.24), k is the wave
number, b is the decay factor and v is the phase velocity.
The partial wave solutions are substituted into Equations
(5.21) and (5.22). The weighing coefﬁcients of these plane
waves are chosen to satisfy the mechanical and electrical
boundary conditions at the surface of the crystal.
In equations of motion, the material parameters are
expressed in terms of axes which are selected for con-
venient boundary conditions and excitation requirements.
The tabulated values of these material parameters are
expressed according to the crystalline axes. It is neces-
sary to transform the material parameters to match the
coordinate system of the problem. In certain cases, this is
a mere interchange of the coordinate axes (as in YZ
lithium niobate). For more complex situations (128YZ
lithium niobate) the parameters are transformed using an
appropriate transformation matrix. The elements of this
matrix are the direction cosines between the crystalline
axis and the ‘problem’ axis.
A YZ lithium niobate crystal is usually the material of
choice in the design of devices of this type as it has the
highest electromechanical coupling efﬁciency. The basic
principle of the device depends on the strength of the
piezoelectric coupling. ‘YZ lithium niobate’ indicates
that the x3 axis is parallel to the crystal axis Y, and x1
is parallel to the crystal axis Z. The orientation of x3 is
called the ‘cut’ of the crystal. For YZ lithium niobate, the
crystal is Y-cut and Z-propagating. Since the material
tensors, permittivity and piezoelectric tensors are speci-
ﬁed with reference to the crystal axes, they need to be
transformed into a frame deﬁned by x1, x2, x3. The
rotated material parameters are:
C ¼
c33
c13
c13
0
0
0
c13
c11
c12
0
c14
0
c13
c12
c11
0
c14
0
0
0
0
c66
0
c14
0
c14
c14
0
c44
0
0
0
0
c14
0
c44
2
6666664
3
7777775
ð5:25Þ
e ¼
e33
e31
e31
0
0
0
0
0
0
e22
0
e15
0
e22
e22
0
e15
0
2
4
3
5
ð5:26Þ
E ¼
E33
0
0
0
E11
0
0
0
E11
2
664
3
775
ð5:27Þ
The partial wave solutions (Equations (5.23) and (5.24))
are substituted into Equations (5.21) and (5.22), after the
material parameters have been rotated to match the
coordinate system deﬁned for the problem, to get:
m11  rV2
m12
m13
m14
m12
m22  rV2
m23
m24
m13
m23
m33  rV2
m34
m14
m24
m34
m44  rV2
2
664
3
775

a1
a2
a3
a4
2
664
3
775 ¼ 0
ð5:28Þ
where:
m11 ¼ c55b2 þ 2c15b þ c11
m12 ¼ c45b2 þ c14 þ c56
ð
Þb þ c16
m13 ¼ c35b2 þ c13 þ c55
ð
Þb þ c15
m14 ¼ e35b2 þ e15 þ e31
ð
Þb þ e11
m22 ¼ c44b2 þ 2c46b þ c66
m23 ¼ c34b2 þ c36 þ c45
ð
Þb þ c56
m24 ¼ e34b2 þ e14 þ e36
ð
Þb þ e16
m33 ¼ c33b2 þ 2c35b þ c55
m34 ¼ e33b2 þ e13 þ e35
ð
Þb þ e15
m44 ¼  E33b2 þ 2E13b þ E11


:
90
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

For YZ lithium niobate, m12, m23 and m24 ¼ 0. For non-
trivial solutions, the determinant of the coefﬁcients of a
must vanish. For a given value of the phase velocity,
setting this determinant equal to zero results in an eighth-
order equation in the decay constant (b). These roots of b
are purely real or conjugate pairs. Only values with
negative imaginary parts are admissible as these roots
lead to waves that decay with depth (i.e. surface waves).
There exist four such roots of b. For each of the four
roots, the corresponding eigenvalues and the eigenvectors
are determined. A linear combination of the partial waves
is then formed:
Uj ¼
X
m
Cmam
j eikbmx3
 
!
eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:29Þ
f ¼
X
m
Cmam
4 eikbmx3
 
!
eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:30Þ
These are then substituted into the boundary conditions
in the mechanical and electrical domains of the problem.
The mechanical boundary condition states that the sur-
face of the crystal is ‘mechanically free’. There is no
component of force in the x3 direction on the surface
(x3 ¼ 0). This further implies that T31, T32 and T33 ¼ 0.
In the electrical domain, since a conductive plate is
placed at a height h above the substrate, the potential
goes to zero at x3 ¼ h. The potential above the surface
satisﬁes Laplace’s equation. The potential and the elec-
tric displacement (D) in the direction normal to the
substrate are continuous at x3 ¼ 0. This boundary con-
dition is represented by the following equations. The
potential in the air gap is given by:
f1ðx3Þ ¼ Bekx3 þ Cekx3


eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:31Þ
The potential at x3 ¼ h is zero. Therefore:
f1ðhÞ ¼ Bekh þ Cekh


eikðx1vtÞ
C ¼ Be2kh
ð5:32Þ
The potential given by Equation (5.27) is equal to the
potential given by the plane wave solution at the surface
(x3 ¼ 0). Equating these results in an expression for the
unknown constant B:
f1ð0Þ ¼ B 1  e2kh


eikðx1vtÞ ¼ fð0Þ
ð5:33Þ
fð0Þ ¼
X
m
cmam
4
 
!
eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:34Þ
B ¼
P
m
cmam
4
1  e2kh
ð5:35Þ
The electric displacement in the air gap is given by:
D3 ¼ e0
@f1ðx3Þ
@x3
ð5:36Þ
The electric displacement on the surface of the crystal is
given by:
D3ðx3 ¼ 0Þ ¼ ke0
P
m
cmam
4
1  e2kh 1 þ e2kh


eikðx1vtÞ
ð5:37Þ
This equation is obtained from the potential equation in
Equation (5.25). The expression for the electric ﬁeld
displacement from the plane wave solution of potential
is similarly obtained and is given by:
D3ðx3 ¼ 0Þ ¼
X
j
eE
3jEj þ
X
j
X
k
e3jkSjk
ð5:38Þ
From the above equations, the relevant electrical bound-
ary conditions can be obtained.
The choice of the suspension for the seismic mass
determines the linearity of motion and the sensitivity to
residual strain. A single support is the simplest and
lowest spring constant design, but allows substantial
ofﬂine motion and rotation in the suspended mass. Two
parallel supports remove the rotation component of the
motion, but still introduce ofﬂine motion due to curvature
of the beams (arclength is preserved, while vertical
distance is not). A two-sided support removes that
problem but greatly increases the sensitivity to residual
stress.
In addition to launching surface waves, the IDT can
also generate bulk acoustic waves. These waves can
propagate in any direction within the body of the sub-
strate material. In this design, the principal effect of the
generation of bulk waves is reduction of the power
available for the generation of surface waves. The fol-
lowing strategies may be useful to minimize the genera-
tion of bulk waves:
(a) The bottom surface of the piezoelectric substrate is
roughened and coated with a soft conductor like
silver epoxy.
(b) Use substrate geometries that are not rectangular in
shape.
(c) Choice of the right number of IDT ﬁngers. The input
power is converted into bulk wave energy and sur-
face wave energy as P ¼ PS þ PB, where PS repre-
sents the power in the excited SAW wave and PB the
component that is radiated as bulk waves. The ratio
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
91

of PS to PB decreases drastically as the number of
ﬁnger pairs in the exciting IDT is reduced. For YZ
lithium niobate, the amount of input power converted
into transverse bulk waves increases almost expo-
nentially as the number of IDT ﬁngers is reduced
below ﬁve.
5.4 FIBER-OPTIC GYROSCOPES
Fiber-optic gyroscopes are miniature solid-state optical
devices for the precise measurements of mechanical
rotation in inertial space. Conventionally used mechan-
ical gyroscopes involve a spinning mass and ‘gimbaled’
mountings. Optical gyroscopes are free of such moving
parts and may be used for a wide range of applications,
for example, navigation, exploration and in the manu-
facturing and defence industries.
The basic theory of rotation sensing by optical means
is known as the Sagnac effect, since this possibility was
ﬁrst demonstrated by G. Sagnac in 1913. The type of
interferometer used to measure rotation is known as the
Sagnac interferometer (Figure 5.5). Two identical light
beams traveling in opposite directions around a closed
path experience a phase difference when the loop is
rotated about its axis, and this phase difference is
proportional to the rotation rate [7]. Consider the inter-
ferometer shown in Figure 5.5. Here, a light beam is split
by using a beam splitter and the two beams (B1 and B2)
are made to travel in a circular path. When the inter-
ferometer is at rest in an inertial frame of reference, the
pathlength of the counter-propagating waves are equal
since light travels at the same speed in both directions
around the loop.
The time taken by the beam B1 to complete the
circular path is:
t1 ¼ 2pr
c
ð5:39Þ
where r is the radius of the circular path. Similarly, the
time taken by the beam B2 is also of the same value.
Therefore:
t1 ¼ t2 ¼ t
ð5:40Þ
If the interferometer is rotating at a speed of m/s in the
clockwise direction and the observer is motionless in the
original inertial frame, the time taken by B1 to complete
the circular path is less than B2. In this case, the time
taken by B1 to complete the circular path is given by:
t1 ¼ 2pr
c þ tr
c
ð5:41Þ
Similarly, the time taken by B2 to complete the circular
path is:
t2 ¼ 2pr
c  tr
c
ð5:42Þ
Therefore, the difference between the propagation times
of the two waves is:
t ¼ t1  t2 ¼ 2tr
c
¼ 4pr2
c2
ð5:43Þ
Obviously, B2 will reach its destination before B1. For a
continuous wave of frequency o, this corresponds to a
phase shift:
f ¼ ot ¼ 4pr2
c2
o ¼ 4o
c2 A
ð5:44Þ
where A is the area of the circular path. It may also be
noted that this result would remain unchanged even when
the interferometer is ﬁlled with a medium of refractive
index n because of the Fresnel–Fiezeau drag effect due to
the movement of the medium compensating for the
increased optical pathlengths.
The advantage of using an optical-ﬁber coil to form the
interferometer is that the Sagnac phase difference
increases with the number of turns or length of the
ﬁber. In this special case, Equation (5.44) can be rewrit-
ten as:
f ¼ 2p LD
lc A
ð5:45Þ
where L is the length of the ﬁber and D is the diameter of
the coil.
Fiber-optic gyroscopes are broadly classiﬁed into two-
types. The ﬁrst type is an open-loop ﬁber-optic gyroscope
r
B1
B2
B
Figure 5.5
Schematic of a Sagnac interferometer.
92
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

with a dynamic range of the order of 1000 to 5000, with a
scale-factor accuracy (inclusive of non-linearity and
hysterisis effects) of about 0.5 %, and sensitivities that
vary from less than 0.01 degrees/h to 100 degrees/h and
higher. These ﬁber-optic gyroscopes are generally used
for low-cost applications where dynamic range and
linearity are not crucial. The second type is the closed-
loop ﬁber-optic gyroscope that may have a dynamic
range of 106 and a scale-factor linearity of 10 ppm or
better. These types of ﬁber-optic gyroscopes are primar-
ily targeted at medium- to high-accuracy navigation
applications that have high turning rates and require
high linearity and large dynamic ranges.
Figure 5.6 illustrates the open-loop conﬁguration. This
consists of a ﬁber coil, two directional couplers, a
polarizer, an optical source and a detector. A piezo-
electric (PZT) device wound with a small length at one
end of the ﬁber coil applies a non-reciprocal phase
modulation. Light from the laser traverses the ﬁrst
directional coupler, polarizer and then the second direc-
tional coupler where it is split into two signals of equal
intensity that travel around the coil in opposite direc-
tions. The light recombines at the coupler, returning
through the polarizer, and half of the light is directed
by the ﬁrst coupler into a photo detector. This conﬁgura-
tion permits measuring the difference in phase between
the two signals to one part in 1016. This is possible due to
the principle of reciprocity. Light passing from the laser
through the polarizer is restricted to a single state of
polarization, and the directional couplers and coil are
made of special polarization-maintaining ﬁbers to ensure
a single-mode path. Beams of light in both directions
travel through the same pathlength. Almost all environ-
mental conditions (except rotation) have the same effects
on both beams and are canceled out. Hence, this gyroscope
is sensitive only to rotation about the axis perpendicular to
the plane of the coil. The light intensity returning from the
coil to the polarizer is a raised cosine function, having a
maximum value when there is no rotation and a minimum
when the optical phase difference is 	 p (half an optical
wavelength). This effect can be shown to be independent
of the shape of the optical path and of the propagation
medium. Modulating PZT with a sinusoidal voltage
impresses a differential optical phase shift between the
two light beams at the modulating frequency. The inter-
ferometer output when there is no rotation of the coil
exhibits the periodic behavior shown in Figure 5.7, whose
frequency spectrum comprises Bessel harmonics of the
modulation frequency. Since the phase modulation is
symmetrical, only even harmonics are present; the ratio
of the harmonic amplitudes depends on the extent of phase
modulation. When the coil is rotated, the modulation
occurs about the shifted position of the interferometer
response. The modulation is unbalanced, and the funda-
mental and odd harmonics will also be present (Figure 5.8).
The amplitudes of the fundamental and odd harmonics
are proportional to the sine of the angular rotation rate,
while the even harmonics have a cosine relationship. The
simplest demodulation scheme synchronously detects
the signal at the fundamental frequency.
Further improvements in dynamic range and linearity
can be obtained by using a closed-loop conﬁguration
where the phase shift induced by rotation is compen-
sated by an equal and opposite artiﬁcially imposed
phase shift. One way to accomplish this is to introduce
a frequency shifter into the loop, as shown in Figure 5.9.
The relative frequency difference of the light beams
propagating in the ﬁber loop can be controlled, resulting
in a net phase difference that is proportional to
the length of the ﬁber coil and the frequency shift. In
Laser
First coupler
Polarizer second coupler
Detector
Amplifier
LD drive
Demodulator
Analog rate output
x-Splice location
PZT phase modulator
Sensing
Coil
Oscillator
Figure 5.6
Schematic of a ﬁber-optic gyroscope in the open-loop conﬁguration [8]. Reproduced with permisison of KVH
Industries Inc
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
93

Figure 5.9, this is done by using a modulator in the
ﬁber-optic coil to generate a phase shift at a rate of o.
When the coil is rotated, the ﬁrst harmonic signal
modiﬁes the phase, in a manner similar to that for
open-loop ﬁber-optic gyroscopes. By using the rotation-
ally induced ﬁrst harmonic as an error signal, the fre-
quency shift can be adjusted by using a synchronous
demodulator with a detector to translate the ﬁrst harmonic
signal into a corresponding voltage. This voltage is
applied to a voltage-controlled oscillator whose output
frequency is fed into the frequency shifter in the loop so
that the phase relationship between the counter-propagat-
ing light beams is locked into a single value.
5.5 PIEZORESISTIVE PRESSURE SENSORS
A pressure sensor can consist of a micromachined silicon
wafer bonded onto a glass substrate. Strain gauges are
patterned onto the micromachined diaphragm area. To
analyze its operation, if we ﬁrst consider a circular plate
of thickness h, where the deﬂection of the plate w, under
a uniformly distributed pressure (p), is assumed to be
smaller than h/5, the differential equation describing the
elastic behavior of the middle plane of a thin plate is
obtained from the elementary theory of plates [9]:
r4w ¼ p
D
ð5:46Þ
Optical
intensity
Photo detector
response
Interferometer
response
Optical bias,
S(f   ), frequency-domain response
t
t
f
fm
2fm
3fm
4fm
f
Figure 5.7
Sagnac interferometer response for stationary open-loop gyroscope conﬁguration [8]. Reproduced with permisison
of KVH Industries Inc
Optical
intensity
Photo detector
response
Interferometer
response
Optical bias,
S(f), frequency-domain response
t
t
f
fm
2fm
3fm
4fm
f
+ Sagnac phase
shift, ∆S
Figure 5.8
Sagnac interferometer response for rotating open-loop gyroscope conﬁguration [8]. Reproduced with permisison of
KVH Industries Inc
94
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

where D is the stiffness of the plate, (D ¼ Eh3=
12 1  n2
ð
Þ
½
); here, E is the Young’s modulus of the
plate and n is the Poison ratio. In the case of a simply
supported edge, w is solved as follows:
w ¼ pða2  r2Þ
64D
5 þ n
1 þ n


a2  r2


ð5:47Þ
where a is the radius of the plate and r is measured in a
coordinate system ﬁxed to the center of the plate.
The radial strain (er) is given by:
erðr; zÞ ¼ 
Dz
Eh3=12
d2w
dr2 þ n
r
dw
dr


¼ 3
8
pa2ðhp  hmÞð3 þ nÞ
Eðhp þ hmÞ3
"
#
1  r2
a2


ð5:48Þ
while the tangential strain (et) is given by:
etðr; zÞ ¼ 
Dz
Eh3=12
n d2w
dr2 þ 1
r
dw
dr


¼ 3
8
pa2ðhp  hmÞð3 þ nÞ
Eðhp þ hmÞ3
"
#
1 
3n þ 1
3 þ n

 r2
a2




ð5:49Þ
where z is the vertical coordinate from the middle plane
to the boundary lamina of the plate and the thickness h
consists of the plate thickness, hp, and the membrane
thickness, hm.
As the pressure-induced strains are functions of the
radius, the mean radial strain is given by:
er ¼
ðr0
ri
erðrÞdr
ðr0
ri
dr
¼ e0 1  1
3a2
r3
0  r3
i
r0  ri




ð5:50Þ
while the mean tangential strain is:
et ¼
ðr0
ri
etðrÞ
ðr0
ri
dr
¼ e0 1  1
3a2
3n þ 1
3 þ n

 r3
0  r3
i
r0  ri




ð5:51Þ
where r0 and r1 represent the outer and inner diameters of
radial strain, r0 and r1 are the outer and inner diameters
of tangential strain and e0 is the maximum strain acting in
the center of the circular plate, given by:
e0 ¼ 3
8
pa2ðhp  hmÞð3 þ nÞ
Eðhp þ hmÞ3
"
#
ð5:52Þ
A Wheatstone bridge is widely used to pick up variation
in the electrical resistances of the strain gauges. When
the bridge is balanced, there is no voltage output (when
there is no resistance change from its balance value) but
the bridge indicates a voltage output if the resistance is
varied from its nominal value. This resistance variation
depends on the strain generated in the resistor and the
change in resistivity:
R
R ¼ ð1 þ 2nÞe þ r
r
ð5:53Þ
where R is the resistance change, R is the original
resistance to achieve the Wheatstone bridge balance, e is
the strain, n is the Poison ratio of the resistor material,
r is the resistivity change and r is the original
resistivity of the resistor materials. Usually, the resistivity
change can be ignored, considering that resistors are
made from homogeneous materials. The linear relation-
ship between the resistance change and strain is obtained
as follows:
R
R ¼ ð1 þ 2nÞe
ð5:54Þ
Here, kgfð¼ 1 þ 2nÞ is called the gauge factor which
directly reﬂects the relationship between resistance
change and strain.
If four gauges are placed on the ﬂexible plate, two of
them for radial-strain sensing and the other two for
tangential-strain measurement, all four gauges have the
same nominal resistance so that the Wheatstone bridge is
in the ‘balance state’ and there is no voltage output. The
radial- and tangential-resistance changes due to the radial
Fiber–optic
coil
Modulater
Oscillator
Detector
Light
source
Polarizer
Integrator
Frequency
shifter
VCO
Figure 5.9
Schematic of a ﬁber-optic gyroscope in the closed-
loop conﬁguration [8].
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
95

and tangential strains, respectively, are obtained by con-
sidering the temperature-shift-induced strain:
Rr
R
¼ kgfðer þ etempÞ
ð5:55Þ
Rt
R
¼ kgfðet þ etempÞ
ð5:56Þ
The voltage output due to the resistance change is
calculated from:
Vout ¼ V0
Rr
R  Rt
R


2 þ Rr
R þ Rt
R


ð5:57Þ
By considering the fact that Rr=R  1 and Rt=R  1
and combining Equations (5.55)–(5.57), the voltage out-
put of the circuit is given by:
Vout ¼ V0
2 kðer  etÞ ¼ k
16
ðhp  hmÞð3 þ nÞ
Eðhp þ hmÞ3

3n þ 1
3 þ n

 r3
0  r3
i
r0  ri



r3
0  r3
i
r0  ri




p
ð5:58Þ
where V0 is the DC supply voltage of the Wheatstone
bridge. If the voltage output of this pressure transducer is
Vout when it is exposed to a pressure p, the sensitivity of
the transducer is then calculated as:
S ¼ 1
V0
dVout
dp
¼ k
16
ðhp  hmÞð3 þ nÞ
Eðhp þ hmÞ3

3n þ 1
3 þ n

 r3
0  r3
i
r0  ri



r3
0  r3
i
r0  ri




ð5:59Þ
It may be interesting to note from the above equation that
pressure transducers with high sensitivities can be
obtained by using ﬂexible materials with low Young’s
modulus values.
5.6 SAW-BASED WIRELESS STRAIN
SENSORS
In this section, a surface acoustic wave (SAW)-based
strain sensor is described. This sensor has recently been
proposed for studying the deﬂection and strain of a
‘ﬂexbeam’-type structure for a helicopter blade [10].
The basic design principles of operation of SAW sensors
have been discussed in Chapter 3. The system presented
here consists of a remotely readable passive MEMS
sensor and a microwave-reader system, as shown in
Figure 5.10. The microwave-reading system used in
this system employs a frequency-modulated (FM) radar-
device. The FM signal sent by the system antenna is:
SðtÞ ¼ A cos o0 þ mt
2


t
ð5:60Þ
where o0 is the start frequency of the FM signal, m is the
rate of modulation and t is time. The echoes from the
reﬂectors, S1ðtÞ and S2ðtÞ, are the same as the transmitted
signal SðtÞ but with time delays t1 and t2 respectively.
These are written as:
S1ðtÞ ¼ S1 cos o0 þ mt
2


t  t1
ð
Þ
ð5:61Þ
and:
S2ðtÞ ¼ S2 cos o0 þ mt
2


t  t2
ð
Þ
ð5:62Þ
where t1 ¼ 2d1=v þ te and t2 ¼ 2d2=v þ te. Here, v is
the SAW velocity, d1 and d2 are the distances from the
IDT transducer to the reﬂectors 1 and 2, respectively, and
PC
Phase
measurement
FM
Generater
Mixer
System antenna
Sensor antenna
IDT
Reflectors
Figure 5.10
Schematic diagram of a remote-reading sensor system with a passive SAW sensor.
96
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

te is the total of other delays, such as the electromagnetic
wave traveling time and the delay in the electronic circuit
and devices, which is the same for both echoes. Through
the mixer, which uses the transmitted signal as the
reference, and low-pass ﬁlter, the frequency differential
signals are obtained as:
E1ðtÞ ¼ E1 cos mt1t þ o0t1  mt2
1




¼ E1cos ðo1t þ f1Þ
ð5:63Þ
and:
E2ðtÞ ¼ E2 cos mt2t þ o0t2  mt2
2




¼ E1 cos o2t þ f2
ð
Þ
ð5:64Þ
It may be observed that both the frequencies and phases
of these two signals depend on the delay times. The two
signals can be separated in the frequency domain. Since
o0 is usually much greater than m, the phase shift is more
sensitive to the variation of the delay time than that of the
frequency. The difference of the two phases can be
written as:
f ¼ f1  f2 ¼ o0  m
2 t1 þ t2
ð
Þ
h
i
t2  t1
ð
Þ
ð5:65Þ
where the extra delay time of the second echo with
reference to the ﬁrst is equal to the ‘round-trip’ time
for the acoustic wave traveling from the ﬁrst reﬂector to
the second, and is t2 ¼ t2  t1 ¼ 2d=v, where d is the
distance between the two reﬂectors. The phase difference
is sensitive to the change in delay times. The variation of
the phase difference due to the change in delay times is
expressed as:
f ¼ o0  m
2 t1 þ t2
ð
Þ
h
i
t
ð5:66Þ
Since o0 is usually much larger than mðt1 þ t2Þ=2, we get
f ¼ o0t.
The wave traveling time t is proportional to the distance
between the two reﬂectors and inversely proportional to
the velocity. If we neglect the possible velocity variation
of the SAW under strain and take into account only the
direct effect, the distance change is given as:
f ¼ o0
2ed
v ¼ o0et0
ð5:67Þ
where e is the strain and t0 is the traveling time when the
strain is zero. The sensitivity of this remote-sensor
system depends on the operating frequency and the
round-trip traveling time between the two reﬂectors of
the SAW. The phase shift of the signal therefore varies
linearly with the strain on the structure to which the
sensor is attached. Strain can therefore be monitored at
the reader unit.
5.7 SAW-BASED CHEMICAL SENSORS
Acoustic microsensors are also used to detect/identify/
estimate many liquids and gases based on variations in
the electroacoustic properties. Their responses can be
easily related to physical quantities, such as mass density
and viscosity. These sensors offer a number of advan-
tages over traditional sensors, including real-time elec-
tronic read-out, small size, robustness and low-cost
fabrication. By employing so-called chemical interfaces,
the interaction of a chemical analyte with the sensor
surface results in a change in the propagation character-
istics of the wave. While Rayleigh surface acoustic wave
(SAW) sensors are most commonly used in gas-sensing
applications, shear horizontal (SH) polarized waves are
more suitable for liquid sensing [11]. However, improved
sensitivity can be obtained by using Lamb waves (ﬂex-
ural plate waves) [12–15]. These sensors can be fabri-
cated on piezoelectric substrates. This approach is used
for simultaneous measurements of both mechanical and
electrical parameters of the ﬂuid. The basic principles of
operation of a SH–SAW sensor in a single free delay-line
conﬁguration are shown in Figure 5.11. In this, the input
and output IDTs are connected to the source and the load
V
1/A1
1/A2
u1
u2
I1
I2
IDT1 (transmitter)
IDT2 (receiver)
l
Liquid
Aperture, w
L
Figure 5.11
Schematic of a delay-line arrangement with inter-digitated transducers on a piezoelectric substrate.
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
97

with admittances A1 and A2, respectively. The basic
design considerations are identical to those used for
Rayleigh SAWs. The design of the IDTs for the genera-
tion and detection of SH–SAWs uses the delay-line
conﬁguration often employed for SAW ﬁlters [11]. The
sensor consists of two adjacent delay lines, as shown
in Figure 5.12, consisting of an uncoated metallized
(reference) surface and an electrically free delay line.
The basic operating principles utilized in the design of
these liquid-sensing devices is that the perturbations
which affect SH–SAW propagation on a metallized and
electrically shorted surface are associated with the
mechanical properties of the adjacent liquid, while the
SH–SAWs propagating on a free surface are associated
with both the mechanical and electrical properties of the
adjacent liquid [12]. Common environmental interactions
arise from both delay lines and can be removed by
comparison between the two signals. The design is
made by considering analysis and prediction of the
sensor response, which requires that the sensor effect is
accounted for in the device response. The sensor effect
can be incorporated into the device unperturbed transfer
function, to allow for the variations of delay time (related
to phase shift) and attenuation. When applying a voltage
across the two bus bars of the transmitter IDT, which are
connected to identical ﬁnger pairs, a current enters the
electrodes. This current is determined by the static
capacitances of the electrodes and the acoustic admit-
tances of the IDTs caused by generation of the SH–
SAWs.
The SH–SAWs which propagate on the surfaces of
piezoelectric substrates have associated electric ﬁelds
that will propagate typically several micrometers into a
liquid. This electrical interaction (also known as the
acoustoelectric interaction) with the liquid affects the
velocity and/or attenuation of SH–SAW propagation and
is utilized in sensing the dielectric properties of liquids
[15]. SH–SAW sensors thus can exhibit some speciﬁcity
in detecting the electrical properties of an adjacent liquid
[16,17].
The piezoelectric potential becomes zero for the elec-
trically shorted surface and hence the mechanical proper-
ties, including viscosity and density of a liquid, can be
detected because the horizontally polarized shear wave
can interact with it. On the other hand, since the piezo-
electric potential at the free space extends into the liquid,
the electrical properties, and hence the wave propagation,
will change due to an acoustoelectric interaction known
as ‘electrical perturbation’. The potential that is asso-
ciated with the SH–SAW will be affected by the elec-
trical properties of the adjacent liquid.
The complex unperturbed acoustic admittance transfer
function for transmitter to receiver can be approximated
as follows: [15,18]
A12ðoÞ ¼ GðoÞae j2pL
l
ð5:68Þ
where a is the attenuation coefﬁcient of the acoustic
wave, l is the acoustic wavelength, L is the distance
between
the
centers
of
the
IDTs
and
GðoÞ ¼
G0ðsino=oÞ2, with o ¼ pNðo  o0Þ=o0
and G0 ¼
2:25o0N2Wðe0 þ eT
pÞK2=2. In the latter, G0 is the con-
ductance at the center frequency, N is the number of
ﬁngers pairs, W is the aperture of the electrodes, e0 is the
permittivity of a vacuum, eT
p is the effective permittivity
of the piezoelectric substrate and K2 is the electrome-
chanical coupling coefﬁcient of the substrate, which
depends on the crystal cut, frequency o0 and the mechan-
ical properties and thickness of the IDT metallization
[18].
The presence of a liquid causes a variation in the delay
time and attenuation of the SH wave. These should be
included in this admittance transfer function as an addi-
tional phase shift and attenuation. Therefore, the perturbed
admittance transfer function for the liquid sensor is:
A12ðoÞ ¼ GðoÞae j2pL
l e
j2pdl
l eal
ð5:69Þ
where ð¼ v=vÞ is the fractional velocity change of the
SH–SAW due to the sensing effect, l is the length of the
liquid contact area and a is the attenuation of the SH–SAW
due to the sensor effect along the region of liquid contact.
If the conductivity of the unperturbed liquid (reference
liquid) is zero, the electrical properties of the liquid, in
terms of permittivity and conductivity, can be written as:
el ¼ ere0
ð5:70Þ
where el, er and e0 are the permittivity and dielectric
constant of the liquid, and the permittivity of free space,
IDT 
Metallized surface 
Free surface 
36YX.LT 
10 mm
7.5 mm
Figure 5.12
Schematic of a dual-delay-line SH–SAW micro-
sensor.
98
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

respectively. The electrical property after perturbation, e0
l,
in terms of the conductivity s, is:
e0
l ¼ e0
re0  j s
o
ð5:71Þ
Using the perturbation theory, the acoustoelectrical inter-
action relations of velocity and attenuation of SH waves
in the presence of a liquid can be written as follows [14]:
v
v ¼  K2
s ðs0=oÞ2 þ e0ðe0
r  erÞðe0
re0 þ eT
PÞ
ðs0=oÞ2 þ ðe0
re0 þ eT
PÞ2
ð5:72Þ
where eT
P is the effective permittivity of the crystal, er
is the permittivity of the reference liquid and e0r and
s0 are the permittivity and conductivity, respectively,
related to loss of the measurand. The change in
attenuation due to the presence of the liquid can be
written as follows [14]:
a
k ¼ K2
s
2
ðs0=oÞðere0 þ eT
PÞ
ðs0=oÞ2 þ ðe0
re0 þ eT
PÞ2
ð5:73Þ
where KT
s is the electromechanical coupling coefﬁcient
and k is the wave number. By using Equations (5.71) and
(5.72), Equation (5.73) can be rewritten as follows:
v
v þ K2
s
2

2
þ a
k 
K2
s
4
ere0 þ eT
P
s0=o2



2
¼
K2
s
4
ere0 þ eT
P
s0=o

2
ð5:74Þ
The SAW that propagates on the metallized surface is
affected only by the mechanical properties of the adja-
cent liquid. However, the SAW that propagates on the
free surface is affected by both the mechanical and
electrical properties of the liquid. The above Equations
(5.73) and (5.74) can be used to determine the permit-
tivity and conductivity of the liquid under test [17].
These may be solved by graphical means.
These sensors can be used in ‘smart tongues’. Taste is
comprised of ﬁve basic qualities, namely sourness, bitter-
ness, saltiness, sweetness and umani. A taste sensor
should be able to measure these effects and discriminate
between them for recognition and identiﬁcation applica-
tions. Acoustic microsensors can detect different physi-
cal properties such as mass, temperature, strain, torque,
pressure and viscosity of liquids and gases. These micro-
sensors, together with an oscillatory circuit, can give a
real-time electronic read-out with smaller size and very
low unit cost. SAW microsensors are a unique class of
devices that have been used as electronic ‘tongues’ and
‘noses’ because the propagating acoustic waves can
effectively couple with the medium placed in contact
with the device surface. The interactions between acous-
tic waves and mass density, elastic stiffness and electric/
dielectric properties of the propagating medium can give
the sensing responses. Any changes in the above proper-
ties can be measured as changes in the phase or ampli-
tude of the propagating waves.
It is highly desirable in the food industry for the
development of a taste sensor with high sensitivity,
stability and selectivity. The main goal of a taste sensor
is to reproduce ﬁve kinds of human senses, which is quite
difﬁcult. The importance of knowing the quality of
beverages and drinking water has been recognized as a
result of the increase in concern in environmental pollu-
tion issues. However, no accurate measuring system,
appropriate for the quality evaluation of beverages, is
yet available.
A similar approach can be extended for the sensing of
gases. However, here the acoustic wave is guided through
a channel of the piezomaterial, with its top surface coated
with a sensitive polymer thin ﬁlm. In such a case, the
gas–polymer partition coefﬁcient, K (the interaction
between vapor and polymer molecules), and the solvation
equation (modeling physio-chemical and biochemical
processes) are expressed by a linear solvation energy
relationship (LSER) [19]:
log K ¼ c þ rR2 þ spH
2 þ aaH
2 þ bbH
2 þ llog L16
ð5:75Þ
where R2 is the excess molar refraction (which models
the polarizability contributions from n and p electrons),
pH
2 is the depolarity/polarizability, aH
2 is the hydrogen-
bond acidicity, bH
2 is the hydrogen-bond basicity and L16
is the gas–liquid partition coefﬁcient for n-hexadecane.
These coefﬁcients are obtained by regression analysis.
The change in the relative phase velocity (v=v0) and
attenuation per wave number (a=k0) of the acoustic
wave for an acoustically thin, viscoelastic and isotropic
ﬁlm is given by the following [20]:
v
v0
ﬃoh rf c1 þ c2 þ c3
ð
Þ 
c1 þ 4c3
v0


G0


ð5:76Þ
a
k0
¼ c1 þ 4c3
ð
Þ oh
v2
0
G00
ð5:77Þ
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
99

where ci represents the substrate speciﬁc material con-
stants, h is the ﬁlm thickness, rf is the ﬁlm density, v0 is
the unperturbed Rayleigh wave velocity, G0 and G00 are
the real and imaginary parts of the shear modulus of the
polymer ﬁlm, respectively, and o is the radian frequency.
When the polymer is exposed to a vapor, the total mass
increases due to adsorption and diffusion and there is an
additional change in the shear modulus due to swelling
and softening. The change in the resonant frequency of a
SAW-based gas sensor can be derived as follows [21]:
f ¼  k1 þ k2
ð
Þf 2
0 hrf þ k2f 2
0 h 4m l þ m
ð
Þ
v2
0 l þ 2m
ð
Þ


ð5:78Þ
where k1 and k2 are the substrate material constants, f0 is
the unperturbed SAW resonant frequency, m is the shear
modulus of the ﬁlm and l is the Lame constant of the
ﬁlm. The second term in the above equation may be
neglected in most cases. As the polymer ﬁlm absorbs
vapor, the change in resonant frequency is due to mass
loading, as well as changes in its shear characteristics.
The change in resonant frequency due to vapor absorp-
tion (fv) in this case is given by the following [20]:
fv ¼ 4fCvK
rf
ð5:79Þ
where K is deﬁned in Equation (5.75) above.
For soft visoelastic materials with low shear acoustic
velocities, the maximum layer thickness, h0, to ensure
monomode operation is given by the following [22]:
h0 ¼
VSVL
2f
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V2
S  V2
L
p
ð5:80Þ
where f is the operational frequency and VS and VL are
the acoustic velocities on the substrate and the deposited
polymer layer, respectively.
5.8 MICROFLUIDIC SYSTEMS
Compared to the number of microsensors discussed
above, far fewer micro-actuators have been commercia-
lized. One of the reasons for this is the fact that the
deﬂection, force or power generated by micro-actuators
is usually low. In this section, the design of various
microﬂuidic systems is presented.
Microvalves is a primary component of microﬂuidic
systems, which have wide applications in areas of the
automotive industry, refrigeration and home appliances,
control, medical and biomedical sciences, chemical ana-
lysis, the aeronautical industry, etc. Basically, micro-
valves are divided into passive valves and active valves,
but both of these share the same ﬂow characteristics. As
an example, an analytical static-ﬂow model of a dia-
phragm microvalve is presented here for us to understand
why ﬂexible diaphragm microvalves are desired in some
applications. A cross-sectional view of a typical dia-
phragm microvalve is shown in Figure 5.13, containing
both a diaphragm and a valve seat. As the viscosity ﬂow
through diaphragm microvalves can be considered as a
viscosity ﬂow through a slot with a varying gap resis-
tance, the volume ﬂow rate through the microvalve can
be calculated as follows [23]:
Q ¼ fðw; lÞ  d3  P=Z
ð5:81Þ
where f(w, l) is a function related to the width (w) and the
length (l), d is the height of the gap, P is the ﬂuid
pressure drop through the gap and Z is the viscosity of the
ﬂuid. One can see that the height of the gap is an
important parameter affecting the valve ﬂow character-
istics. Basically, the gap height of the diaphragm micro-
valve is proportional to the pressure drop applied to the
diaphragm:
d ¼ fðwd; td; ldÞ  F=E
ð5:82Þ
where wd; td and ld are the width, thickness and length,
respectively, of the diaphragm where the pressure drop is
applied, F is the net force applied on the diaphragm
and E is the Young’s modulus of the material used for the
diaphragm. It should be pointed out have that the net
force acting on the diaphragm is related to the inlet and
outlet ﬂuid pressures in the case of a ‘passive’ valve,
while the actuating force needs to be accounted for in the
calculation in the case of an ‘active’ valve. It is easy to
see that with a ﬁxed force, pressure drop and geometric
parameters, the volume ﬂuid ﬂow rate increases signiﬁ-
cantly with the decreasing Young’s modulus of the
diaphragm material. Speciﬁcally, in the case of a passive
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13
Cross-sectional views of a microvalve containing
both a diaphragm and valve seat: (a) opened; (b) closed.
100
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

microvalve,
the
same
pressure
drop
through
the
microvalves will generate larger ﬂow rates or with
smaller pressure drops the desired ﬂow rate can be
achieved when the diaphragm is made of a low-
Young’s-modulus material. In the case of an active
microvalve, a smaller actuating force can be used to
generate the designed ﬂow rate. In addition to the high
ﬂow rate which is practical with a low Young’s modulus,
a large deﬂection of the valve diaphragm will ensure a
lower ‘leakage’ of the valve [24]. The above general
analysis can also be applied to a gas-ﬂow microvalve
[25]. Hence, materials with low Young’s moduli and their
fabrication processes are also important for microvalves
in applications with large ﬂow rates and low leakage
requirements.
Micropumps are further primary components for
microﬂuidic systems. Several micropumps have been
developed
with
various
actuation
principles
and
designs [26]. Reciprocating diaphragm micropumps
are
one
of
the
most
extensively
studied
types
of micropumps. A typical diaphragm micropump
consists of an actuating diaphragm, two microvalves
(or nozzles/diffusers [27]), micropump cavities, etc.
(Figure 5.14). During the initial state, the actuation is
off, both inlet and outlet valves are closed and there is
no ﬂuid ﬂow in or out. Once the actuation is on and
assuming that the actuation diaphragm can move
upwards, the cavity volume will be expanded, hence
resulting in the inside pressure being decreased. The
inlet valve is then opened and the ﬂuid ﬂows into the
pump cavity until the inside pressure is increased to its
original level. Then, the actuation diaphragm moves
downwards and the shrinkage of the pump cavity leads
to the inside pressure increasing; the outlet valve is
then opened and the ﬂuid ﬂows out of the pump cavity.
By repeating the above steps, a continuous ﬂuid ﬂow
can be realized by the micropump.
A static analytical model for diaphragm micropumps
is given below in order to provide a better understanding
of the working behavior of micropumps. By considering
a ‘square actuation’ diaphragm with a side length of 2a,
the deﬂection expression of the diaphragm can be written
as follows:
wðx; yÞ ¼ 49pa4
2304D Fðx; yÞ
Fðx; yÞ ¼
1  x2
a2

2
1  y2
a2

2
ð5:83Þ
where p is the net applied pressure on the diaphragm,
F(x, y) is a polynominal which satisﬁes the boundary
conditions, D is the stiffness of the diaphragm (deﬁned
by Eh3=12ð1  n2Þ, where h is the diaphragm thickness),
E is the Young’s modulus of the diaphragm and n is the
Poison ratio. The ‘stroke volume’ of the diaphragm can
be obtained from:
V ¼
ða
a
ða
a
wðx; yÞdxdy
ð5:84Þ
It can be observed that the ‘stroke volume’ of the pump,
V, is inversely proportional to the Young’s modulus, E,
indicating that with the same conditions, a lower E will
lead to a larger ‘stroke volume’ for the micropump.
From the static model, the ‘stroke volume’ of the
micropump is directly related to the pump ﬂow rate.
In addition, the ‘stroke volume’ is important for realiz-
ing a self-priming micropump which requires a large
ratio between the ‘stroke volume’ and the dead volume,
eð¼ V=V0Þ [26]. Therefore, a ﬂexible actuation dia-
phragm for micropumps is expected in such applica-
tions which require a high pump ﬂow rate and an
excellent ‘priming’ performance. A micropump, fabri-
cated
using
polymeric
materials,
is
shown
in
Figure 5.15.
V0
∆V
–∆V
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.14
Working principle for a diaphragm micropumps: (a) initial state; (b) supply mode; (c) pumping mode.
Design Examples for Sensors and Actuators
101

REFERENCES
1. F.S. Foster, K.A. Harasiewicz and M.D. Sherar, ‘A history of
medical and biological imaging with polyvinylidene ﬂuoride
(PVDF) transducers’, IEEE Transactions: Ultrasonics, Fer-
roelectrics and Frequency Control, 47, 1363–1371 (2000).
2. Website: [http://www.msiusa.com/piezo_download_listing.
htm#PART1-INT.pdf].
3. B. Zhu, ‘Design and development of PVDF based MEMS
micro acoustic sensor and accelerometer’, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, Penny-
sylvania State University, State College, PA, USA (2001).
4. D.A.
Neamen,
Semiconductor
Physics
and
Devices,
McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, India (2002).
5. D.E. Oates, D.L. Smythe and J.B. Green, ‘SAW/FET
programmable transversal ﬁlter with 100 MHz bandwidth
and enhanced programmability’, in Proceedings of the 1985
Ultrasonics Symposium,
IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ,
USA,
pp. 124–129 (1985).
6. I. Yao and S.A. Reible, ‘Wide bandwidth acoustoelectric
convolvers’, in Proceedings of the 1979 Ultrasonics Sym-
posium, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 701–705 (1979).
7. R.A. Bergh, H.C. Lefevre and H.J. Shaw, ‘An overview of
Fiber-optic gyroscopes’, Journal of Lightwave Technology,
LT-2, 91–107 (1984).
8. S. Bennett, S. Emge and R. Dyott, ‘Fiber optic gyros for
robotics’. Available online at: [http://www.kvh.com/pdf/
fog_robots.pdf].
9. J. Martin, W. Bacher, O.F. Hagena and W. K. Schomburg,
‘Strain gauge pressure and volume-ﬂow transducers made by
thermoplastic molding and membrane transfer’, in Proceed-
ings of IEEE: MEMS’98, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp.
361–366 (1998).
10. V.K. Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘Microsensors, microelec-
tromechanical systems (MEMS) and electronics for smart
structures and systems’, Smart Materials and Structures, 9,
953–972 (2000).
11. M.J. Vellekoop, ‘Acoustic wave sensors and their technol-
ogy’, Ultrasonics, 36, 7–14 (1998).
12. J.A. Chilton and M.T. Goosey (Eds), Special Polymers for
Electronics and Optoelectronics, Chapman & Hall, London,
UK (1995).
13. J.S. Kim, ‘Wireless structural health monitoring using a
PVDF interdigital transducer’, Masters Thesis, Pennsylvania
State University, State College, PA, USA (2002).
14. J.D.N. Cheeke and Z. Wang, ‘Acoustic wave gas sensors’,
Sensors and Actuators: Chemical, B59, 146–153 (1999).
15. J. Kondoh, K. Saito, S. Shiokawa and H. Suzuki, ‘Simulta-
neous measurements of liquid properties using shear hor-
izontal surface acoustic wave sensors’, Japan Journal of
Applied Physics, 35(1, No. 5B), 3093–3096 (1996).
16. J. Kondoh and S. Shiokawa, ‘New application of shear
horizontal surface acoustic wave sensors to identifying fruit
juices’, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 33(1, No. 5B),
3095–3099 (1994).
17. M. Cole, G. Sehra, J.W. Gardner and V.K. Varadan, ‘Devel-
opment of smart tongue devices for measurement of liquid
properties’, IEEE Sensors Journal, 4, 543–550 (2004).
18. A. Leidl, I. Oberlack, U. Schaber, B. Mader and S. Drost,
‘Surface
acoustic
wave
devices
and
applications
in
liquid sensing’, Smart Material and Structures, 6, 680–
688 (1997).
19. M. Rapp, J. Reibel, S. Stier, A. Voigt and J. Bahlo, ‘SAGAS:
gas analyzing sensor systems based on surface acoustic wave
devices – an issue of commercialization of SAW sensor
technology’, in Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE International
Frequency Control Symposium, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
pp. 129–132 (1997).
20. J.W. Grate, S.J. Patrash and S.N. Kaganove, ‘Inverse least-
squares modeling of vapor descriptors using polymer-coated
surface acoustic wave sensor array responses’, Analytical
Chemistry, 73, 5247–5259 (2001).
21. B.A. Auld, Acoustic Fields and Waves in Solids, 2nd Edn,
Kreiger, Melbourne, FL, USA (1990).
22. E. Gizeli, A.C. Stevenson, N.J. Goddard and C.R. Lowe, ‘A
novel Love-plate acoustic sensor utilizing polymer over-
layers’, IEEE Transactions: Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and
Frequency Control, 39, 657–659 (1992).
23. R. Rossberg and H. Sandmaier, ‘Portable micro liquid dosing
system’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’98, IEEE, Piscat-
away NJ, USA, pp. 526–531 (1998).
24. X. Yang, C. Grosjean, Y.C. Tai and C.M. Ho, ‘A MEMS
thermopneumatic silicone rubber membrane valve’, Sensors
and Actuators: Physical, A64, 101–108 (1998).
25. A.K. Henning, ‘Microﬂuidic MEMS’, in Proceedings of the
IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference, Vol. 1, Piscat-
away, NJ, USA, pp. 471–486 (1998).
26. M. Ritcher, R. Linnemann and P. Woias, ‘Robust design of
gas and liquid micropumps’, Sensors and Actuators: Phy-
sical, A68, 480–486 (1998).
27. X.N. Jiang, Z.Y. Zhou, X.Y. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Yang and C.Y.
Liu, ‘Micronozzle/diffuser ﬂow and its application in micro
valveless pumps’, Sensors and Actuators: Physical, A70,
81–87 (1998).
28. M.C. Carrozza, N. Croce, B. Magnani and P. Dario, ‘A
piezoelectric-driven
stereolithography-fabricated
micro-
pump’, Journal of Micromechanical and Microengineering,
5, 177–179 (1995).
Ball valves
Pumping
chamber
Piozoelectrc disk
Figure 5.15
Schematic (cross-sectional view) of a polymer
micropump fabricated using the microstereolithography (MSL)
process [28]. M. C. Carrozza, N. Croce, B. Magnani, and P. Dario,
A piezoelectric-driven stereolithographyfabricated micropump,
J. Micromech. Microeng. 5, 1995, # IOP
102
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Part 3
Modeling Techniques
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

6
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
One of the fundamental concepts involved in mathema-
tical modeling is to ﬁrst generate the governing differ-
ential equation of the system. There are two ways of
doing this. In the ﬁrst method, the system is broken at the
continuum level and a small block of this continuum is
isolated as a free body and the 3-D state of stress, acting
on the block, is written. Writing the equilibrium equation
of this free body essentially gives the equation governing
the system. 2-D and 1-D approximations can further be
obtained from the 3-D equations of motion by converting
the stresses into stress resultants through integration of
the equation of motion in the directions where condensa-
tion of the dimension is desired. The method described
above is the Theory of Elasticity procedure of obtaining
the governing equation. One can see that, in this method,
one has to deal with tensors and vectors. This chapter
will give a complete bird’s eye view of this method.
An alternate way of generating the governing equa-
tions is by the energy method, wherein minimization of
the energy functional, will not only yield the desired
governing equations but also their associated boundary
conditions. This is the most widely used method in
discrete modeling techniques (described in Chapter 7),
where obtaining an approximate solution to the govern-
ing equation is the main goal. This chapter gives com-
plete details of obtaining the energy functional from the
continuum modeling and the associated energy theorems
for obtaining an approximate solution to the governing
equation.
The ease of embedding smart sensors and actuators in
laminated composites has increased their popularity as
structural materials. In addition to having low weight and
high strength, laminated constructions enable the struc-
tures to become ‘active’ by placing the smart sensors and
actuators at any desired location. Hence, one can ﬁnd a
variety of applications for the use of smart materials in
laminated composites reported in the literature. These
structures are orthotropic in construction and hence their
behavior is quite complex compared to metallic struc-
tures. Hence, the second part of this chapter deals with
the basic theory related to the behavior of laminated
composite structures.
Many analysis tools are required to study the function-
ality of the designed smart structures. The Finite Element
Method (FEM) is extensively used for this purpose.
However, when the frequency content of the load is
very high (which is very relevant in the case of impact-
related problems) or when one is addressing Structural
Health Monitoring (SHM) in composites (here, for small
ﬂaw sizes, only the higher modes get altered), FEM may
lead to enormous problem sizes due to the small element
size requirement. Hence, the FE solution may be com-
putationally prohibitive. In such a situation, wave-based
techniques are extensively used. Hence, the last part of
this chapter gives the introductory concepts of wave
propagation. The details of FE and wave modeling are
given in Chapter 7.
6.1 INTRODUCTION TO THE THEORY
OF ELASTICITY
6.1.1 Description of motion
Consider a body undergoing deformation to some applied
loading (Figure 6.1). Let u0
i be its position at the time
t ¼ 0 (undeformed) conﬁguration and ut
i its position after
some time t ¼ t. In terms of the unit vectors ei, they can
be expressed as follows:
Undeformed position :u0 ¼ u0
i ei
Deformed position :u ¼ ut
iei
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

Hence, the motion can be expressed as:
ui ¼ uiðx0; y0; z0; tÞ
or
u0
i ¼ u0
i ðx; y; z; tÞ
ð6:1Þ
The former represents the Eulerian coordinates, which
are normally used to represent a ﬂuid in motion. Here,
the independent variables are the position vector ui at a
given instant. The latter is called the Lagrangian variable,
where quantities are expressed in terms of the initial
position vector u0
i
and time. The difference between
these two motion descriptions can be stated as:
 Langragian: If we put a rectangular grid on an
undeformed body and visualize this grid after defor-
mation, it will look like that shown in Figure 6.2(a).
 Eulerian: If we put a rectangular grid on a deformed
body and visualize it in the undeformed state, it will
look like that shown in Figure 6.2(b).
Due to the above deﬁnitions, evaluation of the material
derivatives will defer. For example, in the Langrangian
frame of reference, the derivative of uðx0; y0; z0, and t) is
given by:
du
dt ¼ @u
@t
ð6:2Þ
In the Eulerian frame of reference, the derivative of
uðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ uðx0; y0; z0; tÞ is given by:
du
dt ¼ @u
@t þ @u
@x
dx
dt þ @u
@y
dy
dt þ @u
@z
dz
dt
¼ @u
@t þ vx
@u
@x þ vy
@u
@y þ vz
@u
@z
ð6:3Þ
where vx, vy and vz are the convective velocities in the
three material directions. Deformation is deﬁned as the
comparison of two states, namely the initial and the ﬁnal
conﬁgurations. The motion of the particle is deﬁned in
terms of its coordinates attached to the particle, while
displacement is deﬁned as the shortest distance traveled
when a particle moves from one location to the other.
That is, if the position vectors of two points are r1 and r2,
the displacement vector u is given by:
u ¼ r2  r1 ¼ ðx2i þ y2j þ z2kÞ  ðx1i þ y1j þ z2kÞ
or
u ¼ ðx2  x1Þi þ ðy2  y1Þj þ ðz2  z1Þk
ð6:4Þ
The deformation gradient is an important parameter which
is extensively used in the theory. Let us now compute
the deformation gradients. These relate the behaviors of
the neighboring particles. Consider points P0 and P0
0 at
time t ¼ 0, which are at a distance given by the vector
d^r0 ¼ dx0i þ dy0j þ dz0k (Figure 6.3). At some time t, if
Figure 6.1
Undeformed and deformed conﬁgurations of a body.
Figure 6.2
Grids describing (a) Lagrangian and (b) Eulerian
motions.
Figure 6.3
Deformation of neighboring points.
106
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

these two points move to the new locations P and P0
the new distance between them is given by the vector
d^r ¼ dxi þ dyj þ dzk. The location of P0, with respect to
P is now given by ^r þ d^r ¼ ðx þ dxÞi þ ðy þ dyÞj þ
(z þ dzÞk. Now consider the ﬁrst term in the vector,
namely ðx þ dxÞ. Expanding this term in a Taylor series
with respect to the variables corresponding to time
t ¼ 0, we get:
x þ dx ¼ x þ @x
@x0 dx0 þ @x
@y0 dy0 þ @x
@z0 dz0 . . . . . . : :
ð6:5Þ
This gives the relation:
dx ¼ @x
@x0 dx0 þ @x
@y0 dy0 þ @x
@z0 dz0
Similarly, one can write:
dy ¼ @y
@x0 dx0 þ @y
@y0 dy0 þ @y
@z0 dz0 and
dz ¼ @z
@x0 dx0 þ @z
@y0 dy0 þ @z
@z0 dz0
These relations can be written in tensorial notations as:
dxi ¼ @xi
@x0
j
dx0
j
i; j ¼ 1; 2 and 3
ð6:6Þ
where i and j correspond to the three coordinate direc-
tions, namely x, y and z. Similarly, the motion of the
particles at time t ¼ 0 can be expressed in terms of the
current time t as:
dx0
i ¼ @x0
i
@xj
dxj
i; j ¼ 1; 2 and 3
ð6:7Þ
The quantities @xi=@x0
j
and @x0
i =@xj are called the
deformation gradients and form the basis of description
of any deformation. Equations (6.6) and (6.7), when
expanded and written in the matrix form, become:
fdxg ¼ ½J0fdx0g
¼
dx
dy
dz
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
@x
@x0
@x
@y0
@x
@z0
@y
@x0
@y
@y0
@y
@z0
@z
@x0
@z
@y0
@z
@z0
2
66666664
3
77777775
dx0
dy0
dz0
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð6:8Þ
dx0


¼ ½Jfdxg
¼
dx0
dy0
dz0
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
@x0
@x
@x0
@y
@x0
@z
@y0
@x
@y0
@y
@y0
@z
@z0
@x
@z0
@y
@z0
@z
2
66666664
3
77777775
dx
dy
dz
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð6:9Þ
The determinant of the matrices [J] and [J0] is deﬁned as
the Jacobian. Since the deformation is continuous, it
requires that the value of the Jacobian not be equal to
zero. Since no region of ﬁnite volume can be deformed
into a region of zero or inﬁnite volume, it is required that
they follow the following conditions:
0 < J0 < 1;
0 < J < 1
ð6:10Þ
This condition is very useful to check and see if the
deformation is physically possible. From the above
results, it is straightforward to write the deformation
of lines, areas and volumes. A line along the x-axis
before deformation is represented by a vector d^x0 ¼
dx0i þ dy0j þ dz0k ¼ dx0
i . After deformation, this line
becomes:
d^x ¼ @x
@x0 dx0i þ @y
@x0 dx0 j þ @z
@x0 k
ð6:11Þ
Even though the initial vector is horizontal, the deformed
conﬁguration will have components in all three direc-
tions. Similarly, one can write the deformation of areas
and volumes as:
dAk ¼ J0
@x0
p
@xk
dA0
p;
dV ¼ J0dV0
ð6:12Þ
where J0 is Jacobian with respect to the horizontal
direction, dA0
p is the initial area vector and dAk is the
ﬁnal area vector. In addition, dV0 is the volume before
deformation, while dV represent the same parameter
after deformation. Here, the Jacobian is a function of
two coordinates for area transformation and all three
coordinates for volume transformation.
6.1.2 Strain
Strain is a measure of the relative displacement of
particles within a body and is an essential ingredient
for the description of the constitutive behavior of the
materials. There are three different measures of strain.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
107

These can be described on a specimen of original and
ﬁnal length L0 and L as:
 Engineering strain, e ¼ Change in length
Original length ¼ DL
L0
 True strain, eT ¼
Change in length
Final ðcurrentÞ length ¼ DL
L ¼
DL
L0þDL
 Logarithmic strain, eN ¼ ÐL
L0
True strain ¼ ÐL
L0
dl
l ¼ ln
L
L0
 
Using the above deﬁnitions, the ﬁnal length L can be
written in terms of these strains as:
 Engineering strain L ¼ L0 þ DL ¼ L0 þ L0e ¼
L0ð1 þ eÞ
 True strain
L ¼ L0 þ DL ¼ L0 þ
eTL0
ð1eTÞ ¼
L0
ð1eTÞ
 Logarithmic strain L ¼ L0 exp ðeNÞ
Using the basic deﬁnitions of the above strain measures,
we can also write the relationship among them as:
eT ¼
e
1 þ e ;
eN ¼ ln ð1 þ eÞ
Strain measures are normally established by considering
the change in the distance between two neighboring
material particles. Consider two material particles having
coordinates ðx0; y0; z0Þ and ðx0 þ dx0; y0 þ dy0; z0 þ dz0Þ.
After the motion, these particles will have the coordi-
nates ðx; y; zÞ and ðx þ dx; y þ dy; z þ dzÞ. The initial and
ﬁnal distances between these neighboring particles are
given by:
dS2
0 ¼ ðdx
0Þ2 þ ðdy
0Þ2 þ ðdz
0Þ2
ð6:13Þ
dS2 ¼ ðdxÞ2 þ ðdyÞ2 þ ðdzÞ2
ð6:14Þ
Using Equation (6.8) in Equation (6.14) we get:
dS2 ¼ fdxgTfdxg ¼ fdx0gT½J0T½J0fdx0g
ð6:15Þ
In the event of deformation, dS2 is different from dS2
0.
That is:
dS2  dS2
0 ¼ fdx0gT½J0T½J0fdx0g  fdx0gTfdx0g
¼ fdx0gTh
½J0T½J0  ½I
i
fdx0g
¼ 2fdx0gT½Efdx0g
ð6:16Þ
The above measure gives the relative displacements
between the two material particles, which is insensitive
to the rotations. If the Eulerain frame of reference is
used, then the relative displacement is given by:
dS2  dS2
0 ¼ fdxgTfdxg  fdxgT½JT½Jfdxg
¼ fdxgTh
½I  ½JT½J
i
fdxg
¼ 2fdxgT½efdxg
ð6:17Þ
In Equations (6.16) and (6.17), the matrices [E] and [e]
are the Lagrangian and Eulerian strain tensors. In tensor-
ial form, they are given by:
Eij ¼ 1
2
@xm
@x0i
@xm
@x0j
 dij


;
eij ¼ 1
2
dij  @x0m
@xi
@x0m
@xj


ð6:18Þ
The physical signiﬁcance of Eij and eij can be established
by considering a line element of length dx0 ¼ dS0. The
deformation of the line element is given by dS. The
extension of the line element per unit length ðE1Þ is given
by:
E1 ¼ dS  dS0
dS0
or
dS ¼ ð1 þ E1ÞdS0
ð6:19Þ
From equation (6.16), we have:
dS2  dS0
2 ¼ 2E11dS0
2
Combining the above, we can establish the relationship
between E1 and E11 as:
E11 ¼ E1 þ 1
2 E1
2
or
E1 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2e11
p
 1 ð6:20Þ
Expanding the right-hand term by binomial expansion,
we get:
E ¼ ð1 þ E11  1
2 E11
2 þ . . . : :Þ  1
¼ E11  1
2 E11
2
ð6:21Þ
For very small E11, E1 ¼ E11, which simply says that E11
can be interpreted as an elongation per unit length only
when the extension is very small. Similarly, we can write:
E2 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2E22
p
 1;
E3 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ 2E33
p
 1
ð6:22Þ
for line elements in the other two directions.
108
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

6.1.3 Strain–displacement relationship
In most of the analysis methods to follow, it is customary
to deal with the displacement and displacement gradients
rather than deformation gradients. If u, v and w are the
three displacements in the three coordinate directions,
then, we can write:
x ¼ x0 þ u;
y ¼ y0 þ v;
z ¼ z0 þ w
or
x0 ¼ x  u;
y0 ¼ y  v;
z0 ¼ z  w
ð6:23Þ
The derivatives of these can be written as follows:
@x
@x0 ¼ 1 þ @u
@x0 ;
@y
@x0 ¼ @v
@x0 ;
@z
@x0 ¼ @w
@x0
@x
@y0 ¼ @u
@y0 ;
@y
@y0 ¼ 1 þ @v
@y0 ;
@z
@y0 ¼ @w
@y0
@x
@z0 ¼ @u
@z0 ;
@y
@z0 ¼ @v
@z0 ;
@z
@z0 ¼ 1 þ @w
@z0
In tensorial form, we can write the above equations as:
@xm
@x0
i
¼ @um
@x0
i
þ dim
ð6:24Þ
Similarly, one can write:
@x0
@x ¼ 1  @u
@x ;
@y0
@x ¼  @v
@x ;
@z0
@x ¼  @w
@x
@x0
@y ¼  @u
@y ;
@y0
@y ¼ 1  @v
@y ;
@z0
@y ¼  @w
@y
@x0
@z ¼  @u
@z ;
@y0
@z ¼  @v
@z ;
@z0
@z ¼ 1  @w
@z
In tensorial form, the above equations become:
@x0m
@xi
¼ dim  @um
@xi
ð6:25Þ
where, dij is the Kronecker delta. Substituting Equations
(6.24) and (6.25) in the Lagrangian and Eulerian strain
tensors (Equation (6.18)), we get after some simpliﬁcation:
Eij ¼ 1
2
@ui
@x0
j
þ @uj
@x0
i
þ @um
@x0
i
@um
@x0
j
"
#
eij ¼ 1
2
@ui
@xj
þ @uj
@xi
þ @um
@xi
@um
@xj


ð6:26Þ
The ﬁrst two terms in the above two equations represent
the linear part of the strain tensors, while the last term
represents the non-linear part. Both these tensors are
symmetric. When the displacement gradients are very
small, we can neglect the non-linear parts of the above
tensors. Thus, inﬁnitesimal strain components have
direct interpretations as extensions or changes of angles.
Furthermore, the magnitudes of the strains are very
small compared to unity, which means that the deforma-
tions are very small. Hence, we can conclude for very
small deformations:
Eij ¼ eij ¼ eij
Expanding the linear part of Equation (6.26), we get:
e11 ¼ @u
@x0 ;
e12 ¼ 1
2
@u
@y0 þ @v
@x0


;
e13 ¼ 1
2
@u
@z0 þ @w
@x0


e22 ¼ @v
@y0 ;
e23 ¼ 1
2
@v
@z0 þ @w
@y0


;
e33 ¼ @w
@z0
ð6:27Þ
In addition, for small deformations, following condition
is normally true. That is:
ui
L  1
where L is the smallest dimension of the body. If the
above condition is true, then we can conclude that
x0
i ¼ xi. That is, we do not differentiate between Euler-
ian and Lagrangian coordinates. Hence, the functional
form of displacement and its components become
identical in these two frames of reference. Henceforth,
we will use eij to denote both the Eulerian and Lagran-
gian strain tensors and xi to represent their coordinates.
We will extensively use Equation (6.27) in the later
chapters on composites, ﬁnite element analysis and
wave propagation.
In terms of displacements, the rotation terms can be
written in tensorial form as:
oij ¼ 1
2
@uj
@xi
 @ui
@xj


ð6:28Þ
This is a second-order tensor that is antisymmetric. In
matrix form, the diagonal term is always zero. In the 2-D
case, there is only one non-vanishing component of the
above tensor, which is given by
oxy ¼ 1
2
@v
@x  @u
@y


ð6:29Þ
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
109

6.1.3.1 Stress
Strains (deformations) are normally caused by forces or
moments exerted on the mass of the continuum or
through the contacts contained in the mass. The contact
forces are normally referred to as surface tractions as
their effects occur on the surface of the continuum. The
different types of forces or moments can be Extrinsic,
Mutual or Contact-type, depending upon the way these
act on a body. Extrinsic forces are the external forces that
act outside the body under consideration, such as gravity
loads, magnetic loads, etc. Mutual forces are those that
arise within the body. The most general type of forces
encountered in many phenomena is the contact type of
force that generates what we call Stress or Pressure.
To explain the concept of stress, let us consider a small
surface element of area DA in the deformed conﬁguration,
as shown in Figure 6.4. The forces and moments should be
acting in this small elemental area such that they cancel
each other out, or in other words, the elemental area
should be in equilibrium. These forces can be thought of
as contact forces although they act inside a body. Let ^n be
the unit vector, which is perpendicular to the surface of the
elemental area, and let D^f be the resultant force exerted
for the other part of the surface element. In the limiting
case of DA becoming very small, we get what is called the
Traction Vector, which is given by:
^t ðnÞ ¼ d^f
dA ¼ lim
DA!0
D^f
DA
ð6:30Þ
The above limit is possible due to the assumption that the
material is continuous. This traction vector has a unit of
force per unit area acting on the surface. Note that the use
of ^n is to remind the reader that these traction vectors are
dependent on the orientation of the area. To give an
explicit representation of the traction vector, let us
consider a cube, as shown in Figure 6.5. Let us now
write the components of the vector on this cube on three
faces as shown. On face 1, we have:
^n ¼ i;
^tðnÞ ¼ ^tðiÞ ¼ ti^ei ¼ tðiÞ
x i þ tðiÞ
y j þ tðiÞ
z k
While on face 2, we have:
^n ¼ j;
^tðnÞ ¼ ^tðjÞ ¼ ti^ei ¼ tðjÞ
x i þ tðjÞ
y j þ tðjÞ
z k
The above deﬁnitions can be simpliﬁed by introducing
the following notation, sij ¼ tð^eiÞ
j
. That is, sxx ¼ tðiÞ
x ,
sxz ¼ tðiÞ
z , szx ¼ tðkÞ
x ; . . . : :, etc. Hence, it can be said
that the projections of the traction vector ^tðnÞ on the
faces are the normal stress components, sxx, syy and szz,
while the projections perpendicular to the outward nor-
mal ^n are the shear stress components, sxy, syz, szx, syx,
szy and sxz. Thus, unlike deformations, stress is a second-
order tensor having both direction and a plane of appli-
cation. The matrix containing the elements of the stress
components ½sij, in all 9, is called Cauchy’s Stress
Tensor. It will be shown later that this tensor is sym-
metric, meaning sij ¼ sji. Next, we can establish the
relation between the traction vector ^t and the outward
normal ^n. For this purpose, consider an arbitrary surface
of a tetrahedron, as shown in Figure 6.6.
On the faces perpendicular to the coordinates, the com-
ponents of the three stress vectors are denoted by the
respective stress components (sij) on the plane in which
they are acting. These are the following:
 The stresses acting on the x-axis face:sxx; sxy and sxz.
 The stresses acting on the y-axis face:syx; syy and syz.
 The stresses acting on the z-axis face:szx; szy and szz.
Figure 6.4
A section of an arbitrary continuum.
Figure 6.5
Stress cube with stress vectors and an outward unit
normal.
110
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The stress vector acting on the inclined surface ABC is ^t
and the unit normal vector ^n. The equilibrium of the
tetrahedron requires that the resultant force acting on it
must vanish.
Writing the equilibrium along the x-direction, we get:
txdA  sxxdAx  syxdAy  szxdAz þ bxrdV ¼ 0
where bx is the x-component of the body force vector ^b,
which has a unit of force per unit volume. Here, tx is the
x-component of the stress vector, dAx, dAy and dAz are
the areas of the faces perpendicular to the coordinate
axes x, y and z and dA is the area of the inclined surface.
In addition, we have dV ¼ ð1=3ÞhdA as the volume of the
tetrahedron, where h is the smallest distance from any point
to the inclined surface ABC. Furthermore, the outward
normal vector can be written in terms of unit vectors along
the three coordinate directions as ^n ¼ nxi þ nyj þ nzk. The
elemental areas, dAi, can now be written in terms of the
components of the unit normal vector as:
dAx ¼ nxdA;
dAy ¼ nydA;
dAz ¼ nzdA
and letting dA!0, we get:
tx ¼ sxxnx þ syxny þ szxnz
ð6:31Þ
Similarly, equilibrium of the forces in y and z will give:
ty ¼ sxynx þ syyny þ szynz;
tz ¼ sxznx þ syzny þ szznz
ð6:32Þ
Hence, we can write these equations in tensorial notation
as:
ti ¼ sjinj
ð6:33Þ
The above relation is valid for any value of the outward
normal vector ^n and in any coordinate system. Hence, it can
be concluded that the state of stress in a body is completely
known if the stress tensor sij is given. In other words,
given any surface with the unit normal vector ^n, it will be
possible to determine the stress vector (force intensity)
acting on that surface if the stress tensor is known.
6.1.3.2 Principal stress
It is established now that the stress vector acting on a
surface depends on the direction ^n and in general this is
not parallel to ^n. Now, we will attempt to ﬁnd ^n such that
the stress vector is acting in the direction of ^n. That is:
ti ¼ lni
ð6:34Þ
where l is a scalar representing the magnitude of the
stress vector. The direction ni that satisﬁes the above
condition is the principal direction and l is called the
principal stress. Substituting Equation (6.33) in to Equa-
tion (6.34), we get:
sjinj ¼ lni
The above equation can be written in the matrix form as
h
½s  l½I
i
fng ¼ 0
ð6:35Þ
In other words, the above problem reduces to a standard
eigenvalue problem of size 3  3 with eigenvectors
giving the principal directions n1; n2 and n3 and the
eigenvalues giving the principal stresses l1; l2 and l3.
This problem can be solved by equating the determinant
of the matrix ½s  l½I to zero, as done in conventional
eigenvalue problems. When the determinant of the above
matrix is expanded, we get the following cubic poly-
nomial equation in l:
l3  I1l2 þ I2l  I3
ð6:36Þ
Here, I1; I2 and I3 are the stress invariants, that is, their
values do not change with the coordinate system being
used. They can be written both in terms of the compo-
nents of the stress tensor sij or the principal stresses li as:
I1 ¼ sxx þ syy þ szz ¼ sii ¼ l1 þ l2 þ l3
I2 ¼ 1
2 ðI1
2  sijsijÞ ¼ l1l2 þ l2l3 þ l3l1
I3 ¼ 1
3 ð3I1I2  I1
3 þ sijsjksklÞ ¼ l1l2l3
ð6:37Þ
Figure 6.6
Stresses acting on an arbitrary surface of a
tetrahedron.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
111

In addition, the principal directions ni will have to satisfy
the relation:
n1
2 þ n2
2 þ n3
2 ¼ 1
ð6:38Þ
From the theorem relating to eigenvalue analysis, it can
be easily shown that the eigenvalues are always real since
the stress tensor is symmetric (which will be shown later)
and hence the principal directions are mutually orthogonal.
6.1.3.3 Normal stress
To obtain normal stresses from Cauchy’s stress tensor,
we deﬁne the normal stress sn as the component of the
stress vector in the direction of unit normal ^n to the
surface of interest. This is obtained by taking the dot
product of the stress vector and the normal vector, that is:
sn ¼ tini ¼ sijninj
If the coordinate axes are chosen such that they are
aligned in the direction of principal stresses, then Cauchy’s
stress tensor becomes diagonal with:
sxx ¼ l1;
syy ¼ l2;
szz ¼ l3
Hence, the normal stress can be evaluated from the
expression:
sn ¼ l1n1
2 þ l2n2
2 þ l3n3
2
ð6:39Þ
If l1 > l2 > l3, then by using Equation (6.38) in Equa-
tion (6.39) we can conclude that l1 > sn > l3, from
which we get that l1 and l3 are the maximum and
minimum normal stresses, respectively, at the point
under consideration.
6.1.3.4 Shear stress
We can also extract the shear stresses from Cauchy’s
stress tensor. Projection of the stress vector on any
surface of interest will give the shear stress vector ^t.
Mathematically, this can be represented as follows. The
stress vector equation can be split in terms of normal and
shear stress tensors as:
^t ¼ sn^n þ ^t;
or
^t ¼ ^t  sn^n
ð6:40Þ
The magnitude of the shear stress t can be written as:
t2 ¼ j^tj2  sn
2 ¼ titi  sn
2 ¼ tx
2 þ ty
2 þ tz
2  sn
2
where j^tj is the magnitude of the stress vector. In arriving
at the above relation, we have used the relation j^nj ¼ 1. If
we assume that the coordinate axes coincide with the
principal direction, then we have:
tx ¼ l1nx;
ty ¼ l2ny;
tz ¼ l3nz
ð6:41Þ
Using Equation (6.41), we can write the magnitude of the
stress vector j^tj2 as:
j^tj2 ¼ titi ¼ tx
2 þ ty
2 þ tz
2 ¼ l1
2nx
2 þ l2
2ny
2 þ l3
2nz
2
ð6:42Þ
Using Equation (6.42), the magnitude of the shear stress
can now be written as:
t2 ¼l1
2nx
2 þl2
2ny
2 þl3
2nz
2 l1nx
2 þl2ny
2 þl3nz
2
¼nx
2ð1nx
2Þl1
2 þny
2ð1ny
2Þl2
2 þnz
2ð1nz
2Þl3
2
2l1l2nx
2ny
2 2l2l3ny
2nz
2 2l3l1n2
zn2
x
Using Equation (6.38) in the above equation to replace the
terms in parentheses, for example, 1  n12 ¼ n22 þ n32,
we can write the magnitude of the shear stress as:
t2 ¼n1
2n2
2ðl1l2Þ2þn2
2n3
2ðl2l3Þ2
þn3
2n1
2ðl3l3Þ2
ð6:43Þ
From this relation, it is clear that the magnitude of the
shear stress is zero on the surfaces with:
n1 ¼ 1;
n2 ¼ n3 ¼ 0;
n2 ¼ 1;
n1 ¼ n3 ¼ 0;
n3 ¼ 1;
n1 ¼ n2 ¼ 0
On these surfaces, the normal stresses sn are either
minimum or maximum values. For example, consider
the surface that contains the y-axis with n2 ¼ 0. From
Equation (6.43), the magnitude of the shear stress
becomes:
t2 ¼ n3
2n1
2ðl3  l3Þ2 ¼ ð1  n1
2Þn1
2ðl3  l1Þ2
The maximum value of the shearing stress occurs at:
@ðt2Þ
@n1
¼ 0 ¼ ð2n1  4n1
3Þðl3  l1Þ2
which gives n1 ¼  1=
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
¼ n3. That is, the maximum
shearing stress occurs on the surfaces bisecting the angle
112
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

between the x- and z-axes. The corresponding value of
the shearing stress is:
t2
max ¼ 1
4 ðl3  l1Þ2
The above expression, which is normally found in many
elementary ‘Strength of Materials’ textbooks, is true if
l1 > sn > l3 is true.
6.1.4 Governing equations of motion
There are a number of ways to derive the governing
differential equations of a continuum. The most common
method is to draw the free-body diagram of an isolated
volume of the continuum and establish the equilibrium of
forces in all of the three coordinate directions to get the
required governing equations. However, here we will use
Newton’s Second Law of Motion for not only deriving
the governing equation, but to also establish the symme-
try of Cauchy’s stress tensor.
Consider a body of density r and volume V, as shown
in Figure 6.7. Let the body be subjected to a surface
traction ^t ¼ txi þ tyj þ tzk and a body force per unit
volume ^b ¼ bxi þ byj þ bzk. Newton’s Laws of Motion
relating to force and moment equilibrium for a body of
mass m and having acceleration ^a is given by:
X ^F ¼ m^a;
X ^M ¼ m^x  ^a
where ^F is the resultant force vector, ^M is the resultant
moment vector and ^x ¼ xi þ yj þ zk is the position vector
of the resultant force. Applying these two laws to the
elemental volume shown in Figure 6.7, we get
ð
A
^tdA þ
ð
V
r ^bdV ¼
ð
V
r ^€udV
ð6:44Þ
ð
A
^x ^tdA þ
ð
V
^x  r ^bdV ¼
ð
V
^x  r ^€udV
ð6:45Þ
Here, ^t is the traction vector on the boundary surface of
area A. In tensor notation, these can be rewritten as:
ð
A
tidA þ
ð
V
r bidV ¼
ð
V
r €uidV
ð6:46Þ
ð
A
eijkxjtkdA þ
ð
V
eijkxjbkr dV ¼
ð
V
eijkxjr €ukdV
ð6:47Þ
Here, eijk is the permutation tensor used to represent a
cross-product of any two vectors. By using Equation
(6.33) in Equations (6.46) and (6.47), and using the
Divergence Theorem [1]:
ð
A
tidA ¼
ð
A
spinpdA ¼
ð
V
@spi
@xp
dV
we get:
ð
V
@spi
@xp
þ rbi  r€ui


dV
ð
V
@
@xk
ðeijkxjspkÞ þ reijkxjbk  reijkxj€uk


dV
ð6:48Þ
The ﬁrst term in the second equation can be written as:
@
@xp
ðxjspkÞ ¼ sjk þ xj
@spk
@xp
Using the above equation in Equation (6.48), we can
obtain the governing equilibrium equations as:
@spi
@xp
þ rbi ¼ r€u
ð6:49Þ
eijksjk ¼ 0
ð6:50Þ
While the ﬁrst equation (Equation (6.49)) gives the
governing differential equation of a continuum in terms
of stresses, the second equation states that Cauchy’s stress
tensor sij is symmetric, that is, sij ¼ sji. Expanding
Figure 6.7
Arbitrary small volume under the action of forces.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
113

Equation (6.49), we get the following three differential
equations of motion:
@sxx
@x þ @tyx
@y þ @tzx
@z þ rbx ¼ 0
ð6:51Þ
@txy
@x þ @syy
@y þ @tzy
@z þ rby ¼ 0
ð6:52Þ
@txz
@x þ @tyz
@y þ @szz
@z þ rbz ¼ 0
ð6:53Þ
The above equations will form the heart of many ana-
lyses which will be reported later in this book. It is also
worth mentioning that out of nine stress components in
Cauchy’s stress tensor, only six are independent, which is
the outcome of the symmetry of the tensor. The derived
equations of equilibrium are valid for both small and
large deformation analyses.
6.1.5 Constitutive relations
In the theory of elasticity, constitutive relations are
important components in the analysis and basically
they relate the stresses developed with the strains. In
normal materials, the stresses and strains are related
through a material matrix. In the case of smart materials,
the constitutive law has two parts, one due to mechanical
loading and the other due to either electrical loading
(in cases of piezoelectric or electrostrictive materials)
or magnetic loading (in the case of magnetostrictive
material). That is, the second part denotes the existence
of the coupling between the mechanical motion and
the motion due to electrical or magnetic ﬁelds. This
material law is normally called the actuation law. It is
this coupling strain that gives the required control force
for a host of applications, such as vibration control,
noise control, etc. which are reported in the last chapter
of this book. In addition to the actuation law, smart
materials, such as piezoelectric or magnetostrictive mate-
rials, exhibit a second constitutive law, called the
sensing law, which relates the electric/magnetic ﬂuxes
to the mechanical stresses and the electric/magnetic
ﬁelds. This law is normally used in Structural Health
Monitoring (SHM) applications to sense the presence
of any damage. In this section, we will mention the
constitutive relations for ‘normal’ materials only. Con-
stitutive relations for smart materials will be dealt with
separately in Chapter 8.
Returning back to ‘normal’ materials, the constitutive
relations are normally established under certain assump-
tions. These can be summarized as the following:
 The stress at a point depends on geometric changes
that take place in the immediate vicinity.
 There are no history effects – the present state of
stress will give the strain. Hence, the presence of
material non-linearity is assumed negligible.
 The structure under loading will ‘bounce’ back to its
original shape on its removal.
 Temperature changes only cause a change in shape or
volume but otherwise do not directly affect the stresses.
 The material is homogeneous, that is, the material
properties are not a function of spatial coordinates.
 Displacements and hence the strains are very small
compared to unity.
The constitutive relations can be developed by two
different methods – one is based on the second assump-
tion, which we call the Hookean Elastic Solid, while
the second method is by the use of the Principle of
Virtual Work (which we will dwell on in more detail in
Chapter 7). The constitutive law obtained based on the
above theorem is called Green’s Elastic Solid. Both of
these methods will essentially give the same material
matrix for an elastic solid.
6.1.5.1 Hookean elastic solid
This constitutive model is normally referred to as
Hooke’s Law. It is based on the assumption that for an
elastic body, the stress depends only on deformation and
not on the history of deformation. This can be mathema-
tically expressed as:
sij ¼ f ijðeijÞ
ð6:54Þ
Expanding the above term by a Taylor series about the
initial conﬁguration ðt ¼ 0Þ, we get:
sij ¼ f ijð0Þ þ @f ijð0Þ
@ekl


ekl þ 1
2
@2fijð0Þ
@eklemn


eklemn þ . . . : :
ð6:55Þ
If the assumption of zero initial stress is true, then we
require sij ¼ 0 when eij ¼ 0. This condition leads to
f ijð0Þ ¼ 0. The second term in Equation (6.55) is the
linear term and all other terms in the expression are non-
linear. Retaining only the linear term due to a small-
strain assumption, we can write Equation (6.55) as:
sij ¼ Cijklekl
with
Cijkl ¼ @f ijð0Þ
@ekl


ð6:56Þ
114
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Equation (6.56) is called Hooke’s Law, which states that
the stress tensor is linearly related to the strain tensor.
The term in Equation (6.56), Cijkl, is a fourth-order
tensor of elastic constants, which are independent of either
stress or strain. The tensorial quality of the constants
Cijkl follows the quotient rule, according to which, for a
fourth-order tensor, it should have 34 ¼ 81 elements. Due
to symmetry of the stress tensor (sij ¼ sji), we should
have Cijkl ¼ Cjikl. Furthermore, since the strain tensor is
also symmetric (ekl ¼ elk), we have Cijkl ¼ Cijlk. Under
these conditions, the fourth-order tensor Cijkl will have
only 36 independent constants. Hence, the total number
of elastic constants cannot exceed 36, since the maximum
independent elements in the stress and strain tensors are
only 6 each. With these reductions, the generalized Hook’s
law can be written in the matrix form as:
sxx
syy
szz
tyz
txz
txy
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C21
C22
C23
C24
C25
C26
C31
C32
C33
C34
C35
C36
C41
C42
C43
C44
C45
C46
C51
C52
C53
C54
C55
C56
C61
C62
C63
C64
C65
C66
2
6666664
3
7777775
exx
eyy
ezz
gyz
gxz
gxy
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
ð6:57Þ
where all of the t0s represent the shear stresses in their
respective planes and all of the g0s are the corresponding
shear strains. For most elastic solids, the number of
elastic constants can further be reduced by exploiting
the material symmetry about different reference planes.
6.1.5.2 Green’s elastic solid
An alternate method of deriving the constitutive relation-
ship is by using the work and energy principles. This
method is normally referred to as Green’s Elastic Solid.
For elastic materials, it will give the same material matrix
as that of the Hookean Solid approach. This method is
based on the assumption that the work done by the elastic
forces is completely transformed into potential energy
and furthermore the potential energy is entirely due to the
deformation a body undergoes due to applied tractions
(forces). We begin by considering the total forces acting
on a body, which is given by Equation (6.44). Total
incremental (virtual) work done by the forces (acting on
a surface S) of a body of volume V in displacing by an
incremental (virtual) displacement of dui is given by:
dWe ¼
ð
S
tiduidA þ
ð
V
rbiduidV
ð6:58Þ
Using the Divergence Theorem, the surface integral can
be converted to the volume integral and the above
equation becomes:
dWe ¼
ð
V
sijd @ui
@xj


dV ¼
ð
V
sijdeijdV
ð6:59Þ
The change in the potential energy (also called the Strain
Energy) is given by:
dU ¼
ð
V
dUdV
ð6:60Þ
where U is the potential energy per unit volume (which is
also called the strain energy density function). Assuming
that U is a function of only deformations (strains), which
is the basic hypothesis on which this material model is
based, we can write:
dU ¼ dUðeijÞ ¼ @U
@eij
deij
Using the above in Equation (6.60), we get:
dU ¼
ð
V
@U
@eij
deijdV
ð6:61Þ
Comparing Equations (6.61) and (6.59), we can say:
dWe ¼ dU
or
ð
V
sijdeijdV ¼
ð
V
@U
@eij
deijdV
ð6:62Þ
Since the volume is arbitrary, we can equate the inte-
grands and in doing so we get:
sij ¼ @U
@eij
ð6:63Þ
Equation (6.62) is the famed Principle of Virtual Work
(PVW), which is the heart of many numerical methods,
such as the Finite Element Method (FEM). We will again
deal with this principle in more detail in Chapter 7 on
FEM. Returning to the constitutive modeling, Equation
(6.63) can be expanded by using Taylor series as:
sij ¼ @U
@eij
¼ @Uð0Þ
@eij


þ @2Uð0Þ
@eijekl


ekl þ . . . . . . . . . :
¼ s0
ij þ Eijklekl
ð6:64Þ
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
115

Assuming that the stress is zero when the strains are zero,
the above equation reduces to:
sij ¼ Eijklekl
which is the same as what we derived earlier. Because of
the symmetry of both stress and strain tensors, the
number of independent constants in the Eijkl tensor is
36. Since:
Eijkl ¼ @2Uð0Þ
@eijekl


¼
@2Uð0Þ
@ekleij


¼ Eklij
This additional symmetry reduces the number of inde-
pendent constants to 21.
6.1.5.3 Elastic symmetry
A material having all of the 36 unknown material
constants is said to be a highly Anisotropic material
(Triclinic System). However, if the internal composition
of a material possesses symmetry of any kind, then
symmetry can also be observed in the elastic properties.
The presence of symmetry reduces the number of
independent constants. Such simpliﬁcation in the gen-
eralized Hooke’s law can be obtained as follows. Let x,
y, and z be the original coordinate system of the body
and let x0, y0 and z0 be the second coordinate system,
which is symmetric to the ﬁrst system in accordance
with the form of elastic symmetry. Since the directions
of similar axes of both systems are equivalent with
respect to elastic properties, the equations of the gen-
eralized Hooke’s law will have the same form in both
coordinate systems and the corresponding constants
should be identical.
6.1.5.4 Monoclinic system: one elastic symmetric plane
Supposing that the material system is symmetric
about the z-axis, the second coordinate system x0 , y0
and z0 can be described by the following base unit
vectors:
^e1 ¼ f1; 0; 0g;
^e2 ¼ f0; 1; 0g;
^e3 ¼ f0; 0;  1g
Using this, we can construct a transformation matrix by
having the base vectors as the column of the transfor-
mation matrix. For the above case, the transformation
matrix and the stress tensor in a ‘primed’ coordinate
system becomes:
½T ¼
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
64
3
75;
½s0
ij ¼ ½TT½sij½T ¼
sxx
txy
sxz
tyx
syy
tyx
szx
tzy
szz
2
64
3
75
Similarly, transforming the strains in the ‘primed’ coor-
dinate system will give:
½e0
ij ¼
exx
gxy
exz
gyx
eyy
gyz
ezx
gzy
ezz
2
4
3
5
The elastic symmetry requires that:
fs0
xx
s0
yy
s0
zz
t0
yz
t0
xz
t0
xygT
¼ ½Cijfe0
xx
e0
yy
e0
zz
g0
yz
g0
xz
g0
xygT
Using the above relations, the constitutive law in the
original coordinate system becomes:
sxx
syy
szz
tyz
txz
txy
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C21
C22
C23
C24
C25
C26
C31
C32
C33
C34
C35
C36
C41
C42
C43
C44
C45
C46
C51
C52
C53
C54
C55
C56
C61
C62
C63
C64
C65
C66
2
666666664
3
777777775

exx
eyy
ezz
gyz
gxz
gxy
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
Comparing the above matrix with the general matrix
(Equation (6.57)) leads to the conclusion C14 ¼ C15 ¼
C24 ¼ C25 ¼ C34 ¼ C35 ¼ C46 ¼ C56 ¼ 0. Hence, the
material matrix for a monoclinic system becomes:
C11
C12
C13
0
0
C16
C12
C22
C23
0
0
C26
C13
C23
C33
0
0
C36
0
0
0
C44
C45
0
0
0
0
C45
C55
0
C16
C26
C36
0
0
C66
2
6666664
3
7777775
ð6:65Þ
116
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Hence, in the case of a monoclinic system, 13 indepen-
dents constants require to be determined to deﬁne the
material matrix.
6.1.5.5 Orthotropic system: three orthogonal
planes of symmetry
The most common example of the orthotropic system is
the lamina of a laminated composite structure, which is
dealt with in great detail in Section 6.2. Here, the original
coordinate system of the body is perpendicular to the
three planes. The orthotropy assures that no change in
mechanical behavior will be incurred when the coordi-
nate directions are reversed. Following the procedure
described for the monoclinic system, the material matrix
for an orthotropic system is given by:
C11
C12
C13
0
0
0
C12
C22
C23
0
0
0
C13
C23
C33
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
0
0
0
C55
0
0
0
0
0
0
C66
2
6666664
3
7777775
ð6:66Þ
The number of elastic constants that requires to be
determined is 9. The relationship of these constants
with the elastic constants can be found in Jones [2].
6.1.5.6 Hexagonal system: transversely isotropic system
This system has a plane of symmetry in addition to an
axis of symmetry perpendicular to the plane. If the plane
of symmetry coincides with the x–y plane, then the axis
of symmetry is along the z-axis. Thus, any pair of
orthogonal axes (x0; y0) lying in the x–y plane are similar
to ðx; yÞ. Hence, the stress–strain relations with respect to
(x0; y0; z0Þ where z0 ¼ z, should remain identical to those
with respect to the ðx; y; zÞ system. Following the procedure
given for a monoclinic system, we can derive the material
matrix. The material matrix for this case is given by:
C11
C12
C13
0
0
0
C12
C22
C23
0
0
0
C13
C23
C33
0
0
0
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
0
0
0
C55
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2 C11  C12
ð
Þ
2
6666664
3
7777775
ð6:67Þ
For the transversely isotropic system, the number of
independent material constants required to describe the
system is 5.
6.1.5.7 Isotropic system: inﬁnite plane of symmetry
This is the most commonly occurring material system for
structural materials. For this case, every plane is a plane
of symmetry and every axis is an axis of symmetry. It
turns out that there are only two elastic constants which
require to be determined and the material matrix is given
by:
C11 C12 C12
0
0
0
C12 C11 C12
0
0
0
C12 C12 C11
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2ðC11 C12Þ
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2ðC11 C12Þ
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2ðC11 C12Þ
2
6666664
3
7777775
ð6:68Þ
where:
C11 ¼ l þ 2G;
C12 ¼ l
The constants l and G are the Lame´ constants. The
stress–strain relations for isotropic materials are usually
expressed in the form:
sij ¼ lekkdij þ 2Geij;
2Geij ¼ sij 
l
3l þ 2G skkdij
ð6:69Þ
Note that except for an isotropic material, the coefﬁcients
are given with respect to a particular coordinate system.
In practice, the elastic constants for an isotropic
material are K, E and v. These are called the Bulk
modulus, Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio, respec-
tively. They are related to the Lame´ constants in the
following manner:
K ¼ 1
3 ð3l þ 2GÞ;
n ¼
l
2ðl þ 2GÞ
ð6:70Þ
Some relationships among the constants are as follows:
l ¼
nE
ð1 þ nÞð1  2nÞ ;
G ¼
E
2ð1 þ nÞ ;
K ¼
E
3ð1  2nÞ
ð6:71Þ
6.1.6 Solution procedures in the linear theory
of elasticity
The developments in the last subsections form the basis
of ﬁeld equations of the theory of elasticity. In this
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
117

subsection, these are reformulated to make them con-
venient for solving boundary value problems. The funda-
mental assumptions adopted here are the following:
(a) All the deformations are small.
(b) The constitutive relations are linear. For metallic
structures, the material behavior can be idealized as
isotropic. However, for composite structures, the
material behavior is assumed anisotropic.
In 3-D elasticity, there are 15 unknowns, namely the 6
stress components, 6 strain components and 3 displace-
ments. Hence, for complete solution, we require 15
equations, which come from:
 3 equations of equilibrium (Equation (6.49)).
 6 stress–strain relations (Equation (6.57)).
 6 strain-displacement relations (Equation (6.27)) or 6
compatibility conditions (to be introduced later).
Either of these conditions will be used depending on
the choice of solution schemes to be used.
 In addition, for the solution to be unique it has to
satisfy the boundary conditions on the surface S,
which has two parts, that is, surface Su on which the
boundary conditions in terms of the displacements ui
are prescribed and surface St on which the traction
boundary condition ti ¼ sijnj is prescribed.
Historically, there are two different solution philoso-
phies, one based on assuming displacements as the
basic unknowns, while the other approach is based on
assuming stresses as the basic unknowns. In the former,
the compatibility of the displacements is ensured as we
begin the analysis with displacements as the basic
unknowns. However, the equilibrium is not ensured and
hence they are enforced in the solution process. In the
latter, since the stresses are the basic unknowns, the
equilibrium is ensured and the compatibility is not
ensured and hence enforced during the solution process.
In the next few paragraphs, for both of these methods, we
will derive the basic equations and their solution.
6.1.6.1 Displacement formulation: Navier’s equation
In this approach, the displacements are taken as the basic
unknowns, that is, at each point, there are three unknown
functions u, v and w. These must be determined subject
to the constraint that the stresses derived from them are
equilibrated, or in other words, by enforcing equilibrium.
For this, the stresses are ﬁrst expressed in terms of
displacements. That is, ﬁrst the strains are expressed in
terms of displacements using strain–displacement rela-
tions (Equation (6.27)) and then these are later converted
to stresses. For isotropic solids, these can be written as:
sij ¼ G @ui
@xj
þ @uj
@xi


þ l @uk
@xk
dij
ð6:72Þ
Substituting this into the equilibrium equation (Equation
(6.49)), we get:
G @2ui
@xk@xk
þ ðl þ GÞ @2uk
@xi@xk
þ rbi ¼ 0
ð6:73Þ
These are known as Navier’s equations, with three displace-
ments as unknowns. The above equations should satisfy the
following boundary conditions in terms of displacements:
On Su: ui
specified
On St:
l @uk
@xk
ni þ G @ui
@xj
þ @uj
@xi


nj ¼ ti
specified
Note that the traction boundary conditions are a set of
inhomogeneous differential equations. These are very dif-
ﬁcult to solve directly. The most common way to solve the
above equation is to express the displacement ﬁeld in terms
of scalar potential () and vector potential (H) by using
Helmholz’s theorem. The displacement ﬁeld takes the
following form:
ui ¼ @
@xi
þ eijk
@Hk
@xj
;
@Hk
@xk
¼ 0
ð6:74Þ
where, eijk is the permutation symbol. If the body force is
absent, then Navier’s equations can be expressed as:
ðl þ 2GÞ @
@xi
r2 þ Geijkr2H ¼ 0
ð6:75Þ
This equation will be satisﬁed if:
r2 ¼ constant;
r2H ¼ constant
ð6:76Þ
Thus, the problem reduces to solving a set of Poisson’s
equations in terms of potentials, which are easier to solve
than the original Equation (6.73). The displacements are
later obtained from differentiation.
6.1.6.2 Stress formulation: Beltrami–Mitchell equations
In this approach, the stresses are assumed as basic
unknowns. That is, at each point in the body, there are
118
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

6 unknown functions, namely, sxx; syy; szz; txy; tyz and
tzx. These stresses obviously have to satisfy the equili-
brium equations. However, there are only 3 equations of
equilibrium. The rest of the conditions come from the
requirement that the strains must be compatible.
The assumed stress ﬁelds can be converted to strain
ﬁelds by using the generalized Hooke’s law, which in
turn can be converted to displacement ﬁelds by using
strain displacement relationships. In doing so, we get 6
independent partial differential equations for displace-
ments with prescribed strains eij. For arbitrary values of
eij, there may not exist unique solutions for the displace-
ment ﬁelds. Hence, for getting unique solutions for
displacements, it is necessary to place some restriction
on the strains eij. By differentiating twice, the strain–
displacement relations (Equation (6.27)), we get:
@2eij
@xk@xl
¼ 1
2
@3ui
@xj@xk@xl
þ
@3uj
@xi@xk@xl


ð6:77Þ
Interchanging the subscripts and with some manipulation
leads to the following relation:
@2eij
@xk@xl
þ @2ekl
@xi@xj
 @2eik
@xj@xl
 @2ejl
@xi@xk
¼ 0
ð6:78Þ
There are 81 equations in the above relation, out of which
some are identically satisﬁed and some of them are
repetitions. Only 6 equations are nontrivial and indepen-
dent and in expanded notation, these equations are the
following:
@2exx
@y@z ¼ @
@x
@eyz
@x þ @ezx
@y þ @exy
@z


@2exy
@x@y ¼ @2exx
@y2 þ @2eyy
@x2
@2eyy
@z@x ¼ @
@y
@exz
@y þ @exy
@z þ @eyz
@x


and
@2eyz
@y@z ¼ @2eyy
@z2 þ @2ezz
@y2
@2ezz
@x@y ¼ @
@z
@exy
@z þ @eyz
@x þ @exz
@y


@2ezx
@z@x ¼ @2ezz
@x2 þ @2eyy
@z2
ð6:79Þ
These 6 relations are collectively known as compatibility
equations. The bodies can be simply or multiply con-
nected, as shown in Figure 6.8. For simply connected
bodies, equations of compatibility are necessary and sufﬁ-
cient for their solution. However, for multiply connected
bodies, they are necessary, but no longer sufﬁcient.
Additional conditions needs to be imposed to ensure
that the displacements are single-valued.
The general solution procedure in stress formulation is
as follows. We ﬁrst transform the strains into stresses by
using Hooke’s law (for isotropic solids) of the form:
eij ¼ 1 þ n
E
sij  n
E skkdij
By substituting for strains in the compatibility equations
(Equation (6.79)) and with some simpliﬁcation (that is,
by using equations of equilibrium), we get:
@2sij
@xk@xk
þ
1
1 þ n

 @2skk
@xi@xj
þ
n
1  n


r @bk
@xk
dij
þ r @bi
@xj
þ @bj
@xi


¼ 0
ð6:80Þ
The stress ﬁeld should satisfy the above equation along
with the equilibrium equation (Equation (6.49)) in order
to be admissible. In addition, it has to satisfy the follow-
ing boundary conditions:
On St: sijnj ¼ ti ¼ given and on Su: ui ¼ given
Note that the second set of boundary conditions are
obtained by integrating the strain–displacement relations
in conjunction with the stress–strain relations.
6.1.7 Plane problems in elasticity
The 3-D equations and their associated boundary condi-
tions are extremely difﬁcult to solve and solutions only
exist for very few problems. Hence, in most cases some
approximations are made to reduce the complexity of the
problem. One such reduction is to reduce the dimension
of the problem from three to two. This can be made for
certain types of problems, which falls under two different
Figure 6.8
Simply and multiply connected bodies.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
119

categories, namely the Plane Stress problems and the
Plane Strain problems. A typical plane stress problem is
a thin plate loaded along its plane, as shown in Figure 6.9.
In this case, the stress perpendicular to the plane of the
plate (szz) can be assumed to be zero. In addition, the
corresponding shear in the x–z and y–z planes (tyz and txz)
can also be assumed zero. In the process, the equations get
simpliﬁed considerably.
The following are the equations required for solution
of the plane stress problem:
 Equations of equilibrium.
@sxx
@x þ @txy
@y þ bx ¼ r @2u
@t2 ;
@txy
@x þ @syy
@y þ by ¼ r @2v
@t2
 Strain–displacement relations.
exx ¼ @u
@x ;
eyy ¼ @v
@y ;
gxy ¼ @u
@y þ @v
@x
 Stress–strain relations. This is obtained by inserting
szz ¼ 0; txz ¼ 0; tyz ¼ 0 in the generalized Hooke’s
law (Equation (6.57)) and solving the resulting equa-
tion after substituting for strains in terms of displace-
ments. After substitution, we get:
sxx ¼
E
ð1  n2Þ
@u
@x þ n @v
@y


;
syy ¼
E
ð1  n2Þ
@v
@y þ n @u
@x


;
txy ¼ Ggxy
This we call plane stress reduction in the x–y plane.
Note that a similar reduction of stresses in the other
plane is also possible.
 If one has to use the stress-based approach for the
solution, then only one compatibility equation requires
to be enforced, which is given by:
2 @2gxy
@x@y ¼ @2exx
@y2 þ @2eyy
@x2
Note that although the normal stress szz is zero in the
plane stress case, the normal strain ezz is non-zero and its
value can be computed from the 3-D constitutive law.
The second type of reduction is called the plane strain
reduction, where the body perpendicular to the plane of
loading is assumed rigid, that is, the displacement w and
hence the strains, ezz ¼ exz ¼ eyz ¼ 0, can be inserted in
the 3-D constitutive model and the resulting equations can
be solved to get the stress–strain relations, as was done for
the plane stress case. A typical example of a plane strain
case is the dam structure shown in Figure 6.10, wherein
the structure is assumed rigid in the z-direction.
6.2 THEORY OF LAMINATED COMPOSITES
6.2.1 Introduction
Laminated composites have found extensive use as air-
craft structural materials due to their high strength-to-
weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios. Their popularity
stems from the fact that they are extremely lightweight
and the laminate construction enables the designer to
tailor the strength of the structure in any required
direction depending upon the loading environment to
which the structure is subjected. In addition to aircraft
structures, they have found application in many auto-
mobile and building structures. In addition to better
strength, stiffness and lower weight properties, they have
better corrosion resistance and wear resistance and
Figure 6.9
A thin plate under plane-stress conditions.
Figure 6.10
A dam-type structure under plane-strain conditions.
120
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

thermal and acoustic insulation properties over metallic
structures.
A laminated composite structure consists of many
laminas (plies) stacked together to form the structure.
The number of plies or laminas depends on the strength
that the structure is required to sustain. Each lamina
contains ﬁbers oriented in the direction where the max-
imum strength is required. These ﬁbers are bonded
together by a matrix material. These laminated compo-
site structures derive their strength from the ﬁbers. The
most commonly used ﬁbers include the following: carbon
ﬁbers, glass ﬁbers, Kevlar ﬁbers and boron ﬁbers. The most
commonly used matrix material is epoxy resin. These
materials are orthotropic at the lamina level, while at the
laminate level they exhibit a high level of anisotropic
behavior. The anisotropic behavior results in stiffness
coupling, such as bending-axial–shear coupling in beams
and plates, bending-axial–torsion coupling in aircraft thin-
walled structures, etc. These coupling effects make the
analysis of laminated composite structures very complex.
With the advent of smart materials, the usage of
composites is increasing due to the possibility of embed-
ding smart sensors and actuators anywhere in the struc-
tures, for potential applications such as structural health
monitoring, vibration and noise control, shape control,
etc. This is because many of the smart materials are
available either in powder form (magnetostrictive mate-
rials, such as Terfenol-D) or in thin-ﬁlm form (PVDF
sheets or PZT ﬁlms), which can be readily integrated into
the host composite structure. This increases the possibi-
lity of building on-line health monitoring or vibration
monitoring systems with built-in sensors, actuators and
processors. Laboratory-level models of such systems are
already in place at Stanford University [3] and a few
other places.
The basic theory and modeling aspects of laminated
composite structures are introduced in this section, while
detailed modeling and analysis of smart composites are
introduced in Chapter 8. Readers who are already familiar
with the basic theory of composites can skip the following.
This section is organized as follows. First, the micro-
mechanical aspects of laminas are described. This is
followed by the macromechanics of laminas and the
complete analysis of laminates.
6.2.2 Micromechanical analysis of a lamina
A lamina is a basic element of a laminated composite
structure, constructed with the help of ﬁbers that are
bonded together with the help of a matrix resin. The
strength of the lamina and hence the laminate depends on
the type of ﬁber, its orientation and also the volume
fraction of the ﬁber in relation to the overall volume of
the lamina. Since the lamina is a heterogeneous mixture
of ﬁbers dispersed in the matrix, determination of the
material properties of the lamina, which are assumed to
be orthotropic in character, is a very involved process.
The methods involved in determination of the lamina
material properties constitute micromechanical analysis.
According to Jones [2], micromechanics are the study of
composite material behavior, wherein the interaction of
the constituent materials is examined in detail as part of
the deﬁnition of the behavior of the heterogeneous
composite material.
Hence, the objective of micromechanics is to deter-
mine the elastic modulus of a composite material in
terms of the elastic moduli of the constituent materials,
namely, the ﬁbers and matrix. Hence, the property of a
lamina can be expressed as:
Qij ¼ QijðEf ; Em; nf ; nm; Vf ; VmÞ
ð6:81Þ
where Ef and Em are the elastic moduli of the ﬁber and
the matrix, nf and nm are the Poisson’s ratios of the ﬁber
and matrix and Vf and Vm are the volume fractions of
ﬁber and matrix, respectively. The volume fraction of the
ﬁber is determined from the expression:
Vf ¼
Volume of the fibers
Total volume of the lamina
Similarly, one can determine the volume fraction of the
matrix. There are two basic approaches to determining
the material properties of the lamina. These can be
grouped under the following: (1) Strength of Materials
approach and (2) Theory of Elasticity approach. The ﬁrst
method gives the experimental way of determining the
elastic moduli. The second method actually gives the
upper and lower bounds of the elastic moduli and not
their actual values. In fact, there are many papers avail-
able in the literature that deal with the theory of elasticity
approach to determine the elastic moduli of composites.
In this section, only the ﬁrst method is presented. There
are several classic textbooks on composites, such as
Jones [2] and Tsai [4], which dwell on this in detail.
6.2.2.1 Strength-of-material approach to determination
of the elastic moduli
The material properties of a lamina are determined by
making some assumptions as regards its behavior. The
fundamental assumption is that the ﬁber is the strongest
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
121

constituent of a composite lamina, and hence is the main
load-bearing member, and the matrix is weak and its
main function is to protect the ﬁbers from severe envir-
onmental effects. In addition, the strains in the matrix as
well as in the ﬁber are assumed to be the same. Hence,
the plane sections before being stressed ‘remain plane’
after the stress is applied. In this present analysis, we
consider a unidirectional, orthotropic composite lamina
for deriving the expressions for the elastic moduli. In
doing so, we limit our analysis to a small volume element,
which is small enough to show the microscopic structural
details, yet large enough to represent the overall behavior
of the composite lamina. Such a volume is called the
Representative Volume (RV). A simple RV is a ﬁber
surrounded by a matrix, as shown in Figure 6.11.
First, the procedure for determining the elastic modulus
E1 is given. In Figure 6.11, the strain in the ‘1-direction’ is
given by e1 ¼ DL=L, where this strain is felt both by the
matrix and the ﬁber, according to our basic assumption.
The corresponding stresses in the ﬁber and the matrix are
given by:
sf ¼ Ef e1;
sm ¼ Eme1
ð6:82Þ
Here, Ef and Em are the elastic moduli of the ﬁber and
matrix, respectively. The cross-sectional area of the RV,
A, is made up of the area of the ﬁber, Af , and the area of
the matrix, Am. If the total stress acting on the cross-
section of the RV is s1, then the total load acting on the
cross-section is:
P ¼ s1A ¼ E1e1A ¼ sf Af þ smAm
ð6:83Þ
From the above expression, we can write the elastic
moduli in the ‘1-direction’ as:
E1 ¼ Ef
Af
A þ Em
Am
A
ð6:84Þ
The volume fractions of the ﬁber and the matrix can be
expressed in terms of the areas of the ﬁber and matrix as:
Vf ¼ Af
A ;
Vm ¼ Am
A
ð6:85Þ
Using Equation (6.85) in (6.84), we can write the
modulus in the ‘1-direction’ as:
E1 ¼ Ef Vf þ EmVm
ð6:86Þ
Equation (6.86) is the well known rule of mixtures for
obtaining the equivalent modulus of the lamina in the
direction of the ﬁbers.
The equivalent modulus, E2, of the lamina is deter-
mined by subjecting the RV to a stress s2 perpendicular
to the direction of the ﬁber, as shown in Figure 6.12. This
stress is assumed to be same in both the matrix as well as
the ﬁber. The strains in the ﬁber and matrix due to this
stress are given by:
ef ¼ s2
Ef
;
em ¼ s2
Em
ð6:87Þ
If h is the depth of the RV (see Figure 6.12), then this total
strain e2 gets distributed as a function of volume fraction as:
e2h ¼ Vf ef h þ Vmemh
ð6:88Þ
Substituting Equation (6.87) into (6.88), we get:
e2 ¼ Vf
s2
Ef


þ Vm
s2
Em


ð6:89Þ
However, we have:
s2 ¼ E2e2 ¼ E2 Vf
s2
Ef
þ Vm
s2
Em


ð6:90Þ
Figure 6.11
Representative volume (RV) for determination of
the longitudinal material properties.
Figure 6.12
Representative volume (RV) for determination of
the transverse material properties.
122
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

From the above relation, the equivalent modulus in the
transverse direction is given by:
E2 ¼
Ef Em
Vf Em þ VmEf
ð6:91Þ
The major Poisson’s ratio n12 is determined as follows. If
the RV of width W and depth h is loaded in the direction
of the ﬁber, then both the strains e1 and e2 will be induced
in the ‘1’ and ‘2’ directions. The total transverse defor-
mation, dh, is the sum of the transverse deformation in
the matrix and the ﬁber and is given by:
dh ¼ dhf þ dhm
ð6:92Þ
The major Poisson’s ratio is also deﬁned as the ratio of
the transverse strain to the longitudinal strain and is
mathematically expressed as:
n12 ¼  e2
e1
ð6:93Þ
The total transverse deformation can also be expressed in
terms of depth h as:
dh ¼ he2 ¼ hn12e1
ð6:94Þ
Following the procedure adopted for the determination of
the transverse modulus, the transverse displacement in
the matrix and ﬁber can be expressed in terms of their
respective volume fractions and Poisson’s ratios as:
dhf ¼ hVf nf e1;
dhm ¼ hVmnme1
ð6:95Þ
Using Equations (6.94) and (6.95) in Equation (6.92), we
can write the expression for the major Poisson’s ratio as:
n12 ¼ nf Vf þ nmVm
ð6:96Þ
By adopting a similar procedure to that used in the
determination of the transverse modulus, we can write
the shear modulus in terms of its constituent properties
as:
G12 ¼
Gf Gm
Vf Gm þ VmGf
ð6:97Þ
The next important property of the composite that
requires determination is the density. For this, we begin
with the total mass of the lamina, which is the sum of the
masses of the ﬁber and the matrix. That is, the total mass
M can be expressed in terms of the densities (rf and rm)
and volumes (Vf and Vm) as:
M ¼ Mf þ Mm ¼ rf Vf þ rmVm
ð6:98Þ
The density of the composite can then be expressed as:
r ¼ M
V ¼ rf Vf þ rmVm
V
ð6:99Þ
Once the properties of the lamina are determined, then
one can proceed to a macromechanical analysis of the
lamina to characterize its constitutive model and beha-
vior, which is described in the next subsection.
6.2.3 Stress–strain relations for a lamina
Determination of the overall constitutive model for a
lamina of a laminated composite constitutes the macro-
mechanical study of composites. Unlike the micro-
mechanical study where the composite is treated as a
heterogeneous mixture, here the composite is presumed
to be homogenous and the effects of the constituent
materials are accounted for only as an averaged appar-
ent property of the composite. The following are the
basic assumptions used in deriving the constitutive
relations:
 The composite material is assumed to behave in a
linear (elastic) manner. That is, Hooke’s law, as well
as the principle of superposition, are valid.
 At the lamina level, the composite material is assumed
to be homogenous and orthotropic. Hence, the mate-
rial has two planes of symmetry, one coinciding with
the ﬁber direction and the other perpendicular to the
ﬁber direction.
 The state of stress in a lamina is predominantly plane
stress.
Consider the lamina shown in Figure 6.13 with its
principle axes, which we denote as ‘1’, ‘2’ and ‘3’.
That is, axis ‘1’ corresponds to the direction of the ﬁber
while axis ‘2’ is the axis transverse to the ﬁber. The lamina
is assumed to be in a 3-D state of stress with six stress
components, given by {s11; s22; s33; t23; t31; t12}. The
generalized Hooke’s law for an orthotropic material has
already been derived in the previous section.
This is given by Equation (6.66). For the 3-D state of
stress, nine engineering constants require to be deter-
mined. The macromechanical analysis will begin from
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
123

here. Inverting Equation (6.66), we get:
e11
e22
e33
g23
g31
g12
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
S11
S12
S13
0
0
0
S12
S22
S23
0
0
0
S13
S23
S33
0
0
0
0
0
0
S44
0
0
0
0
0
0
S55
0
0
0
0
0
0
S66
2
6666664
3
7777775
s11
s22
s33
t23
t31
t12
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
ð6:100Þ
Here, Sij are the material compliances. Their relation-
ships with the engineering constants are given in Jones [2];
nij, the Poisson’s ratio for transverse strain in the jth
direction when the stress is applied in the ith direction, is
given by:
nij ¼  ejj
eii
ð6:101Þ
The above condition is for sjj ¼ s, with all other stresses
being equal to zero. Since the stiffness coefﬁcients
Cij ¼ Cji, from this it follows that the compliance matrix
is also symmetric, that is, Sij ¼ Sji. This condition
enforces the relation among the Poisson’s ratios as:
nij
Ei
¼ nji
Ej
ð6:102Þ
Hence, for a lamina under the 3-D state of stress, only
three Poisson’s ratios, namely n12; n23 and n31, require to
be determined. Other Poisson’s ratios can be obtained
from Equation (6.102).
For most of our analysis, we will assume the condition of
plane stress. Here, we derive the equations assuming that
the condition of plane stress exists in the 1–2 plane (see
Figure 6.14 below). However, if one has to carry out an
analysis of a laminated composite beam, which is essen-
tially a 1-D member, the condition of plane stress will
exist in the 1–3 plane and a similar procedure could be
followed.
For the plane-stress condition in the 1–2 plane, we set
the following stresses equal to zero in Equation (6.100),
that is, s33 ¼ t23 ¼ t31 ¼ 0. The resulting constitutive
model under the plane-stress condition can be written as:
e11
e22
g12
8
<
:
9
=
; ¼
1
E1
n12
E1
0
n21
E2
1
E2
0
0
0
1
G12
2
6666664
3
7777775
s11
s22
t12
8
<
:
9
=
;
ð6:103Þ
Note that the strain e33 also exists, which can be obtained
from the third constitutive equation:
e33 ¼ S13s11 þ S23s22
From this equation, it also means that the Poisson’s ratios
n13 and n23 should also exist. Inverting Equation (6.103),
we can expresse the stresses in terms of strains, which are
given by:
s11
s22
t12
8
<
:
9
=
; ¼
Q11
Q12
0
Q12
Q22
0
0
0
Q66
2
4
3
5
e11
e22
g12
8
<
:
9
=
;
ð6:104Þ
where Qij are the reduced stiffness coefﬁcients, which
can be expressed in terms of the elastic constants as:
Q11 ¼
E1
1  n12n21
;
Q12 ¼
n21E1
1  n12n21
¼
n12E2
1  n12n21
;
Q22 ¼
E2
1  n12n21
;
Q66 ¼ G12
ð6:105Þ
Fibers
1
2
3
Figure 6.13
Principal axes of a lamina.
1
2
x
y
θ
Figure 6.14
Principal material axes of a lamina, plus the
‘global’ x–y axes.
124
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

6.2.3.1 Stress–strain relations for a lamina
of arbitrary orientation
In most cases, the orientations of the global axes, which
we call the x–y axes, which are geometrically ‘natural’
for solution of the problem, do not coincide with the
lamina principle axes, which we have already designated
as the 1–2 axes. The lamina principal axes and the global
axes are shown in Figure 6.14. A small element in the
lamina of area dA is taken and the free-body diagram
(FBD) is drawn as shown in Figure 6.15. Consider the
free body A. Summing all of the forces in the direction of
the 1-axis, we get:
s11dA  sxxðcosydAÞðcosyÞ  syyðsinydAÞðsinyÞ
 txyðsinydAÞðcosyÞ  txyðcosydAÞðsinyÞ ¼ 0
ð6:106Þ
On simpliﬁcation, the above equation can be written as:
s11 ¼ sxxcos2y þ syysin2y þ 2txysinycosy
ð6:107Þ
Similarly, by summing up all the forces along the 2-axis
(free body A), we get:
t12dA  sxxðcosydAÞðsinyÞ  syyðsinydAÞðcosyÞ
 txyðsinydAÞðsinyÞ þ txyðcosydAÞðcosyÞ ¼ 0
ð6:108Þ
Simplifying the above equation, we get:
t12 ¼ sxxsinycosy þ syysinycosy þ txyðcos2y  sin2yÞ
ð6:109Þ
Following the same procedure and summing up all the
forces in the 2-direction in the free body B, we can write:
s22 ¼ sxxsin2y þ syycos2y  2txysinycosy
ð6:110Þ
Equations (6.2.107), (6.2.109) and (6.2.110) can be
written in the matrix form as
s11
s22
t12
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
C2
S2
2CS
S2
C2
2CS
CS
CS
ðC2  S2Þ
2
64
3
75
sxx
syy
txy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
;
C ¼ cosy; S ¼ siny
or
fsg1--2 ¼ ½Tfsgx--y
ð6:111Þ
In a similar manner, the strains from the 1–2 axis can be
transformed to the x–y axis by a similar transformation.
Note that by having the same transformation, shear
strains are to be divided by two. Without going into
much too detail, they can be written as:
e11
e22
g12
2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼
C2
S2
2CS
S2
C2
2CS
CS
CS
ðC2  S2Þ
2
64
3
75
exx
eyy
gxy
2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
or feg1--2 ¼ ½Tfegx--y
ð6:112Þ
Inverting Equations (6.111) and (6.112), we can express
the stresses and strains in terms of global coordinates as:
sxx
syy
txy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
C2
S2
2CS
S2
C2
2CS
CS
CS
ðC2  S2Þ
2
64
3
75
s11
s22
t12
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
;
fsgx--y ¼ ½T1fsg1--2
ð6:113Þ
exx
eyy
gxy
2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼
C2
S2
2CS
S2
C2
2CS
CS
CS
ðC2  S2Þ
2
64
3
75
e11
e22
g12
2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
;
fegx--y ¼ ½T1feg1--2
ð6:114Þ
The actual strain vectors in both the 1–2 and x–y axes,
feg1--2 and fegx--y, can be related to feg1--2 and fegx--y
y
2
x
1
A
B
σy
σx
σy
σy
σx
σx
τxy
τxy
σ1
σ2
σ1
σ2
τxy
τ12
τ12
τ12
q
q
q
q
Figure 6.15
Lamina and laminate coordinate system and the
free-body diagram (FBD) of a stressed element.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
125

through a transformation matrix as:
e11
e22
g12
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
2
64
3
75
e11
e22
g12
2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
;
and
exx
eyy
gxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
2
64
3
75
exx
eyy
gxy
2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
feg1--2 ¼ ½Rfeg1--2;
fegx--y ¼ ½Rfegx--y
ð6:115Þ
Now, the constitutive equation of a lamina in its principal
directions (Equation (6.104)) can now be written as:
fsg1--2 ¼ ½Qfeg1--2
ð6:116Þ
Substituting Equations (6.111), (6.112) and (6.115) into
Equation (6.116), we get:
½Tfsgx--y ¼ ½Q½Rfeg1--2 ¼ ½Q½R½Tfegx--y
¼ ½Q½R½T½R1fegx--y
Hence, the constitutive relation in the global x–y axes can
now be written as:
fsgx--y ¼ ½Qfegx--y ¼ ½T1½Q½R½T½R1fegx--y
ð6:117Þ
Here, the matrix ½Q is a fully populated matrix. Hence,
although the lamina in its own principal direction is
orthotropic, in the transformed coordinate it represents
complete anisotropic behavior, that is, the normal stres-
ses are coupled to the shear strains and vice versa. The
elements of the ½Q matrix is given by:
Q11 ¼ Q11C4 þ 2ðQ12 þ 2Q66ÞS2C2 þ Q22S4
Q12 ¼ ðQ11 þ Q22  4Q66ÞS2C2 þ Q12ðS4 þ C4Þ
Q16 ¼ ðQ11  Q12  2Q66ÞSC3 þ ðQ12  Q22 þ 2Q66ÞS3C
Q22 ¼ Q11S4 þ 2ðQ12 þ 2Q66ÞS2C2 þ Q22C4
Q26 ¼ ðQ11  Q12  2Q66ÞS3C þ ðQ12  Q22 þ 2Q66ÞSC3
Q66 ¼ ðQ11 þ Q22  2Q12  2Q66ÞS2C2 þ Q66ðS4 þ C4Þ
ð6:118Þ
Equation (6.118) gives the constitutive equation of a
lamina under plane stress in the 1–2 plane.
6.2.4 Analysis of a laminate
A laminate is one in which two or more laminas are
bonded together to form an integral structural element.
Different laminas in the laminate have different principal
directions and as a consequence, a laminate does not
have any deﬁned principal direction. In addition, differ-
ent ﬁber orientations will enable resisting loads in
different directions. The goal of the analysis is to use
the determined properties of the laminas from micro- and
macromechanical analysis to ﬁnd the stress resultants
acting on the laminate. The heart of the present analysis
here is based on the Classical Lamination Theory (CLT).
6.2.4.1 Classical lamination theory (CLT)
The approach used in the CLT is to ﬁrst write the lamina
constitutive relations for each laminate. Based on the
mechanics of the structure, a suitable displacement ﬁeld
is assumed from which the strains and the stresses in
each lamina are found. These are then integrated over the
thickness to get the overall stress resultants. In this
process, we will also obtain the coupling stiffness
matrices at the laminate level, which are normally called
the [A], [B] and [D] matrices. Matrix [B] determines the
extent of stiffness coupling in the laminate.
The lamina constitutive relation was derived earlier
and is given in Equation (6.117). For the kth lamina in a
laminate, the stress strain relation can be written as:
fsgk ¼ ½Qkfegk
ð6:119Þ
Next, the stress resultants for the laminate are estab-
lished. For this, consider the laminate shown in Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16
Deformation of a laminate in the x–y plane.
126
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Assuming no shear deformation and the condition of
plane stress, the laminate displacement ﬁelds can be
assumed as:
uðx; y; zÞ ¼ u0ðx; yÞ  z @w0
@x ;
vðx; y; zÞ ¼ v0ðx; yÞ  z @w0
@y ;
wðx; y; zÞ ¼ w0ðx; yÞ
ð6:120Þ
Here, u0; v0 and w0 are the mid-plane displacements. The
second term in the u and v displacement ﬁelds represents
the respective slopes of a laminate. From these displace-
ment ﬁelds, the strains can be evaluated as:
exx ¼ @u
@x ¼ @u0
@x  z @2w0
@x2 ;
eyy ¼ @v
@y ¼ @v0
@y  z @2w0
@y2
gxy ¼ @u
@y þ @v
@x ¼ @u0
@y þ @v0
@x  2z @2w0
@x@y
ð6:121Þ
The above strain ﬁelds can be written as:
exx
eyy
gxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
e0
xx
e0
yy
g0
xy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
þ z
kxx
kyy
kxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
;
e0
xx
e0
yy
g0
xy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
@u0
@x
@v0
@y
@u0
@y þ @v0
@x
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
;
kxx
kyy
kxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
@2w0
@x2
@2w0
@y2
@2w0
@x@y
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
ð6:122Þ
The ﬁrst term represents the normal strain, while the
second term represents the curvature. As in the case of
beams, the strain varies linearly over the depth. The
stress–strain relation for the kth laminate is written by
inserting the above strain ﬁeld in Equation (6.119), which
is given by:
sxx
syy
txy
8
<
:
9
=
;
k
¼
Q11
Q12
Q16
Q12
Q22
Q26
Q16
Q26
Q66
2
4
3
5
e0
xx
e0
yy
g0
xy
8
<
:
9
=
; þ z
kxx
kyy
kxy
8
<
:
9
=
;
8
<
:
9
=
;
ð6:123Þ
On a laminate, there are three force resultants, namely
Nx; Ny and Nxy and three moment resultants namely
Mx; My and Mxy (shown in Figure 6.17). The resultant
forces and moments are obtained by integration of
the stresses in each lamina through the laminate thick-
ness. These can be written for an N-ply laminate as:
Nx
Ny
Nxy
8
<
:
9
=
; ¼
ð
h=2
h=2
sxx
syy
txy
8
<
:
9
=
;
k
dz ¼
X
N
k ¼ 1
ðzk
zk  1
sxx
syy
txy
8
<
:
9
=
;
k
dz
ð6:124Þ
and
Mx
My
Mxy
8
<
:
9
=
; ¼
ð
h=2
h=2
sxx
syy
txy
8
<
:
9
=
;
k
zdz ¼
X
N
k ¼ 1
ðzk
zk  1
sxx
syy
txy
8
<
:
9
=
;
k
zdz
ð6:125Þ
Here, h is the laminate thickness and zk1 and zk
represent the ply depths from the middle plane – shown
in Figure 6.18. Substituting for the stresses from Equa-
tion (6.123) in Equation (6.125) and designating:
Aij ¼
X
N
k ¼ 1
ðQijÞkðzk  zk1Þ
ð6:126Þ
Bij ¼ 1
2
X
N
k ¼ 1
ðQijÞkðz2
k  z2
k1Þ
ð6:127Þ
Dij ¼ 1
3
X
N
k ¼ 1
ðQijÞkðz3
k  z3
k1Þ
ð6:128Þ
Figure 6.17
Force and moment resultants on a laminate.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
127

we can write the stress resultants as
Nx
Ny
Nxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
A11
A12
A16
A12
A22
A26
A16
A26
A66
2
64
3
75
e0
xx
e0
yy
g0
xy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
þ
B11
B12
B16
B12
B22
B26
B16
B26
B66
2
64
3
75
kxx
kyy
kxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð6:129Þ
Mx
My
Mxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
B11
B12
B16
B12
B22
B26
B16
B26
B66
2
64
3
75
e0
xx
e0
yy
g0
xy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
þ
D11
D12
D16
D12
D22
D26
D16
D26
D66
2
64
3
75
kxx
kyy
kxy
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð6:130Þ
Equations (6.129) and (6.130) can be combined and
written as:
fNg
fMg

 
¼
½A
½B
½B
½D


fe0g
fkg

 
ð6:131Þ
Equation (6.131) represents the stiffness equation for a
laminate. Here, Aij represents the axial stiffness and Dij
represents the bending stiffness of the laminate. Bij is the
coupling stiffness matrix and exists only for an unsym-
metric ply lay up. In other words, the complete stiffness
coupling is represented by this matrix Bij.
6.3 INTRODUCTION TO WAVE
PROPAGATION IN STRUCTURES
In this section, we present some introductory concepts of
wave propagation in structures. The question that one
may be asking is why this part is necessary in the ﬁrst
place in a book dealing with smart materials, structures
and MEMS. The reason is quite simple. Today, there is a
new class of analytical (numerical) techniques available
for modeling, which is based on wave propagation
theories. This method, which is described in detail in
the next chapter, and used extensively in many examples
in this book, is called the Spectral Finite Element Method
(SFEM). Some applications presented in the last part of
the book are based on wave solutions. Some of the
modeling and control aspects dealt with in Chapters 7,
8 and 9 derive their origin from the governing wave
equation. Hence, it becomes necessary for the reader to
understand the rudiments of wave propagation before he/
she attempts to understand some of the topics given in the
later part of this book.
A structure, when subjected to dynamic loads, will
experience stresses of varying degree of severity depending
upon the load magnitude and its duration. If the temporal
variation of load is of a large duration (of the order of
seconds), the intensity of the load felt by the structure will
usually be of lower severity and such problems falls under
the category of Structural Dynamics. For such problems,
there are two parameters which are of paramount impor-
tance in the determination of its response, namely the
natural frequency of the system and its normal modes
(mode shapes). The total response of the structure is
obtained by the superposition of the ﬁrst few normal
modes. A large duration of the load makes it low on the
frequency content and hence the load will excite only the
ﬁrst few modes. Hence, the structure could be idealized
with fewer unknowns (which we call the degrees of free-
dom, a terminology which we will introduce in the next
chapter). However, when the duration of the load is small
(of the order of microseconds), stress waves are set up,
which start propagating in the medium with certain velo-
cities. Hence, the response is necessarily transient in nature
and in this process many normal modes will get excited.
Hence, the model sizes will be many orders larger than
what is required for the structural dynamics problem. Such
problems come under the category of Wave Propagation.
The key factors in the wave propagation are the propa-
gating velocity, level of attenuation of the response and
its wavelengths. Hence, phase information is one of the
most important parameters, which is of no concern in
the structural dynamics problems.
Since wave propagation is a multi-modal phenomenon,
the analysis becomes quite complex when the problem is
solved in the time domain. This is because the problem
by its very nature is a high-frequency-content problem.
Hence, the analysis methods based on the frequency
Figure 6.18
Depth coordinates for an N-layered lamainate.
128
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

domain are highly suited for such problems. That is, all of
the governing equations, boundary conditions and vari-
ables are transformed to the frequency domain using any
of the integral transforms available. The most common
transformation for transforming the problem to the fre-
quency domain is Fourier Transform. This transform has a
discrete representation and hence is amenable for numer-
ical implementation, which makes it very attractive for
its usage in wave propagation problems. By transforming
the problem into the frequency domain, the complexity
of the governing partial differential equation is reduced
by removing the time variable out of the picture, thus
making the solution of the resulting Ordinary Differential
Equation (ODE) much simpler than the original equation.
In wave propagation problems, two parameters are very
important, namely the wavenumber and the speeds of the
propagation. There are many types of waves that can be
generated in a structure. Wavenumbers reveal the type of
waves that are generated. These give us two important
relations, namely the Spectrum Relation, which is a plot
of the wavenumber with the frequency and the Disper-
sion Relation, which is a plot of wave velocity with the
frequency. These relations reveal the characteristics of
different waves that are generated in a given structure.
In this subsection, ﬁrst the basic Fourier theory is
discussed, which forms the ‘backbone’ of all our wave
analysis to follow. Next, the spectral analysis of motion is
discussed, wherein the determination of wavenumbers
and speeds is given. This will be followed by a subsec-
tion on wave propagation in all commonly occurring
structural elements.
6.3.1 Fourier analysis
The time signal encountered in wave mechanics has two
extreme bounds in the temporal axis, that is, from 1 to
þ1 and is assumed to persist at all times. This signal can
be represented in the Fourier domain in three possible
ways,
namely
the
Continuous
Fourier
Transforms
(CFTs), the Fourier Series (FS) and the Discrete Fourier
Transforms (DFTs). In this section, only brief deﬁnitions
of the above transforms are given. The interested reader
is encouraged to refer to many classic textbooks, such as
Chatﬁeld [5] and Sneddon [6], available on this subject
for greater detail.
6.3.1.1 Continuous Fourier Transforms
Consider any time signal FðtÞ. The inverse and the forward
CFT, which are normally referred to as a transform pair,
are given by:
FðtÞ ¼ 1
2p
ð1
1
^FðoÞeiotdo;
^FðoÞ ¼
ð1
1
FðtÞeiotdt
ð6:132Þ
where, ^FðoÞ is the CFT of the time signal, o is the
angular frequency and i ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
. ^FðoÞ is necessarily
complex and a plot of the amplitude of this function
with the frequency will give the frequency content of the
time signal. As an example, consider a rectangular time
signal of pulse width d. Mathematically, this function can
be represented as:
FðtÞ ¼ F0
 d=2  t  d=2
¼ 0
otherwise
This time signal is symmetric about the origin. If this
pulse is substituted in Equation (6.132), we get:
^FðoÞ ¼ F0d sinðod=2Þ
od=2

 
ð6:133Þ
The CFT in this case is real only and as seen from
Figure 6.19, it is symmetric about o ¼ 0. The term
–100
–50
0
50
100
Frequency n (kHz)
t0 = 5 µs
t0 = –20 µs
t0 = –50 µs
Real
Imaginary
Figure 6.19
Continuous Fourier transforms for various pulse
widths.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
129

inside the brace is called the sinc function. In addition,
the value of the CFT at o ¼ 0 is equal to the area under
the time signal.
Now, if the pulse is allowed to propagate in the time
domain by an amount ts seconds, mathematically such a
signal can be written as:
FðtÞ ¼ F0
ts  t  ts þ d
¼ 0
otherwise
Substituting the above function into Equation (6.132) and
integrating, we get:
^FðoÞ ¼ F0d sinðod=2Þ
od=2


eioðtsþd=2Þ
ð6:134Þ
The above CFT has both real and imaginary parts. These
are again plotted in Figure 6.19. From Equations (6.133)
and (6.134), we see that the magnitudes of both of these
transforms are the same; however, the second transform
has phase information built into it. Furthermore, we see that
propagation of the signal in the time domain is associated
with the change of phase in the frequency domain. Wave-
propagation problems are always associated with the
phase changes occurring as the signal propagates.
Based on the CFT, one can also determine the spread
of the signal both in the time and frequency domains. For
this, one has to look at the frequencies at which the CFT
is zero. This occurs when:
sin ond
2


¼ 0;
or
ond
2
¼ np
or
on ¼ 2np
d
o2  o1 ¼ Do ¼ 2p
d
That is, if the spread of the signal in the time domain is d,
then the spread in the frequency domain is Do ¼ 2p=d.
In other words, if the spread in the time domain is small,
then the spread in the frequency domain gets larger.
Here, Do represents the frequency bandwidth. Hence, a
Dirac Delta function, which has inﬁnitesimal width in the
time domain, will have inﬁnite bandwidth in the frequency
domain. This aspect has greater implications in choosing
the mesh sizes, when one resorts to the Finite Element
technique to solve the wave-propagation problem. The
following are some of the properties of the CFT:
 Linearity: Consider two time functions F1ðtÞ and
F2ðtÞ. The CFTs of these functions are given by
^F1ðoÞ and ^F2ðoÞ and then the Fourier transform of the
combined function F1ðtÞ þ F2ðtÞ , ^F1ðoÞ þ ^F2ðoÞ.
Here, the symbol ‘,’ is used to denote the CFT of a
time signal.
Implications in wave propagation: Here, F1ðtÞ
and F2ðtÞ can be thought of as the incident and
reﬂected waves, respectively. The linearity property
states that the combined transforms of the incident
and reﬂected waves are equal to the individual trans-
form of these obtained separately.
 Scaling: If a time signal FðtÞ is multiplied by a factor
k to become FðktÞ, the CFT of this time signal is given
by FðktÞ , 1=k^F o=k
ð
Þ.
Implications in wave propagation: Time-domain
compression is the frequency-domain expansion. That
is, this property ﬁxes the frequency bandwidth of the
given time signal.
 Time shifting: If a given time signal FðtÞ is shifted by
an amount ts to become Fðt  tsÞ, the CFT of the
shifted signal is given by Fðt  tsÞ , ^FðoÞeiots.
Implications in wave propagation: Propagation in
the time domain is accompanied by the phase changes
in the frequency domain.
 The CFT is always complex: Any given time function
FðtÞ can be split up into symmetric and antisymmetric
functions, FsðtÞ and FaðtÞ. Furthermore, by using the
property of the linearity of the CFT, we can show that:
FsðtÞ ¼ Re al ð^FðoÞÞ and FaðtÞ ¼ i Im ag ð^FðoÞÞ:
Implications in wave propagation: Since the time
signals encountered in wave mechanics are neither
symmetric (even) or antisymmetric (odd) in nature,
the CFT is necessarily complex in nature. Hence, wave-
propagation problems are always associated with phase
changes.
 Symmetric property of the CFT: Since the CFT of a
time signal FðtÞ is complex, it can be split up into real
and imaginary parts as ^FðoÞ ¼ ^FRðoÞ þ i^FIðoÞ. Sub-
stituting this in the ﬁrst equation of Equation (6.132)
and expanding the complex exponential in terms of
sine and cosine functions, we can write the real and
imaginary parts of the transform as:
^FR ¼
ð1
1
FðtÞcosðotÞdt;
^FI ¼
ð1
1
FðtÞsinðotÞdt
The ﬁrst integral is the even function and the second
is the odd function, that is, ^FRðoÞ ¼ ^FRðoÞ and
^FIðoÞ ¼ ^FIðoÞ. Now, if we consider the CFT
about a point o ¼ 0 (origin), the transform on the
right of the origin can be written as ^FðoÞ ¼ ^FRðoÞþ
i^FIðoÞ. Similarly, the transforms to the left of the origin
130
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

can be written as ^FðoÞ ¼ ^FRðoÞ þ i^FIðoÞ ¼
^FRðoÞ  i^FIðoÞ ¼ ^FðoÞ, which is the complex con-
jugate of the transform on the right side of the origin.
The zero frequency point about which this happens
is called the Nyquist Frequency.
Implication in wave propagation: The Nyquist
frequency is an important parameter in wave propaga-
tion analysis, especially in the context of using a Fast
Fourier Transform (to be introduced later), since it is
only up to this frequency that all of the analysis can be
performed.
 Convolution: This is a property relating to the
product of two time signals F1ðtÞ and F2ðtÞ. The
CFT of the product of these two functions can
be written as:
^F12ðoÞ ¼
ð1
1
F1ðtÞF2ðtÞeiotdt
Now, substituting Equation (6.132) for both of these
functions in the above equation, we can write:
^F12ðoÞ ¼
ð1
1
^F1ðoÞ
ð1
1
F2ðtÞeiðooÞtdtdo
¼
ð1
1
^F1ðoÞ^F2ðo  oÞdo
or
F1ðtÞF2ðtÞ ,
ð1
1
^F1ðoÞ^F2ðo  oÞdo
The above form of the CFT is called the Convolution.
Conversely, we can also write:
^F1ðoÞ^F2ðoÞ ,
ð1
1
F1ðtÞF2ðt  tÞdt
Implication in wave propagation: The ﬁrst prop-
erty of using the product of two time domain signals
has its use in understanding the signal-processing
aspects. For example, a truncated signal in the time
domain is equal to the product of the original signal
and the truncated signal. The second (or the converse)
property is of great utility in wave-propagation analy-
sis. That is, all of the responses (output) of mechanical
waveguides to applied loadings can be represented as
the frequency-domain product of the input times the
system transfer function. Thus, the time responses are
obtained by convolving the transfer functions with the
load spectrum.
6.3.1.2 Fourier series
Both forward and inverse CFTs require mathematical
descriptions of the time signals, as well as their integra-
tion. In most cases, the time signals are ‘point-data’
acquired during experimentation. Hence, what we require
is the numerical representation for the transform pair
(Equation (6.132)), which is called the Discrete Fourier
Transform (DFT). This is introduced in great detail in the
next subsection. The Fourier Series (FS) is inbetween the
CFT and the DFT, wherein the inverse transform is
represented by a series, while the forward transform is
still in the integral form as in the CFT. That is, one still
needs a mathematical description of the time signal for
getting these transforms.
The FS of a given time signal can be represented as:
FðtÞ ¼ a0
2 þ
X
1
n¼1
ancos 2pn t
T


þ bnsin 2pn t
T


h
i
ð6:135Þ
where,
an ¼ 2
T
ðT
0
FðtÞcos 2pn t
T


dt;
bn ¼ 2
T
ðT
0
FðtÞsin 2pn t
T


dt;
n ¼ 0; 1; 2 . . .
ð6:136Þ
Equation (6.135) corresponds to the inverse transform of
the CFT, while Equation (6.136) corresponds to the
forward transforms of the CFT. Here, T is the period of
the time signal. That is, the discrete representation of a
continuous time signal, FðtÞ, introduces periodicity to the
time signal. The FS given in Equation (6.135) can also be
written in terms of complex exponentials, which can give
a one-to-one comparison with the CFT. That is, Equa-
tions (6.135) and (6.136) can be rewritten as:
FðtÞ ¼ 1
2
X
1
1
ðan  bnÞeiont ¼
X
1
1
^Fneiont
n ¼ 0;1;2;...
^Fn ¼ 1
2ðan  bnÞ ¼ 1
T
ðT
0
FðtÞeiontdt;
on ¼ 2pn
T
ð6:137Þ
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
131

Because of the enforced periodicity, the signal repeats
itself after every T seconds. Hence, we can deﬁne the
fundamental frequency either in radians/per second (o0)
or Hertz f0 ¼ o0=2p ¼ 1=T
ð
Þ.
We can now express the time signal in terms of the
fundamental frequency as:
FðtÞ ¼
X
1
1
^Fnei2pnf0t ¼
X
1
1
^Fneino0t
ð6:138Þ
From Equation (6.138), it is clear that, unlike in the CFT,
the transform given by the FS is discrete in frequency. To
understand the behavior of the FS as opposed to the CFT,
the same rectangular time signal used earlier is again
considered here. The FS coefﬁcients (or transform) are
obtained by substituting the time-signal variation in
Equation (6.137). This is given by:
^Fn ¼ F0
T
sin pnd
T


npd
T
2
664
3
775eiðtsþd=2Þ2pn=T
ð6:139Þ
The plot of transform amplitude obtained from the CFT
and FS are shown in Figure 6.20. This ﬁgure shows that
the value of the transform obtained by the FS at discrete
frequencies falls exactly on the transform obtained by
the CFT. This ﬁgure also shows the transform values for
different time periods T. We see from this ﬁgure that
the larger the time period, then the more close are the
frequency spacings. Hence, if the period tends to inﬁnity,
the transform obtained by the FS will be exactly equal to
the transform obtained by the CFT.
6.3.1.3 Discrete Fourier transforms
The Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is the other
alternate way of mathematically representing the CFT
in terms of summations. Here, both the forward and
inverse CFT given in Equation (6.132) are represented
by summations. This will completely do away with all of
the complex integration involved in computation of the
CFT. In addition, it is not necessary to represent the time
signals mathematically and the great advantage of this is
that one can use the time data obtained from experimen-
tation. Numerical implementation of the DFT is done
by using the famous Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
algorithm.
We begin here with Equation (6.137), which is the FS
representation of the time signal. The main objective here
is to replace the integral involved in computation of the
Fourier coefﬁcients by summation. For this, the plot of
–100
–50
0
50
100
Frequency n (kHz)
t = 150 µs
t = 200 µs
t = 500 µs
Continous transform
Fourier series coefficents
Figure 6.20
Comparison of Fourier series with continuous Fourier transforms.
132
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

the time signal shown in Figure 6.21 is considered. The
time signal is divided into M piecewise constant rectan-
gles, whose height is given by Fm and the width of these
rectangles is equal to DT ¼ T=M. We have derived earlier
that the continuous transform of a rectangle is a sinc
function. By rectangular idealization of the signal, the
DFT of the signal will be the summation of M sinc
functions of pulse width DT and hence the second
integral in Equation (6.137) can now be written as:
^Fn ¼ DT sinðonDT=2Þ
ðonDT=2Þ

 X
M
m¼0
Fmeiontm
ð6:140Þ
Let us now look at the sinc function in Equation (6.140).
Its value depends on the width of the rectangle DT. That
is, as the width of the rectangle becomes smaller, the
term inside the bracket of Equation (6.140) tends to reach
a unit value. This will happen for all values of n < M. It
can be easily shown that for values of n  M, the values
of the transform is approximately equal to zero. Hence,
the DFT transform pairs can now be written as:
Fm ¼ FðtmÞ ¼ 1
T
X
N1
n¼0
^Fmeiontm ¼ 1
T
X
N1
n¼0
^Fmei2pnm=N
^Fn ¼ ^FðonÞ ¼ DT
X
N1
n¼0
Fmeiontm
¼ DT
X
N1
n¼0
Fmei2pnm=N
ð6:141Þ
Here, both m and n range from 0 to N  1.
The periodicity of the time signal is necessary for the
DFT as we begin from FS representation of the time
signal. Now, we can probe a little further to see whether
the signal has any periodicity in the frequency domain.
For this, we can look at the summation term in Equation
(6.140). Hypothetically, let us assume that n > M.
Hence, we can write n ¼ M þ n. Then, the exponential
term in the equation becomes:
eiontm ¼ eino0tm ¼ eiMo0tmeino0tm
¼ ei2pmeino0tm ¼ eino0tm
Hence,
the
summation
term
in
Equation
(6.140)
becomes:
DT
X
M1
m¼0
Fmeino0tm
This term shows that the above summation evaluates the
same value when n ¼ n. For example, if M ¼ 6, then for
n ¼ 9, 11 and 17 evaluate the same as n ¼ 3, 5 and 11,
respectively. Two aspects are very clear from this analy-
sis. First n > M is not important and the second is that
there is forced periodicity in both the time and frequency
domains in using the DFT. This periodicity occurs about
a frequency where the transform goes to zero. This
frequency can be obtained if one looks at the sinc
function given in Equation (6.140). That is, the argument
of the sinc function is given by:
onDT
2
¼ p nDT ¼ pn
M
where, we have used the relation DT ¼ T=M in the
above.
Here, we see that the sinc function goes to zero when
n ¼ M. It is at this value of n that the periodicity is
enforced and the frequency corresponding to this value is
called the Nyquist frequency. As mentioned earlier, this
happens due to the time signal being real only and the
transform beyond the Nyquist frequency is the complex
conjugate of the transform before this frequency. Thus, N
real points are transformed to N=2 complex points.
Knowing the sampling rate DT, we can compute the
Nyquist frequency from the expression:
fNquist¼
1
2DT
ð6:142Þ
Numerical implementation of the DFT is the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT). There are a number of issues in
numerical implementation of the DFT. These are not
discussed here. However, the interested reader is encour-
aged to refer to many classic textbooks, such as Chatﬁeld
[5] and Sneddon [6], to obtain more information on these
aspects. In all of the wave-propagation examples given in
Figure 6.21
Time–signal discritization for discrete Fourier
transforms (DFTs).
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
133

this text book, the FFT is used to transform the signal
back and forth between time and the frequency.
In order to see the differences in the different trans-
form representations, the same rectangular pulse is again
used here. There are two parameters on which the
accuracy of the transforms obtained from the DFT
depends, namely the sampling rate DT and the time
window parameter N. Figures 6.22 and 6.23 show the
transforms obtained for various sampling rates DT and
the time window parameter N. From these ﬁgures, we can
clearly see the periodicity about the Nyqusit frequency.
For a given time window N, the ﬁgures show that the
frequency spacing increases with the decrease in the
sampling rate. In addition, the Nyquist frequency shifts
to a higher value. Next, for a given sampling rate DT, the
time window is varied through the parameter N. In this
case, the Nyquist frequency does not change. However,
for larger N, the frequency spacing becomes smaller and
hence we get a denser frequency distribution.
6.3.2 Wave characteristics in 1-D waveguides
In this section, we will describe the different types of
waves that are associated with 1-D waveguides. The
general procedure to determine the wave characteristics
is to ﬁrst establish the governing partial differential
equation of motion. This equation is transformed to the
Fourier domain by using a forward FFT. The resulting
equation is then solved to determine the wave para-
meters, such as wavenumbers, phase speeds and group
speeds. Determination of these parameters will even-
tually lead to the solutions for displacements, velocities
and accelerations. Before outlining the procedure in
greater detail, ﬁrst a few wave propagation terminologies
are introduced:
(a) Waveguide. Any structural element is called a
waveguide as it guides the wave in a particular
manner. For example, a rod essentially supports
only the axial motion and hence it is called an
axial or longitudinal waveguide. In the case of a
beam, only a bending motion is possible and hence
the beam is called a ﬂexural waveguide. In the case
of shafts, the only possible motion is a ‘twist’ and
hence they are known as torsional waveguides. In the
case of a laminated composite beam, due to the
stiffness coupling both axial and ﬂexural motions
are possible. In general, if there are n highly coupled
governing partial differential equations, then such a
waveguide can support n different motions.
(b) Wavenumber. This is a frequency-dependent para-
meter which determines the following: (1) whether
the wave is propagating or non-propagating or will
Figure 6.22
Comparison of the fast-Fourier transform (FFT)
and a continuous transform for a sampling rate DT of 1 ms.
Figure 6.23
Comparison of the fast-Fourier transform (FFT)
and a continuous transform for various sampling rates.
134
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

propagate after a certain frequency; (2) the type of
wave – dispersive or non-dispersive. Non-dispersive
waves are those that retain their shapes as they
propagate,
while
dispersive
waves
completely
change their shapes as they propagate. That is, if
the wavenumber (k) is expressed as a linear function
of frequency (o), say k ¼ ao, then the waves will be
non-dispersive in nature. Wavenumber in rods and in
general for most second-order systems will be of this
form and hence the waves in such waveguides will be
non-dispersive in nature. However, if the wave num-
ber is of the form k ¼ aon, the waves will essentially
be dispersive. Such a behavior can be seen in higher-
order systems such as beams and plates. The plot of
wavenumber with frequency is usually referred to as
a spectrum relation.
(c) Phase speeds. These are the speeds of the individual
particles that propagate in the structure. They are
related to the wavenumber through the relation
Cp ¼ o=k. If the waves are non-dispersive in nature
(that is, k ¼ ao), then the phase speeds are constant
and independent of frequency. Conversely, if the
phase speeds are constant, then such a system is a
non-dispersive system.
(d) Group speeds. During the propagation of waves,
groups of particles travel in bunches. The speeds of
each of these groups are called the group speeds of
the wave. They are mathematically expressed as
Cg ¼ do=dk. Again here, for a non dispersive sys-
tem, the group speeds are constant and independent
of frequency. The time of arrival of all of the waves
will be based on this speed. The plot of phase/group
speeds with frequency is called the dispersion
relation.
6.3.2.1 Wave equation for a generalized
higher-order anisotropic laminated composite beam
For characterization of the waves, it is ﬁrst necessary to
obtain the wave equation for the waveguide under con-
sideration. Here, we derive the wave equation for the
most complicated 1-D structure, namely the unsymmetric
higher-order laminated composite beam. From this equa-
tion, various simpliﬁcations can be made to obtain the
governing wave equations for different waveguide mod-
els, such as elementary isotropic rods and beams, higher-
order rods and beams, elementary laminated composite
beams and higher-order laminated composite beams.
There are different methods of obtaining the governing
wave equation for a given waveguide. Here, we resort to
using energy methods for deriving the wave equation.
This is because the energy methods, through Hamilton’s
Principle, will not only give the required wave equa-
tion but also the associated force boundary conditions.
Although this method is explained in greater detail in
Chapter 7 (Section 7.5.5), here we will just mention the
procedure and obtain the governing differential equa-
tion. We make the following assumptions for deriving
the governing equations: (1) the structure is assumed
to behave linearly and the deformations are assumed to
be small; (2) the structural material is also assumed
to behave linearly; (3) the material is homogenous.
Developing the governing equations from Hamilton’s
Principle requires the energy associated with the
motion, namely the strain energy and kinetic energy,
to be expressed in terms of displacements. For this, it is
required to make some assumptions on the displacement
ﬁeld, based on the physics of the problem. Since the
higher-order laminated composite beam is used as an
example for deriving the governing equation of motions,
one can expect a high degree of axial–ﬂexural shear
coupling in the member. Without loss of any generality,
we can assume the displacement ﬁeld for a laminated
composite beam as:
uðx; tÞ ¼ u0ðx; tÞ  zfðx; tÞ
wðx; tÞ ¼ w0ðx; tÞ þ zcðx; tÞ
ð6:143Þ
Here, u0 and w0 are the mid-plane axial and transverse
displacements of the laminate, x and z are the axial and
depthwise coordinates, f is the slope and c represents
the lateral motion due to the Poisson’s ratio effect.
These displacements are pictorially represented in
Figure 6.24. Next, strains are calculated by using the
strain displacement relations (Equation 6.27). These are
given by:
exx ¼ @u0
@x  z @f
@x ;
ezz ¼ c;
gxz ¼ f þ @w0
@x þ z @c
@x
ð6:144Þ
z
x
y
u
w
ψ
ψ
φ
Figure 6.24
Cross-section of a beam and its degrees or freedom.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
135

The stresses are then expressed in terms of displacement
by using the plane-stress-reduced constitutive law in the
x–z plane as:
sxx ¼ Q11exx þ Q13ezz ¼ Q11
@u0
@x  z @f
@x


þ Q13c
szz ¼ Q13exx þ Q33ezz ¼ Q13
@u0
@x  z @f
@x


þ Q33c
txz ¼ Q55 f þ @w0
@x þ z @c
@x


ð6:145Þ
Here, Qij are the plane stress reduced material constants
that depend on the Young’s modulus and the Poisson’s
ratio. For the present problem in question, they are given
by:
Q11 ¼ 4Q66cos2ysin2y þ cos2yðQ11cos2y þ Q12sin2yÞ
þ sin2yðQ12cos2y þ Q22sin2yÞ
Q13 ¼ ðQ13cos2y  Q23sin2yÞ;
Q33 ¼ Q33;
Q55 ¼ ðQ55cos2y þ Q44sin2yÞ
ð6:146Þ
The strain energy stored in the structure is evaluated by
using a volume integral given by
U ¼ 1
2
ð
V
sxxexx þ szzezz þ txzgxz
!
"
dV
ð6:147Þ
where V is the volume of the structure. In a similar
manner, we can write the kinetic energy as:
T ¼ 1
2
ð
V
rð_u2 þ _w2ÞdV ¼ 1
2
ð
v
r½ð_u0  z _fÞ2 þ ð _w0 þ zcÞ2dV
ð6:148Þ
where all quantities with a ‘dot’ on their heads represent
the time derivatives. Hamiltion’s principle, which states
that the minimization of the net energy gives the alter-
nate statement of equilibrium, is mathematically repre-
sented as follows (more details are given in the next
chapter):
d
ðt2
t1
T  U
ð
Þdt ¼ 0
ð6:149Þ
Substituting the energies given in Equations (6.147) and
(6.148) into Equation (6.149) and minimizing, we get
the following four highly coupled partial differential
equations corresponding to four degrees of freedom,
namely u0; w0; f and c. These are given by:
I0
@2u0
@t2  I1
@2f
@t2  A11
@2u0
@x2 þ B11
@2f
@x2  A13
@c
@x ¼ 0
I0
@2w0
@t2 þ I1
@2c
@t2  A55
@2w0
@x2  @f
@x


 B55
@2c
@x2 ¼ 0
I2
@2f
@t2  I1
@2u0
@t2  A55
@w0
@x  f


 B55
@c
@x
þ B11
@2u0
@x2  D11
@2f
@x2 þ B13
@c
@x ¼ 0
I2
@2c
@t2 þ I1
@2w0
@t2 þ A13
@u0
@x  B13
@f
@x þ A33c
 B55
@2w0
@x2  @f
@x


 D55
@2c
@x2 ¼ 0
ð6:150Þ
Here, I0; I1 and I2 represent the inertial constants, while
Aij; Bij and Dij represent the stiffness constants, given by:
½Aij; Bij; Dij ¼
X
i
ð
ziþ1
zi
Qij½1; z; z2bdz; ½I0; I1; I2
¼
X
i
ð
ziþ1
zi
r½1; z; z2bdz
ð6:151Þ
The above highly coupled equations represent a compli-
cated set of partial differential equations that are very
difﬁcult to solve in the time domain. This complexity is
due to the material construction of the laminate which
represents all possible stiffness and inertial couplings,
namely the axial-shear-bending–lateral contraction. How-
ever, we will not try to solve this equation straightaway.
We will reduce the above equations to a simpler isotropic
waveguide devoid of stiffness or inertial coupling and get
an insight of the wave behavior before analyzing the above
system. This will also enable us to compare the behavior
of waves in elementary waveguides as opposed to higher-
order waveguides.
6.3.2.2 Wave propagation in elementary isotropic rods
Rods are structural waveguides that support only the
axial motion uðx; tÞ. Equation (6.150) can be reduced to
a wave equation governing the motion of rods by
assuming the following:
E1 ¼ E2 ¼ E;
n12 ¼ n21 ¼ n;
y ¼ 0;
c ¼ n @u
@x
136
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

On substituting the above into Equations (6.146 and
6.151), the material constants and the stiffness coefﬁ-
cients become:
Q11 ¼ Q11 ¼
E
1  n2 ;
Q13 ¼ Q13 ¼
nE
1  n2 ;
Q55 ¼ Q55 ¼
E
2ð1 þ nÞ
A11 ¼
EA
1  n2 ;
A13 ¼ nEA
1  n2 ¼ A33;
B11 ¼ B55 ¼ B13 ¼ 0
I0 ¼ rA;
I1 ¼ I2 ¼ 0;
D55 ¼ 0;
D11 ¼ EI
Here, E and r are the Young’s modulus and density of the
material and A and I are the area and moment of inertia
of the cross-section. In substituting these into Equation
(6.150), the bending and axial motions are decoupled and
we get the following equations:
rA @2u0
@t2  EA @2u0
@x2 ¼ 0
u0ðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
^unðx; onÞeiont
ð6:152Þ
rA @2w0
@t2  A55
@2w0
@x2  @f
@x


¼ 0
ð6:153Þ
 A55
@w0
@x  f


 EI @2f
@x2 ¼ 0
ð6:154Þ
Differentiating Equation (6.154) with respect to x and
substituting
this
into
Equation
(6.153)
and
using
f ¼ @w0=@x, we get the following governing differential
equation for the elementary beam:
rA @2w0
@t2 þ EI @4w0
@x4 ¼ 0
ð6:155Þ
For wave analysis in elementary rods, we will use only
Equation (6.152). We begin the analysis by transforming
the governing wave equation to the Fourier domain by
using the forward DFT. This can be done by assuming
the solution for axial displacement in the spectral form
as:
u0ðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
^unðx; onÞeiont
ð6:156Þ
In the above equation, ^un are the frequency-dependent
Fourier coefﬁcients and are also a function of the spatial
coordinates. In the rest of the sections in this part, the
quantities with a ‘‘hat’’ represent the frequency-domain
quantity; on is the circular frequency and i ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
.
Equation
(6.156),
when
substituted
into
Equation
(6.152), reduces the partial differential equation into a
set of N ordinary differential equations with constant
coefﬁcients, which is given by:
EA d2^un
dx2 þ rAon
2^un ¼ 0
ð6:157Þ
Here, the summation sign is removed as it is implied. The
above equation has a solution of the form ^un ¼ AneikLnx.
Here, kLn is called the wavenumber of the wave in
question and in the present case it is the longitudinal
wavenumber of the elementary rod. Substituting the
above solution into Equation (6.157), we get:
ðEAkLn
2 þ rAon
2ÞAneikLnx ¼ 0
Since the system is second order, we will have two roots,
one representing the forward moving or incident wave
and the other representing the backward moving or
reﬂected wave. From the above equation, we can get
the longitudinal wavenumbers for a rod as:
kLn ¼ o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rA
EA
r
ð6:158Þ
The spectrum relation, i.e. the relation between the
wavenumber and frequency, is shown in Figure 6.26
below. Hence, the solution for Equation (6.157) is
given by:
^un ¼ AneikLnx þ BneikLnx
ð6:159Þ
The constants An and Bn require to be determined from
the boundary conditions of the problem. The ﬁrst term in
the above equation represents the forward-moving wave
traveling with a wavenumber of þkLn and the second
term represents the backward-moving or reﬂected wave
traveling with a wavenumber of kLn. Hence, the total
solution is the superposition of both incident and
reﬂected waves. The following are some of the aspects
on the behavior of waves in rods:
 The wavenumber is fully ‘real’ and hence the long-
itudinal waves in rods are propagating.
 The Spectrum relation (relation between the wave-
number and the frequency) is linear. Hence, the phase and
group speeds (Cp ¼ o=kLn ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E=r
p
¼ do=dkLn ¼ Cg)
are equal. When such a condition exists, the waves are
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
137

termed Non-dispersive. The main characteristic of such
waves are that they do not change their shape as they
propagate. In such a system, the reﬂections from the
boundary can be easily identiﬁed and hence have great
utility in applications such as identiﬁcation of ‘damage’.
One can visualize the wave nature in rods by considering
an inﬁnite rod. For this system, the second term in
Equation (6.159) does not exist as there will be no
reﬂections from an inﬁnite rod. Hence, we can write
the displacement ﬁeld as:
^un ¼ AneikLnx
The constant An can be determined from the force
boundary condition. That is, if the force, FðtÞ, or its
frequency-domain counterpart, ^FðoÞ ¼ EA d^u=dx, are
known at some point, say at x ¼ x0, then we can write
the displacement ﬁeld as:
^unðx; oÞ ¼
eikLnx
eikLnx0


^Fn
ð6:160Þ
We have actually written the response as:
Output ¼ ðTransfer functionÞ  Input
The term within the bracket in Equation (6.160) repre-
sents the transfer function. Obtaining the transfer function
(also called the Frequency Response Function (FRF)) is
one of the fundamental advantages of the spectral analysis,
which enables this technique to be used in the solution of
the inverse problems, such as Force Identiﬁcation (FI) or
System Identiﬁcation (SI) problems.
The non-dispersive nature of the waves in rods is dis-
played in Figure 6.25, wherein the propagation of a
triangular impulse in an inﬁnite rod shows that the proﬁle
of the incident wave is maintained. The general proce-
dure of using spectral analysis is as follows:
 First, the force is transformed to the Fourier domain
by using a forward FFT.
 The frequency, the real and the imaginary parts of the
force spectrum are read and stored.
 The transfer function is evaluated at each frequency
and at the required spatial point.
 The obtained transfer function is convolved with the
load to get the displacement spectrum.
 The velocity and acceleration spectra are obtained by
multiplying the displacement spectrum by io and
o2, respectively.
 Finally, the time-domain response can be obtained by
taking the inverse FFT on the obtained frequency
response.
Figure 6.25 is obtained in this way. One of the advantages
of the spectral approach is that one can view both the time-
and frequency-domain responses in a single analysis and
the transfer function is a direct byproduct of the approach.
Using Equation (6.159) and knowing the incident
wave, one can construct the reﬂection responses due to
interaction of the incident wave with various boundaries.
These are extensively dealt in Doyle [7].
Some of the properties of propagating non-dispersive
signals are as follows:
(a) Waves travel with constant speed and hence do not
change their shapes.
(b) The given time signal requires proper sampling with
an appropriate time window. If the time window is
small, due to induced periodicity of the wave intro-
duced as a result of using spectral analysis, the waves
from the neighboring window will start propagating
from the left, distorting the overall response. Hence,
the time window is chosen so that (1) there is enough
room for propagation of the signal and (2) since
there is a connection between the time window and
the distance the wave can move, the window size is
to be determined by the slowest traveling component
x=0
x=100
x=200
0
500
1000
1500
Time (µs)
Figure 6.25
Non-dispersive nature of waves in an inﬁnite rod.
138
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

and not the fastest. The time window can be
increased by either increasing the number of points
N or by decreasing the sampling rate DT.
6.3.2.3 Wave propagation in elementary
isotropic beams:
Unlike rods, beams represent the fourth-order system in
space and hence it can be expected that the wave
behavior be much more complex. The beam analysis
can be carried out on similar lines to those for rods. That
is, we begin with the governing differential equation,
which is given by Equation (6.155). We assume that the
spectral form of the solution is as follows:
wðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
^wnðx; onÞeiont
ð6:161Þ
Substituting Equation (6.161) into the governing equa-
tion (6.155), the governing PDE reduces to a set of
ODEs, which is given by:
EI d4^wn
dx4  rAo2^wn ¼ 0
ð6:162Þ
The above equation is a constant-coefﬁcient ODE
and hence we can assume a solution of the type
^wn ¼ AneikBnx. Since the system is fourth order, there
will be four wavenumbers. Using this in Equation
(6.162), we get all of the four wavenumbers as:
kB1n ¼ ibn;
kB2n ¼ ibn;
kB3n ¼ bn;
kB4n ¼ bn
bn
4 ¼ on
2 rA
EI
ð6:163Þ
Clearly, the wavenumber is a nonlinear function of
frequency and hence such waves changes their shapes
as they propagate and so they are called a Dispersive
wave system. From Equation (6.163), it is clear that the
ﬁrst two modes are propagating, while the last two modes
are damped or evanescent modes. That is, the waves, in
addition to being dispersive, attenuate as they propagate.
The spectrum relation is shown in Figure 6.26. The phase
and group speeds are given by:
Cp ¼ o=kBn ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃo
p
EI
rA

0:25
;
Cg ¼ do=dkBn ¼ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃo
p
EI
rA

0:25
Cg ¼ 2Cp
ð6:164Þ
From the above relations, we see that, unlike rods, the
phase and group speeds are different and are functions of
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–40
25
50
75
100
Elementary rod
Elementary beam – mode2
Elementary beam – mode1
Real
Imaginary
Frequency, ν (kHz)
Wavenumber
Figure 6.26
Spectrum relationships for an elementary rods and beams.
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
139

the frequency. That is, different frequency components
of the signal have different speeds. This is one of the
characteristics of the dispersive system. The solution of
the beam system is given by:
^wn ¼ Aneibnx þ Bnebnx þ Cneþibnx þ Dnebnx
ð6:165Þ
Here, the ﬁrst two terms in the above equation represent
the forward-moving wave while the last two terms
represent the backward-moving wave. As in a rod, the
total solution is obtained by superposition of two solu-
tions. If one is dealing with an inﬁnite beam, the last two
terms in equation (6.165) need not be considered. Using
the above equation, the interaction of the incident wave
with various boundaries can be investigated. Further
details on these aspects can be found in Doyle [7].
While dealing with dispersive signals such as those
occurring in beams, the following are some signal
processing aspects that one has to consider:
 The shape of the time signal changes as it propagates
and hence it is not possible to identify the original
proﬁle.
 The speed of the wave changes with the frequency
and hence the low-frequency components take a long
time to arrive and hence the signals have long tails.
 When the time window is small, propagation of the
signal over long distances causes signal distortion due
to the neighboring window ‘coming from the left’.
This problem is called a wraparound problem. This is
due to the low-frequency components occurring ﬁrst,
instead of the high-frequency components. This pro-
blem can be avoided by any of the following: (1) by
‘padding’ the time window by zeros; (2) by using
what is called band-pass ﬁltering – that is, all of the
frequency components below a certain frequency
would be blocked; (3) by using an N-point moving
average, wherein the low-frequency components are
averaged by using a suitable least-squares approach;
(4) by increasing the time-window size by suitably
choosing the sample rate and the number of FFT
points.
6.3.2.4 Wave propagation in elementary
composite beams
Unlike an elementary isotropic beam, a laminated com-
posite beam exhibits stiffness coupling due to unsymme-
trical ply lay up sequences. Due to this, the structure will
exhibit bending–axial coupling. Hence, such beams can
undergo three different motions, namely axial, bending
(transverse) and rotation. To perform the wave analysis,
we need the governing equation, which can be obtained
from Equation (6.150) by ‘proper’ reduction. Since the
beam is still elementary, the shear deformation, rotational
inertia and lateral displacement due to Poisson’s ratio,
are not considered. The governing equation can be
obtained by setting all of the terms associated with the
c motion and its derivates to zero in Equation (6.150). In
addition, in the third part of this equation the contribution
of rotational inertia by the axial degree of freedom is
assumed to be zero (that is, the I1@2u=@t2 term) and by
setting f ¼ @w=@x, we get the following two coupled
governing partial differential equation, which are given by:
I0
@2u0
@t2  A11
@2u0
@x2 þ B11
@3w0
@x3 ¼ 0
I0
@2w0
@t2  B11
@3u0
@x3 þ D11
@4w0
@x4 ¼ 0
ð6:166Þ
From the above equations, we can clearly see the stiff-
ness coupling through the term B11. If this term is zero,
that is, for a symmetric lay up sequence, the axial and
transverse motions will become uncoupled and the beha-
vior would be very similar to that of isotropic rods and
beams, respectively. The wave behavior for this coupled
system can be determined by representing the two
motions in the spectral form, which is given by:
u0ðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
^unðx; oÞeiont;
w0ðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
^wnðx; oÞeiont
ð6:167Þ
Substituting the above into Equation (6.166) reduces the
governing PDE to a set of coupled ODEs with constant
coefﬁcients, which is given by:
 I0o2^un  A11
d2^un
dx2 þ B11
d3^w
dx3 ¼ 0
 I0o2^w  B11
d3^u
dx3 þ D11
d4^w
dx4 ¼ 0
ð6:168Þ
The solutions for axial and transverse displacements will
be of the types:
^un ¼ U0eiknx;
^wn ¼ W0eiknx
The same wavenumber appears in both the solutions
to retain the phase information during propagation. By
140
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

using the above solution, Equation (6.168) can be written
in matrix form as:
ðCLkn
2  on
2Þ
i CCn3
on
kn
3
i CC3
on
kn
3
CBn
4
on2 kn
4  on
2
2
664
3
775
U0
W0

 
¼
0
0

 
ð6:169Þ
Here, CL and CBn are the longitudinal and bending wave
speeds, while CCn is the wave speed due to stiffness
coupling. These are given by:
CL ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
A11
I0
r
;
CBn ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
on
p
D11
I0

1
4
;
CCn ¼ on
B11
I0

1
3
ð6:170Þ
For obtaining the nontrivial solution, it is necessary that
the determinant of the above matrix be zero. In doing so,
we get a sixth-order characteristic equation to solve for
the wavenumber kn, which is given by:
ð1  rÞkn
6  kLn
2kn
4  kBn
4kn
2 þ kLn
2kBn
4 ¼ 0 ð6:171Þ
In the above expression, r is a parameter that represents
the stiffness coupling between the axial and ﬂexural
motions, while kLn and kBn are the longitudinal and
ﬂexural wavenumbers in the absence of stiffness cou-
pling. These are given by:
r ¼
B112
A11D11
;
kLn ¼ on
CL
;
kBn ¼ on
CBn
ð6:172Þ
Equation (6.171) is the sixth-degree polynomial equation
corresponding to three motions, namely the axial, bend-
ing and rotational displacements. Hence, the solution of
Equation (6.168) will have six constants, three of which
represent the forward-moving components, while the
other three represent the reﬂected-wave components.
Before attempting to solve the above equation, we can
easily see that for a symmetric ply lay up r vanishes and
hence there is no stiffness coupling. Equation (6.171)
then becomes:
ðkn
2  kLn
2Þðkn
4  kBn
4Þ ¼ 0
That is, the bending and axial motions become uncoupled
and the solutions of these are the same as those of the
rods and beams described earlier, with EA giving way
to A11, EI giving way to D11 and rA making way for I0.
The solution of Equation (6.171) is quite complex and
requires numerical solution. However, it reduces to sol-
ving a cubic equation as the forward- and backward-
moving waves always occur in pairs. By looking at the
characteristic equation, one cannot say anything about
the behavior of any wave mode. Hence, it is quite likely
that the axial mode is propagating and hence would be
real, while one of the bending modes is likely to be
complex, as in the case of an isotropic beam. One of the
disadvantages of a numerical solution is to keep track of
the mode type. That is, while obtaining the solution, one
would not know what mode (bending or axial in this
case) that one is solving for. However, there are many
numerical methods which will look for only the real roots
or complex roots separately. In the present case, we look
for the real root, say
ﬃﬃﬃa
p , which we will designate as the
longitudinal mode. The other roots can be found easily
by ‘synthetic division’. Hence, we can now write the
wavenumbers as:
k1n ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
an
p
; k2n; k3n
¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðkLrn  anÞ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðkLrn þ anÞ2  4ða2
n  kBrnÞ
q
r
kLrn ¼
kLn2
ð1  rÞ ;
kBrn ¼
kBn4
ð1  rÞ
ð6:173Þ
It is very difﬁcult to ascertain its behavior by looking at
the expression. One thing which is very clear is that the
wave behavior will certainly change with the stiffness
coupling. In order to investigate this, we plot the spec-
trum relation and the dispersion relations for an AS/3501
graphite–epoxy laminated composite beam. Ten plies are
considered in three different ply stacking sequences to
give different degrees of stiffness coupling. The thickness
of each ply is assumed to be 1 mm. The three different
stacking sequences and their values of stiffness coupling
are given as follows:
½010!r ¼ 0;
½05=302
0603!r ¼ 0:312;
½05=905!r ¼ 0:574
The ﬁrst case is the symmetric one wherein there is no
stiffness coupling, while the last represents the case of
a crossply laminate, wherein the stiffness coupling is
maximum. These plots are shown in Figures 6.27 and
6.28, respectively.
In the spectrum relation (Figure 6.27), the real part of the
wavenumber is plotted above the zero and is imaginary
below zero to identify the propagating and evanescent
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
141

components. The axial wavenumber behavior is almost
nondispersive for most of the frequency spectrum. How-
ever, a mild dispersion is introduced at very high fre-
quencies. This is because the dispersive components
from the bending motion, normally introduced through
stiffness coupling, are small. This is the reason why the
stiffness coupling parameter r has a negligible effect on
the longitudinal wavenumber. The ﬂexural-mode beha-
vior is highly dispersive as in the isotropic case; however,
the inﬂuence of the stiffness coupling parameter r is quite
signiﬁcant and is shown by altering the slope of the
curve. The slope is smaller for a smaller r and hence the
speeds will also change with the coupling parameter.
This is shown in Figure 6.28. The general tendency is
that the stiffness coupling reduces the speeds, both for
axial as well as the ﬂexural case. In the axial case, it is
seen that a maximum of 26 % reduction in speeds can be
achieved, while the reduction in the ﬂexural speed at 50
kHz is about 46 %. More details of this analysis can be
found in Roy Mahapatra et al. [8].
A similar analysis can be done for higher-order wave-
guides, where additional constraints are introduced in the
0
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
k2h
k1h
k3h
Real
Imaginary
Frequency (kHz)
Non-dimensional wavenumber
r = 0.0
r = 0.312
r = 0.574
Figure 6.27
Spectrum relationships for elementary composite beam.
0       10     20      30     40      50     60      70      80     90     100
Frequency (kHz)
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.2
0
Non-dimensional group speed
Cg1 /C0, r = 0.0
Cg2 /C0, r = 0.0
r = 0.574
r = 0.312
r = 0.574
r = 0.312
Figure 6.28
Dispersion relationships for an elementary composite beam.
142
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

elementary model. For example, when the shear defor-
mation is introduced in the elementary-beam model, the
shear strains do not vanish and as a result the beam slope
cannot be obtained from the transverse displacement.
Hence, the addition of shear constraints will cause an
alteration in the behavior of the evanescent wave of the
elementary beam. This wave, which starts as a nonpro-
pagating wave at low frequencies, becomes propagating
after a certain frequency. This frequency is called the
cut-off frequency, where the wavenumber traverses from
imaginary to real. Details of the wave behavior in a
higher-order isotropic beam waveguide can be found
in Gopalakrishnan et al. [9], while the same for a com-
posite waveguide can be found in Roy Mahapatra and
Gopalakrishnan [10]. In the case of a longitudinal wave-
guide, the higher-order effects are incorporated through
the introduction of a lateral displacement (also called a
lateral contraction) due to the Poisson’s ratio effect in
the elementary-rod model. This introduces an additional
motion and as a result, increases the order of the
governing differential equation. The behavior of waves
in an isotropic higher-order rod waveguide can be found
in Martin et al. [11]. In the next subsection, the behavior
of the waves in a higher-order laminated composite beam
is discussed, wherein, in addition to the shear deforma-
tion, lateral contraction is also introduced. Hence, one
can expect a four-way coupling.
6.3.2.5 Wave propagation in higher-order laminated
composite beams
Here, we consider the most complicated case of a
higher-order laminated composite waveguide wherein
the higher-order effects, through shear deformation and
lateral contraction via the Poisson’s ratio effect, are
introduced in the mathematical model. Hence, there are
four independent motions for this beam, namely the axial
(u), transverse (w), rotational (f) and lateral contraction
(c) motions.
The displacement ﬁeld for this case is given in
Equation (6.143) and the four-coupled governing equa-
tions for this displacement ﬁeld are given by Equation
(6.150). The wave analysis, as before, begins by repre-
senting the different motions in their spectral forms
and converting the coupled PDEs to a set of coupled
ODEs. As in the earlier cases, these ODEs have con-
stant coefﬁcients and hence one can assume exponential
solutions. Following the procedure employed for deter-
mining the wavenumbers in an elementary composite
beam, we can form the eight-order polynomial charac-
teristic equation for the solution of wavenumbers. The
eight-order polynomial is obtained from the following
equation:
By setting the determinant of the above matrix to zero,
the polynomial of the 8th order is obtained. Clearly, there
is a four-way stiffness coupling, namely the axial-trans-
verse–shear-lateral contraction coupling. The behaviors
of these modes are difﬁcult to estimate unless one plots
these. One can expect cut-off frequencies in the shear and
lateral contraction modes, which can be obtained by
looking at the frequencies where the wavenumber goes
to zero. The cut-off frequencies associated with the
contraction and shear modes are given by:
oc  cont ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
A33
I2ð1  s22Þ
s
;
oc  shear ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
A55
I2ð1  s22Þ
s
ð6:175Þ
Since A33 > A55, the shear cut-off frequency occurs ear-
lier than the contractional cut-off frequency. Figure 6.29
gives the spectrum relation for a higher-order laminated
composite beam. Clearly, the longitudinal mode becomes
ðkn2  kLn2Þ
0
s1s2kLn2
ksn
 rkLnkn2
ksn2


i A13
A11
kn
0
ðkn2  ksn2Þ
ikn
on2I1
A55
 B55
A55
kn
2


rksn2kn2
kLnkBn2  s1s2ksn


ikn
s1
2  1  ksn2kn2
kBn4


iðB55  B13Þkn2
A55


i A13
A33
kn
on2I1
A33
 B55
A33
kn
2


iðB55  B13Þkn2
A33


on2I2
A33
 1  D55
A33
kn2


2
6666666666664
3
7777777777775
U0
W0
f0
c0
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
;
¼
0
0
0
0
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
;
ð6:174Þ
Introductory Concepts in Modeling
143

dispersive at higher frequencies. The ﬁrst bending mode
is always propagating, while the shear mode is evanes-
cent to start with and becomes propagating after the shear
cut-off frequency. If the elementary model is used in such
cases, the dynamics of the beam motion will be grossly
misrepresented. The contractional mode is again evanes-
cent to start with and becomes propagating beyond the
contractional cut-off frequency. Hence, it can be con-
cluded that higher-order effects are more pronounced at
high frequencies and if these properties are not used at
such frequencies, the responses predicted will no longer
be reliable.
REFERENCES
1. G. Arfken, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 3rd Edn,
Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA (1985).
2. R.M. Jones, Mechanics of Composites Materials, McGraw-
Hill, New York, NY, USA (1975).
3. F.K. Chang, ‘Built-in structural health monitoring’, in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Smart
Materials, Structures and Systems: ISSS–SPIE–1999, A.
Selvarajan, A.R. Upadhya and P.D. Mangalgiri (Eds), Allied
Publishers, New Delhi, India, pp. 44–49 (1999).
4. S.W. Tsai, Introduction to Composite Materials, Technomic,
CT, USA (1980).
5. C. Chatﬁeld, The Analysis of Time Series: An Introduction,
Chapman Hall, London, UK (1984).
6. I.N. Sneddon, Fourier Transforms, McGraw-Hill, New York,
NY, USA (1951).
7. J.F. Doyle, Wave Propagation In Structures, Springer-Verlag,
New York, NY, USA (1997).
8. D. Roy Mahapatra, S. Gopalakrishnan and T.S. Sankar,
‘Spectral element based solutions for wave propagation ana-
lysis of multiply connected unsymmetric laminated composite
beams’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 237, 819–836 (2000).
9. S. Gopalakrishnan, M. Martin and J.F. Doyle, ‘A matrix
methodology for spectral analysis of wave propagation in
multiple connected Timoshenko beams’, Journal of Sound
and Vibration, 158, 11–24 (1992).
10. D. Roy Mahapatra and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Axial-shear-
bending coupled wave propagation in thick composite
beams’ Composite Structures, 59, 67–88 (2003).
11. M. Martin, S. Gopalakrishnan and J.F. Doyle, ‘Wave
propagation in multiply connected deep waveguides’, Jour-
nal of Sound and Vibration, 174, 521–538 (1994).
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
0       20       40       60      80      100    120     140    160     180     200
Frequency (kHz)
Imaginary
Real
Non–dimensional wavenumber, k h
k3
k1
k6
k8
Figure 6.29
Spectrum relationships for a higher-order laminated composite beam.
144
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

7
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
7.1 INTRODUCTION
The behavior of any smart dynamic system is governed
by the equilibrium equation (Equation (6.49)) derived in
the last chapter. In addition, the obtained displacements
ﬁeld should satisfy the strain–displacement relationship
(Equation (6.27)) and a set of natural and kinematic
boundary conditions and initial conditions. Also, if the
system happens to be a laminated composite with an
embedded smart material patch, there will be electro-
mechanical/magnetomechanical
coupling
introduced
through the constitutive model. Obviously, these equa-
tions can be solved exactly only for a few typical cases
and for most problems one has to resort to approximate
numerical techniques to solve the governing equations.
Equation (6.49), as such, is not readily amenable for
numerical solutions. Hence, one needs alternate state-
ments of equilibrium equations that are more suited for
numerical solution. This is normally provided by the
variational statement of the problem.
Based on variational methods, there are two different
analysis philosophies: one is the displacement-based
analysis called the stiffness method, where the displace-
ments are treated as primary unknowns and the other is
the force-based analysis called the force method, where
internal forces are treated as primary unknowns. Both
these methods split up the given domain into many
subdomains (elements). In the stiffness method, a dis-
critized structure is reduced to a kinematically determi-
nate problem and the equilibrium of forces is enforced
between the adjacent elements. Since we begin the
analysis in terms of displacements, enforcement of com-
patibility of the displacements (strains) is a non-issue as
it will be automatically satisﬁed. The ﬁnite element
method falls under this category. In the force method,
the problem is reduced to a statically determinate struc-
ture and compatibility of displacements is enforced
between adjacent elements. Since the primary unknowns
are forces, the enforcement of equilibrium is not neces-
sary as it is ensured. Unlike the stiffness method, where
there is only one way to make a structure kinematically
determinate (by suppressing all the degrees of freedom),
there are many possibilities to reduce the problem into a
statically determinate structure in the force method.
Hence, the stiffness methods are more popular.
The variational statement is the equilibrium equation
in the integral form. This statement is often referred to as
the weak form of the governing equation. This alternate
statement of equilibrium for structural systems is pro-
vided by the energy functional governing the system. The
objective here is to obtain an approximate solution of
the dependent variable (say, the displacements u in the
case of structural systems) of the form:
uðx; y; z; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
anðtÞcnðx; y; zÞ
ð7:1Þ
where anðtÞ are the unknown time-dependent coefﬁcients
to be determined through some minimization procedure
and cn are the spatial dependent functions that normally
satisfy the kinematic boundary conditions and not neces-
sarily the natural boundary conditions. There are differ-
ent energy theorems that give rise to different variational
statements of the problem and hence different approx-
imate methods can be formulated. The basis for formula-
tion of the different approximate methods is the Weighted
Residual Technique (WRT), where the residual (or error)
obtained by substituting the assumed approximate solu-
tion in the governing equation is weighted with a weight
function and integrated over the domain. Different types
of weighted functions give rise to different approximate
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

methods. The accuracy of the solution will depend upon
the number of terms used in Equation (7.1).
The different approximate methods again are too difﬁ-
cult to use in situations where the structures are complex.
To some extent, methods like the Rayleigh–Ritz method
[1], which involves minimization of the total energy to
determine the unknown constants in Equation (7.1), can
be applied to some complex problems. The main difﬁ-
culty here is to determine the functions cn, which are
called Ritz functions, and in this case, are too difﬁcult to
determine. However, if the domain is divided into num-
ber of subdomains, it is relatively easier to apply the
Rayleigh–Ritz method over each of these subdomains
and solutions of each are pieced together to obtain the
total solution. This, in essence, is the Finite Element
Method (FEM) and each of the subdomains are called the
elements of the ﬁnite element mesh. Although the FEM
is explained here as an assembly of Ritz solutions over
each subdomain, in principle all of the approximate
methods generated by the WRT, can be applied to each
subdomain. Hence, in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, the
complete WRT formulation and various other energy
theorems are given in detail. These theorems will then
be used to derive the discritized FE governing the equa-
tion of motion. This will be followed by formulation of
the basic building blocks used in the FEM, namely the
stiffness, mass and damping matrices. The main issues
relating to their formulation are discussed.
Even though variational methods enable us to get an
approximate solution to the problem, the latter is heavily
dependent upon the domain discritization. That is, in the
ﬁnite element technique, the structure under consideration
is subdivided into many small elements. In each of these
elements, the variation of the ﬁeld variables (in the case of
a structural problem, displacements) is assumed to be
polynomials of a certain order. Using this variation in
the weak form of the governing equation reduces it into a
set of simultaneous equations (in the case of static ana-
lysis) or highly coupled second-order ordinary differential
equations (in the case of dynamic analysis). If the stress or
strain gradients are high (for example, near a crack tip of a
cracked structure), then one needs very ﬁne mesh dis-
critization. In the case of wave propagation analysis, many
higher-order modes get excited due to the high-frequency
content of loading. At these frequencies, the wavelengths
are small and the mesh sizes should be of the order of
the wavelengths in order that the mesh edges do not act
as the ﬁxed boundaries and start reﬂecting waves from
these edges. These increase the problem size enormously.
Hence, the size of the mesh is an important parameter that
determines the accuracy of the solution.
Another important factor that determines the accuracy
of the Finite Element (FE) solution is the order of the
interpolating polynomial of the ﬁeld variables. For those
systems that is governed by the PDEs of orders higher
than two (for example, the Bernoulli–Euler beam and
classical plate), the assumed displacement ﬁeld should
not only satisfy displacement compatibility, but also the
slope compatibility at the interelement boundaries, since
the slopes are derived from displacements. This necessa-
rily requires higher-order interpolating polynomials.
Such elements are called C1 continuous elements. On
the other hand, for the same beam and plate systems, if
the shear deformation is introduced, then the slopes can
no longer be derived from the displacements and as a
result one can have the luxury of using lower-order
polynomials for displacements and slopes separately.
Such shear-deformable elements are called the C0 con-
tinuous elements. When such C0 elements are used for
beams and plates which are thin (where the shear
deformation is negligible), these elements cannot degen-
erate into C1 elements and as a result the solutions
obtained will be many orders smaller than the actual
solution. These are commonly referred to as shear locking
problems. Similarly, there is incompressible locking in
nearly incompressible materials when the Poisson’s ratio
tends to 0.5, membrane locking in curved members and
Poisson’s locking in higher-order rods. Such problems
where one or other forms of locking are present are
normally referred to as constrained media problems.
There are many different techniques that can be used
to alleviate locking [2]. These will be explained in detail
in the latter part of this chapter. One of the methods to
eliminate locking is to use the exact solution to the
governing differential equation as the interpolating poly-
nomial for the displacement ﬁeld. In many cases, it is not
easy to solve a dynamic problem that is governed by a
PDE exactly. In such cases, the equations are solved
exactly by ignoring the inertial part of the governing
equation. The resulting interpolating function will give
the exact static stiffness matrix (for point loads) and an
approximate mass matrix. These elements can be used
both in deep and thin structures and the user need not use
his judgment to determine whether locking is predomi-
nant or not. Use of these elements will substantially
reduce the problem size, especially in wave-propagation
analysis as these have super-convergent properties.
Hence, a complete section in this chapter is devoted to
the formulation of these super-convergent elements.
The super-convergent elements explained above still
do not provide accurate inertia distribution, which is
extremely
important
for
accurate
wave-propagation
146
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

analysis. This is because the mass matrix in the super-
convergent formulation is formulated using the exact
solution to the static part of the governing equation. This
approach can be extended to certain PDEs by transform-
ing the variables in the governing wave equation to the
frequency domain using the Discrete Fourier Transform
(DFT). In doing so, the time parameter is replaced by the
frequency and the governing PDE reduces to a set of
ODEs in the transformed domain, which is easier to
solve. The exact solutions to the governing equation in
the frequency domain are then used as interpolating
functions for element formulation. Such elements formu-
lated in the frequency domain are called the Spectral
Finite Elements (SFEs). An important aspect of SFEs are
that they give the exact dynamic stiffness matrix. Since
both the stiffness and the mass are exactly represented
in this formulation, the problem sizes are many orders
smaller than the conventional FE solution. Hence, the last
part of this chapter is exclusively devoted to describing
the spectral element formulation.
7.2 VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLES
This section begins with some basic deﬁnition of work,
complementary work, strain energy, complementary
strain energy and kinetic energy. These are necessary to
deﬁne the energy functional, which is the basis for any
ﬁnite element formulation. This will be followed by a
complete description of the WRT and its use in obtaining
many different approximate methods. Next, some basic
energy theorems, such as the Principle of Virtual Work
(PVW), Principle of Minimum Potential Energy (PMPE),
Rayleigh–Ritz procedure and Hamilton’s theorem for
deriving the governing equations of a system and their
associated boundary conditions, are explained. Using
Hamilton’s theorem, ﬁnite element equations are derived,
which is followed by derivation of stiffness and mass
matrices for some simple ﬁnite elements. Next, the mesh-
locking problem in FE formulations and their remedies
are explained, followed by the formulation procedures
for super-convergent ﬁnite elements. Next, the equation
solution in static and dynamic analysis is presented. The
chapter ends with a full review of Spectral Finite Element
(SFE) formulation.
7.2.1 Work and complimentary work
Consider a body under the action of a force system
described in a vectorial form as ^F ¼ Fxi þ Fyj þ Fzk,
where Fx, Fy and Fz are the components of force in the
three coordinate directions. These components can also
be time-dependent. Under the action of these forces, the
body undergoes inﬁnitesimal deformations, given by
d^u ¼ dui þ dvj þ dwk, where u, v and w are the compo-
nents of displacements in the three coordinate directions.
The work done is then given by the ‘dot’ product of force
and displacement vector:
dW ¼ ^F  d^u ¼ Fxdu þ Fydv þ Fzdw
ð7:2Þ
The total work done in deforming the body from the
initial state to the ﬁnial state is given by:
W ¼
ðu2
u1
^F  d^u
ð7:3Þ
where u2 is the ﬁnal deformation and u1 is the initial
deformation of the body. To understand this better, consi-
der a 1-D system under the action of a force Fx and
having an initial displacement of zero. Let the force vary
as a nonlinear function of displacement (u) given by
Fx ¼ kun, which is shown graphically in Figure 7.1.
Here, k and n are some known constants. To determine
the work done by the force, a small strip of length du is
considered in the lower portion of the curve shown in
Figure 7.1. The work done by the force is obtained by
substituting the force variation in Equation (7.3) and
integrating, which is given by:
W ¼ kunþ1
n þ 1 ¼ Fxu
n þ 1
ð7:4Þ
Figure 7.1
Deﬁnitions of work (‘area OAB’) and complimen-
tary work (‘area OBC’).
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
147

Alternatively, work can also be deﬁned as:
W ¼
ð
F2
F1
^u  d^F
ð7:5Þ
where, F1 and F2 are the initial and ﬁnal applied forces.
The above deﬁnition is normally referred to as Comple-
mentary Work. Again, by considering a 1-D system with
the
same
nonlinear
force–displacement
relationship
(Fx ¼ kun), we can write the displacement u as u ¼
ð1=kÞFð1=nÞ
x
. Substituting this into Equation (7.5) and
integrating, the complementary work can be written as:
W ¼
Fð1=nþ1Þ
x
kð1=n þ 1Þ ¼
Fxu
ð1=n þ 1Þ
ð7:6Þ
Obviously, W and W* are not the same although they
were obtained from the same curve. However, for the
linear case (n ¼ 1), they have the same value, given by
W ¼ W ¼ Fxu=2, which is nothing but the area under
the force–displacement curve. The deﬁnition of Work is
normally used in the stiffness formulation, while the
concept of Complementary Work is normally used in
the force method of analysis.
7.2.2 Strain energy, complimentary strain energy
and kinetic energy
Consider an elastic body subjected to a set of forces and
moments. The deformation process is governed by the
First Law of Thermodynamics, which states that the total
change in the energy (E) due to the deformation
process is equal to the sum of the total work done by
the elastic and inertial forces (WE) and the work done
due to head absorption (WH), that is:
E ¼ WE þ WH
If the thermal process is adiabatic, then WH ¼ 0. The
energies associated with the elastic and the inertial forces
are called the Strain Energy (U) and Kinetic Energy (T),
respectively. If the loads are gradually applied, the time-
dependency of the load can be ignored, which essentially
means that the kinetic energy T can be assumed to be
equal to zero. Hence, the change in the energy E ¼ U.
That is, the mechanical work done in deforming the
structure is equal to the change in the internal energy
(strain energy). When the structure behaves linearly and
the load is removed, the strain energy is converted back
to mechanical work.
To derive the expression for the strain energy, consider
a small element of volume dV of the structure under a
1-D state of stress, as shown in Figure 7.2. Let sxx be the
stress on the left face and sxx þ ð@sxx=@xÞdx be the stress
on the right face. Let Bx be the body force per unit volume
along the x-direction. The strain energy increment dU due
to the stresses sxx on face 1 and sxx þ ð@sxx=@xÞdx on
face 2 during inﬁnitesimal deformation du on face 1 and
dðu þ ð@u=@xÞdxÞ on face 2 is given by:
dU ¼ sxxdydzdu þ
sxx þ @sxx
@x dx


dydzd u þ @u
@x dx


þ Bxdydxdz
Simplifying and neglecting the higher-order terms, we
get:
dU ¼ sxxd @u
@x


dxdydz þ dudxdydz @sxx
@x þ Bx


The last term within the brackets is the equilibrium
equation, which is equal to zero. Hence, the incremental
strain energy now becomes:
dU ¼ sxxd @u
@x


dxdydz ¼ sxxdexxdV
ð7:7Þ
Now, we introduce the term called incremental Strain
Energy Density, which we deﬁne as:
dSD ¼ sxxdexx
Integrating the above expression over a ﬁnite strain, we
get:
SD ¼
ð
exx
0
sxxdexx
ð7:8Þ
dx
dz
dy
xx
xx
xx
dx
x
Figure 7.2
Elemental volume for computing the strain energy.
148
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Using the above expression in Equation (7.7) and inte-
grating it over the volume, we get
U ¼
ð
V
SDdV
ð7:9Þ
Similar to the deﬁnition of work and complementary
work, we can deﬁne complimentary strain energy density
and complimentary strain energy as:
U ¼
ð
V
S
DdV;
S
D ¼
ð
sxx
0
exxdsxx
ð7:10Þ
We can represent this graphically in a similar manner as
we did for work and complimentary work. This is shown
in Figure 7.3.
In this ﬁgure, the area of the region below the curve
represents the strain energy while the region above
the curve represents the complementary strain energy.
Since the scope of this chapter is limited to the Finite
Element Method, all of the theorems dealing with com-
plimentary strain energy will not be dealt with here.
Kinetic energy should also be considered in evaluating
the total energy if the inertial forces are important.
Inertial forces are predominant in time-dependent pro-
blems, where both loading and deformation have time
histories. Kinetic energy is given by the product of mass
and the square of velocity. This can be mathematically
represented in the integral form as:
T ¼ 1
2
ð
V
rð_u2 þ _v2 þ _w2ÞdV
ð7:11Þ
Here, u, v and w are the displacement in the three co-
ordinate directions while the dots on the characters
represent the ﬁrst time derivatives and in this case are
the three respective velocities.
7.2.3 Weighted residual technique
Any system is governed by a differential equation of the
form:
Lu ¼ f
ð7:12Þ
where L is the differential operator of the governing
equation, u is the dependent variable of the governing
equation and f is the forcing function.
The system may have two different boundaries t1 and
t2, where the displacements u ¼ u0 and tractions t ¼ t0,
respectively, are speciﬁed. The WRT is one of the ways
to construct many approximate methods of analysis. In
most approximate methods, we seek an approximate
solution for the dependent variable u by, say u (in one
dimension), as:
uðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
anðtÞfnðxÞ
ð7:13Þ
Here, an are some unknown constants, which are time-
dependent in dynamic situations, and fn are some known
functions, which are spatially dependent. When we use
discritization in the solution process as in the case of the
FEM, an will represent the nodal coefﬁcients. In general,
these functions satisfy the kinematic boundary conditions
of the problem. When Equation (7.13) is substituted
into the governing equation, we get Lu  f 6¼ 0 since the
assumed solution is approximate. We can deﬁne the error
function associated with the solution as:
e1 ¼ Lu  f;
e2 ¼ u  u0;
e3 ¼ t  t0
ð7:14Þ
The objective of any weighted residual technique is to
make the error function as small as possible over the
domain of interest and also on the boundary. This can be
done by distributing the errors in different methods with
each method producing a new approximate method of
solution.
Let us consider a case where the boundary conditions
are exactly satisiﬁed, that is, e2 	 e3 	 0. In this case, we
need to distribute the error function e1 only. This can
be done through a weighting function w and integrating
over the domain as:
ð
V
e1wdV ¼
ð
V
ðLu  fÞwdV ¼ 0
ð7:15Þ
Figure 7.3
Concepts of strain energy (‘area OAB’) and com-
plimentary strain energy (‘area OBC’).
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
149

Choice of the weighting functions determines the type
of WRT. The weighting functions used are normally of
the form:
w ¼
X
N
n¼1
bncn
ð7:16Þ
When Equation (7.16) is substituted into Equation (7.15),
we get:
X
N
n¼1
bn
ð
V
ðLu  fÞcn ¼ 0;
n ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . . ; n
Since bn are arbitrary, we have:
ð
V
ðLu  fÞcn ¼ 0;
n ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; n
This process ensures that the number of algebraic equa-
tions resulting in using Equation (7.13) for u is equal to
the number of unknown coefﬁcients chosen.
Now, we can choose different weighting functions to
obtain different approximate techniques. For example, if
we choose all of cn as the Dirac delta function, normally
represented by the d symbol, we get the classical ﬁnite
difference technique. These are the spike functions that
have a unit value only at the point that they are deﬁned
while at all other points they are zero. They have the
following properties:
ð1
1
dðx  xnÞdx ¼
ð
xþr
xr
dðx  xnÞdx ¼ 1
ð1
1
fðxÞdðx  xnÞdx ¼
ð
xþr
xr
fðxÞdðx  xnÞdx ¼ fðxnÞ
Here, r is any positive number and f(x) is any func-
tion that is continuous at x ¼ n. To demonstrate this
method, consider a three-point line element, as shown in
Figure 7.4.
The displacement ﬁeld can be expressed as a three-
term series in Equation (7.13) as:
u ¼ un1f1 þ unf2 þ unþ1f3
ð7:17Þ
Here, the functions f1, f2 and f3 satisfy the boundary
conditions at the nodes, namely its nodal displacements,
and they are given by:
f1 ¼
1  x
L


1  2x
L


;
f2 ¼
4x
L  4x2
L2


;
f3 ¼ x
L
2x
L  1


ð7:18Þ
Now the weighting function can be assumed as:
w ¼ b1dðx  0Þ þ b2dðx  L=2Þ þ b3dðx  LÞ
¼
X
3
n¼1
bndn
ð7:19Þ
Let us now try to solve the following simple 1-D ordinary
differential equation given by:
d2u
dx2 þ 4u þ 4x ¼ 0; uð0Þ ¼ uð1Þ ¼ 0
ð7:20Þ
Here, the independent variable x has limits between 0 and
1. Using Equation (7.17) in Equation (7.20), one can ﬁnd
the error function or residue e1, say at node n, given by:
e1 ¼
d2u
dx2 þ 4u þ 4x


n
¼
1
L2 un1  2
L2 un þ 1
L2 unþ1


þ 4un þ 4xn
ð7:21Þ
Here, L ¼ 1 is the domain length. If we now substitute
the weight function (Equation (7.19)) and integrate, and
using the properties of the Dirac delta function, we get:
1
L2 ðun1  2un þ unþ1Þ


þ 4un þ 4xn ¼ 0
ð7:22Þ
The above equation is the equation for the central ﬁnite
differences.
The method of moments can be derived by assuming
the weight functions of the form given by (for the 1-D
case):
w ¼ b1 þ b2x þ b3x2 þ b4x3 þ . . . ¼
X
N
n¼0
bnxn
ð7:23Þ
x = 0
x = L/2
x = L
n – 1 
n
n + 1
Figure 7.4
Finite differences, according to the weighted
residual technique (WRT).
150
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Consider again the problem given in Equation (7.20). Let
us assume only the ﬁrst two terms in the above series.
Let the ﬁeld variable u be assumed as:
u ¼ a1xð1  xÞ þ a2x2ð1  xÞ
ð7:24Þ
Each of the functions associated with the unknown
coefﬁcients satisfy the boundary conditions speciﬁed in
Equation (7.20). Substituting the above into the govern-
ing equation, the following residue is obtained:
e1 ¼ a1ð2 þ 4x  4x2Þ þ a2ð2  6x þ 4x2  4x3Þ þ 4x
ð7:25Þ
If we weight this residual, we get the following
equations:
ð1
0
1e1dx ¼ 2a1 þ a2 ¼ 3;
ð1
0
xe1dx ¼ 5a1 þ 6a2 ¼ 10
Solving the above two equations, we get a1 ¼ 8=7 and
a2 ¼ 5=7. Substituting these, we get the approximate
solution to the problem as:
u ¼ 8
7 xð1  xÞ þ 5
7 x2ð1  xÞ
The exact solution to Equation (7.20) is given by:
uexact ¼ sin ð2xÞ
sin ð2Þ  x
To compare the results, say at x ¼ 0:2, we get u ¼ 0:205
and uexact ¼ 0:228. The percentage error involved in the
solution is about 10, which is very good considering that
only two terms were used in the weight-function series.
Next, the procedure of deriving the Galerkin technique
from the weighted residual method is outlined.
Here, we assume the weight-function variation to be
similar to the displacement variation (Equation (7.13)),
that is:
w ¼ b1f1 þ b2f2 þ b3f3 þ . . . :
ð7:26Þ
Let us now consider the same problem (Equation (7.20))
with
the
assumed
displacement
ﬁeld
given
by
Equation (7.24). Let the weight function variation have
only the ﬁrst two terms in the series, as:
w ¼ b1f1 þ b2f2 ¼ b1xð1  xÞ þ b2x2ð1  xÞ ð7:27Þ
The residual e1 is the same as that given for the previous
case (Equation (7.25)). If we weight this residual with the
weight function given by Equation (7.27), the following
equations are obtained:
ð1
0
f1e1dx ¼ 6a1 þ 3a2 ¼ 10;
ð1
0
f2e1dx ¼ 21a1 þ 20a2 ¼ 42
Solving the above equations, we get a1 ¼ 74=57 and
a2 ¼ 42=57. The approximate Galerkin solution then
becomes:
u ¼ 74
57 xð1  xÞ þ 42
57 x2ð1  xÞ
The result obtained for x ¼ 0:2 is 0.231, which is very
close to the exact solution (only a 1.3 % error).
In a similar manner, one can design various approxi-
mate schemes by assuming different weight functions.
The FEM is one such WRT, wherein the displacement
variation and the weight functions are the same. The
‘weak form’ of the differential equation becomes the
equation involving the energies.
7.3 ENERGY FUNCTIONALS
AND VARIATIONAL OPERATOR
The use of the energy functional is an absolute necessity
for development of the ﬁnite element method. The energy
functional is essentially dependent on a number of depen-
dent variables, such as displacements, forces, etc. which
themselves are functions of position, time, etc. Hence, a
functional is an integral expression, which in essence is
the ‘function of many functions’. A formal study in the
area of energy functionals requires a deep understanding
of functional analysis. Reddy [3] gives an excellent
account of the FEM from the functional analysis view-
point. However, we, for the sake of completeness, merely
state those important aspects that are relevant for ﬁnite
element development. These are mathematically repre-
sented between the limits a and b as:
IðwÞ ¼
ðb
a
F x; w; dw
dx ; d2w
dx2


ð7:28Þ
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
151

Here, a and b are the two boundary points in the domain.
For a ﬁxed value of w, I(w) is always a scalar. Hence, a
functional can be thought of as a mapping of I(w) from
a vector space W to a real number ﬁeld R, which is
mathematically represented as I : W ! R. A functional
is said to be linear if it satisﬁes the following condition:
Fðaw þ bvÞ ¼ aFðwÞ þ bFðvÞ
ð7:29Þ
Here, a and b are some scalars and w and v are the depen-
dent variables.
A functional is called quadratic functional, when the
following relation exist:
Iða wÞ ¼ a2IðwÞ
ð7:30Þ
If there are two functions p and q, their inner product
over the domain V can be deﬁned as:
ðp; qÞ ¼
ð
V
pqdV
ð7:31Þ
Obviously, the inner product can also be thought of as a
functional. We can use the above deﬁnition to determine
the properties of the differential operator of a given dif-
ferential equation. A given problem is always deﬁned by
a differential equation and a set of boundary conditions,
which can be mathematically represented by:
Lu ¼ f;
over the domain V
u ¼ u0;
over t
q ¼ q0;
over t2
ð7:32Þ
where
L
is
the
differential
operator,
V
is
the
entire domain, t1 is the domain where the displacements
are speciﬁed (kinematic or essential boundary condi-
tions) and t2 is the domain where the forces (natural
boundary conditions) are speciﬁed. If u0 is zero, then we
call the essential boundary conditions homogenous. For
non-zero u0, the essential boundary condition becomes
non-homogenous. There is always a functional for a
given differential equation provided that the differential
operator L satisﬁes the following conditions:
 The differential operator L requires to be self-adjoint
or symmetric. That is, ðLu; vÞ ¼ ðu; LvÞ, where u and v
are any two functions that satisfy the same appropriate
boundary conditions.
 The differential operator L requires to be positive
deﬁnite. That is, ðLu; uÞ  0 for functions u satisfying
the appropriate boundary conditions. The equality
will hold only when u ¼ 0 everywhere in the domain.
The derivation of these relations is beyond the scope of
study here. The interested reader is advised to refer
to Shames and Dym [1] and Wazhizu [4] which are
classic textbooks on variational principles for elasticity
problems.
For a given differential equation, Lu ¼ f, that is,
subjected to homogenous boundary conditions with the
differential operator being self-adjoint and positive deﬁ-
nite, one can actually construct the functional. This is
given by the following expression:
IðwÞ ¼ ðLw; wÞ  2ðw; fÞ
ð7:33Þ
To see what the above equation means, let us construct
the functional for the well-known beam governing
equation, which is given by:
EI d4w
dx4 þ q ¼ 0
In the above equation, EI is the bending rigidity, w is
the dependent variable, which represents the transverse
displacements, x is the independent spatial variable
and q represents the loading. The domain is represented
by the length of the beam l. In the above equation,
L ¼ EId4=dx4 and f ¼ q. Now, the ﬁrst term in
Equation (7.33) becomes:
ðLw; wÞ ¼
ðl
0
EI d4w
dx4 wdx
Integrating by parts, we get:
ðLw; wÞ ¼ wEI d3w
dx3
x¼l
x¼0

ðl
0
EI d3w
dx3
dw
dx dx
The ﬁrst term is the boundary term which has two
parts – one is the displacement boundary condition
while the second part (EId3w=dx3) is the force boundary
condition and in the present case, represents the shear
force. For a right-hand coordinate system, this is denoted
by V. Hence, the above equation can be written as:
ðLw; wÞ ¼ wð0ÞVð0Þ þ wðlÞVðlÞ 
ðl
0
EI d3w
dx3
dw
dx dx
152
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Integrating again the last part of the above equation by
parts, we get:
ðLw; wÞ ¼ wð0ÞVð0Þ þ wðlÞVðlÞ  dw
dx EI d2w
dx2
x¼l
x¼0
þ
ðl
0
EI d2w
dx2
d2w
dx2 dx
¼ wð0ÞVð0Þ þ wðlÞVðlÞ  fðlÞMðlÞ
þ fð0ÞMð0Þ þ
ðl
0
EI d2w
dx2

2
dx
ð7:34Þ
Here, f is the rotation of the cross-section (also called
the slope) and M is the moment resultant. There are three
possible boundary conditions in the beam, namely:
 Fixed end condition, where w ¼ dw
dx ¼ f ¼ 0.
 Free boundary condition, where V ¼ EI d3w
dx3 ¼
M ¼ EI d2w
dx2 ¼ 0.
 Hingedboundarycondition,wherew ¼ M ¼ EI d2w
dx2 ¼ 0.
For all of these boundary conditions, the boundary terms in
Equation (7.34) are zero and hence the equation reduces to:
ðLw; wÞ ¼ 2 1
2
  ðl
0
EI d2w
dx2

2
dx
ð7:35Þ
Substituting the above into Equation (7.33), we can write
the functional as:
IðwÞ ¼ 2 1
2
ðl
0
EI d2w
dx2

2
dx þ
ðl
0
qwdx
2
4
3
5
ð7:36Þ
The terms inside the bracket are the total potential energy
of the beam and the value of the functional is essentially
twice the value of the potential energy. Hence, the func-
tionals in structural mechanics are normally called
energy functionals. We see from the above derivations
that the boundary conditions are contained in the energy
functional.
7.3.1 Variational symbol
In most approximate methods based on variational
theorems, including the ﬁnite element technique, it is
necessary to minimize the functional and this mini-
mization process is normally represented by a varia-
tional symbol (normally referred to as delta operator),
mathematically represented as d. Consider a functional
that is a function of the dependent-variable w and
its derivatives and is mathematically represented as
Fðw; w0; w00Þ, where the primes ð0Þ and ð00Þ indicate the
ﬁrst and second derivatives, respectively. For a ﬁxed
value of the independent variable x, the value of the
functional depend on w and its derivatives. During the
process of deformation, if the value of w changes to au,
where a is a constant and u is a function, then this
change is called the variation of w and is denoted by
dw. That is, dw represents the admissible change of w
for a ﬁxed value of the independent variable x. At the
boundary points, where the values of the dependent
variables are speciﬁed, the variations at these points
are zero. In essence, the variational operator acts like
a differential operator and hence all of the laws of
differentiation are applicable here.
7.4 WEAK FORM OF THE GOVERNING
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION
The variational method gives us an alternate statement
of the governing equation, which is normally referred
to as the strong form of the governing equation. This
alternate statement of the equilibrium equation is essen-
tially an integral equation. This is essentially obtained
by weighting the residue of the governing equation
with a weighting function and integrating the resulting
expression. This process not only gives the weak
form of the governing equation, but also the associated
boundary conditions (both essential and natural bound-
ary conditions). We will explain this procedure by
again considering the governing equation of an elemen-
tary beam. The ‘strong’ form of the beam equation is
given by:
EI d4w
dx4 þ q ¼ 0
Now, we are looking for an approximate solution for w
in a similar form to that given in Equation (7.13). Now,
the residue becomes:
EI d4w
dx4 þ q ¼ e1
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
153

If we weight this with another function v (which also
satisﬁes the boundary conditions of the problem) and
integrate over the domain of length l, we get:
ðl
0
EI d4w
dx4 þ q


vdx
Integrating the above expression by parts (twice), we will
get the boundary terms, which are a combination of both
essential and natural boundary conditions, along with
the weak form of the equation. We obtain the following
expression:
vð0ÞVð0Þ  vðlÞVðlÞ  fðlÞ MðlÞ þ fð0Þ Mð0Þ
þ
ðl
0
EI d2w
dx2
d2v
dx2 þ qv


dx
ð7:37Þ
where V ¼ EId3w=dx3; M ¼ EId2w=dx2 and f ¼ dw=dx.
Equation (7.37) is the weak form of the differential
equation as it requires a reduced continuity requirement
when compared to the original differential equation.
That is, the original equation is a fourth-order equation
and requires functions that are third-order continuous,
while the weak order requires solutions that are just
second-order continuous. This aspect is exploited fully
in the ﬁnite element method.
7.5 SOME BASIC ENERGY THEOREMS
In this section, we outline three different theorems, which
essentially form the backbone of ﬁnite element analysis.
Here, the implications of these theorems on the develop-
ment of ﬁnite element techniques are discussed. For a
more thorough discussion on these topics, the interested
reader is advised to refer to some classic textbooks
available in this area, such as Shames and Dym [1],
Wazhizu [4] and Tauchert [5]. Here, we discuss the fol-
lowing important energy principles:
 Principle of Virtual Work (PVW).
 Principle of Minimum Potential Energy (PMPE).
 Rayleigh–Ritz method.
 Hamilton’s principle (HP).
While the ﬁrst two are essential for FE development for
static problems, the last theorem is used for deriving the
weak form of the equation for time-dependent problems.
This section will also describe a few approximate meth-
ods which are ‘offshoots’ of these theorems.
7.5.1 Concept of virtual work
Consider a body shown in Figure 7.5, under the action of
an arbitrary set of loads P1, P2, etc. In addition, consider
any arbitrary point which is subjected to a kinemati-
cally admissible inﬁnitesimal deformation. By ‘kinema-
tically admissible’, we mean that it does not violate the
boundary constraints. Work done by such small hypothe-
tical inﬁnitesimal displacements, due to applied loads
which are kept constant during the deformation process,
is called virtual work. We denote the virtual displacement
by the variational operator d and in this present case it
can be written as du.
7.5.2 Principle of virtual work (PVW)
This principle states that a continuous body is in equili-
brium, if and only if, the virtual work done by all of the
external forces is equal to the virtual work done by
internal forces when the body is subjected to a inﬁnite-
simal virtual displacement. If WE is the work done by the
external forces and U is the internal energy (also called
the strain energy), then the PVW can be mathematically
represented as:
dWE ¼ dU
ð7:38Þ
Proof
Let us consider a three-dimensional body of ‘arbitrary
material behavior’ which is subjected to surface traction
ti on a portion of the body of area S and a body force per
unit volume Bi. The total external work done by the body
of volume V on displacements ui is given by:
WE ¼
ð
S
tiuidS þ
ð
V
Biui
ð7:39Þ
By taking variation of this work, we get:
dWE ¼
ð
S
tiduidS þ
ð
V
Bidui
ð7:40Þ
  u
Figure 7.5
Representation of a body under virtual displace-
ments.
154
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Substituting for ‘tractions’ from Equation (6.33) in
Chapter 6 in the above equation, we get:
dWE ¼
ð
S
sijniduidS þ
ð
V
Bidui
ð7:41Þ
Here, ni is the surface normal of the body where the
‘tractions’ are acting. The surface integral on the right-
hand side of the above equation is converted to a volume
integral by using the divergence theorem [1] which
states:
ð
V
rudV ¼
ð
S
undS
ð7:42Þ
where r ¼ ð@=@xÞi þ ð@=@yÞj þ ð@=@zÞk is the gradient
operator, u ¼ ðui þ vj þ wzÞ is the displacement vector
and n ¼ ðnxi þ nyj þ nzkÞ is the outward normal vector.
Using Equation (7.42) in Equation (7.41) and simplify-
ing, we get:
dWE ¼
ð
V
sij
@
@xj
ðduiÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
Virtual strain
dV þ
ð
V
@
@xj
ðsijÞduidV þ
ð
V
Bidui
¼
ð
V
sijdeijdV
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
Internal virtual work¼dU
þ
ð
V
@
@xj
ðsijÞ þ Bi


duidV
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
Equation of equilibrium¼0
Further simplifying, the external virtual work becomes
dWE ¼ dU, which is essentially the virtual work principle.
The direct offshoot of PVE is the Dummy Displace-
ment method, which is extensively used for ﬁnding
the reaction forces in many redundant structures. The
details of this method can be found in Tauchert [5] and
Reddy [6].
7.5.3 Principle of minimum potential energy
(PMPE)
This principle states that of all the displacement ﬁelds
which satisfy the prescribed constraint conditions, the
correct state is that which makes the total potential
energy of the structure a minimum.
This principle can be directly obtained from the PVW.
Here, we deﬁne the potential of the external forces V as
the negative of the work done by the external forces. That
is, V ¼ WE. Using this in the PVW expression, we have:
dðU þ VÞ ¼ 0
ð7:43Þ
The above principle is the backbone for ﬁnite element
development. In addition, this principle can be used to
derive the governing differential equations of the system,
especially for static analysis, and also their associated
boundary conditions. This aspect is demonstrated here by
deriving the governing equation for a beam, starting from
the energy functional.
Consider a beam of bending rigidity EI and subjected to
a distributed loading of qðxÞ per unit length over the entire
beam of length L. Let wðxÞ represent the lateral displace-
ment ﬁeld of the beam. The strain energy functional and
the potential of the external forces can be written as:
U ¼ 1
2
ðL
0
EI d2w
dx2

2
dx;
V ¼ 
ðL
0
qwdx
ð7:44Þ
By the PMPE, we have:
d 1
2
ðL
0
EI d2w
dx2

2
dx 
ðL
0
qwdx
2
4
3
5 ¼ 0
Using the operation on the variational operator, we have:
ðL
0
EI d2w
dx2


d d2w
dx2


dx 
ðL
0
qdwdx
2
4
3
5 ¼ 0
¼
ðL
0
EI d2w
dx2

 d2ðdwÞ
dx2


dx 
ðL
0
qdwdx
2
4
3
5 ¼ 0
Integrating the ﬁrst term by parts (twice) and identifying
the boundary terms, as was carried out earlier, we get:
dwð0ÞVð0Þ  dwðLÞVðLÞ  dfðLÞMðLÞ  dfð0ÞMð0Þ
þ
ðL
0
EI d4w
dx4 þ q


dwdx ¼ 0
Since the variation of the displacements at the speciﬁed
locations (boundaries) is always zero and dw is arbitrary,
the only non-zero term contained in the large bracket
should be the governing differential equation of the beam.
The PMPE can be directly used to derive the well-
known Castigliano’s ﬁrst theorem used in elementary
structural mechanics to determine the reaction forces in
a structure discritized by using n generalized degrees
of freedom, qn. Both the strain energy, as well as the
potential of external forces, are functions of these
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
155

generalized degrees of freedom. Hence, we can write
the PMPE statement as:
d UðqnÞ 
X
N
n¼1
Pnqn
"
#
¼ 0
Here, Pn represent the applied load. Taking the ﬁrst vari-
ation of the strain energy and expanding, we can write
the above expression as:
@U
@q1
dq1 þ @U
@q2
dq2 þ . . . þ @U
@qn
dqn  P1dq1  P2dq2
 . . .  Pndqn ¼ 0
Grouping the terms together, we have:
@U
@q1
 P1


dq1 þ
@U
@q2
 P1


dq1 þ . . .
þ
@U
@qn
 Pn


dqn ¼ 0
Since all of the dqn are arbitrary, the terms contained in
each bracket should be equal to zero. Hence, we have:
@U
@qn
 Pn


¼ 0;
or
@U
@qn
¼ Pn
ð7:45Þ
The above statement is essentially the Castigliano’s
theorem, which states that, if a reaction force at a gene-
ralized degree of freedom is required, then differentiating
the strain energy with respect to the said degree of
freedom will give the required reaction force.
The PMPE can also be used to construct some approxi-
mate solutions to the problem, One such method is the
Rayleigh–Ritz method [1]. This is one of the most import-
ant methods in structural mechanics for determining
an approximate solution to a problem. In fact, the Finite
Element Method can be considered as a ‘piecewise’
Rayleigh–Ritz method, where this technique is applied
at the element level and the total solution is obtained by
synthesis of element level solutions. This method is
explained next.
7.5.4 Rayleigh–Ritz method
In this method, we are seeking an approximate solution
to the governing equation Lu ¼ f, where u is the depen-
dent variable normally representing displacements in
structural mechanics. We again assume the approximate
solution in the form:
u ¼
X
N
n¼1
anfn
ð7:46Þ
Here, an are the unknown generalized degrees of freedom
and fn are the known functions – called the Ritz func-
tions. These functions should satisfy the kinematic bound-
ary conditions and need not satisfy the natural boundary
conditions. Next, the strain energy and the potential of
external forces are written in terms of displacements and
the assumed approximate displacement ﬁeld (Equation
(7.46)) and are substituted into the energy expressions
and integrated. The PMPE is invoked and the total energy
is minimized to get a set of n simultaneous equation,
which are solved for determining an. Mathematically, we
can represent the total energy, which is function of an, as:
pðanÞ ¼ ðU þ VÞ
By the PMPE, we have that the ﬁrst variation of the total
energy is zero. That is:
dp ¼ 0 ¼ @p
@a1
da1 þ @p
@a2
da2 þ . . . þ @p
@an
dan
¼
X
N
n¼1
@p
@an
dan
Since dan is arbitrary, we have:
@p
@a1
¼ @p
@a2
¼ : . . . ¼ @p
@an
¼ 0;
n ¼ 1; 2; . . . n
This procedure ensures that there are n equations to solve
n unknown coefﬁcients. The Ritz functions should be so
chosen that they be differentiable up to the order speciﬁed
by the energy functional. Normally polynomials or trigo-
nometric functions are used as Ritz functions. Since the
natural boundary conditions are not satisﬁed by the
assumed ﬁeld, it is highly likely that the solutions would
not yield accurate forces (stresses). Normally, enough
terms should be used in Equation (7.46) to get accurate
solutions. However, if very few terms are used, then
these introduce additional geometric constraints which
make the structure stiffer and hence the predicted displa-
cements are always ‘lower-bound’. The application of this
method to problems of complex geometry is very difﬁcult.
7.5.5 Hamilton’s principle (HP)
This principle is extensively used to derive the govern-
ing equation of motion for a structural system under
156
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

dynamic loads. In fact, this principle can be thought of
as the PMPE for a dynamic system. This principle was
ﬁrst formulated by an Irish mathematician and physi-
cist, Sir William Hamilton. Similar to the PMPE, the HP
is an integral statement of a dynamic system under
equilibrium.
In order to derive this principle, consider a body of
mass m and having a position vector with respect to its
coordinate system as r ¼ xi þ yj þ zk. Under the action
of a force FðtÞ ¼ FxðtÞi þ FyðtÞj þ FzðtÞk, this mass
moves from position
1 at time t1 to a position 2 at
time t2, according to Newton’s Second Law. Such a
path is called the Newtonian Path. The motion of this
mass is pictorially shown in Figure 7.6.
The total force FðtÞ comprises conservative forces such
as internal forces caused by the strain energies of the
structures, the external forces and some non-conservative
forces, such as damping forces. Hence the force vector is
made up of two parts, which can be written as
FðtÞ ¼ FcðtÞ þ FncðtÞ. Each of these will have compo-
nents in all of the three coordinate directions. This force
is balanced by the inertial force generated by the moving
mass. If this mass is given a small virtual displacement,
drðtÞ ¼ dui þ dvj þ dwk, where u, v and w are the dis-
placement components in the three coordinate direc-
tions, the path of mass is as shown by the dashed line in
Figure 7.6. This path need not be a ‘Newtonian path’,
however, at time t ¼ t1 and t ¼ t2, the path coincides
with the ‘Newtonian path’ of the original motion of the
mass. That is, we have drðt1Þ ¼ drðt2Þ ¼ 0. The equili-
brium of this mass can be written as:
FxðtÞ  m€uðtÞ ¼ 0;
FyðtÞ  m€vðtÞ ¼ 0;
FzðtÞ  m€wðtÞ ¼ 0
Invoking the PVM, which essentially states that the total
virtual work done by the inﬁnitesimal virtual displace-
ment should be zero, we have:
½FxðtÞ  m€uðtÞduðtÞ þ ½FyðtÞ  m€vðtÞdvðtÞ
þ ½FzðtÞ  m€wðtÞdwðtÞ ¼ 0
ð7:47Þ
Rearranging the terms and integrating the equation
between the time t1 and time t2, we have:
ðt2
t1
m½€uðtÞduðtÞ þ €vðtÞdvðtÞ þ €wðtÞdwðtÞ
þ
ðt2
t1
½FxðtÞduðtÞ þ FyðtÞdvðtÞ þ FzðtÞdwðtÞ
ð7:48Þ
Consider the ﬁrst integral (I1), which can be written after
integrating by parts as:
I1 ¼ m_uðtÞduðtÞ  m_vðtÞdvðtÞ  m _wðtÞdwðtÞt¼t2
t¼t1
þ
ðt2
t1
mð_ud_u þ _vd_v þ _wd _wÞdt
Recognizing that the virtual displacement must vanish at
the beginning and end of this varied path, we can write
the ﬁrst integral as:
I1 ¼
ðt2
t1
mð_ud_u þ _vd_v þ _wd _wÞdt
¼
ðt2
t1
m
2 dð_u2 þ _v2 þ _w2Þdt ¼ d
ðt2
t1
Tdt
ð7:49Þ
Here, T represents the total kinetic energy of the sys-
tem. Now, let us consider the second integral (I2) in
Equation (7.48). The force term in this expression can be
written in terms of internal and non-conservative forces.
This integral then becomes:
I2 ¼
ðt2
t1
½FcxðtÞduðtÞ þ FcyðtÞdvðtÞ þ FczðtÞdwðtÞdt
þ
ðt2
t1
½FncxðtÞduðtÞ þ FncyðtÞdvðtÞ þ FnczðtÞdwðtÞdt
x
y
z
i
j
k
r(t)
F(t)
mr(t)
r(t)
t2
t1
Real path 
Variable
r(t) = xi + yj + zk 
Figure 7.6
Real and variable paths for a particle of mass m.
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
157

The second integral in the above expression is nothing
but the variation of the work done by the non-conservative
forces and can be written as:
d
ðt2
t1
Wncdt ¼ d
ðt2
t1
½FncxðtÞuðtÞ þ FncyðtÞvðtÞ
þ FnczðtÞwðtÞdt
The ﬁrst integral in I2 is the work done due to internal
forces. From Castigliano’s ﬁrst theorem, which was
derived in Section 7.5.3, the internal force is obtained
by differentiating the strain energy ðUðu; v; w; tÞÞ with
respect to the corresponding displacement (Equation
(7.45)). Accordingly, we can write:
Fcx ¼  @U
@u ;
Fcy ¼  @U
@v ;
Fcz ¼  @U
@w
ð7:50Þ
The negative sign is given to indicate that these forces
resist the deformation. Using Equation (7.50) in I2, we
have:
I2 ¼ 
ðt2
t1
@U
@u duðtÞ þ @U
@v dvðtÞ þ @U
@w dwðtÞ


dt
þ d
ðt2
t1
Wncdt
¼ d
ðt2
t1
ðU þ WncÞdt
ð7:51Þ
By using Equations (7.49) and (7.51) in Equation (7.48),
Hamilton’s principle becomes:
d
ðt2
t1
ðT  U þ WncÞdt ¼ 0
ð7:52Þ
The use of this equation in obtaining the governing equa-
tion and its associated boundary conditions was demon-
strated in Section 6.3.2 in the last chapter. It is of interest
to know that if we omit the inertial energy in Equation
(7.52) and assume that all of the quantities are time-
independent, then the HP reduces to the PMPE.
One can easily deduce the famous Lagrange Equa-
tion of motion for a discrete system having the energies
(kinetic, strain energy and non-conservative energy) as a
function of the generalized coordinates q1; q2; . . . qn as:
T ¼ Tðq1; q2; . . . qn; _q1; _q2; . . . _qnÞ
U ¼ Uðq1; q2; . . . qnÞ
Wnc ¼ P1q1 þ P2q2 þ . . . Pnqn
ð7:53Þ
Here, P1; P2; . . . Pn represent the external and damping
forces. Taking the ﬁrst variation of these energies, we
have:
dT ¼ @T
@q1
dq1 þ @T
@q2
dq2 þ . . . þ @T
@qn
dqn þ @T
@ _q1
d_q1
þ @T
@ _q2
d_q2 þ . .. þ @T
@ _qn
d_qn ¼
X
n
i¼1
@T
@qi
dqiþ @T
@ _qi
d_qi
dU ¼ @U
@q1
dq1 þ @U
@q2
dq2 þ . . . þ @U
@qn
dqn ¼
X
n
i¼1
@U
@qi
dqi
dWnc ¼ P1dq1 þ P2dq2 þ . .. Pndqn ¼
X
n
i¼1
Pidqi
Using the above in the HP (Equation (7.52)), we have:
X
n
i¼1
ðt2
t1
@T
@qi
dqi þ @T
@ _qi
d_qi  @U
@qi
dqi þ Pidqi


dt ¼ 0
ð7:54Þ
Integrating the second term by parts and recognizing that
the virtual displacements vanish at the beginning and
end, the above integral becomes:
ðt2
t1
X
n
i¼1
 d
dt
@T
@ _qi


þ @T
@qi
 @U
@qi
þ Pi


dqi ¼ 0
Since
the
virtual
displacements
are
arbitrary,
the
Lagrange equations become:
d
dt
@T
@ _qi


 @T
@qi
þ @U
@qi
¼ Pi
ð7:55Þ
The above equation is extensively used in the derivation
of discritized equations of motion for a dynamic system.
7.6 FINITE ELEMENT METHOD
The FEM uses the ‘weak form’ of the governing equation
to convert a ordinary differential equation to a set of
algebraic equations in the case of static analysis and a
158
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

coupled set of second-order differential equations in the
case of dynamic analysis. In the previous sections of this
chapter, different approximate methods were explained,
which are very difﬁcult to apply to a problem involving
complex geometry and complicated boundary conditions.
However, if one takes the approach of subdividing the
domain into many subdomains, in each of these sub-
domains, one can assume a solution of the type:
uðx; y; z; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
anðtÞfnðx; y; zÞ
ð7:56Þ
and ﬁt any of the approximate methods described earlier
within the subdomains to get an approximate solution to
the problem. In the FEM, these subdomains are called
elements, which normally take the shapes of line ele-
ments for 1-D structures, such as rods and beams,
rectangles or triangles for 2-D structures and bricks or
tetrahedrons for 3-D structures. Each element has a set of
nodes, which may vary depending on the order of the
functions fnðx; y; zÞ in Equation (7.56) used to approxi-
mate the displacement ﬁelds within each element. These
nodes have unique IDs, which ﬁx their positions in space
of complex structures. In Equation (7.56), anðtÞ normally
represents
the
time-dependent
nodal
displacements,
while fnðx; y; zÞ are the spatially dependent functions,
which are normally referred to as shape functions. The
entire ﬁnite element procedure for obtaining a solution
for a complex problem can be summarized as follows:
 The use of the weak form of the governing differential
equation and an assumption of the ﬁeld-variable vari-
ation over the element (Equation (7.56)) and its subse-
quent minimization will yield a stiffness matrix and a
mass matrix. The sizes of these matrices depend on
the number of nodes and the number of degrees of
freedom each node can support. The mass matrix
formulated through the weak form of the equation is
called the consistent mass matrix. There are other
ways of formulating the mass matrix, which are
explained in detail in the latter part of this chapter.
The damping matrix is normally not obtained through
weak formulation. For linear systems, this is obtained
through a linear combination of stiffness and the mass
matrix. Damping through such a procedure is called
proportional damping.
 The FEM comes under the category of the stiffness
method, where satisfaction of the compatibility is
automatic as we begin the analysis with a displace-
ment assumption. The issue in the stiffness method is
satisfaction
of
the
equilibrium
equations.
This
condition requires to be enforced. Such an enforce-
ment is made by assembling the stiffness, mass and
damping matrices. This is done by adding the stiffness
of a particular degree of freedom coming from the
contiguous elements. Similarly, the force vectors act-
ing on each node are assembled to obtain the global
force vector. If the load is distributed on a segment of
the complex domain, then using the equivalent energy
concept, it is split into concentrated loads acting on
the respective nodes that make up the segment. The
size of the assembled stiffness, mass and damping
matrices is equal to n  n, where n is the total number
degrees of freedom in the discritized domain.
 After assembly of the matrices, the displacement
boundary conditions are enforced, which could be
homogenous or non-homogenous. If the boundary
conditions are homogenous, then the corresponding
rows and columns are eliminated to get the reduced
stiffness, mass and damping matrices. In the case of
static analysis, the obtained matrix equation involving
the stiffness matrix is solved to obtain the nodal
displacements. In the case of dynamic analysis, we
get a coupled set of ordinary differential equations,
which are solved by either modal methods or a ‘time-
marching’ scheme.
7.6.1 Shape functions
The spatial dependent function in Equation (7.56) is
called the shape function of the element. These functions
are normally assumed as being polynomial, whose order
depends on the degrees of freedom that an element can
support. These functions relate the nodal displacements
with the assumed displacement ﬁeld. They are normally
denoted by the symbol N. We will now give the proce-
dure of ﬁnding the shape functions for the elements
shown in Figure 7.7.
7.6.1.1 Rod element
Let us now derive the shape functions for a ﬁnite rod ele-
ment
having
length
L
and
axial
rigidity
EA.
A
rod element can support only axial motion and hence
this element can have two nodes and each node can
support one axial motion, as shown in Figure 7.7(a). That
is, we require a function that is only ﬁrst order contin-
uous (that is C0 continuous elements). Hence, we can
assume the displacement ﬁeld contains two constants
corresponding to two degrees of freedom, that is:
u ¼ a0ðtÞ þ a1ðtÞx
ð7:57Þ
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
159

The above equation also happens to satisfy the governing
static differential equation of a rod, which is given
by EAd2u=dx2 ¼ 0. Equation (7.57) is now converted in
terms of nodal coordinates by substituting uðx ¼ 0Þ ¼ u1
and uðx ¼ LÞ ¼ u2 in the above equation. This will enable
us to write constants a0 and a1 in terms of the nodal
displacements u1 and u2. Eliminating these constants and
simplifying, Equation (7.57) can now be written as:
uðxÞ ¼
1  x
L


u1 þ
x
L
 
u2
ð7:58Þ
In Equation (7.58), the two functions inside the brackets
are the two shape functions of the rod corresponding to
two degrees of freedom. Hence, the displacement ﬁeld
can be written in matrix form as:
uðxÞ ¼ ½N1ðxÞ
N2ðxÞ
u1
u2


¼ ½Nfug
ð7:59Þ
The shape function N1 takes the value of 1 at node one
while it is zero at node two. Similarly, N2 is zero at node 1
and one at node 2. In fact, the displacement for any element
can be written in the form shown in Equation (7.59).
7.6.1.2 Beam element
One can similarly derive the shape functions for a beam
element. The beam element shown in Figure 7.7(b) has
two nodes and each node have two degrees of freedom,
namely the transverse displacement w and rotation
f ¼ ðdw=dxÞ. Hence, the nodal degrees of freedom
vector is given by fug ¼ fw1
f1
w2
f2gT, which
requires a minimum cubic polynomial for displacement.
In addition, since the slope is derived from the transverse
displacements, it is required that the polynomial is
second-order continuous, that is, it requires a higher
continuity when compared to the rod. Such elements
are called C1 continuous elements. We proceed as fol-
lows to obtain the shape functions. The interpolating
polynomial for the beam is given by:
wðx; tÞ ¼ a0ðtÞ þ a1ðtÞx þ a2ðtÞx2 þ a3ðtÞx3
ð7:60Þ
As in the case of rods, the above solution happens to be
the exact solution to the governing beam equation. Now,
if we substitute wð0; tÞ ¼ w1ðtÞ; fð0; tÞ ¼ dwð0; tÞ=dx
¼ f1ðtÞ; wðL; tÞ ¼ w2ðtÞ
and
fðL; tÞ ¼ dwðL; tÞ=dx ¼
f2ðtÞ, we get:
w1
f1
w2
f2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
L
L2
L3
0
1
2L
3L2
2
664
3
775
a0
a1
a2
a3
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼ fug ¼ ½Gfag
Inverting the above matrix, we can write the unknown
coefﬁcients as fag ¼ ½G1fug. Substituting the values
of the coefﬁcients in Equation (7.60), we get:
wðx; tÞ ¼ ½N1ðxÞ
N2ðxÞ
N3ðxÞ
N4ðxÞfuðtÞg;
N1ðxÞ ¼ 1  3 x
L
 2
þ 2 x
L
 3
; N2ðxÞ ¼ x 1  x
L

2
N3ðxÞ ¼ 3 x
L
 2
2 x
L
 3
; N4ðxÞ ¼ x
x
L
 2
 x
L
 


ð7:61Þ
The above shape function will take a unit value at the
nodes and zero everywhere else.
Before we proceed further, we will highlight the
necessary requirements an interpolating polynomial of
an element has to satisfy, especially from the convergence
point of view. These can be summarized as follows:
 The assumed solution should be able to capture the
rigid body motion. This can be made sure by retaining
a constant part in the assumed solution.
 The assumed solution must be able to attain the
constant strain rate as the mesh is reﬁned. This can
be assured by retaining the linear part of the assumed
function in the interpolating polynomial.
Figure 7.7
Different ﬁnite elements: (a) rod element; (b) beam
element; (c) rectangular element; (d) triangular element.
160
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

 Most second-order systems require only C0 continu-
ity, which are easily met in most FE formulations.
However, for higher-order systems such as Bernoulli–
Euler beams or elementary plates, one requires C1
continuity, which are extremely difﬁcult to satisfy,
especially for plate problems, where interelement
slope continuity is very difﬁcult to comply with. In
such situations, one can use shear-deformable models,
that is, models that also include the effect of shear
deformations. In such models, slopes are not derived
from the displacements and are independently inter-
polated. This relaxes the C1 continuity requirement.
However, when such elements are used in thin-beam or
plate models, where the effects of shear deformations are
negligible, the displacements predicted would be many
orders smaller than the correct displacements. Such
problems are called shear-locking problems, which are
addressed in detail in a latter part of this chapter.
 The order of an assumed interpolating polynomial is
dictated by the highest order of the derivative appear-
ing in the energy functional. That is, the assumed
polynomial should be at least one order higher than
that appearing in the energy functional.
 In 2-D formulation, especially for C1 continuity prob-
lems, the polynomials are chosen based on Pascal’s
triangle [7].
7.6.1.3 Rectangular element
We will now determine the shape functions for two-
dimensional elements. Let us now consider a rectangular
ﬁnite element of length 2a and width 2b, as shown in
Figure 7.7(c). This element has four nodes and each node
can support two degrees of freedom, namely the two
displacements, u(x, y) and v(x, y) in the two coordinate
directions. Since there are four nodes, we can assume the
interpolating polynomial as:
uðx; yÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2y þ a3xy
vðx; yÞ ¼ b0 þ b1x þ b2y þ b3xy
ð7:62Þ
The above function has a linear variation of displace-
ment in both the coordinate directions and hence it is
normally referred to as a bi-linear element. In the above
interpolating polynomial, we substitute uða; bÞ ¼ u1,
vða;bÞ¼v1, uða;bÞ¼u2, vða;bÞ¼v2, uða;bÞ¼u3,
vða;bÞ¼v3, uða;bÞ¼u4 and vða;bÞ¼v4. These help
us to relate the nodal displacements to the unknown
coefﬁcients as fug¼ ½Gfag. Inverting the above rela-
tion and substituting for the unknown coefﬁcients in
Equation (7.62), we can write the displacement ﬁeld
and the shape functions as:
uðx;yÞ¼½Nfug¼½N1ðx;yÞ N2ðx;yÞ N3ðx;yÞ N4ðx;yÞfug
vðx;yÞ¼½Nfvg¼½N1ðx;yÞ N2ðx;yÞ N3ðx;yÞ N4ðx;yÞfvg
fug¼fu1 u2 u3 u4gT; fvg¼fv1 v2 v3 v4gT
N1ðx;yÞ¼ðxaÞðybÞ
4ab
; N2ðx;yÞ¼ðxaÞðyþbÞ
4ab
;
N3ðx;yÞ¼ðxþaÞðyþbÞ
4ab
; N4ðx;yÞ¼ðxþaÞðybÞ
4ab
ð7:63Þ
7.6.1.4 Triangular element
One can similarly write the shape functions for a triangle.
However, it is very convenient if one uses the area coordi-
nates for the triangle. Consider the triangle shown in
Figure 7.7(d), having coordinates of the three vertices as
ðx1; y1Þ, ðx2; y2Þ and ðx3; y3Þ.
Consider an arbitrary point P inside the triangle. This
point will split the triangle into three smaller triangles of
area A1, A2 and A3, respectively. Let A be the total area of
the triangle, which can be written in terms of nodal
coordinates as
A ¼ 1
2
1
x1
y1
1
x2
y2
1
x3
y3


ð7:64Þ
We will deﬁne the area coordinates for the triangle as:
L1 ¼ A1
A ;
L2 ¼ A2
A ;
L3 ¼ A3
A
ð7:65Þ
Thus, the position of point P is given by ðL1; L2; L3Þ.
These coordinates, which are normally referred to as area
coordinates, are not independent and satisfy the relation:
L1 þ L2 þ L3 ¼ 1
ð7:66Þ
These area coordinates are related to the global x–y
coordinate system through:
x ¼ L1x1 þ L2x2 þ L3x3
y ¼ L1y1 þ L2y2 þ L3y3
ð7:67Þ
where:
Li ¼ ðai þ bix þ ciyÞ
2A
i ¼ 1; 2; 3
ð7:68Þ
and:
a1 ¼ x2y3  x3y2;
b1 ¼ y2  y3;
c1 ¼ x3  x2
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
161

The other coefﬁcients are obtained by cyclic permuta-
tion. Equation (7.67) requires to be used when the
derivative with respect to the coordinate is required.
Now, one can write the shape functions for the triangle
as:
u ¼ N1u1 þ N2u2 þ N3u3
v ¼ N1v1 þ N2v2 þ N3v3
N1 ¼ L1; N2 ¼ L2; N3 ¼ L3
ð7:69Þ
These shape functions also follow the normal rules. That
is, at point A where the value of L1 ¼ 1, the shape func-
tions take the value of 1. At the same point, L2 ¼ L3 ¼ 0.
Similarly, at the other two vertices, L2 and L3 take a unit
value, while the other two go to zero.
In summary, for all of the elements, we can express the
displacements in terms of shape functions and the nodal
displacements as u ¼ PN
n¼1 Nnun or ½Nfug. This spatial
discritization will be used in the energy functional to
obtain the ﬁnite element governing equation. This is
shown in the next section.
7.6.2 Derivation of the ﬁnite element equation
Consider a body of volume V under the action of surface
tractions in the three coordinate directions ftsg ¼
ftx
ty
tzgT on the boundary S and the body force
vector per unit volume fBg ¼ fBx
By
BzgT. Let the
displacement
vector
be
written
as
fdðx; y; z; tÞg ¼
fuðx; y; z; tÞ
vðx; y; z; tÞ
wðx; y; z; tÞgT, where u, v and
w are the displacement variations in the three coordinate
directions. We will now invoke Hamilton’s principle,
which states that:
d
ðt2
t1
ðT  U þ WncÞdt ¼ 0
ð7:70Þ
where the kinetic energy T is given by:
T ¼ 1
2
ð
V
rð_u2 þ _v2 þ _w2ÞdV
Taking the ﬁrst variation and integrating, we get:
ðt2
t1
dTdt ¼
ðt2
t1
ð
V
r du
dt
dðduÞ
dt
þ dv
dt
dðdvÞ
dt
þ dw
dt
dðdwÞ
dt


dVdt
Integrating by parts, and noting that the ﬁrst variation
vanishes at times t1 and t2:
ðt2
t1
dTdt ¼ 
ðt2
t1
ð
V
rð€udu þ €vdv þ €wdwÞdtdV
¼ 
ðt2
t1
ð
V
rfddgTf€dgdVdt
ð7:71Þ
where f€dg ¼ f€u
€v
€wgT represents the acceleration
vector and fddg ¼ fdu
dv
dwgT represents the vector
containing the ﬁrst variation of the displacements.
The strain energy for a 3-D body in terms of stresses
and strains is given by:
U ¼1
2
ð
V
ðsxxexxþsyyeyyþszzezzþtxygxyþtyzgyzþtzxgzxÞdV
¼1
2
ð
V
fegTfsgdV
ð7:72Þ
For the linear elastic case, the constitutive law given by
Equation (6.68) in Chapter 6 can be written as fsg ¼
½Cfeg. Hence, the strain energy becomes:
U ¼ 1
2
ð
V
fegT½CfegdV
Taking the ﬁrst variation and integrating, we have:
ðt2
t1
dUdt ¼
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fdegT½CfegdVdt
ð7:73Þ
The work done by the body forces, surface forces,
damping elements and the concentrated forces are
‘clubbed’ together under Wnc. That is, Wnc ¼ WB þ
WS þ WD. The work done by the body forces is given by:
WB ¼
ð
V
ðBxu þ Byv þ BzwÞdV ¼
ð
V
fdgTfBgdV ð7:74Þ
The ﬁrst variation of the body force work is given by:
ðt2
t1
dWBdt ¼
ðt2
t1
ð
V
ðBxdu þ Bydv þ BzdwÞdVdt
¼
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTfBgdVdt
ð7:75Þ
162
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The work done by the surface forces is given by:
WS ¼
ð
S
fdgTftsgdS
The ﬁrst variation of this work is given by:
ðt2
t1
dWSdt ¼
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTftsgdSdt
ð7:76Þ
Similarly, the ﬁrst variation of the work done by the
damping force is given by:
ðt2
t1
dWDdt ¼ 
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTfFDgdVdt
ð7:77Þ
If the damping is of the viscous type, then the damping
force is proportional to the velocity and is given by
fFDg ¼ Zf_dg, where Z is the damping coefﬁcient and
f_dg ¼ f_u
_v
_wgT is the velocity vector in the three
coordinate directions. Now, using Equations (7.71) and
(7.73)–(7.77), in the Hamilton’s principle (Equation
(7.70)), we get:

ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTrf€dgdVdt 
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fdegT½CfegdVdt
þ
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTfBgdVdt þ
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTftsgdSdt

ðt2
t1
ð
V
fddgTfFDgdVdt ¼ 0
ð7:78Þ
In the above equation, we substitute the assumed dis-
placement variation in terms of the shape function and
nodal displacements, derived earlier. That is, we have:
fdðx; y; z; tÞg ¼ ½Nðx; y; zÞfueðtÞg
ð7:79Þ
where [N(x, y, z)] is the shape function matrix and fueg is
the nodal displacement vector of an element. Using the
above, we can write velocity, acceleration and its ﬁrst
variation as:
f_dg¼½Nf_ueg; f€dg¼½Nf€ueg and fddg¼½Nfdueg
ð7:80Þ
Now the strains can also be written in terms of the strain–
displacement relationship (Equation (6.27) in Chapter 6).
That is, the six strain components can be written in
matrix form as:
exx
eyy
ezz
gxy
gyz
gzx
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
@
@x
0
0
0
@
@y
0
0
0
@
@z
@
@y
@
@x
0
0
@
@z
@
@y
@
@z
0
@
@x
2
66666666666666666664
3
77777777777777777775
u
v
w
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð7:81Þ
feg ¼ ½Bfdg
ð7:82Þ
fdeg ¼ ½Bfddg
ð7:83Þ
Now, we will consider the entries term-by term in
Equation (7.78) and further simplify. We have the ﬁrst
term, which is essentially the inertial part of the governing
equation. If we substitute Equation (7.79), it becomes:
ð
V
rfddgTf€dgdV ¼
ð
V
rfduegT½NT½Nf€uegdV
¼ fduegT
ð
V
r½NT½NdV
2
4
3
5f€ueg
¼ fduegT½mf€ueg
ð7:84Þ
The term inside the brackets is called the element mass
matrix. The mass matrix obtained from the above form
is called the consistent mass matrix, although other
forms of mass matrix exist. Next, we consider the second
term involving strains in Equation (7.78). Using Equation
(7.79) and (7.83), the second term can be written as:
ð
V
fdegT½CfegdV ¼
ð
V
fduegT½BT½C½BfuegdV
¼ fduegT
ð
V
½BT½C½BdV
2
4
3
5fueg
¼ fduegT½kfueg
ð7:85Þ
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
163

In the above equation, the term inside the bracket
represents the stiffness matrix of the formulated element.
The other terms in Equation (7.78) can be written
similarly in terms of the nodal displacement vector and
it ﬁrst variation, using Equations (7.79) and (7.80). Now,
the term due to body force can be written as:
ð
V
fddgTfBgdV ¼
ð
V
fduegT N
½ TfBgdV ¼ fduegT

ð
V
½NTfBgdV
2
4
3
5 ¼ fduegTffBg
ð7:86Þ
The bracketed term represents the body force vector
acting on the element. Similarly, we can write the surface
forces as:
ð
S
fddgTftsgdS ¼ fdugTffsg;
ffsg ¼
ð
S
½NTftsgdS
ð7:87Þ
Finally, the damping force vector, assuming viscous-type
damping, can be written as:

ð
V
fddgTZf_dgdV ¼ fduegT
ð
V
Z½NT½NdV
2
4
3
5f_ueg
¼ fduegT½cf_ueg
ð7:88Þ
Matrix [c] is the consistent damping matrix. This form is
seldom used in actual analysis. There are different ways
of treating damping, which is explained in the latter part
of this chapter. Now, using Equations (7.84)–(7.88) in
Equation (7.78), we have:
ðt2
t1
fduegT½½mf€uegþ½cf_uegþ½kfuegffBgffsgdt¼0
Since the ﬁrst variation of the displacement vector is
arbitrary, we have:
½mf€ueg þ ½cf_ueg þ ½kfueg ¼ fRg
ð7:89Þ
Equation (7.89) is the discritized governing equation of
motion that we need to solve through the ﬁnite element
technique. Here, fRg is the combined force vector due to
body, surface and concentrated forces. Note that the
above equation is a highly coupled second-order linear
differential equation. If the inertial and the damping
forces are absent, the above equation reduces to a set
of simultaneous equations, which are solved to obtain the
static behavior. The sizes of the matrices [m], [k] and [c]
are equal to the number of degrees of freedom an element
can support. All of these matrices are generated for each
element and assembled to obtain the global mass matrix
[M], stiffness matrix [K] and damping matrix [C],
respectively. Before assembling these matrices, displace-
ment boundary conditions are enforced. All of these
matrices are symmetric and banded in nature. The band-
width is dictated by the node numbering of the mesh.
This is determined by taking the highest difference in
node numbers multiplied by the number of degrees of
freedom supported by each node. The present formulation
requires modiﬁcation to handle curved boundaries. Such a
formulation is called the Isoparametric Formulation.
7.6.3 Isoparametric formulation and numerical
integration
Until now we have dealt only with ﬁnite elements having
straight edges. In practical structures, the edges are
always curved and to model such curved edges with
straight-edged elements will result in an enormous sys-
tem size for the problem. In addition, in many practical
situations, it is not always required to have a uniform
mesh density throughout the problem domain. Meshes
are always graded from ﬁne (in the region of a high-stress
gradient) to coarse (in the case of a uniform stress ﬁeld).
These curved elements enable us to grade the mesh
effectively. With the availability of curved quadrilateral,
triangular and wedge elements, it is now possible to
model the 3-D geometry of any complex shape.
The elements with curved boundaries are mapped to
the straight boundaries through a coordinate transfor-
mation which involves mapping functions, which are
functions of the mapped coordinates. This mapping is
established by expressing the coordinate variation as a
polynomial of a certain order with the order of the poly-
nomial decided upon by the number of nodes involved
in the mapping. Since we are working with a straight-
edged mapped domain, the displacement should also be
expressed as a polynomial of a certain order in the
mapped coordinates. In this case, the order of the poly-
nomial is dependent upon the number of degrees of
freedom that an element can support. Thus, we have two
transformations, one involving the coordinates and the
other involving the displacements. If the coordinate
transformation is of a lower order than the displacement
164
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

transformation, then we call such a transformation as
sub-parametric transformation. That is, if an element has
n nodes, while all of the n nodes participate in the
displacement transformation, only a few nodes will
participate in the coordinate transformation. If the coor-
dinate transformation is of a higher-order compared to
the displacement transformation, such a transformation is
called a super-parametric transformation. In this case,
only a small set of nodes will participate in the displace-
ment transformation, while all of the nodes will partici-
pate
in
the
coordinate
transformation.
The
most
important transformation as regards the FE formulation
is when both the displacement and coordinate transfor-
mations are of the same order. That is, all of the nodes
participate in both transformations. Such a transforma-
tion is called an iso-parametric transformation. The
concept of mapping is shown for 1-D and 2-D elements
in Figure 7.8. Next, the concept of isoparametric for-
mulation is demonstrated for 1-D and 2-D elements and
the stiffness matrices for some simple elements are
derived by using this concept.
7.6.3.1 One-dimensional isoparametric rod element
Figure 7.8(a) shows the 1-D rod element in the original
rectangular coordinate system and the mapped coordi-
nate system, with the 1-D mapped coordinate x. Note that
at the two extreme ends of the rod, where the axial
degrees of freedom u1 and u2 are deﬁned, the mapped
coordinates x ¼ 1 and þ1, respectively. We now
assume the displacement variation of the rod in the
mapped coordinates as:
uðxÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x
ð7:90Þ
We now substitute uðx ¼ 1Þ ¼ u1 and uðx ¼ 1Þ ¼ u2
and eliminating the constants, we can write the displace-
ment ﬁeld in the mapped coordinates as:
uðxÞ ¼
1  x
2


u1 þ
1 þ x
2


u2
¼
1  x
2
1 þ x
2


u1
u2


¼ ½NðxÞfueg
ð7:91Þ
We also assume that the rectangular x-coordinate to vary
with respect to the mapped coordinate x in the same
manner as displacement, that is:
x ¼
1  x
2
1 þ x
2


x1
x2


¼ ½NðxÞfxeg
ð7:92Þ
In the above equation, x1 and x2 are the coordinates of
the actual element in the rectangular x-coordinate system.
We can see that there is a ‘one-to-one correspondence’ of
the coordinates in the original and mapped systems. The
derivation of the stiffness matrix requires computation
of the strain–displacement matrix [B], which requires eva-
luation of the derivatives of the shape functions with respect
to the original x-coordinate system. In the case of a rod,
there is only axial strain and hence the [B] matrix becomes:
½B ¼
dN1
dx
dN2
dx


ð7:93Þ
However, one coordinate system can be mapped to the
different coordinate system by using a Jacobian.
That is, by invoking the chain rule of the differentia-
tion, we have:
dNi
dx ¼ dNi
dx
dx
dx
i ¼ 1; 2
ð7:94Þ
From Equation (7.92), we have:
x ¼ 1  x
2
x1 þ 1 þ x
2
x2
dx
dx ¼ ðx2  x1Þ
2
¼ L
2 ¼ J
ð7:95Þ
dx
dx ¼ 2
L ¼ 1
J ;
dx ¼ Jdx
ð7:96Þ
Using Equation (7.96) in Equation (7.94), we get:
dNi
dx ¼ dNi
dx
1
J ¼ dNi
dx
2
L
ð7:97Þ
x = 0
x = 0
y
x
4
(a)
(b)
(c)
3
1
1
–1,–1
1,–1
2
4
–1,1
1,1
3
2
x = L
x = L/2
x = L
Figure 7.8
Various isoparametric ﬁnite elements: (a) linear
rod; (b) quadratic rod; (c) quadrilateral.
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
165

Substituting the shape functions in the above equation,
the shape function derivatives with respect to the mapped
coordinates and hence the [B] matrix become:
dN1
dx ¼ 1
2 ;
dN2
dx ¼ 1
2 ;
½B ¼
1
2
1
2


ð7:98Þ
In the case of a rod, there is only axial stress acting and
as a result [C], the material matrix in Equation (7.85) for
evaluating the stiffness matrix, will have only E, the
Young’s modulus of the material. The stiffness matrix for
a rod is given by:
½K¼
ð
V
½BT½C½BdV ¼
ðL
0
ð
A
½BTE½BdAdx¼
ð1
1
½BTEA½BJdx
ð7:99Þ
Substituting Equations (7.95) and (7.98) into the above
equation for the Jacobian and [B] matrix, we get the
stiffness matrix for a rod as:
½K ¼ EA
L
1
1
1
1


ð7:100Þ
The reader can check that one can directly obtain the
above result without going through the iso-parametric
formulation by directly substituting the shape functions
from Equation (7.58) into Equation (7.85) and perform-
ing a direct integration. For lower-order and straight-
edged elements, the Jacobian is constant and not a
function of the mapped coordinate. For complex geo-
metries and higher-order elements, the Jacobian is
always a function of the mapped coordinate. In such
cases, integration of the expression for computing the
stiffness matrix will involve rational polynomials. To
demonstrate this, we will consider a higher-order rod
having three degrees of freedom, all being axial, as
shown in Figure 7.8(b). The displacement variation for
this element in the mapped coordinate is given by:
uðxÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2x2
ð7:101Þ
Following the same procedure as was done for the
previous
case,
we
ﬁrst
substitute
uðx ¼ 1Þ ¼ u1,
uðx ¼ 0Þ ¼ u2 and uðx ¼ 1Þ ¼ u3 into Equation (7.101)
to get the following three shape functions corresponding
to the three degrees of freedom:
N1 ¼xð1þxÞ
2
; N2 ¼ð1x2Þ; N3 ¼xð1þxÞ
2
ð7:102Þ
Next, the Jacobian requires to be computed, for which
we assume the coordinate transformation as:
x ¼ xð1 þ xÞ
2
x1 þ ð1  x2Þx2 þ xð1 þ xÞ
2
x3
ð7:103Þ
In the above expression x1, x2 and x3 are the coordinates
of the three nodes of the element in the original coordi-
nate system. Taking the derivative with respect to the
mapped coordinate, we get:
dx
dx ¼ ð2x  1Þ
2
x1  2xx2 þ ð2x þ 1Þ
2
x3 ¼ J;
dx ¼ Jdx
ð7:104Þ
Unlike in the two-noded rod case, the Jacobian in the
higher-order rod case is a function of the mapped coordi-
nate and its value changes as we move along the bar. If
the coordinate x2 coincides with the mid-point of the rod,
the value of the Jacobian becomes L=2. The [B] matrix in
this case becomes:
½B ¼ 1
J
2x  1
2


2x 2x þ 1
2




ð7:105Þ
The [B] matrix, unlike the two-noded rod, is a function of
the mapped coordinate. Hence, the stiffness matrix, given
in Equation (7.99) cannot be integrated in the closed
form. One can see that it involves integration of rational
polynomials. Hence, one has to resort to numerical inte-
gration. The most popular numerical integration scheme
is through the Gauss Quadrature, which is explained a
little later in this section.
7.6.3.2 Two-dimensional plane isoparametric element
formulation
The original and mapped representations of an isopara-
metric quadrilateral is shown in Figure 7.8(c). Here, x–y
is the original coordinate system and x--Z is the mapped
coordinate system. Each of the mapped coordinates range
from þ1 to 1. This element has four nodes and each
node can support two degrees of freedom. In all, the
element has eight degrees of freedom and the resulting
stiffness matrix would be of size 8  8. The displacement
variation in the two coordinate directions (u along the
x-direction and v along the y-direction) is given in terms
of the mapped coordinates as:
uðx; ZÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2Z þ a3xZ
vðx; ZÞ ¼ b0 þ b1x þ b2Z þ b3xZ
ð7:106Þ
166
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Substituting the mapped coordinates at the four nodes
would result in determination of the shape functions. The
displacement ﬁeld, as well as the shape functions, are
given by:
u
v
 
¼ N1 0 N2 0 N3 0 N4 0
0 N1 0 N2 0 N3 0 N4


fueg¼½Nfueg
ð7:107Þ
fueg ¼ fu1
v1
u2
v2
u3
v3
u4
v4gT
N1 ¼ ð1  xÞð1  ZÞ
4
;
N2 ¼ ð1 þ xÞð1  ZÞ
4
N3 ¼ ð1 þ xÞð1 þ ZÞ
4
;
N4 ¼ ð1  xÞð1 þ ZÞ
4
ð7:108Þ
The coordinate transformation between the original and
mapped coordinates can be similarly written as:
x
y
 
¼
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
0
0
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4


fxeg
¼ ½Nfxeg
fxeg ¼ x1
y1
x2
y2
x3
y3
x4
y4
f
gT
ð7:109Þ
To compute the derivatives, we will invoke the chain rule.
Noting that the original coordinates are functions of both
mapped coordinates x and Z, we have:
@
@x ¼ @
@x
@x
@x þ @
@y
@y
@x ;
@
@x ¼ @
@x
@x
@Z þ @
@y
@y
@Z
or
@
@x
@
@Z
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼
@x
@x
@y
@x
@x
@Z
@y
@Z
2
664
3
775
@
@x
@
@Z
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼ ½J
@
@x
@
@Z
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
ð7:110Þ
The numerical value of the Jacobian depends on the size,
shape and orientation of the element. In addition:
@
@x
@
@Z
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼ ½J1
@
@x
@
@Z
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
ð7:111Þ
Using Equation (7.111), we can determine the derivatives
required for computation of the [B] matrix. Once this
is done, we can derive the stiffness matrix for a plane
element as:
½K ¼ t
ð1
1
ð1
1
½BT½C½BJdxdZ
ð7:112Þ
where J is the determinant of the Jacobian matrix and t
is the thickness of the element. The stiffness matrix will
be 8  8. [C] is the material matrix, and assuming the
plane stress condition, we have:
½C ¼
E
1  n2
1
n
0
n
1
0
0
0
1  n
2
2
64
3
75
ð7:113Þ
Equation (7.112) cannot be integrated as such in the
closed form. It has to be numerically integrated and for
this purpose, we use the Gauss Quadrature, which is
explained in the next subsection.
7.6.4 Numerical integration and Gauss quadrature
Evaluation of the stiffness and mass matrices, speciﬁcally
for isoparametric elements, involves an expression such
as that given in Equation (7.112), which are necessarily
rational polynomials. Evaluation of these integrals in
their closed forms is very difﬁcult. One has to use a
numerical integration scheme. Although there are several
different numerical schemes available, the Gauss Quad-
rature approach (Cook et al. [7] and Bathe [8]) is most
ideally suited for isoparametric formulation as it evalu-
ates the value of the integral between 1 and þ1, which
is the typical range of natural coordinates in isopara-
metric formulation.
Consider an integral of the form:
I ¼
ð
þ1
1
Fdx;
F ¼ FðxÞ
ð7:114Þ
Let FðxÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x. This function requires to be inte-
grated over the domain 1 < x < 1 with the length of
the domain equal to two units. When the above expres-
sion is substituted into Equation (7.114), the exact value
of the integral is 2a0. If the value of the integrand is
evaluated at the mid-point (i.e. at x ¼ 0) and multiplied
by the length of the domain (i.e. 2), we obtain the exact
value. Hence, an integral of any linear function can be
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
167

evaluated in this way. This result can be generalized for a
function of any order as:
I ¼
ð
þ1
1
Fdx  W1F1 þ W2F2 þ . . . þ WnFn
ð7:115Þ
Hence, to obtain the approximate value of the integral I,
we evaluate FðxÞ at several locations xi, multiply the
resulting Fi with the appropriate weights Wi and add
them together. The points where the integrand is evalu-
ated are called sampling points. In the Gauss Quadarure,
these are the points of very high accuracy, sometimes
referred to as Barlow Points. These points are located
symmetrically with respect to the center of the interval
and symmetrically placed points have the same weight.
The number of points required to integrate the integrand
depends exactly on the degree of the highest polynomial
involved in the expression. If p is the highest degree of
the polynomial in the integrand, then the minimum
number of points n required to integrate the integrand
exactly is equal to n ¼ ðp þ 1Þ=2. That is, for a poly-
nomial of the second degree, i.e. p ¼ 2, the minimum
number of points required to integrate is equal to two.
Table 7.1 gives the locations and weights for the Gauss
Quadrature [7]. In the case of 2-D elements, the stiffness
and mass matrix computation involves evaluation of the
double integral of the form:
I ¼
ð1
1
ð1
1
Fðx; ZÞdxdZ ¼
ð1
1
X
N
i¼1
WiFðxi; ZÞ
"
#
dZ
¼
X
N
i¼1
X
M
j¼1
WiWjFðxi; ZjÞ
ð7:116Þ
Here, N and M are the number of sampling points used in
the x and Z directions. Similarly, we can extend this to
three dimensions. The sampling points of the Gauss
Quadrature are located such that the stresses, which are
less accurate than the displacements in the FE method, at
the Gauss points are very accurate when compared to
other points [9].
Numerical integration for the isoparametric triangle
is also possible by using the Gauss Quadrature. However,
the Gauss points and the weights are quite different.
These are given in Cook et al. [7]. The numerical inte-
gration of the type given in Equation (7.115) is given by:
I ¼ 1
2
X
n
i¼1
WiFðai; bi; giÞ
where, ai, bi and gi are the locations of the Gauss points
in area coordinates.
7.6.5 Mass and damping matrix formulation
The expression for the consistent mass matrix is repre-
sented by Equation (7.84), which is given by:
½M ¼
ð
V
r½NT½NdV
where r is the density and [N] is the shape-function matrix.
This matrix is a fully populated and banded matrix, whose
bandwidth is equal to that of the stiffness matrix. For a
rod element of length L, area of cross-section A and
density r, the shape function is given by Equation (7.58).
Using this shape function, the mass matrix becomes:
½M ¼
ðL
0
ð
A
r
1  x
L
x
L
2
64
3
75 1  x
L
x
L


dx ¼ rAL
6
2
1
1
2


ð7:117Þ
For the case of a beam of length L and area of cross-
section A, the four shape functions are given by Equation
(7.61). Substituting these into the mass matrix expression
and integrating, we get:
½M ¼ rAL
420
156
22L
54
13L
4L2
13L
3L
SYM
156
22L
4L2
2
664
3
775
ð7:118Þ
In both of these cases, we ﬁnd that the matrix is sym-
metric and positive deﬁnite.
Table 7.1
Sampling points and weights for the
Gauss Quadrature.
Order,
Location, xi
Weight, Wi
n
1
0
2
2
0.57735 02691 89626
1.0
3
0.77459 66692 41483
0.00000 00000 00000
0.55555 55555 55556
0.88888 88888 88889
4
0.86113 63115 94053
0.33998 20435 84856
0.34785 48451 37454
0.65214 51548 62546
5
0.90617 98459 38664
0.53846 93101 05683
0.00000 00000 00000
0.23692 68850 56189
0.47862 86704 99366
0.56888 88888 88889
168
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

There are alternate ways to formulate the mass matrix.
That is, the masses can be ‘lumped’ corresponding to the
main degrees of freedom, which make the mass matrix
diagonal. The diagonal mass matrix will result in a very
small storage requirement and hence enables faster solu-
tion of the dynamic equation of motion. There are certain
problems, such as wave propagation, where a lumped
mass is preferred to a consistent mass. There are three
different methods of lumping of the mass reported in the
literature, as follows:
 Adhoc lumping
 HRZ lumping
 Optimal lumping
Adhoc lumping is the simplest way of lumping the mass.
The total mass of the structure is computed and is distri-
buted evenly among all of the translational degrees of
freedom. If the element has rotational degrees of free-
dom, then the mass moment of inertia of the element is
computed and distributed evenly among the rotational
degrees of freedom.
Let us again consider a two-noded rod element of
length L, density r and area of cross-section A. The total
mass of the element is rAL. If this mass is equally distri-
buted between the two axial degrees of freedom, the
lumped mass can be written as:
½Mlumped ¼ rAL
2
1
0
0
1


Now consider a three-noded quadratic bar having the
same elemental properties as the two-noded bar. The
total mass is again equal to rAL, which can be distributed
equally among the three axial degrees of freedom. The
lumped mass matrix then becomes:
½Mlumped ¼ rAL
3
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
4
3
5
ð7:119Þ
Based on experience, the above matrix is expected to
give ‘terrible’ results. On the other hand, if the three-
noded bar is split into two halves having mass rAL=2,
then the middle node will get the mass contribution from
both halves and the mass matrix becomes:
½Mlumped ¼ rAL
4
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
2
4
3
5
ð7:120Þ
The above mass representation gives much better results
as there is a more even distribution of mass. Hence, in
adhoc mass lumping, no ﬁxed rules are speciﬁed for the
lumping procedure. It is purely left to the judgment of the
analyst to decide on how the masses should be lumped.
The lumped mass for a beam of length L, density r and
area of cross-section A, which has four degrees of free-
dom, including two rotational degrees of freedom, is
derived as follows. The total mass m is again equal to
rAL, which can be distributed equally between the two
transverse degrees of freedom. The mass corresponding
to the rotational degrees of freedom is derived as follows.
The mass moment of inertia of a bar is given by mL2=3,
where m is the mass of the bar. In our case, for a better
approximation, we split the beam into two halves of
length L=2 and the mass moment of inertia of each half is
computed and lumped onto the respective rotational
degrees of freedom. That is, the mass moment of inertia
is equal to ð1=3Þðm=2ÞðL=2Þ2 ¼ rAL3=24. Hence, the
lumped mass for the beam becomes:
½Mlumped ¼ rAL
420
a
0
0
0
0
bL2
0
0
0
0
a
0
0
0
0
bL2
2
6664
3
7775;
a ¼ 210;
b ¼ 17:5
ð7:121Þ
In the above form, one can compare Equation (7.121)
with Equation (7.118) and establish the correlation
between two different mass matrices.
Hinton et al. [10] derived a new lumping scheme that
uses the consistent mass matrix. This lumping scheme is
called HRZ lumping, named after the three authors. The
diagonal coefﬁcients are extracted from the consistent
mass matrix as follows. The consistent mass matrix is
ﬁrst obtained. If m is the total mass and Ni is the shape
function of the ith degree of freedom, then the diagonal
coefﬁcients of the mass matrix are given by:
Mii ¼ m
S
ð
V
rN2
i dV;
S ¼
X
N
n¼1
ðMiiÞconsistent
ð7:122Þ
Let us consider the same example of a two-noded bar.
The total mass of the bar is m ¼ rAL. The consistent
mass matrix for this linear bar is given by Equation
(7.117). We have S in Equation (7.122) as equal to
ð2=3ÞrAL. The shape functions N1 and N2 are given in
Equation (7.58). Using this and the values of S and m,
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
169

we can write the lumped mass matrix through HRZ
lumping as:
½MHRZ ¼ rAL
2
1
0
0
1


ð7:123Þ
This matrix is the same as the one derived using adhoc
lumping. The same can be established for the beam
and 2-D isoparametric elements. In the case of beams,
the consistent mass matrix is given by Equation (7.118).
For this case, we have two value of S, one for the
translational degrees of freedom and one for the rota-
tional degrees of freedom. For the translational degrees
of freedom, S ¼ ðrAL=420Þð156 þ 156Þ ¼ ð26=35ÞrAL
and for the rotational degrees of freedom, S ¼ ðrAL=
420Þð4L2 þ 4L2Þ ¼ ð2L2=105ÞrAL. Using this and the
shape functions given in Equation (7.61), we get:
½MHRZ ¼ rAL
78
39
0
0
0
0
L2
0
0
0
0
39
0
0
0
0
L2
2
664
3
775
ð7:124Þ
Comparing this with the mass matrix obtained by adhoc
lumping given in Equation (7.121), the translational
degrees of freedom have a similar mass distribution,
while the rotational degrees of freedom have smaller
values. Similar mass matrices for eight- and nine-noded
isoparametric 2-D elements can be obtained. These are
shown in Figure 7.9.
HRZ lumping gives very good results for lower-order
elements and sometimes this lumping scheme is better
than the consistent formulation, although it is less accu-
rate for higher-order elements.
Optimal lumping was ﬁrst introduced by Malkus and
Plesha [11]. This uses a numerical integration scheme to
obtain the lumped mass matrix. That is, it uses the pro-
perty of the shape function which takes the value of unity
at the node where it is evaluated. Hence, the scheme
requires an integration scheme that uses the nodes as the
sampling points. This process eliminates the off-diagonal
terms in the mass matrix. The Newton–Coates method,
which is the ‘one-third Simpons’s rule’, provides for inte-
grating numerically with nodal points as the sampling
points. The 2-D version of the Newton–Coates method is
the Labatto Integration rule. The number of sampling
points required is determined by the highest order of the
polynomial involved in computation of the mass matrix
and in general is given by:
n ¼ 2ðp  mÞ
ð7:125Þ
Here, p is the highest order of the polynomial, n is the
number of sampling points required for numerical inte-
gration and m is the highest order of the derivative
appearing in the energy functional. For a plane-stress
problem, m ¼ 1, while for bending problems, m ¼ 2.
Let us consider a three-noded isoparametric quadratic
bar element of length L and having three axial degrees of
freedom corresponding to the three nodes. The isopara-
metric shape functions are given in Equation (7.102). In
this case, p ¼ 2 and m ¼ 1 and hence the minimum num-
ber of points required according to Equation (7.125) is 2.
The Newton–Coates formula for integrating the function
f(x) in the interval a to b is given by:
ðb
a
fðxÞdx ¼ ðb  aÞ 1
6 fðx ¼ aÞ þ 4
6 f
x ¼ a þ b
2



þ 1
6 fðx ¼ bÞ

ð7:126Þ
Now, the mass matrix of the bar in the indicial notation
can be written in terms of the shape functions as:
Mij ¼
ð1
1
rANiNjJdx
ð7:127Þ
Here J is the Jacobian and its value is equal to L=2 if
the middle node is exactly at the center. Now, using
the Newton–Coates formula and noting that b  a ¼ 2,
we get:
Mij¼rAL
1
6Niðx¼1ÞNjðx¼1Þþ4
6Niðx¼0ÞNjðx¼0Þ
þ1
6Niðx¼1ÞNjðx¼1Þ
2
664
3
775
ð7:128Þ
1/36
(a)
(b)
8/36
1/36
4/36
16/36
Figure 7.9
HRZ lumping for 2-D elements: (a) eight-noded;
(b) nine-noded.
170
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Substituting the shape functions and evaluating, we get:
½Moptimal ¼ rAL
6
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
2
4
3
5
ð7:129Þ
One can get the same results if we use HRZ lumping.
One can similarly obtain the optimally lumped mass
matrix for 2-D triangular and quadrilateral elements,
which are shown in Figure 7.10. From this ﬁgure,
we see that some mass coefﬁcients are zero and can
even have negative values. This poses a problem in the
solution of dynamic equations. Some special solution
schemes are required for the purpose.
Here, we state the general guidelines for the choice of
mass matrix. A consistent mass matrix is generally used
for ﬂexural problems and in general gives poor results
when the mode shape spans more than four elements.
This is generally not advised for wave-propagation
problems. The computed natural frequencies required
for the solution of dynamic equations are always upper
bound and these are expensive to store and operate as
they are fully populated. However, these are most ideally
suited for higher-order elements.
A lumped mass matrix is extensively used for wave
propagation and highly transient dynamics problems as
it gives very few spurious oscillations. It also gives good
results for lower-order elements. However, for higher-
order elements, one can use an optimally lumped matrix.
Damping is a very complex phenomenon in structures
that is difﬁcult to ascertain exactly. Some of the sources
of damping are the material hysterisis and friction in
joints. The damping matrix derived from the equation of
motion (Equation (7.88)) is seldom used as it is difﬁcult
to measure the damping parameter Z. The most common
method of deriving the damping matrix is known as
Rayleigh’s proportional damping, where the damping
matrix is used as a combination of stiffness and mass
matrix as:
½C ¼ a½K þ b½M
ð7:130Þ
where a and b are the stiffness and mass proportional
damping coefﬁcients to be determined experimentally.
They can be measured by determining the damping ratio
x from the single-degree-of-freedom model. The damp-
ing ratio and the stiffness and mass proportional para-
meters are related by the equation:
x ¼ 1
2
ao þ b
o


ð7:131Þ
A plot of frequency o with the damping ratio x is shown
in Figure 7.11. By measuring the damping ratio at two
different frequencies, one can ﬁnd the stiffness and mass
proportional damping coefﬁcients. The above damping
representation has a great advantage in uncoupling the
governing equation for solution of the dynamic equation
in the modal domain.
7.7 COMPUTATIONAL ASPECTS IN THE
FINITE ELEMENT METHOD
The efﬁciency of the FE solution scheme is judged by the
speed with which the solution can be obtained for a large
complex problem. The speed of the FE solution depends
on various factors, such as mesh sizes, node and element
numbering, type of storage of matrices and the type of
‘solvers’ used in the solution. This section brieﬂy out-
lines the various methods available to reduce the system
size and the various solutions techniques for static and
dynamic problems, without going into much detail. The
interested reader is encouraged to refer to various text-
books available on the FE method [7,8], which dwell on
this aspect in greater detail.
–A/12
A/3
A/9
4A/9
(a)
(b)
(c)
0
A/3
A/36
Figure 7.10
Optimal mass lumping for: (a) an eight-noded
element; (b) a nine-noded element; (c) a six-noded triangular
element (A, area of the element).
(stiffness)          
Frequency 
1
2
1
2
Design spectrum 
Figure 7.11
Damping behavior as a function of frequency.
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
171

7.7.1 Factors governing the speed of the FE solution
The FE discritization process requires the solution of a
set of simultaneous equations of the form ½Kfdg ¼ fFg
in the case of static analysis and a set of coupled second-
order ordinary differential equations of the form given in
Equation (7.89) in the case of dynamic analysis. For a
given mesh, the speed of solution depends upon the
following:
 Node and element numbering of the mesh
 Storage of stiffness, mass and damping matrices
 Type of ‘solver’ used
 Type of assignment of arrays in the main FE program
All of the matrices in the FE solution process are sym-
metric and banded. Hence, it is not necessary to store
only the upper half of these matrices. Even in this upper
half, there are many zeros, which need not be stored. For
example, consider the mesh shown in Figure 7.12(a).
Each node here supports two degrees of freedom. Note
that the nodes are numbered here along the shorter
direction. The stiffness matrix is 12  12 and the band-
width B ¼ 8. The bandwidth is evaluated by using the
expression:
B ¼ ðND þ 1Þ  NDOF
ð7:132Þ
In the above expression, ND is the maximum difference
in the node numbers in a given FE mesh and NDOF is the
number of degree of freedom that an element can sup-
port. That is, for the mesh given in Figure 7.12(a), ND ¼
3, NDOF ¼ 2 and and hence, B ¼ 8.
Now let us consider the mesh shown in Figure 7.12(b),
where the nodes are numbered along the longer direction.
The stiffness matrix will again be 12  12 and the maxi-
mum node number difference ND ¼ 4. Hence, the band-
width B is 10. Therefore, the bandwidth is dependent on
the way we number the nodes. If the bandwidth is larger,
then we need to store more elements of the stiffness matrix.
The following procedure is normally followed while
storing the banded matrices. The diagonal entries become
the ﬁrst column of the banded matrix. The next line
parallel to the diagonal becomes the second column and
so on. In this way, we simplify the storage procedure.
Even if the problem is large and the bandwidth is small,
the time taken to solve the system of the equation would
be of the order NB2 compared to N3 of the full system,
where N is the size of the matrix and B is the bandwidth.
Alternatively, the matrix can be stored even more efﬁ-
ciently by not storing all of the zeros contained within
the bandwidth. Consider the stiffness matrix of the mesh
shown in Figure 7.12(b). The stiffness matrix can be
stored as shown in Figure 7.13. This storage resembles
that of a skyscraper in a city and hence it is called the
skyline storage scheme. In this storage, the column
heights are stored, from which the address of each ele-
ment in the stiffness matrix can be found. By this approach,
many zeros contained within the bandwidth need not be
stored.
The type of storage scheme employed is also depen-
dent upon the FE ‘solvers’ used for obtaining the solu-
tion. If one uses the Gauss elimination or Cholesky’s
decomposition method of solution, it is preferable to
use the banded /skyline storage scheme. On the other
hand, if one chooses the Frontal method of solution, then
the element system matrices need not be assembled and
stored to get the global matrices. Instead, the element-
wise operation is performed to eliminate those degrees of
freedom that do not participate further in the solution
process. If one uses the Frontal solution technique, then
the way the nodes are numbered is not signiﬁcant. It is
the element numbering that is very important.
The speed of the solution is greatly inﬂuenced by the
memory allocation of various matrices such as the stiff-
ness, mass and damping matrices in the main program
and the way these matrices are accessed by the program.
1
2
1
2
3
4
–5
–4
3
6
(a)
(b)
5
6
Figure 7.12
A single mesh with two different node numbering(s).
x
x
x
x
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
B = 10
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Figure 7.13
Illustration of the skyline storage system.
172
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

It is prudent to have single dimension arrays and memory
pointers to access the elements of these matrices. More
details of the programing part can be obtained from
Bathe [12] and Hinton and Owen [13].
7.7.2 Equation solution in static analysis
In the static analysis, we are looking for the solution fdg
in the equation ½Kfdg ¼ fFg, where ½K is the assembled
stiffness matrix and fFg is the assembled force vector.
Although there are many methods of equation solving,
there are only a few methods that can be readily adapted
under an FE environment. Here, we brieﬂy discuss four
such methods.
One of the simplest methods of solving the FE static
equation is the Gauss Elimination Method. Here, the ﬁrst
equation is considered and the displacement d1 is then
expressed in terms of the others. This involves dividing
all of the elements in the ﬁrst row by its ‘pivot’, that is,
K11, which make the diagonal element equal to one.
Then, matrix operations are made to make the off-
diagonal terms equal to zero. This process is done for
all other degrees of freedom. Finally, the original matrix
is reduced to the upper diagonal form with all of the
diagonal entries equal to one. This process is called
forward reduction. In this process, the fFg vector gets
modiﬁed. The last equation in this form will be only an
algebraic equation containing only the last degree of
freedom (nth degree of freedom), which is solved. This
is then ‘back-substituted’ in the (n  1)th equation to
get dn1. This process is continued until all of the
degrees of freedom are solved. This process is called
back-substitution. No search of the pivot is made as it is
assumed that it is always large when compared to off-
diagonal elements. This is always the case unless the
structure is unstable. In this process, each elimination
frees a degree of freedom or releases a constraint. The
numerical value of the diagonal coefﬁcients continues to
decrease but remain positive at all stages of forward
reduction.
In the Choleski decomposition method, the stiffness
matrix is reduced to the following form:
½K ¼ ½UT½U
ð7:133Þ
where ½U is the upper diagonal matrix. Such decom-
position is possible for all square matrices, which are
symmetric. That is, we need to solve the equation:
½UT½Ufdg ¼ fFg
ð7:134Þ
Here, we designate ½Ufdg ¼ fyg. This is substituted in
the above equation and we solve ﬁrst the equation
½UTfyg ¼ fFg for obtaining the vector fyg through
forward substitution. Once the fyg is solved, the actual
displacement vector fdg is obtained by solving ½Ufdg ¼
fyg through back-substitution. The elements of the
matrix Uij are obtained from the stiffness matrix [K]
using the following algorithm:
Uij ¼ 0;
for
i > j
ðupper triangular formÞ
U11 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K11
p
;
U1j ¼ K1j
U11
Uii ¼
Kii 
X
i1
k¼1
Uki
2
 
!0:5
ðfor i > 1Þ
Uij ¼
Kij  P
i1
k¼1
UkiUkj


Uii
ðfor i > 1
j > 1Þ
The Gauss and Choleski algorithms have same computa-
tional efﬁciency for a full matrix. However, for a ‘sparse’
matrix, their efﬁciencies are different. Gauss elimination
is row-oriented for a banded matrix, while the Choleski
method is column-oriented. One of the disadvantages of
the Choleski’s method is that it cannot handle indeﬁnite
matrices as in the case of mixed ﬁnite elements.
The other important solver that is extensively used in
the FE solution process is the wave front or frontal solver.
In this method, assembly of FE equations alternates the
FE solution. The details of this method can be found in
Hinton and Owen [13] and Irons [14]. As mentioned
earlier, this method is driven by element numbering.
First, the equations associated with the ﬁrst element are
reduced by using Gauss elimination. Next, the second
element number makes its contribution to the stiffness
matrix. Those degrees of freedom that are common to
elements one and two are reduced. The next reduction
awaits further contribution to the partially formed stiffness
matrix. The assembly-solution process can be viewed as a
‘‘wave’’ that sweeps over the structure. Proper element
numbering will increase the efﬁciency of the method as
the processing of the degrees of freedom proceeds in
element-number order. This method requires little main
storage but requires extensive bookkeeping of the data.
More recently, iterative solvers, such as the Precondi-
tioned Conjugate Gradient (PCG) method or GMRES
method are extensively used. These methods are not
sensitive to either node or element numbering. They are
based on an initial ‘guess’ and the residue of the governing
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
173

equation is obtained and the iteration continued until the
solution converges. These methods are dealt with in great
detail in Kane [15].
7.7.3 Equation solution in dynamic analysis
The governing partial differential equation of a dynamic
structural system reduces to a coupled set of second-
order ordinary differential equations on the application
of FE discritization, which is given by ½Mf€dgþ
½Df_dg þ ½Kfdg ¼ fRg. This equation requires to be
solved to obtain the dynamic response to the time-
dependent input. The following are two different and
distinct methods of obtaining the response:
 Modal method
 Direct time integration
As before, only a short introduction to these methods is
given here. Readers can obtain further details from many
classic FE textbooks and journal papers available in the
literature.
7.7.3.1 Modal method
In this method, ﬁrst the undamped free-vibration problem
is solved, which is an eigenvalue problem given by:
½Kfdg ¼ o2½Mfdg
ð7:135Þ
Here, o2
i is the ith eigenvalue, which happens to be the
natural frequency of the ith degree of freedom of the sys-
tem and fdgi is the eigenvector or mode shape of the ith
degree of freedom. There are different eigenvalue extrac-
tion schemes and all of these are necessarily iterative.
The most commonly used methods of eigenvalue extrac-
tion are as follows:
 Jacobi’s method
 Subspace iteration method
 Lanchoz’s method
 Determinant search method
 Inverse iteration method
 Forward iteration method
These methods are explained very brieﬂy here.
Jacobi’s method uses a set of transformations to reduce
both the stiffness and mass matrix into a diagonal form.
In this form, the eigenvalues are given by o2 ¼ Kiir=Miir,
where the r superscript is used to denote the reduced or
transformed stiffness or mass matrices. This method
computes all of the eigenvalues at a time and hence is
a very costly and time-consuming process. In conven-
tional dynamic analysis, all of the eigenmodes are seldom
computed. Hence, this method is limited to problems of
small system size.
Subspace iteration is the most famous eigenvalue/
vector extraction technique which is extensively used in
many general-purpose FE software. Here, the property of
orthogonality of the modes is used to reduce the size of
matrices from n  n to m  m, where m << n. On this
reduced set of matrices, Jacobi’s method is used to
compute the eigenvalues/vectors.
Lanchoz’s method is also a powerful technique, which
uses a set of transformations to reduce the stiffness and
consistent matrices into tridiagonal form using suitable
transformations. The extraction of eigenvalue for tridia-
gonal matrices is very fast and well-established. This
method has some in-built parallelism and is hence
extensively used along with many parallel FE codes.
A determinant of the matrix ½½K  o2½M will give a
polynomial of order n, whose solution will give the
eigenvalues of the problem. Since the general structural
problem will have a large number of degrees of freedom,
explicit determination of the coefﬁcients of the charac-
teristic polynomial is extremely difﬁcult. In the Determi-
nant search method, these coefﬁcients are computed
without actually solving the characteristic polynomial.
This is done through use of the Strum sequence check,
which states that if we assume the magnitude of an eigen-
value, one can then split the effective dynamic stiffness
matrix into a Choleski’s decomposition, that is:
½½K  m½M ¼ ½U½D½UT
ð7:136Þ
where m is the assumed value of the eigenvalue and [U]
is the upper diagonal matrix. The number of negative
elements in the diagonal matrix [D] indicates the number
of eigenvalues less than m. Using this property, one can
converge on the actual eigenvalue. However, this method
is not recommended for large-scale dynamic analysis.
Inverse and forward iteration techniques are normally
used to ﬁnd the lowest and highest natural frequencies of
the problem having n degrees of freedom. They are
normally used to determine the frequency bounds
of the problem in hand, which is very useful in choosing
the method of analysis for computing the dynamic res-
ponse. It uses Rayleigh’s principle in determining the
eigenvalues, which states that:
o2 ¼ fdgT½Kfdg
fdgT½Mfdg
ð7:137Þ
174
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Here, fdg is the ‘best-guess’ displacement proﬁle of
the structure. In principle, the static solution can form
the best initial guess, and this solution can be iterated to
get the correct eigenvalue.
It is apparent that the extraction of eigenvalues/vectors
is the most computationally costly activity in the entire
analysis process. The computational time and the memory
cost involved in the various schemes are dealt with in
great detail in Bathe [12]. For a system with n degrees of
freedom, only the ﬁrst m natural frequencies and mode
shapes are computed, where m  n.
After obtaining the ﬁrst m eigenvalues/vectors, these
are put in the matrix form as ½ and ½	. The former is
called the modal matrix, which is of size n  m. In this
matrix, the modes are stored column-wise. The latter is a
diagonal matrix of size m  m containing the natural
frequencies of the computed m modes. This matrix is also
called the spectral matrix. The modal matrix is orthogo-
nal with respect to both the stiffness and mass matrix.
These two matrices along with the orthogonality condi-
tions are used to estimate the dynamic response. There
are two orthogonality conditions, which can be stated as:
½T½K½ ¼ ½	;
½T½M½ ¼ ½I
ð7:138Þ
In general, modal methods use similarity transformation
to convert the actual degrees of freedom fdg of size
n  1 to generalized degree of freedom fZg of size
m  1. This similarity transformation is given by:
fdðtÞgn1 ¼ ½nmfZðtÞgm1
ð7:139Þ
There are two different modal methods by which the
response can be computed. These are:
 Normal Mode method or Mode Displacement method
 Mode Acceleration method
In the Normal Mode method, the orthogonality relations
are used to uncouple the governing differential equation.
This is done in the following manner. The FE differential
equation is given by:
½Mf€dg þ ½Cf_dg þ ½Kfdg ¼ fFg
In this equation, let us use Rayleigh’s proportional damp-
ing of the form ½C ¼ a½K þ b½M. The reason for using
such a damping scheme will become clear in the next
few steps. Now, we substitute Equation (7.139) into the
above equation, which becomes:
½M½f€Zg þ a½K þ b½M
ð
Þ½f _Zg þ ½K½fZg ¼ fFg
Premultiplying ½
T and using the orthogonality condi-
tions (Equation (7.138)) uncouples the differential equa-
tion and can be explicitly written, say for the rth mode as:
€Zr þ 2xror _Zr þ or
2Zr ¼ ffrgTfFg ¼ Fr
ð7:140Þ
Note that, by using a smaller set of modes, we have
reduced n coupled differential equation to m uncoupled
differential equations. In the above equation, xr ¼
ðCr=2MrorÞ is the damping ratio of the rth mode and
ffrg is the eigenvector of the rth mode. Equation (7.140)
is nothing but the governing equation for a single degree
of freedom vibratory system, which can be easily solved
in terms of generalized degrees of freedom. Using these,
the actual degrees of freedom is evaluated using the
similarity transformation (Equation (7.139)).
One of the fundamental limitations of the normal
mode method is that it cannot recover the static displace-
ments in the limit as the frequency tends to zero. As a
result, this method requires more modes to represent the
dynamic response. This limitation is circumvented in the
Mode Acceleration method. This method is described
below.
The similarity transformation (Equation (7.139)) is
ﬁrst expressed in terms of summation as, say for the
kth degree of freedom, as:
dkðtÞ ¼
X
m
r¼1
fkrZr
ð7:141Þ
From Equation (7.140), we can write Zr as:
Zr ¼
Fr
or2  2xr
or
_Zr  1
or2 €Zr
Using this in Equation (7.141), we get:
dkðtÞ ¼
X
m
r¼1
fkr
Fr
or2  2xr
or
_Zr  1
or2 €Zr


ð7:142Þ
Now, we can write the inverse of the stiffness matrix, that
is, ½K1, by using the ﬁrst orthogonality condition. The
inverse can be written as:
½K1 ¼ ffrgTffrg
o2
r
ð7:143Þ
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
175

Using the above in Equation (7.138) and noting that
Fr ¼ ffrgTfFg, we can write this equation as:
dkðtÞ ¼ ½K1fFg 
X
m
r¼1
fkr
2xr
or
_Zr þ 1
o2
r
€Zr


ð7:144Þ
The ﬁrst term is the static response. This representation
gives a quite accurate response using a smaller set of modes.
Modal methods are not suitable for wave-propagation
problems, which are necessarily high-frequency-content
problems. Such problems require evaluation of higher-
order modes and natural frequencies, which are compu-
tationally prohibitive. For such problems, one normally
uses Direct Time Integration, which is described next.
7.7.3.2 Direct time integration
Here, we write the differential equation at a particular
time instant, say n, where the time derivatives are written
in terms of the ﬁnite difference coefﬁcients. This method
can be universally applied to both low- and high-
frequency-content problems as well as both linear and
nonlinear problems. The modal methods cannot be
applied to nonlinear problems. Hence, this method is
extensively used in highly transient dynamics and wave-
propagation problems. There two different time integra-
tion schemes. These are:
 Explicit Time Integration
 Implicit Time Integration
7.7.3.3 Explicit time integration
In this type of integration, the displacement, velocity and
acceleration histories before the current time instant are
known. This method is very easy to implement and gives
very good results for wave-propagation problem. How-
ever, one of the main disadvantages of this method is that
the method is conditionally stable, that is, there is a
constraint placed on the time step.
Consider the variation of a function that requires to
be integrated with respect to time, shown in Figure 7.14.
The governing equation at time step n can be written as:
½Mf€dgn þ ½Cf_dgn þ fRingn ¼ fFgn; fRingn
¼
ð
V
½BTfsgndV
2
4
3
5fdg
ð7:145Þ
The above form is generally used for nonlinear problems,
where fRing represents the internal force vector. In linear
problems, fRing ¼ ½Kfdg ¼ ½
Ð
V ½BT½D½BdVfdg. Using
the forward and backward difference at times n þ 1=2
and n  1=2, the velocities can be written as:
f_dgnþ1=2 ¼ fdgnþ1  fdgn
t
;
f_dgn1=2 ¼ fdgn  fdgn1
t
ð7:146Þ
Here, t is the time step adopted for the time-marching
scheme. Combining these, we can write the velocities and
accelerations at time step n as:
f_dgn ¼ fdgnþ1  fdgn1
2t
;
f€dgn ¼ fdgnþ1  2fdgn þ fdgn1
t2
ð7:147Þ
The above representation of the second derivative is
‘second-order accurate’. The above scheme is called
the central difference scheme. Substituting the above
into Equation (7.145), we get:
½M
t2 þ ½C
2t


fdgnþ1 ¼ fFgn  ½Kfdgn þ 1
t2 ½Mð2fdgn
 fdgn1Þ þ 1
2t ½Cfdgn1
ð7:148Þ
In the above expression, the right-hand side contains
expressions that depend on time instants previous to the
current time step. After the displacements are obtained,
the velocities and accelerations can be obtained from
n – 1  n – 1/2  n   n + 1/2 
Time
d(t)
f (t)
Figure 7.14
Displacement variation at different times for the
ﬁnite difference approximation.
176
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Equation (7.147). If matrices [M] and [C] are diagonal,
then the equations are uncoupled and one can obtain dis-
placements without solving the simultaneous equations.
Equation (7.148) requires the value of fdg1 and f€dg0 at
time t ¼ 0; fdg1 is obtained by expanding the fdgn by a
Taylor series and substituting t ¼ 0 in the expression.
f€dg0 is obtained by the governing differential equation
written at t ¼ 0. These are given by:
fdg1 ¼ fdg0  tf_dg0 þ t2
2 f€dg0
f€dg0 ¼ ½M1fFg0  ½Kfdg0  ½Cf_dg0
ð7:149Þ
This method is conditionally stable. That is, a large time
step would result in divergence of the displacements.
Hence, a constraint is placed on the time step. This
constraint is derived based on a rigorous error analysis
based on Z-transforms [7]. This constraint is given by:
t ¼
2
omax
ð7:150Þ
The omax can be evaluated in the following ways:
(1) The frequency content of the input signal can be
obtained through the FFT and the maximum fre-
quency can be determined from the FFT plot. This
will normally be used in wave-propagation problems.
(2) The omax can also be evaluated from the global
stiffness and mass matrix as:
omax
2 ¼ Max Kii þ
X
N
j¼1
jKijj
 
!
=Mii
(3) For each element, the eigenvalue problem is solved.
Then, the critical time step can be obtained by
t ¼ Minð2=oe2Þ, where oe is the maximum natural
frequency of each element.
7.7.3.4 Implicit time integration
Implicit time integration requires information of quanti-
ties beyond the current time step. That is, for computing
the displacements at time step n, information of displace-
ments, velocities and accelerations at time steps n þ 1
and n þ 2 are required. This integration method uses the
well-known Trapezoidal rule and Simpson’s rule to come
up with different time-marching schemes. Here, we
describe a simple integration scheme based on the
Trapezoidal rule. This is called the average acceleration
method and when applied to a parabolic PDE is some-
times referred to as the Crank–Nicholson Method. The
implicit schemes are hard to implement; however, these
methods are unconditionally stable.
In this scheme, we write the governing equation at
time step n þ 1, which is given by:
½Mf€dgnþ1 þ½Cf_dgnþ1 þ½Kfdgnþ1 ¼ fFgnþ1 ð7:151Þ
Using the Trapezoidal rule, the displacements and velo-
cities at time n þ 1, can be written in terms of velocities
and accelerations as:
fdgnþ1 ¼ fdgn þ t
2 ðf_dgn þ f_dgnþ1Þ;
f_dgnþ1 ¼ f_dgn þ t
2 ðf€dgn þ f€dgnþ1Þ
ð7:152Þ
The velocities and accelerations at time n þ 1 can now
be written as:
f_dgnþ1 ¼ 2
t ðfdgnþ1  fdgnÞ  f_dgn
f€dgnþ1 ¼ 4
t2 ðfdgnþ1  fdgnÞ  4
t f_dgn  f€dgn
ð7:153Þ
Substituting these into Equation (7.151), we get:
½Kefffdgnþ1 ¼ fFeffgnþ1
ð7:154Þ
where:
½Keff ¼ 4
t2 ½M þ 2
t ½C þ ½K
fFeffgnþ1 ¼ fFgnþ1 þ ½M
4
t2 fdgn þ 4
t f_dgn þ f€dgn


þ ½C
2
t fdgn þ f_dgn


ð7:155Þ
Equation (7.154) is solved for ﬁnding out the displace-
ments at time step n þ 1 using the information available
at time step n. Velocities and accelerations are computed
using Equation (7.153). At each step, Equation (7.154) is
a highly coupled set of simultaneous equations even
when [M] and [C] are diagonal. This is unlike the explicit
method. Hence, there is no merit in using lumped
approximations for the mass. It is similar to solving a
static problem at each time step. When implementing this
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
177

scheme, one can perform Choleski decomposition on
½Keff only once for forward reduction as it is a function
of only the time step, which is decided a priori before the
analysis. If [M] is positive deﬁnite, ½Keff is nonsingular
even for singular [K]. This scheme is said to give poor
convergence for nonlinear problems. This scheme gives
better results with the use of a consistent mass matrix.
The most important advantage of this method is that it is
unconditionally stable. That is, even for a large time step,
the solution will not diverge. This does not, however,
mean unconditional accuracy. For nonlinear problems,
the time step should be small for better accuracy.
In general, both of the integration schemes, namely the
implicit and explicit, do not provide for automatic dis-
sipation of high-frequency noise, which normally exists.
Hence, there are many integration schemes that are
designed to incorporate additional parameters that would
take care of dissipating this high-frequency noise. One
such method, which is extensively used in many general
purpose packages, is the Newmark-b method. This
method has two parameters that dictate the amount of
dissipation and the type of integration scheme, namely
explicit or implicit. That is, by appropriately tuning these
parameters, we can make the integration scheme purely
explicit or implicit. More details of this method can be
found in Bathe [12].
7.8 SUPERCONVERGENT FINITE
ELEMENT FORMULATION
The FEM is an approximate technique and the accuracy
of the solution is heavily dependent upon the element
size and the order of the interpolating polynomial. To
improve the accuracy in the case of elements formulated
with lower-order polynomials, it is necessary to increase
the mesh density, especially for transient dynamic pro-
blems and also for problems with high stress gradients.
Such an approach for increasing the mesh density is
called the h-FEM approach. Alternatively, one can
increase the order of the polynomial, thereby increasing
the number of nodes in each element. Such an approach
is called the p-FEM approach. In the case of transient
dynamic problems, what is required for accurate solution
is accurate mass distribution. This necessarily requires a
ﬁne mesh density, no matter what type of approach one
adopts. The problems in smart structures, especially
structural health monitoring problems, are necessarily
high-frequency-content problems. In most cases, it
requires interrogation of a high-frequency tone-burst-
type signal to infer the state of the structure. The
frequency content of such signals is of the order of
50 kHz–2 MHz.
In
such
problems,
all
higher-order
modes not only get excited but also have high-energy
contents. To capture these higher modes, the mesh sizes
should be so ﬁne that they should match the wavelength
of the stress wave that is set up due to the given
excitation. Hence, such problems are beyond the reach
of the FEM.
The problem of obtaining an accurate mass distribu-
tion ‘boils down’ to how close the assumed displacement
ﬁeld satisﬁes the governing equation. In the FEM, time-
dependency does not enter explicitly in the solution.
Hence, if we choose our interpolating functions to satisfy
the spatial part (static part) of the governing equation,
one would exactly characterize the stiffness of the struc-
ture, while the mass distribution of the structure will
still be approximate. However, it is the accurate predic-
tion of resonances or natural frequencies that is key to
obtaining an accurate solution to the dynamic problem. If
one carries out an error analysis of an assumed solution,
it can be shown that the order of error magnitude in
stiffness characterization is quite a lot higher as opposed
to mass. This aspect is proved in Strang and Fix [16].
Hence, one can expect a better prediction of higher-order
modes using smaller ﬁnite element meshes by employing
the above approach. We call this formulation the Super
Convergent Finite Element Formulation (SCFEM). In
fact, the elementary rod and beam elements described
earlier in this chapter are super-convergent elements as
they satisfy the static part of the governing equation
exactly. As a result, one element, no matter how long the
element is, is sufﬁcient to capture the static response
exactly. This is true as long as the structure is subjected
to point loads, which is normally the case in most wave-
propagation problems.
Another situation where the SCFEM is very useful is
in constraint media problems. These problems occur
when ﬁnite elements based on higher-order theory are
used to predict responses in the models based on
elementary theory. For example, let us consider the
Timoshenko beam and Euler–Bernoulli beam models.
The basic difference between the two models is that, in
the former shear deformation is introduced. Introduction
of shear deformation violates the condition that ‘‘plane
sections remain plane before and after bending’’. Hence,
the beam slopes cannot be obtained by differentiating the
transverse displacement and therefore, in ﬁnite element
formulations, it requires to be separately interpolated.
This reduces the continuity requirement from C1 in the
elementary beam to C0 in the Timoshenko beam. When
this Timoshenko beam model is used to predict responses
178
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

in very thin beams (where the shear strains are zero), one
obtains solutions that are many orders smaller than the
correct solution. This problem is called the shear locking
problem. The reason for this locking is that the formula-
tion introduces two stiffness matrices, one due to bending
and the other due to shear. It is this shear stiffness matrix
that introduces the shear constraints, which makes the
structure excessively stiff. That is, the shear stiffness
matrix is non-singular. If one needs to eliminate shear
locking, the shear matrix should be made ‘rank-deﬁcient’,
which makes this matrix singular. This is accomplished
by ‘under-integrating’ the shear stiffness using the Gauss
Quadrature. These schemes are explained in greater
detail in Prathap and Bhashyam [17], Hughes et al.
[18] and Prathap [19].
In such constrained media problems, the SCFEM can
be employed. In this formulation, the user need not know
if the higher-order effects are predominant or not. In
addition, it is extremely useful in solution of the transient
dynamics problems using smaller problem sizes. In the
next subsection, we introduce the SCFEM formulation
for a deep rod, where the higher-order effects due to
lateral contraction introduce an additional degree of
freedom.
7.8.1 Superconvergent deep rod ﬁnite element
An elementary rod can support only axial motion. Hence,
a linear polynomial is sufﬁcient to capture the static
response exactly under point loads. In the deep rod, the
lateral displacements are signiﬁcant due to Poisson’s
ratio. This is accounted for through an additional degree
of freedom c. This lateral motion is shown in Figure 6.24
in Chapter 6. This was earlier introduced in Chapter 6
to study the wave-propagation behavior in composites
(Section 6.3.2). Here, we consider an isotropic rod of
length L, axial rigidity EA, density r, Poisson’s ratio n
and shear rigidity GI. A and I are the area and moment of
inertia of the cross-section. The assumed displacement
ﬁeld can be taken as:
uðx; tÞ ¼ uðx; tÞ;
wðx; tÞ ¼ zcðx; tÞ
ð7:156Þ
In the above expression, uðx; tÞ and wðx; tÞ are the axial
and lateral displacement ﬁelds and z the depth coordi-
nate. Using this, we write the strains by using the strain–
displacement relations (Equation (6.27)) and stresses,
using Equation (6.68) (Chapter 6). These are then used
to write the strain and kinetic energies in terms of
displacements, which is used in Hamilton’s principle
(Equation (7.52)) to obtain the following governing
equations for a deep rod:
EA
1  n2
@2u
@x2 þ n @c
@x


¼ rA @2u
@t2
GIK @2c
@x2 
EA
1  n2 c þ n @u
@x


¼ rIK1
@2c
@t2
ð7:157Þ
In the above equations, the two constants K and K1 are
introduced
to
compensate
for
the
approximations
enforced in the analysis. When this equation is uncoupled
in terms of the axial displacement uðx; tÞ, it becomes a
fourth-order partial differential equation, as opposed to
the second order of the elementary rod. The elementary
rod theory can be recovered by setting c ¼ nð@u=@xÞ,
GIK ¼ 0 and rIK1 ¼ 0. In regular ﬁnite element analy-
sis, a linear polynomial in u and c would have been
sufﬁcient to formulate the basic element. Such an ele-
ment would behave very well in a deep-rod situation.
However, in the limit as c ¼ nð@u=@xÞ, this rod ele-
ment would lock, giving responses much smaller than
the true solution. In order to circumvent this problem, we
ignore the dynamic part in Equation (7.157) (the right-
hand side of the equation) and solve the coupled ordinary
differential equation exactly. This exact solution can be
used in interpolating functions for FE formulation. In
doing so, we get the following solution:
uðxÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2ebðLxÞ þ a3ebx
cðxÞ ¼ b0 þ b1ebðLxÞ þ b2ebx
ð7:158Þ
Here, b2 ¼ EA=GIK and L is the length of the ﬁnite
element. In reality, the above function is a polynomial of
inﬁnite order. If GIK ¼ 0, then we would recover our
elementary rod solution. In the above equation, we have
seven constants and only four boundary conditions at
both ends. Hence, there are three dependent constants
which can be expressed in terms of independence by
substituting the solution (Equation (7.158)) in the govern-
ing differential equation (Equation (7.157)). In doing so,
we get the following relations among the constants:
b0 ¼ na1;
b1 ¼ a2
b
n ;
b2 ¼ a3
b
n
ð7:159Þ
Now, the interpolating polynomial can be written only
in terms of four constants as:
uðxÞ ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2ebðLxÞ þ a3ebx
cðxÞ ¼ na1  a2
b
n ebðLxÞ þ a3
b
n ebx
ð7:160Þ
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
179

Here, we see that some of the coefﬁcients associated
with lateral contraction are material-dependent. This is
one of the features of the SCFEM. First, the shape
functions are established. This is done by enforcing
uð0Þ ¼ u1, uðLÞ ¼ u2, cð0Þ ¼ c1 and cðLÞ ¼ c2. This
will give a relation between the unknown coefﬁcients
fag ¼ fa0
a1
a2
a3gT and the nodal degrees of free-
dom fug ¼ fu1
c1
u2
c2gT, which can be written
as fag ¼ ½Gfug. These coefﬁcients are substituted back
into Equation (7.158), and hence we can write the
displacement ﬁeld as:
uðxÞ ¼ ½Nufug;
½Nu ¼ ½1
x
ebðLxÞ
ebx
½G ¼ ½Nu1
Nu2
Nu3
Nu4
cðxÞ ¼ ½Ncfug;
½Nc ¼ ½0
n
ebðLxÞ
ebx
½G ¼ ½Nc1
Nc2
Nc3
Nc4
ð7:161Þ
Here, ½Nu and ½Nc are the 1  4 shape function matrices
corresponding to u and c degrees of freedom at the two
ends of the rod. The above shape functions are exact
shape functions for performing static analysis. The for-
mulation from here is the same as was carried out for a
regular ﬁnite element. First, the strain displacement
matrix [B] is established. The strains are as follows:
exx ¼ du
dx ;
eyy ¼ dv
dy ¼ c;
gxy ¼ du
dy ; þ dv
dx ¼ z dc
dx
ð7:162Þ
This can be written in matrix form as:
exx
eyy
gxy
8
<
:
9
=
;¼
dNu1
dx
dNu2
dx
dNu3
dx
dNu4
dx
Nc1
Nc2
Nc3
Nc4
zdNc1
dx
zdNc2
dx
zdNc3
dx
zdNc4
dx
2
6666664
3
7777775
u1
c1
u2
c2
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼½Bfug
ð7:163Þ
The constitutive matrix assuming the plane stress condi-
tion is given by Equation (7.113). Using the formulated
[B] matrix and the material matrix [C], the expression for
the stiffness matrix is given by:
½K ¼
ðL
0
ð
A
½BT½C½BdAdx
ð7:164Þ
The explicit expressions for the elements of the stiffness
matrix is given by:
k11 ¼ R
 ;
k12 ¼ aLS

;
k13 ¼ k11;
k14 ¼ k12
k22 ¼ L2aðR2 þ S2  2naRSÞ
2nS
;
k23 ¼ k12;
k24 ¼ L2aðR2  S2  2naRSÞ
2nS
k33 ¼ k11;
k34 ¼ k12;
k44 ¼ k22
R ¼ 1 þ ebL;
S ¼ 1  ebL;
a ¼ n
bL ;
 ¼ R  2naS;
b ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
EA
GIK
r
ð7:165Þ
Using the shape functions given in Equation (7.161), we
can also formulate the consistent mass matrix. It has two
components, one due to axial motion and the other due to
lateral contraction. Hence, we can write the mass matrix as:
½M ¼ ½Mu þ ½Mc
½Mu ¼ rA
ðL
0
½NuT½Nudx; ½Mc ¼ rIK1
ðL
0
½NcT½Ncdx
ð7:166Þ
Substituting for the shape functions from Equation
(7.161), we can write the mass matrix as:
½M ¼ rAL½GT½mu½G þ rIK1½GT½mc½G
ð7:167Þ
The elements of ½mu and ½mc are given by:
m11
u ¼1; m12
u ¼L
2; m13
u ¼Sa
n ; m14
u ¼m13
u
m22
u ¼L2
3 ; m23
u ¼La
n
1Sa
n


; m24
u ¼La
2n
SRþ2Sa
n


m33
u ¼RSa
2n ; m34
u ¼RS
2
; m44
u ¼m33
u
ð7:168Þ
m11
c ¼m12
c ¼m13
c ¼m14
c ¼0
m22
c ¼n2L; m23
c ¼S; m24
c ¼S
m33
c ¼ RS
2naL; m34
c ¼RS
2La2 ; m44
c ¼m33
c
ð7:169Þ
Before we use this element, we should determine the
values of the parameters K and K1. This is normally done
180
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

by looking at the limiting behavior of the rod at very high
frequencies. Since the present theory is an approximation
of the 2-D behavior, a practical approach would be to
consider a better representation of this model with a 2-D
FE model and choose the values of K and K1 to get the
best results in the frequency of interest. This was carried
out by Martin et al. [20] and values of K ¼ 1:2 and
K1 ¼ 1:75 were suggested.
To demonstrate the utility of this element, two exam-
ples are considered – one is a static-analysis example
while the other is a wave-propagation example. For static
analysis, we consider a cantilever rod of axial rigidity
EA and length L under a tip axial load, as shown in
Figure 7.15(a). One single element will give an exact
static response. If the rod is elementary, then the tip axial
displacement will be equal to PL/AE. A single deep rod
element will give the tip axial displacement as:
utip ¼ PL
AE 1  2naRS
R2 þ S2


ð7:170Þ
Here, the parameters R, S, etc. are deﬁned in Equation
(7.165). The second term in the brackets is the error in
using the elementary theory. A plot of the error with the
L/h ratio, where h is the depth of the rod, would show that
even for a very thick rod (very small L/h ratio), the error
is only about 8 %. This was reported by Gopalakrishnan
[21]. Hence, the errors are not large enough to justify the
use of a higher-order model for static analysis. An
elementary rod model is sufﬁcient.
It has been shown by Gopalakrishnan [21], Doyle [22],
Chakraborty and Gopalakrishnan [23] and Roy Mahapatra
and Gopalakrishnan [24] that a very high-frequency beha-
vior gets affected by introduction of the lateral contrac-
tion mode. That is, an additional propagating mode is
introduced at very high frequencies, which was shown in
Chapter 6 for an unsymmetric laminate (Section 6.3.2).
To demonstrate the presence of an additional propagating
mode, an inﬁnite isotropic rod is considered, as shown in
Figure 7.15(b).
This rod is subjected to a tone-burst narrow-banded
signal sampled at 125 kHz. This frequency is chosen so
that the tone-burst frequency is beyond the cut-off fre-
quency for this rod to ensure that the second propagating
contraction mode is excited. The cut-off frequency for a
deep rod with aluminum properties has been given by
Gopalakrishnan [21].
o0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
EA
ð1  n2ÞrIK1
s
¼ 88 kHz
ð7:171Þ
The pulse is allowed to propagate a distance of 3048 mm
for the contraction mode to appear. The inﬁnite rod was
modeled using 9000 formulated ﬁnite elements to make
sure that the element size matches the wavelength at this
high frequency. Figure 7.16 shows a comparison of the
solutions between the present model and the spectral
model [20]. At about 2000 ms, one can see the contraction
mode appearing in both of the models. The ﬁnite element
model over estimates the speed due to an approximate
mass distribution. This narrow-banded tone-burst pulse is
very useful for performing structural health monitoring
studies.
The SCFEM models are now available for practically
all 1-D models such as deep composite beams [23], ﬁrst-
order shear-deformable composite beams [25], function-
ally graded beams [26] and thin-walled composite box
beams with and without smart ‘patches’ [27,28]. One
practical difﬁculty in the SCFEM is that it is extremely
difﬁcult to formulate 2-D and 3-D elements as exact
solutions of the governing equations, as these are very
difﬁcult to obtain.
L
EA,   A
P
P(t)
3048 mm
h = 22 mm
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.15
Examples used in deep-rod formulation: (a)
cantilevered rod with a tip axial load; (b) inﬁnite deep rod.
Figure 7.16
Two propagating modes in a deep rod: (a) ﬁnite
element solution; (b) spectral element solution.
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
181

7.9 SPECTRAL FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION
Application of the FEM for wave propagation requires
a very ﬁne mesh to capture the mass distribution accu-
rately. The mesh size should be comparable to the wave-
lengths, which are very small at high frequencies. Hence,
the problem size increases enormously. Many applica-
tions in smart structure applications, such as structural
health monitoring or active wave control in composite
structures, require wave-based modeling since one has to
use high-frequency interrogating signals. If one needs
online diagnostic tools in structures, wave-based model-
ing is an absolute must. For such problems, the FEM by
itself cannot be used as a modeling tool as it is very
expensive from the computational viewpoint. Hence, one
needs an alternate formulation wherein the frequency
content of the exciting signal is not an issue. That is, we
need a modeling tool that can give a smaller problem
size for high-frequency loading, at the same time retain-
ing the matrix structure of the FEM. Such a technique is
feasible through the spectral ﬁnite element (SFEM)
technique.
The SFEM is the FEM formulated in the frequency
domain and wavenumber space. That is, these elements
will have interpolating functions that are complex expo-
nentials or Bessel functions. These interpolating func-
tions are also functions of the wavenumbers. In Chapter 6
(Section 6.3.2), we have seen that a governing partial 1-D
wave equation, when transformed into the frequency
domain using DFT, removes the time derivative and
reduces the PDE to a set of ODEs, which have complex
exponentials as solutions. In the SFEM, we use these
exact solutions as the interpolating functions. As a result,
the mass is distributed exactly and hence, one single
element is sufﬁcient between any two discontinuities
to get an exact response, irrespective of the frequency
content of the exciting pulse. That is, one SFEM can
replace hundreds of FEMs normally required for wave-
propagation analysis. Hence, the SFEM is an ideal
candidate for developing online health monitoring soft-
ware. In addition to smaller system sizes, other major
advantages of the SFEM include the following:
 Since the formulation is based on the frequency
domain, system transfer functions are the direct
byproduct of the approach. As a result, one can perform
inverse problems such as force identiﬁcation/system
identiﬁcation in a straightforward manner.
 The approach gives the dynamic stiffness matrix as a
function of frequency, directly from the formulation.
Hence, we have to deal with only one element of
dynamic stiffness as opposed to two matrices in the
FEM (stiffness and mass matrices).
 Since different normal modes have different amounts
of damping at various frequencies, by formulating the
elements in the frequency domain one can treat the
complex damping mechanisms more realistically.
 The SFEM lets you formulate two sets of elements –
one is the ﬁnite length element and the other is the
inﬁnite element or ‘throw-off element’. This ‘throw-
off element’ acts as a conduit of energy out of the
system. There are various uses of this inﬁnite ‘throw-
off element’, such as adding maximum damping,
obtaining good resolution of the responses in the
time and frequency domains and also in modeling
large lengths, which are computationally very expen-
sive to model in the FEM.
 The SFEM is probably the only technique that gives
you responses in both the time and frequency domains
in a single analysis.
The SFEM can be formulated in a similar manner to the
FEM by writing the ‘weak form’ of the governing differ-
ential equation and substituting the assumed functions
for displacements and integrating the resulting expres-
sion. Since the functions involved are much more com-
plex, integration of these functions in the ‘closed form’
takes a longer time. In addition, by this approach we
cannot obtain the dynamic stiffness matrix of the ‘throw-
off element’, as the latter is normally complex. Hence,
we adopt an equilibrium approach of element formula-
tion, which eliminates integration of the complex func-
tions. In this chapter, we show this formulation for a
simple isotropic rod element, while the procedure remains
the same for other elements.
Formulation of the spectral elements requires deter-
mination of the spectrum (the variation of wavenumber
with frequency) relations and the dispersion relations
(speed with frequency). The procedure to determine
these were given in Chapter 6 (Section 6.3.2). The
SFEM begins with transformation of the governing
equation into the frequency domain by using a discrete
Fourier transform. The solution of this transformed equa-
tion becomes the interpolating function for the spectral
element formulation. The procedure of formulating the
SFEM for a simple 1-D rod is illustrated below.
The governing differential equation for a uniform rod
with associated boundary conditions are given by:
EA @2u
@x2 ¼ rA @2u
@t2 ;
F ¼ EA @u
@x
ð7:172Þ
182
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

where EA is the axial rigidity and r is the density of
the material. Assuming the spectral form of solution (or
Fourier transform) given by:
uðx; tÞ ¼
X
N
n¼1
^unðx; oÞeiont
Substituting the above spectral form of the solution into
Equation (7.172) converts the PDE to a set of ODEs,
which is given by:
X
N
n¼1
EA d2^un
dx2 þ rAo2^un


¼ 0
ð7:173Þ
The longitudinal wavenumber for the rod is given by
k ¼ o
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rA=EA
p
, where o is the frequency.
Consider a rod of length L. The force and displacement
degrees of freedom are shown in Figure 7.17. Note here
that all of the variables with a ‘‘hat’’ indicate frequency-
dependent quantities. The interpolating function for ele-
ment formulation, which is the exact solution of Equation
(7.173), is given by:
^uðx; oÞ ¼ Aeikx þ BeikðLxÞ
ð7:174Þ
We now substitute the boundary conditions, that is, at
^uð0Þ ¼ ^u1; ^uðLÞ ¼ ^u2, we get:
^u1
^u2


¼
1
eikL
eikL
1


A
B
 
; f^uge ¼½^Gfag
ð7:175Þ
Inverting the above relation, we get:
A
B


¼
1
ð1  e2ikLÞ
1
eikL
eikL
1


^u1
^u2


;
fag ¼ ½G1f^uge
ð7:176Þ
Substituting Equation (7.176) into Equation (7.174), we
get the spectral shape functions, which are given by:
^uðx;oÞ¼½eikx ekðLxÞfag¼½eikx ekðLxÞ½G1f^uge
¼½^Nf^uge; ½^N¼½^N1 ^N2¼½eikx ekðLxÞ½G1
ð7:177Þ
Now, we consider the force results at the two ends, which
are given in Equation (7.172) and can write the resultants
in terms of the boundary resultants as:
^F1 ¼ EAd^u
dx
((((
x¼0 ;
^F2 ¼ EAd^u
dx
((((
x¼L
The above relation can be put in the matrix form as:
^F1
^F2


¼ EA
L ikL
1
eikL
eikL
1


A
B


Substituting Equation (7.175) into the above equation
and carrying out the required matrix multiplication will
give the required force–displacement relation in the
frequency domain through a dynamic stiffness matrix,
which is given by:
^F1
^F2
(
)
¼ EA
L
ikL
ð1  e2ikLÞ
1 þ e2ikL
2eikL
2eikL
1 þ e2ikL


^u1
^u2


f^Fge ¼ EA
L ½^Kf^uge
ð7:178Þ
Here, ½^K is the element dynamic stiffness matrix, which is
symmetric and real, as in the case of a conventional ﬁnite
element dynamic stiffness matrix, which is given by:
½^KFEM ¼ ½K  o2½M ¼ EA
L
1
1
1
1


 o2 rAL
6
2
1
1
2


ð7:179Þ
Figure 7.18 gives a comparison of some stiffness coefﬁ-
cients of the SFEM and FEM at low and medium
frequencies.
We see that at low frequencies they practically match
each other. At medium frequencies, we see that the stiff-
ness coefﬁcients differ substantially. We can make the
FEM stiffness match the spectral stiffness if we use many
elements to model the rod. This is one of the reasons why
the model sizes of the SFEM are very small. The
formulation of various spectral elements for 1-D isotro-
pic waveguides is given in Doyle [22]. Spectral elements
for 1-D elementary and ﬁrst-order shear deformable
composite waveguides are given in Roy Mahapatra and
Gopalakrishnan [24] and Roy Mahapatra et al. [29].
Spectral elements are also available for composite
tubes [30] and functionally graded beams [31]. Spectrally
formulated elements are also available for 2-D isotropic
ˆ
ˆ
u1, F1
ˆ
ˆ
u2, F1
EA,   A
L
Figure 7.17
Degrees of freedom for a spectral rod element.
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
183

membrane waveguides [32] and composite waveguides
[33]. In all of these works, exact solutions to the inter-
polating functions were used for element formulation.
There are a few approximate spectral elements, where an
approximate solution, along with the frequency-domain
variational principle, was used to formulate the spectral
element. These are available for a shear-deformable
tapered beam [34] and a inhomogeneous rod [35].
The SFEM computer code has many resemblances to
the FEM code. That is, as in the FEM the element dynamic
stiffness matrix is generated, assembled and solved. How-
ever, all of these operations have to be performed for each
frequency. Since the system sizes are small, these do not
pose a major computational ‘roadblock’.
The analysis procedure using the SFEM can be sum-
marized as follows:
(1) The given forcing signal is fed into the FFT program
and the output is stored in a ﬁle, which contains
three columns containing the frequency and real and
the imaginary parts of the forcing function. The
sampling rate of the signal and the number of FFT
points is decided by various factors, such as the
nature of the wave (dispersive or nondispersive),
length of propagation and level of damping.
(2) These frequencies, along with the real and imaginary
components, are read and stored.
(3) The analysis begins over a big ‘do-loop’ over the
frequency. The analysis is performed over all of the
frequency components, but only up to the Nyquist
frequency. For each frequency, the element dynamic
stiffness matrix is generated, assembled and stored
for further use. This is unlike the FEM, where the
matrices (stiffness and mass) are generated and
assembled before the analysis is performed over a
‘loop’ of time steps.
(4) The equations are solved in the frequency domain by
using the conventional Gauss elimination with Cho-
leski decomposition. However, the ‘solver’ should be
able to handle complex variables. The equations
are ﬁrst solved for a unit impulse – this will give
the system transfer function (FRF) directly, which
has a varied use in addition to computing responses.
If the number of different time histories is used in the
analysis, computing the FRF needs to be done only
once. By multiplying this FRF with the input, we get
the displacement response in the frequency domain.
If we are performing inverse problems such as force
identiﬁcation, the input is divided by the FRF to get
the force response in the frequency domain.
(5) If quantities such as stresses, strains or energies are
needed, the displacement response is ‘post-processed’
as is done in the conventional time-domain FEM.
However, the computed responses will be frequency-
dependent.
(6) The frequency-domain responses are converted into
time-domain responses by using the inverse FFT.
One of the major disadvantages of the spectral approach
is that the exact solutions are limited to only a few
waveguides. It is not possible to develop spectral ele-
ments for geometries of arbitrary shape or for structural
waveguides with discontinuities such as cracks or holes.
These can be modeled in several ways within the SFEM
environment. In Gopalakrishnan and Doyle [36], wave-
guides with cracks and holes were modeled with the
FEM over a small region and reduced as ‘super-spectral
elements’, which are then coupled with regular spectral
elements and the analysis is performed.
REFERENCES
1. I.H. Shames and C.L. Dym, Energy and Finite Element
Methods in Structural Mechanics, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
London, UK (1991).
2. S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Behavior of isoparametric quadrilateral
family of lagrangian ﬂuid ﬁnite elements’, International Journal
for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 54, 731–761 (2002).
Dynamic stiffness coefficient
Dynamic stiffness coefficient
Spectral finite element
Finite element
Spectral finite element
Finite element
Frequency (kHz)
Frequency (kHz)
2
(a)
(b)
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
200
400
600
800
0
200
400
600
800
Figure 7.18
Dynamic stiffness comparison between SFEM
and FEM: (a) stiffness coefﬁcient, k11; (b) stiffness coefﬁcient,
k12.
184
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

3. J.N. Reddy, Applied Functional Analysis and Variational
Methods in Engineering, McGraw-Hill, Singapore (1986).
4. K. Wazhizu, Variational Methods in Elasticity and Plasticity,
2nd Edn, Pergamon Press, New York, NY, USA (1974).
5. T.R. Tauchert, Energy Principles in Structural Mechanics,
McGraw-Hill, Tokyo, Japan (1974).
6. J.N. Reddy, Energy Principles and Variational Methods in
Applied Mechanics, 2nd Edn, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hobokon, NJ, USA (2002).
7. R.D. Cook, R.D. Malkus and M.E. Plesha, Concepts and
Applications of Finite Element Analysis, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York, NY, USA (1989).
8. K.J. Bathe, Finite Element Procedures, 3rd Edn, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA (1996).
9. G. Prathap, ‘Barlow points and Gauss points and the aliasing
and best ﬁt paradigms’, Computers and Structures, 58,
321–325 (1996).
10. E. Hinton, T. Rock and O.C. Zienkiewicz, ‘A note on mass
lumping and related processes in the ﬁnite element method’,
Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics,
4,
245–249 (1976).
11. D.S. Malkus and M.E. Plesha, ‘Zero and negative masses in
ﬁnite element vibration and transient analysis’, Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 59,
281–306 (1986).
12. K.J. Bathe, Finite Element Procedures in Engineering
Analysis, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA (1982).
13. E. Hinton and D.R.J. Owen, Finite Element Programming,
Academic Press, New York, NY, USA (1977).
14. B.M. Irons, ‘A frontal solution program’, International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 2, 5–32
(1970).
15. J.H. Kane, Boundary Element Analysis in Engineering
Continuum Mechanics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, USA (1992).
16. G. Strang and G.J. Fix, An Analysis of Finite the Element
Method, Prentice Hall Series in Automatic Computation,
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA (1973).
17. G. Prathap and G.R. Bhashyam, ‘Reduced integration and
shear
ﬂexible
beam
element’,
International
Journal
for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 18, 211–243
(1982).
18. T.G.R. Hughes, R.L. Taylor and W. Kanoknukulchal, ‘A
simple and efﬁcient ﬁnite element for plate bending’,
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineer-
ing, 11, 1529–1543 (1977).
19. G. Prathap, The Finite Element in Structural Mechanics,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
(1993).
20. M. Martin, S. Gopalakrishnan and J.F. Doyle, ‘Wave propa-
gation in multiply connected deep waveguides’, Journal of
Sound and Vibration, 174, 521–538 (1994).
21. S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘A deep rod ﬁnite element for structural
dynamics and wave propagation problems’, International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 48, 731–744
(2000).
22. J.F. Doyle, Wave Propagation in Structures, Springer-Verlag,
New York, NY, USA (1997).
23. A. Chakraborty and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Study of Poisson’s
contraction effects in a deep laminated composite beam
through a new ﬁnite element formulation’, Mechanics of
Advanced Structures and Materials, 10, 1–21 (2003).
24. D. Roy Mahapatra and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Axial-shear-
bending coupled wave propagation in thick composite
beams’, Composite Structures, 59, 67–88 (2003).
25. A. Chakraborty, D. Roy Mahapatra and S. Gopalakrishnan,
‘Finite element analysis of free vibration and wave propaga-
tion in asymmetric composite beams with structural dis-
continuities’, Composite Structures, 55, 23–36 (2002).
26. A. Chakraborty, S. Gopalakrishnan and J.N. Reddy, ‘A new
beam ﬁnite element for the analysis of functionally graded
materials’, International Journal for Mechanical Sciences,
45, 519–539 (2003).
27. Mira Mitra, S. Gopalakrishnan and M. Seetharama Bhat,
‘Vibration control in a composite box beam with piezo-
electric actuators’, Smart Structures and Materials, 13,
676–690 (2004).
28. Mira Mitra, S. Gopalakrishnan and M, Seetharama Bhat, ‘A
new super convergent thin walled composite beam element
for analysis of box beam structures’, International Journal of
Solids and Structures, 41, 1491–1518 (2004).
29. D. Roy Mahapatra, S. Gopalakrishnan and T.S. Sankar,
‘Spectral element based solutions for wave propagation
analysis of multiply connected unsymmetric laminated
composite beams’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 237,
819–836 (2000).
30. D. Roy Mahapatra and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘A spectral ﬁnite
element for analysis of wave propagation in uniform
composite tubes’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 268,
429–463 (2003).
31. A. Chakraborty and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘A spectrally for-
mulated ﬁnite element for wave propagation in functionally
graded beams’, International Journal of Solids and Struc-
tures, 40, 2421–2448 (2003).
32. S.A. Rizzi and J.F. Doyle, ‘ A spectral element approach to
wave motion in layered solids’, ASME Journal of Vibration
and Acoustics, 114, 569–577 (1992).
33. A. Chakraborty and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘A spectrally for-
mulated ﬁnite element for wave propagation analysis in
layered composite media’, International Journal for Solids
and Structures, 41, 5155–5183 (2004).
34. S. Gopalakrishnan and J.F. Doyle, ‘Wave propagation in
connected waveguides of varying cross-section’, Journal of
Sound and Vibration, 175, 347–363 (1994).
35. A. Chakraborty and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Various numerical
techniques for analysis of longitudinal wave propagation in
inhomogeneous
one
dimensional
waveguides’,
Acta
Mechanica, 162, 1–27 (2003).
36. S. Gopalakrishnan and J.F. Doyle, ‘Spectral super-elements
for wave propagation in structures with local non-
uniformities’, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 121, 77–90 (1995).
Introduction to the Finite Element Method
185

8
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Modeling of systems with structures having smart sen-
sors and actuators are very similar to conventional
structures wherein numerical techniques, such as the
FEM or spectral techniques, as outlined in Chapter 7,
can be used. However, the modeling has to take care of
additional complexities arising due to the material prop-
erties of smart materials that make up the smart sensors
and actuators. These are reﬂected in the constitutive laws
in the form of electromechanical coupling, as in the case
of piezoceramic or PVDF sensors or magneto-mechan-
ical coupling, as in the case of magnetostrictive sensors/
actuators, such as Terfenol-D. From the modeling point
of view, these complexities would lead to additional
matrices in FEM/SFEM approachs.
Piezoelectric or magnetostrictive materials have two
constitutive laws, one of which is used for sensing and the
other for actuation purposes. For 2-D problems, the con-
stitutive model for a piezoelectric material is of the form:
fsg31 ¼ ½CðEÞ
33feg31 	 ½e32fEg21
ð8:1Þ
fDg21 ¼ ½eT
23feg31 þ ½mðsÞ
22fEg21
ð8:2Þ
The ﬁrst of this constitutive law is called the actua-
tion law, while the second is called the sensing law.
Here,
fsgT ¼ fsxx
syy
txyg
is
the
stress vector,
fegT ¼ fexx
eyy
gxyg is the strain vector, ½e is the
matrix
of
piezoelectric
coefﬁcients
of
size
3  2,
which has units of N=ðV mmÞ, fEgT ¼ fEx
Eyg ¼
fVx=t
Vy=tg is the applied ﬁeld in two coordinate
directions, where Vx and Vy are the applied voltages in
the two coordinate directions, and t is the thickness
parameter. The latter has units of V/mm; ½m is the
permittivity matrix of size 2  2, measured at constant
stress and has units of N/V/V and fDgT ¼ fDx
Dyg is
the vector of electric displacement in two coordinate
directions. This has units of NðV mmÞ. ½C is the mechan-
ical constitutive matrix measure at constant electric ﬁeld.
Equation (8.1) can also be written in the form:
feg ¼ ½Sfsg þ ½dfEg
ð8:3Þ
In the above expression, ½S is the compliance matrix,
which is the inverse of the mechanical material matrix
½C, and ½d ¼ ½C	1½e is the electromechanical coupling
matrix, where the elements of this matrix have units of
mm/V and the elements of this matrix are ‘direction-
dependent’. In most analyses, it will be assumed that the
mechanical properties will change very little with the
change in electric ﬁeld and as a result, the actuation law
(Equation (8.1)) can be assumed to behave linearly with
the electric ﬁeld, while the sensing law (Equation (8.2)) can
be assumed to behave linearly with stress. This assumption
will considerably simplify the analysis process.
The ﬁrst part of Equation (8.1) represents the stresses
developed due to mechanical load, while the second part
of the same equation gives the stresses due to voltage
input. From Equations (8.1) and (8.2), it is clear that the
structure will be stressed due to the application of electric
ﬁeld, even in the absence of a mechanical load. Alter-
natively, when the mechanical structure is loaded, it
generates an electric ﬁeld. In other words, the above
constitutive law demonstrates electromechanical cou-
pling, which is exploited for a variety of structural
applications, such as vibration control, noise control,
shape control and structural health monitoring. Actuation
using piezoelectric materials can be demonstrated by
using a plate of dimensions L  W  t, where L and W
are the length and width of the plate and t is its thickness.
Thin piezoelectric electrodes are placed on the top and
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

bottom surfaces of the plate, as shown in Figure 8.1.
Such a plate is called a Bimorph plate. When a voltage is
passed between the electrodes, as shown in the ﬁgure
(which is normally referred as the poling direction), the
deformations in the length, width and thickness direc-
tions are given by:
dL ¼ d31E1L ¼ d31VL
t
;
dW ¼ d31E2W ¼ d31VW
t
;
dt ¼ d33V
ð8:4Þ
Here, d31 and d33 are the electromechanical coupling
coefﬁcients in the directions 1 and 3, respectively. Con-
versely, if a force F is applied in any of the length, width
or thickness directions, the voltage V developed across
the electrodes in the thickness direction is given by:
V ¼ d31F
mL
or
d31F
mW
or
d33F
mLW
ð8:5Þ
Here, m is the dielectric permitivity of the material. The
reversibility between the strain and voltages makes
piezoelectric materials ideal for both sensing and actua-
tion. Finite element modeling of the mechanical part is
very similar to what was discussed in Chapter 7, except
that the coupling terms introduce additional energy terms
in the variational statements, which results in additional
coupling matrices in the FE formulation.
There are different types of piezoelectric materials that
are used for many structural applications. The most
commonly used material is PZT (Lead Zirconate Titanate)
which is extensively used as a bulk actuator material as it
has a high electromechanical coupling factor. Due to this
low electromechanical coupling factor, ‘Piezo polymers’
(PVDF) are extensively used as sensor materials. With
the advent of smart composite structures, a new brand of
material, called Piezo Fiber Composites (PFCs) have
been found to be very effective actuator materials for
use in vibration/noise control applications.
The constitutive laws (both actuation and sensing) for
magnetostrictive materials, such as Terfenol-D, are much
more complex than those of piezoelectric materials.
These are highly nonlinear and have a similar form to
those of piezoelectric materials, which are given by:
feg ¼ ½SðHÞfsg þ ½dTfHg
ð8:6Þ
fBg ¼ fdgfsg þ ½mðsÞfHg
ð8:7Þ
Here, ½S is the compliance matrix measured at a con-
stant magnetic ﬁeld H, ½d is the magneto-mechanical
coupling matrix, the elements of which have units of m/A
and fBg is the vector of magnetic ﬂux density in the two
coordinate directions. It has units called teslas, equal to
weber/metre3. fHg is the magnetic ﬁeld intensity vector
in the two coordinate directions and has units called
oersted, equal to ampere/meter. It is related to the AC
current ðIðtÞÞ through the relation H ¼ nI, where n is the
number of turns in the actuator; ½m is the matrix of
magnetic permeability measured at constant stress and
has units of weber/(Ampere meter). As in the case of
piezoelectric materials, the ﬁrst equation (Equation (8.6))
is the actuation constitutive law, while the second equa-
tion (Equation (8.7)) is the sensing law. The stress–strain
relations are different for different magnetic ﬁeld inten-
sities. The strain is linear with stress only for small
magnetic ﬁeld intensities. For higher magnetic ﬁeld inten-
sities, both sensing and actuator equations require to be
simultaneously solved to arrive at the correct stress–strain
relation. This is because a change in the magnetic ﬁeld
changes the stress, which changes the magnetic perme-
ability. Hence, characterization of the material properties
of Terfenol-D is more difﬁcult when compared to the
piezoelectric material.
In this book we will assume only linear behavior of
these materials and proceed with modeling of these smart
sensors and actuators based on this assumption. This
chapter gives the FE modeling of both 1-D and 2-D
structures with both piezo and magnetostrictive material
patches and 1-D Spectral element modeling of beam
structures with smart material patches.
More
recently,
micro
electromechanical
systems
(MEMS) have found extensive applications in almost
all ﬁelds of science and engineering. These structures are
of micron-level thickness and millimeter-level dimen-
sions. Most MEMS devices are micro sensors. A typical
MEMS device has a substrate usually made of silicon or
a polymer. Over this substrate the electrodes are placed to
obtain the necessary electromechanical coupling. Hence,
V
Electrode
L
W
t
1
3
2
(direction of polarization)
Figure 8.1
Illustration of the actuation effect in a piezoelectric
plate.
188
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

the design of these sensors involves mechanical design as
well as the design of the electrical circuit. As in the case
of smart materials, these sensors exhibit strong electro-
mechanical coupling. When these are bonded to the main
structure (of macro dimensions), they contribute negligi-
bly to the stiffness and as such do not alter the mechanics
of the macro structure. If one needs to assess the device
performance, a local analysis of the device on the host
structure is required. In other words, we need to resort to
multi-scale modeling techniques to analyze the bulk
structures with MEMS-type devices. In addition, if one
needs to design these sensors, it is necessary to perform
local FE analysis of the MEMS device since the device
itself could be of any arbitrary shape. However, if one
needs to design a distributed sensor of micron-level
thickness and long dimensions, it is necessary to model
the host structure as well as the sensor itself. The long
dimension of the sensor may result in incomplete transfer
of the response to the sensor from the host for effective
sensing. That is, there may be some response loss. In such
cases, it is necessary to perform the analysis taking into
consideration the mechanics of the host structure and also
accounting for this loss. One such analysis for the design
of capacitive sensors is given in this chapter.
Presently, research is being focused to further minia-
turize sensors from the micro scale to the nano scale.
This was made possible by the discovery of new forms of
stable carbon atoms, namely the C60 fullerenes and
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), in the late 1980s and early
1990s, respectively. These have opened up new area of
researchs in material science to harness their immense
potential in various ﬁelds. More importantly, when these
materials are dispersed in a matrix, due to their enormous
strength and low density they have immense potential to
become ‘next-generation’ structural materials. They are
currently a fertile area of research the world over. The
properties of CNTs were discussed in detail in Chapter 2.
One of the key properties of CNTs is that they can
propagate waves at the terra-frequency levels. This
aspect is investigated in this chapter.
In the next section, FE modeling of piezoelectric
sensors and actuators is given. In this section, a general
3-D formulation is outlined from which 2-D plane stress/
plane strain ﬁnite elements will be deduced. Next, a
superconvergent thin-walled box beam FE element with
an embedded piezoelectric actuator is formulated. This is
followed by a section on the modeling of magene-
tostrictive sensors/actuators where ﬁrst the numerical
characterization of the nonlinear constitutive law is
described, followed by the formulation of a general 3-D
FE formulation of magnetostrictive sensors and actuators.
Following this, there is a subsection that will deal with the
modeling of 1-D structures with piezoelectric/magnetos-
trictive sensors/actuators using spectral ﬁnite element
methods. This is followed by a subsection that will address
the modeling of MEMS devices and in particular will
address the analysis of distributed thin-ﬁlm-type capaci-
tive sensors. The last part of this chapter will address the
modeling issues and the continuum spectral element
modeling of single-walled and multi-walled carbon nano-
tubes. All these sections will also carry some numerical
examples, which highlight the capabilities and utilities of
these analytical/numerical tools.
8.2 FINITE ELEMENT MODELING
OF A 3-D COMPOSITE LAMINATE WITH
EMBEDDED PIEZOELECTRIC SENSORS
AND ACTUATORS
8.2.1 Constitutive model
Fundamental to any FE modeling is to ﬁrst establish the
constitutive model and this is also true for a 3-D laminate
with embedded piezoelectric sensors/actuators. Here, we
take the same approach as we had taken for conventional
composite structures described in Chapter 6 (Section 6.2).
That is, we ﬁrst establish the constitutive model at the lamina
level in the ﬁber coordinate system, which is transformed to
the global coordinate system. These relations are then
synthesized for all the laminas to establish the constitutive
model of the laminate. However, additional matrices will
arise in this case due to the presence of electromechanical
coupling. Consider a lamina with a piezoelectric layer, as
shown in Figure 8.2. The constitutive model in directions
1, 2, and 3 for such a lamina is given by Equations (8.1) and
(8.2), respectively. In matrix form, it is given by:
fsg
fDg
(
)
¼
½C
	½e
½eT
½m
"
#
feg
fEg
(
)
or
fsg ¼ ½Cfeg
ð8:8Þ
θ
θ
3, Z
2
y
x
1
Piezoelectric patch
Composite ply
Figure 8.2
Local and global coordinate systems for a lamina
with an embedded piezoelectric patch.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
189

Expanding the above equation, we get:
s11
s22
s33
s23
s31
s12
D1
D2
D3
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
C11 C12 C13
0
0
0
0
0
	e31
C12 C22 C23
0
0
0
0
0
	e32
C13 C23 C33
0
0
0
0
0
	e33
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
	e24
0
0
0
0
0
C55
0
	e15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C66
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
e15
0
m11
0
0
0
0
0
e24
0
0
0
m22
0
e31 e32 e33
0
0
0
0
0
m33
2
66666666666666664
3
77777777777777775

e11
e22
e33
e23
e31
e12
E1
E2
E3
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
Here, Ei ¼ 	rF, where F is the electric potential
vector. The above constitutive model is then transformed
to the global x–y–z coordinate system using the transfor-
mation matrix, which is given by:
½T ¼
½T11
½0
½0
½T22


ð8:9Þ
where:
½T11 ¼
C2
S2
0
0
0
	2CS
S2
C2
0
0
0
2CS
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
C
S
0
0
0
0
S
C
0
CS
	CS
0
0
0
C2 	 S2
2
666666664
3
777777775
;
½T22 ¼
C2
S2
0
S2
C2
0
0
0
1
2
64
3
75;
C ¼ cos ðyÞ;
S ¼ sin ðyÞ
Here, y is the ﬁber orientation of the lamina. The consti-
tutive model in the global x–y–z direction is then given by:
fsg ¼ ½TT
½C
	½e
½eT
½m
"
#
½Tfeg ¼
½C
	½e
½e
½m
"
#
feg
In expanded form, the above equation becomes:
sxx
syy
szz
syz
szx
sxy
Dx
Dy
Dz
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
C11 C12 C13
0
0
0
0
0
	e31
C12 C22 C23
0
0
0
0
0
	e32
C13 C23 C33
0
0
0
0
0
	e33
0
0
0
C44
0
0
0
	e24
0
0
0
0
0
C55
0 	e15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
C66
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
e15
0
m11
0
0
0
0
0
e24
0
0
0
m22
0
e31 e32 e33
0
0
0
0
0
m33
2
66666666666666664
3
77777777777777775
exx
eyy
ezz
2eyz
2ezx
2exy
Ex
Ey
Ez
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
ð8:10Þ
The elements of ½C and ½e are given by:
C11 ¼ 4C66C2S2 þ C2ðC11C2 þ C12S2Þ
þ S2ðC12C2 þ C22S2Þ
C12 ¼ 	4C66C2S2 þ S2ðC11C2 þ C12S2Þ
þ C2ðC12C2 þ C22S2Þ;
C13 ¼ C13C2 	 C23S2
C16 ¼ 	2C66CSðC2 	 S2Þ þ CSðC11C2 þ C12S2Þ
	 CSðC12C2 þ C22S2Þ;
C21 ¼ C12
C22 ¼ 4C66C2S2 þ S2ðC11S2 þ C12C2Þ
þ C2ðC12S2 þ C22C2Þ;
C23 ¼ C23C2 þ C13S2
C26 ¼ 2C66CSðC2 	 S2Þ þ CSðC11S2 þ C12C2Þ
	 CSðC12S2 þ C22C2Þ;
C31 ¼ C13;
C32 ¼ C23
C33 ¼ C33;
C36 ¼ CSðC13 	 C23Þ;
C44 ¼ C44C2 þ C55S2;
C45 ¼ CSðC55 	 C44Þ
C54 ¼ C45;
C55 ¼ C44S2 þ C55C2;
C61 ¼ C16;
C62 ¼ C26;
C63 ¼ C36
C66 ¼ C66ðC2 	 S2Þ2 þ C2S2ðC11 	 C12Þ
	 C2S2ðC12 	 C22Þ
e31 ¼ ðe31C2 þ e32S2Þ;
e32 ¼ ðe31S2 þ e32C2Þ;
e33 ¼ e33;
e14 ¼ ðe15C2S þ e24CS2Þ
e24 ¼ ðe24C3 þ e15S3Þ;
e15 ¼ ðe15C3 	 e24S3Þ;
e25 ¼ ðe24C2S 	 e15CS2Þ
e36 ¼ CSðe31 	 e32Þ;
m11 ¼ m11C4 þ m22S4;
m12 ¼ C2S2ðm11 þ m22Þ
m22 ¼ m22C4 þ m11S4;
m33 ¼ m33
ð8:11Þ
For 2-D analysis, we normally employ either plane stress
or plane strain assumptions. For the plane stress assump-
tion in the x–y plane, we substitute syy ¼ sxy ¼ syz ¼
190
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Dx ¼ Dy ¼ 0 in Equation (8.10). Simplifying this, we
can write the constitutive model for a 2-D piezoelectric
composite as:
fsg
Dz


¼
½^C
	½^e
½^eT
^m
"
#
feg
Ez


¼
sxx
szz
sxz
Dz
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
;
¼
^C11
^C12
0
	^e31
^C13
^C33
0
	^e32
0
0
^C55
0
^e31
^e32
0
^m33
2
6664
3
7775
exx
ezz
2exz
Ez
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
;
ð8:12Þ
where:
^C11 ¼ C11 þ 1
D
hC12ðC26 C16 	 C66 C12Þ
þ C16ðC26 C16 	 C22 C16Þ
i
^C13 ¼ C13 þ 1
D
hC12ðC26 C36 	 C66 C23Þ
þ C16ðC26 C23 	 C22 C36Þ
i
^C33 ¼ C33 þ 1
D
hC23ðC26 C36 	 C66 C23Þ
þ C36ðC26 C23 	 C22 C36Þ
i
^C55 ¼ C55 	
C2
45
C44
^e31 ¼ e31 þ 1
D
h
e32ðC12 C66 	 C16 C26Þ
þe36ðC16 C22 	 C12 C26Þ
i
^e32 ¼ e32 þ 1
D
h
e32ðC23 C66 	 C26 C36Þ
þe36ðC36 C22 	 C23 C26Þ
i
^m33 ¼ m33 þ 1
D
h
e36ðC22 C69 þ C66 C29Þ
þe32ðC29 C66 	 C26 C69Þ
i
ð8:13Þ
8.2.2 Finite element modeling
Let us consider a 2-D composite laminate under plane
stress in the x–z plane. Let uðx; y; tÞ and wðx; y; tÞ be its
displacement components. First, the weak form of the
governing differential equation is written. This requires
that the energy associated with the problem be written in
terms of displacements. The kinetic, strain and electrical
energy for the smart laminate having a volume V are
given by:
T ¼ 1
2
ð
V
rf_ugTf_ugdV;
U ¼ 1
2
ð
V
fsgTfegdV;
Ue ¼ 1
2
ð
V
EzmzdV
ð8:14Þ
where:
fugT ¼ fu vg; fsgT ¼ fsxx szz sxzg
Here, r is the density of the smart composite. The
stresses are related to the strain using Equation (8.12),
which can be expressed in terms of displacement using
the strain–displacement relationship (Equation (6.27) in
Chapter 6). Using these energies in Hamilton’s principle,
we get the following strong form of the governing
equation and its associated boundary conditions:
r @2u
@t2 	 ^C11
@2u
@x2 	 ^C13
@2w
@x@z 	 ^C55
@2u
@z2 þ @2w
@x@z


þ ^e31
@Ez
@x ¼ Fsx þ ^e31
@Es
@x
r @2w
@t2 	 ^C33
@2w
@z2 	 ^C13
@2u
@x@z 	 ^C55
@2w
@x2 þ @2u
@x@z


þ ^e33
@Ez
@z ¼ Fsz 	 ^e33
@Es
@z
^e31
@u
@x þ ^e33
@w
@z þ m33Ez ¼ 	Ds 	 m33Es
ð8:15Þ
where fFsgT ¼ fFsx Fszg is the surface force vector in
the two directions and Es and Ds are the residual
electrical ﬁeld and the electrical displacement in the
smart composite. In the above equation, the ﬁrst two
represent the force equilibrium in the x- and z-directions,
while the third equation represents the equation for
electrical ﬁeld equilibrium. The associated force bound-
ary conditions on the edge parallel to the z-axis are:
^C11
@u
@x þ ^C13
@w
@z 	 ^e31Ez ¼ Fcx þ ^e31Es
or u prescribed
^C55
@u
@z þ @w
@x


¼ Fcz
or w prescribed
ð8:16Þ
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
191

Similarly, the force boundary conditions on the edge
parallel to the x-axis are:
^C13
@u
@x þ ^C33
@w
@z 	 ^e33Ez ¼ Fcz þ ^e33Es
or w prescribed
^C55
@u
@z þ @w
@x


¼ Fcx
or u prescribed
ð8:17Þ
where Fcx and Fcz are the sum of all point loads in the x-
and z-directions, respectively. The main goal here is to
solve Equation (8.15). These are very difﬁcult to solve
exactly. Hence, it necessary to recast the above equili-
brium equation in its weak form and best-ﬁt an approx-
imate solution using the FE procedure.
The weak form of the governing differential equation is
obtained by adopting the procedure outlined in Chapter 7
(Section 7.4). This is obtained by performing a variational
minimization (Hamilton’s Principle) of the total energy,
which can be written as:
d
1
2
ðt2
t1
ð
V
f_ugTrf_ugdVdt þ 1
2
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fsgTfegdVdt
þ 1
2
ðt2
t1
ð
V
EzDzdVdt þ
ðt2
t1
fugTfFcgdt
þ
ðt2
t1
ð
S1
fugTfFsgdS1dt þ
ðt2
t1
ð
S2
EzDsdS2dt
0
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
@
1
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
¼ 0
ð8:18Þ
where S1 and S2 are the surfaces in the structure where
the surface forces and residual displacements act. Sub-
stituting for stresses and electrical displacements from
Equation (8.12), the weak form of the differential equa-
tion becomes:
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fd_ugTrf_ugdVdt
þ
ðt2
t1
ð
V
fdegT½CfegdVdt	
ðt2
t1
ð
V
dE½eTfegdVdt
þ
ðt2
t1
ð
V
dEz½eTfegdVdt þ
ðt2
t1
ð
V
dEzmEzdVdt
þ
ðt2
t1
fdugTfFcgdt þ
ðt2
t1
ð
S1
fdugTfFsgdS1dt
þ
ðt2
t1
ð
S2
dEzDsdS2dt ¼ 0
ð8:19Þ
The above equation is the weak form of the governing
equation (Equation (8.15)) for a composite laminate with
piezoelectric smart patches. This is the starting point for
the FE formulation.
8.2.3 2-D Isoparametric plane stress smart
composite ﬁnite element
Here, we outline the procedure for formulating a four-
node isoparametric plane stress smart composite ﬁnite
element.
The
element
conﬁguration
is
shown
in
Figure 8.3. This element will have two mechanical
degrees of freedom, namely the two displacement com-
ponents uðx; y; tÞ and wðx; y; tÞ, respectively, and a single
electrical degree of freedom Ezðx; y; tÞ in the z-direction.
The electric ﬁeld in this direction will induce stresses in
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
4
(–1, 1)
(1, 1)
(1, –1)
(–1, –1)
h
x
x
y
E4
E1
E2
E3
v3
u3
v4
v1
v2
u4
u1
u2
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.3
(a) Element degrees of freedom and (b) the isoparametric coordinate system.
192
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

the x-direction. Thus, this element will have a total of
twelve degrees of freedom. Here, we will use the iso-
parametric formulation outlined in Chapter 7 (Section
7.6.3). Since the proposed element is four-noded, we will
use the bilinear shape functions for the mechanical
displacements required, which can be written as:
uðx; y; tÞ ¼
X
4
i¼1
Niðx; ZÞuiðtÞ;
wðx; y; tÞ
¼
X
4
i¼1
Niðx; ZÞwiðtÞ
ð8:20Þ
where x and Z are the isoparametric coordinates and uiðtÞ
and wiðtÞ are the nodal mechanical degrees of freedom.
The four bilinear shape functions are given by:
N1 ¼ 1
4 ð1 	 xÞð1 	 ZÞ;
N2 ¼ 1
4 ð1 þ xÞð1 	 ZÞ;
N3 ¼ 1
4 ð1 þ xÞð1 þ ZÞ;
N4 ¼ 1
4 ð1 	 xÞð1 þ ZÞ
ð8:21Þ
Now, in order to choose the interpolating polynomial for
the electrical degrees of freedom, we look at the strong
form of the governing equation (Equation (8.15)). By
substituting the linear variation for the mechanical
degrees of freedom, we ﬁnd that for consistency of the
displacement ﬁeld we also require a bilinear variation of
the electrical ﬁeld. Hence, we assume the electric ﬁeld to
vary as:
Ezðx; y; tÞ ¼
X
4
i¼1
Niðx; ZÞEziðtÞ
ð8:22Þ
where the same shape function given in Equation (8.21)
is also used here, and Ezi are the nodal electrical degrees
of freedom at the four nodes.
In isoparametric formulation, we map the actual geo-
metry of the element to a square of size two deﬁned in the
generalized coordinate system ðx; ZÞ through a Jacobian
transformation. This requires the variation of the coordi-
nate system in the generalized coordinates in terms of the
nodal coordinates of the actual element geometry. Hence,
one can use the same displacement shape functions to
describe this variation and which can be written as:
xðx;yÞ¼
X
4
i¼1
Niðx;ZÞxi; zðx;yÞ¼
X
4
i¼1
Niðx;ZÞzi
ð8:23Þ
The Jacobian can be computed using the procedure given
in Chapter 7 (Section 7.6.3). The strains are evaluated by
using the strain–displacement relationship, that is:
exx
ezz
2exz
Ez
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼
@=@x
0
0
0
@=@z
0
@=@z
@=@x
0
0
0
1
2
664
3
775
u
w
Dz
8
<
:
9
=
;
Using Equations (8.20) and (8.22) in the above equation
enables us to express the strains in terms of the nodal
displacement vector fuge ¼ fu1
w1
u2
w2
u3
w3
u4
w4gT and the electric ﬁeld vector fEzge ¼ fEz1
Ez2
Ez3
Ez3gT. That is, the strain can be written as
feg ¼ ½Bfug ¼
"
½Buð38Þ
0
0
½BEð14Þ
#
ð8:24Þ
where the [B] matrix, is given by:
½B¼
@N1
@x
0
@N2
@x
0
@N3
@x
0
@N4
@x
0
0
0
0
0
0
@N1
@z
0
@N2
@z
0
@N3
@z
0
@N4
@z
0
0
0
0
@N1
@z
@N1
@x
@N2
@z
@N2
@x
@N3
@z
@N3
@x
@N4
@z
@N4
@x
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N1 N2 N3 N4
2
66666666664
3
77777777775
ð8:25Þ
Using Equations (8.24) and (8.25) in the weak form of
the equation (Equation (8.19)), and performing varia-
tional minimization, we get:
fdugT
e
ð
V
½NTr½NdV
0
@
1
Af€uge
þ fdugT
e
ð
V
½BuT½^C½BudV
0
@
1
Afuge
	 fdugT
e
ð
V
½BuT^e½BEdV
0
@
1
AfEzge
	 fdEzgT
e
ð
V
½BET½^eT½BudV
0
@
1
Afuge
	 fdEzgT
e
ð
V
½BET^m33½BEdV
0
@
1
AfEzge
	 fdugT
e fFcg 	 fdugT
e
ð
S1
½NTfFsgdS1
	 fdEzgT
e
ð
S2
½BETDsdS2 ¼ 0
ð8:26Þ
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
193

Since fduge and fdEzge are arbitrary, the above expres-
sion can be written in a concise matrix form as:
½Muu
½0
½0
½0


f€uge
f€Ezge


þ
½Kuu
½KuE
½KuET
½KEE


fuge
fEzge


¼
fFge
fqge


ð8:27Þ
The above equation is the elemental equilibrium in the
discritized form, where ½Muu is the mass matrix, ½Kuu is
the stiffness matrix corresponding to the mechanical
degrees of freedom, ½KuE is the stiffness matrix due to
electromechanical coupling and ½KEE is the stiffness
matrix due to the electrical degrees of freedom alone.
Note that all of these matrices require the volume integral
to be evaluated. Since the exact integration of these is
most difﬁcult to achieve, we resort to numerical integra-
tion (see Chapter 7, Section 7.6.3). Here, fFge is the
elemental nodal vector and fqge is the elemental charge
vector. These matrices are given by:
½Muu ¼ t
ð1
	1
ð1
	1
½NTr½NjJjdxdZ
½Kuu ¼ t
ð1
	1
ð1
	1
½BuT½^C½BujJjdxdZ
½KuE ¼ 	t
ð1
	1
ð1
	1
½BuT½^e½BEjJjdxdZ
½KEE ¼ t
ð1
	1
ð1
	1
½BET^m33½BEjJjdxdZ
ð8:28Þ
The elemental load and charge vectors are given by:
fFge ¼ fFgc þ
ð
S1
½NTfFgsdS1;
fqge ¼ 	
ð
S2
½NTDsdS2
ð8:29Þ
The matrices in Equation (8.27) are then assembled to
obtain their global counterparts and solved for obtaining
solutions for displacements and electric ﬁeld. Note that
this has a zero diagonal block in the mass matrix. The
methods of solution for the sensing and actuation pro-
blems are quite different. For the sensing problem, for a
given mechanical loading, we need to determine the
voltage developed across the smart patch. This is done
by ﬁrst obtaining the mechanical displacement due to the
given mechanical load, which is then used to obtain the
electric ﬁeld and hence the voltage developed in the
sensor patch. In order to solve this, the global matrix
equation can be expanded and written as:
½Muuf€ug þ ½Kuufug þ ½KuEfEzg ¼ fFg
½KuETfug þ ½KEEfEzg ¼ fqg
ð8:30Þ
We can write the second part of the above equation as:
fEzg ¼ ½KEE	1fqg 	 ½KEE	1½KuETfug
ð8:31Þ
Using the above equation in the ﬁrst part of Equation
(8.30) and simplifying, we get
½Muuf€ug þ ½Kuu ¼ fFg
ð8:32Þ
where:
½Kuu ¼ ½Kuu 	 ½KuE½KEE	1½KuET;
fFg ¼ fFg 	 ½KEE	1fqg
ð8:33Þ
Note that Equation (8.32) is only in terms of mechanical
displacements, which can be solved by using the conven-
tional solution techniques given in Chapter 7 (Section 7.7).
Using this solution, electrical ﬁelds are obtained using
Equation (8.31), from which the voltages can be obtained.
For the actuation problem, the voltages and hence the
electric ﬁelds go as input. That is, the second part of
Equation (8.27) is not required. Hence, the equation that
requires solution becomes:
½Muuf€ugþ½Kuufug¼fFg	½KuEfEzg¼fFg ð8:34Þ
If an arbitrary value of Ez is speciﬁed, the problem comes
under the catagory of open-loop control. If the value of
Ez comes from the sensor output that is fed back to the
controller, then the control scheme is referred to as
closed-loop control. These aspects are discussed in
more detail in the next chapter.
8.2.4 Numerical example
In order to discuss the validity of the formulated four-
noded quadrilateral element and to check its performance
and behavior, a numerical example is presented. The
results obtained from the formulated element are then
compared with standard published results.
194
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

In this study, the modeling and static analysis of a
piezoelectric bimorph composite beam is done using the
formulated smart composite element. Chen et al. [1]
presented a comparative study of the bending of a
bimorph beam due to an external applied voltage as
part of verifying the accuracy of the piezoelectric FE
solution, with this bimorph beam conﬁguration being
adopted from Hwang and Park [2]. In this study, the same
conﬁguration of the bimorph beam is considered to verify
the accuracy of the formulated FE. The bimorph beam
consists of two identical PVDF beams laminated together
with opposite polarities. A schematic diagram of the
bimorph beam is shown in Figure 8.4. The dimensions
of the beam are taken as 100 mm  5:0 mm  0:5 mm.
The material properties of the PVDF bimorph beam are
taken as being the same as that of Chen et al. [1] and are
given in Table 8.1. The theoretical solution for transverse
displacement for the above problem is presented in Chen
et al. [1], and given by:
wðxÞ ¼ 0:375 e31V
E
x
t
" #2
ð8:35Þ
where V is the applied voltage and t is the thickness of
the beam. This beam is modeled using 200 formulated
elements along the x–z plane. When an external active
voltage is applied across the thickness, the induced strain
generates control forces that bend the bimorph beam. A
unit voltage is applied across the thickness and the
deﬂections at the nodes are computed. The deﬂection
of the beam along the central longitudinal axis obtained
from the present formulation is compared with the
theoretical value given by Equation (8.35) and the
works of Chen et al. [1] and Tzou and Tseng [3],
respectively. Figure 8.5 shows the comparison of deﬂec-
tion along the length of the beam for a unit voltage
applied across the thickness.
Next, the deﬂection of the beam is calculated for
different applied voltages over the range 0–200 V. The
calculated deﬂections from the present study are com-
pared with those of Chen et al. [1] and Tzou and Tseng
[3] and Equation (8.35). Chen et al. [1] used a ﬁrst-order
shear-deformable plate ﬁnite element, while Tzou and
Tseng [3] used hexahedral solid elements to model the
same problem. These are plotted in Figure 8.6. Figure 8.7
shows the variation of the deﬂection along the central
longitudinal axis for various values of applied voltages.
This problem solved here is associated with actuation
with open-loop control. That is, for an electrical load
caused by the voltage, strains are generated, which in
turn cause deformations. In Figure 8.7, we can clearly see
that greater voltages produce larger deformations. The
results presented here show close agreement between the
z
y
x
100 mm
0.5 mm
5.0 mm
Figure 8.4
Schematic of the piezoelectric PVDF bimorph
cantilver beam.
Table 8.1
Material properties used in the numerical
example.
Property
Value
Young’s modulus, E11
0:2  1010 N=m2
Shear modulus, G12
0:775  1010 N=m2
Poisson’s ratio, n12
0.29
Poisson’s ratio, n21
0.28
Piezoelectric constant, e31
0:046 C=m2
Piezoelectric constant, e32
0:046 C=m2
Piezoelectric constant, e33
0.0
Therory
Tseng
Chen
Present
0
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
20
40
60
80
100
Deflection (µm)
Longitudinal axis (mm)
Figure 8.5
Centerline deﬂections for a PVDF bimorph beam
under a unit voltage.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
195

theoretical and the formulated element and also with the
established works. This present study has demonstrated
the accuracy of the formulated element to handle pro-
blems involving electromechanical coupling.
8.3 SUPERCONVERGENT SMART
THIN-WALLED BOX BEAM ELEMENT
The procedure for formulating a superconvergent FE was
given in Chapter 7 (Section 7.8). In this section, a generic
smart composite thin-walled beam element having an
arbitrary cross-section with open and closed contours is
developed. This element will ﬁnd its use in the modeling
of aircraft structures, which are essentially thin-walled.
The element uses higher-order interpolating polynomials
that are derived by solving the static homogeneous
coupled governing differential equation and hence pre-
dicts the exact elemental stiffness matrix and a electro-
mechanically coupling matrix. Each node has seven
degrees of freedom (dof) including extension, two in
the bending dof in the span-wise and chord-wise direc-
tions, corresponding shears and twist and a single elec-
trical dof.
First-order shear deformation theory is used for trans-
verse shear deformation and out-of-plane torsional warp-
ing is modeled by using Vlasov theory. A higher-order
interpolating polynomial for twist eliminates the need of
a separate dof for the resulting restrained torsional
warping. The element is then validated by comparing
the electrically actuated response of different smart beam
conﬁgurations to those available in the literature. The
fundamental aspect of the superconvergent ﬁnite element
formulation is the interpolating polynomials that satisfy
the static part of the governing equation exactly. Hence,
deriving the governing differential equation is the ﬁrst
step in the formulation of this element. This is taken up
in the next subsection.
8.3.1 Governing equation for a thin-walled smart
composite beam
The general coordinate system for deriving the governing
equation is shown in Figure 8.8. The proposed element
is assumed to undergo three translations and three rota-
tions. From geometrical considerations and assuming the
Theory
Tseng
Chen
Present
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
50
100
150
200
Voltage (V)
Deflection (µm)
Figure 8.6
Tip deﬂection for a PVDF bimorph beam as a
function of voltage.
50 V
100 V
150 V
200 V
0
20
40
60
80
100
–0.08
–0.07
–0.06
–0.06
–0.04
–0.03
–0.02
–0.01
0
–0.01
Longitudinal axis (mm)
Centerline deflection (mm)
Figure 8.7
Deﬂection proﬁle for a PVDF bimorph beam for
various voltages.
q
n
s
Y
Z
X
w0
v0
u0
ψ
r
qz
qy
Figure 8.8
General coordinate system adopted for the box-
beam element formulation.
196
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

in-plane deformation to be very small, the beam displa-
cement ﬁeld considering First-Order Shear Deformation
Theory (FSDT) and Vlasov theory for torsion can be
written as:
wðsÞ ¼ v0
@z
@s 	 w0
@y
@s 	 qc
vðsÞ ¼ v0
@y
@s þ w0
@z
@s þ rc
uðsÞ ¼ u0 þ zyy þ yyx þ j @c
@x
ð8:36Þ
where u0, v0 and w0 are the displacements in the x, y
and z directions; c, yy and yz are the rotations about the
x, y and z directions (see Figure 8.8). The torsional
warping function j for a closed cross-section of wall
thickness t is expressed as in Megson [4].
j ¼ 	
ðs
0
rds þ 2Ae
dos
d ;
dos ¼
ðs
0
ds
Gt ;
d ¼
I ds
Gt
ð8:37Þ
where Ae is the cross-sectional area enclosed by the mid-
line contour, G is the shear modulus, r is the radius, s is
the tangential coordinate and n is the normal coordinate.
For open contours, neglecting secondary warping, j is
given by:
j ¼ 	
ðs
0
rds
ð8:38Þ
The relevant strains are the axial strain exx and the two
shear strains, which are given by:
exx ¼ @u
@x ¼ @u0
@x þ z @yy
@x þ y @yz
@x þ j @2c
@x2
ð8:39Þ
gxs ¼ @u
@s þ @v
@x ¼
@w0
@x þ yy

 @z
@s þ
@v0
@x þ yz

 @y
@s


þ
r 	 @j
@s

 @c
@x


ð8:40Þ
gxn ¼ @u
@n þ @w
@x ¼
yz
@y
@n 	 @w0
@x
@y
@s



þ yy
@z
@n þ @v0
@x
@z
@s


	
q þ @j
@n

 @c
@x


ð8:41Þ
The last square brackets in Equations (8.40) and (8.41)
are due to torsional displacement, which are normally
quite small and hence neglected in the present formula-
tion. A state of plane stress is assumed and a reduction
procedure as adopted in Chapter 7 (Section 7.2.1) is
again done here starting from the 3-D constitutive model
given in Equation (8.8) to arrive at the required consti-
tutive relations, which can be written for smart laminated
thin-walled structures as:
sxx
txs
txn
8
<
:
9
=
; ¼
^C11
^C16
0
^C16
^C66
0
0
0
^C55
2
4
3
5
exx
gxs
gxn
8
<
:
9
=
; 	
^e31
^e36
0
2
4
3
5E
ð8:42Þ
where:
^C11 ¼ C11 	
C122
C22
;
^C16 ¼ C16 	
C12 C26
C22
;
^C66 ¼ C66 	
C262
C22
;
^C55 ¼ C55 	
C452
C44
^e31 ¼ e31 	
C12
C22
e32;
^e36 ¼ e36 	
C26
C22
e32
ð8:43Þ
The equations of motion are derived using Hamilton’s
Principle for which it is necessary to write down all of the
energies associated with the problem, expressed in terms
of deformations. That is, there are three energies asso-
ciated with the problem, namely the strain energy, kinetic
energy and the energy due to electrical degrees of free-
dom, which can be written as:
U ¼ 1
2
ðL
0
ð
A
"
sxxexx þ txsgxs þ txngxn
#
dAdx;
T ¼ 1
2
ðL
0
ð
A
"
_u2 þ _v2 þ _w2#
dAdx
UE ¼ 1
2
ðL
0
ð
A
EDdAdx
ð8:44Þ
where E is the electrical ﬁeld, D is the electrical dis-
placement and L is the length of the beam. Applying
Hamilton’s principle, we get seven highly coupled partial
differential equations corresponding to seven degrees of
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
197

freedom, which are given by:
I0
@2u0
@t2 þ I1
@2yy
@t2 þ I1
@2yz
@t2 þ Ij
@3c
@x@t2 	 A11
@2u0
@x2
	 Ays16
@2v0
@x2 	 Azs16
@2w0
@x2 	 Ac11
@3c
@x3
	 Aa16
@2c
@x2 	 B11
@2yy
@x2 	 Azs16
@yy
@x 	 B11
@2yz
@x2
	 Ays16
@yz
@x þ Ae31
@E
@x ¼ 0
ð8:45Þ
"
I2
zs þ I2
ys
# @2v0
@t2 	
"
I2
zsq 	 I2
ysr
# @2c
@t2 	 Ays16
@2u0
@x2
	
"
A2
ys66 þ A2
zs66
# @2v0
@x2
	
"
Azsys66 	 Azsys55
# @2w0
@x2 þ Aysj16
@3c
@x3 	 Aysa16
@2c
@x2
	 Bys16
@2yy
@x2 	
"
Azsys66 	 Azsys55
# @yy
@x 	 Bys16
@2yz
@x2
	
"
A2
ys66 þ Aynzs55
# @yz
@x þ Ae36ys
@E
@x ¼ 0
ð8:46Þ
"
Izs2 þ Iys2
#@2w0
@t2 þ
"
Iysq þ Izsr
#@2c
@t2 	 Azs16
@2u0
@x2
	
"
Ayszs66 	 Ayszs55
#@2v0
@x2 	
"
Azs266 þ Ays255
#@2w0
@x2
þ Azsj16
@3c
@x3 	 Azsa66
@2c
@x2 	 Bzs16
@2yy
@x2
	
"
Azs266 	 Ayszn55
#@yy
@x 	 Bzs16
@2yz
@x2
	
"
Ayszs66 	 Aynys55
#@yz
@x þ Ae36zs
@E
@x ¼ 0
ð8:47Þ
	 Ij
@3u0
@x@t2 	
"
Izsq 	 Iysr
#@2v0
@t2 þ
"
Iysq þ Izsr
#@2w0
@t2
þ
"
Iq2 þ Ir2
# @2c
@t2 	 Ij2 @4c
@t2@x2 þ Izj
@3yy
@x@t2
þ Iyj
@3yz
@x@t2 	 Aj11
@3u0
@x3 	 Aa16
@2u0
@x2 	 Aysj16
@3v0
@x3
	 Aysa66
@2v0
@x2 	 Azsj16
@3w0
@x3 	 Azsa66
@2w0
@x2 þ Aj211
@4c
@x4
	 Aa266
@2c
@x2 	 Bj11
@3yy
@x3 	
"
Ba16 þ Azsj16
# @2yy
@x2
	 Azsa66
@yy
@x 	 Bj11
@3yz
@x3 	
"
Ba16 þ Azsj16
# @2yz
@x2
	 Aysa66
@yz
@x þ Ae31j
@2E
@x2 þ Ae36l
@E
@x ¼ 0
ð8:48Þ
I1
@2u0
@t2 þ I2
@2yy
@t2 þ I2
@2yz
@t2 	 I2j
@3c
@t2@x
	 B11
@2u0
@x2 þ Azs16
@u0
@x 	 Bys16
@2v0
@x2
þ
"
Ayszs66 þ Azszn55
# @v0
@x 	 Bzs16
@2w0
@x2
þ
"
Azs266 þ Ayszn55
# @w0
@x þ Bj11
@3c
@x3
	
"
Aysj16 þ Ba16
# @2c
@x2 þ Azsa66
@c
@x 	 D11
@2yy
@x2
þ
"
Azs266 þ Azn255
#
yy 	 D11
@2yz
@x2
	
"
Bys16 	 Bzs16
# @yz
@x þ
"
Ayszs66 þ Aynzn55
#
yz
þ Be31
@E
@x 	 Ae36zsE ¼ 0
ð8:49Þ
I1
@2u0
@t2 þ I2
@2yy
@t2 þ I2
@2yz
@t2 	 Iyj
@3c
@t2@x
	 B11
@2u0
@x2 þ Ays16
@u0
@x 	 Bys16
@2v0
@x2
þ
"
Ays266 þ Azsyn55
# @v0
@x 	 Bzs16
@2w0
@x2
þ
"
Azs266 	 Aysyn55
# @w0
@x þ Bj11
@3c
@x3
	
"
Aysj16 þ Ba16
# @2c
@x2 þ Aysa66
@c
@x 	 D11
@2yy
@x2
þ
"
Azsys66 þ Aznyn55
#
yy 	 D11
@2yz
@x2
þ
"
Bys16 	 Bzs16
# @yy
@x þ
"
Aysys66 þ Aznyn55
#
yy
þ Be31
@E
@x 	 Ae36ysE ¼ 0
ð8:50Þ
Ae31
@u0
@x þ Ae36ys
@v0
@x þ Ae36zs
@w0
@x
	 Ae36j
@2c
@x2 þ Ae36l
@c
@x þ Be31
@yy
@x
þ Ae36zsyy þ Be31
@yz
@x þ Ae36ysyz þ Am33E ¼ 0
ð8:51Þ
where the stiffness constants are given by:
h
Afðs;nÞij; Bfðs;nÞij; Bfðs;nÞij; Dfðs;nÞij; Dfðs;nÞij; Dfðs;nÞij
i
¼
ð
s
ð
n
^Cijfðs; nÞ 1; z; y; z2; y2; yz
%
&
dsdn
198
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

and:
fðs; nÞ 2 1; zs; ys; zn; yn; r; q; j;
r 	 @j
@s




Here, ðr 	 @j=@sÞ is taken equal to a. The stiffness
coefﬁcients associated with smart or electrical degrees
of freedom are given by:
½Aeij fðs;nÞ; Beij fðs;nÞ; Beij fðs;nÞ ¼
ð
s
ð
n
^eijfðs; nÞ½1; z; ydsdn;
Am33 ¼
ð
s
ð
n
^m33dsdn
Hamilton’s principle will also give the six essential
(force) boundary conditions, which are necessary for
the element formulations. These essential boundary con-
ditions are given by:
A11
@u0
@x þ Ays16
@v0
@x þ Azs16
@w0
@x
	 Aj11
@2c
@x2 þ Aa16
@c
@x þ B11
@yy
@x þ Azs16yy
þ B11
@yz
@x þ Ays16yz 	 Ae31E ¼ P
ð8:52Þ
Ays16
@u0
@x þ
"
Ays266 þ Azs255
# @v0
@x
þ
"
Azsys66 þ Azsys55
# @w0
@x 	 Aysj16
@2c
@x2
þ Aysa66
@c
@x þ Bys16
@yy
@x þ
"
Azsys66 þ Azszn55
#
yy
þ Bys16
@yz
@x þ
"
Ays266 þ Aynzs55
#
yz
	 Ae36ysE ¼ Vy
ð8:53Þ
Azs16
@u0
@x þ
"
Ayszs66 	 Ayszs55
# @v0
@x
þ
"
Azs266 þ Ays255
# @w0
@x 	 Azsj16
@2c
@x2
þ Azsa66
@c
@x þ Bzs16
@yy
@x þ
"
Azs266 	 Ayszn55
#
yy
þ Bzs16
@yz
@x þ
"
Ayszs66 	 Aynys55
#
yz
	 Ae36zsE ¼ Vz
ð8:54Þ
Aj11
@2u0
@x2 þ Aa16
@u0
@x þ Aysj16
@2v0
@x2 þ Aysa66
@v0
@x
þ Azsj16
@2w0
@x2 þ Azsa66
@w0
@x
	 Aj211
@3c
@x3 þ Aa266
@c
@x þ Bj11
@2yy
@x2
þ
"
Ba16 þ Azsj16
# @yy
@x þ Azsa66yy
þ Bj11
@2yz
@x2 þ
"
Ba16 þ Aysa66
#
yz 	 Ae31j
@E
@x
	 Ae36aE ¼ T
ð8:55Þ
B11
@u0
@x þ Bys16
@v0
@x þ Bzs16
@w0
@x 	 Bj11
@2c
@x2
þ Ba16
@c
@x þ D11
@yy
@x þ Bzs16yy
þ D11
@yz
@x þ Bys16yz 	 Be31E ¼ My
ð8:56Þ
B11
@u0
@x þ Bys16
@v0
@x þ Bzs16
@w0
@x 	 Bj11
@2c
@x2
þ Ba16
@c
@x þ D11
@yy
@x þ Bzs16yy
þ D11
@yz
@x þ Bys16yz 	 Be31E ¼ Mz
ð8:57Þ
These governing equations and the associated boundary
conditions will be used for ﬁnite element formulation.
8.3.2 Finite element formulation
The proposed element is a two-noded box beam element
and each node has three translational degrees of freedom,
namely the u, v and w displacement components, three
rotational degrees of freedom, namely yy, yz and c, and
one electrical degree of freedom, E. These are shown in
Figure 8.9.
The ﬁrst task here is to solve the static part of the
governing equation exactly and use this solution as
interpolating functions for FE formulation. However,
the static part of the governing equations (Equations
(8.45)–(8.51)) is highly coupled and complex and
needs careful analysis before one assumes a solution
that could be nearly exact. Looking at the governing
differential equations, we see that the axial displacement
ðu0Þ and slopes about the y- and z-axis (yy and yz)
require a quadratic polynomial while the lateral and
transverse displacements (v0 and w0) and the rotation
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
199

about the longitudinal axis (twist c) require cubic poly-
nomials.
Assuming a polynomial variation for the electrical
degree of freedom is very involved. Here, we assume
that the electrical degree of freedom will be prevalent
only in those regions where the structures have these
smart PZT patches, which are normally of small length
over a small area and hence variation of the electrical
ﬁeld over this small length can be assumed constant. This
amounts to assuming that all of the gradients of the
electric ﬁeld are equal to zero. Hence, we can assume the
solution to the governing equation as:
u0ðxÞ ¼ a1 þ a2x þ a3x2;
v0ðxÞ ¼ a4 þ a5x þ a6x2 þ a7x3
w0ðxÞ ¼ a8 þ a9x þ a10x2 þ a11x3;
cðxÞ ¼ a12 þ a13x þ a14x2 þ a15x3
yyðxÞ ¼ a16 þ a17x þ a18x2;
yzðxÞ ¼ a19 þ a20x þ a21x2;
EðxÞ ¼ ae
ð8:58Þ
There are a total of twenty two constants in the assumed
solutions. However, there are only twelve mechanical
degrees of freedom. All of the other nine constants in the
mechanical displacement ﬁeld are dependent constants.
The dependent constants and the constant associated with
the electric ﬁeld can be obtained in terms of the inde-
pendent constants by substituting the assumed displace-
ment ﬁeld (Equation 8.58) into the electromechanically
coupled governing equations (Equations (8.45)–(8.51)).
Here, two vectors are introduced, fag and fag, where the
former contains all the unknown constants, while the
latter contains all the dependent constants. These can be
written as:
fag ¼ fa1
a2
a4
a5
a8
a9
a12
a13
a16
a17
a19
a20gT
ð8:59Þ
fag ¼ ffaug aegT ¼ fa3
a6
a7
a10
a11
a14
a15
a18
a21
aegT
ð8:60Þ
We ﬁrst establish the relationship between the dependent
and independent coefﬁcients by substituting the assumed
ﬁeld in the governing equations. This can be written
as:
½A1fag ¼ ½A2fag
ð8:61Þ
where ½A1 and ½A2 are matrices dependent on the
material properties. These are of sizes 10  10 and
10  12, respectively. Inverting the above relation and
rewriting the above relation:
fag ¼
faug
ae


¼ ½A1	1½A2fag ¼
½A
½AE


fag
faug ¼ ½Afag;
ae ¼ ½AEfag
ð8:62Þ
The matrices ½A1 and ½A2 can be found in Mira Mitra
[5]. Matrices ½A and ½AE are evaluated by inverting
Mz1qz1
My1
Vz1
Vz2
Mz2
W02
Vy1
Vy2
My2
V02
Oy
P1u01
w01
qy1
qz2
y1
V01
T1
y2
P2
y2
T2
z
z
y
y
t
x
2h
2b
x
x = L
x = 0
Figure 8.9
Schematic of a thin-walled box beam with nodal degrees of freedom.
200
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

matrix ½A1 numerically. Evaluation of these matrices will
help in writing the displacement ﬁeld only in terms of the
unknown independent coefﬁcients fag.
The next step is to evaluate the exact shape functions.
For this, we need to deﬁne the nodal mechanical degrees
of freedom vector, which is given by:
fuge ¼ fu01
v01
w01
c1
yy1
yz1
u02
v02
w02
c2
yy2
yz2gT
ð8:63Þ
The displacement ﬁeld is evaluated at the two nodes of
the box beam element located at x ¼ 0 and at x ¼ L. This
enables us to write the nodal degrees of freedom in terms
of the unknown coefﬁcients as:
fuge ¼ ½Rfag
ð8:64Þ
Inverting the above equation, we get:
fag ¼ ½R	1fuge ¼ ½Bfuge
ð8:65Þ
Similarly, we can express the electric ﬁeld in terms of
mechanical nodal displacements. For this, we use Equa-
tion (8.62) and (8.65), from which we can write:
ae ¼ ½AEfag ¼ ½AE½Bfuge ¼ ½Ksfueg
ð8:66Þ
Next, we use the six force boundary conditions given in
Equations (8.52)–(8.57) and express them in terms of
nodal forces, that is:
Pð0Þ ¼ 	P1;
Vyð0Þ ¼ 	Vy1;
Vzð0Þ ¼ 	Vz1;
Tð0Þ ¼ 	T1;
Myð0Þ ¼ 	My1;
Mzð0Þ ¼ 	Mz1
PðLÞ ¼ P2;
VyðLÞ ¼ Vy2;
VzðLÞ ¼ Vz2;
TðLÞ ¼ T2;
MyðLÞ ¼ My2;
MzðLÞ ¼ Mz2
Substituting these in the six force boundary conditions
(Equations (8.52)–(8.57)), we can write the nodal force
vector as:
fFg ¼ ½Cfag 	 ½KAE
ð8:67Þ
where the matrix ½KA is of the form:
½KA ¼½	Ae31
	Ae36ys
	Ae36zs
	Ae36a
	Ae31
	Be31
Ae31
Ae36ys
Ae36zs
Ae36a
Ae31
	Be31
ð8:68Þ
½KA is the electromechanical coupling matrix which
gives the expression for the actuating force due to the
electric ﬁeld E applied to the PZT patch. Substituting for
fag from Equation (8.65) into Equation (8.67), we get:
fFg ¼ ½CfBgfuge 	 ½KAE ) ½Kfuge 	 ½KAE
or
fFg þ ½KAE ¼ ½Kfuge
ð8:69Þ
Here, ½K is the exact static stiffness matrix, which is
derived from the interpolating polynomials that exactly
satisfy the governing differential equations.
8.3.3 Formulation of consistent mass matrix
The consistent mass matrix for this element is obtained
by using the material-dependent shape functions ½N and
is given by:
½M ¼
ðL
0
ð
A
r½NT½Ndnds
ð8:70Þ
Hence, it is necessary to ﬁrst establish the shape func-
tions. For this, we use Equation (8.65) in the interpolat-
ing polynomials given by Equation (8.58) and these can
be written as:
u0ðxÞ ¼
%
1
x
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
&
fag
þ
%
x2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
&
½Afag
v0ðxÞ ¼ ½0
0
1
x
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0fag
þ
%
0
x2
x3
0
0
0
0
0
0
&
½Afag
w0ðxÞ ¼
%
0
0
0
0
1
x
0
0
0
0
0
0
&
fag
þ
%
0
0
0
x2
x3
0
0
0
0
&
½Afag
cðxÞ ¼
%
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
x
0
0
0
0
&
fag
þ
%
0
0
0
0
0
x2
x3
0
0
&
½Afag
yyðxÞ ¼
%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
x
0
0
&
fag
þ
%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
x2
0
&
½Afag
yzðxÞ ¼
%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
x
&
fag
þ
%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
x2&
½Afag ð8:71Þ
Using fag from Equation (8.65) in the above equation,
we can write the displacement vector as:
fug ¼ ½Nfug;
½N ¼ ½Nu
Nv
Nw
Nc
Nyy
Nyz
ð8:72Þ
where ½Nu
Nv
Nw
Nc
Nyy
Nyz are the shape
functions corresponding to the six displacement ﬁelds.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
201

Equation (8.72) is then substituted into Equation (8.70)
to get the mass matrix, which becomes:
½M¼I0
ðL
0
½NuT½Nudx
þ

Izs2þIys2
ðL
0
"
½NvT½Nvþ½NwT½Nw
#
dx
	ðIzsq	IysrÞ
ðL
0
"
½NvT½Ncþ½NcT½Nv
#
dx
þðIzsrþIysqÞ
ðL
0
"
½NwT½Ncþ½NcT½Nw
#
dx
þðIr2þIq2Þ
ðL
0
"
½NcT½Nc
#
dxþI2
ðL
0
½NyyT½Nyydx
þI2
ðL
0
½NyzT½NyzdxþI1
ðL
0

½NyzT½Nuþ½NuT½Nyz

dx
þI1
ðL
0

½NyyT½Nuþ½NuT½Nyy

dx
þI2
ðL
0

½NyyT½Nyzþ½NyzT½Nyy

dx
þI1j
ðL
0

½NyyT½Nc;x	½Nyy;x T½Nc

dx
I1j
ðL
0

½NyzT½Nc;x 	 ½Nyz;x T½Nc

dx
	Ij
ðL
0

½NuT½Nc;x 	 ½NcT½Nu;x

dx
	Ij2
ðL
0
½NcT½Nc;xxdx
ð8:73Þ
where the inertial constants are given by:
½I0; I1;I1; I2;I2;I2; If ðs;nÞ
¼
ð
s
ð
n
r½1; z; y; z2; y2; ys; fðs; nÞdsdn
8.3.4 Numerical experiments
The performance of the formulated element is ﬁrst
examined for an open-loop response due to electrical
actuation. The static and dynamic responses are then
compared with the experimental and numerical results
available in the literature.
The static analysis is performed on a bimorph PVDF
(piezoelectric poly(vinylidine ﬂuoride)) cantilever beam
due to an applied voltage of 1 V using the formulated
element. The beam has two layers of PVDF with oppo-
site polarities for bending actuation. The dimensions of
the beam are shown in Figure 8.10. The PVDF material
has a Young’s modulus of 2 GPa, a Poisson’s ratio of
0.29 and a density of 1800 kg/m3. It also has piezo-
electric coefﬁcients d31 ¼ d32 ¼ 2:2  10	11 m=V. The
5
4
3
2
1
100 mm
5 mm
0.5 mm ×  2
Poling  Direction
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.10
Schematic of a PVDF bimorph beam for static analysis: (a) top view; (b) side view.
202
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

tip displacements of the beam were obtained experimen-
tally by Tzou [6]. In Table 8.2, the displacements at the
ﬁve nodes (see Figure 8.9) are presented and compared
with experimental and 3-D and shell FE results available
in the literature.
A good correlation is observed with the FE results.
The tip displacement obtained with the formulated ele-
ment converges with just one element, conﬁrming the
exactness of the solution. The 3-D FE results were
obtained by Tzou and Tseng [3] using 5, 11-noded
hexahedron elements. The shell FE results were obtained
by Tzou and Ye [7] using a 12-noded piezoelectric
triangular shell elements with four dof per node.
An experimental dynamic analysis of a cantilever
aluminum beam with PZT actuators was done by Reaves
and Horta [8]. This beam had one PZT actuator mounted
on the top surface and near the root. A schematic of
this beam is shown in Figure 8.11. A PZT actuator (type
PZT-5A) was used, the material properties of which are
the following: Young’ modulus, E ¼ 1:0  107 lb=in2;
Poisson’s ratio¼ 0.3; Shear modulus G¼3:82106lb=in2;
density ¼ 7:1610	4ðlbs2Þ=in4; piezoelectric constant,
d31 ¼6:7310	9in=V. For this problem, the ﬁrst four
natural frequencies were obtained in Reaves and Horta [8]
using a general-purpose software package (MSC/NAS-
TRAN). Here, the same model is modeled with ten
formulated elements. The results of these two analyses
are compared and shown in Table 8.3. These results show
excellent agreement between the two models.
Next, a composite T300/976 graphite–epoxy box
beam, shown in Figure 8.12, having two bimorph sur-
face-mounted PZT actuators, is considered. This problem
was again studied in Reaves and Horta [8] using MSC/
NASTRAN. The material properties of the PZT actuators
are the same as in the previous example. The properties
of the T300/976 graphite–epoxy beam are as follows:
E11 ¼ 2:17107 lb=in2;
E22 ¼ 1:305106 lb=in2;
G12 ¼ 1:03106 lb=in2 ¼ G13;
G23 ¼ 1:305106 lb=in2;
r ¼ 1:4910	4 ðlb=s2Þ=in4
Table 8.2
Comparison of the results obtained for
a PVDF bimorph beam with literature values
(all entries  10	7 m).
Nodes
1
2
3
4
5
Experiment [6]
—
—
—
—
3.15
Solid FE [3]
0.124
0.508
1.16
2.10
3.30
Shell FE [7]
0.132
0.528
1.19
2.11
3.30
Present
formulation
0.132
0.528
1.19
2.11
3.30
Actuator
Actuator
16 in
3 in
1.75 in
2.78 in
0.04 in
0.008 in
Figure 8.11
Schematic of the PZT-mounted aluminum beam for dynamic analysis.
Table 8.3
Natural frequencies ðHzÞ for the aluminum
beam shown in Figure 8.10.
Mode
MSC/NASTRAN [12]
Present
formulation
1 (bending)
5.68
5.76
2 (bending)
33.59
33.77
3 (torsion)
60.24
59.06
4 (bending)
91.21
90.48
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
203

As before, the above beam was modeled with ten super-
convergent FEs and Table 8.4 shows comparison of the
results between the present element and the MSC/NAS-
TRAN results, which again shows excellent correlation.
8.4 MODELING OF MAGNETOSTRICTIVE
SENSORS AND ACTUATORS
8.4.1 Constitutive model for a magnetostrictive
material (Terfenol-D)
Some magnetic materials (magnetostrictive) show elon-
gation and contraction in the magnetization direction due
to an induced magnetic ﬁeld. This is called magnetos-
triction, which is due to the switching of a large amount
of magnetic domains caused by spontaneous magnetiza-
tion, below the Curie temperature point. Thus, magne-
tostrictive materials have the ability to convert magnetic
energy into mechanical energy, and vice versa. This
coupling between magnetic and mechanical energies
represents what is called the transductor capability,
which allows a magnetostrictive material to be used in
both actuation and sensing applications.
One of the main issues in the design of these magne-
tostrictive sensors/actuators is to predict their behaviors
under various mechanical and/or magnetic excitation
conditions through the constitutive relationships of the
materials. The constitutive relationship of magnetostrictive
materials consists of two equations, i.e. a sensing and an
actuation equation. In the sensing equation, the magnetic
ﬂux density is a function of the applied magnetic ﬁeld and
stress whereas in the actuation equation, the strain is a
function of the applied magnetic ﬁeld and stress. Both
sensing and actuation equations are coupled through the
applied magnetic ﬁeld and mechanical stress level. As a
result, the constitutive relations for a magnetostrictive
material, such as Terfenol-D, are highly nonlinear.
The analysis of structures with magnetostrictive sen-
sors/actuators is generally performed by using uncoupled
models. Uncoupled models are based on the assumption
that the magnetic ﬁeld within the magnetostrictive mate-
rial is proportional to the electric coil current multiplied
by the number of coil turns per unit length. Due to this
assumption, the actuation and sensing equations become
uncoupled. For the actuator, the strain due to the mag-
netic ﬁeld (which is proportional to the coil current) is
incorporated as the equivalent nodal load in the ﬁnite
element model for calculating the ‘block’ force. Thus,
0.5 in
1.75 in
66.0 in
3.0 in
3.0 in
0.75 in
0.75 in
0.03 in
3.0 in
Actuator
Actuator
Figure 8.12
Schematic of the PZT actuator mounted on a T300/976 graphite–epoxy box beam.
Table 8.4
Natural frequencies (Hz) for the
composite beam shown in Figure 8.11.
Mode
MSC/NASTRAN [8.12]
Present
formulation
1 (bending)
11.1
10.9
2 (bending)
68.9
67.7
3 (torsion)
186.7
187.7
4 (bending)
279.6
239.1
204
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

with this procedure the analysis is carried out without
taking smart (magnetic) degrees of freedom in the ﬁnite
element model. Similarly for the sensor, where generally
the coil current is assumed to be zero, the magnetic ﬂux
density is proportional to the mechanical stress, which
can be calculated from the ﬁnite element results through
‘post-processing’. This assumption for the magnetic ﬁeld
leads to ‘violation’ of the ﬂux line continuity, which is
one of the four Maxwell’s equations in electromagnet-
ism. On the other hand, in the coupled model it is
considered that the magnetic ﬂux density and/or strain
of the material are functions of the stress and magnetic
ﬁeld, without any additional assumptions for the mag-
netic ﬁeld, as in the uncoupled model.
The 3-D constitutive law for a magnetostrictive mate-
rial is given by:
feg ¼ ½SfHgfsg þ ½dTfHg ) fsg ¼ ½Qfeg 	 ½eTfHg
fBg ¼ ½dfsg þ ½mfsgfHg ) fBg ¼ ½efeg þ ½mefHg
ð8:74Þ
where feg and fsg are the strain and stress, respectively;
½SfHg represents the elastic compliance matrix measured
at a constant magnetic ﬁeld fHg and ½mðsÞ represents the
permeability measured at a constant stress fsg. Here, ½d
is the magneto–mechanical coupling coefﬁcient matrix,
which provides a measure of the coupling between the
mechanical strain and magnetic ﬁeld. In general, ½S, ½d
and ½m are nonlinear as they depend upon fsg and {H}.
The ﬁrst part of Equation (8.74) is often referred to as the
direct effect and is called the actuation equation, while
the second part of Equation (8.74) is known as the
converse effect. It should be noted that the elastic con-
stants which are used correspond to the ﬁxed magnetic
ﬁeld values while the permeabilities correspond to the
ﬁxed stress values. Alternatively, we can write the con-
stitutive relations as given on the right-hand side of
Equation (8.74). Here, ½Q is the elasticity matrix,
which is the inverse of the compliance matrix, ½me is
the permeability matrix measured at constant strain and
½e is the magneto-mechanical stress coefﬁcient matrix.
½me and ½e are related to ½Q through the relation:
½e ¼ ½d½Q;
½me ¼ ½ms 	 ½d½Q½dT
Let us consider a simple 1-D model. A look at Equation
(8.74) reveals that for each value of the magnetic ﬁeld
H, there is a different stress–strain curve. Similarly, for
each stress level, there is a separate magnetostriction–
magnetic ﬁeld curve. In other words, unlike piezoelectric
materials, one has to solve the sensing and actuation
equations simultaneously to get all of the required
quantities. Hence, the equations require to be solved
iteratively. This is done in Ghosh and Gopalakrishnan
[9] through two approaches. In the ﬁrst approach, an
Artiﬁcial Neural Network is created by ‘training’ the
network with the data supplied by ETREMA Inc., USA,
which is one of the few companies in the world which
market the products derived from Terfenol-D. If the
stress level and the magnetic ﬁeld intensity are fed into
this network, then the required stress–strain and magne-
tostriction–magnetic ﬁeld relations can be obtained. In
the second approach, the data supplied by ETREMA Inc.,
USA are used to ﬁt a ﬁfth-degree polynomial for mag-
netostriction as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld H. This
curve is later used to get the required curve for stress–
strain. These curves are shown in Figures 8.13 and 8.14.
These two plots were obtained through an iterative
solution of Equation (8.74) and match exactly with the
plots given in the ETREMA manual [10] on Terfenol-D. In
addition, the stress–strain and magnetostriction–magnetic
ﬁeld curves are given for different levels of magnetic ﬁeld/
stress not covered in the ETREMA manual.
8.4.2 Finite element modeling of composite
structures with embedded magnetostrictive patches
The ﬁnite element formulation of structures with embedded
magnetostrictive patches differs depending upon whether
the constitutive model is coupled or uncoupled. For the
uncoupled model, the magnetic ﬁeld is assumed to be
proportional to the coil current and as a result, the sensing
and actuation constitutive relations are solved independently.
That is, there is no need to have the magnetic ﬁeld as
the independent degree of freedom. However, in a
coupled model, both the sensing and actuation constitu-
tive laws need to be solved simultaneously, since no
explicit variation of the magnetic ﬁeld with respect to the
magnetostrictive patch parameters are available. This
requires that the magnetic ﬁeld be taken as an indepen-
dent degree of freedom. Here, we outline the procedure
of modeling magnetostrictive sensors/actuators for both
uncoupled and coupled constitutive laws.
Finite element formulation begins by writing the
associated energy in terms of the nodal degrees of free-
dom by assuming displacement and magnetic ﬁeld varia-
tions in three coordinate directions over each element.
That is, the displacement ﬁeld can be written as:
fUg ¼ fu
v
wg ¼ ½NufUge
ð8:75Þ
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
205

Here, uðx; y; tÞ, vðx; y; z; tÞ and wðx; y; z; tÞ are the dis-
placement components in the three coordinate directions,
½Nu is the shape functions associated with mechanical
degrees of freedom and fUge is the nodal displacement
vector. If an isoparametric formulation is used, then the
conventional isoparametric shape functions in natural
coordinate
could
be
adopted.
The
strains
can
be
expressed in terms of displacement through a strain–
displacement relationship, that is:
feg ¼ fexx
eyy
ezz
gyz
gxz
gxygT ¼ ½BfUge
ð8:76Þ
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
4
6
8
10
12
6 MPa
8 MPa
10 MPa
12 MPa
14 MPa
16 MPa
18 MPa
20 MPa
22 MPa
24 MPa
Magnetic field (×104 amp/m)
Magnetostriction l (×10)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Figure 8.13
Magnetostriction–magnetic ﬁeld curves for different stress levels in Terfenol-D.
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.6
1.4
1.8
Elastic compressive strain (× 10–5es)
Compressive Stress (×107 Pa)
0 amp/m
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
Figure 8.14
Stress–strain curves for different magnetic ﬁeld intensities in Terfenol-D.
206
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

where ½B is the strain-displacement matrix and its
evaluation is given in Chapter 7. For coupled analysis,
we need to take the magnetic ﬁeld as the independent
degree of freedom. In such cases, we can write the
magnetic ﬁeld in the three coordinate directions as:
fHg ¼ fHx
Hy
Hzg ¼ ½NHfHge
ð8:77Þ
where fHge is the nodal magnetic ﬁeld vector and ½NH is
the shape function associated with the magnetic ﬁeld
degree of freedom.
The strain energy in a structure with magnetostrictive
patches over a volume V is given by:
Ve ¼ 1
2
ð
V
fegTfsgdV
Substituting for fsg from Equation (8.74) converts the
above equation into terms of strains and magnetic ﬁeld
vectors. In this equation, the strains are expressed in
terms of displacement using Equation (8.76) and the
magnetic ﬁeld in terms of the nodal magnetic ﬁeld vector
using Equation (8.77).
The resulting expression for the strain energy will
become:
Ve ¼ 1
2 fUge
T½KuufUge 	 1
2 fUge
T½KuHfHge
ð8:78Þ
where:
½Kuu ¼
ð
V
½BT½Q½BdV;
½KuH ¼
ð
V
½BT½eT½NHdV
ð8:79Þ
and ½Kuu is the stiffness matrix associated with the
mechanical degrees of freedom and ½KuH is the coupling
stiffness matrix, which couples the mechanical and
magnetic degrees of freedoms. The kinetic energy is
given by:
Te ¼ 1
2
ð
V
f _UgTrf _UgdV
ð8:80Þ
Here, f _Ug is the velocity vector and r is the average
density of the host material. Using Equation (8.75) in the
above equation, we can write the kinetic energy as:
Te ¼ 1
2 f _UgT½Muuf _Ug
ð8:81Þ
where ½Muu is the mass matrix associated only with
mechanical degrees of freedom and is given by:
½Muu ¼
ð
V
½NuTr½NudV
ð8:82Þ
The magnetic potential energy for the system can be
written as:
Vm ¼ 1
2
ð
V
½BTfHgdV
ð8:83Þ
Substituting for ½B from Equation (8.74) and for fHg
from Equation (8.77), we can write the magnetic poten-
tial energy as:
Vm ¼ 1
2
ð
V
n
½efeg þ ½mefHg
oT
fHgdV
ð8:84Þ
Substituting for strains from Equation (8.76), we get:
Vm ¼ 1
2fUge
T½KuHTfHge þ1
2fHge
T½KHHfHge ð8:85Þ
where:
½KHH ¼
ð
V
½NHT½me½NHdV
ð8:86Þ
When an applied current I (amp) (AC or DC) is fed to
the patch having N number of coils, it creates a magnetic
ﬁeld, which in turn introduces an external force in the
patch. The external work done over a magnetostrictive
patch of area A due to this ﬁeld is given by:
Wm ¼ IN
ð
A
½msfHgdA
ð8:87Þ
Here, ½ms is the permeability matrix measured at con-
stant stress. It is necessary to convert this area integral
into a volume integral. If n is the number of coil turns per
unit length and flcg is the direction cosine vector of the
coil axis, the above area integral can be converted into
the volume integral by replacing N by nflcgT. Substitut-
ing for the magnetic ﬁeld from Equation (8.77), Equ-
ation (8.87) becomes:
Wm ¼ fFHgTfHge;
fFHg ¼ InflcgT
ð
V
½ms½NHdV
ð8:88Þ
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
207

The external mechanical work done due to the body force
or surface traction vector can be written in the form:
We ¼ fRgTfUge
ð8:89Þ
Using Hamilton’s principle, d
Ðt2
t1
ðTe 	 Ve þ Vm þ Wmþ
WeÞdt ¼ 0, gives the necessary FE governing equation.
This takes a varied form for uncoupled and coupled
models, which are given below.
In the uncoupled model, the magnetic ﬁeld is assumed
to be proportional to the coil current and hence a
variation with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld is not per-
formed. That is, the magnetic ﬁeld is normally equal to
H ¼ nI, where n is normally the coil turns per unit length of
the magnetostrictive material patch. With this assumption,
Hamilton’s principle will give the equation of motion as:
½Muuf€Uge þ ½KuufUge ¼ ½KuHfHge 	 fRg
ð8:90Þ
where f€Uge is the elemental acceleration vector and the
magnetic ﬁeld in the above equation is obtained by
fHge ¼ neI; with ne being the elemental coil turns per
unit length.
In the case of the coupled model, one has to also take a
variation on the magnetic ﬁeld as there is no explicit
relation of this with respect to any of the parameters.
Hence, both mechanical and magnetic degrees of free-
dom are considered as unknowns. Hamilton’s principle
will give the following coupled set of equations:
½Muu
½0
½0
½0


f€Uge
f€Hge
(
)
þ
½Kuu
	½KuH
½KuHT
½KHH


fUge
fHge


¼
	fRg
fFHg


ð8:91Þ
Note that the stiffness matrix is not symmetric and we
have a block zero diagonal matrix in the mass matrix as
the magnetic ﬁeld does not contribute to the inertia of the
composite. For an effective solution, the above equation
is expanded and the magnetic degrees of freedom are
condensed out. The reduced equation of motion can be
written as:
½Muuf€Uge þ ½K
uufUge ¼ fRg
ð8:92Þ
where:
½K
uu ¼ ½Kuu þ ½KuH½KHH	1½KuHT
h
i
;
fRg ¼ ½KuH½KHH	1fFHg 	 fRg
ð8:93Þ
The assembly of matrices and solution procedures are
similar to those detailed in Chapter 7.
After computation of the nodal displacements and
velocities, we can compute the sensor open-circuit
voltage. This is particularly of great interest in structural
health monitoring studies. The processes of computing
this for coupled and uncoupled models are quite differ-
ent. Using Faraday’s law, the open-circuit voltage Vv in
the sensing coil can be calculated from the magnetic ﬂux
passing through the sensing patch.
In the uncoupled model, the nodal magnetic ﬁeld is
assumed constant over the element and with zero sensor
coil current. To get the open-circuit voltage, the magnetic
ﬂux density can be expressed in terms of strain from the
sensing equation (second part of Equation (8.74)), which
is given by:
fBg ¼ ½dfsg ¼ ½d½Qfeg ¼ ½efeg ¼ ½e½BfUge
Now using Faraday’s Law, the open-circuit voltage of the
sensor having NS turns and area A, can be calculated
from the expression:
Vv ¼ 	NS
ð
A
@
@t f½efeggdA
ð8:94Þ
The above integral can be converted into the volume
integral as before by multiplying it with the direction
cosine vector and the open-circuit voltage can now be
written as:
Vv ¼ fFvgTfUeg; FvgT ¼ 	nsflcgT
ð
V
½e½BdV
ð8:95Þ
Here, ns is the coil turns per unit length of the sensor.
In the case of the coupled model, the magnetic ﬂux
density is computed from the nodal magnetic ﬁeld, which
is obtained from ﬁnite element analysis. Thus, the open-
circuit voltage in the sensor takes a different expression
and can be calculated from the expression:
Vv ¼ 	Ns
ð
A
@
@t½msfHgdA
ð8:96Þ
This can again be converted into the volume integral as
before. Substituting for fHg from Equation (8.77) in
terms of the nodal magnetic degrees of freedom, for
which the second part of Equation (8.91) is used, and
208
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

ﬁnally after simpliﬁcation, the open-circuit voltage can
be written as:
Vv ¼ fFvgTfUeg;
fFvgT ¼ 	nsflcgT
ð
V
½ms½NHdV
2
4
3
5½KHH	1½KuHT
ð8:97Þ
8.4.3 Numerical examples
In this section, the effect of coupling on the overall
response of a 1-D composite structure is brought out.
Hence, for all analysis the results are compared with the
uncoupled model to see the effect of coupling. Here, we
consider two examples of a one-dimensional structure –
the ﬁrst is a 1-D magnetostrictive rod model, while the
second is a composite beam model based on ﬁrst-order
shear deformation theory. For the last example, static,
frequency response and time history analyses are per-
formed to bring out the essential differences between the
coupled and uncoupled models.
8.4.3.1 Effect of coupling in a Terfenol-D rod
The displacement ﬁeld in a rod is given by:
uðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ uðx; tÞ;
vðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ 0;
wðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ 0
and the magnetic ﬁeld is present only in the axial
direction and is given by Hðx; tÞ. Consider a Terfenol-D
rod of length L, cross-sectional area A, Young’s modulus
E, magneto–mechanical coefﬁcient d and constant stress
permeability ms. For ﬁnite element formulation, we use
conventional rod shape functions for both displacement
and magnetic degrees of freedom, which are given
by:
uðx; tg ¼ ½NufUge ¼ N1ðxÞu1ðtÞ þ N2ðxÞu2ðtÞ
Hðx; tg ¼ ½NHfHge ¼ N1ðxÞH1ðtÞ þ N2ðxÞH2ðtÞ
N1 ¼
1 	 x
L
"
#
;
N2 ¼
x
L
" #
ð8:98Þ
where u1 and u2 are the two axial degrees of freedom at
the two ends of the rod. Using the above equations,
strains can be evaluated as a function of nodal displace-
ment. Substituting Equation (8.98) into Equations (8.79),
(8.82), (8.86), (8.88), we can get the mass matrix, all the
relevant stiffness matrices and the load vector due to the
magnetic ﬁeld. These are given by:
½Muu ¼ rAL
6
2
1
1
2


;
½Kuu ¼ EA
L
1
	1
	1
1


;
½KuH ¼ EAd
2
	1
	1
1
1


;
½KHH ¼ ALms
6
2
1
1
2


;
fFHg ¼ nIALms
2
1
1


ð8:99Þ
Uncoupled analysis
For uncoupled static analysis, the
corresponding equations become:
EA
L
1
	1
	1
1


u1
u2


	 EAd
2
	1
	1
1
1


H1
H2


¼
R1
R2


ð8:100Þ
where u1 and u2 are the two nodal axial displacements
in a magnetostrictive rod. For uncoupled analysis,
H1 ¼ H2 ¼ nI. Here, we consider the following three
cases:
 Keeping the boundaries ﬁxed, that is, u1 ¼ u2 ¼ 0, by
solving Equation (8.100) for the block force, we get
R1 ¼ 	R2 ¼ AdEH1 ¼ AdEIn
and
the
stress
s ¼ R1=A ¼ R2=A ¼ dEIn.
 Next, if we consider the completely ﬁxed–free bound-
ary conditions, where R1 ¼ R2 ¼ u1 ¼ s ¼ 0, we get
the tip displacement and strain as u2 ¼ LdnI; e ¼ dnI.
 If the coil current is zero and the rod is subjected to a
‘pure’ tension F, then a purely mechanical state exists
and for the ﬁxed-free boundary condition, we have
u2 ¼ FL=AE, which is the conventional strength-of-
material solution.
Now, the same set of analyses is performed using the
coupled model to see the essential differences in
responses.
Coupled analysis
Coupled analysis requires solution of
the following equation:
EA
L
1
	1
	1
1


u1
u2


	EAd
2
	1 	1
1
1


H1
H2


¼
R1
R2


EAd
2
	1 1
	1 1


u1
u2


þALme
2
2 1
1 2


H1
H2


¼ALmsIn
2
1
1
 
ð8:101Þ
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
209

The same three analyses are again performed here:
 For ﬁxed–ﬁxed boundary conditions, the second part
of the above equation gives:
H1 ¼ H2 ¼ In ms
me
ð8:102Þ
The value of the magnetic ﬁeld is less than the generally
considered value (In) for the uncoupled model. The value
of the magnetic ﬁeld will increase (decrease) with the
increase (decrease) in the ratio of constant stress and
constant strain permeability. Similarly, the blocked force
in the support is obtained from the ﬁrst part of Equation
(8.101) and is given by:
R1 ¼ 	R2 ¼ AdEH1 ¼ AdEIn ms
me
ð8:103Þ
which is less than the value generally considered (AdEIn).
These also depend on the ratio of the permeabilities.
 For ﬁxed–free boundary conditions, the solution of
Equation (8.101) gives:
H1 ¼ H2 ¼ H ¼ In;
u2 ¼ LdnI;
e ¼ dnI
ð8:104Þ
That is, H ¼ In is only true for ﬁxed–free boundary
conditions. For the other boundary condition (ﬁxed–
ﬁxed), the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld depends on
the ratio of permeabilities.
 For ﬁxed–free boundary conditions and a tensile force
F acting at the tip with zero coil current ðI ¼ 0Þ, the
solution of Equation (8.101) gives:
H1 ¼ H2 ¼ Fd
Ams ;
u2 ¼ FLme
AEms
ð8:105Þ
Here again, the dependence on the ratio of perme-
abilities is noticeable. If this ratio of permeabilities is
equal to 1, the effect of coupling vanishes. However,
for Terfenol-D, the ratio of permeabilities ðms=meÞ is
in the range of 0.4 to 0.5. Hence, the effect of
coupling is quite signiﬁcant.
8.4.3.2 Modeling of a laminated composite beam
with embedded Terfenol-D patch
The displacement ﬁeld for the beam based on the ﬁrst-
order Shear Deformation Theory (FSDT) is given by:
uðx; y; x; tÞ ¼ u0ðx; tÞ 	 zfðx; tÞ;
vðx; y; z; tÞ ¼ 0;
wðx; y; x; tÞ ¼ wðx; tÞ
ð8:106Þ
As before, the magnetic ﬁeld (H) is only in the axial
direction. Next, we need to assume the necessary poly-
nomials for the mid-plane axial displacement u0, lateral
displacement w0 and slope f. Since the slopes are
independent and not derivable from the lateral displace-
ment, a C0 continuous formulation is sufﬁcient and hence
of the use linear polynomials given in Equation (8.98) is
sufﬁcient. All of the formulated matrices are numerically
integrated. However, this formulation is prone to exhibit
what is called the shear-locking problem, which was
explained in Chapter 7. One of the simplest ways to
eliminate locking is to ‘reduce-integrate’ the part of the
mechanical stiffness matrix contributed by the shear
stress. This is undertaken in this formulation.
The approach to formulation is very similar to rod
formulation, and hence all of the details are skipped here.
We will write down only the ﬁnal forms of the elemental
matrices involved. The mechanical stiffness matrix ½Kuu
is 6  6 and is given by:
½Kuu
¼
A11
L
A15
L
A15
2 	B11
L


	A11
L
	A15
L
A15
2 þB11
L


A55
L
A55
2 	B15
L


	A15
L
	A55
L
A55
2 þB15
L


A55L
4
	B15


	A15
2 þB11
L


	A55
2 þB15
L


A55L
4
	D11
L


A11
L
A15
L
	A15
2 	B11
L


SYM
A55
L
	A55
2 	B15
L


A55L
4
þB15 þD11
L


2
6666666666666666666664
3
7777777777777777777775
where:
½Aij; Bij; Dij ¼
ð
A
Qij½1; z; z2dA
The magneto–mechanical coupling matrix is given by:
½KuHT ¼ 1
2
	e011
0
e111
e011
0
	e111
	e011
0
e111
e011
0
	e111


where:
½e0
11
e1
11 ¼
ð
A
e11½1
zdA
The matrix ½KHH is given by:
½KHH ¼ Lm0
6
2
1
1
2


;
m0 ¼
ð
A
medA
210
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

In the case of the coupled model, we require the force
vector fFHg, which is given in Equation (8.88). This
vector becomes:
fFHg ¼ Inm0L
2
1
1


The mass matrix is given by:
½Muu ¼
2I0
0
	2I1
I0
0
	I1
2I0
0
0
I0
0
2I2
	I1
0
I2
2I0
0
	2I1
SYM
2I0
0
2I2
2
6666664
3
7777775
where:
½I0; I1; I2 ¼
ð
A
r½1; z; z2dA
The composite magnetostrictive bimorph beam shown in
Figure 8.15 is analyzed to verify the effectiveness of the
formulated element. Static and frequency response ana-
lyses are performed on this beam to bring out the effects
of coupling. The length and width of the beam are
500 mm and 50 mm, respectively. The beam is made of
12 layers with the thickness of each layer being 0.15 mm.
Surface-mounted magnetostrictive patches on the top and
bottom layers are considered as sensor and actuator,
respectively. The elastic moduli of the composite are
assumed as 181 and 10.3 GPa in the parallel ðE1Þ and
perpendicular ðE2Þ directions of the ﬁber, respectively.
The density (r) and shear modulus ðG12Þ of the compo-
site are 1:6 g=ml and 28 GPa, respectively. The elastic
modulus ðEmÞ, shear modulus ðGmÞ and density ðrmÞ of
the magnetostrictive material are taken as 30 GPa,
23 GPa and 9.25 g/ml, respectively.
The magneto–mechanical coupling coefﬁcient is taken
as 15  10	9 m=amp, and the permeability in vacuum or
air is assumed to be 400p nH/m. The constant-stress
relative permeability of the magnetostrictive material is
assumed to be equal to 10, while the number of coil turns
per meter (n) in the sensor and actuator is assumed to be
20 000.
Static analysis
The effect of coupling of a magnetos-
trictive material in a laminated composite beam for static
actuation is analyzed for a 1 amp DC actuation coil
current. It is observed that the tip deﬂection for coupled
analysis is 2.17 mm, whereas for uncoupled analysis it
is 2.44 mm. The ratio between these two is 1:12. As the
thickness of the actuator is smaller when compared
to the thickness of the composite beam, the effective
increase of stiffness in the global stiffness matrix due to
coupling is very much smaller. The increases in thickness
of the sensor and actuator patches will increase the
effective thickness and hence decrease the effective
deﬂection, especially in the coupled analysis. In addition,
an increase in the ply angle will also increase the stiffness
in the transverse direction. These observations are quite
evident from Table 8.5 for different ply angles of 0  and
90 . It is very clear from this table that for 90  ply angle,
the effect of coupling is considerable. This reinforces the
need for coupled analysis for structures with magnetos-
trictive patches.
Frequency response analysis
To observe the effects of
the coupling terms on the behavior of a cantilever beam
with a magnetostrictive material in the frequency domain,
the frequency response function (FRF) is computed with
both coupled and uncoupled models for the same canti-
lever composite beam up to a 500Hz frequency. The
FRFs for 0 and 90  ply angles are shown in Figures 8.16
Actuator
Magnetostrictive Patches
Sensor
x
z
y
Figure 8.15
Schematic of a magnetostrictive cantilever bimorph beam.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
211

and 8.17, respectively. For a 0  ply angle, we see that the
ﬁrst three modes are least affected due to the effects of
coupling. However, we can see a signiﬁcant shift in the
resonant frequencies of the higher modes. For the 90  ply
angle, we see shifts in the natural frequencies, even for
the lower modes. This further reinforces our belief that
uncoupled analysis underestimates the stiffness of the
structure with a magnetostrictive material.
8.4.4 Modeling of piezo ﬁbre composite (PFC)
sensors/actuators
The concept of broadband distributed active control in
ﬂexible structures has evolved in recent times. Tremen-
dous technological success in the ﬁeld of micro electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) has laid the path toward
implementation of such concepts. Especially, structures
made of multifunctional multiphase composites [11–14]
have provided a wide range of platforms for structural
sensing,
actuation
and
control-related
applications
[15,16]. Currently, a number of designs are available
which use different forms of PZT ceramic ﬁbers and
conventional matrices. Experimental observations have
shown sustained electromechanical properties of these
composites that match well with the microscopic models
Table 8.5
Ratios of uncoupled and coupled analysis
tip displacement of a cantilever beam with
magnetostrictive patches.
Ply sequence
Coupled
Uncoupled Ratio, wu
wc
analysis
analysis
wc (mm)
wu (mm)
m=½010=m
2.17
2.44
1.12
m=½3010=m
2.83
3.30
1.17
m=½4510=m
3.84
4.78
1.24
m=½6010=m
5.52
7.69
1.39
m=½9010=m
8.62
15.40
1.78
m=½0=905=m
3.44
4.80
1.40
m=½90=05=m
7.62
10.73
1.48
½m2=½08=½m2
5.25
6.97
1.33
½m2=½308=½m2
6.03
8.41
1.39
½m2=½458=½m2
7.07
10.58
1.5
½m2=½908=½m2
10.72
21.56
2.01
½m2=½904=½04=½m2
10.77
19.57
1.82
½m3=½906=½m3
12.15
25.53
2.10
½m3=½903=½03=½m3
12.88
26.31
2.04
½m4=½902=½02=½m4
14.06
30.44
2.17
Figure 8.16
Frequency response function for a laminated composite magnetostrictive bimorph beam with 0  ply angles.
212
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

mathematically derived from their bulk forms in the
linear and high-frequency regimes. Following the perfor-
mance standardization of these active composites as
distributed actuators, the main task remains as to how
better control performances can be achieved, particularly
in transverse actuation. Before real-scale implementa-
tion, various complexities due to embedded electronics,
limitations in the electro–magnetic properties and inter-
actions with the host structures need detailed analysis.
Some physical insight into the macroscopic behavior of
these PFC actuators has been reported [17,18].
Here, we consider a PFC with an interdigitated surface
electrode as the distributed actuator element and a broad-
band vibration sensor capable of measuring far-ﬁeld as
well as near-ﬁeld. The computational model accounts for
the axial–ﬂexural coupling due to the out-of-plane actua-
tion effort and unsymmetric mechanical stiffness and
inertia across the beam thickness. As the frequency
content of the external disturbance increases, wave-
lengths of the traveling waves decrease. Therefore,
scattering of the waves at minute discontinuities in the
structural interfaces becomes signiﬁcant at these high-
frequency ranges. Here, the spectral ﬁnite element model
is used to characterize the waves at the high-frequency
ranges. This model is used in tandem with the Active
Spectral Finite Element Model (ASFEM) (to be dealt
with in detail in the next chapter) for active wave con-
trol. Here, we will describe the constitutive model for a
PFC actuator. We will use this SFEM along with the
ASFEM for controlling broadband applications in the next
chapter.
To illustrate the derivation of the constitutive model
for piezoelectric ﬁber composite (PFC) actuation, we
consider rectangular-packing square PZT ﬁbers with a
matrix as shown in Figure 8.18. The rectangular cross-
section of the ﬁbers can provide a maximum volume
fraction of ceramic, which is preferable for actuation.
The conﬁguration can be obtained using ﬁbers that have
been tape-cast and diced, extruded or cast into a mold.
Figure 8.18 shows an actuator element (say, the qth)
with its host composite structure and having a local
coordinate system (Xq
a; Yq
a; Zq
a). The representative volume
element (RVE), of the two-phase ceramic–matrix compo-
site system is described by one quadrant axisymmetric
model about the x3 axis. Here, h is the total depth of a
single PFC layer, p is the uniform spacing of the inter-
digitated electrodes spanning along xi and b is the width of
each electrode. The constitutive relations for an ortho-
tropic active ceramic bulk form [19] can be represented as:
sxx
szz
txz
Dz
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
¼
CE11
CE12
CE13
	e31
CE12
CE22
CE23
	e32
CE13
CE23
CE33
	e33
e31
e32
e33
ms
33
2
664
3
775
exx
ezz
gxz
Ez
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
This is of a very similar form to that of a PZT actuator.
For 1-D waveguide analysis, this requires reduction into
a single equivalent constitutive law by considering the
Figure 8.17
Frequency response function for a laminated composite magnetostrictive bimorph beam with 90  ply angles.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
213

volume fraction of the piezo ﬁber (PZT) to the total
volume of the laminate. For a pure piezoceramic,
CE
11 ¼ CE
22, CE
23 ¼ CE
13 and e32 ¼ e31. For the matrix
phase, all eij are zero and their mechanical and dielectric
properties are represented without superscripts. Assum-
ing negligible distortion of the equipotential lines and
electric ﬁelds beneath the electrodes, and imposing a
proper ﬁeld continuity between the ceramic and matrix
phases, the effective unidirectional constitutive law for a
PFC beam structure can be expressed as:
szz ¼ Ceff
33 ezz 	 eeff
33 Ez
ð8:107Þ
where:
C33
eff ¼ðC33V1
p þC22V1
mÞ	V1pV1mðC12 	 C13Þ2
C22V1p þ C11V1m
ð8:108Þ
eeff
33 ¼e33V1
p þ
e31V1pV1mðC12 	 C13Þ
C22V1p þ C11V1m
ð8:109Þ
C11 ¼ðC11V2
p þC22V2
mÞ	V2pV2mðC12 	 C12Þ2
C11V2p þ C12V2m
C13 ¼ðC13V2
p þC12V2
mÞ	V2pV2mðC12 	 C12ÞC12 	 C23Þ
C11V2p þ C22V2m
C11 ¼ðC33V2
p þC11V2
mÞ	V2pV2mðC12 	 C23Þ2
C11V2p þ C22V2m
ð8:110Þ
e31 ¼ e31V2
p þ e32V2pV2mðC12 	 C12Þ
C11V2p þ C22V2m
e33 ¼ e33V2
p þ e32V2pV2mðC12 	 C23Þ
C11V2p þ C22V2m
ð8:111Þ
Cjk ¼ CE
jk þ
V3me3je3k
V3mm33 þ V3mms
33
;
e3j ¼
m33e3j
V3pm33V3mms
33
ð8:112Þ
Here, n p
i and nm
i , for i ¼ 1 and 2 represent, respectively,
the length fractions of the ceramic and matrix phases
along direction i and:
V3
p ¼
p
h
p
h þ ð1 	 V2
pÞ
b  p
ð8:113Þ
represents the volume fraction of the ceramic phase in the
RVE. The details of the above derivation can be found in
Roy Mahapatra [20]. Similar models for uniform-packing
circular ﬁbers can be found in Bent [13]. Essentially,
these models provide dominant electromechanical cou-
pling in direction ‘3’, which can be aligned along the
local host beam axis during bonding or embedding. This is
unlikely in a uniformly electroded PZT plate structure.
Electrode
Electrode
Z q
a
Y q
a
X q
a
h
PZT fiber
x1
x2
x3
p/2
h/2
b/2
Figure 8.18
Conﬁguration of a piezoelectric ﬁber composite (PFC) for composite beam actuation.
214
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

8.4.4.1 Spectral element modeling of beams with
PFC sensors/actuators
Assuming a Euler–Bernoulli-type displacement ﬁeld for
the PFC actuator or sensor system integrated with the
host composite beams and considering cross-sectional
unsymmetry and neglecting rotational inertia, the gov-
erning wave equations can be written as:
rA@2u0
@t2 	A33
@2u0
@x2 þB33
@3w
@x3 þA33
PFC @Ez
@x ¼ 0
rA@2w
@t2 	B33
@3u0
@x3 þD33
@4w
@x4 þB33
PFC @2Ez
@x2 ¼ 0
ð8:114Þ
where u0, w and Ez are the mid-plane axial displacement,
transverse displacement and electric ﬁeld intensity in the
z-direction and r is the density of the composite having
an area of cross-section A. The three associated force
boundary conditions, which are required for the spectral
and active spectral ﬁnite element models, are given by:
A33
@u0
@x 	 B33
@2w
@x2 	 A33
PFCEz ¼ Nx;
B33
@2u0
@x2 	 D33
@3w
@x3 	 B33
PFC @Ez
@x ¼ Vx
	 B33
@u0
@x þ D33
@2w
@x2 þ B33
PFCEz ¼ Mx
ð8:115Þ
where:
½A33; B33; D33 ¼
ð
A
C33
eff ½1; z; z2dA;
½A33
PFC; B33
PFC
¼
ð
A
e33
eff ½1; zdA
ð8:116Þ
Nx is the axial force, Vx is the shear force and Mx is the
bending moment. Once the constitutive model, the gov-
erning differential equation and its associated boundary
conditions are known, then one can proceed to formulate
the required spectral ﬁnite element, as outlined in Chap-
ter 7. For this, ﬁrst the wavenumbers are characterized,
followed by the solution of the differential equation in
the transformed domain, which is used as the interpolat-
ing function for spectral element formulation.
8.4.4.2 Spectral element modeling of beams
with magnetostrictive sensors/actuators
The spectral element formulation for modeling compo-
site beams with embedded/surface-mounted magnetos-
trictive sensors/actuators is very similar. The constitutive
law for the magnetostrictive material is of the form:
ez ¼ SH
33sz þ dm
33Hz;
Bz ¼ dm
33sz þ ms
33Hz
ð8:117Þ
The governing equation for a beam with a magnetostric-
tive actuator using the Euler–Bernoulli beam model is
given by:
rA @2u0
@t2 	 A33
@2u0
@x2 þ B33
@3w
@x3 þ A33
m @Hz
@x ¼ 0
rA @2w
@t2 	 B33
@3u0
@x3 þ D33
@4w
@x4 þ B33
m @2Hz
@x2 ¼ 0 ð8:118Þ
and the associated force boundary conditions are:
A33
@u0
@x 	 B33
@2w
@x2 	 A33
mHz ¼ Nx;
B33
@2u0
@x2 	 D33
@3w
@x3 	 B33
m @Hz
@x ¼ Vx
	 B33
@u0
@x þ D33
@2w
@x2 þ B33
mHz ¼ Mx
ð8:119Þ
where:
½A33; B33; D33 ¼
ð
A
S33½1; z; z2dA;
½A33
m; B33
m ¼
ð
A
d33½1; zdA
ð8:120Þ
The rest of the procedure of spectral ﬁnite element
formulation is similar to that outlined in Chapter 7
8.5 MODELING OF MICRO
ELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS
Modeling and analysis of an MEMS device is absolutely
essential for validating the design and performance.
These devices are of a few millimeters in dimensions
and a few microns in thickness. The most important
question one has to answer here is that ‘can we employ
the analysis tool developed for macro structures’?. ‘Can
we idealize the constitutive model for these structures in
the same manner as the macro structures, since it is a
question of scale?’. Most MEMS analyses are performed
using the conventional ﬁnite element technique and the
experience reported in many papers in the literature is
that the techniques for macro models give acceptable
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
215

results. When an MEMS device is used in structural
applications, they are surface bonded and as such, they
contribute to negligible stiffness to the complete struc-
ture. Since the area of application of the device is small,
it can be considered as a point-sensing case. In such
cases, the performance of the MEMS device can be
assessed based on the component analysis. However, in
certain applications, such as crack sensing in a structure,
the stresses at the crack tip are theoretically inﬁnite and
hence small devices mounted at a number of location
may not perform to the desired level. In such cases, one
has to go onto distributed sensing, where the sensor could
be a few centimeters in dimensions and will still retain
the micron-level thickness. In such a case, due to longer
dimensions, the modeling of the MEMS device should
also take care of the host structure to account for the
losses during response transfer. The mechanics here is
more complex compared to the point-sensing case.
There are different types of MEMS device available
with the most common type being the capacitive device,
where the performance (sensitivity) and design of the
device is essentially assessed based on the capacitance of
the electrical circuit of the device. Typically, an MEMS
device will have a wafer of a few microns thickness and
in most cases are made of silicon or a polymer and in
many cases, they are also made of PZT material. Over
these wafers, IDTs (interdigitated transducers) or elec-
trodes are placed to get the required actuation due to the
electric ﬁeld. Hence, the constitutive models for these
devices are very similar to those of bulk piezoelectric
(PZT) materials. The general procedure for design of
MEMS capacitive sensors is that ﬁrst the minimum
capacitance required by the electrical circuit of the
device for sustaining the general mechanical loading is
obtained through electromechanical analysis. The electri-
cal circuit is then designed to get the required capacitance.
There are many papers on the analysis of MEMS
devices, such as pressure sensors, accelerometers, rate
gyroscopes etc., available in the literature. Most of these
use the FE technique to model the device and assess its
performance without considering on what structure it is
going to be mounted. This is because of the assumption
of point-sensing. Hence, the aspects of modeling point-
sensors are not addressed here since a knowledge of the
FEM addressed earlier in this book (Chapter 7) will be
sufﬁcient enough for this. Here, we address the analysis
and design
aspects
of distributed MEMS
sensors,
wherein the modeling will take care of the host structure
material properties and the properties of sensors such as
the thickness of wafers, thickness of the IDT, material
properties of the sensor and the loss factor due to leakage
of response from the structure and sensor. Modeling of
one such sensor, namely the capacitive thin ﬁlm sensor, is
addressed in the next subsection.
8.5.1 Analytical model for capacitive thin-ﬁlm
sensors
Here, a novel analytical technique towards the design and
development of thin-ﬁlm distributed and deformable
capacitive sensors in a composite structure is presented.
The approach is a ‘one-step’ improvement over the
already prevailing analysis and design methodology for
conventional micro electromechanical transducers. In
engineering structural health monitoring (SHM) applica-
tions, the identiﬁcation of hidden structural defects and
any damage process taking place at the sub surface and/
or in deep interlaminar regions in composites are of great
importance. Conventional strain gauges and MEMS
sensor arrays are being used for performing the damage
detection task. Similarly, in electroactive ﬂexible adap-
tive structures for shape and vibration-control applica-
tions, understanding the effects of various material and
geometric parameters on the electromechanical coupling
is essential.
One of the major concerns for MEMS is the relatively
poor reliability caused by delamination, brittle fracture
and fatigue degradation of multilayer thin-ﬁlm structures.
However, identiﬁcation of the damage conﬁguration,
which is non-local and spatio-temporal, can be per-
formed best if a continuous distributed ﬁlm sensor with
segmented electrode arrays (like a synthetic skin with
active
pixels/grids
for
imaging)
can
be
modeled,
designed and fabricated. While validating such a design
concept, it is essential to incorporate several effects, such
as electromechanical coupling in the sensor structure,
dissipation factor in the sensor materials, bulk electrical
resistivity of the sensor material and AC frequency and
loss factor of the matrix, as against the conventional
design, where all of these factors are not taken into
consideration. For certain materials, where the dipoles
do not get oriented instantly and hence show signiﬁcant
reaction times, there is a phase delay in the polarization
that results from the sinusoidal electric ﬁeld. A detail
analytical model incorporating all of these effects
appears necessary.
Most of the analytical and ﬁnite element analysis
techniques for coupled electromechanical simulations
reported in the literature are based on iterations over
the mechanical and electrical equivalents of the stress
ﬁeld to achieve optimum capacitances and voltages
(Schrag et al. [21]). In recent times, there has been
216
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

increasing effort in developing analytical techniques to
study the constrained effect on thin ﬁlms [22,23]. Similar
problems in deformable capacitive devices for distributed
transducer applications are also expected to play an
important role and a systematic analytical model of the
coupled electromechanical ﬁeld appears advantageous.
Here, we develop an electromechanical continuum ﬁeld
model to analyze the constrained boundary effects on the
transduction performance of thin ﬁlms based on the
method of stress transfer and strain continuity.
Here, we shall consider a simple model of the sensor
ﬁlm bonded to the surface of the host structure. A
constant in-plane tensile stress proﬁle in the host layer
is considered to be directly transferred to the ﬁlm, along
with the condition of strain continuity at the interface. A
plane-stress case of a surface-mounted sensor on the host
structure is considered here. The free-body diagram of
the sensor is shown in Figure 8.19. The stress transfer
mechanism is based on the shear-lag model [24].
In the following derivation, we use the superscript s to
indicate the variables in the host structural domain and a
superscript a to indicate the variables in the ﬁlm domain.
As shown in Figure 8.19, ts, tm and ta=2 are, respectively,
the thickness of the host structure (an equivalent thick-
ness for effective stress transfer), the thickness of the
bonding layer and the thickness of the ﬁlm. Considering
a ‘span-wise’ segment of inﬁnitesimal length dx of the
ﬁlm along with the bonding layer, the equilibrium
equations can be written as:
dsxxtab þ 2bdxtxz ¼ 0;
dss
xxtsb 	 bdxtxz ¼ 0 ð8:121Þ
where txz is the shear stress transferred from the host
structure to the ﬁlm through the bonding layer. From the
shear-lag model, we have:
txz ¼ G us 	 ua
tm
ð8:122Þ
Differentiating Equation (8.121) three times and substi-
tuting sxx ¼ C11exx and ss
xx ¼ Cs11es
xx, after some simpli-
ﬁcation, we get:
d4esxx
dx4 	 2
0
d2esxx
dx2
¼ 0;
d4exx
dx4 	 2
0
d2exx
dx2 ¼ 0
ð8:123Þ
where:
2
0 ¼
G
Cs11tstm
2Cs11ts þ C11ta
C11ta


ð8:124Þ
Here, G is the complex shear modulus of the bonding
layer taking into account its viscoelastic properties as a
generalization of the analytical model and Cs11 and C11
are the 1-D material constants of the sensor and host,
respectively; us and ua are the interface displacements of
sensor and host structure, respectively. The general solu-
tion for Equation (8.123) is given by:
es
xx ¼ a1 þa2x	 C11ta
2Cs11ts
"
a3 sinhð0xÞþþa4 coshð0xÞ
#
exx ¼ a1 þa2xþ
"
a3 sinhð0xÞþa4 coshð0xÞ
#
ð8:125Þ
Boundary conditions are now applied separately on the
host structure and on the ﬁlm, which are:
es
xxðxÞ ¼ ssxx
Cs11
;
sxxðL=2Þ ¼ 0
ð8:126Þ
The above boundary conditions enable determination of
all constants in Equation (8.125), which are given by:
a1 ¼
ssxx
Cs11 1 þ C11ta
2Cs11ts

 ;
a2 ¼ 0;
a3 ¼ 0;
a4 ¼ 	
a1
cosh
0
L
2


ð8:127Þ
z
ts
dx
tm
ta /2
x
Host structure
Bonding layer
Film
sxx
sxx
s
sxx
s
dsxx
s
+
sxx
τxz
τxz
dsxx
+
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.19
Schematic of a surface-mounted sensor based on stress transfer and strain continuity at the bonding layer.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
217

For pure sensory transduction, that is, assuming all the
stresses are transformed into electric potential and dis-
sipated through the circuit:
sxx ¼C11exx 	e31
DF
ta
; Dz ¼e31exx þm33
DF
ta
ð8:128Þ
where DF is the change in the electric potential. Note
that the electric potential is related to the electric ﬁeld by
the relation Ez ¼ dF=dz. The surface charge accumu-
lated over the ﬁlm segment of width b and span
x ð ¼ 	L=2, þL=2) is given by:
Q ¼
ð
þL=2
	L=2
Dzbdx ¼
e231
C11
þ m33


bC11sxx
e31Cs11 1 þ C11ta
2Cs11ts


ð
L=2
	L=2
1 	 cosh ð0xÞ
cosh
0
L
2


2
664
3
775
ð8:129Þ
Equating the deformation-induced electric power gener-
ated, the equivalent capacitance < ¼ ð
ÐL
0
ðDzbdx=DFÞÞ of
the ﬁlm segment L is obtained as:
<¼
e231
C11
þm33

b
ta
L	
4sinh 0
L
2


cosh 0
L
2


0
þ
1
4cosh2 0
L
2

 2sinhð0LÞ
0
þ2L


2
6666666664
3
7777777775
ð8:130Þ
Clearly, the capacitance value depends on both the host
material as well as on the sensor properties. In addition, in
the absence of any piezoelectric effect, the conventional
form of electrostatic capacitance given by bm33ðL2 	 L1Þ=ta
can be clearly seen from Equation (8.130).
8.5.2 Numerical example
In this section we show the variation in the capacitance
and output voltage based on the proposed model and
compared with the results from the conventional expres-
sion of electrostatics. Note that in this simple one-
dimensional model, only a constant in-plane tensile stress
proﬁle in the host structure is assumed to be directly
transferred to the sensor ﬁlm. In addition, further assump-
tion is that the effective thickness ts of the host structure
over which the stress transfer takes place is known.
The material properties of the PVDF and PZT ﬁlms
used in the numerical simulations are shown in Table 8.6.
Carbon–epoxy composite (55 % ﬁber volume fraction) is
used as the host structural material with C11 ¼ 55:1 GPa.
The shear modulus of the bonding layer is assumed as
G ¼ 1 GPa. The viscoelastic property of this bonding
layer is modeled as G ¼ Gð1 	 iZÞ where the loss factor
Z ¼ 0:007 is assumed. The frequency-dependent dielec-
tric including the effect of AC loss [24] is assumed as:
m33 ¼ ms
33ð1 	 iZmÞ 	
i
rro
where ms33 is the DC component of the dielectric, Zm is
the AC component of the dielectric loss, rr is the volume
resistivity and o is the AC frequency. In numerical
simulations,
the
thickness
of
the
bonding
layer
tm ð¼ 10 mmÞ, the ﬁlm width b ð¼ 1 mmÞ, the ﬁlm lengths
L ð¼ 2 mm and 3 mmÞ, respectively, for PVDF and PZT,
and the ﬁlm thicknesses ta ð¼ 10 mm and 100 mmÞ,
respectively, are assumed.
Figures 8.20 and 8.21, respectively, show the depen-
dences of the capacitances of the surface-mounted PVDF
sensor and PZT sensor on their geometric properties, that
is, the ﬁlm thickness and length.
It can be seen that for both of the PVDF and PZT
sensors, the results predicted by the present model differ
Table 8.6
Material properties of the ﬁlms used
in numerical studies.
Property
PVDF
PZT
C11 (GPa)
2.00
69.00
C13 (GPa)
0.768
23.664
C33 (GPa)
2.00
55.00
C55 (GPa)
0.746
26.336
Poisson’s ratio, n
0.34
0.31
d31 (pC/N)
8
	175
d33 (pC/N)
15
350
e31 (N(V m))
0.027 53
	3.792 56
e33 (N/(V m))
0.036 15
15.1088
Relative permittivity,
11
1800
es
33=e0, at o ¼ 1 MHz
Dissipation factor, Zk
0.018
0.018
Volume Resistivity, r
5  1012
2  1010
(ohm m)
218
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

from the results predicted by the conventional electro-
statics model. This can be attributed to the higher
stiffness and higher thickness range that signiﬁcantly
affect the constrained electro mechanical behavior.
Figures 8.22 and 8.23, respectively, shows the varia-
tions in the output voltages of the surface-mounted
PVDF and PZT sensors on carbon–epoxy composite. It
is clear that the low stiffness of the PVDF ﬁlm produces a
smaller voltage amplitude compared to PZT sensor,
which has a high stiffness. Normally it is assumed that
the admissible in-plane tensile stress is constant through-
out the ﬁlm span, which is not the exact case because of a
certain amount of horizontal shear deformation across
the sensor ﬁlm thickness, as the ﬁlm stiffness increases.
This additional contribution of shear energy should be
included in the model to get a better prediction of the
voltage.
From the design point of view, it is necessary that for
maximum sensitivity of the sensor the capacitance of the
electrical circuit is maximized. This will result in mini-
mum impedance and hence a maximum voltage output.
Hence, the above model can help in a better design of the
capacitive sensors.
8.6 MODELING OF CARBON NANOTUBES
(CNTs)
The basic properties of CNTs, their construction, forms
and properties were described in Chapter 2. In most
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Length (mm)
Thickness (µm)
Capacitance (pF)
0.5
1
1.5
2
20
40
20
40
60
Length (mm)
Thickness (µm)
Capacitance (pF)
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.20
Capacitance of a PVDF sensor: (a) present formulation; (b) conventional electrostatics formulation.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 3
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Length (mm)
Thickness (µm)
Capacitance (nF)
1
2
3
50
100
2
4
6
8
Length (mm)
Thickness (µm)
Capacitance (nF)
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.21
Capacitance of a PZT sensor: (a) present formulation; (b) conventional electrostatics formulation.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
219

structural application, a CNT is normally used as a
reinforcing material for the development of new classes
of highly strong and lightweight nanocomposites. It has
been shown that 1 % by weight of a CNT mixed with a
matrix material can yield an increase in stiffness in the
range of 36–42 % and an increase in tensile strength of
25 %. The mechanical load-carrying capacity of these
nanocomposites are also increased by many orders of
magnitude. Hence, when these CNTs are used in con-
junction with other materials, the length scales and the
time scales of the host materials and the CNTs are
different. Conventional modeling and simulation meth-
ods are not well suited for these problems since they are
typically formulated at a single time or length scale. It is
a great challenge to break the boundaries between scales
and develop a robust method that is capable of integrat-
ing the different length and time scales involved in a
general class of applications. There are essentially three
different modeling techniques that have unique time and
length scales. These are summarized in Table 8.7.
–0.5
–0.25
0
0.25
0.5
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
60
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/L
Stress (Pa)
Voltage (V)
Figure 8.22
Output voltage of a PVDF sensor surface-mounted on carbon–epoxy composite.
−0.5
−0.25
0
0.25
0.5
103
104
105
106
107
−300
−250
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
x/L
Stress (Pa)
Voltage (V)
Figure 8.23
Output voltage of a PZT sensor surface-mounted on cabron–epoxy composite.
220
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The modeling of a CNT alone should be typically
performed using Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation.
Since the length scales and time scales are very small, the
computational cost of modeling is enormous. However, it
is the most accurate method of modeling a CNT. The MD
approach has provided abundant simulation results for
understanding the behaviors of individual and bundled
CNTs [24–32]. However, MD simulations cannot deal
with the larger length scales in studying nanocomposites.
Nanocomposites
for
engineering
applications
must
expand from nano to micro, and eventually to macro-
length scales.
The next alternative is Micromechanics (MM) model-
ing, where a Representative Volume Element (RVE) with
a built-in CNT is considered, as shown in Figure 8.24.
This is classiﬁed as a ‘middle-level’ analysis inbetween
the molecular dynamics method and Continuum Mechanics
(CM) modeling.
Many micromechanical models have been developed
to predict the macroscopic behavior of composite mate-
rials reinforced with ﬁbers, such as laminated compo-
sites, that are much larger than the CNT. These models
assume that the ﬁber, matrix and sometimes the interface,
are continuous materials and the constitutive equations
for the bulk composite material are formulated based on
assumptions of continuum mechanics. That is, an RVE is
isolated and the continuum theory (Theory of Elasticity)
is applied to this isolated RVE. The RVE can be of any
shape. Many researchers have studied the behavior of
CNTs embedded in a matrix using both cylindrical and
square RVEs [33]. If the properties of the CNT and its
volume fraction are known, then the effective properties
of this nanocomposite can be computed using the law of
mixtures given in Chapter 6 (Section 6.2). The MM
analysis is based on the assumption that quantities such
as mass, momentum and energy exist in a mathematical
sense, irrespective of the length or time scales. In most
cases reported in the literature, RVE analysis has been
used for estimation of the material properties. Due to the
computational limitation of the MD approach, research-
ers have adopted continuum mechanics to model a CNT,
that is, by using an idealization of an SWCNT, as shown
in Figure 8.25. In most models, elastic, isotropic and
small deformations are assumed. Yakobson et al. [34]
gave the analytical energy expressions for shells in terms
of the local stresses and deformations. The parameters
entering this expression were derived from atomistic
simulations. The various deformation modes and critical
strains were calculated analytically and found to be in
good agreement with the results from microscopic stu-
dies. Govindjee and Sackman [35] used the Bernoulli–
Euler beam bending theory to investigate the applicabil-
ity of continuum theory to study the behavior of a CNTs.
They emphasized that the tube should be broken down
Table 8.7
Modeling and simulation approaches
with their length and time scales.
Modeling approach
Length
Time
scale (m)
scale (s)
Continuum mechanics
>10	3
>10	3
Micromechanics
10	6–10	4
10	9–10	3
Molecular dynamics
10	10–10	6
10	12–10	9
Matrix
CNT
y
x
z
Figure 8.24
Representative volume element (RVE) of a carbon nanotube embedded in a matrix. Reprinted from Computational
Materials Science, 29, pp. 1–11, Copyright 2004, with permission from Elsevier
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
221

into a number of parallel cross-sections, rather than
described as a single rod/beam. A similar point was
made by Ru [36] who emphasized that the continuum
shell theory breaks down once atomic dimensions are
reached. Thus, attempts to reconcile the continuum
theory with atomistic simulations had to use parameters,
such as the effective thickness of the shell, whose
physical origins are doubtful at best. Finally, a clear
breakdown of the continuum theory occurs when the
tubes undergo plastic deformation, since the continuum
model is insensitive to the chirality of the wrapping
index, while tight-binding MD simulations are believed
to show a dependence of the elastic limit on chirality.
Clearly, the continuum approximation can be very valu-
able and may be the only feasible approach for large and
complex systems, but its applicability deserves further
investigation.
Some of the common models in continuum mechanics,
such as ﬁnite element techniques, are normally employed
to study the behaviors of SWCNTs and MWCNTs. These
are straightforward approaches, which were dealt with
extensively in the last chapter. The only difference is that
the modeling is done on the nano scale. Hence, FE
modeling of a CNT is not dealt with here. However,
recently CNTs have been used for a variety of applica-
tions which require propagation of signals at very high
frequencies [37,38]. These frequencies are in THz range
and at these frequencies it is almost unthinkable to use
conventional FE modeling due to the very small wave-
lengths and hence very small element sizes (of the order
of nm–mm). In such situations spectral FE modeling is
the only option. Hence, we outline the spectral ﬁnite
element modeling of single- and multi-walled nano tubes
and show how one can propagate the THz frequencies in
such tubes.
8.6.1 Spectral ﬁnite element modeling of an
MWCNT
The spectral FE formulation begins by computing the
wavenumbers to determine the types of waves propagat-
ing in the CNT. For this, we need to ﬁrst establish the
governing PDE of the multi-walled CNT. The multiple-
elastic beam model for an N-walled CNT, based on the
Euler–Bernoulli beam theory, is governed by the follow-
ing set of N-coupled equations:
c1ðw2 	 w1Þ ¼ EI1
@4w1
@x4 þ rA1
@2w1
@x2
 
  p ¼ 2;3;......N 	 1
cpðwpþ1 	 wpÞ 	 cp	1ðwp 	 wp	1Þ ¼ EIp
@4wp
@x4 þ rAp
@2wp
@x2
	 cN	1ðwN 	 wN	1Þ ¼ EIN
@4wN
@x4 þ rAp
@2wN
@x2
ð8:131Þ
where x is the axial coordinate of the beam, t is the time,
wpðx; tÞðp ¼ 2; :: . . . NÞ is the deﬂection of pth CNT, Ip
and Ap are, respectively, the moment of inertia and the
area of the cross-section of the pth tube. The Young’s
modulus E ¼ 1 TPa (with an effective thickness 0.35 nm)
and the mass density r ¼ 1300 kg=cm3. The interaction
Figure 8.25
Equivalent continuum model of a single-wall carbon nanotube.
222
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

coefﬁcients cpðp ¼ 1; 2; :: . . . NÞ, arising due to van der
Waals interactions between any two adjacent layers, can
be estimated approximately as given in Yoon et al. [39]:
cp ¼ 400R
16d2 erg=cm2; d ¼ 0:142 nm; p ¼ 1;2;:::...N 	1
ð8:132Þ
where Rp is the inner radius of the pth wall. The
coefﬁcients cp are estimated as the second derivative of
the energy-interlayer spacing relations of two ﬂat mono-
layers. Hence, they do not take the curvature effects of
the CNTs into account. The spectral formulation begins
by assuming the displacement ﬁeld as a synthesis of
plane waves of the form:
wpðx; tÞ ¼
X
Nq
n¼1
~wejkxejont
ð8:133Þ
where k is the wavenumber, on is the circular frequency
at the nth sampling point and j2 ¼ 	1; Nq is the fre-
quency index corresponding to the Nyquist frequency in
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). When Equation
(8.133) is substituted into Equation (8.131), we get:
c1ð~w2	 ~w1Þ	ðEI1k4	rA1o2Þ~w1 ¼0
::
::
p¼2;...; N	1
cpð~wpþ1	 ~wpÞ	cp	1ð~wp	 ~wp	1Þ	ðEIpk4	rApo2Þ~wp ¼0
	cN	1ð~wN 	 ~wN	1Þ	ðEINk4	rANo2Þ~wN ¼0
ð8:134Þ
The above equation is a complicated polynomial that
requires special schemes for the solution of the wave-
numbers. The order of the polynomial increases with an
increase in the value of N, the number of walls. Instead of
using some adhoc schemes, we need a generalized and
robust scheme of polynomial equation solving. In addi-
tion, after the solution of the wavenumbers, spectral
formulation requires computation of wave amplitudes
for all propagating modes. In numerical solution schemes
for the roots of the above polynomial equation, it is
practically impossible to keep track of individual modes.
There are two different methods of equation solving that
can remove most of the above problems, namely the
Companion Matrix (CM) approach and the Polynomial
Eigenvalue Problem (PEP) approach. These methods can
be employed with the Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) technique to obtain the wave amplitudes. These
methods, in relation to the wave propagation, are
explained in great detail in Chakraborty [40].
In the present case, the PEP approach is used to solve
for the wavenumbers. We can write Equation (8.134)
as:
"
k4½A4þ½A0
#
fvg ¼ ½Wfvg ¼ 0; fvg ¼ fw1 : : wNgT
ð8:135Þ
where ½A4 and ½A0 are N  N matrices given by:
½A4 ¼ DiagðEIp;
p ¼ 1;2;...NÞ;
½A0 ¼ ½C 	 o2½M
ð8:136Þ
Furthermore, the matrices [M] and [C] are deﬁned as:
½M ¼ Diag ðrIp;
p ¼ 1; 2; . . . NÞ;
½C ¼ <N
n¼1ðcnÞ
ð8:137Þ
where < is an assembly operator (like the stiffness matrix
assembler of a rod element) and the matrix cn is deﬁned
as:
½cn ¼
cn
	cn
	cn
cn


On solving Equation (8.135), the eigenvalues k and the
eigenvectors fvg can be obtained, which will be used in
subsequent element formulation. Since, in the PEP the
coefﬁcient matrices of k, k2 and k3 are zero, we can
minimize the cost of computation by substituting l for k4
in Equation (8.135) and solving the PEP as a generalized
eigenvalue problem:
½A0fvg ¼ l½	A4fvg
and the desired wavenumbers can be expressed as 1
and  j times l1=4. However, the eigenvectors obtained in
this method will be of no consequence and the real
eigenvectors need to be computed in a different way.
For an N-walled nanotube, there are 4N wavenumbers
and corresponding N phase speeds ðcpÞ and group speeds
ðcgÞ. The deﬁnition of these speeds is deﬁned in Chapter 6
(Section 6.3). Although the phase speeds can be computed
directly from the wavenumbers, it is not straightforward to
compute the group speeds. Here, they are computed using
the characteristic equation, which is given by:
fðkÞ ¼ detðk4½A4 þ ½A0Þ ¼ 0
ð8:138Þ
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
223

These equations are polynomials in k, whose general
form is:
fðkÞ ¼
X
N
p¼0
apk4p
where the coefﬁcients ap are dependent on material
properties and other than a0, all are functions of o.
Differentiating fðkÞ with respect to k, and using
the deﬁnition of the expression for ðcgÞ the latter
becomes:
cg ¼ do
dk ¼
P
N
p¼1
ð4papk4p	1Þ
P
N
p¼1
a0
pk4p
ð8:139Þ
where a0
p indicates the derivative of ap with respect to o.
While computing the group speeds using the above
expression, for ReðkÞ < 0, the group speeds will be
zero. One characteristic of this multi-walled beam-
based model is that there are N 	 1 frequencies where
the wavenumber becomes zero, thus rendering the group
speed equals to zero and the phase speed escapes to
inﬁnity. These frequencies are called the ‘cut-off fre-
quencies’, whose expression can be obtained by substi-
tuting k ¼ 0 in the dispersion relation and solving for k.
However, for large N, the problem of root ﬁnding of a
polynomial becomes a cumbersome task (even if we use
the companion-matrix-based technique, we have to form
the related matrices). The problem becomes simple if
k ¼ 0 is substituted into Equation (8.135) and the task of
ﬁnding o is identiﬁed as another PEP:
ð½C 	 o2½MÞfxg ¼ 0
ð8:140Þ
where fxg is a hypothetical eigenvector of no conse-
quence in our subsequent formulation. For N ¼ 2, there
is one cut-off frequency given by:
oc ¼ c1ðA1 þ A2Þ
rA1A2


ð8:141Þ
which for equal cross-sectional properties reduces to
2c1=rA.
For the spectral element formulation, it is essential to
know the eigenvectors fvg of the PEP given in Equation
(8.135), which are also known as the wave vectors. This
PEP can be solved directly by the method of linearization
for obtaining fvg or the method of singular value
decomposition (SVD) can be adopted. In the ﬁrst
method, the PEP is converted into a generalized eigen-
value problem in terms of the matrices ½A4 and ½A0.
These matrices are constructed in the following way. If
the PEP is posed as:
ðlÞx ¼ ðllAl þ ll	1Al	1 þ . . . . . . lA1 þ A0Þfxg ¼ 0;
Al ¼2 Cm x m
then the problem is linearized to:
½Afzg ¼ l½Bfzg
ð8:142Þ
where:
½A ¼
½0
½I
½0
:
:
½0
½0
½0
½I
:
:
½0
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
½	A0
½	A1
½	A2
:
:
½	Al	1
2
666666664
3
777777775
;
½B ¼
½I
½I
:
:
½I
	½Al
2
666666664
3
777777775
and the relation between fxg and fzg is given by:
fzg ¼
n
fxgT
lfxgT:
:
;
ll	1fxgToT
Here, ½B	1½A is a block companion matrix of the PEP.
The generalized eigenvalue problem of Equation (8.142)
can be solved by the QZ algorithm, iterative method,
Jacobi–Davidson method or the rational Krylov method.
Each one of these has its own advantages and disadvan-
tages; however, the QZ algorithm is the most powerful
method for small-to-moderate-sized problems and hence
for this present problem, as the order of the matrices ½A
and ½B is not large ðl ¼ 4; m ¼ NÞ and hence the
computation can be performed by the economic and
efﬁcient subroutines available in many mathematical
software packages, such as LAPACK.
In the second method, it is noted that fvg are the
elements of the null space of the matrix ½W (which has
non-trivial elements as the matrix is singular). In the
224
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

SVD technique, ½W is factorized as ½W ¼ ½U½S½VH
where ½S is a diagonal matrix containing the singular
values. Since, ½W is singular, there will be zero diagonal
elements in ½S and the columns of fvg corresponding to
the zero singular values are the elements of the null space of
½W (actually they form a basis for the null space). The SVD
can be also be performed by the LAPACK subroutines.
After the wavenumbers and wave amplitudes are
computed, the spectral element formulation procedure
is same as that given in Chapter 7 (Section 7.9). Hence,
the formulation is not repeated here. Now, we will take a
closer look at the behavior of waves in an MWCNT.
The wavenumber and group speed variations for
N ¼ 3 are plotted in Figures 8.26 and 8.27, respectively.
These plots were obtained using the following properties;
Youngs’s modulus E equal to 1.0 TPa, shear modulus G
equal to 0.4 TPa, density r equal to 1300 kg/m3, inner
wall radius equal to 5 nm, wall thickness equal to
0.35 nm and the van der Waals interaction force equal
to 0.62 TPa. The plot above the zero value represents
the real (propagating components) wavenumber while the
plot below the zero value is the imaginary value of the
wavenumber (evanescent components). As previously
mentioned, there are two cut-off frequencies, one at
1.014 and another at 1.757 THz. At these frequencies,
the wavenumber becomes zero, while the corresponding
phase speed becomes inﬁnite and the group speed zero.
However, before the cut-off frequencies, the wavenum-
bers (k2 and k3) have real as well as imaginary parts,
which indicate that there are propagating components of
these modes. Due to the presence of the imaginary part,
these waves will, however, attenuate while propagating.
Thus, these waves are the so-called inhomogeneous
waves. Thus, there are non-zero phase and group speeds
before the cut-off frequencies.
For N ¼ 10, the spectrum relations and phase speed
variations are given in Figures 8.28 and 8.29, respec-
tively. The characteristic remains the same as before,
where there are nine cut-off frequencies. The minimum
of these is at 0.2886 THz and the maximum at 1.891 THz.
Thus, it becomes apparent, even for this many number of
tubes that there is no great variation in the maximum cut-
off frequency. This suggests that there exists an upper
bound to the range of cut-off frequencies and similarly a
lower bound. To study this aspect, the number of walls N
was varied from 2 to 100 and for these values the
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
−0.3
−0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Frequency (THz)
Wavenumber, (nm–1)
k1
k2
k3
1
2
Figure 8.26
Wavenumbers in multi-wall carbon nanotubes for N ¼ 3.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
225

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
1
10
105
104
103
102
10–2
Frequency (THz)
Group speed, (km/s)
Figure 8.27
Group speeds in multi-wall carbon nanotubes for N ¼ 3.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
–0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Frequency (THz)
Wavenumber, (nm–1]
Figure 8.28
Wavenumbers in multi-wall carbon nanotubes for N ¼ 10.
226
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

maximum and minimum cut-off frequencies are plotted
in Figure 8.30. This ﬁgure suggests that indeed there is
both an upper and lower bound of the cut-of frequencies,
which, for this particular material and geometric para-
meters, are at 1.891 THz and 0.0169 THz. Since there
is no appreciable difference in cut-off frequency with
wall numbers, an MWCNT can be approximated by a
Double-Walled Carbon Nanotube (DWCNT), where the
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
50
100
150
Frequency (THz)
Phase speed (km/s)
Figure 8.29
Phase speeds in multi-wall carbon nanotubes for N ¼ 10.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
Number of layers
ω/c,max (THz)
ω/c,min (THz)
1.891 THz
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
Number of layers
0.0169 THz
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.30
Variation of (a) maximum and (b) minimum cut-off frequncies as a function of N.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
227

effective inner radius of the DWCNT can be obtained
from the magnitudes of the maximum and minimum
cut-off frequencies. For example, in this present case,
for an identical DWCNT, the inner radius will be
1.737 nm, which is obtained by using the maximum
cut-off frequency and Equation (8.141).
Once the characteristics of the waves are known, real-
time data can be obtained by using the formulated spectral
element with a small-duration loading of suitable frequency
content. A broad-band pulse is considered with a frequency
content of around 2.1 THz, shown in Figure 8.31, which is
above the highest cut-off frequency for any N.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Frequency (THz)
Frequency amplitude (nN × 10−5)
0
2
3
5
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time (ps)
Force (nN)
Figure 8.31
Broad-band pulse loading and its frequency amplitude.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Time (ps)
Transverse velocity (nm/s)
N = 1
N = 2
N = 3
Figure 8.32
Transverse velocity at the free end of a cantilevered multi-wall carbon nanotube for different values of N.
228
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The time-domain data of the loading is shown in the
inset in Figure 8.31. As this ﬁgure suggests, the load
starts at 2 ps and is completed by 3 ps, within which it
attains a maximum magnitude of unity. This load is
applied at the free end of a cantilever MWCNT and the
responses are measured at the tip. The load is equally
distributed at all of the tubes so that the total load is
always 1 nN.
The transverse velocity history at the tip of the beam is
shown in Figure 8.32 for different numbers of walls. The
initial peak is the instantaneous effect of the loading,
whereas the oscillations at the latter part are refections
from the ﬁxed end of MWCNT. As this ﬁgure suggests,
with increasing N the overall stiffness increases consid-
erably and the group speed decreases, as is evident from
the decreasing magnitude and arrival time of the bound-
ary reﬂections.
REFERENCES
1. S.H. Chen, Z.D. Wang and X.H. Liu, ‘Active vibration
control and suppression for intelligent structures, Journal of
Sound and Vibration, 200, 167–177 (1997).
2. W.-S. Hwang and H.-C. Park, ‘Finite element modeling
of piezoelectric sensors and actuators’, AIAA Journal, 31,
930–937 (1993).
3. H.S. Tzou and C.I. Tseng, ‘Distributed piezoelectric sensor/
actuator design for dynamic measurement/control of distrib-
uted parameter systems: a piezoelectric ﬁnite element
approach’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 138, 17–34 (1990).
4. T.H.G. Megson, Linear Analysis of Thin-Walled Elastic
Structures, Surrey University Press, Guildford, UK (1974).
5. Mira Mitra, Active Vibration Suppression of Composite Thin
Walled Structures, M.Sc. Thesis, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India (2003).
6. H.S. Tzou, Piezoelectric Shells (Distributed Sensing and
Control of Continua), Kluwer Academic Press, Dordrecht,
The Netherlands (1993).
7. H.S. Tzou and R. Ye, ‘Analysis of piezoelectric structures
with laminated piezoelectric triangle shell elements’, AIAA
Journal, 34, 110–115 (1996).
8. M.C. Reaves and L.G. Horta, ‘Test cases for modeling and
validation of structures with piezoelectric actuators’, in
Proceedings
of
the
42nd
AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC
Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA),
Reston, VA, USA (2001) [on CD-Rom].
9. D.P. Ghosh and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Role of coupling terms
in constitutive relationships of magnetostrictive materials,
Computers, Materials and Continua, 1, 213–227 (2004).
10. J.L. Butler, Application manual for the design of Terfenol-D
magnetostrictive transducers, Technical Report TS 2003,
Edge Technologies, Inc., Ames, IA, USA (1988).
11. U.K. Vaidya, ‘Integrated and multi-functional thick section
and sandwich composite materials and structures’, in
Proceedings of the ISSS–SPIE International Conference
on Smart Materials Structures and Systems, A. Selvarajan,
A.R. Upadhya and P.D. Mangalgiri (Eds), Allied Publisher,
New Delhi, India, pp. 311–318 (1999).
12. J. French, J. Weitz, R. Luke, R. Cass, P. Jadidan, P. Bhargava
and A. Safari, ‘Production of continuous piezoelectric
ceramic ﬁbers for smart materials and active control
devices’, SPIE, 3044, 406–412 (1997).
13. A.A. Bent, Active Fiber Composites for Structural Actua-
tion, Ph.D. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA (1997).
14. Y. Wu, Magnetostrictive Particulate Actuator and its Char-
acterization for Smart Structure Applications, Ph.D. Thesis,
University of Maryland, Baltimore Country, MD, USA
(1997).
15. J.P. Rodgers and N.W. Hagood, ‘Design, manufacture and
testing of an integral twist-actuated rotor blade’, in Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Conference on Adaptive
Structures and Technology, pp. 63–72 (1993).
16. S. Yoshikawa and T. Shrout, ‘Multilayer piezoelectric
actuators
–
structures
and
reliability’,
AIAA
Paper,
93-1711-CP, 3581–3586 (1993).
17. N.W. Hagood, R. Kindel, K. Ghandi and P. Gudenzi,
‘Improving transverse actuation of piezoceramics using
integrated surface electrodes’, SPIE, 1917, 1917–1925
(1993).
18. A. Bent, N.W. Hagood and J.P. Rodgers, ‘Anisotropic
actuation with piezoelectric composites’, Journal of Intel-
ligent Material Systems and Structures, 6, 338–49 (1995).
19. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE
Standard on Piezoelectricity, IEEE Standard 176-1978,
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Piscataway, NJ, USA (1978).
20. D.R. Roy Mahapatra, Spectral Element Models for Wave
Propagation Analysis, Structural Health Monitoring and
Active Control of Waves in Composite Structures, Ph.D.
Thesis, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India (2004).
21. G. Schrag, G. Zelder, H. Kapels and G. Wachutka, ‘Numer-
ical and experimental analysis of distributed electromecha-
nical parasitics in the calibration of a fully BiCMOS-
integrated capacitive pressure sensor’, Sensors and Actua-
tors: Physical, 76A, 19–25 (1999).
22. T.C. Chen, H.C. Wu and C.-L. Lin, ‘Longitudinal anisotropic
stressanddeformationinmultilayeredﬁlmheterostructuresdue
to lattice misﬁt’, Journal of Crystal Growth, 249, 44–58 (2003).
23. N. Mokni, F. Sidoroff and A. Danescu, ‘A one-dimensional
viscoelastic model for lateral relaxation in thin ﬁlms’,
Computational Materials Science, 26, 56–60 (2003).
24. A. Pizzochero, Residual Actuation and Stiffness Properties
of Piezoelectric Composites: Theory and Experiment, M.Sc.
Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA (1998).
25. M. Macucci, G. Iannaccone, J. Greer, J. Martorell, D.W.L.
Sprung, A. Schenk, I.I. Yakimenko, K.F. Berggren, K.
Modeling of Smart Sensors and Actuators
229

Stokbro and N. Gippius, ‘Status and perspectives of nanos-
cale device modeling’ Nanotechnology, 12, 136–142 (2001).
26. J. Han, A. Globus, R. Jae and G. Deardor, ‘Molecular
dynamics simulations of carbon nanotube-based gears’,
Nanotechnology, 8, 95–102 (1997).
27. C.F. Cornwell and L.T. Wille, ‘Elastic properties of single
walled carbon nanotubes in compression’, Solid State
Communications, 101, 555–558 (1997).
28. S.B. Sinnott, O.A. Shenderova, C.T. White and D.W.
Brenner, ‘Mechanical properties of nanotubule ﬁbers and
composites determined from theoretical calculations and
simulations’, Carbon, 36, 1–9 (1998).
29. T. Halicioglu, ‘Stress calculations for carbon nanotubes’,
Thin Solid Films, 312, 11–14 (1998).
30. G.H. Gao, T. Cagin and W.A. Goddard, ‘Energetics,
structure, mechanical and vibrational properties of single-
walled carbon nanotubes’, Nanotechnology, 9, 184–191
(1998).
31. M. Buongiorno Nardelli, J.L. Fattebert, D. Orlikowski,
C. Roland, Q. Zhao and J. Bernholc, ‘Mechanical properties,
defects and electronic behavior of carbon nanotubes’,
Carbon, 38, 1703–1711 (2000).
32. J.W. Kang and H.J. Hwang, ‘Mechanical deformation study
of copper nanowire using atomistic simulation’, Nanotech-
nology, 12, 295–300 (2001).
33. Y.J. Liu and X.L. Chen, ‘Evaluations of the effective
materials properties of carbon nanotube-based composites
using
a
nanoscale
representative
volume
element’,
Mechanics of Materials, 35, 69–81 (2003).
34. B.I. Yakobson, C.J. Brabec and J. Bernholc, ‘Nanomecha-
nics of carbon tubes: instabilities beyond linear range’,
Physical Review Letters, 76, 2511–2514 (1996).
35. S. Govindjee and J.L. Sackman, ‘On the use of continuum
mechanics to estimate the properties of nanotubes’, Solid
State Communications, 110, 227–230 (1999).
36. C.Q. Ru, ‘Effect of van der Waals forces on axial buckling of
a double-walled carbon nanotube’, Journal of Applied
Physics, 87, 7227–7231 (2000).
37. J. Yoon, C.Q. Ru and A. Mioduchowski, ‘Timoshenko-beam
effects on transverse wave propagation in carbon nanotubes’,
Composites: Engineering, B35, 87–93 (2004).
38. J. Yoon, C.Q. Ru and A. Mioduchowski, ‘Vibration of an
embedded multiwall carbon nanotube’, Composites Science
and Technology, 63, 1533–1542 (2003).
39. J. Yoon, C. Ru and A. Mioduchowski, ‘Non-coaxial reso-
nance of an isolated multiwall carbon nanotube’, Physical
Review, B66, 233–402 (2002).
40. A. Chakraborty, Wave Propagation in Anisotropic and
Inhomogeneous Structures, Ph.D. Thesis, Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore, India (2004).
230
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

9
Active Control Techniques
9.1 INTRODUCTION
The concept of control, which originated in early 1900,
has advanced tremendously to the level that every
designed system has a control component in its various
functions. One cannot visualize a robot performing with-
out built-in control systems. Today, control plays a major
role in almost all branches of engineering. In many space
vehicles, missile guidance and robotic systems, control
has become an integral part of the manufacturing pro-
cess.
In
structural
applications,
which
are
mainly
addressed in this book, we require control techniques
for controlling displacements (velocities or accelera-
tions), pressure (force or stress), temperature, humidity,
viscosity, etc. Controlling these quantities translates into
many applications such as:
 Vibration control, where control techniques are used
to reduce the dynamic displacements.
 Noise control, where acoustical disturbances (dyna-
mical responses) are regulated by using control tech-
niques. In helicopters, we can induce the twist of the
rotor blades to control exterior noise (air borne) or
treat the path of disturbance to radiate it so as to
control the interior noise (structure-borne).
 Shape control, wherein the shape of the structure is
modiﬁed for a particular application. For example, the
shape of the aerofoil of wing or tail surfaces of an
aircraft can be altered to change the ﬂow conditions.
 More recently, there have been efforts to control or
delay the growth of cracks. The severity of a crack is
measured by a quantity called the Stress Intensity
Factor (SIF) and not the stress. This is because the
stress at the crack tip is inﬁnite. Hence, for delaying
the growth of cracks, control systems are designed.
Here, the quantity that is controlled is the SIF.
The principle behind all control techniques for structural
applications is to generate additional forces for enforcing
control of the required variable. For example, in vibration-
control problems, the control system generates damping
forces that reduce the dynamic displacement amplitudes,
which are one of the control variables. Hence, for gen-
erating such additional forces, an additional input is
needed in conventional structures, which in many cases
is difﬁcult to generate. However, this is not the case in
structures with built-in smart sensors and actuators. Smart
sensors/actuators, made of piezoelectric or Terfenol-D
materials, exhibit strong electromechanical coupling. As
explained in Chapter 8, this results in additional terms in
both the actuator and sensor constitutive laws. Here, we
are only concerned with the actuator law, wherein this
additional term helps in generating the additional input
required for the control of the desired variable. This is one
of the main reasons why a smart actuator is much more
popular as opposed to conventional hydraulic or other
types of actuators.
In this chapter, we will not go into greater depth on the
control theory. The interested reader is advised to go
through some classic control textbooks, such as Ogata
[1], for greater detail on automatic modern control
theory. Here, we will deal only with those topics that
are directly relevant for smart actuation in structural
applications. Before going into greater detail on smart
actuation, we will deﬁne some common deﬁnitions that
we will encounter while dealing with control theory:
(1) Control. This means a sustained release of energy
for limiting or controlling the response of a desired
control variable by inducing an additional input in
the form of a manipulated variable to the system.
(2) Control variable. This is a quantity such as dis-
placement, force, stress or strain (in structural
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

applications) that requires to be measured and/or
controlled. These are necessarily the output vari-
ables. ‘Control of the control variable’ is normally
performed through an additional input to the system
called the manipulated variable.
(3) Plant. This is deﬁned as the physical object that
requires control, such as a mechanical device (heli-
copter rotor blade, mechanical gear, cantilever beam
etc.), aircraft, spacecraft, etc.
(4) Disturbance. A signal that propagates through a
system carrying a considerable amount of energy is
called a disturbance. For enforcing control of a
system, one may require many such disturbances,
which can be internally generated (by using smart
materials) or externally given as an input.
(5) Feedback Control. If due to a disturbance, the
difference between the output of the system to
some reference input is reduced, and if this reduction
was obtained based on this difference, then we term
the operation as feedback control.
(6) Error Signal. The difference between the output
signal and the feedback signal is called the error
signal. In many cases, the feedback signal may be a
function of the output signal or its derivatives. In
structural applications, the output signals are nor-
mally displacements or strain and its derivatives,
namely the velocities and accelerations.
(7) Closed-loop control. When the output of the system
is brought to the desired value by feeding an error
signal to the controller under feedback control, such
an action is called closed-loop control.
(8) Open-loop control. A system, in which the outputs
do not play any role in the control action of bringing
down the response is termed as an open-loop response.
That is, the error signal is not needed in the control
action and therefore the output is not compared with
any reference signal. Hence, a ﬁxed operating condi-
tion exists for all inputs and so the accuracy is always
not assured and depends on the calibration.
(9) Linear System. A system is said to be linear if the
principle of superposition holds for such a system.
That is, the response to several inputs can be
obtained by treating one input at a time and adding
the result. If the governing equation describing the
system is of a constant coefﬁcient type, such a
system is called a linear time invariant system.
As mentioned earlier, we, in this chapter, will give only a
‘bird’s eye view’ of control theory. The material given
will address only the smart actuation normally encoun-
tered in smart structures applications.
This chapter is organized as follows. First, the math-
ematical concept of control theory is described, wherein
the state-space modeling of a second-order system along
with determination of the transfer function and frequency
response function are discussed. This is followed by a
section on the stability of control systems. This is
followed by a section on design concepts and methodol-
ogy for control systems. Different FE model-order reduc-
tion schemes are given next. Finally, the concept of the
Active Spectral Finite Element (ASFEM) and its use in
controller design is addressed.
9.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR
CONTROL THEORY
For the analysis and design of control systems, a proper
mathematical model is necessary. A number of different
methods are available for the design of control systems.
Each method requires a different mathematical model.
Central to all of these methods is the second-order
differential equation. This differential equation can be
characterized in many different forms, depending upon
the type of controller that requires to be designed. For
example, in a Single-Input-Single-Output (SISO) system,
the transfer-function-based approach is mostly suitable.
This is generally performed either in the Laplace
or Fourier (frequency) domain. More recently, the
frequency-domain-based Active Spectral Finite Element
has
been
used
for
Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output
(MIMO) systems. This is discussed in the latter part of
this chapter. The most common method adopted for
MIMO systems is the approach based on state-space
modeling. This chapter gives some important aspects of
these modeling techniques.
9.2.1 Transfer function
The output and input of the system are algebraically
related through what is called the transfer function. Such
an relation is possible only in the frequency (or Laplace)
domain and is not valid in the time domain. If the output
of the system in the transformed frequency domain is
^uðx; y; z; oÞ (where x; y; z are the spatial dimensions and
o is the circular frequency at which the output is
sampled) and ^Fðx; y; z; oÞ is the input, then the transfer
function
^Gðx; y; z; oÞ
is
obtained
by
the
equation
^u ¼ ^G^F. In structural dynamic applications, the transfer
functions are normally called Frequency Response Func-
tions (FRF), which essentially gives all of the resonant
frequencies and their corresponding energies associated
232
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

with each of the modes. In the design of controllers, it is
necessary to obtain transfer functions, which are nor-
mally characterized using Laplace transforms. The use of
Laplace transform is, however, limited to smaller SISO
systems. If we use an FE for solving a dynamic problem,
then we need to reduce the order of the system for the
design of the controller. There are many model order
reduction schemes available. Some of these important
schemes are given in the latter part of this chapter.
9.2.1.1 Transfer function in Laplace and Fourier
domains
Here, Laplace transformation is used to transform the
variable from the time domain to the Laplace domain.
Laplace transformation for a function fðx; y; tÞ is deﬁned
as:
Lðfðx; y; tÞÞ ¼ ^fðx; y; sÞ ¼
ð1
0
fðx; y; tÞestdt
ð9:1Þ
The Laplace transformation for the derivative of the
function fðx; y; tÞ is given by:
L dfðx; y; tÞ
dt


¼ s^fðx; y; sÞ  fðx; y; 0Þ
L d2fðx; y; tÞ
dt2


¼ s2^fðx; y; sÞ  sfðx; y; 0Þ  _fðx; y; 0Þ
ð9:2Þ
Here, fðx; y; 0Þ and _fðx; y; 0Þ are the value of the function
and its derivative at time t ¼ 0. The use of Laplace
transformation on a differential equation reduces the
same to an algebraic equation. Let y be the output
variable and x the input variable. The linear differential
equation that has an nth-order temporal derivative and an
mth-order temporal input derivative, where n > m, can be
written as:
A0
dny
dtn þ A1
dn1y
dtn1 þ . . . þ An1
dy
dt þ Any
¼ B0
dmx
dtm þ B1
dm1x
dtm1 þ . . . Bm1
dx
dt þ Bmx
ð9:3Þ
Applying the Laplace transformation reduces the above
equation to an algebraic equation. The transfer function
that relates the output to the input under a ‘zero initial
condition’ is then given by:
^yðsÞ
^xðxÞ ¼ B0sm þ B1sm1 þ . . . þ Bm1s þ Bm
A0sn þ Ansn1 þ . . . þ An1s þ An
ð9:4Þ
If the highest power of s is n, then the system is called an
nth-order system. Both the numerator and the denomi-
nator can be factorized and written as:
^yðsÞ
^xðxÞ ¼ ðs þ a1Þðs þ a2Þ . . . ðs þ amÞ
ðs þ b1Þðs þ b2Þ . . . ðs þ bmÞ
ð9:5Þ
Here, a1; a2; . . .  am are the points in the s-plane,
where the value of the transfer function is zero and are
called
the
zeros
of
the
transfer
function,
while
b1; b2; . . .  bn are the points where the value of
the transfer function goes to inﬁnity. These points are
called the poles of the transfer function. Poles and zeros
are very important parameters in the design of control-
lers. In vibrational analysis, poles represent the resonant
condition, where at this frequency (normally referred to
as the resonant frequency) the response increases steeply.
Let us now consider a second-order single-degree-of-
freedom mechanical system that governs the vibrational
motion of a spring–mass–damper system, which is given
by:
m€x þ c_x þ kx ¼ fðtÞ
ð9:6Þ
In the above equation, m denotes the mass of the system,
c is the viscous damping coefﬁcient and k represents the
effective stiffness of the system. Here, x; _x;€x represent
the displacement, velocity and acceleration of the system
and fðtÞ is the force and is considered as the point-input.
When a Laplace transformation is applied to both sides
of Equation (9.6) and assuming that the initial conditions
are zero, we get:
ðms2 þ cs þ kÞ^xðsÞ ¼ ^fðsÞ
^xðsÞ
^fðsÞ
¼
1
ms2 þ cs þ k
ð9:7Þ
The second part of the above equation gives the transfer
function and can be factorized and written as:
^xðsÞ
^fðsÞ
¼
1
ðs þ a1Þðs þ a2Þ
a1 ¼  c
2m þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c
2m

2
 k
m
r
;
a2 ¼  c
2m 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c
2m

2
 k
m
r
ð9:8Þ
From the above equation, we have no zeros and the
two poles at a1 and a2. Here, a1 and a2 can be real or
Active Control Techniques
233

complex, depending on the radical under the square root.
For the design of a controller, it is necessary that the
values of the real parts of a1 and a2 should be negative.
This aspect is dealt within more detail in the next section
on the stability of control systems.
From Equation (9.7), when we substitute s ¼ io, we
can transform the problem from the Laplace domain to
the Fourier domain. That is, the transfer function
becomes:
^xðoÞ
^fðoÞ
¼
1
mo2 þ ico þ k
ð9:9Þ
The right-hand side of the above equation is called the
Frequency Response Function (FRF), which is normally
obtained in conventional vibration analysis.
9.2.1.2 Transfer function from the ﬁnite element
method
The discritized form of the governing equation in the
Finite Element method is of the form:
½M	f€xg þ ½C	f_xg þ ½K	fxg ¼ fFg
ð9:10Þ
Here, [M], [C], and [K] are the mass, damping and
stiffness matrices of size n  n and fxg; f_xg; f€xg are
the displacement, velocity and acceleration vector of
size n  1 and fFg is the applied force vector. Applying
a Fourier (or Laplace) transformation to the above
equation and assuming the initial conditions to be zero,
we get:
½^K	f^xg ¼ f^Fg; ½^K	 ¼ ½o2½M	 þ io½C	 þ ½K		
ð9:11Þ
where ½^K	 is the frequency-dependent dynamic stiffness
matrix. To obtain the transfer function, we apply a unit
impulse at the desired degree of freedom and Equation
(9.11) is solved for this unit impulse. Such an n degree of
freedom will have n poles (resonant frequency). If n is
very large, control design becomes extremely difﬁcult
and one has to reduce the FE system. This can be
accomplished by Modal Order Reduction.
9.2.2 State-space modeling
A system is said to be in state if for a given input, the
response can be completely determined for all future
times with a minimum amount of information. Mathe-
matically, a dynamic system is deﬁned by a differential
equation of the form given by:
dny
dtn þ An1
dn1y
dtn1 þ . . . þ A1
dy
dt þ A0y ¼ RðtÞ
ð9:12Þ
The above differential equation is of the nth order and
hence all of the n derivatives are deﬁned and it requires n
initial conditions for its solution. We may choose to call
each of the variables y and each of the ﬁrst (n  1)
derivatives as state variables. The number of state vari-
ables required to model a differential equation is equal to
the order of the differential equation. The fundamental to
the state-space modeling is to provide a systematic
mathematical approach to analysis of the characteristics
of the system by reducing a single differential equation
into a coupled set of ﬁrst-order differential equations
with each equation deﬁning one state. This set of equa-
tions is called the state equations.
In Equation (9.12), RðtÞ represents the forcing term.
Let us ﬁrst assume that RðtÞ does not involve any
derivative terms and is equal to fðtÞ. We can now assume
that yðtÞ; dy=dt; . . . ; dn1y=dtn1 as a set of n state vari-
ables. Let us now deﬁne:
x1 ¼ y;
x2 ¼ dy
dt ¼ dx1
dt
x3 ¼ d2y
dt2 ¼ dx2
dt ;
x4 ¼ d3y
dt3 ¼ dx3
dt
:
:
ð9:13Þ
:
xn1 ¼ dn2y
dtn2 ¼ dxn2
dt
;
xn ¼ dn1y
dtn1 ¼ dxn1
dt
The nth-state equation is obtained by using the above
deﬁnition in Equation (9.12) that is:
dxn
dt ¼ fðtÞ  A0x1  A1x2  . . .  An2xn1  Anxn
ð9:14Þ
Equations (9.13) and (9.14) can be put in matrix forms
as:
f_xg ¼ ½A	fxg þ ½B	ffg
ð9:15Þ
234
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

where:
fxg ¼
x1
x2
:
:
xn
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
;
½A	 ¼
0
1
0
:
:
:
:
0
0
0
1
:
:
:
:
0
:
:
A0
A1
A2
:
:
:
:
An1
2
6666664
3
7777775
;
½B	 ¼
0
0
:
:
1
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
The output can be written in the form given by:
y ¼ 1
0
:
:
0
½
	
x1
x2
:
:
xn
8
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
;
or y ¼ ½C	fxg
ð9:16Þ
Here, [A] is called the state matrix, [B] is called the input
matrix and [C] is called the output matrix.
Now, let us consider a case where the right-hand side
of Equation (9.12) has, in addition to the forcing function
fðtÞ, its time derivatives, that is:
RðtÞ ¼ B0fðtÞ þ B1
df
dt þ . . . þ Bn1
dn1f
dtn1 þ Bn
dnf
dtn
ð9:17Þ
In this case, deﬁning the state variables are not straight-
forward. The earlier deﬁnitions of state variables, given
in Equation (9.13), will not yield unique solutions. In this
case, the state variables must be chosen such that they
will eliminate the derivatives of the input fðtÞ. This can
be accomplished if we deﬁne the n state variables as:
x1 ¼ y  c0f;
x2 ¼ dy
dt  c0
df
dt  c1
f ¼ dx1
dt  c1f
x3 ¼ d2y
dt2  c0
d2f
dt2  c1
df
dt  c2
f ¼ dx2
dt  c2f
...
xn ¼ dn1y
dtn1  c0
dn1f
dtn1  c1
dn1f
dtn2  . . .  cn1
f ¼ dxn1
dt
 cn1f
ð9:18Þ
where:
c0 ¼ b0;
c1 ¼ b1  a1c0;
c2 ¼ b2  a1c1  a2c;
..
.
cn ¼ bn  a1cn1  . . .  an1c1  anc0
ð9:19Þ
The choice of the above state variables ensures the
uniqueness of the solution of the state equation. Now,
the reduced ﬁrst order state equation can be written as:
dx1
dt ¼ x2 þ c1f
dx2
dt ¼ x3 þ c2f
ð9:20Þ
...
dxn1
dt
¼ xn þ cn1f
dxn
dt ¼ anx1  an1x2  . . .  a1xn þ cnf
The above set of equations can be written in the matrix
form as:
_x1
_x2
:
:
_xn1
_xn
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
0
1
0
:
:
0
0
0
1
:
:
0
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
0
0
0
:
:
1
an
an1
an2
:
:
a1
2
666666664
3
777777775

x1
x2
:
:
xn1
xn
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
þ
c1
c2
:
:
cn1
cn
2
666666664
3
777777775
f
y ¼ 1
0
:
:
0
0
½
	
x1
x2
:
:
xn1
xn
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
þ c0f
Active Control Techniques
235

That is, in the shortened form, these equations can be
written as:
f_xg ¼ ½A	fxg þ ½B	f
y ¼ ½C	fxg þ Df
ð9:21Þ
Equation (9.21) is the state-space representation of
Equation (9.12), wherein the right-hand side has deriva-
tives of the forcing function.
One can now obtain the transfer function of the system
from the state equation (Equation (9.21)). This can be
done if one takes the Laplace transform of Equation
(9.21), that is:
sf^xðsÞg  fxð0Þg ¼ ½A	f^xðsÞg þ ½B	^fðsÞ
^yðsÞ ¼ ½C	f^xðsÞg þ D^fðsÞ
ð9:22Þ
Here, f^xðsÞg and ^fðsÞ are the Laplace transform of the
state vector fxðtÞg and the forcing function fðtÞ. Transfer
functions are normally derived by assuming a zero initial
condition. From the ﬁrst part of Equation (9.22), we
have:
f^xðsÞg ¼ ½s½I	  ½A		1½B	^fðsÞ
ð9:23Þ
Using the above in the second part of Equation (9.22), we
can relate the output to the input, that is, the transfer
function is given by:
^yðsÞ
^fðsÞ
¼ GðsÞ ¼ ½C	½s½I	  ½A		1½B	 þ D
ð9:24Þ
That is, the transfer function computation involves com-
putation of ½s½I	  ½A		1. Hence, the determinant of
matrix ½s½I	  ½A		 will give the characteristic polynomial
of the transfer function and the eigenvalue of matrix ½A	
will give the poles of the system.
Let us now consider a simple single degree of freedom
of the spring–mass vibratory system, the governing
differential equation of which is given by:
m€x þ c_x þ kx ¼ fðtÞ
ð9:25Þ
where m is the mass of the system, c is the viscously
damped damper coefﬁcient and k is the stiffness of the
system. For state-space representation of the system, we
deﬁne the state variables x1ðtÞ ¼ xðtÞ and x2ðtÞ ¼ _xðtÞ.
Using these state variables, Equation (9.25) reduces to
the following two ﬁrst-order equations (state equations),
written in the matrix form as:
_x1
_x2


¼
0
1
 k
m
 c
m
"
#
x1
x2


þ
0
1
m
(
)
f;
y ¼ 1
0
½
	
x1
x2


ð9:26Þ
The above equation is in the conventional form of state
equations given by Equation (9.21). Substituting the
matrices [A], [B], [C] and [D] derived from the above
equation in Equation (9.24), we can write the transfer
function as:
GðsÞ ¼
1
ms2 þ cs þ k
ð9:27Þ
This is the same as what was derived in Equation (9.7),
obtained by taking a Laplace transformation on the
governing equation.
In designing controllers for multi-input multi-output
systems, especially for structural applications, one will
have to depend extensively on the discritized mathema-
tical model as that derived from FE techniques. The
discritized Finite Element governing equation of any
structure is of the form:
½M	f€xg þ ½C	f_xg þ ½K	fxg ¼ ffg
ð9:28Þ
Here, [M], [C], and [K] are the mass, damping and
stiffness matrices, respectively.
These matrices are of size n  n:fxg is the degree of
freedom vector and ffg is the force vector, both of which
are of size n  1. The above equation is similar to the
single-degree-of-freedom equation (Equation (9.25)) and
the state space equation will be of the form of Equation
(9.26). Hence, the state vectors for the FE equation are
fx1g ¼ fxg and fx2g ¼ f_x1g. The reduced-state-space-
form of Equation (9.28) and its corresponding output
vector fyg is given by:
f_x1g
f_x2g


¼
½0	
½Ig
½M	1½K	
½M	1½Cg


fx1g
fx2g


þ
0
½M	1


ffg
fyg ¼

½I	
½0	

fx1g
fx2g


ð9:29Þ
The above is in the standard form given in Equation
(9.21), wherein we can clearly identify matrices [A], [B]
236
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

and [C], respectively. Equation (9.29) represents a
2n  2n system. That is, an n  n second-order system
(Equation (9.28)), when reduced to state-space form,
becomes 2n  2n of the ﬁrst-order system. In addition,
the input and the output are related, especially for the
feedback, by:
ffg ¼ ½G	fyg
ð9:30Þ
In the above equation, [G] is the gain matrix of size
n  r, when r states are chosen for input feedback to
reduce the response, especially for vibration control
applications. Using the second part of Equation (9.29)
in the above equation, we can write the output–input
relation in terms of the state vector as:
ffg ¼ ½G	½C	fxg
ð9:31Þ
Once we reduce the governing equation in the state-space
form, and using Equation (9.26), one can determine the
transfer function. However, normally, the system size of
the FE system is quite high, especially for dynamic
systems. In order to design the control system, it is
practically impossible to consider the entire FE system
due to its large system size. In most control applications
to structural problems, such as vibration or noise control,
only the ﬁrst few modes are targeted for reduction based
on their energy content. In such a situation, one has to
reduce the order of the system using suitable reduction
techniques. The concepts of dynamic reduction are
addressed in the latter part of this chapter.
9.3 STABILITY OF CONTROL SYSTEM
A control system design should adhere to some basic
concepts that ensure the stability of the system. In this
section, some of the commonly used methods in deter-
mining the stability of the system are highlighted.
An engineer’s deﬁnition of stability is that a system
should have enough damping to damp out all of the
transients and resumes a steady-state condition. That is, a
system is said to be stable if a ﬁnite duration input causes
a ﬁnite duration response. On the other hand, a system is
said to be unstable if a ﬁnite duration input causes the
response to diverge from its initial value. That is, when
the output changes ‘unidirectionally’ and ‘shoots up’
with ever increasing amplitude, the system is said to be
unstable.
Here, let us consider a linear system. Most systems we
come across are differential equations, second-order in
time, and in most cases are equations with constant
coefﬁcients. One of the fundamental features of constant
coefﬁcient equations is that they have exponential solu-
tions of the form:
yðtÞ ¼ Aer1t þ Ber2t þ Cer3t þ Der4t þ . . .
ð9:32Þ
In the above equation, the constants A, B, C, etc. are
determined by using the initial conditions and the forcing
functions; r1; r2, etc. are the roots or eigenvalues of the
characteristic polynomial. The stability of Equation
(9.32) depends on the values of r. If these are negative
and real, then the output tends to zero value as t ) 1.
Such a system, where all of the r’s are negative and real,
is said to be a stable system. If the roots of the
characteristic polynomial are positive and real, then the
output of Equation (9.32) grows without a bound as
t ) 1. Such a system is said to be an unstable system.
If all of the r’s are purely imaginary, then the system
exhibits continuous oscillations due to the presence of
sine and cosine terms in the output equation. Finally, if
all of the r’s are complex, having both real and imaginary
parts, it amounts to attenuation of the response due to a
growth in time. Hence, the determination of the stability
of the system amounts to determination of the roots of
the characteristic polynomial. In terms of the complex
variable s, a system is said to be stable if all of the roots
are in the left half of the s-plane and unstable if any roots
are on the imaginary axis or in the right half of the
s-plane.
If the system is linear, then testing of the stability of
the system amounts to determining whether any root is in
the right half of the s-plane or on the imaginary axis. The
following are the different methods of testing the stability
of a control system:
(1) Numerically determining the roots of the character-
istic polynomial.
(2) Routh–Hurwitz criterion.
(3) Nyquist criterion.
(4) Root Locus method.
(5) Using the state-space or transfer-function approach.
The choice of using the above tests is ‘problem-
dependent’. We will now brieﬂy describe the above
methods in a few sentences. The reader is advised to
refer to Kuo[2] for a detailed account of these methods.
In the ﬁrst test, a characteristic polynomial of order n
is ﬁrst obtained and its roots are determined numerically.
There are many elementary root-ﬁnding algorithms, such
as the Newton–Raphson technique, bisection method,
Active Control Techniques
237

secant method, etc. For complex differential equations,
some of the more recent techniques, such as the compa-
nion matrix method or polynomial eigenvalue method,
can be used. These are discussed in Chakraborty [3]. In
Finite Element terminology, an n degree of freedom
model will yield a characteristic polynomial of order n.
If n is very large, as in the case of the transient dynamic
problem, then solving for all poles from the characteristic
polynomial is an ‘horrendous’ task. Hence, the system
size of the FE equations is reduced using proper model
order reduction.
The Routh–Hurwitz criterion test gives us the number
of roots if any of these exist to the right of the s-plane. It
does not give the location of these roots on the s-plane
and hence does not give any guidance for design proce-
dures. It can be conveniently used for lower-order
systems and is relatively simple to implement.
The Nyquist criterion [4] helps in identifying the poles
that are located on the right half of the s-plane. This is a
frequency-domain technique that is based on conformal
mapping and complex variable theory. The method
involves plotting the open-loop Frequency Response
Function (FRF) and looking at the frequency amplitude
at the resonant frequencies. From this, one can infer on
the stability of the system. The main advantage of this
criterion is that one can modify the control design by
reshaping the frequency-response plots.
The root locus is again a graphical method, wherein
the curves are constructed in the s-plane that show the
response of each root of the characteristic polynomial as
a speciﬁed system parameter is varied. Using this
method, it is possible to evaluate the root location for a
given value of the system parameter and also establish
the conditions for stability. Again, due to the graphical
nature of the method, design procedures can be devel-
oped based on reshaping of the curves.
In the state-space approach, the eigenvalues of the
state matrix [A] (see Equation 9.21) will give the poles in
the s-plane from which the stability of the system can be
assessed. From the FE point of view, this method is ideal.
As a part of the FE code, there are many eigenvalue/
vector extraction routines, which are used in free/forced
vibration analysis. These routines can be used to extract
the pole information from the state matrix [A].
There are two other terms that are normally used in the
control theory as regards the stability of the system.
These are Controllability and Observability. These
terms are commonly used in the control theory as they
play an important role in the design of controllers,
particularly when using the state-space approach. These
were introduced by Kalman. A system is said to be ‘not
controllable’ if it does not satisfy the controllability and
observability conditions. Hence, some conditions are
speciﬁed in terms of the control parameters, which a
system is made to satisfy for if it is to become con-
trollable and observable. These conditions can be derived
by using the following deﬁnitions. A system is said to be
controllable at some time t0 if it is possible to transfer the
system from an initial state xðt0Þ to any other state in a
ﬁnite interval of time by using an unconstrained control
vector. A system, which is in the state xðt0Þ, is said to be
observable at some time t0, if it is possible to determine
this state from observation of the output over a ﬁnite
interval of time.
Using the above deﬁnition, we can derive the condi-
tions for both input and output controllability. Here, a
‘mere’ condition is stated without going into much detail.
Let us consider the governing differential equation of
order n in the state-space form given in Equation (9.21).
The condition of controllability of the input is that the
vectors ½B	; ½A	½B	; . . . ; ½A	n1½B	 are linearly independent
and the matrix is given by:
½B	
½A	½B	
:
:
:
½A	n1½B	


ð9:33Þ
which is of rank n or is not singular. Similarly, we can
state the condition of output controllability of the state
equation given by Equation (9.21) in a similar manner.
That is, we can write the output controllable matrix as:
½C	½B	
½C	½A	½B	
½C	½A	2½B	
:
½C	½A	n1½B	
½D	


ð9:34Þ
The above matrix is of the order m  ðn þ 1Þr, where
matrix [A] is n  n, vector [B] is n  r, [C] is m  r and
[D] is m  r. The condition for output controllability is
that the matrix given in Equation (9.34) is of the rank m.
On similar lines, we can write the observability con-
dition by using the deﬁnition. That is, the state equation
given by Equation (9.21) is observable, if and only if, the
matrix given by:
½CT	
½AT	½CT	
:
:
:
½AT	n1½CT	


ð9:35Þ
is of the rank n. We can also state the conditions for
complete controllability and observability in the s-plane.
That is, the system is not completely controllable or
observable if there exists common factors in the transfer
functions in the numerator and denominator. For example,
a transfer function given by:
GðsÞ ¼
ðs þ 1Þðs þ 4Þ
ðs þ 1Þðs þ 2Þðs þ 3Þ
238
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

is not completely controllable or observable due to the
common factor (s þ 1) in both numerator or denominator
of the above equation.
9.4 DESIGN CONCEPTS AND
METHODOLOGY
The fundamental to the design of the control system is to
place the poles at the appropriate positions so that the
stability of the system is ensured. The plant is a part of
the control system that has unchangeable parts and is
described by the transfer functions or state variables. The
poles can be shifted to the appropriate positions by
closing a loop around the plant with a feedback signal
with appropriate gain. The gain matrix is the one that
relates the output vector to the input vector. The gains
can be constant or variable, depending upon the control
system design. The basic or minimum system is deter-
mined by having a closed-loop unit feedback. Normally,
sensors are assumed ideal (unit gain) and only an
ampliﬁer is added between the error signal and the
plant. The gain is then set accordingly to meet the
steady-state and bandwidth requirements, which are
followed by a stability analysis. For a smart system, we
have a sensor(s) and an actuator(s) to receive the sensor
input and a controller. The stability of such a smart
system is governed by the placement of the sensor, the
placement of actuator, the error signal, the gain variation
and the type and method of control design.
Design of a control system involves a design of
compensation. Compensation can be designed in two
different ways. The main objective of the ﬁrst way is to
modify the basic system in order that the stability of the
system is ensured. Stability analysis is a very important
preliminary step that determines how unstable (or stable)
the system is and hence tells the designer how much
compensation is necessary to ensure stability. The second
step in the design process is to mathematically determine
the parameters for the chosen value.
It has been mentioned earlier that the unstable system
will have roots in the right half of the s-plane. To
stabilize an unstable system, we need to move these
roots to the left half of the s-plane. In addition, for a
stable transient response, these moved poles need to be
reallocated in a suitable area in the s-plane. The roots are
generally complex and the real part of the root deter-
mines the duration of the transient and the imaginary part
determines the oscillating characteristics. In general, one
can move the roots by (a) changing gain, (b) changing
plant, (c) placing a dynamic element (ﬁlter) at the
forward transmission path, (d) placing a dynamic ele-
ment (ﬁlter) at the feedback path and (e) feedback all or
some of the states. Of the above, the ﬁrst two ((a) & (b))
are seldom permissible. All of the other four are possible
options a designer can use. Selection of these is a matter
of engineering judgment and also depends on the nature
of the problem. Although one can design the control
system using frequency-response or root-locus techni-
ques, in this chapter the state-variable approach is used,
keeping in mind that the designed control system can
handle
the
multiple-input-multiple-output
problem.
Under this approach, two different design schemes are
outlined, namely the PID controller and the controller
based on eigenstructure assignment. These are discussed
in the following subsections.
9.4.1 PD, PI and PID controllers
From the previous discussion, it is clear that gain is an
important parameter governing the design of a controller.
An increase in the gain increases the bandwidth and
makes the response faster and accurate. However, an
increase in gain decreases the damping. The damping is
improved by introducing a derivative signal and if there
is a need to increase the accuracy substantially, then an
integrator is used. Several commercially available con-
trollers combine several of these concepts. The most
common among them are the following:
 PD Controller ¼ Proportional þ Derivative
) GðsÞ ¼ Kp þ Kds
 PI Controller ¼ Proportional þ Integral
) GðsÞ ¼ Kp þ KI
s
 PID Controller ¼ Proportional þ Integral þ Derivative
) GðsÞ ¼ Kp þ KI
s þ Kds
In the above equations, Kp; Kd and KI are the gain
parameters, which are adjustable. Among the above,
PID controllers are extremely popular and successful
and have been used in many applications, such as
autopilots in ships and aircraft. Ziegler and Nichols [5]
have developed adjustment procedures, which is one of
the reasons why such controllers are so popular.
Let us now consider the transfer function of a PD
controller. This is given by:
GðsÞ ¼ Kp þ Kds ¼ Kd
s þ Kp
Kd


ð9:36Þ
Active Control Techniques
239

This controller simply introduces a free zero and the
design requires a zero to be placed at the appropriate
location and adjust the gain accordingly.
The Proportional–Integral (PI) is a type of feedback
controller whose output is uðtÞ, with a control variable
(CV) which is generally based on the error signal eðtÞ
between some user-deﬁned set point (SP) and some
measured process variable (PV). The control action of
a proportional plus integral controller with uðtÞ as the
output of the controller and an eðtÞ actuating error signal
input is deﬁned by:
uðtÞ ¼ KpeðtÞ þ KI
ðt
0
eðtÞdt
plus where the transfer function of the controller is given
by:
GðsÞ ¼ Kp þ KI
s ¼ Kp s þ KI=KP
ð
Þ
s
ð9:37Þ
The proportional gain Kp is multiplied by the error – this
is an adjustable ampliﬁer. In many systems, Kp is
responsible for process stability. If it is too low, the PV
can drift away; if it is too high, the PV can oscillate. The
integral gain KI is multiplied by the integral of error. In
many systems, KI is responsible for driving the error to
zero; however, if KI is set too high, there will be
oscillation, instability, integrator windup or actuator
saturation. The integral adds zeros at s ¼ KI=Kp and
a pole at s ¼ 0 to the open-loop transfer function. The
effects of Kp and KI on a closed-loop system are
summarized in Table 9.1. These correlations may not
be exactly accurate, because Kp and KI are dependent on
each other and changing one can bring about a change in
the other.
The PI controller involves adjustment of Kp and KI or
tuning to achieve some user-deﬁned optimal character of
system response. The industrially accepted procedure is
the Ziegler-Nichols technique [5], which is as follows.
First, KI ¼ 0 is set and using proportional action only, Kp
is increased from 0 to a critical value Kcr where the
output ﬁrst exhibits sustained oscillations. Thus, the
critical gain and corresponding period Pcr are experi-
mentally determined.
To get the error signal, sensors are required. The
sensing is normally done through accelerometers. The
acceleration sensed varies with the location of the accel-
erometers. The corresponding [C] matrix entries are then
estimated. The feedback is given as a proportional gain
matrix ½Gp	 times the acceleration vector f€qg and an
integral gain matrix ½GI	 times the velocity vector f_qg.
For acceleration and velocity feedback, the output vector
fyg can be written as:
fyg ¼ ½Cp	f_xg þ ½CI	fxg
where ½Cp	 and ½CI	 are measurement matrices.
Let us now consider the PID controller. The transfer
function in this case is given by:
GðsÞ ¼ Kp þ KI
s þ Kds ¼ Kds2 þ Kps þ KI
s
ð9:38Þ
This requires a pole to be placed at the origin and two
zeros at the desired locations for adjustment of the
dynamic response. The two zeros may be real or com-
plex, depending on the gains used and it will always be
on the left-half plane. PID controllers can be digitally
implemented with microprocessors.
9.4.2 Eigenstructure assignment technique
The eigenstructure assignment technique for feedback con-
trol system design allows the closed-loop system to have
speciﬁed eigenvalues and eigenvectors. The forced response
of a multi-variable system depends on both these eigen
parameters; thus, this technique is an efﬁcient tool for
effective controller design, where the number of closed-
loop eigen parameters can be speciﬁed a priori depending
on the number of measurable outputs and inputs.
For a linear time-invariant system, the governing
equations written using the standard notations are given
by Equation (9.29). It was mentioned previously that the
eigenvalues of matrix [A] give the poles of the system.
Each of these eigenvalues/vectors satisfy the identity:
½A	fnig ¼ lifnig
ð9:39Þ
where li is the ith eigenvalue and fnig is the correspond-
ing eigenvector. The free transient response of the system
Table 9.1
Effect of gains Kp and KI on close-loop
response.
Closed-
Rise
Overshoot
Settling
S–S
loop
time
time
error
response
Kp
Decrease
Increase
Small
Decrease
change
KI
Decrease
Increase
Increase
Eliminate
240
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

to a non-zero initial condition fx0g is given by the
equation:
fxðtÞg ¼ e½A	tfx0g
ð9:40Þ
Assuming the eigenvalues of [A] to be distinct, a non-
singular modal matrix ½	 consisting of eigenvectors can
be found, where:
½	 ¼ n1
n2
n3
:
:
:
nn
½
	
ð9:41Þ
and:
½A	 ¼ ½	½	½	1
ð9:42Þ
where ½	 is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues. Now, the
response in Equation (9.40) can be written as:
fxðtÞg ¼ ½	e½	t½	1x0
ð9:43Þ
By deﬁning:
½	1 ¼ w1
w2
w3
:
:
:
wn
½
	T; yk ¼
X
n
j¼1
wkjx0j
ð9:44Þ
Substituting the above equation in Equation (9.43), we
get:
xiðtÞ ¼ n1iy1el1t þ n2iy2el2t þ . . . þ nniynelnt
ð9:45Þ
From the above equation it can be interpreted that:
 The state-variable response consists of a combination
of all existing modes.
 Each eigenvalue determines the growth/decay rate of
the corresponding mode.
 The amplitude of contribution from a particular mode
depends on the eigenvectors.
9.4.2.1 Design methodology
A linear time-invariant, multi-variable, controllable and
observable system is given by:
f_xg ¼ ½A	fxg þ ½B	fug;
fyg ¼ ½C	fxg
ð9:46Þ
where there are n state vector ðfxgÞ, m input vectors
ðfugÞ and r output vectors ðfygÞ. The objective here is to
ﬁnd a control law of the form:
fug ¼ ½K	fyg
ð9:47Þ
such that the closed-loop system matrix is ð½A	 þ ½B	½K	
½C	Þ (after applying feedback) satisﬁes:
ð½A	 þ ½B	½K	½C	Þni ¼ lini;
i ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; n
ð9:48Þ
where li is the ith desired eigenvalue and ni is the
corresponding desired eigenvector. The general metho-
dology to achieve this eigenstructure involves three
numerical steps, as follows:
 Computation of the allowable subspace of the eigen-
vectors.
 Choice of eigenvectors.
 Computation of the gain value for assignment of the
above eigenstructure.
In the eigenstructure assignment technique, the number
of assignable eigenvalues is determined by the number of
outputs and inputs. Full-state feedback requires that all of
the state variables are measurable, which is often not
possible and in such cases the output feedback is used.
Here, eigenstructure assignment using output feedback is
implemented to get a desirable closed-loop eigenstruc-
ture. With accelerometers used as sensors, the measur-
able quantities are the acceleration and velocity as
integral of the acceleration.
9.5 MODAL ORDER REDUCTION
We have seen that design of a control system involves
placement of the poles at the appropriate positions so as
to ensure stability of the system. If one uses FE methods
for mathematical modeling of the dynamic system, the
system size of the problem is determined by the FE
mesh density, which is usually very high for transient
dynamics problems. That is, if the FE model of the
system has n degrees of freedom, there will be n different
poles in the system and the characteristic polynomial of
the system is of the order n. If n is very large, then
handling the design of the control system becomes
‘horrendous’ since most of the control system design
techniques are mostly to shift the ﬁrst few poles of the
system. Even in real-world problems, such as vibration
control in structures, it is sufﬁcient that the ﬁrst few
modal amplitudes are reduced through a control system.
In essence, the large system size of the FE model of the
problem requires to be reduced for design of the control
system. This can be achieved through what is called
modal order reduction. In this section, all of the available
model order reductions are reviewed and the behavior of
Active Control Techniques
241

these techniques are compared for a transient dynamics
problem through numerical examples.
9.5.1 Review of available modal order reduction
techniques
The general procedure for modal order reduction is as
follows:
 First, a few important degrees of freedom (dof) of the
full order system are selected as the ‘master’ dof and
these are retained in the reduction process and the rest
of the dof are designated as the ‘slave’ dof that is to be
condensed out. The selected conﬁguration of the
‘master–slave’ dof depends on the nature of the
problem sought for solution and also upon the algo-
rithm adopted for reduction.
 A linear coordinate transformation (also called a
similarity transformation) that transforms the original
full-order system to a reduced-order system is deﬁned.
 All of the system matrices (mass, stiffness and damp-
ing matrices) are then transformed to this new trans-
formed coordinate system to obtain the reduced-order
matrices.
With the usual FEM notations, the second-order govern-
ing differential equation of motion for a dynamical
system of order n is expressed as:
½M	f€uðtÞg þ ½C	f_uðtÞg þ ½K	fuðtÞg ¼ ffðtÞg
ð9:49Þ
where [M], [C] and [K] are the system mass matrix,
damping matrix and stiffness matrix, respectively, of
order n  n. Here, fug; f_ug and f€ug are the displacement,
velocity and acceleration vectors, respectively, of size
n  1 while ffðtÞg is the nodal force vector of size n  1.
After selection of the master and slave dofs of orders m
and s, respectively, the objective of reduced-order mod-
eling (ROM) is to establish an equivalent model for the
above equation of order m instead of n, where m  n.
This reduced model can be expressed as:
½ ~M	f€umðtÞg þ ½~C	f_umðtÞg þ ½~K	fumðtÞg ¼ f~fðtÞg
ð9:50Þ
The overhead ‘tilde’ indicates the system matrices of the
equivalent ROM. The transformation matrix [T] relates
the full-scale model to the reduced scale and is expressed
in terms of the displacement vectors of the full and
reduced models, respectively, as shown below:
fuðtÞg ¼
fumðtÞg
fusðtÞg


¼ ½T	fumðtÞg
ð9:51Þ
wherein the subscripts m refers to the retained (master) dof
and s to the condensed (slave) dof. Substituting Equa-
tion (9.51) into Equation (9.49) and ‘pre-multiplying’
½T	T,
the
expression
in
Equation
(9.49)
reduces
to:
½T	T½M	½T	f€umðtÞg þ ½T	T½C	½T	f_umðtÞg
þ ½T	T½K	½T	fumðtÞg ¼ ½T	TffðtÞg
ð9:52Þ
which can be written in form given in Equation (9.50).
Hence, we have:
½ ~M	 ¼ ½T	T½M	½T	;
½~C	 ¼ ½T	T½C	½T	
½~K	 ¼ ½T	T½K	½T	;
f~fg ¼ ½T	Tf fg
ð9:53Þ
Different model-order reduction methods prescribe steps
for computation of the transformation matrix [T]. The
review of theoretical formulations of different ROMs and
derivation of the corresponding transformation matrices
are discussed in this section. A similar transformation
applies for the ROM of the system in the state-space
framework. The state-space equation for the full system
is given by:
f_xg ¼ ½A	fxg þ ½B	ffg
ð9:54Þ
with the output vector given by:
fyg ¼ ½C	fxg
The state-space equation of the ROM and the corre-
sponding reduced output state vector are given by:
f_xmg ¼ ½~A	fxmg þ ½~B	f~fmg;
fymg ¼ ½~C	fxmg
ð9:55Þ
In this section, three important model-order reduction
techniques are reviewed in detail.
9.5.1.1 Guyan reduction technique
Time-domain model-order reduction methods that are
applicable to steady-state structural problems date back
to the 1960s, due to the work of Guyan [6]. These
methods are based on the assumption that the effects of
inertial forces on the eliminated physical coordinates are
negligible, that is, the condensed dof does not experience
any force and the effect of associated inertia and damp-
ing are not included in the transformation. Upon parti-
tioning the mass and stiffness matrices into submatrices
and the displacement and force vectors as subvectors
242
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

based on the master and slave conﬁgurations, the equa-
tion of motion can be expressed as:
½Mmm	
½Mms	
½Mms	T
½Mss	


f€umg
f€usg


þ
½Kmm	
½Kms	
½Kms	T
½Kss	


fumg
fusg


¼
ffmg
0


ð9:56Þ
Expanding the second equation and neglecting the
masses associated with the ‘slave’ degrees of freedom,
we get:
½Kms	Tfumg þ ½Kss	fusg ¼ 0
ð9:57Þ
The above equation helps us to relate the ‘slave’ dof in
terms of the ‘master’ dof, which can be written as:
fusg ¼ ½Kss	1½Kms	Tfum	
ð9:58Þ
The transformation matrix required for order reduction is
given by:
fug ¼
fumg
fusg


¼ ½T	fumg;
½T	 ¼
½I	
½Kss	1½Kms	T


ð9:59Þ
This method is simple and has been used in various
engineering applications. In dynamic analysis, Guyan’s
method is adopted by usually considering the dof with
small inertia as the ‘slave’ dof. A computational algo-
rithm was proposed by Shah and Reymand [7] for
analytical selection of ‘master’ and ‘slave’ conﬁgurations
in Guyan’s reduction.
9.5.1.2 Dynamic condensation method
This method is an improvement over Guyan’s reduction
method in the sense that the transformation is based on the
dynamic stiffness matrix [D] rather than the static stiffness
matrix [K]. This method is a ‘frequency-selective’
approach. At a given frequency o, the equilibrium
equation in the frequency domain is expressed as:
½K	  o2½M	


f^uðoÞg ¼ f^fðoÞg;
½DðoÞ	f^uðoÞg ¼ f^fðoÞg
ð9:60Þ
The above equation is obtained by taking a Fourier
transform on the displacement and acceleration para-
meters in the original governing equation (Equation
(9.49)) and f^ug and f^fg are the frequency-domain
amplitudes’ displacement and force vectors, respectively.
Again, partitioning the above in terms of matrices asso-
ciated with the ‘master’ and ‘slave’ dofs, we get:
½Dmm	
½Dms	
½Dms	T
½Dss	
"
#
f^umðoÞg
f^usðoÞg
(
)
¼
f^fmg
0
(
)
ð9:61Þ
Following the same procedure used in Guyan’s reduction,
we ﬁrst express the ‘slave’ dof in terms of the ‘master’
dof through the second equation. Then, the transforma-
tion matrix becomes:
f^ug ¼
f^umg
f^usg


¼ ½T	f^umg;
½T	 ¼
½I	
½Dss	1½Dms	T


ð9:62Þ
Based on this approach, a central frequency o for
condensation was proposed by Paz [8]. For dynamic
problems, where multiple modes participate, as in the
case of wave problems, the use of the geometric mean as
the central frequency over the frequency band under
interest has been employed by Paz [8].
9.5.1.3 System equivalent reduction and expansion
process (SEREP)
SEREP was proposed by O’Collahan [9], primarily as a
technique for a cross-orthogonality check between ana-
lytical and experimental modal vectors, linear and non-
linear forced response studies and analytical model
improvement. This method uses a modal matrix instead
of a stiffness matrix to derive the required transformation
matrix. That is, this method proposes transformation of
the dynamic characteristics through the collection of
desired eigenmodes. The modal matrix ½c	 of the system
computed for p numbers of modes is partitioned as ½cm	
and ½cs	 for m numbers of the ‘master’ dof and s numbers
of the ‘slave’ dof and is expressed as:
½c	 ¼
½cm	
½cs	


ð9:63Þ
The modal matrix relates the generalized displacements
to the modal displacements through the expression given
as:
fumg
fusg


¼
½cm	
½cs	


Zg
f
ð9:64Þ
Active Control Techniques
243

where fZg is the generalized degree of freedom vector.
From the above equation, we can write:
fZg ¼ ½cm	þfumg
ð9:65Þ
where ½cm	þ is the generalized inverse of ½cm	, which is a
rectangular matrix of size m  p, where m is the number
of ‘master’ dofs and p is the number of modes retained in
the transformation. To and Ewins [10] discussed the
computation of a generalized inverse for a rectangular
matrix, which is given by:
½cm	þ ¼ ½cm	T½cm	

1½cm	T
when m > p
½cm	þ ¼ ½cm	T ½cm	½cm	T

1
when m < p
ð9:66Þ
Substituting for fZg from Equation (9.65) into Equation
(9.64), we get:
fumg
fusg


¼
½cm	
½cs	


½cm	þfumg
ð9:67Þ
The transformation matrix in this case is given by:
½T	 ¼
½cm	
½cs	


½cm	þ
ð9:68Þ
As discussed by O’Callahan [9], this method allows an
arbitrary selection of the modes that are to be selected in
the ROM and the quality of the ROM does not depend
upon the location of the ‘master’ dof. However, the
number of modes included in the transformation should
be more than or equal to the number of ‘master’ dofs. In
addition, the frequencies and modes shapes of the ROM
are exactly the same as those of the selected frequencies
and mode shapes of the full-system model. This is one of
the great advantages in the design of control systems,
wherein one has to design the same by using a limited
number-of-degrees-of-freedom model. Since the reduced
mathematical model based on the SEREP can exactly
represent the dynamic characteristics of the full model,
the control theory tolerances are greatly enhanced.
In addition to the above three ROM techniques, there
are three other techniques reported in the literature. These
are the Condensation Modal Order Reduction Technique,
based on the Projection Operator, proposed by Dyka et
al. [11] and referred to as the CMR method, the Improved
Reduced System of O’Callahan [12], referred to as the
IRS method and the Dynamic Improved Reduced System
of Friswell et al. [13], referred to as the DIRS method.
The above three methods are not discussed here, although
some of the results from these methods are used in the
next subsection for comparison purposes.
9.5.1.4 Reduced order modeling in transient dynamics:
a comparative study
The main objective of this section is to identify the
reduction technique that results in the most accurate
response for the given master–slave dof conﬁguration.
It was explained previously that the characteristics of the
transient dynamic problem is that the frequency content
of the forcing function is quite high. In other words, the
time duration is very short, normally of the order of
microseconds. Hence, it excites all higher-order modes.
This results in very ﬁne FE discritization and hence a
very large system size. Thus, when using an ROM, one
has to be very careful in choosing the master–slave dof
combination.
For comparative study of different ROMs, a 2-D canti-
lever beam under plane-stress conditions and subjected to
axial impact, shown in Figure 9.1 is considered. The
dimensions of the beam are 500 mm  6:0 mm 9:0 mm
and the isotropic material properties are E ¼ 72:0 GPa,
n ¼ 0:3, and r ¼ 2700 kg=m3. The time history and the
frequency spectrum of the applied load is shown in
Figure 9.2 and the load is acting axially at the free
end of the cantilever beam. The full system model is
L = 500 mm D = 6 mm B = 10 mm
P
Figure 9.1
Schematic of a cantilever beam used for the
comparative study.
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.50
50
100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
Load (N)
Time (s)
00
20
40
Frequency (kHz)
Frequency amplitude
60
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 9.2
Input load history and its frequency spectrum used
in the comparative study.
244
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

descritized based on the wavelength consideration. The
full system matrix is of the order 624  624. For compar-
ison of the response, three reduced-order models, namely,
the Dynamic Condensation (DC), Dynamic IRS (DIRS)
and SEREP are considered and the response is computed
for the same ‘master–slave’ dof conﬁguration for all of the
methods. Two different patterns of ‘master–slave’ dof
conﬁgurations are used in the investigation, which form
the reduced-order system matrices of order 150  150 and
50  50, respectively. The conﬁgurations indicating the
spatial distribution of the ‘master–slave’ dof for the two
patterns are shown in Figure 9.3. The locations of the
‘master’ dofs at the nodes are shown by * marks.
The axial velocities are plotted at the middle node of
the free end of the beam. For pattern 1 with 150 dof, the
axial velocity plot is given in Figure 9.4. In this case, the
location and amplitude of the incident and ﬁrst reﬂection
of the wave are accurately captured for all of the
reduction
methods;
however,
the
response
through
SEREP is observed to be able to capture even a small
dispersion exhibited by the longitudinal wave and the
results match exactly with the full-system response. The
number of modes included in the transformation in the
case of SEREP is equal to the number of ‘master’ dofs,
that is, 150. The condensing frequency used in the DC
method is the fundamental frequency of the system
(185.09 Hz). Figure 9.5 gives a comparison of the same
for the pattern-2 (dof 50) conﬁguration of the ‘master–
slave’ dof. In this case, the response by SEREP matches
accurately with that of the full-system response, but the
response histories by DC and DIRS have shown some
time lag in the occurrences of the reﬂected pulses, while
there is no such time lag observed for the incident pulse.
That is, the other two ROMs under-predict the axial wave
velocity.
In
addition,
a
slight
under-prediction
of
response and perturbation is observed in the cases of
DC and DIRS. The accurate matching of the response in
this case for the ROM through SEREP can be explained
by the fact that the ﬁrst few eigenmodes carry maximum
spectral energy, which can be observed by the FFT
diagram of the load history, as shown in Figure 9.2 and
SEREP can be said to work excellently with inclusion of
the eigenmodes that carry maximum energy.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.3
Conﬁgurations showing the spatial distributions of the master-slave dofs: (a) pattern 1 – master dof of 150; (b) pattern –
master dof of 50.
Full-order response
ROM (SEREP)
ROM (DIRS)
ROM (DC)
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
–0.15
–0.2
0
100
Axial velocity (m/s)
200
300
400
500
Time (µs)
Figure 9.4
Comparison of axial velocity for pattern 1 (150
dof) for different ROMs.
Full-order response
ROM (SEREP)
ROM (DIRS)
ROM (DC)
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
0
100
Axial velocity (m/s)
Time (µs)
200
300
400
500
Figure 9.5
Comparison of axial velocity for pattern 2 (50 dof)
for different ROMS.
Active Control Techniques
245

Next, the transverse loading is considered. For the
same cantilever beam and for two different ‘master-
slave’ conﬁgurations, the free-end transverse responses
are plotted in Figures 9.6 and 9.7, respectively. The ROM
simulation of wave propagation for the transverse excita-
tion is observed to be more sensitive to the order of
reduction and the ‘master–slave’ dof conﬁguration. For
the case of the ROM of order 150 (pattern 1), all of the
methods are observed to give a slight decay in the
amplitude of the transverse velocity corresponding to
the occurrence of the incident pulse.
For the case of the ROM of order 50 (pattern 2),
SEREP gives the most accurate solution, which matches
exactly with the full-system response after the occur-
rence of the incident pulse peak. DC and DIRS result in
an oscillatory response and a slight perturbation from the
original system response at a longer time range. In all of
the simulations discussed above, for SEREP the number
of modes is always taken equal to the number of ‘master’
dofs, while for DIRS and DC the condensing frequency is
taken as the fundamental frequency of the system. From
the above example, it is quite clear that the SEREP
method is perhaps the best ROM from the computational
viewpoint. That is, whatever the modes that are retained
in the transformation, those modes are accurately repre-
sented in the ROM. This is particularly useful in multi-
modal control, wherein the modes that requires suppres-
sion are a priori assigned while designing the control
law.
9.6 ACTIVE CONTROL OF VIBRATION
AND WAVES DUE TO BROADBAND
EXCITATION
The FE model of a system is usually very ‘high’,
especially for transient dynamics and wave-propagation
problems. Designing a control system for such problems
is very difﬁcult due to the very ‘high’ system size. For
example, in vibration-control problems, it is customary to
reduce the vibration amplitudes of the ﬁrst few modes
using suitable control algorithms. This can be easily
accomplished by using a reduced-order model of the
complete system that has all of the necessary information
about the ﬁrst few relevant modes. This ROM can be
used in conjunction with state-space modeling or the
transfer function approach that was outlined earlier, for
designing the control law. However, transient dynamics
or wave-propagation problems are multi-modal pro-
blems. That is, if we use the FE approach, then one
cannot design the controller based on the ﬁrst few modes,
since many higher-order modes carry signiﬁcant portion
of kinetic energy. Obtaining all of the higher-order
eigenvalues/vectors is computationally very prohibitive.
That leaves one with no other option but to look for an
alternate mathematical tool that has a smaller system size
and yet contains all of the model information. A tool that
ﬁts into the above description is the Spectral Finite
Element Model (SFEM) which was dealt within Chapters
7 and 8. In this present chapter, a new design philosophy
based on Fourier transforms is developed, wherein the
existing SFEM is modiﬁed to model the control ele-
ments, namely the sensor and the actuator, and also the
controller. Since the system size of the SFEM model is
very small and also contains all modal information, no
model-order reduction is required. In addition, the con-
troller can be designed for the entire eigenspectrum and
hence in cases of vibration- or noise-control problems,
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6
–0.7
–0.80
100
200
300
Time (µs)
Transverse velocity (m/s)
400
500
Full-order response
ROM (SEREP)
ROM (DIRS)
ROM (DC)
Figure 9.6
Comparison of transverse velocity for pattern 1
(150 dof) for different ROMs.
Full-order response
ROM (SEREP)
ROM (DIRS)
ROM (DC)
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6
–0.7
–0.80
100
Transvers velocity (m/s)
200
300
Time (µs)
400
500
Figure 9.7
Comparison of transverse velocity for pattern 2
(50 dof) for different ROMS.
246
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

one can obtain the Frequency Response Function of the
structure after the feedback signal is enforced. This will
quantitatively give the amount of vibration amplitude
reduction over the entire eigenspectrum. This will give a
great reduction in the computational effort as opposed to
the traditional approaches. One other major advantage of
the model is that one can handle arrays of sensors/
actuators and any sensor(s) can be fed to any actuator(s)
or set of actuators. That is, it is quite simple to handle
both collocated and non-collocated sensor–actuator con-
ﬁgurations. This aspect is extremely difﬁcult to handle in
the traditional approaches.
9.6.1 Available strategies for vibration
and wave control
Design of smart structural systems based on control of
the ﬁrst few resonant modes, individually, is the most
common in practice. For many vibration-control appli-
cations, this serves the control objective, since the
modal energy is distributed over the ﬁrst few resonant
modes only. The basic steps behind development of
such active control system models can be described as
follows:
 First, an appropriate kinematics and constitutive
model is assumed. For actuators or load cells mounted
on the host structure, appropriate ‘lumping’ of the
control force and actuator inertia can be considered.
For surface-bonded or embedded layered sensors/
actuators, the same kinematics as the host structure
with additional constraints (for example, shear-lag to
model active/passive constrained layers, discontinu-
ous functions to represent interfacial slip while hand-
ling inclusions, air-gap, etc.) can be used.
 Next, one has to adopt an application-speciﬁc control
scheme. For a known harmonic disturbance, a control
force can be applied in the open-loop having an
optimal phase difference with the mechanical distur-
bance. An actuator force can directly be speciﬁed to
add onto the equivalent mechanical force vector. For
unknown dynamic loading, and as required in most
stable controller designs, closed-loop control schemes
are to be adopted. The initial conﬁguration of the error
sensors, whose placements and numbers are to be
ﬁxed based on optimal control performance (observa-
bility and controllability), can be used for feedback or
feed-forward control. These error measurements are
considered as inputs to the controller under design.
The controller output vector is to be used as the input
electrical signal to the actuators. For an off-line
optimal control design based on a conventional opti-
mization technique, the above steps are to be repeated
at every iteration while extremizing the cost func-
tion(s). For an off-line optimal control design based
on soft-computing tools (e.g. genetic algorithms),
these solution spaces can be explored directly.
 Once all of the system parameters (stiffness, mass,
damping, electromechanical properties of sensors and
actuators, sensor locations, actuator locations, actua-
tor input, etc.) for a particular conﬁgurations are
available, one has to develop a global model for the
passive structure and senor/actuator segment using
analytical or ﬁnite techniques. Under certain cases
of electromechanical coupling, the system matrices
can be decoupled into passive and active components.
For the fully coupled electromechanical case, an
analytical solution can be obtained for only a few
electromechanical boundary conditions and for this,
one can use a detailed ﬁnite element model. For
mounted actuator or load cells, the effect of actuator
stiffness, inertia and force can be ‘lumped’.
 Next, one has to adopt suitable methods of system
solution in temporal or modal space. When the dis-
cretized system size is large, an appropriate reduced-
order modeling technique can be used. Dynamic Con-
densation, Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD)
or the System Equivalent Reduction Expansion Process
(SEREP), among many reduced-order modeling tech-
niques, are found useful. Based on the formalism of the
control cost function construction, a state-space model
(ﬁrst-order representation) is often used instead of a
direct second-order representation. This is particularly
suitable for conventional designs based on the quad-
ratic regulator approach, where the state-space plant
matrix, the input/output matrix, along with the required
weighting matrices, are introduced. Peak-response spe-
ciﬁcations are generally found to be linear matrix
functions of the design variables, which allow them
to be incorporated within the design framework with-
out increasing the complexity of the optimization [14].
In time-marching schemes (for example, Newmark
time integration) while designing optimal control sys-
tem, the control cost function is minimized, including
special control system features (e.g. gain scheduling,
feedback delay, etc.). When modal analysis is adopted,
the modiﬁed dynamic stiffness matrix (including the
contributions of sensor, controller and actuator para-
meters) is to be optimized so that the prescribed modes
are controlled. In this approach, the control efﬁciency is
quantiﬁed in terms of reduction in the modal amplitude
level in the frequency response.
Active Control Techniques
247

 Once the range of control system parameters and the
sensor/actuator collocation pattern is obtained, sensi-
tivity and stability studies are carried out. Sensitivity
studies are important to identify the most effective
solution-space of the design parameters. This also
helps in visualizing the deviation in the desired
response due to control uncertainty and measurement
of noise. With the narrowed-down solution-space of
the design parameters thus obtained above, the locus
of the roots of the characteristic system, that is, poles
(resonances) and zeros (anti-resonances) of the system
transfer function for varying design parameters are
studied. The range of design parameters that produces
the root locus on the right-half phase-plane are
unstable and are avoided in the ﬁnal design. A
secondary objective is often placed for control of
transient disturbances, which is to minimize the tran-
sient response time of the controller.
 For real-time automatic control systems, the off-line
design discussed above is augmented by an adaptive
ﬁlter that tunes the control gains in the presence of
measurement errors and uncertainty [15]. In addition,
there are certain drawbacks of the ﬁnite dimensional
design to control a distributed parameter system, such
as control spillover. This is the result of insufﬁcient
modes considered in the MIMO state-space model.
Although adaptive ﬁlters can augment the perfor-
mance of an off-line design based on a ﬁnite number
of states, better modeling techniques for distributed
parameter systems are often advantageous. This is
where techniques such as SFEM score over other
methods available for the solution. A modiﬁed
SFEM that includes the modeling of control elements
such as sensors, actuators and control elements is
what is called the Active Spectral Finite Element
Model (ASEM). This formulation is built on the
same lines as the FEM and removes most of the
limitations of the other off-line techniques. This
method is explained in the next subsection.
9.6.2 Active spectral ﬁnite element model (ASEM)
for broadband wave control
In this subsection, a generalized active spectral ﬁnite
element model (ASEM) capable of handling arbitrary
distributed sensor–actuator conﬁgurations with a PID
feedback scheme is presented. The main objective is to
develop an efﬁcient and faster computational technique
for the analysis and design of multiple sensor–actuator
conﬁgurations for active control of broadband waves in
connected composite beams. The ASEM can be used to
study structure–control interactions produced by various
types of mounted or embedded active actuators and
sensors, along with classical transducers modeled as
‘lumped’ devices. Among the speciﬁc advantages are
the accurate sensors and actuators dynamics based on a
uniform micro electromechanical ﬁeld model, considera-
tion of multiple scattering of waves through structural
joints and boundaries and near-ﬁeld effects on the
sensors. Numerical experiments on a slender laminated
composite cantilever beam with a bonded piezoelectric
ﬁber composite (PFC) (explained in Section 8.4.4, chap-
ter 8) are performed. Various aspects of low-authority
control against parametric variations are explained. Some
physical insight into the macroscopic behavior of these
PFC actuators has been reported in Bent [16] and Hagood
et al. [17].
In this ASEM model, the beam network is discretized
and classiﬁed into three different classes of elements, as
follows: (1) a spectral element for ﬁnite beams with
mechanical and passive properties; (2) distributed or
point sensors; (3) distributed or point actuators. A sche-
matic diagram of a sensor–actuator element conﬁguration
is shown in Figure 9.8. Here, it is assumed that that the
controller output for a single actuator can be designed
based on a feedback signal constructed from a group of
sensors. Furthermore, in Figure 9.8, the connectivity
between the pth sensor and the qth actuator is also
shown, where the sensor response is measured at the
local coordinate system ðXsp; YspÞ and the actuation force
is provided at the local coordinate system ðXaq; YaqÞ.
9.6.2.1 Spectral element for ﬁnite beams
The SFEM outlined in Chapter 7 is again used here to
represent the dynamics of the beam structure. For the
zsp
xsp
xsp
xaq
Laq
zaq
Lsp
Feedback controller
Actuator element
Sensor element
Figure 9.8
Sensor–actuator conﬁguration for the active spec-
tral ﬁnite element model.
248
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

sake of completeness, the element-level equations invol-
ving the nodal displacement vector are repeated here.
Assuming the beam to have three degrees of freedom
(two translational dofs and one rotational dof) per node
and having two nodes, the elemental displacement vector
in the frequency domain is given by:
f^ueg ¼
^u0
1
^w1
^y1
^u0
2
^w2
^y2
 
!
ð9:69Þ
and the corresponding nodal force vector is given
by:
f^Fge ¼
^N1
^V1
^M1
^N2
^V2
^M2
 
!
ð9:70Þ
The use of the spectral form of solution for the governing
equation and its eventual solution in the frequency
domain results in the dynamic shape functions for the
spectral element formulation, which can be written as:
^uðx; oÞ
^wðx; oÞ
^yðx; oÞ
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
½@1	
½0	
½0	
½0	
½@2	
½0	
0	
½0	
½@3	
2
64
3
75
f^u0ge
f^wge
f^yge
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
; f^Fge
¼ ½^K	ef^uge
ð9:71Þ
where ½@1	; ½@2	; ½@3	 are the exact spectral element
shape-function matrices corresponding to the axial, trans-
verse and rotational degrees of freedom, and ½^K	e is the
exact element dynamic stiffness matrix. As in the case of
the FE, the stiffness matrix in the elemental coordinate
system is transformed to the global coordinate system by
using a suitable transformation matrix.
9.6.2.2 Sensor element
For illustrative purposes, a point sensor has been con-
sidered in the modeling. However, it should be noted that
the formulation does allow for distributed sensors such as
piezoelectric ﬁlm sensors. The force-balance equations
for the sensor element are identical in form to Equation
(9.71). Based on the response measured by a displace-
ment sensor ðsÞ, which is located at ðxsp; zspÞ in the pth
sensor element (denoted by subscript sp), the actuator
input spectrum can be expressed with the help of Equa-
tion (9.71) as:
^Zuðxsp; wsp; onÞ ¼ ðionÞma
X
6
j¼1
@1j  zsp@3j
"
#
^uje
"
#
ð9:72Þ
when longitudinal displacement is measured, and:
^Zuðxsp; wsp; onÞ ¼ ðionÞma
X
6
j¼1
@2j^uje
"
#
ð9:73Þ
when transverse displacement is measured. In Equations
(9.72) and (9.73), i ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
p
, a is the sensor sensitivity
parameter and m ¼ 0; 1 and 2, for displacement, velocity,
and acceleration spectra, respectively. Similarly, if a
strain sensor is used, one can write the actuator input
spectrum:
^Zuðxsp; wsp; onÞ ¼ ðionÞma
X
6
j¼1
q@1j
qx  zsp
q@3j
qx


^uje
"
#
ð9:74Þ
9.6.2.3 Actuator element
In the formulation of the ASFEM presented here, we
consider
the
PID
(Proportional–Integral–Derivative)
feedback control scheme [18]. Other types of frequency
domain control schemes, such as feed-forward control
can also be implemented. The controller output in the
form of current spectrum ^I (or voltage spectrum ^j) for
the qth actuator, and the resulting ﬁeld (magnetic ﬁeld ^H
for a magnetostrictive material or electric ﬁeld ^E for a
piezoelectric material) can be written as:
^I ¼
X
p
g^Z;
^H ¼ b^I;
^Z ¼ ð^Zu;^Zw; ^ZeÞ
ð9:75Þ
where ^Z is given by Equations (9.72)–(9.74). The con-
stant g is a scalar gain and b is the actuator sensitivity
parameter introduced to account for the actuator assem-
bly and packaging properties (e.g. the solenoid conﬁg-
uration for a packaged Terfenol-D rod actuator [19],
voltage-to-electric ﬁeld conversion factor for plane-
polarized PZT wafers, etc.). Next, after substituting for
^H from the magnetomechanical (or electromechanical)
force-boundary condition (Equation (8.119) in chapter 8)
into Equation (9.75) and following the same procedure as
used for discretizing the purely mechanical domain using
the SFEM, the force-balance equation for the qth actuator
element (denoted by subscript aq) in the actuator local
coordinate system can be obtained as:
f^Fgaq ¼ ½^K	aqf^uegaqþ
A33eff
0
B33eff
A33eff
0
B33eff

T
aqbg^Z
ð9:76Þ
Active Control Techniques
249

where:
½A33
eff ; B33
eff 	 ¼
ð
e33
eff 1; z
½
	dz
ð9:77Þ
deﬁnes the equivalent mechanical stiffness due to the
effective
magnetomechanical
(or
electromechanical)
coupling coefﬁcient eeff
33 (see Equation (8.109) in chapter
8 for the PFC) for actuation in the longitudinal mode. A
similar vector with non-zero second and ﬁfth elements in
Equation (9.76) be used. After substituting ^Z in terms of
the sensor element shape function matrix ½@	 and the
corresponding nodal displacement vector
^ue
f
g from
Equations (9.72)–(9.74), Equation (9.76) can be rewritten
as:
fFegaq ¼ ½^Ke	aqf^uegaq þ ½^Ke	aq spf^uegsp
ð9:78Þ
where the notation ½^Ke	aq sp is introduced to represent
the Sensor–Actuator Stiffness Inﬂuence Matrix (SASIM).
This equation is transformed to the global coordinates as
in a regular FE solution. This procedure leads to the ﬁnal
expression for the qth actuator element with the pth
feedback sensor. If ½	sp is the transformation matrix
that transforms the stiffness matrix of a sensor element
from local coordinates to global coordinates, and ½	ap is
the transformation matrix for the actuator element, then
the assembled closed-loop MIMO system with a general
sensor–actuator conﬁguration in the ASEM is obtained in
the form:
f^Fgsp
:
:
:
f^Fgap
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
¼
½sp	T½^Ke	sq½sp	
:
:
:
½0	
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
½ap	T½^Ke	aq sp½sp	
:
:
:
½ap	T½^Ke	aq½ap	
2
6666664
3
7777775

f^ugsp
:
:
:
f^ugap
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
ð9:79Þ
As evident from the above derivation, restrictions are not
placed on the sensor and actuator locations. In addition,
in terms of computational cost and broadband analysis
capabilities, the proposed ASEM is a better option
compared to the conventional state-space models which
are of very high order and several accuracy-related
problems due to errors in model-order reduction, modal
truncation etc. need to be addressed before they can be
applied for broadband Low Authority Control (LAC). So
far as LAC is concerned, after combining the displace-
ment (or strain) ﬁeld generated by the primary distur-
bance (external mechanical load) and the secondary
sources (actuators), one can obtain the wave coefﬁcient
vector f~ug for a subdomain 	 of interest as:
f^ug	 ¼ ½^T		1 ½^K	 þ ½^KðxsÞa s

1f^Fg	
ð9:80Þ
In the above equation, ½^T		 is the matrix that relates the
displacement ﬁeld to the wave vector. At this stage, if a
transfer-function-based concept of wave cancellation is
chosen for designing the controller, Equation (9.80) pro-
vides a direct way to carry out identiﬁcation of appropriate
control gains for known sensor and actuator locations that
will reduce certain elements of f^ug	 to zero, and hence
the corresponding wave components can be controlled.
However, the analytical approach to achieve this is limited
by the fact that one cannot obtain an explicit expression
for the dependence of local wave components on sensor
and actuator locations and other control parameters for a
complex problem, which may have more than one dis-
cretized subdomain. Hence, a semiautomated scheme
integrated with an ASEM is chosen to analyze the
spatially rediscretized system by changing sensor loca-
tions or actuator locations on an iterative basis. This is
feasible because of the fast computation and small system
size permitted by the ASEM.
9.6.2.4 Numerical implementation
As the initial step, input time-dependent forces or dis-
turbances are decomposed into Fourier components by
using the forward FFT. Note that all of the element-level
operations as well as the global system-level operations
are carried out at each discrete frequency on. Except for
this basic difference, the proposed program architecture
is almost identical (for an open-loop conﬁguration) to a
ﬁnite element program in terms of features such as input,
assemblage, solving of the system and output. For a
closed-loop system, we use Equation (9.79) to implement
the explicit form of the global dynamic stiffness matrix at
a particular frequency, which is in most of the cases,
250
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

neither banded nor symmetric. Here, a non-symmetric
sparse complex matrix inversion routine needs to be used
as part of the global system solver. After solving the
closed-loop system at each frequency, the time history
of displacements, strains, stresses, etc. are then post-
processed using an inverse FFT.
9.6.2.5 Effect of broadband distributed actuator
dynamics
Here, we consider a composite cantilever beam with
surface-bonded PFC to study the effect of distributed
actuator dynamics towards broadband control of trans-
verse response of the cantilever tip under transverse-
impact-type loading. Essentially, the control point of
interest for LAC in this case is the cantilever tip. This
requires a feedback sensor to be placed at the cantilever
tip. It is well known that optimal placement of an
actuator is dictated by the location of high average strain
[20]. Hence, while controlling the static or ﬁrst mode
shape under tip loading on a cantilever beam, it is
essential that the actuator be placed at the root of the
cantilever beam. For velocity feedback with a collocated
sensor, Crowley and Luis [20] has shown that the damp-
ing of a particular vibration mode, while using a surface-
bonded PZT wafer, can be expressed as:
x ¼
e31g _w
2 ^Mo0LB
chBb
ð6 þ cÞ
d^fðx2Þ
dx
 d^fðx1Þ
dx
"
#
ð9:81Þ
where g _w is the velocity feedback gain,o0 is the natural
frequency associated with the mode, M is the modal
mass, LB is the length of the beam, b is the width of the
beam, hb is the thickness of the beam, c ¼ ðCBhBÞ=
ðCPZThBÞ is the effective stiffness ratio for a PZT wafer
thickness of hB, and d^fðx2Þ=dx  d^fðx1Þ=dx is the dif-
ference between the gradients of the strain mode shape at
the two ends ðx1; x2Þ of the PZT actuator. With the
speciﬁed actuator-to-beam length scale, the maximum
modal damping of a single mode is obtained for
maximum feedback gain as:
ðg _wÞ ¼ EmaxhPZT
o0^wmax
ð9:82Þ
where Emax is the saturation electric ﬁeld. Note that when
the feedback sensor is placed non-collocated with the
actuator, the sensor output signal will have a phase
difference with the modal strain at the actuator ends
and the effect can be destabilizing for a phase difference
of more that 180 . A similar consequence will also be
evident while controlling more than one mode using the
same conﬁguration. For example, while controlling the
second mode along with the ﬁrst mode, one has to
overcome the difﬁculty of almost zero average modal
strain around the strain node (point of zero modal strain)
at x ¼ 0:216LB. Two options are available to overcome
this difﬁculty. One is to use segmented actuators, where
one of the actuator located at x < 0:216LB must be driven
180  out of phase with a second actuator located at
x > 0:216LB. Obviously, control over further numbers of
modes means more strain nodes and hence further
numbers of segmented actuators. In addition, the possi-
bility of interaction between the controlled modes and
modal
spillover
for
multiple-segmented
actuators
becomes evident. This necessitates the requirement of
appropriate optimal control strategy. The second option
for multi-modal control is to use a single actuator at
the root of the cantilever beam with an optimal length of
the actuator and a frequency-weighted optimal gain
while using a non-collocated sensor. Direct feedback
from the control point of interest is found to be more
suitable when a large number of modes over a broad
frequency band are to be controlled. The fundamental
behavior of this non-collocated sensor–actuator conﬁg-
uration for LAC resembles that of the disturbance pro-
pagation in a structural network [21].
In the following numerical simulation, the sensitivity
of the PFC actuator length (actuator located at the
cantilever root) while using velocity feedback from the
sensor (located at the cantilever tip) is studied. The
conﬁguration is shown in Figure 9.9. The beam is of
length L ¼ 1 m and thickness ¼ 2 cm. An AS/3501-6
graphite–epoxy material with a play-stacking sequence
of ½00
5	=½900
5	 is considered. Assuming Euler–Bernoulli
z
x
Ia
xs
F(t)
L
PID controller
Point sensor
PFC actuator
Figure 9.9
Schematic of composite cantilever beam with a
surface-bonded PFC actuator and a non-collocated velocity
feedback sensor for broadband local control at the tip.
Active Control Techniques
251

beam kinematics, the coupled electromechanical wave
equation can be expressed as:
rA q2u0
qt2  A33
q2u0
qx2 þ B33
q3w
qx3 þ Aeff
33
qE3
qx ¼ 0
rA q2w
qt2  B33
q3u0
qx3 þ D33
q4w
qx4 þ Beff
33
q2E3
qx2 ¼ 0
ð9:83Þ
The associated force-boundary conditions are:
A33
qu0
qx  B33
q2w
qx2  Aeff
33 E3 ¼ Nx
B33
q2u0
qx2  D33
q3w
qx3  Aeff
33
qE3
qx ¼ Vx
B33
qu0
qx þ D33
q2w
qx2 þ Beff
33 E3 ¼ Mx
ð9:84Þ
In Equations (9.83) and (9.84), the mechanical stiffness
coefﬁcients Aij, Bij and Dij are deﬁned in Equation
(8.120) of Chapter 8 and the electromechanical stiffness
coefﬁcients Aeff
33 and Beff
33 are described in Equation (9.77).
One actuator element and one composite beam element
(with a point sensor in it) is used in the ASFEM.
The
beam
is
subjected
to
an
impact
loading
(Figure 9.2) in the transverse direction at the cantilever
tip. Note that under such loading, which is likely to
excite many higher-order modes, the control analysis
becomes challenging because of additional axial–ﬂexural
coupling due to the unsymmetric ply-stacking sequence.
Control of multiple spectral peaks in the frequency
response of the transverse tip displacement is considered
as the local control objective. If satisﬁed, this require-
ment will also ensure the stability of the close-loop
system. That is, all of the resonant modes will be damped
and hence the poles will be moved to the left-half of the
complex phase plane. In addition, the possibility of
modal truncation over a sufﬁciently large frequency
band can be eliminated. It is important to note that the
waves that will travel from the tip to the ﬁxed-end of the
beam will be of the same order of magnitude as the
incident impact. It is also necessary that the scattered
axial and ﬂexural waves from the ﬁxed end be suppressed.
This is also one of the reasons, apart from those discussed
in the context of Equations (9.81) and (9.82), why the PFC
actuator is placed adjacent to the ﬁxed end. The sensor is
assumed at x ¼ xs, which is considered near the tip for
direct velocity feedback to the actuator in advance. A non-
dimensional scalar feedback gain g is derived from the
feedback gain g (Equation (9.75) to perform parametric
study. These two quantities are related as g ¼ ðc0abÞg=E0,
where E0 is a reference AC voltage and c0 is the speed of
sound in air. An optimal closed-loop performance which
corresponds to La ¼ 0:25 m; xs ¼ 1:0 m (at the tip) and
g ¼ 3:4  106 is shown in Figure 9.10.
From Figure 9.10, which shows the locations of the
forced resonances and anti-resonances along the fre-
quency axis and the corresponding spectral amplitudes
of transverse displacement at the tip, it can be seen that
the conﬁguration is able to suppress most of the resonant
modes. Furthermore, we study the effects of parametric
variation on the amplitude level over the frequency range
of 20 kHz under consideration. First, it is assumed that
the feedback gain g chosen above is optimal and is not
sensitive to small variations in other parameters, such as
La and xs. La is slowly varied from 0.15 m to 0.35 m,
corresponding to velocity feedback from various sensor
locations xs
moving away from the cantilever tip
(Figure 9.9). The integral effect of the change in
With load actuator
Close-loop
–100
–120
–140
–160
–180
–200
–220
–240
–260
–280
–300 0
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency (kHz)
Transverse tip displacement
amptitude (dB)
12
14
16
18
20
Figure 9.10
Closed-loop transverse displacement at the canti-
lever tip under impulse excitation.
Figure 9.11
Performance of actuator and control point inter-
action by variation in total amplitude level of the transverse tip
response.
252
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

amplitude level of the closed-loop response (transverse
displacement at the tip) over the whole frequency range
is evaluated by using the control cost function:
Y
¼
X
N=2
n¼1
ð20:0Þ log10j^wðonÞ2
openj  log10j^wðonÞ2
closej
h
i
ð9:85Þ
In Figure 9.11, the sensitivity of Q is shown by a two-
dimensional solution space involving the actuator length
La and sensor location xs.
This plot conﬁrms the result of Figure 9.11 that one
optimum solution exists at ðxs=L ¼ 1:0; La=L ¼ 0:25Þ
and
yields
a
total
reduction
of
6.025 dB
in
Q.
Figure 9.11 also predicts that another solution exists at
ðxs=L ¼ 1:0; La=L ¼ 0:15Þ.
REFERENCES
1. K. Ogata, Mordern Control Engineering, 3rd Edn, Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA (1999).
2. B.C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, 4th Edn, Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA (1999).
3. A. Chakraborty, Wave Propagation in Anisotropic and
Inhomogeneous Structures, Ph.D. Thesis, Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore, India (2004).
4. H. Nyquist, ‘‘Regeneration theory’’, Bell Systems Technical
Journal, 11, 126–147 (1932).
5. J.G. Ziegler and N.B. Nichols, ‘‘Optimum settings for
automatic controllers’’, ASME Transactions, 64, 959–768
(1942).
6. R.J. Guyan, ‘‘Reduction of mass and stiffness matrices’’,
AIAA Journal, 3, 380 (1965).
7. V.N. Shah and M. Raymund, ‘‘Analytical selection of masters
for the reduced eigenvalue problem’’, International Journal of
Numerical Methods in Engineering, 18, 89–98 (1982).
8. M. Paz, ‘‘Dynamic condensation’’, AIAA Journal, 22,
724–727 (1984).
9. J. O’Callahan, ‘‘System equivalent reduction and expansion
process’’, in Proceedings of 7th International Modal analysis
conference, Society of Experimental Mechanics, Bethel, CT,
USA, 29–37 (1989).
10. W.M. To and D.J. Ewins, ‘‘The role of generalized inverse in
structural dynamics’’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 186,
185–195 (1995).
11. C.T. Dyka, R.P. Ingel and L.D. Flippen, ‘‘A new approach to
dynamic condensation for FEM’’, Computers and Struc-
tures, 6, 763–773 (1996).
12. J. O’Callahan, ‘‘A procedure for an Improved Reduced
System (IRS)’’, in Proceedings of 7th International Modal
analysis conference, Society of Experimental Mechanics,
Bethel, CT, USA, 17–21 (1989).
13. M.I. Friswell, S.D. Garvey and J.E.T. Penny, ‘‘Model
reduction using dynamic and iterated IRS techniques’’,
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 186, 311–323 (1995).
14. D.J. Leo and C.A. Smith, ‘‘Performance tradeoffs in
active–passive vibration isolation’’, in Proceedings of 11th
Symposium on Structural Dynamics and Control, 25–31
(1997).
15. E.H. Anderson and J.P. How, ‘‘Active vibration isolation using
adaptive feed forward control’’, 3, American Control Con-
ference, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, Paper I-97115B,
1783–1788 (1997).
16. A.A. Bent, Active Fiber Composites for Structural Actua-
tion, Ph.D. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
(Cambridge, MA, USA (1997).
17. N.W. Hagood, R. Kindel, K. Ghandi and P. Gudenzi, ‘‘Improv-
ing transverse actuation of piezoceramics using integrated
surface electrodes’’, SPIE, 1917, 1917–1925 (1993).
18. B.D.O.
Anderson
and
J.B.
Moore,
Optimal
Control,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA (1990).
19. J.L. Butler, Application manual for the design of Terfenol-D
magnetostrictive transducers. Technical Report TS 2003,
Edge Technologies, Inc., Ames Iowa, IA, USA (1988).
20. E.F. Crawley and J. Luis, ‘‘Use of piezoelectric actuators
as elements of intelligent structures’’, AIAA Journal, 25,
1373–1385 (1987).
21. D.W. Miller, S.R. Hall and A. von Flotow, ‘‘Optimal control
of power ﬂow in structural junctions’’, Journal of Sound and
Vibration, 140, 475–497 (1990).
Active Control Techniques
253

Part 4
Fabrication Methods and Applications
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

10
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
10.1 INTRODUCTION
The technology of micro electromechanical systems
(MEMS) spun off from developments in the integrated
circuit (IC) fabrication processes, enabling co-fabrication
of sensors, actuators and control functions on silicon
chips. Since then, remarkable research progress has been
achieved in MEMS areas under strong capital promotions
from both government and industry. In addition to several
applications
already
commercialized,
the
feasibility
of more complex MEMS devices have been proposed
in microﬂuidics, aerospace, biomedical ﬁelds, chemical
analysis, wireless communications, data storage, display,
optics, etc. [1,2]. These sensors and actuators could also
form the building blocks of several smart systems.
Micromachining is the fundamental technology for the
fabrication of micro electromechanical system (MEMS)
devices, in particular, miniaturized sensors and actuators
having dimensions in the sub-millimeter range. Silicon
micromachining is the most mature of the micromachining
technologies and has been a key factor for the tremendous
progress of MEMS within a short time. Micromachining
refers to the fashioning of microscopic mechanical parts
out of a silicon substrate or on a silicon substrate, making
the structures three-dimensional, thus bringing new ave-
nues to designers.
Silicon micromachining comprises two technologies:
bulk micromachining, in which structures are etched into
a silicon substrate, and surface micromachining in which
the micromechanical layers are formed from layers and
ﬁlms deposited on the surface. Yet another but less
common method, LIGA 3-D microfabrication, has been
used for the fabrication of high-aspect ratio and three-
dimensional microstructures for MEMS [3–5]. However,
three-dimensional microfabrication processes incorporat-
ing more material layers have been recently reported for
MEMS in some speciﬁc application areas (e.g. biomedi-
cal devices) and micro-actuators with higher output
powers [6–11]. Employing materials such as crystalline
silicon, polycrystalline silicon and silicon nitride, a
variety of mechanical microstructures including beams,
diaphragms, grooves, oriﬁces, springs, gears, suspensions
and numerous other complex mechanical structures have
been fabricated [12–16]. These processes are reviewed
brieﬂy in the subsequent sections of this chapter.
10.2 FABRICATION PROCESSES
FOR SILICON MEMS
Important steps in the fabrication of silicon-based MEMS
are as follows:
 Lithography
 Resists and mask formation
 Lift-off technique
 Etching techniques
 Wafer bonding
Hardly any MEMS device is fabricated without going
through all of these steps. Hence, a brief description of
these is provided in the following paragraphs.
10.2.1 Lithography
The patterning of geometries is an essential process step
in the fabrication of devices for microelectronics and
MEMS. The process of transferring a geometrical
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

pattern from a mask to the radiation-sensitive resist is
called lithography. Both additive and subtractive pro-
cesses are employed in the industry to deﬁne features
after transferring the pattern. In both cases, suitable
resists are ﬁrst spin-coated onto the wafer surface. The
wafer surface is then irradiated with the mask placed
above it. Depending on the choice of resist material and
mask (c.f. Section 10.2.2), part of the resists gets cured,
thereby affecting its solubility. Thus, the resist may be
used either to protect areas that need not be etched
(subtractive) or to protect areas that should not be
deposited on (additive). After etching or depositing,
the resist itself is removed by dissolving it in suitable
chemicals.
The mask is often made on glass or quartz with a
chrome pattern on areas where we intend the radiation to
be blocked from reaching the resist. Often, the mask
itself is made by (higher-precision) lithography. UV light
(e.g. from a high-pressure mercury lamp) is the most
common source of radiation.
Several types of lithographic tools are in use in the
industry. For example, contact aligners can be used to
interlock the mask and the wafer before the latter is being
exposed. Resolution of the order of 0.5 mm can be
obtained with this approach. Resolution is deﬁned as
the minimum feature size with good ﬁdelity that can be
transferred onto the resist ﬁlm coated on the wafer. The
radiation schemes employed depend on the desired
resolution; electromagnetic (UV or X-rays) or particulate
(electrons or ions) beams may be used for the irradiation.
Contact aligners with optical lithography use UV
radiation (0.2–0.4 mm wavelengths). The minimum line
width with this approach is 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
lg
p
, where l is the optical
wavelength used and g is the spacing between the mask
and the wafer. Since the mask covers the entire wafer, the
process involves single exposure. This technique results in
a feature size the same as that on the mask. An alternate
approach uses stepper technology to improve the resolu-
tion ( 0.25 mm) of features. In this case, the radiation is
passed through a focusing lens arrangement, after it
encounters the mask. Although the mask is simpler and
cleaner, the equipment cost far exceeds that with the
contact aligner.
Fresnel diffraction of the radiation beam at the edges
of the features on the mask is the limiting factor in the
resolution of the features obtained with lithography.
Signiﬁcant reduction in minimum feature size is there-
fore possible with electron beam lithography. The beam
from an electron source, typically of a 20 nm diameter
spot, is passed through electrostatic plates to direct onto
the wafer in vacuum. This technique, however, does not
use a mask, but instead relies on a ‘direct-write’ techni-
que. The steering and blanking (switching) of the beam is
controlled by a computer with the geometry loaded in a
computer-aided design (CAD) package. However, the
writing process is time-consuming (several hours per
wafer) and the equipment used is far more expensive
than other approaches.
Several new techniques are emerging for better reso-
lution, with a potential for mass production, especially
in the context of the increased thrust for nanotechnol-
ogy. Embossing lithography, also known as nano-
imprinting lithography, uses a mold made by the elec-
tron beam lithography to imprint the pattern onto a
substrate coated with a resist (e.g. PMMA). Metal lines
of 10 nm width have been reported based on this
approach [17]. By repeatedly using the mold, a higher
throughput is obtained at the cost of reduced resolution.
Scanning probe lithography is another high-resolution
method in which electrostatic discharge from the probe
tip is used as the stimulant to modify (e.g. by oxidizing)
the wafer surface, thereby creating a pattern on it [18].
10.2.2 Resists and mask formation
As mentioned previously, accurate fabrication of the
mask and selection of the proper resist material are
vital to the success of lithography. The mask-making
process is quite similar to lithography itself. The equip-
ment consists of a UV light source, an automated x–y
positioning stage and optical control and reduction units.
The positioning stage and the optical aperture are con-
trolled by a computer with a CAD package in which the
required mask geometry is loaded. For better resolution,
low-expansion glass or quartz is used as the substrate. An
optical blocking material, such as chromium or iron
oxide, is used to deﬁne the mask features.
Geometrical patterns are transferred to resists prior to
deposition or etching of substrates. Since optical radia-
tion is most often used, these materials are generally
called photoresists. These may be either positive or
negative resists – depending on how these respond to
the radiation. The processes of developing positive and
negative resists are compared in Figure 10.1. The positive
resists becomes soluble in a developer after being
exposed to radiation, leaving patterns on the substrate
the same as that on the mask. In contrast, when a negative
resist is exposed to radiation, it becomes less soluble to
the developer, thus leaving a pattern the reverse of that on
the mask. Some of the commercially positive and nega-
tive resists for various lithography approaches are listed
in Table 10.1.
258
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The resist is formed on the substrate by spin-coating.
By this process, a thin uniform ﬁlm is deposited on the
substrate. The clean wafer is placed on the wafer holder
of a spinner and is held tight by using vacuum. The resist
in the liquid form is dropped on the surface of the wafer.
The spinner motor is then operated at a speciﬁed speed
for good-quality ﬁlms. The wafer is dried and then baked
at the desired temperature after spin-coating the solution.
The baking step is required to strengthen the adhesion of
the resist to the wafer before further processing.
10.2.3 Lift-off technique
The lift-off technique is used to deﬁne a structural
geometry on a substrate. The process steps involved in
this are schematically shown in Figure 10.2. The resist is
spin-coated and then exposed to the radiation though a
mask. A thin ﬁlm of the desired material (e.g. a metal)
is then deposited on the top of this structure by any of
the processes described in Chapter 2. The resist can be
dissolved in an appropriate solution, which detaches
the ﬁlm on top of the resist as well. The primary criterion
for this lift-off process to be effective is that the thickness
of the deposited thin ﬁlm should be less than that of the
resist. Some of the features of the lift-off process of
patterning are:
 The ﬁlm thickness should be smaller than that of the
resist.
 High-resolution geometries can be produced.
 Discrete devices can be patterned.
Final image
Remove resist
Each material
Develop
Positive resist
Negative resist
Photomask
Photoresist
SiO2
Si substrate
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 10.1
Images formed using positive and negative resists
[19]. Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Table 10.1
Types of some commercially available
resists.
Resist type
Commercial name
Lithography
Positive
AZ-1350J
Optical
Positive
PR 102
Optical
Positive
Poly(methyl methacrylate)
E-beam and
X-ray
Negative
Kodak 747
Optical
Negative
Dichloropropyl acrylate
X-ray
and gylcidyl metha-
crylate-co-ethyl acrylate
Negative
Poly[(glycidyl metha-
E-beam and
crylate)-co-ethylacrylate]
X-ray
Substrate 
Resist 
(a)
Mask
Radiation
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 10.2
Steps involved in the lift-off process of patterning.
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
259

10.2.4 Etching techniques
Etching is the key technological step for bulk micro-
machining. The etch process employed in the microma-
chining of silicon comprises one or several of the
following techniques:
 Wet etching – isotropic/anisotropic
 Dry etching – plasma/reactive ion
These etch processes are standard technologies widely
employed in the microelectronics industries. Process
parameters that characterize etching are etch rate, etch
selectivity and etch uniformity. Etch rate is the thickness
of the material removed per unit time. Etch selectivity is
a measure of the effectiveness of the removal of
unwanted material without affecting other materials or
ﬁlms present on the wafer. This is often represented as
the ratio between the etch rate of the material to be
etched and other materials (such as an etch mask) on the
wafer. The performance of etchants used to remove some
of the common materials used in the microelectronics
and MEMS industries are listed in Table 10.2. Wet
etching is done by dipping the substrate into an etchant
bath or spraying it with etchants. Wet etching can be
either isotropic or anisotropic, depending on the structure
of the materials or the etchants used. If the material is
amorphous or polycrystalline, isotropic wet etching is
employed. During isotropic etching (Figure 10.3(a)), the
resist is always undercut, meaning that the deep etching
is not practical for MEMS. In this process, the etchant
used is an acid solution. Single-crystal silicon can be
anisotropically etched. The etching features are deter-
mined by the etching speed which is dependent on the
crystal’s orientation. The etching slows down signiﬁ-
cantly at the (111) planes of silicon, relative to other
planes. With the chosen wafers with different crystal
orientation,
different
features
can
be
achieved
(Figure 10.3 (b,c)). The most common etchants used
for the anisotropic etching of silicon include alkali
hydroxide etchants (KOH, NaOH, etc.), ammonium-
based solutions (NH4OH, TMAH ((CH3)4NOH), etc.)
and EDP (ethylene diamine, pyrocatechol and water).
These etchants have different etch rates in different
crystal orientations of silicon [13,20].
The etch process can be made selective by the use of
dopants (heavily doped regions etch slowly), or may even
be halted electrochemically (e.g. etching stops upon
encountering a region of different polarity in a biased
p–n junction). A region at which wet etching tends to slow
down or diminish is called an ‘etch-stop’. Methods that
make use of an etch-stop region include doping-selective
etching (DSE) and bias-dependent DSE [13,20,21].
Wet etching in many cases is done from the back side
of the wafer while plasma etching preferred for the front
side. Dry etching is done by chemical or physical
interaction between the ions in the gas and the atoms
of the substrate. The non-plasma, isotropic dry etching is
possible by using xenon diﬂuoride or mixture of inter-
halogen gases and provides very high selectivity for
aluminum, silicon dioxide, silicon nitride, photoresists,
etc. Common methods for dry etching of bulk silicon are
plasma etching and reactive ion etching, where the
external energy in the form of radio frequency (RF)
drives chemical reactions in low-pressure reaction cham-
bers. A wide variety of chloroﬂuorocarbon gases, sulfur
hexaﬂuoride, bromine compounds and oxygen are com-
monly used as reactants. The anisotropic dry etching
processes are widely used in MEMS because of the
geometry ﬂexibility and sometimes less chemical con-
tamination than in wet etching. Arbitrarily oriented
features etched deep into silicon by using anisotropic
dry etching are shown in Figure 10.3 (f). Very deep
silicon microstructures can be obtained by the deep RIE
(DRIE) dry etching process [14]. During plasma etching,
radicals react chemically with the wafer and selectively
remove the material. Diluents such as inert gases are
introduced into the chamber to maintain the reaction rate.
Increasing RF power helps increase ionization, but may
affect wafer uniformity and selectivity at very high levels
of power. Corrosion, reproducibility, sidewall proﬁle and
loss of critical dimensions are issues to be addressed
while evaluating and optimizing etching.
Table 10.2
Wet etchants used in etching selected
electronic materials.
Material
Composition of the etchant
Etch rate
(mm/min)
Si
HF (3 ml) þ HNO3 (5 ml)
35
GaAs
H2SO4 (8 ml) þ H2O2 (1 ml) þ
8
H2O (1 ml)
SiO2
HF (28 ml) þ H2O (170 ml) þ
0.1
NH4F (113 g)
HF (15 ml) þ HNO3 (10 ml) þ
0.012
H2O (300 ml)
Si3N4
Buffered HF
0.005
H3PO4
0.01
Al
HNO3 (1 ml) þ CH3COOH
0.035
(4 ml) þ H3PO4 þ H2O (1 ml)
Au
KI (4 g) þ I2 (1 g) þ H2O (40 ml)
10
260
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

10.2.5 Wafer bonding for MEMS
As silicon micromachining has limitations in forming
complex three-dimensional microstructures in a mono-
lithic format, multi-chip structures have been proposed
for advanced MEMS, where wafer-to-wafer bonding is
critical in the formation [23]. Wafer bonding of silicon
for MEMS can be categorized into three major types:
anodic bonding, intermediate-layer assisted bonding and
direct bonding.
10.2.5.1 Anodic bonding
Anodic bonding is typically done between a sodium glass
and silicon for MEMS. For anodic bonding, a cathode
and an anode are attached to the glass (or silicon with a
thin coating glass) and silicon wafer (Figure 10.4),
respectively – the voltages applied range from 200 to
1000 V. At the same time, the anode is put on a heater to
provide the bonding temperature of 180–500 C. During
the bonding, oxygen ions from the glass migrate into the
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
54.74°
SiO2 mask
ISOTROPIC WET ETCHING: AGITATION
ISOTROPIC WET ETCHING: NO AGITATION
ANISOTROPIC WET ETCHING: (100) SURFACE
ANISOTROPIC WET ETCHING: (100) SURFACE
(100) Surface orientation
(100) Surface orientation
(100) Surface orientation
(110) Surface orientation
(111)
(111)
(111)
Concave
corner
Convex
corner
Canliver
beam
Top view
Top view
Side view
Side view
(111)
Masking
film
Masking
film
Buried etchstop
layer
Dilectric
layer
Diffusion
mask
Diffusion
boron
Dopant-
selective
itch
Released
structure
Etched
feature
(a)
(b)
(c)
(f)
(e)
(d)
Figure 10.3
Silicon etching by various methods: (a) isotropic etching; (b) anisotropic etching; (c) anisotropic etching with buried
‘etch-stop’ layer; (d) dielectric membrane released by ‘back side’ bulk etching; (e) dopant-dependant wet etching; (f) anisotropic dry
etching [22]. G.T.A. Kovacs, N.I. Maluf, K.E. Petersen, Bulk micromachining of silicon, Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, No. 8, # 1998 IEEE
Anode 
Cathode 
Glass
Silicon
V
+
–
Figure 10.4
Schematic of the process of anodic bonding.
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
261

silicon, resulting in the formation of a silicon dioxide
layer between the silicon wafer and glass wafer to form a
strong and hermetic chemical bond. The advantage of
anodic bonding for MEMS is that the low temperatures
used can ensure the metallization layers (e.g. aluminum)
could withstand this temperature without degradation.
This technique is also called ﬁeld-assisted thermal bond-
ing or electrostatic bonding. Anodic bonding is also used
to seal two silicon wafers together by using a thin
sputter-deposited glass layer. The equipment used in
this case is basically a heat chuck element with an
electrode capable of supplying a high voltage across
the structure to be bonded. The system automatically
controls the temperature and power supply during the
bonding process. In this process, after surface cleaning
and polishing, one of the wafers (referred to here as the
top wafer) is coated with a few-microns-thick glass ﬁlm
(usually by sputtering). The top wafer is placed on top of
a second silicon wafer (referred to as the support wafer)
for these two wafers to be bonded. The support wafer
rests on an aluminum chuck. The two wafers are usually
sealed together at temperatures less than 400 C with an
electrostatic DC voltage of 50 to 200 V. The negative
electrode is connected to the top wafer. The voltage
should be applied over a sufﬁciently long time (10 to
20 min) to allow the current to reach a minimum steady-
state level. This bond process usually takes place in air at
atmospheric pressure.
10.2.5.2 Direct bonding
Direct bonding is based on a chemical reaction between
the OH groups present at the surface of native silicon or
grown oxides covering the wafers [24]. Direct bonding is
also called silicon fusion bonding, since it is used for
silicon–silicon fusion bonding. This process is usually
done is three steps: surface preparation, contacting and
thermal annealing.
The surface-preparation step involves cleaning the
surfaces of the two wafers to form a hydrate surface.
The wafer surface should be ‘mirror-smooth’, the rough-
ness should be no greater than 10 A

, and the bow of a 400
wafer should be less than 5 mm to achieve the necessary
ﬂatness [23]. Following this preparation, the wafers are
aligned and contacted in a clean-room environment by
gently pressing the two wafers at the surface central
point. The surface attraction of the two hydrated surfaces
creates an intimate contact over the entire wafer surfaces.
At room temperature, these wafers adhere via hydrogen
bridge bonds of chemisorbed water molecules that
subsequently react during the annealing process to form
Si–O–Si bonds. Consequently, wafer pre-treatment pro-
cedures such as hydrophilization steps (wet-cleaning
processes, plasma hydrophilization) assist the bonding
process. The ﬁnal step in direct bonding is to anneal the
bonding from room temperature to 1200 C. This anneal
process increases the bond strength by more than one
order of magnitude at a temperature as high as 800–
1200 C. However, high-temperature annealing is not
allowed for the metallized wafers. The direct bonding
prevails in the high-strength bonding and the devices’
dimensions design could be scaled down if direct bond-
ing approaches other than anodic bonding are used.
In the last decade, several groups [25–27] have demon-
strated that the fusion of hydrophilic silicon wafers is
possible for obtaining silicon-on-insulator (SOI) materials.
Since then, wafer-bonding techniques have found various
applications in the ﬁeld of microelectronics such as in
static random access memories (SRAMs), CMOS and
power devices. For micromechanical applications, fusion
bonding has rendered possible the fabrication of complex
structures by combining two or more patterned wafers.
According to the reaction mechanism, annealing at
temperatures above 1000 C for several hours should
result in an almost complete reaction of the interface.
Annealing at 1000 C for about 2 h would give a sufﬁ-
ciently high bond strength for all subsequent treatments
[28]. It is not possible to separate the two bonded Si
wafers without breaking the silicon. Although high-
temperature annealing increases the strength of the
bond, this step (usually if the temperature is above
800 C) may introduce problems, such as doping proﬁle
broadening, thermal stresses, defect generation and con-
tamination. Annealing also prevents the use of bonding
technology for compound semiconductor materials since
their dissociation temperatures are often low. In addition,
post-metallization bonding also requires bonding tem-
peratures that are less than  450 C since most of the
common metals used in device fabrication melt below
this temperature. Therefore, in order to make full use of
the potential provided by wafer bonding for microstruc-
tures, low-temperature bonding methods have to be
developed. To summarize, three ranges of annealing
temperature are of interest in wafer bonding:
 < 450 C – for post-metallization wafers.
 > 800 C – for wafers with diffusion dopant layers
(e.g. pþ etch-stop layers).
 > 1000 C – for wafer bonding before processing.
A major concern of all bonding processes is the presence
of non-contacting areas which are generally called voids.
262
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Voids are mainly caused by particles, organic residues,
surface defects and inadequate ‘mating’. Therefore, both
the surfaces being fusion-bonded have to be perfectly
smooth and clean since the smallest of particles could
cause large voids. Optimized processing includes wafer
surface inspection, surface pre-treatment (hydrophiliza-
tion, cleaning), and mechanically controlled, aligned
mating in a particle-free environment.
10.2.5.3 Intermediate layer assisted bonding
This type of bonding for MEMS requires an intermediate
layer, which can be metal, polymer, solders, glasses, etc.,
to fulﬁll the bonding between wafers [23]. One of the
earliest wafer bonding – eutectic bonding – utilized Au
as the intermediate layer for Si–Si bonding in a pressure
sensor [29]. The Au–Si eutectic bonding takes place at
363 C, well below the critical temperature of the metal-
lized Al layer. However, the stress generated during
bonding was found signiﬁcant and introduced ‘sensor
drift’ [29].
The use of polymers as intermediate layers for bond-
ing requires very low temperatures and results in reason-
ably high strength and low stress due to the low-elasticity
polymers. Usually, UV photoresists such as polyimide,
AZ-4000, SU-8, PMMA and other UV-curable cross-
linked polymers can be used for this purpose [24]. The
major disadvantage of this approach is that the device
bonded with polymer may not have the performance of
hermetic sealing.
Glasses with low melting temperatures as intermedi-
ate layers for the bonding has also been demonstrated,
where a layer of glass frit is usually deposited onto the
silicon wafer. The ﬂatness of the deposited frit layer is
critical to obtaining uniform, strong, low-stress bond-
ing. A screen-printed glass frit has been used to bond a
pressure sensor [29].
10.2.5.4 Bonding of silicon-based materials
Fusion bonding of polysilicon, silicon dioxide or silicon
nitride to silicon proceeds in a manner similar to silicon-
to-silicon bonding. For examples, to bond polysilicon to
silicon, a polishing step for the two surfaces to be bonded
is necessary to produce two smooth defect-free surfaces.
The bonding mechanism is mostly identical to silicon-
to-silicon fusion bonding in that in both cases Si–OH
groups are present at the surface. Thus, the pre-treatment
(hydrophilization) and annealing conditions are also
similar. Because of the dissimilar mechanical character-
istics of the different bonded materials, the yield of void-
free wafers can be signiﬁcantly reduced by ‘wafer bow’
or defects caused by stress during thermal treatment.
Bonding of wafers covered with a thin thermal oxide or a
thin silicon nitride results in homogenous-bonded wafers,
while wafers with thicker oxide or nitride ﬁlms generally
developed voids [30].
10.3 DEPOSITION TECHNIQUES FOR THIN
FILMS IN MEMS
Deposition and etching of thin ﬁlms facilitates ‘quasi-
3D’ structures based on planar processing techniques
commonly used in the semiconductor industry. Solid
thin ﬁlms can be deposited from liquid, plasma, gas or
the solid state. The deposition process is usually followed
by thermal processing for achieving desired material
properties and substrate adhesion. Some of the materials
used in MEMS and microelectronics are Si, Al, Au, Ti,
W, Cu, Cr, O, N and Ni–Fe alloys. Some materials are
used in MEMS and not in microelectronics applications,
i.e. Zr, Ta, Ir, C, Pt, Pd, Ag, Zn and Nb. A large number of
distinct material systems are usually required in sensors
and biomedical devices. The quality of the deposited ﬁlm
is evaluated by ascertaining the grain size, ﬁlm composi-
tion, thickness, uniformity, step-coverage, adhesion and
corrosion resistance.
Many different kinds of thin ﬁlms are used in the
fabrication of MEMS:
(1) Metallization of thin ﬁlms.
(2) Thermal deposition of silicon dioxide.
(3) Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) for dielectric
layers.
(4) CVD of polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si).
(5) Deposition of ceramic thin ﬁlms.
Metal ﬁlms are used to form low-resistance ohmic
connections both to heavily doped nþ=pþ regions and
poly-Si layers and rectifying (non-ohmic) contacts in
metal–semiconductor
barriers.
The
dielectric
layers
include silicon dioxide (referred to as ‘oxide’) and silicon
nitride. These dielectrics are used for insulation between
conducting layers, for diffusion and ion-implantation
masks and for passivation to protect devices from impu-
rities, moisture and scratches. Poly-Si is used as a gate
electrode in metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) devices,
as a conductive material for multilevel metallization and
as a contact material for devices with shallow junctions.
In addition, several smart system applications require
deposition of ceramic thin ﬁlm materials.
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
263

10.3.1 Metallization techniques
Metallization is a process whereby metal ﬁlms are
formed on the surface of a substrate. These metallic
ﬁlms are used for interconnections and ohmic contacts,
apart from structures. Hence their continuity, uniformity
and surface properties are critical in the device perfor-
mance. Metal ﬁlms can be formed by using various
methods, the most important being physical vapor
deposition (PVD). PVD is performed under vacuum
using evaporation or sputtering techniques. In these,
physical mechanisms such as evaporation or impact are
used as the means of deposition. In contrast, in chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) methods, a chemical reaction is
taking place under favorable conditions.
10.3.1.1 Evaporation
An evaporation system consists of a vacuum chamber,
pump, wafer holder, crucible and a shutter, as shown in
Figure 10.5. The source metal to be deposited is placed in
an inert crucible, and the chamber is evacuated to a pressure
of 106–107 torr. The crucible is heated using a tungsten
ﬁlament or an electron beam to ‘ﬂash-evaporate’ the metal
from the crucible and condense onto the cold substrate. The
ﬁlm thickness is determined by the length of time that the
shutter is opened and can be measured using a QMB-based
ﬁlm thickness monitor. The evaporation rate is a function of
the vapor pressure of the metal. Hence, metals that have a
low melting point (e.g. 660 C for aluminum) are easily
evaporated, whereas refractory metals require much higher
temperatures (e.g. 3422 C for tungsten) and can cause
damage to polymeric or plastic samples. In general, evapo-
rated ﬁlms are highly disordered and have large residual
stresses; thus, only thin layers of the metal can be evapo-
rated. The chemical purity of the evaporated ﬁlms depends
on the level of impurities in the source, contamination of
the source from the heater, crucible or support materials, or
due to residual gases within the chamber [31]. In addition,
this deposition process is relatively slow.
For depositing metal alloys, the constituents are eva-
porated independently of one another. The deposited ﬁlm
has atoms that are less tightly bound than inorganic
compounds [31]. Sources of individual metals are often
kept at different temperatures.
10.3.1.2 Sputtering
Sputtering is a physical phenomenon involving the accel-
eration of ions via a potential gradient and the bombard-
ment of a ‘target’ or cathode. Through momentum
transfer, atoms near the surface of the target metal
become volatile and are transported as a vapor to a
substrate. A ﬁlm grows at the surface of the substrate
via deposition. Figure 10.6 shows a typical sputtering
system comprising a vacuum chamber, a sputtering target
Figure 10.5
Schematic of a thermal expansion unit for depos-
iting metals and other materials.
+
+
+
+
Anode
Substrate
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
–
Cathode
(target)
Primary
electron
Accelerated
ion
Sputtered
atom
Figure 10.6
Schematic of sputtering unit for depositing
materials.
264
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

of the desired ﬁlm, a substrate holder and a high-voltage
DC or RF power supply. After evacuating the chamber
down to a pressure of 106–108 torr, an inert gas such as
helium is introduced into the chamber at a few mtorr of
pressure. Plasma of the inert gas is then formed. The
energetic ions of the plasma bombard the surface of the
target. The energy of the bombarding ions ( keV) is
sufﬁcient to make some of the target atoms escape from
the surface. Some of these atoms land on the sample
surface and form a thin ﬁlm. Sputtered ﬁlms tend to have
better uniformity than evaporated ones, and the high-
energy plasma overcomes the temperature limitations of
evaporation.
Most elements from the Periodic Table can be sput-
tered, as well as inorganic and organic compounds.
Refractory materials can be sputtered with ease. In
addition, materials from more than one target can be
sputtered at the same time. This process is referred to as
‘co-sputtering’ and can be used to form compound thin
ﬁlms on the substrate. The sputtering process can, how-
ever, be used to deposit ﬁlms with the same stoichio-
metric composition as the source, and hence allows the
utilization of alloys as targets [31]. Sputtered thin ﬁlms
have better adhesion to the substrate and many more
grain orientations than evaporated ﬁlms.
The structure of sputtered ﬁlms is mainly amorphous,
and their stress and mechanical properties are sensitive to
speciﬁc sputtering conditions. Some atoms of an inert gas
can be trapped in the ﬁlm, causing anomalies in its
mechanical and structural characteristics. Therefore, the
exact properties of a thin ﬁlm vary according to the
precise conditions under which it was made. The deposi-
tion rate is proportional to the square of current density
and inversely proportional to the spacing between the
electrodes.
10.3.1.3 Metallo-organic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD)
Metallo-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) is a
relatively low temperature (200–800 C) process for the
epitaxial growth of metals on semiconductor substrates.
Metallo-organics are compounds where each atom of the
element is bound to one or many carbon atoms of
hydrocarbon groups. For precise control of the deposition,
high-purity materials and most accurate controls are
necessary [32]. However, due to the high cost, this
approach is used only where high-quality metal ﬁlms are
required. A summary of the MOCVD reaction parameters
for depositing various metals are given in Table 10.3.
10.3.2 Thermal oxidation for silicon dioxide
Thermal oxidation is the method by which a thin ﬁlm of
SiO2 is grown on a silicon wafer. This is a key method in
modern IC technology. The basic thermal oxidation
apparatus is shown in Figure 10.7. This comprises a
resistance-heated furnace, a cylindrical fused-quartz tube
containing the silicon wafers held vertically in a slotted-
quartz boat and a source of either pure, dry oxygen or
pure water vapor. The loading end of the furnace tube
protrudes into a vertical ﬂow hood where a ﬁltered ﬂow
of air is maintained. The hood reduces dust in the air
surrounding the wafers and minimizes contamination
during wafer loading.
The thermal oxidation of silicon in oxygen or water
vapor can be described by the following two chemical
reactions:
SiðsolidÞ þ O2ðgasÞ 
  


 
 

!
9001200C SiO2ðsolidÞ
ð10:1Þ
Table 10.3
Reactants and reaction conditions for
MOCVD of various metals (adapted from Pierson [32]).
Metal
Reactant
Conditions
Al
Trimethyl aluminum
200–300 C,
Triethyl aluminum
1 atm
Tri-isobutyl aluminum
Demethyl aluminum hydride
Au
Dimethyl-1,2,4-pentadionate gold
—
Dimethyl-(1,1,1-triﬂuoro-2,4-
pentadionate) gold
Dimethyl-(1,1,1,5,5,5 hexaﬂuoro-
2,4-pentadionate) gold
Cd
Dimethyl cadmium
10 Torr
Cr
Dicumene chromium
320–545 C
Cu
Copper acetylacetonate
260–340 C
Copper hexaﬂuoroacetylacetonate
200 C
Ni
Nickel alkyl
200 C in H2
Nickel chelate
250 C
Pt
Platinum hexaﬂuoro-2,4-
200–300 C
pentadio nate
in H2
Tetrakistriﬂuorophosphine
Rh
Rhodium acetylacetonate
250 C, 1 atm
Rhodium triﬂuoroacetylacetonate
400 C,1 atm
Sn
Tetramethyl tin
500–600 C
Triethyl tin
Ti
Tris(2,20bipyridene) titanium
< 600 C
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
265

and:
SiðsolidÞ þ 2H2OðgasÞ 
  


 
 

!
9001200C SiO2ðsolidÞ
þ 2H2ðgasÞ
ð10:2Þ
Using the densities and molecular weights of silicon and
silicon dioxide, it can be shown that by consuming an ‘x-
thick’ layer of silicon, a ‘2.27x’ thick oxide layer can be
grown.
10.3.3 CVD of dielectrics
Three methods based on chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) are commonly used to form a dielectric thin
ﬁlm, such as silicon dioxide or silicon nitride, on a
substrate. These are:
(1) Atmospheric-pressure
chemical
vapor
deposition
(APCVD).
(2) Low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD).
(3) Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).
The appropriate method from among these three deposi-
tion methods is based on the substrate temperature, the
deposition rate and ﬁlm uniformity, the morphology, the
electrical and mechanical properties and the chemical
composition of the dielectric ﬁlms.
Schematics
of two CVD systems (LPCVD
and
PECVD) are shown in Figure 10.8. In Figure 10.8(a),
the quartz tube is heated by a three-zone furnace and gas
is introduced at one end of the reactor and pumped out at
the opposite end. The substrate wafers are held vertically
in a slotted quartz boat. The type of LPCVD reactor
shown in Figure 10.8(a) is a ‘hot-wall’ LPCVD reactor
where the quartz tube wall is heated by the furnace, in
contrast to a ‘cold-wall’ LPCVD, such as the horizontal
epitaxial reactor that uses radio frequency (RF) heating.
Usually, the reaction-chamber LPCVD process para-
meters are in the following ranges:
 Pressure – 0.2–2.0 torr
 Gas ﬂow – 1–10 cm3/s
 Temperature – 300–900 C
Figure 10.8(b) shows two views of a parallel-plate,
radial-ﬂow PECVD reactor that comprises a vacuum-
sealed cylindrical glass chamber. Two parallel aluminum
plates are mounted in the chamber with an RF voltage
applied to the upper plate while the lower plate is
grounded. The RF voltage causes a plasma discharge
between the plates (electrodes). Wafers are placed in the
lower electrode, which is heated between 100 and 400 C
by resistance heaters. Process gas ﬂows through the
discharge from outlets located along the circumference
of the lower electrode.
CVD is used extensively in depositing SiO2, silicon
nitride (Si3N4) and polysilicon. The CVD of SiO2 does
not replace thermally grown SiO2 which has superior
electrical and mechanical properties to CVD oxide.
However, CVD oxides are used, instead, to complement
thermal oxides and in many cases to form oxide layers
that grow much thicker in relatively very short times than
thermal oxides. SiO2 can be deposited by CVD by
several methods. It can be deposited from reacting silane
and oxygen in an LPCVD reactor at 300 to 500 C
where:
SiH4 þ O2 !
500 C
SiO2 þ 2H2
ð10:3Þ
SiO2 can also be deposited by LPCVD by decomposing
tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) (Si(OC2H5)4). TEOS is
vaporized from a liquid source. Alternatively, dichloro-
silane can be used as follows:
SiCl2H2 þ 2H2O !
900 C
SiO2 þ 2H2 þ 2HCl
ð10:4Þ
Likewise, Si3N4 can be deposited by LPCVD by an
intermediate-temperature process or a low-temperature
PECVD process. In the LPCVD process, which is the
more common process, dichlorosilane and ammonia
react according to the reaction:
3SiCl2H2 þ 4NH3 !
800 C Si3N4 þ 6HCl þ 6H2 ð10:5Þ
Figure 10.7
Schematic of the furnace used for thermal oxida-
tion of silicon wafers.
266
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

3–Zone furanace
3–Zone furanace
Pressure sensor
Wafers
Pump
Gas inlet
Load door
(a)
Figure 10.8
(a) Typical layout of (a) an LPCVD reactor; (b) two views of a PECVD reactor.
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
267

10.3.4 Polysilicon ﬁlm deposition
Polysilicon comprises small crystallites of single-crystal
silicon, separated by grain boundaries. Polysilicon is often
used as a structural material in MEMS. It is also used in
MEMS and microelectronics for electrode formation and
as a conductor or high-value resistor, depending on its
doping level (must be highly doped to increase conduc-
tivity). Polysilicon is commonly used for MOSFET gate
electrodes since it can form an ohmic contact with Si, its
resistivity can be made up to 500–525 m cm by doping,
and it is easy to pattern.
A low-pressure reactor, such as the one shown in
Figure 10.8(a), operated at a temperature of between
600 and 650 C, is used to deposit polysilicon by pyr-
olyzing silane according to the following reaction:
SiH4 !
600 C
Si þ 2H2
ð10:6Þ
Most common low-pressure processes used for polysili-
con deposition operate at pressures between 0.2 and 1.0
torr using 100 % silane.
10.3.5 Deposition of ceramic thin ﬁlms
Ceramics are another major class of materials widely used
for silicon-based MEMS. These materials generally have
better hardness and high-temperature strength. Both crys-
talline as well as non-crystalline materials are used in the
context of MEMS. Examples of ceramic-based MEMS
include ceramic pressure microsensors for high-tempera-
ture pressure measurement [33] and silicon carbide
MEMS for harsh environments [34]. In addition to these
structural ceramics, functional ceramics such as ZnO, BST
and PZT have also been incorporated into MEMS.
Ceramic thin ﬁlms have been fabricated by conven-
tional methods, such as RF sputtering [35], laser ablation
[36], MOCVD [37] and hydrothermal processes [37].
Even though sputtering is widely used for the deposition
of thin ﬁlms, it has the potential for ﬁlm degradation by
neutral and negative-ion bombardment during its growth.
This ‘re-sputtering’ can lead to ‘off-stoichiometric’ ﬁlms
and degradation of electrical properties.
Figure 10.9 illustrates the inverted cylindrical magne-
tron (ICM) RF sputtering gun set-up [38]. This consists
of a water-cooled copper cathode which houses a cylind-
rical target material surrounded by a ring magnet con-
centric with the target. A stainless steel thermal shield is
mounted to shield the magnet from the thermal radiation
coming from the heated table. The anode is recessed in
the hollow-cathode space. It aids in collecting electrons
and negative ions minimizing ‘re-sputtering’ the growing
ﬁlm. Outside the deposition chamber, a copper ground
wire is attached between the anode and the stainless steel
chamber. A DC bias voltage could be applied to the
anode to alter the plasma characteristics in the cathode/
anode space. The sputter gas enters the cathode region
through the space surrounding the table.
Using the above set-up, Cukauskas et al. [38] were able
to deposit BST ﬁlms at temperatures ranging from 550 to
800 C. The substrate temperature was maintained by two
quartz lamps, a type-K thermocouple and a temperature
controller. The ﬁlms were deposited at 135 W to a ﬁlm
thickness of 7000 A

. The ﬁlms were cooled to room
temperature in 1 atm of oxygen before removing them
from the deposition unit. This was then followed by
annealing the ﬁlms in 1 atm of ﬂowing oxygen at a
temperature of 780 C for 8 h in a tube furnace.
10.4 BULK MICROMACHINING
FOR SILICON-BASED MEMS
Starting in the early 1960s, bulk micromachining has
since matured as the principal silicon micromachining
technology. Bulk micromachining is employed to fabri-
cate the majority of commercial devices available today.
The term ‘bulk micromachining’ arises from the fact that
this type of micromachining is used to realize micro-
mechanical structures within the bulk of a single-crystal
silicon wafer by selectively removing the wafer material.
The microstructures fabricated using bulk micromachin-
ing may have thicknesses ranging from sub-microns to
the full thickness of a wafer (usually 200 to 500 mm), and
lateral dimensions ranging from microns to the full
diameter of a wafer (usually 75 to 200 mm).
For bulk-micromachined silicon microstructures, a
wafer-bonding technique is necessary for the assembled
Anode
Thermal
shield
Shutter
Table with
quartz lamps
(Ts ≤ 850°C)
Ba0.5 Sr0.5 TiO3
Magnet
Substrate
holder
Thermocouple
Cr–Al
Figure 10.9
Schematic of an ICM sputter gun [38].
268
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

MEMS devices. The bulk micromachining technique
allows us to selectively remove signiﬁcant amounts of
silicon from a substrate to form membranes on one side
of a wafer, a variety of trenches, holes or other structures
(Figure 10.3). In recent years, a vertical-walled bulk
micromachining techniques known as single crystal
reactive etching and metallization (SCREAM) which is
a combination of anisotropic and isotropic plasma etch-
ing, is used [29].
The construction of any complicated mechanical device
requires not only the machining of individual components
but also the assembly of the components to form a
complete set. In micromachining, bonding techniques
are used to assemble individually micromachined parts
to form a complete structure. For example, wafer bonding,
when used in conjunction with micromachining techni-
ques, allows the fabrication of 3-dimensional structures
that are thicker than a single wafer. Several processes have
been developed for bonding silicon wafers. The most
common bonding process is fusion bonding. These tech-
niques are described in Section 10.2.5. In the following
sections, we will describe the commonly used bulk micro-
machining processes.
10.4.1 Wet etching for bulk micromachining
Wet chemical etching is widely used in semiconductor
processing. It is used for lapping and polishing to give an
optically ﬂat and damage-free surface and to remove
contamination that results from wafer handling and
storing. Most importantly, it is used in the fabrication
of discrete devices and integrated circuits of relatively
large dimensions to delineate patterns and to open
windows in insulating materials. It is to be noted that
most of the wet etching processes are isotropic. That is,
etch rate is unaffected by crystallographic orientation.
However, some wet etchants are orientation depen-
dant, i.e. have the property of dissolving a given crystal
plane of a semiconductor much faster than other planes
(see Table 10.4). In diamond and zinc blende lattices, the
(111) plane is more closely packed than the (100) plane
and, hence, for any given etchant the etch rate is expected
to be slower.
A commonly chemical used orientation-dependent
etchant for silicon consists of a mixture of KOH in
water and isopropyl alcohol. The etch rate is about
2.1 mm/min for the (110) plane, 1.4 mm/min for the
(100) plane and only 0.003 mm/min for the (111) plane
at 80 C; therefore, the ratio of the etch rates for the (100)
and (110) planes to the (111) plane are very high, at
400:1 and 600:1, respectively.
10.4.2 Etch-stop techniques
Properties that make etchants indispensable to the micro-
machining of three-dimensional structures are their
selectivity and directionality. As etching processes in
polar solvents are fundamentally charge-transport phe-
nomena, the etch rate will depend on the type of dopant
and its concentration, and an external bias. Etch pro-
cesses can therefore be made selective by the use of
dopants – heavily doped regions etch slower or are halted
electrochemically when observing the sudden rise in
current through an etched n–p junction.
A region at which wet (or dry) etching tends to slow
down (or halt) is called an ‘etch stop’. There are several
ways in which an etch-stop region can be created. In the
following paragraphs, we discuss such methods by which
etch selectivity is achieved.
In the electrochemical etching of silicon, a voltage is
applied between the silicon wafer (anode) and a counter-
electrode (cathode) in the etching solution. The funda-
mental steps of the etching mechanism are:
(1) Injection of holes into the semiconductor to raise it to
a higher oxidation state, Siþ.
(2) Attachment of negatively charged hydroxyl groups
(OH) to positively charged Si.
(3) Reaction of the hydrated silicon with the complexing
agent in the solution.
(4) Dissolution of the reaction products into the etchant
solution.
The conventional electrochemical etch-stop technique is
an attractive method for fabricating microsensors and
Table 10.4
Anisotropic etching characteristics of
different wet etchants for single-crystalline silicon.
Reprinted from Applied Surface Science, vol. 164,
R.K. Kupka, F. Bouamrane, C. Cremers, and
S. Megtert, Microfabrication: LIGA-X and
applications, pp. 97–110, Copyright 2000, with
permission from Elsevier
Etchant
Temperature (C)
Etch rate (mm/h)
Si (100) Si (110) Si (111)
KOH:H2O
80
84
126
0.21
KOH
75
25–42
39–66
0.5
EDP
110
51
57
1.25
N2H4H2O
118
176
99
11
NH4OH
75
24
8
1
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
269

micro-actuators since it has the potential for allowing
reproducible fabrication of moderately doped n-type
silicon microstructures with good thickness control.
However, a major limiting factor in the use of this
process is the effect of a reverse-bias leakage current in
the junction. Since the selectivity between n-type and
p-type silicons in this process is achieved through the
current-blocking action of the diode, any leakage in this
diode will affect the selectivity. In particular, if the
leakage current is very large, it is possible for etching
to terminate well before the junction is reached. In some
situations, the etching process may fail completely
because of this leakage. This effect is well known, and
alternative biasing schemes employing three (or four)
electrodes have been proposed to minimize this problem.
Alternately, dopant-selective techniques that use pulsed
anodizing voltages applied to silicon samples immersed
in etching solutions can be used [39].
In bias-dependent etching, oxidation is promoted by a
positive voltage applied to the silicon wafer, which causes
an accumulation of holes at the Si–solution interface.
Under these conditions, oxidation at the surface proceeds
rapidly while the oxide is readily dissolved by the solu-
tion. Holes, such as Hþ ions, are transported to the cathode
and are released as hydrogen (gas). Excess hole–electron
pairs can, in addition, be created at the silicon surface, e.g.
by optical excitation, to increase the etch rate.
Silicon membranes are generally fabricated using the
etch-stop phenomenon of a thin, heavily boron-doped layer,
which can be epitaxially grown or formed by the diffusion
or implantation of boron into a lightly doped substrate. This
stopping effect is a general property of basic etching
solutions such as KOH, NaOH, ethylene diamine pyroca-
techol (EDP) and hydrazine (see Table 10.5). Due to the
heavy
boron-doping,
the
lattice
constant
of
silicon
decreases slightly. This leads to highly strained membranes
that often show slip planes. They are, however, taut and
fairly rugged, even at a few micron thickness and  1cm
diameter. The technique, however, is not suited to stress-
sensitive microstructures as this could lead to the movement
of structures without an external load.
The main beneﬁts of the high-boron etch stop are the
independence of crystal orientation, the smooth surface
ﬁnish and the possibilities it offers for fabricating
released structures with an arbitrary lateral geometry
in a single etch step. On the other hand, the high levels
of boron required are known to introduce considerable
mechanical stress into the material, which may cause
buckling or even fracture in a diaphragm or other
‘double-clamped’ structures. Moreover, the introduction
of electrical components for sensing purposes into these
microstructures, such as the implantation of piezoresis-
tors, is inhibited by the excessive background doping.
The latter consideration constitutes an important limita-
tion to the applicability of the high-boron-dose etch
stop.
The pulsed potential anodization technique is used to
selectively etch n-type silicon [39]. The difference in the
dissolution time of anodic oxide formed on n-type and
p-type silicon samples under identical conditions is used
for etch selectivity. However, the difference in dissolution
time is believed to be due to a difference in oxidation rates
caused by the limited supply of holes in n-type samples
[39]. This technique is applicable in a wide range of
anodizing voltages, etchant compositions and tempera-
tures. It differs from the conventional p–n junction etch
stop in that the performance of the etch stop does not
depend on the rectifying characteristics or quality of a
diode. Using this technique, p-type microstructures of both
low and moderate doping can be fabricated. Hence, the
pulsed potential anodization technique opens up the pos-
sibility for the creation of fragile microstructures in p-type
silicon.
The main problems with the conventional electroche-
mical etch stop and the pulsed potential anodization
techniques are related to the etch holders required for
contacting the epitaxial layer (and the substrate with
several electrodes) and for protecting the ‘epitaxial-side’
of the wafer from the etchant. Any leakage in these
holders interferes with proper operation of the etch stop.
Moreover, mechanical stress introduced by the holder
reduces production yield substantially. The development
Table 10.5
Dopant-dependent etch rates of selected silicon wet etchants. W.C. Tang, ‘‘Micromechanical devices
at JPL for space exploration,’’ IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference Proceedings, vol. 1,  1998 IEEE
Etchant
Temperature
(100) Etch rate (mm/min) for
(100) Etch rate (mm/min) for
(diluent)
(C)
boron doping  1019 cm3
boron doping  1020 cm3
EDP (H2O)
115
0.75
0.015
KOH (H2O)
85
1.4
0.07
NaOH (H2O)
65
0.25–1.0
0.025–0.1
270
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

of a reliable wafer holder for anisotropic etching with an
electrochemical etch stop is not straightforward. The
process of making contact to the wafer itself can also be
critical and difﬁcult to implement. Therefore a single-step
fabrication of released structures with either a conven-
tional electrochemical etch stop or pulsed potential ano-
dization techniques may be troublesome.
An alternative etch-stop technique which does not
require any external electrodes (or connections to be
made to the wafer) has been recently developed. This
new technique is referred to as the photovoltaic electro-
chemical etch-stop technique (PHET) [40]. The PHET
approach can be used to produce the majority of struc-
tures that can be formed by either the high-boron or the
electrochemical etch-stop process [40]. PHET does not
require the high impurity concentrations of the boron
etch stop and does not require external electrodes or an
etch holder as in the conventional electrochemical etch-
stop or pulsed anodization techniques. Free-standing
p-type structures with an arbitrary lateral geometry can
be formed in a single etch step. In principle, PHET is to
be seen as a two-electrode electrochemical etch stop
where the potential and current required for anodic
growth of a passivating oxide is not applied externally,
but is generated within the silicon itself. The potential
essentially consists of two components, being the photo-
voltage across an illuminated p–n junction and the
‘Nernst’ potential of an n-Si/metal/etchant solution elec-
trochemical cell.
The buried oxide process generates microstructures by
means of exploiting the etching characteristics of a
buried layer of silicon dioxide. After implanting oxygen
into a silicon substrate using suitable ion-implantation
techniques, high-temperature annealing causes the oxy-
gen ions to interact with the silicon to form a buried layer
of silicon dioxide. The remaining thin layer of single-
crystal silicon can still support the growth of an epitaxial
layer from a few microns to many tens of microns thick.
In micromachining, the buried silicon dioxide layer is
used as an etch stop. For example, the etch rate of an
etchant such as KOH slows down markedly as the etchant
reaches the silicon dioxide layer. However, this process
has the potential for generating patterned silicon-dioxide-
buried layers by appropriately implanting oxygen.
10.4.3 Dry etching for micromachining
As discussed above, bulk micromachining processes
using wet chemical etchants, such as EDP, KOH and
hydrazine, can yield microstructures on single-crystal
silicon (SCS) by ‘undercutting’ the silicon wafer. The
etch stop in these cases can be either crystal-orientation-
dependent or dopant-concentration-dependent. How-
ever, the type, shape and size of the SCS structures
that can be fabricated with the wet chemical etch
techniques are severely limited. On the other hand, a
dry-etch-based process sequence has been developed to
produce suspended, SCS mechanical structures and
actuators [41]. This process is known as the SCREAM
(single crystal reactive etching and metallization) pro-
cess. SCREAM uses RIE processes to fabricate released
SCS structures with lateral feature sizes down to 250 nm
and with arbitrary structure orientations on a silicon
wafer. SCREAM includes process options to make
integrated, ‘side-drive’ capacitor actuators. A compati-
ble high step-coverage metallization process using
metal sputter deposition and isotropic metal dry etch
is used to form ‘side-drive’ electrodes. The metalliza-
tion process complements the silicon RIE processes
used to form the ‘movable’ SCS structures.
The SCREAM process can be used to fabricate com-
plex circular, triangular structures in SCS, often with a
single mask. These structures can include integrated,
high-aspect-ratio and conformable capacitor actuators.
The capacitor actuators are used to generate electrostatic
forces and so produce micromechanical motion.
10.5 SILICON SURFACE MICROMACHINING
Since the beginning of the 1980s, much interest has been
directed towards micromechanical structures fabricated
by a technique called surface micromachining. The
resulting ‘2½-dimensional’ structures are mainly located
on the surface of a silicon wafer and exist as a thin ﬁlm –
hence, the ‘half-dimension’. The dimensions of these
surface-micromachined structures can be an order of
magnitude smaller than bulk-micromachined structures.
The main advantage of surface-micromachined structures
is their easy integration with IC components, since the
same wafer surface can also be processed for the IC
elements.
Surface micromachining does not shape the bulk
silicon, but instead builds structures on the surface of
the silicon by depositing thin ﬁlms of ‘sacriﬁcial layers’
and ‘structural layers’ and by removing eventually the
sacriﬁcial layers to release the mechanical structures
(Figure
10.10).
The
dimensions
of
these
surface-
micromachined structures can be several orders of mag-
nitude smaller than bulk-micromachined structures. The
prime advantage of surface-micromachined structures is
their easy integration with IC components, since the
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
271

wafer is also the ‘working’ one for the IC elements.
Surface micromachining can therefore be used to build
monolithic MEMS devices.
Surface micromachining could also be performed
using dry-etching methods. Plasma etching of the silicon
substrate with SF6/O2-based and CF4/H2-based gas mix-
tures is advantageous since high selectivities for the
photoresist, silicon dioxide and aluminum masks can
be achieved. However, when using plasma etching, a
large ‘undercut’ of the mask is observed. This is due to
the isotropic ﬂuorine-atom-etching of silicon which is
known to be high compared with the vertical etch
induced by ion bombardment. In contrast, reactive-ion
etching of poly-Si using a chlorine/ﬂuorine gas combina-
tion produces virtually no ‘undercut’ and almost vertical
etch proﬁles when using a photoresist as a masking
material. Thus, rectangular silicon patterns which are
up to 30 mm deep can be formed by using chlorine/
ﬂuorine plasmas out of poly-Si ﬁlms and silicon wafer
surfaces.
Silicon microstructures fabricated by surface micro-
machining are usually planar (or two dimensional) struc-
tures. Other techniques involving the use of thin-ﬁlm
structural materials released by the removal of an under-
lying sacriﬁcial layer have helped to extend conventional
surface micromachining into the ‘third dimension’. By
connecting polysilicon plates to the substrate and to each
other with hinges, 3-D micromechanical structures can
be assembled after release. Another approach to 3-D
structures have used the conformal deposition of poly-
silicon and sacriﬁcial oxide ﬁlms to ﬁll deep trenches
previously etched in the silicon substrate.
Sacriﬁcial-layer technology generally uses polycrys-
talline rather than single-crystal silicon (SCS) as the
structural material for the fabrication of microstructures.
Low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) of
polysilicon is well known in standard IC technologies
and has excellent mechanical properties similar to those
of SCS. When polycrystalline silicon is used as the
structural layer, sacriﬁcial-layer technology normally
employs silicon dioxide as the sacriﬁcial material. This
sacriﬁcial layer is required during the fabrication process
to realize some microstructures but does not constitute
any part of the ﬁnal device.
The key processing steps in sacriﬁcial-layer technol-
ogy are:
(1) Deposition and patterning of a sacriﬁcial silicon
dioxide layer on the substrate.
(2) Deposition and deﬁnition of a polysilicon ﬁlm.
Lithography
Lithography
Mask
Mask
Sacrificial layer
(silicon dioxide)
Development of
the sacrificial layer
Removal of
the sacrificial layer
Deposition of
the structural layer
Patterning of
the structural layer
Polycrystalline
silicon
Final
structure
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(6)
(5)
Figure 10.10
Processing steps for a typical micromachining process [23]. Reproduced by permission of Gabor Kiss
272
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

(3) Removal of the sacriﬁcial oxide by lateral etching in
hydroﬂuoric acid (HF), i.e. etching away of the oxide
underneath the polysilicon structure.
Here, we refer to polysilicon and silicon dioxide as the
structural and sacriﬁcial materials, respectively. Several
other material combinations are also used in surface
micromachining.
10.5.1 Material systems in sacriﬁcial layer
technology
An important consideration in the fabrication of an ideal
mechanical microstructure is that it is without any residual
mechanical stress, so that the ﬁlms deposited have no
signiﬁcant residual strain. In particular, doubly supported
free-standing structures will buckle in the presence of a
relatively modest residual compressive strain in the struc-
tural material. By choosing the appropriate deposition
conditions and by optimizing the annealing step, an almost
strain-free structural material layer can be obtained.
Surface micromachining requires a compatible set of
structural materials, sacriﬁcial materials and chemical
etchants. The structural materials must possess the phy-
sical and chemical properties that are suitable for the
desired application. In addition, the structural materials
must have appropriate mechanical properties, such as
high yield and fracture strengths, minimal creep and
fatigue and good wear resistance. The sacriﬁcial materi-
als should also be able to avoid device failure during the
fabrication process. Furthermore, they should have good
adhesion and a low residual stress in order to eliminate
device failure by delamination and/or cracking. The
etchants must have excellent etch selectivity and they
must be able to etch-off the sacriﬁcial materials without
affecting the structural ones. In addition, the etchants
must also have appropriate viscosity and surface tension
characteristics.
The common IC-compatible materials used in surface
micromachining are as follows. (1) Poly-Si/silicon diox-
ide – LPCVD-deposited poly-Si as the structural material
and LPCVD-deposited oxide as the sacriﬁcial material.
The oxide is readily dissolved in HF solution without the
poly-Si being affected. Together with this material sys-
tem, silicon nitride is often used for electrical insulation.
(2) Polyimide/aluminum – in this case, polyimide is the
structural material and aluminum is the sacriﬁcial mate-
rial. Acid-based etchants are used to dissolve the alumi-
num sacriﬁcial layer. (3) Silicon nitride/poly-Si – silicon
nitride is used as the structural material, whereas poly-Si
is the sacriﬁcial material. For this material system,
silicon anisotropic etchants, such as KOH and EDP, are
used to dissolve the poly-Si. (4) Tungsten/silicon dioxide
– CVD-deposited tungsten is used as the structural
material with oxide as the sacriﬁcial material. HF solu-
tion is used to remove the sacriﬁcial oxide. Other IC-
compatible materials, such as silicon carbide, ‘diamond-
like’ carbon, zinc oxide and gold, are also used.
10.5.1.1 Polycrystalline silicon/silicon dioxide
The poly-silicon/silicon dioxide material system is the
most common one used in the silicon-surface micro-
machining of MEMS. This uses poly-silicon deposited
by LPCVD as the structural material and a thermally
grown (or LPCVD) oxide as the sacriﬁcial material. The
oxide is readily dissolved in HF solution, without
affecting the poly-silicon. Silicon nitride is often used,
together with this material system for electrical insula-
tion. The advantages of this material system include the
following:
(1) Both poly-silicon and silicon dioxide are used in IC
processing and, therefore, their deposition technolo-
gies are readily available.
(2) Poly-silicon has excellent mechanical properties and
can be doped for various electrical applications. Dop-
ing not only modiﬁes the electrical properties but can
also modify the mechanical properties of poly-silicon.
For example, the maximum ‘mechanically-sound’
length of a free-standing beam is signiﬁcantly larger
for a phosphorous-doped compared with undoped
poly-silicon. However, in most cases the maximum
length attainable is limited by the tendency of the
beam to stick to the substrate.
(3) The oxide can be thermally grown and deposited by
CVD over a wide range of temperatures (from about
200 to 1200 C) which is very useful for various
processing requirements. However, the quality of
oxide will vary with the deposition temperature.
(4) The material system is compatible with IC processing.
Both poly-silicon and silicon dioxide are standard
materials for IC devices. This commonality makes
them highly desirable in sacriﬁcial-layer-technology
applications which demand integrated electronics.
10.5.1.2 Polyimide/aluminum
In this second material system, the polymer ‘polyimide’
is used for the structural material while aluminum is used
for the sacriﬁcial material. Acid-based aluminum etch-
ants are used to dissolve the aluminum sacriﬁcial layer.
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
273

The three main advantages of this material system are:
(1) Polyimide has a small elastic modulus which is  50
times smaller than that of polycrystalline silicon.
(2) Polyimide can take large strains before fracture.
(3) Both polyimide and aluminum can be prepared at
relatively low temperatures (< 400 C).
(4) However, the main disadvantage of this material system
lies with polyimide in that it has unfavorable viscoe-
lastic characteristics (i.e. it tends to creep) and so such
devices may exhibit considerable parametric drift.
10.5.1.3 Other material systems
In the third material system of silicon nitride/poly-Si,
silicon nitride is used as the structural material and
poly-Si as the sacriﬁcial material. For this material
system, silicon anisotropic etchants such as KOH and
EDP are used to dissolve the poly-Si.
In the fourth material system of tungsten/oxide, tung-
sten deposited by CVD is used as the structural material
with the oxide as the sacriﬁcial material. Here again, an
HF solution is used to remove the sacriﬁcial oxide.
Similarly, silicon nitride is employed as the structural
material with aluminum as the sacriﬁcial layer instead of
poly-Si.
10.6 PROCESSING BY BOTH BULK
AND SURFACE MICROMACHINING
Many MEMS devices are fabricated by either bulk
micromachining or surface micromachining, as described
in the previous sections. Their relative merits and demer-
its are compared in Table 10.6. It is possible to combine
advantages of both of these approaches by following a
‘mixed route’ for fabricating MEMS. The process ﬂow
for a ‘microgripper’ fabricated with this mixed approach
is shown in Figure 10.11. In the ﬁrst step, with thermally
grown silicon dioxide as a mask, boron is diffused into
the wafer at 1125 C. The masking SiO2 and borosilicate
glass (BSG) grown during this diffusion are removed.
Then, a 2 mm thick layer of phosphosilicate glass (PSG)
and a 2.5 mm thick polysilicon layer are deposited by
LPCVD. This polysilicon layer is patterned by RIE in a
CCl4 plasma. Polysilicon at the back side of the wafer is
later removed. Then, the PSG ﬁlm is deposited in three
steps to reach a thickness of 6 mm. This is used for
diffusing phosphorous into the polysilicon layer (by
annealing at 1000 C) and to protect it while bulk micro-
machining. The alignment window in Figure 10.11(c) is
used for ‘front-to-back’ reference. Break lines are pat-
terned on the PSG around the polysilicon gripper area to
prevent cracks. The PSG ﬁlm on the back side is also
patterned. Unwanted silicon from the back side is removed
by etching in EDP (bulk micromachining). On the front
side, the EDP causes undercut etching of channels beneath
the PSG break line, eventually connecting to the open
space caused from the back side etch. The PSG ﬁlm
(sacriﬁcial layer) is then removed from both the top and
bottom. Thus, the structure on the top side of the wafer is
thought of as being fabricated by surface micromachining.
10.7 LIGA PROCESS
Even though miniaturization is immensely increased by
silicon surface micromachining, the small sizes/masses
created are often insufﬁcient for viable sensors and,
particularly, actuators. The problem is most acute in
Table 10.6
Comparison of bulk-and surface-micromachining processes for MEMS fabrication.
Aspect
Bulk
Surface
micromachining
micromachining
Maturity
Well established
Relatively new
Ruggedness
Yes – structures can withstand vibration
Less rugged
and shock
Die area
Large mass/area
Small mass/area (reduced
(suitable for accelero meters,increases cost)
sensitivity, reduces cost)
IC
Not fully integrated
IC compatible
compatibility
Structural
Limited
Wide range
geometry
possible
Materials
Well characterized
Relatively new
274
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

capacitive mechanical microsensors and especially capa-
citively driven micro-actuators because of the low cou-
pling capacitances. Deep etching techniques, such as
LIGA, have been developed in order to address this
problem but are difﬁcult to realize for silicon.
‘LIGA’
is
a
German
acronym
for
Lithographie,
Galvanoformung, Abformung (lithography, galvanoform-
ing, molding). This versatile technique was developed by
the Research Center in Karlsruhe in Germany in the early
1980s using X-ray lithography for mask exposure, galva-
noforming to form the metallic parts and molding to
produce micro-parts with plastics, metals, ceramics, or
their combinations [42,43]. A schematic diagram of the
LIGA process ﬂow is shown in Figure 10.12. The X-ray
LIGA relies on synchrotron radiation to obtain necessary
X-ray ﬂuxes and uses X-ray proximity printing. Inherent
advantages are its extreme precision, depth of ﬁeld and
very low intrinsic surface roughness [44]. With the LIGA
process, the microstructure heights can be up to hundreds
of microns to several millimeters, while the lateral resolution
is kept at the submicron level due to the advanced X-ray
lithography. Various materials can be incorporated into the
LIGA process, allowing electrical, magnetic, piezoelec-
tric, optical and insulating properties of sensors and
actuators with a high-aspect ratio, which are not possible
to make with the silicon-based processes. In addition, by
combining the sacriﬁcial layer technique and the LIGA
process, advanced MEMS with moveable microstructures
p+ support cantilever
Si wafer
Si die
Si die
PSG
PSG
V-groove
V-groove
Poly
Etch channel
Open
space
Alignment
window
Si wafer
Poly
PSG
PSG break line
Alignment
window
Poly
PSG
Si wafer
PSG
p+
Si wafer
PSG
Poly
p+
Si wafer
p+
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 10.11
Process ﬂow for MEMS ‘microgripper’ fabricated with bulk and surface micromachining. C.-J. Kim, A.P. Pisano, and
R.S. Muller, Silicon-Processed overhanging microgripper, J. Microelectromechanical Systems, Vil. 1, # 1992 IEEE
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
275

can be built (Figure 10.13). However, the high production
cost of the LIGA process, due to the fact that it is not easy
to access the X-ray source, limits the application of LIGA.
Another disadvantage of the LIGA process relies on the
fact that structures fabricated using LIGA are not truly
three-dimensional, because the third dimension is always
in a ‘straight’ feature. The quality of fabricated structures
often depends on secondary effects during exposure and
effects like resist adhesion. A similar technique, UV-LIGA,
relying on thick UV resists, is a useful fabrication process,
but with less precision. Modulating the spectral properties
of synchrotron radiation, 3-D components with different
size regimes can be fabricated using X-ray lithography [44].
Considerations for these cases are shown in Table 10.7.
Figure 10.12
Schematic of the LIGA process [23]. Reproduced by permission of Gabor Kiss
276
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Figure 10.13
Combination of LIGA process and sacriﬁcial layer process [45]. A. Rogner, et al., ‘‘LIGA based ﬂexible
microstructures for ﬁber chip coupling,’’ J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 1, 1991, # IOP
Table 10.7
X-ray lithography for various feature sizes [44]. Reprinted from Applied Surface Science, vol. 164,
R.K. Kupta, F. Bouamrane, C. Cremers, and S. Megtert, Microfabrication: LIGA-X and applications, pp. 97–110,
Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier
Feature
Low-aspect-ratio
High-aspect-ratio
High-aspect-ratio
High-aspect-ratio
nanostructures
nanostructures
microstructures
‘cm structures’
Photon energy range
500 eV–2 keV
2–5 keV
4–15 keV
> 15 keV
Exposable resist
< 5 mm
< 50 mm
< 1 mm
< 2 cm
(PMMA) thickness
Membrane
SiC, 2 mm; diamond,
Be, 50 mm;
Be, 300 mm;
Be, 500 mm;
thickness
5 mm Be, 20 mm
D263, 5 mm
D263, 15 mm
D263, 50 mm
Absorber (Au, W)
100–500 nm
500 nm to
10–20 mm
20–50 mm
thickness
10 mm
Proximity contrast
<10 dB
10–15 dB
15–20 dB
>20 dB
Development time
s–min
min–h
h–days
days
Application
Rapid mass production
2-D photonic
Micromechanics,
—
of nanostructures
crystals
micro-optics
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
277

LIGA-based fabrication procedures of various systems
for micromechanics (such as micromotors, microsensors,
spinnerets, etc.) and micro-optics, micro-hydrodynamics,
microbiology, medicine, biology and chemistry (micro-
chemical reactors) are under various stages of develop-
ment. A comparison of LIGA with the bulk and surface
micromachining technologies used in MEMS is given in
Table 10.8 [46].
REFERENCES
1. H. Fujita, ‘Future of actuators and microsystems’, Sensors
and Actuators, A56, 105–111 (1996).
2. H. Fujita, ‘Microactuators and micromachines’, Proceedings
of the IEEE, 86, 1721–1732 (1998).
3. G.T.A. Kovacs, N.I. Maluf and K.E. Petersen, ‘Bulk micro-
machining of silicon’, Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1536–
1551 (1998).
4. J.M. Bustillo, R.T. Howe and R.S. Muller, ‘Surface micro-
machining for microelectromechanical systems’, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 86, 1552–1574 (1998).
5. H. Guckel, ‘High-aspect-ratio micromachining via deep
X-ray lithography’, Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1586–
1593 (1998).
6. Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides, ‘Soft lithography’, Angewandte
Chemie, International Edition, 37, 550–575 (1998).
7. V.K. Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘Three dimensional poly-
meric and ceramic MEMS and their applications’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 2722, 156–164 (1996).
8. K. Ikuta and K. Hirowatari, ‘Real three dimensional micro-
fabrication using stereo lithography and metal molding’, in
Proceedings of IEEE MEMS’93, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 42–47, (1993).
9. T. Katagi and N. Nakajima, ‘Photoforming applied to ﬁne
machining’, in Proceedings of IEEE MEMS’93, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 173–178, (1993).
10. C.S. Taylor, P. Cherkas, H. Hampton, J.J. Frantzen,
B.O. Shah, W.B. Tiffany, L. Nanis, P. Booker, A. Salahieh
and R. Hansen, ‘A spatial forming – a three dimensional
printing process’, in Proceedings of IEEE MEMS’94, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 203–208 (1994).
11. G. Thornell and S. Johansson, ‘Microprocessing at the
ﬁngertips’, Journal of Micromechanical and Microengineer-
ing, 8, 251–262 (1998).
12. S. Middelhoek and S.A. Audet, Silicon Sensors, Academic
Press, London, UK (1989).
13. K.E. Peterson, ‘Silicon as a mechanical material’, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 70, 420–457 (1982).
14. J. Bryzek, K. Peterson and W. McCulley, ‘Micromachines on
the march’, IEEE Spectrum, 31(5), 20–31 (May 1994).
15. L.-S. Fan, Y.-C Tai and R.S. Muller,‘Integrated movable
micromechanical structures for sensors and actuators’,
IEEE
Transactions:
Electron
Devices,
35,
724–730
(1988).
16. V.K. Varadan, X. Jiang and V.V Varadan, Microstereolitho-
graphy and other Fabrication Techniques for 3D MEMS,
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, London, UK (2001).
17. C. Vieu, F. Carcenac, A. Pe´pin, Y. Chen, M. Mejias,
A. Lebib, L. Manin-Ferlazzo, L. Couraud and H. Launois,
‘Electron beam lithography: resolution limits and applica-
tions’, Applied Surface Science, 164, 111–117 (2000).
18. S. Gwo, ‘Scanning probe oxidation of Si3N4 masks for
nanoscale lithography, micromachining and selective epi-
taxial growth on silicon’, Journal of Physics and Chemistry
of Solids, 62, 1673–1687 (2001).
19. S.M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York, NJ, USA (1981).
20. H. Seidel, ‘The mechanism of anisotropic silicon etching and
its relevance for micromachining’, in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actua-
tors, Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan Tokyo, Japan,
pp. 120–125 (1987).
21. K.W. Shaw, Z.L. Zhang and N.C. MacDonald, ‘ SCREAM: a
single mask, single-crystal silicon, reactive ion etching
Table 10.8
Various technologies used in MEMS fabrication [46]. W.C. Tang, ‘‘Micromechanical devices at JPL for
space exploration,’’ IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference Proceedings, vol. 1,  1998 IEEE
Feature
Bulk (100) wafer
Surface
LIGA
Maximum structure thickness
Wafer thickness
< 50 mm
< 500 mm
Planar geometry
Rectangular
Unrestricted
Unrestricted
Minimum planar feature size
1.4  depth
1 mm
3 mm
Side-wall features
54.74  slope
Limited by
0.2 mm runout
dry etch
over 400 mm
Surface and edge deﬁnitions
Excellent
Mostly adequate
Very good
Material properties
Very well controlled
Mostly adequate
Well controlled
Integration with electronics
Demonstrated
Demonstrated
Difﬁcult
Capital investments and cost
Low
Medium
High
278
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

process for microelectromechanical structures’, Sensors and
Actuators, A40, 63–70 (1994).
22. G.T.A. Kovacs, N.I. Maluf and K.E. Petersen, ‘Bulk micro-
machining of silicon’, Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1536–
1551 (1998).
23. G. Stix, ‘Trends in micromechanics: micron machinations’,
Scientiﬁc American, 72–80 (November 1992).
24. M. Madou, Fundamentals of Microfabrication, CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, USA (1997).
25. J.B. Lasky, ‘Wafer bonding for silicon-on-insulator technol-
ogies’, Applied Physics Letters, 48, 78–80, (1986).
26. H. Ohashi, J. Ohura, T. Tsukakoshi and M. Simbo,
‘Improved dielectrically isolated device integration by
silicon-wafer direct bonding (SDB) technique’, in Interna-
tional Electron Devices Meeting Technical Digest IEEE,
New York, NY, USA, pp. 210–213 (1986).
27. U. Apel, H.G. Graf, C. Harendt, B. Hofﬂinger and T. Ifstrom,
‘A 100-V lateral DMOS transistor with a 0.3 micron channel
in a 1 micron silicon-ﬁlm-on-insulator-on silicon’, IEEE
Transactions: Electron Devices, 38, 1655–1659 (1991).
28. C. Harendt, H.G. Graf, B. Hollinger and E. Penteker,
‘Silicon direct bonding for sensor applications – character-
ization of the bond quality’, Sensors and Actuators, A25,
87–92 (1991).
29. W.H. Ko, J.T. Suminto and G.J. Yeh, ‘Bonding techniques
for microsensors’, Studies in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering 20, 41–61 (1985).
30. J.W. Gardner, V.K. Varadan and O. Awadelkarim, Micro-
sensors, MEMS and Smart Devices, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
London, UK (2001).
31. M. Ohring, The Materials Science of Thin Films, Academic
Press, San Diego, CA, USA (1991).
32. H.O. Pierson, Handbook of Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CVD): Principles, Technology and Applications, 2nd
Edn, Noyles Publications, New York, NY, USA (1999).
33. M. Jennifer and M.G. Allen, ‘Wireless micromachined
ceramic pressure sensors’, in Proceedings of the IEEE
MEMS’ 99, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 511–516
(1999).
34. L.C. Chin, V.V. Varadan and V.K. Varadan, ‘Hybrid ﬁnite
element formulation for periodic piezoelectric arrays sub-
jected to ﬂuid loading’, International Journal of Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 37, 2987–3003 (1994).
35. J.H. Won, H. Paek, Y.S Huang, K.K. Kim and Y.S. Cho,
‘Phase formation and characteristics of RF sputtering of
barium strontium titanate thin ﬁlms on various bottom
layers’, Journal of Materials Science Materials in Electro-
nics, 6, 161–164 (1995).
36. X.X. Xi, H.-C. Li, W.Si, A.A. Sirenko, I.A. Akimou, J.R.
Fox, A.M. Clark and J. Hao, ‘Oxide thin ﬁlms for Tunable
microwave devices’, Journal of Electroceramics, 4, 393–405
(2000).
37. I. Levin, R.D. Leapman and D.L. Kaiser, ‘Microstructure
and chemistry of nonstoichiometric (Ba,Sr)TiO3 thin ﬁlms
deposited by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition’,
Journal of Materials Research, 15, 1433–1436 (2000).
38. E.J. Cukauskas, S.W. Kirchoefer and J.M. Pond, ‘ Low-loss
Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3 thin ﬁlms by inverted magnetron sputtering,
Journal of Applied Physics, 88, 2830–2835 (2000).
39. S.S. Wang, V.M. McNeil and M.A. Schmidt, ‘An etch-stop
utilizing selective etching of n-type silicon by pulsed
potential anodization’, Journal of Microelectromechanical
Systtems, 1, 187–192, (1992).
40. E. Peeters, D. Lapadatu, R. Puers and W. Sansen, ‘PHET, an
electrodeless photovoltaic electrochemical etch-stop techni-
que’, Journal of Microelectromechamical Systems, 3, 113–
123 (1994).
41. Z.L. Zhang and N.C. McDonald, ‘An RIE process for
submicron, silicon electromechanical structures’, Journal
Micromechamical and Microengineering, 2, 31–38 (1992).
42. H. Guckel, ‘High-aspect-ratio micromachining via deep
X-ray lithography’, Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, 1586–
1593 (1998).
43. J. Mohr, P. Bley, C. Burabaum, W. Menz and U. Wallarabe,
‘Fabrication of microsensor and microactuator elements by
the LIGA process’, in Transdycers’91, Proceedings of the
International Conference in Solid-State Sensors and Actua-
tors, IEEE Electron Devices Society, IEEE, New York, NY,
USA, pp. 607–609 (1991).
44. R.K. Kupka, F. Bouamrane, C. Cremers and S. Megtert,
‘Microfabrication: LIGA-X and applications’, Applied Sur-
face Science, 164, 97–110 (2000).
45. A. Rogner, W. Ehrfeld, D. Manchmeger, P. Bley, C.
Burbaum and J. Mohr, ‘LIGA based ﬂexible microstructures
for ﬁber chip coupling’, Journal of Micromechamical and
Microengineering, 1, 167–170, (1991).
46. W.C. Tang, ‘Micromechanical devices at JPL for space
exploration’, in IEEE Aerospace Applications Conference
Proceedings, Vol. 1, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 461–
470 (1998).
Silicon Fabrication Techniques for MEMS
279

11
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The advancement of silicon-based micro electromecha-
nical systems (MEMS) closely follows developments in
silicon semiconductor processing technology. Various
processing approaches have already been established for
the integration of silicon-based MEMS with standard
CMOS processing. For precision devices, and for devices
requiring integrated electronics, silicon is presently unri-
valed. However, it is not necessarily the best material
for all applications. For example, silicon is brittle, it is
only available in speciﬁc shapes (wafers), it is limited to
2-D or very limited 3-D structures, it is incompatible
with many chemical and biological substances and fab-
rication requires sophisticated, expensive equipment
operated in a clean-room environment. These often
limit the low-cost potential of silicon-based MEMS.
Polymer-based MEMS are gaining momentum rapidly
due to their potential for conformability and other special
characteristics not available with silicon. In general,
polymer-based devices may not be as small or as com-
plex as those with silicon. However, polymers are ﬂex-
ible, chemically and biologically compatible, available in
many varieties and can be fabricated in truly 3-D shapes.
Most of these materials and their fabrication methods are
inexpensive.
Polymer MEMS are particularly advantageous in mod-
erate-performance devices which are low cost or dispo-
sable.
Many
silicon
devices
are
packaged
inside
polymers. On the other hand, polymer MEMS can be
‘self-packaged’. Active polymer components can take
advantage of several functional polymers to increase
their functionality. MEMS can deﬁnitely beneﬁt from
the fairly large polymer industry. While conventional
integrated circuits cannot be made in polymers, electro-
nic circuits based on organic thin-ﬁlm transistors (TFTs)
are feasible. The technology of organic TFTs is nearing
its maturity, and is ﬁnding several applications in systems
requiring large coverage area, structural ﬂexibility and
low cost. These noticeable advantages are also common
for polymer MEMS. Although the existing technology of
organic TFTs cannot rival the well-established silicon
semiconductor technology, especially in terms of speed,
they are still useful in displays, several high-volume,
low-performance, disposable devices and sensors.
Polymers are very large molecules (macromolecules)
made up of a number of small molecules. The small
molecules that connect with each other to build up the
polymer are referred to as monomers, and the reaction by
which they connect together is called polymerization.
Two types of polymers are employed for micromachining
polymeric MEMS devices – structural polymers and
sacriﬁcial polymers. The structural polymer is usually a
UV-curable polymer with urethane acrylate, epoxy acry-
late or acryloxysilane as the main ingredient. Its low
viscosity allows easy processing through automatic
equipment or manual methods without the addition of
solvents or heat to reduce the viscosity. It also complies
with all VOC regulations. It has excellent ﬂexibility and
resistance to fungus, solvents, water and other chemicals.
Other physical, chemical, mechanical and thermal prop-
erties are given in Table 11.1 [1]. This structural polymer
may be used as a backbone structure for building the
multifunctional polymer described below.
For 3-D MEMS devices, the polymers need to have
conductive and possibly piezoelectric or ferroelectric
properties. In addition, for these polymers to be used
for polymeric MEMS, they should have strong interfacial
adhesion between the functional polymer and conducting
polymer layers, elastic moduli to support the deformation
initiated by MEMS devices, excellent overall dimen-
sional stability (allowing local mobility) and long-term
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

environmental stability. In addition, their processes
should help attachment of nanoceramics and/or conduc-
tive phases and formation of a uniform coating layer.
Furthermore, many of these polymers provide a large
strain under an electric ﬁeld and thus can be used
as actuators for MEMS-based devices such as micro
pumps.
The polymer processing techniques include photopoly-
merization, electrochemical polymerization and vacuum
polymerization, either stimulated by electron bombard-
ment or initiated by ultraviolet irradiation or microwave-
assisted polymerization. These methods are also widely
used for processing and curing thin and thick polymer
ﬁlms on silicon-based electronic components.
Several polymeric materials useful in MEMS have
already been discussed in Chapter 2. It has been men-
tioned that UV-radiation curing has signiﬁcant advan-
tages in the context of fabricating MEMS devices. In this
chapter, we discuss the technologies involved in such
fabrication.
Stereolithography has evolved as a viable technique
for rapid prototyping used in several industries. Micro-
stereolithography is a natural extension of this for fabri-
cating objects at a smaller scale. Another common
technique for fabricating three-dimensional polymer
structures is by molding. Microstereolithography and
micromolding can be extended to fabricate ceramic and
metallic structures by starting with a mixture of their
powders in a suitable polymer matrix. Special techniques
such as electroplating can also be used to fabricate 3-D
metallic structures. Fabrication techniques for 3-D struc-
tures with both polymers and metals are discussed next.
The last section in this chapter addresses combined
architectures where silicon-based and polymer-based
techniques are combined for increased ﬂexibility.
11.2 MICROSTEREOLITHOGRAPHY
Several new manufacturing technologies that build
devices ‘layer-by-layer’ have emerged recently. Using
these technologies, the time for fabricating these devices
of virtually any complexity has become short, measur-
able in hours rather than in days, weeks or months. These
rapid prototyping (RP) technologies consist of various
manufacturing processes by which a solid physical model
of a device is fabricated directly from its 3-D CAD
model, without the need for any special tooling. This
CAD model is generated by 3-D CAD software pro-
grams, scan or model data created by 3-D digitizing
systems. An important difference between RP and tradi-
tional micromachining techniques is that here devices are
built by adding a material (e.g. ‘layer-by-layer’) instead
of removing it.
11.2.1 Overview of stereolithography
Stereolithography (SL) is the best known rapid prototyping
system. SL was introduced in the early 1980s by teams
around the world [2–4], as a three-dimensional manufac-
turing process based on photopolymerization, where a laser
beam is directed onto the surface of a optically curable
liquid plastic (resin) to produce solid objects. The stereo-
lithography process begins with the generation of a three-
dimensional CAD model of the desired object, followed by
slicing this model into a series of closely spaced horizontal
planes representing the two-dimensional cross-sections of
the 3-D object, each at a slightly different z-coordinate. All
of these 2-D models are next translated into numerical
Table 11.1
General properties of polymers used
in MEMS.
Physical properties
Adhesion (#600 ‘Cellotape’)
Excellent
Clarity
Transparent
Flammability, ASTM D635
Self-extinguishing
Flexibility
Good
Weather resistance
Excellent
Chemical properties
Fungus resistance, ASTM G21
Excellent
Resistance to chemicals
Excellent
Resistance to solvents
Excellent
Resistance to water
Excellent
Thermal properties
Continuous operating range (C)
65–125
Decomposition temperature (C)
242
Mechanical properties
Tensile strength (psi),
3454
ASTM D 683
Percentage elongation,
5.2
ASTM D 683
Dielectric properties
Dielectric permittivity
1.9–2.0
(200–1000 MHz)
Loss tangent
0.023–0.05
(200–1000 MHz)
282
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

control codes and merged together into a ﬁnal ‘build ﬁle’ to
control the laser beam scanning and z-axis movement. The
desired object is then built from a UV-curable resin in a
layer-by-layer additive fashion (Figure 11.1).
SL is a photopolymerization process, linking small
molecules (monomers) into larger molecules (polymer).
Most SL systems utilize the principle of UV-radiation
curing of polymers. Different photopolymers based on
free-radical photopolymerization and cationic photo-
polymerization are normally used in SL prototyping. In
general, photopolymerization is a process initiated by the
photons generated by UV light leading to either breaking
of the monomer double bonds or ring opening (so-called
‘reactive species’), resulting in chain propagation and the
cross-linked polymer chain is ﬁnally formed when the
chain propagation is terminated.
The generalized molecular structures of three major
photopolymer systems, namely monofunctional acrylate,
epoxy and vinyl ether, are shown in Figure 11.2. The
selection of the photopolymer for a particular SL fabrica-
tion process depends on the requirements for dimensional
accuracy and mechanical properties of each individual
photopolymer formulation.
Three-dimensional modeling for the prototypes is done
with CAD software on a PC or workstation. The design
model and the support data are converted to a STL format
through a speciﬁc interface [5]. STL ﬁles comprise a
mesh of connected triangles, representing the 3-D object.
These triangle categories determine how the vectors are
generated to represent the surfaces to build the part.
Vectors are very small lines which are traced by the
laser to fabricate polymer objects [6].
After necessary corrections to the model, the designed
object is then sliced into a number of layers consisting of
cross-sections of a 3-D object (slice ﬁles or SLI ﬁles).
The slicing layer thickness may be selected from con-
sideration of the ‘stair-casing’ effect. When these trian-
gles are sliced, three types of vectors are created to deﬁne
the surface boundaries and internal structure on a layer-
by-layer basis – layer borders, cross-hatches and skin ﬁll.
The cross-hatch vectors in the internal grid structures are
created to strengthen the walls and maintain structure
integrity. The skin-ﬁlling vectors, usually a series of
closely located parallel vectors, deﬁne the horizontal
surfaces.
All slice ﬁles (support and object ﬁles) are then
merged to generate SLA format data in the form of
four ﬁles (layer, vector, range and parameter ﬁles). The
layer ﬁle deﬁnes the types of vector blocks in each layer.
The vector ﬁle contains vector data used to build each
layer and the range ﬁle contains user-speciﬁed ranges and
parameters for fabrication. The parameter ﬁle has the
control for global part building. The numerical control
(NC) codes for controlling the light scanning and eleva-
tor movement are included in these ﬁles. Parameters,
such as laser intensity and scanning speed, should also be
selected before executing these NC codes.
SL systems have components with CAD design and
layer preparation functions and a laser scanning or imaging
system. A typical SL system is shown schematically in
Figure 11.3. The imaging system for SL includes a light
source (laser or lamp) and beam delivery and focusing
elements (Figure 11.3). The laser or lamps must be appro-
priate for the resin used. Wavelength, output beam shape
and available power are important characteristics. Helium–
cadmium (He–Cd) and argon lasers are preferred in
most SL systems due to the availability of appropriate
wavelengths. The key advantages of He–Cd lasers are
UV light
Mirror 
Elevator 
Vat of photo
curable
solution 
Figure 11.1
Principle of Stereolithography.
C
C
C
O
O
O
R
R
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
O
R
H
H
H
Acrylate
Epoxy
Vinyl ether
Figure 11.2
General structures of monofunctional acrylate,
epoxy, and vinylether monomers [5].
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
283

low power consumption, long lifetime and low instal-
lation and operation costs. One disadvantage of this is
the low output power. At present, He–Cd lasers with
output powers of 50 to 100 mW are available at 325 nm.
In contrast, argon lasers with high UV output powers
(over 1 W) at 351 and 364 nm are available. However,
disadvantages of argon-laser-based SL systems include
higher power consumption, shorter lifetimes and higher
installation and operating costs.
Beam-delivery elements are used to limit the laser beam
path, to keep the overall size compact and to provide an
appropriately sized laser spot on the surface of the resin. A
typical SL system may employ two orthogonally mounted,
servo-controlled, galvanometer-driven mirrors to direct the
laser beams onto the surface of the vat. A focused beam
with a small-beam-spot size is obtained when the beam
passes through a focusing objective and shoots onto the
resin surface. An optical shutter is usually used to control
the beam ‘on/off’ which functions according to the build
ﬁles. Mechanical shutters requiring about 1 ms to change
the state have been replaced with an acoustic optical
modulator with a typical response time of 1 ms, allowing
faster and more precise fabrication.
11.2.2 Introduction to microstereolithography
Microstereolithography (MSL) is a method derived from
conventional stereolithography and works on similar
principles, but in much smaller dimensions. MSL (also
called ‘micro-photoforming’) was introduced in 1993
to fabricate high-aspect-ratio and complex 3-D micro-
structures [7,8]. In contrast to conventional subtractive
micromachining, microstereolithography is an additive
process, which enables fabrication of high-aspect-ratio
microstructures with novel smart materials. MSL is com-
patible in principle with silicon processes and batch
fabrication [9,10].
In MSL, a UV laser beam is focused to a spot size of
about 1 to 2 mm to solidify a thin layer of about 1 to
10 mm thickness. Submicron resolution of the x–y–z
translation stages and a very ﬁne UV beam spot enable
precise fabrication of complex 3-D microstructures using
MSL. Unlike SL, MSL usually does not need supports
during the fabrication because the solidiﬁed polymer is
strong enough to support its own weight and the ﬂoat-
ation force can support free-standing polymer micro-
structures [7]. Monomers used in MSL and SL are both
UV-curable systems, but their viscosity requirements are
different. In MSL, the viscosity of the monomers should
be kept low to ensure a good layer recoating since surface
tension may prevent efﬁcient ﬁlling of the liquid and
the formation of a ﬂat surface on the micro-scale. The
viscosity of the monomer systems used in SL [11] varies
from 170 cps to 3800 cps, while in MSL the viscosity of
the monomer is two orders of magnitude lower (e.g. 6
cps for HDDA) [7]. Another difference is that some
of the monomer systems used for most projection-type
MSL are visible-light curable.
Laser
source
Program on 
Computer  
Beamforming 
optics 
Photopolymer 
resin
Galvanometric  
x-y scanner 
Substrate
Leveling & 
Elevator
System 
Figure 11.3
Block schematic of a typical stereolithography system [5].
284
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

An MSL system operates with the same working
procedure as an SL system. A 3-D solid model designed
with CAD software is sliced into a series of 2-D layers
with uniform thickness. The NC codes generated for each
sliced 2-D ﬁle is then executed to control the UV beam
scanning. The focused scanning UV beam is absorbed
by an UV-curable solution consisting of monomer and
photoinitiators, leading to the polymerization. As a result,
a polymer layer is formed according to each sliced 2-D
layer. After one layer is solidiﬁed, the elevator moves
downward and a new layer of liquid resin can be solidi-
ﬁed. With the synchronized beam scanning and the z-axis
motion, complicated 3-D micro-parts are built in a layer-
by-layer fashion.
Various MSL systems aimed at improving the precision
and speed of fabrication have been developed. Scanning
MSL [7–9,11,12] and projection MSL [10,13–15] are the
two major approaches. Scanning MSL builds the solid
micro-objects in a spot-by-spot and line-by line fashion,
while projection MSL builds one layer with one exposure,
signiﬁcantly saving the time of fabrication.
11.2.3 MSL by scanning methods
Most of the MSL systems developed thus far are based
on a scanning method which is similar to the widely used
conventional stereolithography. A 3-D microstructure
can be fabricated with the scanning method in which a
well-focused laser beam (with spot size of  1 mm) is
directed onto the resin surface to initiate the polymeriza-
tion, scanning either the light beam or the work piece and
by repeating the layer preparation. This scanning method
is also called vector-by-vector MSL [16].
Although the classical MSL system has a focusing
problem which prevents high-resolution fabrications,
its fast fabrication speed is a deﬁnite advantage due to
its implication in industrial mass production. One of the
limitations of conventional MSL is that commercially
available galvanometric mirrors are not suitable for high-
resolution MSL because of de-focusing and the resulting
poor scanning resolution (hundreds of microns). A series
of integrated hardened (IH) polymer stereolithography
processes have been developed to overcome this limitation
[7,17]. These IH processes are based on the scanning
method.
The schematic for an MSL system with the IH process
is shown in Figure 11.4, where the light source used is
UV lamp (xenon lamp) and the beam is focused on the
resin surface through a glass window. The focus point of
the apparatus remains ﬁxed during the fabrication and
the workpiece in a container attached to an x–y stage is
moved, in order to emulate the scanning done by the
galvanometric mirrors in the conventional system. Using
an x–y stage to move the workpiece leads to a smaller
focus spot, indicating a higher fabrication resolution. In
addition, there is no need of a dynamic focus lens as the
focal point is ﬁxed. The glass window was attached to the
z-stage for precise control of the layer thickness.
Typical speciﬁcations of the IH process are listed
below:
 Spot size of UV beam, 5 mm.
 Position accuracy, 0.25 mm (in the x–y direction) and
1.0 mm in the z-direction.
 Minimum unit size of hardened polymer, 5 mm 
5 mm  3 mm (in the x, y, and z directions).
 Maximum size of fabricated structure, 10 mm 
10 mm  10 mm.
Features of the IH process include a capability for
building real 3-D and high-aspect-ratio microstructures,
processibility of various materials, a ‘mask-less’ and cost-
effective process, a medium range of accuracy (3–5 mm)
and the possibility of ‘desktop’ micro-fabrication. It should
be pointed out that the fabrication speed is relatively lower
than that of classical MSL, because the scanning speed
of the x–y stage with the container is lower than that of
galvanometric scanning.
To overcome the limitation of fabrication speed of the
basic IH process, a mass-producible IH process, called
the Mass-IH process, was proposed by Ikuta et al. in
microcomputer
UV source
z-stage
x-y stage
shutter
Figure 11.4
Schematic of a system for the IH process [7].
K. Ikuta, and K. Hirowatari, Real three dimensional microfab-
rication using stereo lithography and metal molding, Proc. IEEE
MEMS’ 93,  1993 IEEE
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
285

1996 to demonstrate the possibility of mass production of
3-D microstructures by MSL [10]. The Mass-IH process
uses optical ﬁbers for multi-beam scanning. An array
composed of numerous single-mode optical ﬁbers is used
here to enable high-speed production of multiple struc-
tures. Other speciﬁcations of the system remain the same
as those of the original IH process. Although the fabrica-
tion speed can be improved signiﬁcantly, this Mass-IH
process needs further improvements in its resolution and
capability for integration of more ﬁbers.
Both the IH and Mass-IH processes are based on a
scanning method with layer-by-layer fabrication, sharing
the same principles of conventional SL. Problems caused
by this fabrication approach include limitation of the
depth resolution by thickness of the stacked-up layer and
the micro-scale deformation and destruction of the soli-
diﬁed microstructures due to the viscous nature of the
liquid monomer. The surface tension of the liquid mono-
mer decreases the precision of the 3-D fabrication [18].
The Super IH process can be used to solidify the
monomer at a speciﬁc point in the 3-D space by focusing
a laser beam into the liquid monomer. Thus, 3-D struc-
tures are fabricated by scanning the focused spot in three
dimensions inside the liquid, enabling 3-D fabrication
without any supports or sacriﬁcial layers. Since there is
no layer preparation step in the super IH process, the
inﬂuence of viscosity and surface tension is minimal. A
schematic diagram of the super IH process is shown in
Figure 11.5, which consists of an He–Cd laser (442 nm),
optical shutter, galvano-scanner set, x–y–z stages, objec-
tive lens, etc. The laser beam was focused inside the
monomer volume and by co-ordinating the beam scan-
ning and z-stage movement, any 3-D structures can be
formed inside the liquid. The properties of a UV-curable
monomer system must be precisely tuned to ensure that
the polymerization happens only in the focus point,
similar to two-photon MSL [11]. A typical UV monomer
system used in this case is a mixture of urethane acrylate
oligomer, monomer and photoinitiator [18].
Although the resolution of the super IH process is less
than 1 mm and the fabrication speed can be increased by
combining the galvano-scanning mirror and x–y stage,
the optics system used in this case is more expensive than
the other two types of IH processes. This process also
requires the development of speciﬁc monomer systems.
A limitation of most scanning MSL processes is the
minimum thickness of the resin layer during the layer
preparation due to the viscosity and surface tension of the
liquid monomer. The two-photon MSL process over-
comes this problem since the resin does not have to be
layered. Usually, only one photon is absorbed during the
photochemical change. However, recently a large number
of experiments in which multiple photons are absorbed
for the photochemical change in a single particle have
been observed. Multi-photon excitation is a non-linear
process, observed only at high intensities [19].
Two-photon absorption is one of the most popular
methods of multiple-photon excitation for photochemical
change. There are two kinds of mechanisms for two-
photon excitation. The ﬁrst is called sequential excita-
tion, which involves a real intermediate state of the
absorbing species. This intermediate state becomes
very populated by the ﬁrst photon, and can act as the
starting point for the absorption of the second one. The
real intermediate state A* has a well-deﬁned lifetime,
typically 104 to 109s. This means that the second
photon must be absorbed by the same particle within the
lifetime of A* to cause the photochemical change. Since
in sequential excitation the particle is best excited by a
resonantly absorbed photon, the overall sequential process
is also referred to as resonant two-photon excitation.
A set-up for the two-photon MSL is shown in Figure 11.6.
The beam from a mode-locked titanium sapphire laser
is directed to the galvanic-scanning mirrors and is
focused with an objective lens into the resin. The monitor-
ing system including a camera is used to ensure focusing
and to monitor fabrication. A z-stage moves along the
optical axis for multilayer fabrication. The longest total
Galvano scanner
x–y–z-stage
Lens
UV polymer
He–Cd laser
Shutter
ND filter
Computer
Figure 11.5
Schematic of the super IH process [18]. K. Ikuta,
S. Maruo, and S. Kojima, New micro stereo lithography for
freely moved 3D micro structure- super IH process with sub-
micron resolution, Proc. IEEE MEMS’ 98,  1998 IEEE
286
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

length of a structure in the direction of the optical axis
is a limitation of two-photon MSL although this has a very
good depth resolution. In addition, the system is more
expensive than most of the other MSL systems.
Another widely used MSL apparatus for 3-D micro-
fabrications is based on a free-surface method that
utilizes x–y stage scanning (Figure 11.7) [9,12]. In this
method, all of the optics for the beam delivery remain
ﬁxed, but an x–y stage moves simultaneously the resin
tank and the vertical axis onto which the plate supporting
the fabrications was attached. The scanning method is
similar to the one used in the IH process, but the galvano-
scanning is replaced with an x–y stage scanning so that
system is simpliﬁed and the focus precision is enhanced.
In this MSL process, a free-surface method was adopted
for layer preparation, rather than the constrained surface
(with a window) method used in the IH process. This
overcomes the disadvantage of the latter, where micro-
structures may be destroyed because of the parts sticking
to the window, by utilizing free-surface layer preparation.
With the free-surface method, the time needed to obtain a
fresh layer of resin on top of a cured layer depends on the
rheological properties of the resin, and so a resin with a
low viscosity is preferred. Free-surface MSL is a single-
photon-based photopolymerization process, and hence
the curing volume is relatively large. However, by adding
a light-absorbing medium into the resin, the line width
and depth can be decreased as required [9,12]. If the
beam delivery system is optimized to obtain the ﬁnest
beam spot size, the line width of 1–2 mm and a depth of
10 mm can be obtained with free-surface MSL [12].
The advantages of free-surface MSL include a simple
set-up, good focusing and high resolution. However, the
workpiece scanning has a limitation in the scanning speed
due to the fact that relative movement between the work-
piece and the liquid resin may cause a waved surface on
the fabricated micro-objects. In addition, precision stages
are required for this MSL because any stage motion errors
will be reﬂected directly in the fabricated parts.
11.2.4 Projection-type methods of MSL
As seen from the previous section, although the scanning
MSL can be used for the fabrication of very ﬁne, high-
aspect-ratio, 3-D microstructures, the fabrication speed
for mass production of components is low. The scanning
MSL builds objects in a layer-by-layer fashion, but each
layer is built in a line-by-line way. The projection MSL is
proposed for building 3-D microstructures more rapidly,
although still in a layer-by-layer way. However, in this
case each layer is built by just one exposure through a
mask, thus signiﬁcantly saving time. Two types of
projection MSL are introduced here: one is with real
mask to generate pattern projection for exposure curing
[14] and the other is with dynamic-mask projection
(LCD projection method) [13].
In real-mask-projection lithography, similar to photo-
lithography, an image is transferred to the liquid
Monitor
CCD camera
Objective lens
x-scan mirror
y-scan mirror
z-scan stage
Lamp
Focused beam
Photopolymerizable resin
Shutter
Attenuator
Ti:sapphire laser
Argonionlaser
Figure 11.6
Schematic of 3-D micro-fabrication with two-
photon absorption [20]. S. Maruo, and S. Kawata, Two-photon-
absorbed near-infrared photopolymerization for threedimen-
sional microfabrication, J. of Microelectromechanical Systems,
Vol. 7, No. 4,  1998 IEEE
Micro 
computer 
AOM      
UV laser 
Mirror 
Converging
lenses 
x-y-z stage
Figure 11.7
Schematic of free-surface microstereolithography
[12]. Microsystem Technologies, 2–2, 1996, pp. 97–102, Stereo-
lithography and microtechnologies, S. Zissi, A. Bertsch, J.Y.
Jezequel, S. Corbel, J.C. Andre, and D.J. Lougnot, with kind
permission of Springer Science and Business Media
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
287

photopolymer by irradiating a UV beam through a
patterned mask (as shown in Figure 11.8) and another
fresh layer of liquid photopolymer is then prepared on
top of the patterned solid polymer. By repeating the
above mask-based exposure and layer preparation, mul-
tilayer 3-D microstructures will be ﬁnally built by the
described mask-projection MSL [14,17,21].
Similar to scanning MSL, the fabrication precision in
this case can be related to the exposure. The curing depth
strongly depends on the laser exposure and the distance
between the mask and the resin surface. The lateral
dimension is marginally inﬂuenced by the exposure but
is determined mainly by the mask pattern if the distance
between mask and resin surface is ﬁxed. A large distance
between the mask and resin surface results in relatively
large lateral dimensions due to diffraction of the beam
[14]. Therefore, in high-precision mask-projection MSL,
the mask should be located close to the resin surface to
reduce light diffraction. This real-mask-projection MSL
can produce high-aspect-ratio micro-fabrications with a
few different cross-sections at a high fabrication preci-
sion. However, for truly 3-D micro-fabrications, a num-
ber of masks are needed, making it not only time-
consuming but also expensive.
Dynamic-mask-projection MSL utilizes a dynamic-mask
generator instead of the real mask and allows the fabrica-
tion of a complete layer by just one exposure. This leads
to quick fabrication of complex 3-D micro objects. A
schematic of a dynamic-mask-projection MSL is shown in
Figure 11.9 [13]. For the exposure of a complete layer, the
irradiation beam is shaped with a computer-controlled liquid
crystal display (LCD) used as a dynamic-mask generator.
In general, an addressed LCD light valve array (or
panel) acting as a projector is used to control light ‘on/
off’. The liquid crystal effect is adopted to modulate the
light transparency of the panel. By the liquid crystal
effect the electrical and optical characteristics of the
liquid crystal materials are changed upon application of
an electric ﬁeld. The nematic phase is one of the most
important materials for light valves applications. It con-
sists of rod-like molecules, more or less parallel to each
other. The vector that deﬁnes the orientation of the long
axes of these molecules is called the ‘director’. The
optical properties of nematic liquid crystals can be varied
by manipulation of the orientation of the director in a
device by an electric ﬁeld. The LCD panel is made of
pixels physically separated by a thread of electrical con-
nections being used for control. Every pixel is a small cell
which contains matter in its liquid crystal state, and can
be set either to its transparent or to its opaque state by
changing the orientation of the molecules it is made of.
The pixels in their opaque state stop the light, in contrast
to those in their transparent state. Usually, the LCD panel
is addressed by a thin-ﬁlm-transistor (TFT) array.
For using an LCD in projection MSL, a CAD ﬁle with
white and black coloring is translated into a numerical
control code which is sent to the LCD device via a
computer; the LCD can then function as a dynamic
mask with controlled imaging. When a beam passes
through this LCD, it carries the pattern of the layer. The
light beam is focused on the resin surface, allowing
selective polymerization of the exposed areas corre-
sponding to the transparent pixels on the LCD. The
remaining principles of operation, such as layer pre-
paration, beam on/off control, etc., are similar to the
standard MSL. It may be noticed that the z-stage is the
only movable element in the system.
The dynamic-projection MSL fabrication process has
a reasonably good accuracy. Even though dynamic-
projection MSL has disadvantages, such as low lateral
resolution and small scope of fabrication (currently
only several millimeters), this MSL process has great
UV light 
source 
Photomask 
Lens
Resin 
z- stage 
Figure 11.8
Microstereolithography using real-mask projec-
tion [14].
Light
source
Shutter
Pattern
generator
Mirror
Shutter controller
PC main control
CAD image
z-translation stage
Figure 11.9
Schematic of dynamic-mask-projection microster-
eolithogrphy [13]. Microsystem Technologies, 1997, pp. 42–47,
Microstereolithography using a liquid crystal display as dynamic
mask-generator, A. Bertsch, S. Zissi, J.Y. Jezequel, S. Corbel,
and J.C. Andre, Fig 4, with kind permission of Springer Science
and Business Media
288
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

potential due to its capability for batch fabrication of 3-D
microstructures.
11.3 MICROMOLDING OF POLYMERIC
3-D STRUCTURES
Although a number of micro-fabrication techniques,
including silicon micromachining, LIGA and microster-
eolithography, have been developed for MEMS, many of
them are faced with problems of low speed of fabrication
and/or high cost of production [22]. In this context,
micromolding
technology
assumes
signiﬁcance
in
MEMS fabrication because of its capability of large
volume capacity. The micromolding techniques useful
for MEMS include injection molding [23], hot emboss-
ing [24], jet molding [25], replica molding [26], micro-
transfer molding [27], micromolding in capillaries [28]
and solvent-assisted micromolding [29] (Table 11.2).
In principle, the ﬁrst three processes can be used for
fabrication of micro-parts with high-aspect-ratios and
even 3-D features and the last four are especially useful
for thin microstructures.
The key aspects in micromolding include degassing
prior to molding, thermal or photochemical curing and
‘demolding’ [23]. Vacuum molding and hot isostatic
pressing have been demonstrated as helpful to exempt
gas [30]. In order to remove the polymer mold, selective
plasma etching is preferred to using the burnout process, to
prevent ‘topple’ in ﬁne structures with high-aspect-ratios
[30,31]. The micromolding techniques are fairly well
established for plastics and ceramics.
‘Master molds’ are often built using polymers, metals or
silicon. ‘Polymer masters’ can be built using photolitho-
graphy, stereolithography, etc. ‘Metal masters’ are formed
mostly by micro-electroplating, LIGA and the DEEMO
process utilizing metallic molds [32,33]. ‘Silicon masters’
are fabricated using wet or dry etching [24,33].
The polymer mold inserts should withstand a certain
level of mechanical strength and thermal resistance since
pressure and heating are necessary during molding.
Materials used for such mold inserts range from common
photoresists to UV-curable resins used in microstereo-
lithography. To fabricate elastomer mold inserts, the
photoresist is ﬁrst patterned using photolithography, the
elastomer solution (PDMS and solvent) is then poured
into the pattern followed by solvent evaporation and
curing. The PDMS mold insert is then obtained by
dissolving the photoresist pattern (Figure 11.10).
Most micromold inserts used for micromolding are
made of metals. These are widely used for plastic, metal
and ceramic micro-moldings. The fabrication approaches
include precision mechanical machining (e.g. micro
electro-discharge machining (EDM)) and lithography
Table 11.2
A brief comparison of micromolding techniques.
Molding
Molding
Feature
Mold insert
Notes
Reference
type
material
size
material
Injection
Plastic
Hundreds of
Nickel
LIGA
[32]
molding
microns high
Embossing
Polymer
 100 mm
Nickel
DEEMO
[33]
Photoreaction;
Polymer
 mm
Brass
Faster curing than
[23]
injection
(photocuring)
thermal reaction
molding
molding
Jet molding
PZT
 40 mm thick
—
Slow process.
[25]
Embossing
Plastic
 21 mm thick,
Silicon
Limited 3-D
[24]
30 mm wide
Pyrolysis
Ceramic
Aspect ratio
Polymer
Good ﬁlling, degassing,
[34]
molding
of 5
but too high
shrinkage ( 60 %)
Microtransfer
Polymer
Several mm
Polymer
Small thin structure,
[27]
molding
limited 3-D
Injection
Plastics,
Aspect ratio
Polymer
A broad variety of
[35]
molding
ceramics,
of 20
materials can be
metals
molded
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
289

(e.g. E-beam, UV, X-ray) or excimer laser ablation or
microstereolithography followed by electroplating [22].
Through-mask electroplating has been used exten-
sively in the fabrication of metal mold inserts. Nickel
is the most commonly used material for the fabrication of
such inserts because of its well-known electroplating
potential, the high replication accuracy and low internal
stresses. However, the hardness of nickel is relatively low
compared with iron or stainless steel, resulting in a
limited lifetime for nickel mold inserts. Other materials
such as nickel–iron or tungsten–cobalt alloys with
enhanced hardness are also considered [22].
Laser micromachining is also used for the fabrication
of metal mold inserts [36]. As shown in Figure 11.11, a
polymer (e.g. PMMA) is machined by an excimer laser
beam. The polymer structure is then coated with a thin
evaporated metal layer which serves as the ‘seed’ layer
for the following electroplating. After electroplating, the
polymer is removed and the metal mold insert is ready
for molding. Features of mold inserts fabricated by laser
micromachining include the possibility of a large variety
of 3-D shapes, a lateral resolution of the order of microns
and the feasibility for ‘hundreds-of-micron-high’ struc-
tures. This is a mask-less process.
Mechanical machining processes such as micromill-
ing, sawing, grinding and micro-EDM are suitable for the
fabrication of metal micromold inserts. Several materials
are available for such precision machining processes.
Since the fabrication of metal mold inserts by precision
mechanical machining results in large structures, lithogra-
phy can be used for micro-scale mold insert fabrication
[22]. However, lithography-based mold insert fabrications
have limited applications due to abrasion and wear of
nickel, slow speed of electroplating and the possibility of
voids in the electroplated mold insert structures.
Silicon micromold inserts are useful for micromolding
with ﬂat and even surfaces [37]. Both silicon wet and dry
etching can be used for their fabrication. For example, a
silicon mold insert with a lateral dimension of 5 mm and
an aspect ratio of 2 has been fabricated by RIE etching
[37]. Although silicon mold inserts have limited shaping
variations, a high resolution of mold insert is possible
by the approach. Silicon mold inserts are useful for hot
embossing of polymer structures and isotropic pressing
casting of ceramic microstructures [24,31].
11.3.1 Micro-injection molding
Injection molding is a widely used technique for shaping
plastics, metals, metal alloys and ceramics. However,
several modiﬁcations should be made in the conventional
injection molding technique to facilitate micro-scale
injection molding. There are many air-vent slots in
conventional injection molding to facilitate the escape
of air during molding. Since the dimensions of these vents
are generally close to the size of the microstructures,
similarly sized unwanted structures will be formed if
they are used in micro-injection molding. To avoid this,
the air inside the mold is removed before molding, and
hence air-vent slots are not necessary in micro-injection
molding. In addition, a temperature-variation program
must be included in micro-injection molding because of
the high aspect ratio of the microstructures. The tempera-
tures of the mold inserts should be kept higher and for
longer durations, to ensure good mold ﬁlling. Further-
more, since the microstructures are relatively weak at high
temperatures, it is necessary to cool the mold down to a
stable temperature at which the molded part has sufﬁcient
mechanical strength and stable chemical properties.
Therefore, in addition to the heating used in conventional
injection molding, an inside heating and cooling technique
(called the variotherm process) should be used in micro-
injection molding [35].
Photoresist coating
Lithography  
Pattern transfer 
Mold insert 
Photoresist 
Elastomer 
Figure 11.10
Elastomer mold inserts fabrication.
Laser ablation
Metal evaporation coating
and Electroplating
Polymer removal
Polymer removal
Figure 11.11
Metal mold insert fabrication using laser ablation
and electroplating [36].
290
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

A typical micro-injection molding process has the
following steps:
 Placing mold insert into the molding chamber.
 Evacuation of the chamber.
 Heating the plastic pellets to above the melting point.
 Injection of polymer at controlled pressure and tem-
perature.
 Cooling.
 De-molding.
The molding temperature is set above the melting point
of the polymer being used. The pressure applied ranges
from 500 to 2000 bars. Typically, injection-molded micro-
parts have a minimum wall thickness of 20 mm and an
aspect ratio of more than 20. However, structural details
below 0.2mm have been achieved. The thermoplastics used
in micro-injection molding include polysulfonate (PSU),
polycarbonate (PC), polyoxymethylene (POM), polyamide
(PA) and poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK) [35,39].
11.3.2 Micro-photomolding
Micro-photomolding is a process based on micro-injection
molding that uses a photocuring technique to solidify
the feedstock system instead of the heating/cooling-
based phase change in micro-injection molding. The
feedstock system is a reactive polymer resin with a low
viscosity (e.g. methyl methacrylates, unsaturated poly-
esters). The steps involved in the micro-photomolding
process are [23]:
 Sealing the molding chamber and its evacuation.
 Injection of the liquid resin (injection pressure < 20 bar).
 Curing using intense UV/visible radiation under con-
stant holding pressure to compensate curing shrinkage.
 Removal of the molded micro-component from the
molding tool.
The curing time of the micro-photomolding process
depends on the photochemical properties of the resin,
mold thickness and radiation intensity. Usually, a few
minutes are needed to complete photomolding. The
photomolding of powders is made possible by the addi-
tion of ceramic or metal powders into the resin [23].
11.3.3 Micro hot-embossing
Hot embossing is a process for the replication of plastics
by heating and pressing the polymer thick ﬁlms to ﬁt into
the mold insert, as shown in Figure 11.12. Hot embossing
differs from injection molding in the fact that the heating
temperature is just above the glass transition temperature
in hot embossing, while the temperature should be above
the melting point used in injection molding. Another
difference is that polymer ﬁlms are used as the starting
materials in this case, compared to the pellets of poly-
mers used in injection molding.
The embossing tool and the polymer ﬁlm substrate are
mounted in the hot embossing machine and are heated
separately to a temperature just above the glass transition
temperature of the polymer material. For most thermo-
plastic materials, the glass transition temperature is in
the range 120–180 C. The tool is then driven into the
substrate under a controlled force, which is kept up for
several seconds. The tool–substrate–sandwich is then
cooled below the glass transition temperature of the
polymer material. After the polymer material solidiﬁes,
the tool is taken out of the structure. Advantages of this
method are its ﬂexibility and the low internal stresses
and high structural replication accuracy due to the small
thermal cycle (ca. 40 C), which facilitate structural
replications in the nm-range [37].
11.3.4 Micro transfer-molding
Micro transfer-molding (mTM) was developed to fabri-
cate 3-D polymer and ceramic microstructures with sub-
micron-and nanometer-scale features. A schematic diagram
of micro transfer-molding is shown in Figure 11.13. As
a mold insert, an elastomeric tool must be fabricated ﬁrst.
Unlike injection molding and hot embossing where
the hardness of the mold inserts should be high, a soft
Polymer  film 
Mold insert 
Heating and pressing 
De-molding  
Figure 11.12
Hot embossing for polymer micro-component
fabrication.
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
291

elastomeric material should be used to fabricate the mold
inserts for mTM. Usually, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is
used for elastomeric tool fabrication. The Micro contact-
printing process or RIE etching may be used for fabricat-
ing the PDMS molding tool [27]. The thickness of this
tool is controlled to be less than 2 mm to ensure its
ﬂexibility.
A drop of liquid precursor is placed on the patterned
surface of the PDMS tool and the excess liquid is
removed by a piece of ﬂat PDMS, followed by blowing
away any drops of liquid left on the raised areas of the
mold. The ﬁlled PDMS tool is then placed onto a
substrate where the polymer structure will be built. The
prepolymer is next fully cured thermally or photochemi-
cally and the PDMS tool is ﬁnally peeled away and the
polymer microstructure is left on the substrate.
Multilayer microstructures can be fabricated with this
technique. Another characteristic of mTM is that polymer
microstructures can be formed on non-planar surfaces
[27]. One of the limitations of using mTM is that there is a
thin (< 0.1 mm) ﬁlm formed between the polymeric
features due to the polymer transfer of prepolymer
from the raised surfaces of the mold and capillary
‘wicking’ of prepolymer from the PDMS relief tool.
11.3.5 Micromolding in Capillaries (MIMIC)
The micromolding in capillaries process is used to
fabricate polymeric microstructures by generating a net-
work of capillaries formed by contacting an elastomeric
master with a surface embossed with an appropriate
relief structure, and by allowing the liquid precursor to
ﬁll the channels by capillary action [26,28]. Figure 11.14
shows the procedure of an MIMIC process. Similar to
micro transfer-molding, an elastomer (PDMS) tool is
fabricated ﬁrst and is patterned with a relief structure
on its surface. It is then placed on the surface of a
substrate to form a network of channels between them.
When a drop of precursor solution is then placed at one
end of these channels, it ﬁlls the channels by capillary
action. After the solvent is evaporated and the PDMS
tool is carefully removed, the polymer microstructures
are left on the surface of the substrate. Although the
capillary action takes a long time (hours) to ﬁll the
channels with solution, especially for small-diameter
channels
(microns)
and
highly
viscous
precursor
(b)
(a)
Repeat
(1) Fully cure prepolymer
(2) Flip upside down
(3) Peel PDMS away
Piace a substrate
upside down on a
filed mold
Use a block of PDMS
toscrape off the excess
prepolymer
PDMS
PDMS
PDMS
PDMS
Liquid
prepolymer
Place the filled
PDMS mold on a
substrate
Substrate
(1) Cure prepolymer
(2) Peel PDMS away
Figure 11.13
Schematic diagram of micro-transfer molding:
(a) Process ﬂow for a single layer; (b) multiple layer structure
fabrication [27]. Reproduced with permisison of John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Place PDMS mold on support
PDMS mold
Place a drop of polymer
solution at one end
Fill channels by
capillary action
Evaporate solvent and
remove PDMS mold
Figure 11.14
Schematic of micromolding in capillaries [40].
Reproduced with permisison of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
292
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

solutions, the MIMIC process has advantages such as
high fabrication resolution and processibility of a vari-
ety of precursor materials.
Care should be taken in choosing the solvent, as this
should not swell the PDMS mold. MIMIC is usually used
for micro-fabrications of structures ranging from 350 nm
to 50 mm size, with low processing temperatures and no
pressure applied. This method is compatible with the
semiconductor micromachining process.
11.4 INCORPORATION OF METALS AND
CERAMICS BY POLYMERIC PROCESSES
The
fabrication
of
several
advanced
MEMS
for
special applications often requires the integration of poly-
mers, ceramics, metals and metal alloys to utilize their
unique properties. These functional and structural ceramic
materials possess unique properties, such as high tempera-
ture/chemical resistance, low thermal conductivity, ferroe-
lectricity
and
piezoelectricity.
The
use
of
ceramic
materials in MEMS has attracted a great deal of attention
recently [41–45]. The three-dimensional (3-D) ceramic
microstructures are of special interest in applications such
as microengines [42] and microﬂuidics [43]. Various novel
approaches for ceramic micro- fabrication have been
developed. In this section, some fundamental processes
are introduced to show how these can be incorporated into
the fabrication cycle, starting with some of the processes
described thus far for polymeric materials.
11.4.1 Burnout and sintering
In 3-D ceramic and metallic micro-fabrications, poly-
mers are usually used as binders to bond solid particles to
form the desired shape. Since in most of the cases, pure
metal or ceramic structures are required, the binder is
removed (debinding) and the structures are sintered for
densiﬁcation. Since binders are used in most ceramic and
metallic 3-D micro-fabrications, an understanding of the
burnout and sintering process is necessary for obtaining
highly dense ceramic and metal parts. In addition, electro-
chemical deposition is one of the most frequently used
processes for 3-D micro-fabrications. Some of the recently
developed 3-D micro-fabrication processes for ceramics,
metals and polymer/metals will also be introduced.
Debinding techniques can be done by either a solvent or
a thermal process. Since in most of the photoforming
processes the polymer is cross-linked, solvent cannot be
used to dissolve the binders and hence thermal degradation
is preferred. Therefore, the debinding process is often
called the burnout process. Thermal degradation involves
several basic steps [46]. During the early stages of heating,
thermal expansion of the liquid binder induces an hydrau-
lic pressure in the fully saturated part. As the temperature
rises, binder removal, due to evaporation from the surface,
increases. When the saturation level of the binder is
sufﬁciently reduced, the liquid remaining in the mix is
driven to the surface by capillary pressure, where it
evaporates. As binder removal by liquid transfer con-
tinues, gas pockets begin to coalesce, forming a network
of interconnected pores. Finally, this internal structure
creates passages for gas to ﬂow through, allowing diffu-
sion to play an important role in debinding.
Once the overall debinding time is determined, the
heating rate and peak temperature must be carefully
selected. The heating rate is directly related to the
retaining shape. Since rapid heating often leads to cracks
and distortion, slow heating is necessary at the beginning
of the degradation. In some cases, the debinding, however,
cannot be processed in air, to avoid oxidation, e.g.
debinding of metallic structures. A controlled atmosphere
should be provided for the debinding. Hydrogen, argon or
nitrogen is often used in these cases.
Sintering is the term used to describe the consolidation
of the product by ﬁring. Consolidation requires that
within the components, particles have to be joined
together into an aggregate for better strength. Geometric
shrinkage and densiﬁcation usually occurs during sinter-
ing. Sintering densiﬁcation occurs close to the melting
temperature of the material. The bonds between particles
grow by the motion of individual atoms, which is related
to the temperature. This relationship between atomic
motion and temperature varies for different materials
with different melting temperatures. For example, steel
is often sintered near 1250 C, alumina near 1600 C,
copper near 1045 C and PZT near 1200 C. Measures of
sintering include shrinkage and ﬁnal sintering density.
Successful sintering leads to a density g close to the
material density. Theoretically, a ﬁnal sintering density
level can be 95–100 %. [47].
Recently, microwave sintering has been used for bulk
ceramics [48,49]. The obvious advantage of microwave
sintering is the possibility of quick heating, but its non-
uniformity is a concern. However, for micro-scale sinter-
ing, microwave sintering may be a good choice since the
heating uniformity will be fairly good.
11.4.2 Jet molding
Jet molding is a process developed for microfabrication
of metal and ceramic microstructures. Mixture of gas and
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
293

ultra-ﬁne particles (< 0.1 mm) is heated and ejected to the
substrate and form microstructures. There are three major
forming methods: free forming, insert molding and mask
deposition. The fabrication is controlled by the substrate
movement in the case of free forming, while the fabricated
object is deﬁned by the mold insert or mask in the cases of
insert molding and mask deposition, respectively.
Figure 11.15 shows schematically a jet-molding sys-
tem [25]. There are two chambers and nozzles for
different materials supply: one for metal materials and
the other for ceramics. A heating system is used to heat
the powders in a crucible so that the powders have good
bonding after being ejected. An excimer laser is used for
mold-insert fabrication and mask generation to facilitate
a rapid fabrication. As an example, the typical experi-
mental conditions required for jet molding of silver and
PZT are listed in Table 11.3.
11.4.3 Fabrication of ceramic structures with MSL
Unlike these molding or printing-based micro-fabrication
processes, microstereolithography can be used to build
complex ceramic 3-D microstructures in a rapid ‘free-
form’ fashion without high pressure or a heat-curing
process [50]. Ceramic MSL differs from polymeric
MSL in several aspects. First, the resin system for
ceramic MSL is composed of ceramic powders, disper-
sant and diluents in addition to monomers and photo-
initiators that are used in polymer MSL [50–52].
Dispersant and diluent are used to obtain a homogeneous
ceramic suspension with relatively low viscosity. After
UV polymerization, the ceramic particles are bonded by
the polymer and the ceramic ‘green body’ is thus formed.
Generally, the viscosities of ceramic suspensions used for
MSL are higher than the viscosities of most liquid
polymers, leading to a slow layer preparation. A
Film-depostion chamber
Aerosol room
Vacuum system
Operation system
UFP-production chamber
Excimer laser
x–y–z stage
Z
Y
X
Substrate holder
Mask
Rotation holder
and x-stage
Nozzle
Vacuum system
He gas
Nozzle heating system
Valve for mixture
or switch
High frequency
induction
heating-
system
Figure 11.15
Schematic of a jet-molding system [25]. J. Akedo, et al., Fabrication of three dimensional micro structure composed
of different materials using excimer laser ablation and jet molding, Proc. MEMS’ 97,  1997 IEEE
Table 11.3
Typical experimental conditions for
jet molding of Ag and PZT.
Experimental
Jet molding
Jet molding
parameters
with Ag
with PZT
Pressure in
3 torr
0.55 torr
molding chamber
Distance between
100 mm
400 mm
mask and substrate
Distance between
3 mm
5 mm
mask and nozzle
Oriﬁce of
5 mm
5 mm
the nozzle
 150 mm
 350 mm
Deposition time
20 min
120 min
Substrate
Room
Room
temperature
temperature
temperature
Crucible temperature
1250 C
—
294
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

precision blade may be used for layer preparation to
solve this problem [50]. Secondly, light transmission
during MSL processing is complicated in the two-phase
medium (solid and liquid). Light scattering by solid
ceramic particles affects both the curing depth and the
line width.
In general, UV curing of ceramic suspensions for MSL
can be considered to be similar to UV curing with
pigmentation. Two effects may occur as the UV radiation
travels into a highly concentrated suspension. Particles
scatter the radiation and the UV-curable solution absorbs
part of the radiation, thereby reducing its intensity. The
radiation which is not absorbed travels further into the
suspension. The energy of the radiation reaches a critical
level, Ec, at which the radiation energy is absorbed by the
monomer system. This critical level of energy is required
for the gellation of the monomer.
The fabrication of ceramic microstructures using MSL
follows the steps shown in Figure 11.16. A homogeneous
ceramic suspension is ﬁrst prepared. Submicron ceramic
powders are mixed with monomer, photoinitiator, dis-
persant, diluents, etc. by ball-milling for several hours.
The prepared ceramic suspension is then put into the vat
for MSL based on the CAD design. After MSL, the
‘green bodies’ of ceramic micro-parts are obtained. To
get dense micro-ceramic parts, the ‘green body’ is ﬁrst
kept inside a furnace to burn out the polymer binders and
is then sintered in a high-temperature furnace. The binder
burnout and sintering temperature vary for different
polymers and ceramics.
The photomolding of powders is made possible by the
addition of ceramic or metal powders into the resin [23].
The addition of solid powders inside resins will introduce
problems of radiation scattering and absorption, hence
resulting in a longer curing time. However, the addition
of a thermal initiator will help to decrease the curing time
[23]. Table 11.4 shows the particle sizes, volume solid
loadings to and curing times of some resin systems.
11.4.4 Powder injection molding
Powder injection molding (PIM) extends the shaping
advantages of injection molding to metals and ceramics.
The PIM process starts with the feedstock preparation by
mixing a small quantity of a polymer with an inorganic
powder. During injection molding, the metal or ceramic
parts are shaped by the bonding of the polymer binder
containing these inorganic powders. The polymeric binder
is later removed by the burnout process and the object is
sintered, to yield pieces that are as dense as the bulk
material.
Micro powder injection molding (MPIM) has been
used for fabricating MEMS with metallic and ceramic
micro-components [53]. Materials, such as carbonyl iron
powder, aluminum oxide and zirconium oxide, have been
used for MPIM. The powder with mean particle sizes
ranging from 0.6 to 5 mm is mixed with polycleﬁn/wax
to make the feedstock. The nickel mold inserts used
for MPIM is fabricated via the LIGA process. The de-
binding process is critical to obtain crack-free metal and
ceramic micro-parts. Thermal elimination of the organic
components or catalytical de-binding can be used for a
polyacetal-based polymer system. The sintering proce-
dure is done inside a tube furnace. A reducing N2/H2
atmosphere is necessary to sinter metal microstructures,
although ceramic micro-parts can be sintered in air. The
CAD design 
Materials preparation: 
ball milling of UV 
monomer system and 
Ceramic powders 
Microstereolithography 
De-binder (burnout)  
and sintering 
Figure 11.16
Schematic of the ﬂow for ceramic microstereo-
lithography and post-processing.
Table 11.4
Micro-photomolding with powders in
an unsaturated polyester- or PMMA-based resins.
Powder
Particle
Maximum solid
Curing time
materia
size (mm)
loading (vol%)
(min/mm)
SiO2
10
64
10
Al2O3
0.4–0.6
54
20
ZrO2
0.2–0.4
24
17
SiC
0.5
42
20
TiO2
0.021
23
17
Carbonyl–Fe
4.5
53
5
Ag/Al
44
52
14
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
295

fabrication resolution and the ﬁnal density of the fabri-
cated micro-parts obtained by MPIM vary with the
different powders used and the solid loading in the
feedstock system. Although the fabrication resolution is
not comparable with silicon micromachining, it is good
enough for many metal and ceramic micro-component
applications. A high density of the feed stock will ensure
high strength, stiffness and other mechanical properties
of the metal and ceramics micro-parts.
11.4.5 Fabrication of metallic 3-D microstructures
Metallic microstructures have been fabricated extensively
for MEMS. Three-dimensional metallic microstructures
have been built by spatial forming, electrochemical fabri-
cation (EFAB), localized electrodeposition, selective
laser sintering and laser cladding [54–57]. Some of these
processes are introduced in this section due to their
relatively higher fabrication resolution and prospects.
11.4.5.1 Electroplating
Electroplating is a process of electrodeposition in which
an electric current is carried across an electrolyte in an
effort to deposit material onto a substrate at one of the
electrodes. A simple electrodeposition system may con-
tain an electrolyte, an anode, a cathode and an electric
power supply, as shown in Figure 11.17.
The electrolyte is a conducting medium which allows
the ﬂow of electric current as a means of movement of
the matter. Any liquid or solution containing ions can be
used as the electrolyte. A large majority of commercial
electrolytes, however, use water as the solvent and
are therefore called aqueous electrolytes. Deposition
occurs at the cathode. This deposition reaction is related
to the quantity of current that reaches the cathode. The
current ﬂow into the cathode is usually expressed as
current density or quantity of current per unit surface
area of the electrode. Hence, current density is more
frequently used as the ‘control parameter’ in electro-
plating. The anode is the electrode which acts as the
source for deposition at the cathode. The position of the
anode has much to do with the distribution of current
at the cathode and further inﬂuencs the plating rate and
quality.
Electrodeposition follows Faraday’s laws:
 The quantities of different elements liberated at the
anode or cathode during electrolysis are proportional
to the quantity of electricity that passes through the
electrolyte.
 The quantities of different elements or radicals liber-
ated by the same quantity of electricity are propor-
tional to their equivalent weights.
One gram equivalent weight of ions is discharged at the
cathode by 1 faraday (F) (¼ 965 00 coulombs (c) ) charge
ﬂow. One gram equivalent weight of a metal is its atomic
weight divided by its valency (equal to the number of
charges available in the ion). Based on these deﬁnitions,
one can calculate the metal deposited (in grams) on the
cathode per faraday (Table 11.5).
The total deposition thickness d is an important factor
in electroplating [58]:
d ¼ MIt
ZFA
ð11:1Þ
where M is the molar mass (atomic weight (g/mol)), I is
the current, t is the time, Z is the valency, F is the Faraday
Anode
Cathode 
Electrolyte 
Electric power 
supply 
–
–
–
––
––
–
–
––
––
–
–
––
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 11.17
Schematic of electrodeposition.
Table 11.5
Calculation of the metals deposited
at the cathode.
Metal
Ion
Atomic
Valency
Metal deposited
weight
per faraday (g)
Silver
Agþ
107.88
1
107.88
Copper
Cuþ
63.57
1
63.57
Copper
Cu2þ
63.57
2
31.78
Gold
Auþ
197.20
1
197.20
Tin
Sn4þ 118.70
4
29.67
Chromium
Cr3þ
52.02
3
17.34
Nickel
Ni2þ
58.7
2
29.35
Zinc
Zn2þ
65.38
2
32.69
296
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

constant (F ¼ 965 00 C),  is the mass density and A is
the area of the substrate.
The above calculation is useful for estimating an
approximate value of the plating thickness and plating
rate, assuming a cathode efﬁciency of 100 %. In practice,
the cathode efﬁciency is not as high because some
fraction of the current is consumed in producing hydro-
gen. In addition, the distribution of deposition may vary
over the surface of an object. To achieve a desired
deposition with expected properties, such as hardness,
strength and functional properties, there are two para-
meters that can be modiﬁed. These include altering the
bath composition and changing the operating conditions
of plating. Among the operating conditions for plating,
three principal changes that may be made for a given
bath are (i) current density, (ii) method or degree of
agitation and (iii) temperature.
In general, it is desirable to use high current densities
to increase the plating rate in accordance with the above.
It is noticed that within certain limits, an increase in
current density decreases the crystal size [59]. However,
once the current density exceeds such a limit, there is a
tendency to produce ‘rough’ or ‘treed’ depositions. The
current density far beyond this limit may yield ‘spongy’
or ‘burnt’ depositions. Agitation of the solution brings up
a fresh supply of metal salts or ions to the cathode and
thus replenishes the metal ions or compounds at the
cathode surface. Another advantage of agitation is that
it removes gas bubbles. The increase in the temperature
causes an increase in the crystal size and increases the
mobilities of the metal ions and decreases the viscosity of
the solution, so that the cathode ﬁlm is replenished more
rapidly. Another advantage of relatively high tempera-
tures is that there is usually less absorption of hydrogen
in the deposits, less stress and tendency toward cracking.
11.4.5.2 Micro-electroplating
Micro-electroplating works on the same principles as
electrodeposition discussed in the previous section.
Micro-electroplating has advantages in forming thick
metallic ﬁlms, metallic microstructures with high-aspect-
ratios and even 3-D features [60]. Micro-electroplating
can be divided into two major categories: through-
mask-plating (or through-mold-plating) and mask-less
plating. The electroplated micro-parts can be either
directly used for functional devices or act as molds for
subsequent micromolding. Most of the micro-electro-
plating processes used for MEMS belong to through-
mask-plating (Figure 11.18), which has been used for
electronics fabrication since the 1960s [60]. Electro-
plating used for MEMS differ from that used for con-
ventional electronics in several aspects. First, thick
photoresist molds (several microns to hundreds of
microns thick) are used for MEMS while several-
microns-thick molds are sufﬁcient for conventional elec-
tronics. Secondly, multilayer electroplating may be
necessary for MEMS to form micro-metallic structures
with 3-D and high-aspect-ratio features. In contrast, only
single-layer electroplating is often required for electronics.
Materials electroplated for MEMS include gold, copper,
aluminum, nickel and their alloys, for micro systems with
different applications (Table 11.6).
Mask less electroplating is done by either localized
electroplating or laser-enhanced electroplating [53,61].
Although rapid fabrication of 3-D structures is a unique
property of mask-less electroplating, its limitation for
mass production restricts its usefulness.
11.4.5.3 Spatial forming
The spatial forming process combines several technol-
ogies to generate solid metallic microstructures from
ﬁne powders, as shown in Figure 11.19 [56]. As in
projection MSL, data for cross-sections of objects from
their solid CAD models are used for patterning a chrome
mask with images. A custom-built offset printing press
prints negative materials (space around the solid parts) on
a ceramic substrate with multiple registered layers of
pigmented organic ink ( 0.5 mm thick) and are cured
with UV light. After forming a certain number of layers
( 30) of negative materials, the positive ink heavily
loaded with metal powders (e.g. 50 vol%) is ‘knifed’
onto the assembly, ﬁlling the voids (Figure 11.19).
This step is followed by curing of the ﬁlled material
Photoresist 
Seed layer 
Substrate 
Plated metal 
(a)
(b)
Photoresist removal
(demolding) 
(c)
Figure 11.18
Schematic of the through-mask-plating process.
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
297

with UV light. The above steps are repeated until the
desired thickness (typically 500 mm) of the ‘green-body’
metallic micro-parts is reached. The ‘green-body’ parts
are then ‘de-binderized’ to remove organic binders and
are sintered in controlled atmosphere furnaces to obtain
the ﬁnished pure metallic micro-parts. In principle,
mass production is feasible with the spatial forming
process [56].
11.4.5.4 Electrochemical fabrication process
Electrochemical fabrication (EFAB) is a micromachining
process, based on solid freeform fabrication principles,
for high-aspect-ratio and 3-D metallic microsystems [55].
The major fabrication steps in EFAB include instant
masking and selective electroplating, blanket deposition
and planarization (Figure 11.20).
Instant masking makes use of photolithographically
patterned masks on the anode for the following selective
electroplating. The instant mask consists of a conform-
able insulator since the pattern may be topologically
complex. Instant masking patterns a substrate by simply
pressing the insulator mask against it and depositing
electroplating materials onto the substrate through aper-
tures in the insulator mask. The mask consists of a layer
Table 11.6
Micro-electroplating: materials and features.
Typea
Material
Material of
Formation of
Feature
Functional
Reference
plated
plating mold
plating mold
size
device
TMP
Ni
PMMA
X-ray
 1000 mm thick
—
[62]
TMP
Ni, Cu
Polyimide
UV lithography
 150 mm thick
—
[63]
TMP
Ni
Si
UV, plasma
 140 mm
—
[50]
etching
TMP
Al
Polyimide
UV
Aspect ratio
—
[63]
of 21
TMP
NiFe
AZ4562 (positive
UV
 20 mm
Used for
[64]
photoresist)
thick
data storage
TMP
Au, Cu,
AZ 4000
UV
Aspect ratio > 10
Micro-coil
[65]
NiFe
TMP
Ni, NiFe
PMMA
X-ray
 hundreds
Electrostatic
—
of mm
actuator
TMP
Ni
Polyimide
UV
—
Micro-
[66]
accerometer
TMP
Cu, Ni
Polymer, metal
UV
—
RF inductor
[67]
TMP
Cu, NiFe
Polyimide
UV
—
Magnetic
[68]
device
MLP
Cu, Ni
—
—
Arþ laser
—
[69]
MLP
Ni
—
—
Tool tip
Helical spring
[53]
aTMP, through-mask plating ; MLP, mask-less plating.
Application of ink
Filling
Curing
Curing
Ink (cured
and uncured)
Cured filling
Uncured filling
(and substrate)
Figure 11.19
Schematic of the spatial-forming process [56].
C. S. Taylor, P. Cherkas, H. Hampton, J.J. Frantzen, B.O. Shah,
W. B. Tiffany, L. Nanis, P. Booker, A. Salahieh, R. Hansen, A
spatial forming—three dimensional printing process, Proc. IEEE
MEMS’ 94,  1994 IEEE
298
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

of insulator patterned on a ﬂat Cu disk. In selective
electroplating, pressure is applied between the Cu anode
with the mask and the Ni substrate (cathode).
Blanket deposition is also based on the electroplating
technique, but without a mask. Basically, the blanket-
deposited material (e.g. Ni) is different from the selective
plated one (Cu), so that one of them acts as the sacriﬁcial
material and could be removed later. The planarization
is done by lapping the surplus materials to achieve a
precise layer thickness and ﬂatness before deposition
of the subsequent layer. By repeating the above steps,
a
metallic
3-D
microstructure
can
be
formed
(Figure 11.20).
The EFAB process is in its development stage. The
resolution obtained is around 25 mm and the smearing
caused by lapping and ‘misregistration’ also affects the
fabrication precision. Moreover, the fabrication speed is
a concern since too many time-consuming electroplating
steps are involved, although a throughput of two planar-
ized 5 mm layers per hour or about 50 layers per day was
anticipated [55].
11.4.5.5 Localized electrochemical deposition
A localized electrochemical deposition apparatus is
schematically shown in Figure 11.21 [53]. The tip of a
sharply pointed electrode is placed in a plating solution
and brought near the surface where deposition is to
occur. A potential is applied between the tip and the
substrate. The electric ﬁeld generated for electrodepo-
sition is then conﬁned to the area beneath the tip, as
shown in Figure 11.21(a).
Structural material
Sacrificial
(support)
material
(g)
(e)
(f)
(d)
(a)
Substrate
Selectively
deposited 1st
material
(b)
(c)
Electrolyle
Anode
Insulator
Blanket–
depsosited
2nd material
Figure 11.20
The EFAB process: (a) electroplating through an instant mask; (b) instant-mask removal; (c) blanket deposition of
the structural material; (d) planarization by polishing; (e) repetition of electroplating, blanket deposition and planarization until the
ﬁnal structure is formed; (f) remove of the sacriﬁcial materials; (g) cross-sectional view of one layer consisting of structural material
and sacriﬁcial materials [55]. A. Cohen, G. Zhang, F. Tseng, U. Frodis, F. Mansfeld, P. Will, EFAB: rapid, low-cost desktop
micromachining of high aspect ratio true 3-D MEMS, Proc. IEEE MEMS’ 99,  1999 IEEE
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
299

In principle, truly 3-D microstructures can be formed
by using localized electrochemical deposition, provided
it is ‘electrically continuous’ with the substrate. The
spatial resolution of this process is determined by the
size of the microelectrode. Another important parameter
that needs to be considered in this process is the electro-
deposition rate. The deposition rate in this case can be
6 mm/s – two orders of magnitude greater than those of
conventional electroplating [53]. The shape and geome-
try of the microelectrode used for localized electroche-
mical deposition is critical for the deposition proﬁle.
11.4.6 Metal–polymer microstructures
Composite metal/polymer microstructures are becoming
very popular for MEMS. A process developed in cabrera
et al. [70] allows build layer-by-layer the 3-D object so
as
to
obtain
conductive
and
non-conductive
parts
together, instead of manufacturing them separately and
assembling afterwards, for example, to build the cylind-
rical object described in Figure 11.22, which consists of a
metallic element (‘Part 1’) freely rotating inside a poly-
mer housing (‘Part 2’). The major steps involved in the
fabrication include the following:
 Electroplating of copper to make Part 1.
 ‘Local’ laser silver plating on the polymer to get the
conductive base for the following.
 Electroplating of copper.
 Microstereolithography (MSL) with an insoluble resin
to make Part 2.
 MSL with a soluble resin to make a sacriﬁcial
structure between Parts 1 and 2.
11.5 COMBINED SILICON AND POLYMER
STRUCTURES
The MSL process can be used for fabrication of polymer
3-D microstructures, while the silicon micromachining
processes have their own advantages in circuit and
sensing and actuating element fabrication. Hence, a
combined silicon and polymeric microstructure will be
attractive for MEMS applications. Some of the research
efforts in this direction are introduced in this section.
11.5.1 Architecture combination by MSL
Architecture combination is a technology for building
complicated structures by mechanically connecting two
or more architectures made by different micromachining
processes. This approach can enable fabrication of a system
consisting of LIGA linkages driven by a Si micromotor
Fine 
electrode 
Deposit
Mandrel 
Plating 
solution 
(a) 
Micro stepping 
motors 
Stepping 
motor 
controller
Workstation 
V ref
Voltage
sulfamate 
solution
Cu or Ni 
mandrel 
Pt:Ir
tip
Trigger 
Current 
amplifier 
(b)
Figure 11.21
Localized electrochemical deposition for 3-D
micro-fabrication: (a) concept; (b) apparatus [53]. Madden, J.D.;
Hunter, I.W., ‘‘Three-dimensional microfabrication by localized
electrochemical deposition,’’ Journal of Microelectromechanical
Systems, Volume 5, Issue 1,  1996 IEEE
Metal
(Part 1)
(Part 2)
Air
Polymer
Figure 11.22
Complex 3-D metal–polymer part [70].
300
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

and housed in a polymer structure (Figure 11.2). Photo-
forming (its use here is the same as in MSL) is developed
for this because of its relatively high resolution and 3-D
fabrication capability (Figure 11.23(c)) [71].
Since in this approach the components fabricated with
different processes are joined together during the photo-
forming process, their proper alignment is critical to
achieve a successful architecture combination.
11.5.2 MSL integrated with thick-ﬁlm lithography
Many micromechanical components have been fabri-
cated using planar processes, such as thin-ﬁlm and
bulk-silicon
micromachining
and
high-aspect-ratio
micromachining (e.g. LIGA, deep RIE and thick-resist
lithography), which have high fabrication resolutions,
but do not allow true 3-D fabrications. On the other
hand, MSL allows the building of 3-D complex micro-
structures, but with limited resolution and the problems
associated with the manipulation and assembling of
the obtained polymer structures. An approach of com-
bining MSL and thick-resist lithography may provide a
unique technique to build 3-D microstructures with
more functions [72].
11.5.3 AMANDA process
AMANDA is a process which combines surface micro-
machining, micromolding and diaphragm transfer to
fabricate micro-parts from polymers. A ﬂexible dia-
phragm with other functional or structural materials is
deposited and patterned on a silicon substrate using a
surface micromachining process. The molding process is
then used to build the housing for the fabricated dia-
phragm and is then transferred from the silicon substrate
to the polymeric housing. Hence, the AMANDA process
Elevator driver
Elevator
Window
Laser oscillator
Resin container
Pin hole
Beam shutter
Condenser
Head driver
(a)
Micromotor
Substrate
Support
Glue mechanism
Next substrate
(b)
(1) Make a substrate with
      functional elements
(2) Make glue mechanisms
      by photoforming
(3) Pile up next substrate
      and remove supports
(c)
Position the elevator
  near the window
Scan the beam
  along the first layer
Finish the first layer
Pull up the elevator
  for thickness of one layer
Repaet these operations
  to make the object shape
Figure 11.23
(a) 3-D micro-fabrication by the combined process; (b) schematic of a photoforming system; (b) process ﬂow
for photoforming [71]. T. Takagi, and N. Nakajima, Architecture combination by micro photoforming process, Proc. IEEE MEMS 94,
 1994 IEEE
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
301

allows low-cost production of reliable micro devices by
batch fabrication.
As an example for the AMANDA process, the fabri-
cation process for a pressure transducer is shown in
Figure 11.24. A silicon wafer is covered with 60 nm of
gold by PVD and then with 1.5 mm of polyimide by spin-
coating. The polyimide is patterned by photolithography
and an additional 100 nm gold is evaporated on top of the
polyimide layer. The second layer of gold is patterned
to form strain gauges. A second polyimide disk with a
thickness of 30 mm is built on these strain gauges by spin-
coating and photolithography.
The housing of AMANDA devices are produced by
molding. Typically, several housings can be fabricated in
a batch. Injection molding is generally used for the
molding in AMANDA in order to save time [73]. The
housing can be molded from thermoplastic materials
such as polysulfone, PMMA, PA, PC, PVDF or PEEK.
[73]. Mold inserts are fabricated by milling and drilling
with an CNC machine, LIGA, deep RIE, etc.
The diaphragm is then transferred into the housing. An
adhesive is injected into the cavities inside the housings.
In the example shown in Figure 11.24, the housings are
‘adhesively’ bonded to the polyimide on the wafer. The
polyimide outside the housing is cut and the housing,
together with the polyimide diaphragm, is then separated
from the wafer. The polyimide can be peeled off from the
wafer because adhesion of the ﬁrst gold layer to silicon is
low. Usually, the diaphragm is encapsulated by a second
shell, which is molded and bonded similarly to the ﬁrst shell.
The
dimensional
accuracy
of
the
microstructures
fabricated by the AMANDA process depends on the
lithography, precision of the mold insert and molding
process and alignment and temperature control during
bonding of the molded part and diaphragm. The lateral
accuracy of the pattern on the diaphragm can be very high
because it is fabricated by photolithography. Transfer of
the diaphragm to the polymer housing causes an overall
shrinkage due to thermal expansion of the housing and the
heating for bonding. The precision of the mold insert for
housing fabrication can be very high if the LIGA process
is used. The precision of molding can be of several
microns but can be improved with injection molding or
hot-embossing molding. Disadvantages of this process are
in the alignment and control of shrinkage which affects the
dimensional accuracy of the AMANDA process [73].
REFERENCES
1. B. Zhu and V.K. Varadan, ‘Integrated MOSFET based
hydrophone device for underwater applications’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 4700, 101–110 (2002).
2. C.W. Hull, ‘Apparatus for production of three-dimensional
objects by stereolithography’, US Patent 4 575 330 (1984).
3. J.C. Andre´, A. Le Me´haute´ and O. de Witte, ‘Dispositif pour
re´alisar un mode`le de pie`ce industrielle’, French Patent,
8 411 241 (1984).
4. H. Kodama, ‘Automatic method for fabricating a three-
dimensional plastic model with photo-hardening polymer’,
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 52, 1770–1773 (1981).
Electric
contact
Fluidic contacts Molded housings
(b)
(d)
(c)
(a)
Polyimide
Gold
Silicon wafer
Polyimide disk
Strain gauges
Adhesive
Figure 11.24
Major ﬂow of AMANDA process; (a) a diaphragm is fabricated by silicon surface micromachining; (b) housings are
fabricated by molding or mechanical machining; (c) a diaphragm is transferred from the silicon substrate to the housing; (d) diced
chips with electric and ﬂuidic contacts [73]. Reprinted from Sensors and Actuators A, 70, W.K.Schomburg, R. Ahrens, W. Bacher,
C. Goll, S. Meinzer, A. Quinte, AMANDA—low-cost production of microﬂuidic devices, pp. 153–158, Copyright 1998, with
permission from Elsevier
302
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

5. P.F. Jacobs, Rapid Prototyping and Manufacturing: Funda-
mentals of Stereolithography, Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, Dearborn, MI, USA (1992).
6. D.
Kochan,
Solid
Freeform
Manufacturing,
Elsevier,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (1993).
7. K. Ikuta, and K. Hirowatari, ‘Real three dimensional
microfabrication using stereo lithography and metal mold-
ing’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’93, IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, pp. 42–47 (1993).
8. T. Katagi and N. Nakajima, ‘Photoforming applied to ﬁne
machining’, in Proceedings of IEEE:MEMS’93 IEEE, Pis-
cataway, NJ, USA, pp. 173–178 (1993).
9. X. Zhang, X.N. Jiang and C. Sun, ‘Micro-stereolithography
of polymeric and ceramic microstructures’, Sensors and
Actuators: Physical, A77, 149–156 (1999).
10. K. Ikuta, T. Ogata, M. Tsubio and S. Kojima, ‘Development
of mass productive micro stereo lithography (Mass-IH pro-
cess)’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’96, IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, pp. 301–305 (1996).
11. P.F.Jacobs,StereolithographyandOtherRP&MTechnologies:
FromRapidPrototypingtoRapidTooling,AmericanSocietyof
Mechanical Engineers, New York, NY, USA (1996).
12. S. Zissi, A. Bertsch, J.Y. Jezequel, S. Corbel, J.C. Andre and
D.J. Lougnot, ‘Stereolithography and microtechnologies’,
Microsystem Technologies, 2, 97–102 (1996).
13. A. Bertsch, S. Zissi, J.Y. Jezequel, S. Corbel and J.C. Andre,
‘Microstereolithography using a liquid crystal display as
dynamic mask-generator’, Microsystem Technologies, 3,
42–47 (1997).
14. T. Nakamoto and K. Yamaguchi, ‘Consideration on the
producing of high aspect ratio micro parts using UV
sensitive photopolymer’, in Proceedings of the Seventh
International Symposium on Micro Machine and Human
Science, IEEE, New York, USA, pp. 53–58 (1996).
15. S. Monneret, V. Loubere and S. Corbel, ‘Microstereolitho-
graphy using a dynamic mask generator and a non-coherent
visible light source’, Proceedings of SPIE, 3680, 553–561
(1999).
16. L. Beluze, A. Bertsch and P. Renaud, ‘Microstereolithogra-
phy: a new process to build complex 3D objects’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 3680, 808–817 (1999).
17. T. Katagi and N. Nakajima, ‘Photoforming applied to ﬁne
machining’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’93, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 173–178 (1993).
18. K. Ikuta, S. Maruo and S. Kojima, ‘New micro stereo
lithography for freely moved 3D micro structure – super IH
process with submicron resolution’, in Proceedings of IEEE:
MEMS’98, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 290–295 (1998).
19. B.P. Wayne, Principles and Applications of Photochemistry,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK (1988).
20. S. Maruo and S. Kawata, ‘Two-photon-absorbed near-
infrared photopolymerization for three-dimensional micro-
fabrication, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 7,
411–415 (1998).
21. K. Suzumori, A. Koga and R. Haneda, ‘Microfabrication of
integrated FMAs using stereo lithography’, in Proceedings
of IEEE: MEMS’94, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 136–
141 (1994).
22. L. Weber, W. Ehrfeld, H. Freimuth, M. Lacher, H. Lehr and
B. Pech, ‘Micro molding – a powerful tool for the large scale
production of precise microstructures’, Proceedings of SPIE,
2879, 156–167 (1996).
23. T. Hanemann, R. Ruprecht and J.H. HanBelt, ‘Micromolding
and photopolymerization’, Advanced Materials, 9, 927–929
(1997).
24. L. Lin, C.-J. Chiu, W. Bache and M. Heckele, ‘Microfab-
rication using silicon mold insert and hot embossing’, in
MHS’96, Proceedings of the Seventh International Sympo-
sium Micro Machine and Human Science, IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, pp. 67–71 (1996).
25. J. Akedo, M. Ichiki, K. Kikuchi and R. Maeda, ‘Fabrication
of three-dimensional micro structure composed of different
materials using excimer laser ablation and jet molding’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE: The Tenth Annual International
Workshop on Micro electro Mechanical Systems, IEEE,
Piscataway, USA, pp. 135–140 (1997).
26. Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides, ‘Soft lithography’, Angewandte
Chemie; International Edition, 37, 350–375, (1998).
27. X.-M. Zhao, Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides, ‘Fabrication of
three-dimensional micro-structures: microtransfer molding’,
Advanced Materials, 8, 837–840 (1996).
28. E. Kim, Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides, ‘Polymer microstruc-
ture formed by moulding in capillaries’, Nature (London),
376, 581–584 (1995).
29. E. Kim, Y. Xia, X.-M. Zhao and G.M. Whitesides, ‘Solvent-
assisted microcontact molding: a convenient method for
fabricating three-dimensional structures on surfaces of
polymers’, Advanced Materials, 9, 651–654 (1997).
30. Y. Hirata, H. Okuyama, S. Ogino, T. Numazawa and H.
Takada, ‘Piezoelectric
composites for micro-ultrasonic
transducers realized with deep-etch X-ray lithography’, in
Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’95, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 191–196 (1995).
31. S.N. Wang, J.-F. Li, R. Toda, R. Watanabe, K. Minami and
M. Esashi, ‘Novel processing of high aspect ratio 1–3
structures of high density PZT’, in Proceedings of IEEE:
MEMS’98, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 223–228
(1998).
32. W. Bacher, W. Menz and J. Mohr, ‘The LIGA technique and
its potential for microsystems — a survey’, IEEE Transac-
tions: Industrial Electronics, 42, 431–441 (1995).
33. J.Elders, H.V. Jansen, M. Elwenspoek and W. Ehrfeld,
‘DEEMO: a new technology for the fabrication of micro-
structures’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’95, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 238–243 (1995).
34. H. Freimuth, V. Hessel, H. Koelle, M. Lacher, W. Ehrfeld, T.
Vaahs and M. Brueck, ‘Formation of complex ceramic
miniaturized structures by pyrolysis of poly(vinylsilazane),
Journal of the American Ceramics Society, 79, 1457–1465
(1996).
35. V. Piotter, T. Benzler, T. Hanemann, H. Wollmer, R.
Ruprecht and J. Hausselt, ‘Innovative molding technologies
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
303

for the fabrication of components for microsystems, Pro-
ceedings of SPIE, 3680, 456–463 (1999).
36. Website: [http://potomac-laser.com/applications_micromold.
htm].
37. H. Becker and U. Heim, ‘Silicon as tool material for polymer
hot embossing’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’99, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 228–231 (1999).
38. O. Kemmann, C. Schaumburg and L. Webber, ‘Micro
moulding behavior of engineering plastics’, Proceedings
of SPIE, 3680, 464–471, (1999).
39. L. Weber, W. Ehrfeld, M. Begemann, U. Berg and F. Michel,
‘Fabrication of plastic microparts on wafer level’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 3874, 44–52 (1999).
40. W.S. Beh, I.T. Kim, D. Qin, Y. Xia and G.M. Whitesides,
‘Formation of patterned microstructures of conducting
polymers by soft lithography and applications in microelec-
tronic device fabrication’, Advanced Materials, 11, 1038–
1041 (1999).
41. J.M. English and M.G. Allen, ‘Wireless micromachined
ceramic
pressure
sensors’,
in
Proceedings
of
IEEE:
MEMS’99, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 511–516 (1999).
42. A.H. Epstein, S.D. Senturia, G. Ananthasuresh, A. Ayon, k.
Breuer, K.-S. Chen, F. Ehrich, G. Gauba, R. Ghodssi, C.
Groshenry, S. Jacobson, J. Lang, C.-C. Mehra, J. Mur
Miranda, S. Nagle, D. Orr, E. Piekos, M. Schmidt, G.
Shirley, S. Spearing, C. Tan, Y.-S. Tzeng and I. Waitz,
‘Power MEMS and ‘Power MEMS and microengines’, in
Proceedings of Transducers’97: International Conference
on Solid State Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 2(2), IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 753–756 (1997).
43. H.H. Bau, S.G.K. Ananthasuresh, J. J. Santiago-Aviles, J.
Zhong, M. Kim, M. Yi, P. Espinoza-Vallejos and L.
Sola-Laguna, ‘Ceramic tape-based meso systems tech-
nology’,
in
Proceedings
of
the
ASME
International
Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition on Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), ASME, New York,
NY, USA, pp. 491–498 (1998).
44. D.L. Polla and L.F. Francis, ‘Ferroelectric thin ﬁlms in
microelectromechanical systems applications’, MRS Bulle-
tin, 59–65 (July 1996).
45. V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan and S. Motojima, ‘Three-
dimensional polymeric and ceramic MEMS and their appli-
cations’, Proceedings of SPIE, 2722, 156–164 (1996).
46. B.C. Mutsuddy and R.G. Ford, Ceramic Injection Molding,
Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1995).
47. R.M. German, and A. Bose, Injection Molding of Metals and
Ceramics, Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton,
NJ, USA (1997).
48. R. Roy, D. Agrawal, J. Cheng and S. Gedevanishvili, ‘Full
sintering of powdered-metal bodies in a microwave ﬁeld’,
Nature (London), 399, 668–670 (1999).
49. W. Bartusch, P. Mehringer and G.A. Muller, ‘Microwave
sintering – from the laboratory to industrial scale’, Kera-
mische Zeitschrift, 50, 810–817 (1998).
50. X.N. Jiang, C. Sun, X. Zhang, B. Xu and T.H. Ye, ‘Micro-
stereolithography of lead zirconate titanate thick ﬁlm on
silicon substrate’, Sensors and Actuators: Physical, 87A,
72–77 (2000).
51. X. Zhang, X.N. Jiang and C. Sun, ‘Micro-stereolithography
for MEMS, in Proceedings of the ASME International
Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition on
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), ASME New
York, NY USA, pp. 3–9 (1998).
52. M.L. Grifﬁth, and J.W. Halloran, ‘Stereolithography of
ceramics’,
in
Proceedings
of
the
27th
International
SAMPE Technical Conference, SAMPE, Covina, CA,
USA, pp. 970–979 (1995).
53. T. Benzler, V. Piotter, T. Hanemann, K. Mueller, P. Norajitra,
R. Ruprecht and J. Hausselt, ‘Innovations in molding
technologies for microfabrication’, Proceedings of SPIE,
3874, 53–60 (1999).
54. J.D. Madden and I.W. Hunter, ‘Three-dimensional micro-
fabrication by localized electrochemical deposition’, Jour-
nal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 5, 24–32 (1996).
55. A. Cohen, G. Zhang, F. Tseng, U. Frodis, F. Mansfeld and P.
Will, ‘EFAB: rapid, low-cost desktop micromachining of
high aspect ratio true 3-D MEMS’, in Proceedings of IEEE:
MEMS’99, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 244–251 (1999).
56. C.S. Taylor, P. Cherkas, H. Hampton, J.J. Frantzen, B.O.
Shah, W.B. Tiffany, L. Nanis, P. Booker, A. Salahieh and R.
Hansen, ‘A spatial forming – a three dimensional printing
process’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’94, IEEE, Piscat-
away, NJ, USA, pp. 203–208 (1994).
57. Y.P. Kathuria, ‘Rapid prototyping: an innovative technique
for microfabrication of metallic parts’, in Proceedings of the
Seventh International Sympossium on Micro Machine and
Human Science, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 59–65
(1996).
58. J.B. Mohler and H.J. Sedusky, Electroplating for the Metal-
lurgist, Engineer and Chemist, Chemical Publishing Co.,
Inc., New York (1951).
59. W. Blum and G.B. Hogaboom, Principles of Electroplating
and Electroforming, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA
(1949).
60. L.T. Romankiw, ‘A path from electroplating through litho-
graphic masks in electronics to LIGA in MEMS’, Electro-
chimica Acta, 42, 2985–3005 (1997).
61. R.J. von Gutfeld and K.G. Sheppard, ‘Electrochemical
microfabrication
by
laser-enhanced
photothermal
pro-
cesses’, IBM Journal of Research and Development, 42,
639–653 (1998).
62. E.W. Becker, W. Ehrfeld, P. Hagmann, A. Maner and D.
Muenchmeyer, ‘Fabrication of microstructures with high
aspect ratios and great structural heights by synchrotron
radiation lithography, galvanoforming and plastic moulding
(LIGA process)’, Microelectronic Engineering, 4, 35–56
(1986).
63. A.B. Frazier and M.G. Allen, ‘Metallic microstructures fabri-
cated using photosensitive polyimide electroplating molds’,
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 2, 87–94 (1993).
64. J.-M. Quemper, S. Nicolas, J.P. Gilles, J.P. Grandchamp, A.
Bosseboeuf, T. Bourouina and E. Dufour-Gergam, ‘Permal-
304
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

loy electroplating through photoresist molds’, Sensors and
Actuators: Physical, A74, 1–4, (1999).
65. B. Loechel, A. Maciossek, H.J. Quenzer and B. Wagner,
‘Ultraviolet depth lithography and galvanoforming for
micromachining’, Journal of Electrochemical Society, 143,
237–244 (1996).
66. Y. Konaka and M.G. Allen, ‘Single- and multi-layer elec-
troplated microaccelerometers’, in Proceedings of IEEE:
MEMS’96, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 168–173 (1996).
67. J.-B. Yoon, B.K. Kim, C.H. Han, E. Yoon and C.K. Kim,
‘Surface micromachined solenoid on-Si and on-glass induc-
tors for RF applications’, IEEE Electron Device Letters, 20,
487–489 (1999).
68. C.H. Ahn and M.G. Allen, ‘Micromachined planar inductors
on silicon wafers for MEMS applications’, IEEE Transac-
tions : Industrial Electronics, 45, 866–876 (1998).
69. Q. Lin, K.G. Sheppard, K.G. M. Datta and L.T. Romankiw,
‘Laser-enhanced electrodeposition of lead–tin solder’,
Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 139, L62–L63
(1992).
70. M. Cabrera, A. Bertsch, J. Chassaing, J.Y. von Jezequel and
J. C. Andre, ‘Microphotofabrication of very small objects:
pushing the limits of stereolithography’, Molecular Crystals
and Liquid Crystals, 315, 223–234 (1998).
71. T. Takagi and N. Nakajima, ‘Architecture combination by
micro photoforming process’, in Proceedings of IEEE:
MEMS’94, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 211–216
(1994).
72. A. Bertsch, H. Lorenz and P. Renaud, ‘Combining micro-
stereolithography and thick resist UV lithography for 3D
microfabrication’, in Proceedings of IEEE: MEMS’98,
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 18–23 (1998).
73. W.K. Schomburg, R. Ahrens, W. Bacher, C. Goll, S. Meinzer
and A. Quinte, ‘AMANDA – low-cost production of micro-
ﬂuidic devices’, Sensors and Actuators, A70, 153–158
(1998).
Polymeric MEMS Fabrication Techniques
305

12
Integration and Packaging of Smart
Microsystems
12.1 INTEGRATION OF MEMS
AND MICROELECTRONICS
The integration of an MEMS sensor with electronics has
several advantages when dealing with small signals. The
function of electronics is to make sure that the MEMS
components operate correctly. The state-of-the-art in
MEMS is combination with ICs, utilizing advanced
packaging techniques to create a system-on-a-package
(SOP) or a system-on-a-chip (SIP) [1]. However, in such
cases it is important that the process used for MEMS
fabrication does not adversely affect the electronics.
MEMS devices can be fabricated as pre- or post-proces-
sing modules, which are integrated by standard proces-
sing steps. The choice of integration depends on the
application and different aspects of its implementation
technology. Various approaches for their integration with
microelectronics are considered in this section.
In general, three possibilities exist for monolithic
integration of CMOS and MEMS: (a) CMOS ﬁrst, (b)
MEMS in the middle, and (c) MEMS ﬁrst [2,3]. In
addition, a hybrid approach, known as a multichip
module is also used often for such integration. Each of
these methods has its own advantages and disadvantages.
A comparison is listed in Table 12.1. It may be recalled
that a number of materials, such as ceramics, are used in
the fabrication of various MEMS, unlike in CMOS.
Annealing of polysilicon or sintering of most ceramics
generally require higher processing temperatures, often
exceeding that allowed in CMOS. For example, at
temperatures in excess of about 800 C, aluminum metal-
lizations may diffuse and cause performance degrada-
tion.
Hence,
if
ceramic
processing
at
a
higher
temperature is involved, it may be preferable to fabricate
the MEMS ﬁrst. In contrast, if the MEMS involves
delicate structures, several common CMOS processes,
such as ‘lift off’, may degrade the MEMS performance.
Hence, the choice of process sequence is highly depen-
dent on the particular MEMS structure at hand.
12.1.1 CMOS ﬁrst process
In this approach, ﬁrst developed at UC Berkeley, the
temperature limitation due to aluminum is eliminated by
using tungsten as the conducting layer [4]. In this
process, known as ‘modular integration of CMOS with
microstructures’ (MICSs), CMOS circuits are ﬁrst fabri-
cated using conventional processes, and polysilicon
microstructures are then fabricated on the top after
passivating with SiN and using a phosphosilicate glass
(PSG) sacriﬁcial layer. Rapid thermal annealing (RTA) of
polysilicon in nitrogen at 1000 C for ‘stress relief’ does
not affect the CMOS performance. A cross-sectional
view of the device is shown in Figure 12.1. In an
alternate approach, MEMS fabrication is limited to
below 400 C so that these steps do not adversely affect
the CMOS fabricated ﬁrst. Some examples of successful
microsystems fabricated by this approach as listed in
Table 12.2.
12.1.2 MEMS ﬁrst process
In the method, MEMS structures are ﬁrst fabricated on
the silicon wafer [12,13]. The primary advantage is that
higher processing temperature can be used to achieve
better process optimization. In this process, developed at
the Sandia National Laboratories, shallow trenches are
ﬁrst anisotropically etched on the wafer and the MEMS is
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

built within these trenches [14]. Silicon nitride and
sacriﬁcial oxide may be deposited within these trenches
for the MEMS structures. A polysilicon layer on top of
these layers helps establish contacts with the subsequent
CMOS processing. Chemical–mechanical planarization
(CMP) and high-temperature annealing are done to
optimize this polysilicon layer. The sacriﬁcial oxide
covering the MEMS structure is removed after fabrica-
tion of the CMOS device. A photoresist is used as a
protective layer during the release process. A cross-
sectional view of a typical device fabricated with this
process in shown in Figure 12.2. Some examples of
successful microsystems fabricated by this approach are
listed in Table 12.3.
12.1.3 Intermediate process
The simplest form of an integrated MEMS device is where
the existing layers for fabricating the IC are used for the
mechanical components in MEMS [17–19]. Standard
microelectronics processes require a number of layers on
top of the wafer, such as oxide, polysilicon, metal and
nitride. Utilizing these layers in an MEMS requires only a
few additional steps of masking and etching, as explained
in Figure 12.3. Some examples of successful microsys-
tems fabricated by this approach are listed in Table 12.4.
12.1.4 Multichip module
The incompatibilities in the fabrication processes of
MEMS and ICs have made their monolithic integration
difﬁcult. Multichip module (MCM) packaging provides
an efﬁcient solution to integrate MEMS with microelec-
tronic circuits as it supports a variety of die types in a
common substrate without the need for resorting to
signiﬁcant changes in the fabrication process of either
component. Several sensors, actuators or a combination
can be combined in a single chip using the MCM
technique [22]. Using this approach, both surface- and
bulk-micromachined components may be integrated with
the electronics. When using this approach, separate
procedures are required for releasing and assembling
the MEMS structures without degrading the package or
other dies in the module.
Several variants of this approach exist: high-density
interconnect (HDI), chip-on-ﬂex (COF) and micro-module
system
(MMSs)
MCM-D.
These
are
compared
in
Tungsten
metallization
Gate
poly TiN/TiSi2
Poly-poly
capacitor PSG
Nitride
passivation
Poly 2
Poly 1
n+
n+
N Substrate
P well
p+
p+
Figure 12.1
Cross-sectional view of a device fabricated with the MICS process [4]. W. Yun; Howe, R.T.; Gray, P.R., ‘‘Surface
micromachined, digitally force-balanced accelerometer with integrated CMOS detection circuitry,’’ 5th Solid-State Sensor and
Actuator Workshop, 1992. Technical Digest, # 1992 IEEE
308
Smart Material Systems and MEMS
Publisher's Note:
Permission to reproduce this image
online was not granted by the
copyright holder. Readers are kindly
requested to refer to the printed v ersion
of this chapter.

Table 12.5. In standard HDI process the dies are embedded
in cavities milled on the base substrate and then a thin-ﬁlm
interconnecting layer is deposited on top of the compo-
nents. Holes for the interconnecting vias are made by laser
ablation using a 350 nm argon ion laser. Physical access to
the MEMS die is provided by an additional laser ablation
step. Figure 12.4(a) shows a typical HDI process ﬂow,
compared with an augmented HDI process for MEMS
Table 12.2
Examples of the CMOS ﬁrst approach for the fabrication of microsystems [5].
Organization
Microsystem
Remarks
Reference
UC Berkeley
Micro-
Tungsten metallization to
[4]
accelerometer
increase temperature limit of
CMOS; by MICS process
Texas Instruments
Digital
An array of aluminum
[6]
micro-mirror
micro-mirrors integrated over a
static random access memory
University of Michigan/ Gyroscope
—
[7]
Delphi Automotive
Systems
University of
Acceleration
MEMS parts built by additive
[8]
Bremen/Inﬁneon
switch
electroplating technology
Honeywell
Infrared
SiN encapsulation of emitter
[9]
thermal
for electrical isolation and
imager
mechanical support
Stanford
Biosensor with
A hybrid glass/PDMS/silicon
[10]
University
disposable
chamber in a cell cartridge
cartridges
that includes ﬂuidic interchanges,
physiological sensors and
environmental regulation
Austrian Micro
Capacitive
Wafer bonding of a
[11]
Systrems
acceleration
polysilicon sensor wafer
sensor
with a CMOS substrate
p-tub
N-tub
Sec oxide
CMOS device area
Micromechanical device area
Poly 2
Poly 1
n-type silicon substrate
Nitride
Nitride
Arsenic-doped epitaxial layer
MM poly 0
PETEOS
Fiell oxide
TFOF
Ped
TEOF
Field Oxide
PE nitride
Pad
Figure 12.2
Cross-sectional view of a typical device fabricated with an MEMS – ﬁrst fabrication process developed at the Sandia
National Laboratories [14]. J.H. Smith, S. Montague, J.J. Snieowski, J.R. Murray, and P.J. McWhorter, ‘‘Embedded micromechanical
devices for monolithic integration of MEMS with CMOS,’’ IEDM’95 Tech. Digest, # 1995 IEEE
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
309

packaging (Figure 12.4(b)) by an additional laser-ablation
step to allow physical access to the MEMS die. The
windows in the dielectric overlay above the MEMS device
are selectively etched used laser ablation. COF is a lower-
cost variant of HDI in which a molded plastic substrate
replaces the ceramic.
In the MCM-D approach, the interconnected layers are
deposited on the substrate and the dies are mounted
above these. Interconnection between the dies and the
packaging is done by wire bonding. Most of the common
wet-etching techniques are not suitable for bulk micro-
machining of structures while following this approach.
Hence, isotropic dry etching using XeF2 can be used for
selectively etching silicon. Wet etching using HF can,
however, be used for releasing the surface-micromachined
structure parts of this chip after shielding the bulk micro-
machined parts by a positive photoresist.
The main disadvantage of the MCM approach is the
possibility for signal degradation due to parasitic effects
between the components and the apparent added packag-
ing expenses.
12.2 MEMS PACKAGING
Packaging is the science of establishing interconnections
between the various subsystems and providing an appro-
priate operating environment for the electromechanical
circuits to process the gathered information. The disci-
pline of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) was
developed so closely with silicon processing that most
of the early packaging technologies for MEMS were
directly adapted from microelectronics. However, in
contrast to the case of microelectronics, most MEMS
devices need a physical access to the outside world,
Table 12.3
Examples of the MEMS ﬁrst approach for the fabrication of microsystems [5].
Organization
Microsystem
Remarks
Reference
Sandia National
—
Microstructures embedded
[14]
Laboratories
below the CMOS by an integrated
MEMS (iMEMS) process
Physical
Trench–Hall
Hard mask, consisting of
[15]
Electronics
device
SiO2/SiN/SiO2, is ﬁrst
Laboratory,Zurich/
deposited for etching trenches
Inﬁneon
and apolysilicon layer for
electrical shielding
Microsystems
Pressure sensor
Micromachined parts are added
[16]
Technology
and angular
to the CMOS fabricated parts by
Laboratory, MIT
rate sensor
wafer fusion bonding
Circuit
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Acceleration sensor
n-silicon
p-well
n-well
Passivation
Aluminium
photoresist
Silicon dioxide
n-doped Polysilicon
Silicon nitride 
Sacrificial layer
n+ doped silicon
p+ doped silicon
Siesmic mass
Suspension
Anchor
Figure 12.3
Integration of surface micromachining with CMOS [17]. Hierold, C, Hildebrandt, A, Naher, U, Scheiter, T, Mensching,
B, Steger, M, Tielert, R. ‘‘A pure CMOS surface micromachined integrated accelerometer,’’ The 9th Annual Intl Workshop on Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems, 1996, MEMS ’96, Proceedings. IEEE, 11–15 Feb, # 1996 IEEE
310
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

either to mechanically react with an external parameter
or to sense a physical variable. In state-of-the art micro-
electronics, the device normally accesses the outside
world via electrical connections alone and the systems
are totally sealed and isolated. Therefore, unlike electro-
nic packaging, where a standard package can be used for
a variety of applications, MEMS packages tend to be
customized.
Challenges in the design of packaging depend on the
overall complexity of the ultimate application of the
device. However, there are no sharp boundaries between
these classes. The size of the package, choice of its shape
and material, alignment of the device, mounting for the
isolation of shock and vibration and sealing are some of
the many concerns in MEMS packaging. Considerations
in packaging may be different, depending on whether the
device is used as an MOEMS, RF MEMS or simpler
sensors or actuators. Furthermore, special considerations,
such as biocompatibility, may have to be examined when
designing the packaging of a system. Many important
lessons that have been learned throughout years of
experience in the microelectronics industry could be
adapted to the packaging of MEMS devices.
In MEMS, mechanical structures and electrical com-
ponents are combined to form a functional system. While
packaging, these electrical and mechanical components
are interconnected and the electrical inputs are interfaced
with external circuits. MEMS components can be extre-
mely fragile and must be protected from mechanical
damage and hostile environments. This section presents
the fundamentals of microelectronic packaging adapted
for MEMS technology.
12.2.1 Objectives in packaging
The objective of packaging is to integrate all components
of a system such that cost, mass and complexity are
minimized. The MEMS package should protect the
device, while at the same time letting it perform its
intended functions with less attenuation of signal in a
given environment [23,24]. Packaging is an expensive
process since it seeks to protect relatively fragile struc-
tures integrated into the device. For a standard integrated
circuit, the packaging process may take up to 95 % of the
total manufacturing cost. Issues in MEMS packaging are
more difﬁcult to solve due to stringent requirements in
processing and handling and the diversity and fragile
nature of the microstructures.
MEMS packages provide a mechanical support, an
electrical interface to the other system components and
protection from the environment. In addition, packages
should also provide an interface between the system and
the physical world. Many of the MEMS sensors often
require an interface between the sensing media and the
sensing area. For example, a pressure-sensor packaging
requires incorporation of a pressure port to transmit ﬂuid
pressure to the sensor. This makes the major difference
between the standard semiconductor device packages and
the MEMS packages.
12.2.1.1 Mechanical support
Once the MEMS devices are wire-bonded and other
electrical connections are made, the assembly must be
protected by covering the base or by encapsulating the
assembly in plastic or ceramic materials and the electrical
connections are usually made through its walls. If the
packaging creates excessive stress in the sensing structure,
it can cause a change in device performance. Managing
package-induced stress in the device becomes important
for MEMS package design. With most MEMS being
mechanical systems, protection and isolation of such
Table 12.4
Examples of the intermediate approach
for the fabrication of microsystems [5].
Organization
Microsystem
Reference
Analog Devices
Accelerometer
[20]
Inﬁneon
Pressure sensor
[21]
Table 12.5
A comparison of various MCM
technologies [22]. Butler J.T., Bright V.M., Chu P.B.
and Saia R.J., Adapting Multichip module foundries
for MEMS packaging, Proc of IEEE International
Conf on Multichip modules and High density
Packaging, # 1998 IEEE
Property
MCM-D
HDI
Substrate
Aluminum
Alumina
Dielectric material
Polyimide
Kapton
Conductor
Copper
Ti/Cu/Ti
metallization
Die-interconnection
Wire
Direct
method
bond
metallization
Maximum operating
100–400
>1 GHz
frequency
MHz
Requirement
None
Additional laser
for process
ablation required
modiﬁcations
for open access
to MEMS dies.
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
311

devices from thermal and mechanical shock, vibration,
acceleration and other physical damages during their
operation is critical to their performance. The mechanical
stress affecting a system depends on the application. For
example, the device package for a military aircraft is
different from those used in communication satellites.
The coefﬁcient of thermal expansion of the package
material should be equal to that of silicon for reliability
because the thermal cycle may cause cracking or delami-
nation if they are unmatched.
12.2.1.2 Electrical interface
The connection between the MEMS and the signal lines
is usually made with wire bonds or ﬂip-chip die attach-
ments and multilayer interconnections. Wire bonds and
other electrical connections to the device should be made
with care taken to protect the device from scratches and
other physical damages. DC and RF signals to the
MEMS systems are given through these connections
and interfaces. In addition, these packages should be
able to distribute signals to all components within the
package. Examples of the external interfaces required
when packaging variuos types of devices are shown in
Table 12.6.
12.2.1.3 Protection from environment
Many of the MEMS devices and sensors are designed to
measure variables from the surrounding environment.
MEMS packages must protect the micromachined parts
from the environment and at the same time it must
provide interconnections to electrical signals, as well as
access to and interaction with the external environment.
The hermetic packaging generally useful in microelec-
tronic devices is not suitable in such MEMS devices.
These devices might be integrated with the circuits or
mounted on a circuit board. Special attention in packa-
ging can protect a micromachined device from aggres-
sive surroundings and mechanical damage. Elements that
cause corrosion or physical damage to the metal lines as
well as other components, such as moisture, remain a
concern for many MEMS devices. Moisture may be
introduced into the package during fabrication and before
sealing can damage the materials. For example, alumi-
num lines can corrode quickly in the presence of moist-
ure. Junctions of dissimilar metals can also corrode in the
presence of moisture.
Hermetic MEMS packages provide good barriers to
liquids and gases. In hermetic packages, the electrical
interconnections through a package must conﬁrm her-
metic sealing. Wire bonding is the popular technique to
electrically connect the die to the package. Bonding of
gold wires is easier than bonding aluminum wires. The
use of wire bonding has serious limitations in MEMS
packaging due to the application of ultrasonic energy at
Mill substrate and attach die
Bond pads
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Substrate
Die
Die
Die
Die
Die
Die
Die
Die
MEMS
CMOS
Apply dielectric layer and laser drill vias
Dielectric
Sputter metallization and apply next dielectric layerMetal
Laser-ablated windows for MEMS access
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.4
(a) HDI process; (b) MEMS access in the HDI
process [22]. Butler J.T., Bright V.M., Chu P.B. and Saia R.J.,
Adapting Multichip module foundries for MEMS packaging,
Proc of IEEE International Conf on Multichip modules and High
density Packaging, # 1998 IEEE
Table 12.6
External interfaces required when
packaging various types of devices.
Device
Electrical
Non-electrical
interface
interface
Microelectronics
Input/
—
Output
MEMS sensors
Output
Fluid channels
(gas/liquid)
Physical contact
(pressure/temperature)
None (navigational)
MEMS actuators
Control
Fluid channels
(micro pump)
RF-MEMS
Control
RF cables/connectors
MOEMS
Control
Optical ﬁbers/couplers
312
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

a frequency between 50 to 100 kHz as these frequencies
may stimulate oscillations by the microstructures. Since
most microstructures have resonant frequencies in the
same range, the chance of structural failure during the
wire bonding is high [25].
In most spaceborne applications, parts are hermetically
sealed due to the perceived increase in reliability and to
minimize the outgassing. When epoxies or cyanate esters
are used to attach the die, they outgas while curing.
Outgassing is a concern for many devices since these
particles could be deposited on the components, hence
degrading their performance. This leads to ‘stiction’ and
corrosion of the device. Die-attachment materials with a
low Young’s modulus allow the chip to move during the
ultrasonic wire bonding, so resulting in low bond
strength.
12.2.1.4 Thermal considerations
MEMS devices used for present-day applications do not
have a high-power-dissipation requirement. The thermal
dissipation from MEMS devices is not a serious problem
since the temperature of the MEMS devices usually does
not increase substantially during operation. However, as
the integration of MEMS with other high-power devices,
such as ampliﬁers, in a single package increases, the need
for heat dissipation arises to ensure proper operations of
these devices. Thus, thermal management is an important
consideration in package design.
Heat-transfer analysis and thermal management beco-
me more complex by packaging different functional
components into a tight space. This miniaturization
also raises issues such as coupling between the system
conﬁgurations and the overall heat dissipation to the
environment. The conﬁguration of the system shell
becomes important for heat dissipation from the system
to the environment [26,27]. Heat spreading in the thin
space is one of the most important modes of heat transfer
in compact electronic equipment and microsystems. As
the system shrinks, the space available for installation of
a fan or pump inside the system shell disappears and the
generated heat has to be dissipated through the shell to
the surrounding environment. In general, the primary
motives in heat-transfer design are to diffuse heat as
rapidly as possible and to maximize the heat dissipation
from the system shell to the environment.
12.2.2 Special issues in MEMS packaging
Although it follows a similar path as microelectronics
packaging, the design of MEMS packages does need to
address several unique challenges. Some of these, as well
as their typical solutions, are described in the following
paragraphs.
12.2.2.1 Release of structures
During the fabrication of MEMS polysilicon structures
by surface micromachining techniques, these are pro-
tected against damage or contamination by silicon diox-
ide layers. In order to release these polysilicon structures,
the oxide layers should be etched out, often by HF
solution. The issue here is the timing of this release
etch, vis-a`-vis the packaging. If this is done before the
start of packaging, it may weaken the structure, but if
done during or after packaging, there is scope for con-
tamination and incompatibility issues. Another asso-
ciated risk is stiction – a phenomenon by which
microstructures tend to stick to one another after release.
This is caused by capillary action of the droplets of the
rinse solutions used after etching and may be reduced by
incorporating ‘dimples’ into the structures. Other solu-
tions, such as freeze drying and critical CO2 drying, are
also useful to reduce stiction after release. To further
reduce the possibilities of stiction during the lifetime of
the device, non-stick dielectric ﬁlms may be inserted
during the fabrication process.
12.2.2.2 Die separation
‘Dicing’ is a common process used in microelectronics
fabrication for separating mass-produced devices. The
current standard die-separation method adopted for silicon
is to cut the wafer by using a diamond-impregnated blade.
The blade and the wafer are ‘ﬂooded’ with high-purity
water while the blade spins at 45 000 rpm. This creates no
problem for standard ICs because the surface is essentially
sealed to the effects of water and silicon dust. However, if
a released MEMS device is exposed to water and debris,
the structures may break off or get clogged and the
moisture may adversely affect their performance. Efforts
to protect these surfaces with photoresist and other coat-
ings have provided only limited success. Another possi-
bility is to delay the release of the structures to until after
the dicing. An alternate process called wafer cleaving,
used in III–IV semiconductor lasers, may also be useful in
MEMS die separation [3].
12.2.2.3 Die handling
During automated processes, vacuum pick-up heads are
commonly used in handling the die in microelectronics.
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
313

As these may not be used for MEMS devices, due to the
presence of delicate structures, additional clamp attach-
ments are required to handle the MEMS die, possibly by
their edges. However, the requirement for this special
equipment may be eliminated by wafer level encapsula-
tion. In this approach, a capping wafer is used during
dicing, such that each MEMS chip has a protective chip
attached to it. These wafers are bonded by using direct
binding or anodic bonding. However, the additional
process steps required may cause an increase in the
cost of the device.
12.2.2.4 Interfacial stress
Thermal annealing is required for MEMS structures
fabricated with polysilicon. There are several other
processes during packaging of the device (such as the
use of hard solders for die attachments, package lid
sealing, etc.) that may introduce additional thermal
stress. The application of high temperatures for these
purposes on a complex structure, such as MEMS invol-
ving several materials with varying coefﬁcients of ther-
mal expansion (CTEs) may result in device deformation,
misalignment of parts, change in the resonant frequencies
of the structures and ‘buckle’ in long beam elements.
Lower-moduli die-attach materials may solve these pro-
blems to a limited extent but may introduces additional
complications, such as ‘creep over time’ [3]. They may
also allow the chip to move during wire bonding, so
resulting in low bond strength.
12.2.2.5 Control of outgassing
Many die-attachment materials outgas during their cur-
ing. These vapors and moisture may deposit on structures
and cause stiction or corrosion and may result in degra-
dation of performance. The solution may include using
low-outgassing materials and/or the removal of outgas-
sing vapors during the die-attachment curing process.
12.2.3 Types of MEMS packages
Although MEMS represent a relatively new topic, the
methods of packaging of very small mechanical devices
are not new. For example, the aerospace and watch
industries have been performing this task for a very
long time. However, MEMS applications usually require
specialized package designs, depending on the applica-
tion and optimization procedures. In general, the possible
group of packages for MEMS can be categorized into
metal, ceramic, plastic and multilayer packages.
12.2.3.1 Metal packages
Metal packages are often used in MMIC and hybrid
circuits due to their thermal dissipation and electromag-
netic shielding effectiveness. In addition, these packages
are sufﬁciently rugged, especially for larger devices.
Hence, these are also often preferred for MEMS applica-
tions. Materials like CuW (10/90), SilverTM (Ni–Fe
alloy), CuMo (15/85) and CuW (15/85) are good thermal
conductors and have higher coefﬁcients of thermal
expansion (CTEs) than silicon.
A ‘baking’ step is performed before the ﬁnal assembly
in order to remove trapped gas and moisture, thus
reducing the possibility of corrosion. Au–Sn solders are
preferred since these are especially suited when joining
dissimilar materials. An alternate method is to use weld-
ing by localized heating methods, such as by the use of
lasers. The primary limitation of these packages is the
presence of the glass or ceramic ‘feedthroughs’, as these
may be brittle if not handled properly.
12.2.3.2 Ceramic packages
Ceramic packaging is one of the most common types
used in the microelectronics industry, due to its features
such as low mass, low cost and easy mass production.
The ceramic packages can be made hermetic, adapted to
multilayer designs and be easily integrated for the signal-
‘feedthrough’ lines. Multilayer packages reduce the size
and cost of integration of multiple MEMS into a single
package. The electrical performances of the packages
can be tailored by incorporating multilayer ceramics and
‘interconnect’ lines.
Co-ﬁred multilayered ceramic packages are con-
structed from individual ‘green’ pieces of thin ﬁlms.
Metal lines are deposited in each ﬁlm by thick-ﬁlm
processing, such as screen printing, and via holes for
the interconnections to be drilled. The unﬁred layers are
then stacked and aligned and laminated together by ﬁring
at high temperatures. MEMS and the necessary compo-
nents are then attached using epoxy or solders and wire
bonds are made.
There are several problems associated with the cera-
mic packaging. The ‘green state’ shrinks during the ﬁring
process and the amount of shrinkage depends on the
number of via holes (and hence may be different in each
layer.) The ceramic-to-metal adhesion is not as strong as
the ceramic-to-ceramic adhesion. The processing tem-
peratures of ceramics limit the choice of metal lines as
the metal may react with ceramics at high temperatures.
In such cases, metals used are W and Mo are employed
but if low-temperature ‘co-ﬁred’ ceramics (LTCCs) are
314
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

used, the most frequently used metal lines are Ag, Au
and Au–Pt.
12.2.3.3 Thin-ﬁlm multilayer packages
This method of packaging uses layers of thin ﬁlms of
polyimide instead of the ceramics described above.
These, having lower dielectric constants result in lower
line capacitances (faster circuits) and less line-to-line
couplings (miniaturization). These packages may be put
together by individually processing thick (25 mm) poly-
imide sheets or by spin-coating polyimide thin ﬁlms on a
substrate and processing
the interconnecting
metal
layers.
12.2.3.4 Plastic packages
Plastic packages are common in the electronic industry
because of their low manufacturing cost. However, the
hermetic seals, generally required for high reliability,
are not possible when using plastic packages. Plastic
packages are also susceptible to cracking during tem-
perature cycling.
12.3 PACKAGING TECHNIQUES
Each MEMS device may have its own packaging meth-
ods, which may be absolutely suitable for its functioning.
The type of packaging should be decided at the very
beginning of the device development.
12.3.1 Flip-chip assembly
‘Flip-chip’ is the most favored assembly technology for
high-frequency applications because the short-bump
interconnections can reduce parasitics. In ﬂip chips, the
IC die is placed on a circuit board with the bond pads
facing down and directly joining the bare die with the
substrate. The bumps form electrical contacts as well as
mechanical joints to the die. This reduces the electrical
pathlength and the associated capacitance and induc-
tance, which is particularly suited for high-density RF
applications. The minimization of the parasitic capaci-
tance and inductance can reduce the signal delay in high-
speed circuits. The technology was developed by IBM
during the 1960s and was termed as ‘controlled collapse
chip connection’ (C4).
Flip-chip bonding involves the bonding of die, top-
face down on a package substrate. Electrical connections
are made by means of plated solder bumps between the
bond pads on the die and metal pads on the substrate
[28]. The attachment is intimately associated with rela-
tively small spacing ( 100 mm) between the die and the
substrate. In ﬂip-chip assemblies, the bumps serve as
electrical contacts to the substrate, as well as to the
mechanical joints.
Figure 12.5 shows the ﬂip-chip design of a MEMS
package. Since the active surface of the MEMS is placed
towards the substrate, the cavity will protect the movable
elements of the MEMS. The stand-off distance can be
accurately controlled by the bump height. Flip-chip
technology is therefore a very ﬂexible assembly method
suitable for several applications. Figure 12.6(a) presents
the ﬂip-chip bonding process on a ceramic substrate,
such as alumina. The bump with an acute tail makes it
easy to deform, so making the bonding area more stable
under thermal conditions. However, another considera-
tion in deciding the bump height is that taller bumps
MEMS IC
Seal or dam
Figure 12.5
Flip-chip MEMS package [29]. S.J. Kim, Kwon
Y.S., and Lee H.Y., ‘‘Silicon MEMS packages for coplanar
MMICs,’’ Proc of 2000 Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conf., Australia,
# 2000 IEEE
Figure 12.6
(a) Flip-chip bonding procedure; (b) photographs
of acute and ﬂat-tail bumps used for ﬂip-chip bonding [30].
H. Kusamitsu, Morishita Y., Marushashi K, Ito M. and Ohata K.,
‘‘The ﬁlp-chip bump interconnection for millimeter wave GaAs
MMIC,’’ IEEE Trans on Electronics Packaging and Manuf.,
vol. 22, # 1999 IEEE
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
315

introduce additional series inductances which degrade
high-frequency performance.
Flip-chip bonding is attractive to the MEMS industry
because of its ability to closely package a number of dies
on a single package with multiple levels of electrical
traces. A similar system can be built with wire bonding,
but it may require a larger area and raise the reliability
issues due to the number of gold wires within the
package. The process is self-aligning, since the wetting
action of the solder align the chip’s bump to the substrate
pads and compensates for slight misalignment between
them. Another feature of this process is that it allows
removal or replacement without scrapping the compo-
nents. However ﬂip-chip packaging may not be compa-
tible for MEMS with microstructures that should be
exposed to the open environment.
Figure 12.7 shows the cross-sectional view of the three
dimensional multilayered packaging for MEMS struc-
tures on a silicon substrate. Passive elements, such as
ﬁlters and matching circuits, are formed in each layer
(on GaAs) and active devices (on Si) are assembled on
the top layer using ﬂip-chip technology. The structure is a
three-dimensional hybrid IC using silicon, which is more
cost effective than GaAs.
The primary advantages of this process are [31]:
 Size and weight reduction.
 Applicability for existing chip designs.
 Performance enhancement and increased production.
 Feasibility for chip replacement.
 Increased I/O capability, extendable for RF and opti-
cal interfaces.
The reliability of this scheme depends on the difference
in the coefﬁcients of thermal expansion of the substrate
and the chip which may introduce thermal and mechan-
ical stresses on the bumps.
12.3.2 Ball-grid array
The ball-grid array (BGA) is a surface-mounted chip
package containing a grid of solder balls for interconnec-
tions. This approach leads to small size, high ‘lead count’
(due to this being surface mounted) and low ‘parasitic’
inductance. Both ceramic and plastic variants are avail-
able. A miniaturized version, known as the micro-ball-
grid array (mBGA) results in package sizes very close to
the die size. In this scheme, a ﬂexible circuit tape is used
as the substrate and a low-stress elastomer for the die
attachment. The die is mounted face-down and the
electrical connections are made by bonding. The leads
are encapsulated with epoxy for protection.
12.3.3 Embedded overlay
An embedded overlay [33] concept for MEMS packa-
ging is derived from the chip-on-ﬂex (COF) process
widely used for microelectronics packaging. COF is a
high-performance multichip packaging technology in
which the dies are encased in a molded plastic substrate
and interconnections are made by using a thin-ﬁlm
structure formed over these components. The electrical
interconnections are made through a patterned overlay
with the die embedded in a plastic substrate, as shown in
Figure 12.8. The chips are attached face-down on the
COF overlay using polyimide or thermoplastic adhe-
sives. The substrate is formed after bonding the chips
around the components by using a plastic mold-forming
process, such as transfer, compression or injection mold-
ing. The electrical connections are made by drilling via
Silicon substrate
Trench dry-etching
GaAs devices
(Flip-chip bonding)
Dual-mode ring filter
Multilayered
BCB
High-resistivity silicon substrate
Metal carrier
Bonding
Figure 12.7
Three-dimensional millimeter wave MEMS IC
[32]. K. Takahashi, Sangawa U., Fujita S., Matsuo M., Urabe T.,
Ogura H. and Y, ubuki H., ‘‘Packaging using Microelectrome-
chanical technologies and planar components,’’ IEEE Trans on
Microwave Theory and Tech., vol. 49, # 2001 IEEE
Plastic substrate
CMOS Die
MEMS Die
Metal
Overlay
Figure 12.8
COF MEMS packaging concept [33]. J.T. Butler
and V.M. Bright, ‘‘An embedded overlay concept for Micro-
systems Packaging,’’ IEEE Trans on advanced Packaging, vol.
23, # 2000 IEEE
316
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

holes, using a continuous argon ion laser at 350 nm.
Ti/Cu metallization is sputtered and patterned to form
the electrical interconnections. The use of varying laser
ablation power levels, with plasma cleaning and high-
pressure water scrubs, provides an effective means of
removing the COF overlay without damaging the
embedded MEMS device. Figure 12.9 shows a 5  5
array of micro-mirrors packaged in COF/MEMS mod-
ules with integrated control circuitry.
12.3.4 Wafer-level packaging
A cost-efﬁcient method for MEMS packaging is by
wafer-level packaging [34,35]. Designing the packag-
ing schemes and incorporating these into the device-
manufacturing process itself can reduce the overall cost.
Versatile packaging may be needed for many devices in
which MEMS and microelectronics are on a single chip.
Since MEMS devices have movable structures built on
the surface of the wafer, the addition of a ‘cap’ wafer on
the silicon substrate enables their use in many applica-
tions. The cap provides protection against handling
damage, as well as avoiding atmospheric damping.
This is done by bonding the substrate with an active
device to a second wafer, which need not be of the same
material as the substrate. The bonding is done by using a
glass frit or by an anodic bond created by an electrical
potential. Precision-aligned wafer bonding is the key
technology for high-volume, low cost packaging of
MEMS devices [36,37]. State-of-the art silicon wafer
bonding can provide assembly level packaging solutions
for many MEMS devices.
The wafer-level package, which protects the device at
the wafer stage itself, is a clear choice to make in the
product-design stage. This involves an extra fabrication
process, where a micromachined wafer has to be bonded
to a second wafer with appropriate cavities etched on it.
Figure 12.10 shows a schematic diagram of a device after
wafer-level packaging. This approach enables the MEMS
device to move freely in vacuum or an inert atmosphere
with hermetic bonding which prevents any contamination
of the structure. Etching cavities in a blank silicon wafer
and bonding it with the substrate by placing over the
device can make a hermetic seal.
Cavities are formed by any of the etching methods.
Anisotropic wet etching of bulk silicon along certain
crystal planes by using strong alkaline solutions such as
KOH can create thin diaphragms, through-wafers via
holes and V-grooves with typical masking layers like
silicon dioxide or LPCVD silicon nitride. The fastest etch
rates for the silicon are for the (100) and (110) crystal
planes while the slowest is for the (111) plane. Examples
of successful development and packaging using silicon
micromachining are ink-jet heads and silicon piezoresis-
tive pressure sensors for automotive and industrial con-
trol applications. Many of these devices require silicon
wafer bonding to another substrate as a ‘ﬁrst-level’
packaging solution. Anodic (electrostatic) bonding of
silicon to glass, low-temperature glass-frit bonding of
silicon to silicon, silicon direct-wafer bonding and,
eutectic bonding epoxy bonding are examples of the
few methods available to bond a silicon wafer to another
silicon entity.
Another concept in wafer-level packaging is to apply a
microcap to the device and then package with a standard
procedure. However, conventional wafer bondings like
line-fusion or anodic bonding cannot be employed because
the micromechanical circuits can be damaged due to high
temperatures or high electric ﬁelds. Low-temperature
Micro controller
MEMS
Laser-ablated 
window
COF overlay
Micro-mirror 
array
Figure 12.9
COF MEMS package of a 5  5 array of micro-
mirrors [33]. J.T. Butler and V.M. Bright, ‘‘An embedded
overlay concept for Microsystems Packaging,’’ IEEE Trans on
advanced Packaging, vol. 23, # 2000 IEEE
Silicon 
MEMS 
Bond pad 
Silicon die 
Figure 12.10
Silicon wafer-level packaging of an MEMS. K.
Gelleo, ‘‘MEMS Packaging issues and materials,’’ Proc of IEEE
Int Symp on Advanced Packaging: Process, Properties and
Interfaces, # 2001 IEEE
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
317

bonding techniques may increase the cost of packaging. If
MEMS devices can be packaged at the device level ﬁrst,
then the remaining packaging can be done the same as IC
packaging by using common procedures. Figure 12.11
shows the concept of cap-on-chip packaging for MEMS.
Microscale riveting [39,40] or eutectic bonding [41]
can be performed by directional etching of silicon for the
rivet molds and directional electroplating in an electric
ﬁeld for rivet formation. The wafer joining can be done at
room temperature and with low voltages. The protected
devices after micro riveting can be treated the same as for
IC wafers during the dicing process. Once the joining is
complete, the resulting chips can be handled in the same
way as IC chips during the remaining packaging steps,
such as wire-bonding and molding for plastic packages.
Figure 12.12 shows the concept of a protected chip
with an MEMS device. Rivets are formed all around the
cap wafer, thereby holding the cap-base pair together.
Figure 12.13 shows the prepared cap and base wafers and
the electroplating set-up. Nickel can be easily electro-
plated as a rivet material. A ‘seed’ layer of 125 A

Cr and
750 A

of Ni is deposited on the surface of the base wafer
by thermal evaporation. The cap and the base wafers are
held together during the plating process so that the
plating can start at the exposed area of the seed layer,
grow through the rivet hole in the cap wafer and form the
rivet. Simple mechanical clamping of the wafer together
in the electrolyte is sufﬁcient to rivet them together since
electroplating does not occur in the microscopic wafer
gap.
In fusion bonding, polysilicon is deposited and pat-
terned as the heating and bonding material. Fusion
bonding is mostly used in silicon-on-insulator (SOI)
technology, such as Si-SiO2 [42–44] and silicon bonding
[45]. Aluminum-to-glass [46] bonding using localized
heating can be applied for hermetic packaging. In eutec-
tic bonding, gold resistive heaters are sputtered and used
as the heating and bonding materials. The temperature of
the micro-heater rises upon the ﬂow of current, which
activates the bonding process. The principle of the
localized bonding is shown in Figure 12.14. The effec-
tiveness of the micro-heater depends on the selection of
materials and design of the geometrical shape of the
structure. For example, a high temperature of 1000 C
can be created by using micro-heaters, while the tem-
perature less than 2 mm away can drop to 100 C [26].
Figure 12.14(b) shows the experimental set-up for the
localized eutectic bonding. This set-up can be used for
silicon–gold as well as for silicon–glass eutectic bonding.
The conventional bonding takes 1 h to reach the tem-
perature while localized eutectic heating will take only
less than 5 min. A summary of the various bonding
process conditions is provided in Table 12.7.
Phosphorous-doped polysilicon and gold resistive hea-
ters are used in silicon-to-glass fusion and silicon-to-gold
eutectic bonding process, respectively. Both processes
can be completed in less than 5 min.
The aligned wafer-bonding process typically consists
of two separate steps. The wafers are aligned initially to
each other in a bond aligner. This system can align a
mask to a wafer for conventional photolithography,
as well as it can align two wafers to each other. The
aligned wafers are clamped with an appropriate separa-
tion gap between them in a bond ﬁxture. The next step is
to load the bond ﬁxture into a vacuum-bond chamber
where the wafers are contacted together. Some of the
common methods of wafer bonding are compared in
Table 12.8.
(1) Apply cap to device or
wafer; solder, weld, bond
(2) Attach and bond
device
(3) Conventional 
‘overmolding’ followed
by solderball attachment
MEMS IC
May required gel coat
to protect thin cap
Figure 12.11
Cap-on-chip packaging [38].
Dicing line
Dicing 
line
Micro river
Contact pad for
wire bonding
Active MEMS area
Seed layer
Base wafer
Cap wafer
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.12
Views of a packaged chip using micro rivets: (a)
top (showing half the die); (b) cross-section [39]. B. Shivkumar
and C.J. Kim, ‘‘Microrivets for MEMS packaging: Concept,
fabrication and strength testing,’’ J. Microelectromechanical
Systems, vol. 6, # 1997 IEEE
318
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Micromachining technology has proved to be a ﬂexible
approach for the development of small-sized components
as well as micropackages that provide self-packaging [12]
of individual components. The upper wafer has an air-
ﬁlled cavity that is mounted over the metallic conductors.
Integration of both of the upper and lower shielded circuits
results in a self-packaged device.
12.4 RELIABILITY AND KEY FAILURE
MECHANISMS
As with any other commercial system, extensive studies
have been done on the reliability and mechanisms of
failure
of
various
MEMS
components.
Reliability
requirements for MEMS are signiﬁcantly different for
various applications, especially in systems with unique
MEMS devices. Hence, standard reliability testing is not
possible until a common set of reliability requirements
are developed. The chain of events that establishes the
reliability of an MEMS package is described in Table 12.9
An understanding of the reliability of the systems
comes from a knowledge of their failure behaviors and
failure mechanisms. The common failure mechanisms of
MEMS devices are summarized as follows.
Stiction and wear. These cause most of the failures of
MEMS devices. Stiction occurs due to microscopic
adhesion when two surfaces come into contact. This
adhesion is caused by van der Waals forces, resulting
from the interaction of instantaneous dipole moments of
the atom. To reduce stiction, various dielectric thin-ﬁlm
materials are often inserted between these surfaces.
Wear occurs due to the movement of one surface over
another, and is deﬁned as the removal of material from a
solid surface by some kind of mechanical action. The
primary mechanisms of wear in MEMS devices are
Nickel source plate
Plating 
occurs
Cap wafer
Cap wafer
Base wafer
Base wafer
Electrolyte
V
+
–
Active MEMS area
Ni/Cr seed layer
(base of river)
Rivet 
hole
Recess
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.13
Schematics of (a) the prepared cap and (b) the electroplating set-up [39]. B. Shivkumar and C.J. Kim, ‘‘Microrivets
for MEMS packaging: Concept, fabrication and strength testing,’’ J. Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 6, # 1997 IEEE
Figure 12.14
Schematics of (a) the micro-heater locations and (b) the experimental set-up for the localized heating and bonding
test [26]. L. Lin, ‘‘MEMS post-packaging by localized heating and bonding,’’ IEEE Trans Advanced Packaging, vol. 23, # 2000
IEEE
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
319

adhesion (one surface pulling sections of another, due to
surface bonding), abrasion, corrosion and surface fatigue.
Corrosion is caused by one or more of the following:
 Moisture ingress
 Loss of hermeticity
 Galvanic corrosion
 Crevice corrosion
 Pitting corrosion
 Surface oxidation
 Stress corrosion
 Corrosion resulting from contaminants or micro-
organisms
Delamination. MEMS devices may fail due to delamina-
tion of bonded thin-ﬁlm materials. Failure of bonds
between dissimilar materials or wafer-to-wafer bonding
can also cause delamination in MEMS [48].
Dampening. This arises as being critical for MEMS
devices because of the mechanical nature of the parts and
their resonant frequency. Dampening can be caused by
Table 12.7
Typical process conditions for anodic,
glass frit and silicon direct-wafer-bonding (DWB)
(adapted from Mirza and Ayon [47].a
Parameter
Anodic
Glass frit
DWB
Temperature
300–500
400–500
1000
Pressure (bar)
N/A
1
N/A
Voltage (V)
0.1–1 kV
N/A
N/A
Surface roughness
20
N/A
0.5
(nm)
Precise gap
Yes
No
Yes
Hermetic seal
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vacuum level
105
10
103
during bonding
(torr)
aN/A, not available.
Table 12.8
Comparison of wafer-bonding schemes
[26]. L. Lin, ‘‘MEMS post-packaging by localized
heating and bonding,’’ IEEE Trans Advanced
Packaging, vol. 23, 4, # 2000 IEEE
Type
Bonding
Sensitivity
Hermiticity
temperature to roughness
Fusion bonding
Very high
High
Yes
Anodic bonding
Medium
High
Yes
Epoxy bonding
Low
Low
No
Integrated
High
Medium
Yes
process
Low-temperature
Low
High
—
bonding
Eutectic bonding
Medium
Low
Yes
Brazing
Very high
Low
Yes
Table 12.9
Typical ﬂow of events to establish
the reliability of MEMS device packaging.a
Testing
Objective
Historic data
Investigation of all previous
research
failure mechanisms of MEMS
External visual
Use of lower-power optical
microscopy in examination of all
aspects of MEMS packaging
Electrical test
Identiﬁcation of failure modes by
veriﬁcation of non-functionality
Bake and
Use of unbiased baking, followed
electrical
by assessment of functionality
testing
Use of
Analyses of internal connections
X-radiography
and alignments, especially where
decapsulation might have an effect
on the integrity of the MEMS
Hermeticity
Assessment of hermeticity MEMS
and internel
cavity packages and internal
Testing
atmosphere by residual gas analysis
atmosphere
(RGA) to identify the sealing
environment
Decapsulation
Exposure of internal aspects of the
testing
component by a variety of mechan
ical or chemical methods or the
preparation of plastic encapsulated
samples for intrared microscopy
examination by ‘back-polishing’
Electrical
Examination to ensure that
‘re-testing’
decapsulation has not altered the
failure mode
Non-destructive
Thermal analysis or material
analysis
analysis by energy- or wavelength-
dispersive spectroscopy
(EDS or WDS)
Destructive
‘Bond pull’ and ‘die shear,’ circuit
analysis
-node probing and circuit element
isolation, section and stain,
selective etching, etc.
aSource – corrosion effects on micro electromechanical systems
(MEMS) by Ivars Gutmanis, Hobe Corporation.
320
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

many variables, including atmospheric gases. Good seal-
ing is critical for MEMS devices. Since MEMS devices
have mechanical moving parts, they are more susceptible
to environmental failure than packaging systems.
Fatigue.
Failure of structures caused by continu-
ous
variation
of
loading
characteristics
below
their
thresholds is known as fatigue. Such cyclic loading causes
formation of micro-cracks which weaken the material over
time and create localized deformations. The duration it takes
for a structure to ultimately fail depends on various factors,
including material properties, geometry and variation in
load characteristics. It is believed that in MEMS devices,
for example, structures made of polysilicon, formed by
deposition techniques such as chemical vapor deposition,
have rough surfaces that result from the plasma etching used
in the ﬁnal stages of MEMS processing. Under compressive
loading, these surfaces come into contact, and their wedging
action produces micro-cracks that grow during subsequent
tension and compression cycles. This fatigue strength is
strongly inﬂuenced by the ratio of compression to tension
stresses experienced during each cycle [49].
Mechanical failure. Changes in elastic properties
affect the resonant and damping characteristics of the
beam and will cause a change in the sensor performance.
12.5 ISSUES IN PACKAGING
OF MICROSYSTEMS
The three levels of packaging strategy may be adaptable
for MEMS packaging. This includes (i) die level, (ii)
device level, and (iii) system level. Die-level packaging
involves the passivation and isolation of the delicate and
fragile devices. These devices have to be dieced and
wire-bonded. The device level packaging involves con-
nection of the power supply, signal and interconnection
lines. The system-level packaging integrates MEMS
devices with signal conditioning circuitry or ASICs for
custom applications.
The major barriers in MEMS packaging technology
can be attributed to lack of information and standards in
materials, shortage of cross-disciplinary knowledge and
experience in the ﬁelds of electrical/mechanical/RF/
optics/materials/processing/analysis/software. Microsys-
tem packaging is more a combination of engineering
and science, which has to share and exchange the
experience and information in a dedicated fashion.
Table 12.10 presents different challenges and solutions
facing microsystem packaging.
Packaging design standards have yet to be made.
Apart from certain types of pressure and inertial sen-
sors used by the automotive industry, most MEMS
devices are custom-built. Standardized design and
packaging methodology are virtually impossible at
this present time due to the lack of data available in
these areas. However, the joint efforts of industry and
academies/research institutions can develop sets of
standard for the design of microsystems. In addition,
the thin-ﬁlm mechanics which includes constitutive
relations of thin-ﬁlm materials used in FEM and other
numerical analysis systems need to be thoroughly
investigated.
Table 12.10
Issues in packaging: challenges and some solutions (adapted from Ma Ishe et al. [1].
Packaging parameters
Challenges
Possible solutions
Release etch
Stiction of devices
Freeze drying, supercritical CO2 drying,
and dry
roughening of contact surfaces such as
dimples,non-stick coatings
Dicing/Cleaving
Contamination risks,elimination
Release die after dicing, cleaving of wafers,
of particles generated
laser swing, wafer-level encapsulation
Die handling
Device failure,top die face is
Fixtures that hold the MEMS die by sides
very sensitive to contact
rather than the top face
Stress
Performance degradation and
Low-modulus die attachment, annealing,
resonant frequency shifts
compatible CTE match-ups
Out-gassing
Stiction, corrosion
Low out-gassing epoxies, cyanate esters,
low-moduli solders, new die attachment
materials, removal of out-gassing vapors
Testing
Applying non-electric
Test all that is possible using wafer-scale
stimuli to devices
probing, and ﬁnish with cost-effective
specially modiﬁed test systems
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
321

REFERENCES
1. A.P. Malshe, C. O’Neal, S. Singh and W.D. Brown,
‘Packaging and integration of MEMS and related
microsystems for system-on-a-package (SOP)’ in Pro-
ceedings of the SPIE Symposium on Smart Structures
and Devices, Vol. 4235, D.K. Sood, R.A. Lawes and
V.V. Varadan (Eds), SPIE, Bellinghan, WA, USA, pp.
198–208 (2001).
2. H.Xie and G.K. Fedder ‘Integrated microelectromechanical
gyroscopes’, Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 16, 65–75
(2003).
3. C.B. O’Neal, A.P. Malshe, S.B. Singh and W.D. Brown,
‘Challenges in packaging of MEMS’, in proccedings of the
IEEE International Symposium on Advanced Packaging
Materials, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 41–47 (1999).
4. W. Yun, R. Howe and P. Gray, ‘Surface micromachined
digitally
force-balanced
accelerometer
with
integrated
CMOS detection circuitry’ in Proceedings of the IEEE
Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, IEEE, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, pp. 126–131 (1992).
5. H. Baltes, O. Brand, A. Hierlemann, D. Lange and C.
Hagleitner, ‘‘CMOS MEMS – present and future’’, in Procee-
digs of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 459–466 (2002).
6. P.F. van Kessel, L.J. Hornbeck, R.E. Meier and M.R.
Douglass, ‘‘A MEMS-based projection display’’, Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 86, 1687–1704 (1998).
7. D.R. Sparks, X. Huang, W. Higdon and J.D. Johnson,
‘‘Angular rate sensor and accelerometer combined on the
same micromachined CMOS chip’’, Microsystem Technol-
ogies, 4, 139–142 (1998).
8. S. Michaelis, H.J. Timme, M. Wucisk and J. Binder,
‘Acceleration threshold switches from an additive electro-
plating MEMS process’, Sensors and Actuators: Physical
A85, 418–423 (2000).
9. B.E. Cole, R.E. Higahi and R.A. Wood, ‘Monolithic two-
dimensional arrays of micromachined microstructures for
infrared
applications’,
Proceedings
of
the
IEEE,
86,
1679–1686 (1998).
10. B.D. DeBusschere and G.T.A. Kovacs, ‘‘Portable cell-based
biosensor system using integrated CMOS cell-cartridges’’,
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 16, 543–556 (2001).
11. M. Brandl and V. Kempe, ‘High performance accelerometer
based on CMOS technologies with low cost add-ons’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS) Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp.
6–9 (2001).
12. Y.B. Gianchandani, H. Kim, M. Shinn, B. Ha, B. Lee, K.
Najaﬁand C. Song, ‘MEMS – ﬁrst fabrication process for
integrating CMOS circuits with polysilicon microstructures’
in Proceedings of the IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems
(MEMS)
Conference,
IEEE,
Piscataway,
NJ,
USA, pp. 257–262 (1998).
13. Y.B. Gianchandani, H. Kim, M. Shinn, B. Ha, B. Lee, K.
Najaﬁand C. Song, ‘Fabrication process for integrating
polysilicon microstructures with post-processed CMOS
circuits’, Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering,
10, 380–386 (2000).
14. J.H. Smith, S. Montague, J.J. Snieowski, J.R. Murray and P.J.
McWhorter,
‘Embedded
micromechanical
devices
for
monolithic integration of MEMS with CMOS’, IEDM’95
Technical Digest, 609–612 (1995).
15. R. Steiner Vanha, F. Kroener, T. Olbrich, R. Baresch and H.
Baltes, ‘Trench–Hall devices’, Journal of microelectrome-
chanical Systems, 9, 86–87 (2000).
16. L.P. Parameswaran, C.H. Hsu and M.A. Schmidt, ‘A merged
MEMS–CMOS process using silicon wafer bonding’,
IEDM’95 Technical Digest, 613–616 (1995).
17. P.J. French, ‘Integration of MEMS devices’, in Proceedings
of SPIE Device and Process Technologies for MEMS and
Microelectronics,Vol. 3892, N.W. Bergamann, O. Reinhold
and N.C. Tien (Eds), SPIE, Bellingham, WA, USA,
pp. 39–48 (1999).
18. T.-R. Hsu, ‘Packaging design of microsystems and meso-
scale devices’, IEEE Transactions: Advanced Packaging, 23,
596–601 (2000).
19. R. Ramesham and R., Ghaffarian, ‘Challenges in intercon-
nection and packaging of microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS)’, in Proceedings of the 50th Electronic Compo-
nents and Technology Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 666–675 (2000).
20. K.H.-L. Chau, S.R. Lewis, Y. Zhao, R.T. Howe, S.F. Bart
and R.G. Marcheselli, ‘An integrated force-balanced
capacitive accelerometer for low-g applications’, Sen-
sors and Actuators: Physical, A54, 472–476 (1996).
21. C. Hierold, ‘Intelligent CMOS sensors’, in Proceedings of the
IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) Confer-
ence, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 1–6 (2000).
22. J.T. Butler, V.M. Bright, P.B. Chu and R.J. Saia, ‘Adapting
multichip module foundations for MEMS packaging’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Multichip Modules and High-Density Packaging, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 106–111 (1998).
23. M. Elwenspoek and R. Wiegerink, Mechanical Microsen-
sors, Springer-Verlag, Barlin, Germany (2001).
24. G.R. Blackwell (Ed.), The Electronic Packaging Handbook,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA (2000).
25. N. Maluf, An Introduction to Micromechanical System
Engineering, Artech House, Boston, MA, USA (2000).
26. L. Lin, ‘MEMS post-packaging by localized heating and
bonding’, IEEE Transactions: Advanced Packaging, 23,
608–616 (2000).
27. W. Nakayama, ‘Thermal issues in Microsystems packaging’,
IEEE Transactions: Advanced Packaging, 23, 602–607
(2000).
28. H.H. Oppermann, C. Kallmayer, C. Klein, R. Aschenbrenner
and H. Reichl, ‘Advanced Flip chip technologies in RF,
322
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Microwave and MEMS applications’, Proceedings of SPIE,
4019, 308–314 (2000).
29. S.J. Kim, Y.S. Kwon and H.Y. Lee H.Y, ‘Silicon MEMS
packages for coplanar MMICs’, in Proceedings of the 2000
Asia–Paciﬁc Microwave Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA pp. 17–20 (2000).
30. H. Kusamitsu, Y. Morishita, K. Marushashi, M. Ito and
K. Ohata, ‘‘The ﬁlp-chip bump interconnection for milli-
meter wave GaAs MMIC’’, IEEE Transactions: Electronics
Packaging and Manufacturing, 22, 23–28 (1999).
31. R.D. Gerke, ‘MEMS packaging’, In MEMS Reliability
Assurance Guidelines for Space Applications, B. Stark
(Ed.), Publication 99-1, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasa-
dena, CA, USA, pp. 166–191 (1989). [available at http://
nppp.jpl.nasa.gov/docs/JPL%20PUB% 2099-1H.pdf].
32. K. Takahashi, U. Sangawa, S. Fujita, M. Matsuo, T. Urabe,
H. Ogura and H. Yubuki, ‘Packaging using microelectro-
mechanical technologies and planar components’, IEEE
Transactions: Microwave Theory and Technology, 49,
2099–2104 (2001).
33. J.T. Butler and V.M. Bright, ‘An embedded overlay concept
for microsystems packaging’, IEEE Transactions: Advanced
Packaging, 23, 617–622 (2000).
34. H. Reichal and V. Grosser, ‘Overview and development
trends in the ﬁeld of MEMS packaging’, in Proceedings of
the 14th IEEE International Conf on MEMS’ 2001 IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 1–5 (2001).
35. K. Gilleo, ‘Overview of new packages, materials and
processes’, in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Symposium on Advanced Packaging Materials, IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 1–5 (2001).
36. A.R. Mirza, ‘One micron precision wafer-level aligned
bonding for interconnect, MEMS and packaging applica-
tions’, in Proceedings of the IEEE 2000 Electronic Compo-
nents and Technology Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
USA, pp. 676–680 (2000).
37. M.P. Helsel, J.D. Berger, D.W. Wine and T.D. Osborn,
‘Wafer scale packaging for a MEMS video scanner’, in
Proceedings of the SPIE Symposium on MEMS Design,
Fabrication, Characterization and Packaging, Vol. 4407,
U.F.W. Behringer and D.G. Uttanchandani (Eds), SPIE,
Bellingham, WA, USA, pp. 214–220 (2001).
38. K. Gelleo, ‘MEMS Packaging issues and materials’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on
Advanced Packaging: Processes, Properties and Interfaces,
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 1–5 (2001).
39. B. Shivkumar and C.J. Kim, ‘Microrivets for MEMS
packaging: Concept, fabrication and strength testing’,
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 6, 217–225
(1997).
40. L. Lin, ‘Selective encapsulations of MEMS: micro channels,
needles, resonators and electromechanical ﬁlters’, Ph.D.
Dissertation, University of California at Berkeley, Barkeley,
CA, USA, (1993).
41. Y.T. Cheng, L. Lin and K. Najaﬁ, ‘Localized silicon fusion
and eutectic bonding for MEMS fabrication and packaging’,
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 9, 3–8 (2000).
42. A.R. Mirza, ‘Wafer level packaging technology for MEMS’,
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Society Conference
on Thermal Phenomena, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp.
113–119 (2000).
43. J. Laskey, ‘Wafer bonding for silicon-on-insulator technol-
ogies’, Applied Physics Letters, 48, 78–80 (1986).
44. Z. Li, Y. Hao, D. Zhang, T. Li and G. Wu, ‘An SOI–MEMS
technology using substrate layer and bonded glass as wafer
level package’, Sensors and Actuators: Physical, A96,
34–
42 (2002).
45. M. Shimbo, K. Furukawa, F. Fukuda and K. Tanzawa,
‘Silicon-to-silicon direct bonding method’, Journal of
Applied. Physics Letters, 60, 2987–2989 (1986).
46. Y.Y. Cheng, L. Lin and K. Najaﬁ, ‘A hermetic glass–silicon
package formed using localized aluminum/silicon-glass
bonding’, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 10,
392–399 (2001).
47. A.R. Mirza and A.A. Ayon, ‘‘Silicon wafer bonding’, IEEE
Sensors’’, 24–33 (December, 1998).
48. P. Sandborn, R. Swaminathan and G. Subramanian, ‘Test and
evaluation of chip-to-chip attachment of MEMS devices’, in
Proceedings of the IEEE 2000 Inter-Society conference on
Thermal Phenomena, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp.
133–140 (2000).
49. H. Kahn, R. Ballarini, J. Bellante and A.H. Heuer, ‘Fatigue
failure in polysilicon not due to simple stress corrosion
cracking’, Science, 298, 1215–1218 (2002).
Integration and Packaging of Smart Microsystems
323

13
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
13.1 INTRODUCTION
With the basic principles of sensor and actuators dis-
cussed in Part 2 and the fabrication technologies in
earlier chapters in Part 4, the reader should be able to
reasonably visualize fabrication approaches for most of
the devices discussed in this book so far. This chapter
endeavors to discuss case studies of some speciﬁc
devices to widen their understanding.
Poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF) is gaining accep-
tance as a good substitute for PZT in piezoelectric sensor
applications. The ﬁrst set of examples here looks at its
application in structural health monitoring and in hydro-
phones. The design of a SAW-based accelerometer was
discussed in Chapter 5. We address its fabrication in
Section 13.3. Another SAW-based device, for liquid
sensing, is discussed next. Chemical and biological
sensing properties of carbon nanotubes are beginning to
be understood by the community. Hence, an example
based on this conﬁguration is included in the next
section. As discussed in Chapter 11, polymer-based
fabrication approaches are gaining acceptance in several
biomedical applications. A set of examples for fabricat-
ing microﬂuidic systems with polymeric materials is
included as Section 13.5. Preliminary characterization
set-ups and measured results are also included for each of
these devices for a better appreciation.
13.2 PVDF TRANSDUCERS
Two examples based on PVDF ﬁlms, one for the fabrica-
tion of a transducer for structural health monitoring and a
sensor for hydrophone applications, are discussed in this
section. In the second, we show how the addition of a
PVDF ﬁlm attached to the gate electrode of an FET can
result in various pressure-detecting sensors. Interdigital
electrodes deposited on one side of a PVDF ﬁlm can
excite and detect surface-propagating acoustic waves.
Hence, in the ﬁrst example we demonstrate the construc-
tion of such a transducer.
13.2.1 PVDF-based transducer for structural
health monitoring
Ensuring the structural integrity of equipment and air-
craft is of great importance in aerospace industry to avoid
catastrophic failures and to extend the life span of these
expensive vehicles. Most of the maintenance and health
monitoring schemes currently employed for large-area
surfaces, such as aircraft wings and fuselages, are time
consuming and hence very expensive. Schemes based on
radiography, ultrasonics, eddy currents, liquid penetra-
tion and magnetic particles have been successfully used
in the ﬁeld for such applications. Of these, ultrasonic
non-destructive testing offers immense possibility for a
great deal of improvement to make the schemes less
expensive, and less time consuming. In this proposed
research work, we plan to develop a remotely readable,
PVDF-based ultrasonic transducer for in situ health
monitoring of aircraft structures.
Usually, ultrasonic inspection requires a bulky probe
assembly, which is usually based on piezoelectric trans-
ducers, and should be scanned over the entire area to be
tested. This is a particularly laborious process and is
often limited by accessibility for some difﬁcult-to-reach
parts. These incorporate bulk longitudinal or shear wave
propagation within the structure, which limits the area
covered by a typical transducer. In contrast, guided Lamb
waves offers great potential in the health monitoring of
wide surface areas that have the possibility of having
some defects [1]. Piezoelectric PVDF ﬁlm is used to
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

generate acoustic waves, which propagate as Lamb
waves on the surface of the structure. PVDF ﬁlm is
thin, ﬂexible and has a low impedance, wide frequency
range and good sensitivity. Due to these characteristics, it
can be coupled onto difﬁcult-to-access structures or
curved surfaces with little harm to the functions of the
structure. In contrast conventional ultrasonic transducers
typically consist of PZT material which has a tendency of
being stiff and not suitable for places which are hard to
access or of curved shape. An interdigitated pattern
comprising of a ﬂexible copper layer is deposited on
top of the PVDF ﬁlm [2].
For a simpliﬁed design procedure, the transducer may
be considered as being attached to the plate, as shown in
Figure 13.1 [3]. Recall that for a given structure Lamb
waves have many antisymmetric and symmetric modes.
The out-of-plane displacement across the thickness of
the plate represents the wave propagation on the sur-
face. Of these, the Al mode is more sensitive to cracks
located on the surface of the structure. In the case of a
thin aluminum skin, defects (cracks) existing on the
surface or just underneath the surface can be detected
by using this scheme. Therefore, the PVDF IDT is
designed to excite and receive the antisymmetric A1
Lamb wave mode. The frequency–thickness product (fd)
corresponding to the maximum group velocity point on
the dispersion curve is selected [2]. At a point of max-
imum group velocity of A1, wave propagation occurs
without much dispersion. Once fd is decided, the opera-
tional frequency and hence the IDT ﬁnger spacing can
be determined. Since the thickness of the structural
member is usually known (0.8 mm in the case shown
here), the operational frequency is estimated to be
3.145 MHz.
In order to make PVDF interdigital transducers, the
interdigital electrodes must be prepared. A PVDF ﬁlm
from Measurement Specialties, Inc. is used here. A
PVDF interdigital transducer is shown in Figure 13.2.
Copper-clad polyamide ﬁlm is patterned by standard
lithographic process. Copper-deposited ﬂexible polya-
mide ﬁlm is then glued with PVDF ﬁlm using ‘Future
GlueR’. This transducer is coupled to the aluminum plate,
again using ‘Future GlueR’, for a permanent mount on
the structure. In order to supply a voltage to the IDT,
these sets of ﬁngers are connected to a voltage source.
These ports are then covered with non-conducting tape to
prevent an electrical short circuit between the ﬁnger
electrodes.
PVDF film
Flexible Cu-clad Polyamide film
Figure 13.1
Transducer made of PVDF for structural health monitoring.
Crack
Excited lamp wave 
Interdigital transducer
Figure 13.2
Schematic of a PVDF IDT (interdigital transducer) bonded onto an aluminum plate.
326
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The most important design factor of an IDT is to
decide the interdigital transducer ﬁnger spacing. To
accommodate for the constructive interference of the
acoustic waves excited by each pair of IDTs, the spacing
between them is chosen to be constant at l/4 (l is the
acoustic wavelength).
Guided waves are generated by the interdigital transdu-
cer with PVDF ﬁlm. The transducer connected to a pulse-
echo experimental set-up can detect the signal reﬂected
from the crack as well as the edge of the aluminum plate.
The self-calibrating technique employed here can relate
the intensity of the reﬂected signal to the crack size. The
sensed signal is represented as the product of the following
factors:
Fcr ¼ TðfÞaðfÞSðfÞRðfÞ
ð13:1Þ
where Fcr is the Fourier transform coefﬁcient of the
signal from the cracks, T(f) is the transmission coefﬁcient
of the transducer, a(f) is the attenuation coefﬁcient, S(f) is
the scattering coefﬁcient and R(f) is the receiving coefﬁ-
cient of the transducer.
Since only one transducer is used in the pulse-echo
experimental set-up, it is assumed that the factors T, a
and R remain the same for all crack sizes. Therefore, the
intensity of scattering for a given crack can be obtained
as:
Fcr
Fbig cr
¼
TðfÞaðfÞScrðfÞRðfÞ
TðfÞaðfÞSbig crðfÞRðfÞ ¼
ScrðfÞ
Sbig crðfÞ ¼ ScrðfÞ
X
ð13:2Þ
By means of the self-calibrating technique, the term
ScrðfÞ is determined with respect to the measured
reference signal Sbig crðfÞ from the biggest crack in the
same material. The algorithm needs further reﬁnement
to resolve when multiple cracks are present.
The relation between the intensity of scattering and the
crack size is represented by Equation (13.2). The Fourier
transform coefﬁcient of the signal is a function of the
intensity of scattering. Since the reﬂected signal from the
crack is changing with respect to the size of the crack, its
Fourier transform coefﬁcient also changes, thus affecting
the intensity of scattering.
The PVDF IDT launches a narrow acoustic wave
beam. If the size of the crack is over the length of the
IDT ﬁngers, the amplitude of the reﬂected crack signal
does not change much with increasing crack length.
Therefore, the PVDF interdigital transducer is sensitive
to detecting cracks only up to the overlapped ﬁnger
length of the IDT. This means that if one has the purpose
of searching in a narrow region for cracks, by adjusting
the overlapped ﬁnger length of the IDT the width of the
scanned region can be changed.
Studies indicate that the overlapped ﬁnger length of
the interdigital transducer limits the maximum size of
crack that can be detected. The ﬁnger length also
determines the angle of dispersion. The expression for
the dispersion angle is:
g ¼ sin1
l
l
 
ð13:3Þ
where g is the angle of dispersion, l is the wavelength
and l is the overlapped ﬁnger length of the IDT.
The set-up for experimental studies uses a windows-
based data-acquisition system (Figure 13.3). This is con-
nected to the IDTattached to the aluminum plate specimen.
Wave 
generator
Amplifier
Sensor
   A/D
Filter
  Switch
 Computer
   Amplifier
Figure 13.3
Block diagram of the experimental set-up.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
327

The specimen dimensions (as shown in Figure 13.2) are
91.5  15.3 cm and the crack is located 62.5 cm away from
the transducer. The results presented in Figure 13.4 shows
that the A1 modes are excited with the maximum group
velocity. At an operational frequency of 3.145 MHz, both
Al and A0 modes are generated. It may also be noted that
the velocities of the A1 and A0 modes are not very different
at this frequency.
The reﬂected signals from the crack and the edge not
only gives information about the location in the time
domain but also is effective to determine the crack size in
the frequency domain. Slots are cut through the aluminum
sheet to emulate the cracks. In Figure 13.5, the measured
time domain signals are presented for different crack sizes.
Since the reﬂected signal from the crack is changing
with respect to the size of the crack, its Fourier transform
coefﬁcient also changes, thus affecting the intensity of
scattering. These are plotted for different crack sizes in
Figure 13.6. In order to verify the ability to detect surface
defects, cracks are engraved with half the thickness of the
aluminum plate. These results are comparable with the
previously calibrated results. In Figure 13.6, the results
of estimation of crack size are provided for cracks half
the thickness of the aluminum plate. These results
indicate that piezoelectric PVDF ﬁlm can be used to
generate acoustic Lamb waves, which can be used to
detect and estimate surface defects.
13.2.2 PVDF ﬁlm for a hydrophone
A schematic of the device structure is shown in
Figure 13.7 [4]. The device consists of a sensing part
containing the PVDF ﬁlm and an amplifying part made
of an n-channel MOSFET with an extended aluminum
gate. The basic structure is fabricated using a standard
NMOS process. Transistors with larger W/L ratios are
preferred in order to obtain a larger transconductance and
better noise characteristics.
The operating principle of this device can be explained
as follows. The incident acoustic signal initiates the
charge redistribution on the surface of the PVDF ﬁlm
which in turn changes the charge on the gate of an n-type
MOSFET. The shift in gate voltage is used to modulate
the drain current in a common source conﬁguration The
design of this sensor was described in Section 5.2. This
hydrophone was fabricated using six photo mask levels.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
6
4
2
0
Frequency × thickness (Mhz mm)
Group velocity (km/s)
A0
S0
A1
S1
S2
A2
S3
A3
2.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
8
6
4
2
0
Frequency × thickness (Mhz mm)
Phase velocity (km/s)
A0
S0
A1
S1
S2
A2
S3
A3
Figure 13.4
Dispersion curves for the specimen used in the measurements.
328
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The fabrication process ﬂow is shown in Figure 13.8 and
is described in the following.
The starting substrate was a 2 in diameter, lightly
doped p-type (100) silicon wafer. The ﬁrst step to
begin the fabrication was wafer cleaning, which is
referred to as residual cleaning agent (RCA) cleaning.
RCA cleaning is a standard process used in industry. The
compositions of the RCA solutions are RCA1 (H2O:
H2O2:NH4OH ¼ 600:150:100) and RCA2 (H2O:H2O2:
HCl ¼ 700:150:100). The purpose of RCA cleaning is
to remove the organic surface ﬁlms, particles and alkali
ions from the silicon wafer.
Next, a wet oxidation was performed at 1100 C for
3 h to grow a silicon dioxide layer of  1 mm on the
surfaces of the silicon substrate to electrically isolate the
devices from each other. As will be discussed later, the
ﬁeld oxide for the hydrophone devices should be quite
thick in order to decrease the capacitance between the
lower electrode of the PVDF sensing pad and the con-
ductive silicon substrate.
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Time (ms)
Amplitude (mV)
A1
A0
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Time (ms)
Amplitude (mV)
Reflected signal
from the crack
Reflected signal
from the edge
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Time (ms)
Amplitude (mV)
Figure 13.5
Reﬂected signals in the time-domain showing the presence and size of a crack in the specimen.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
329

The ﬁrst lithography step was then performed to deﬁne
the source and drain diffusion regions, followed by an
etching to open the diffusion windows. Phosphorus was
used as the n-type dopant. Thermal diffusion, consisting
of predeposition and ‘drive-in’, was employed to form nþ
regions. Predeposition, as unlimited source diffusion,
was carried out at 1000 C for 25 min. Following an
HF dip to remove the oxide grown during the predeposi-
tion step, ‘drive-in’ was performed at 1050 C for 20 min
without a phosphorus source. The purpose of ‘drive-in’ is
to redistribute the dopant such that its concentration is
more uniform. This diffusion was carried out in an oxygen
atmosphere so that another layer of oxide was grown
simultaneously on the wafer to protect the nþ regions.
Gate windows were opened by the second lithography
step and etching. Dry oxidation was then carried out at
950 C for 47 min to grow the gate oxide with a thick-
ness of 300 A

. Since the quality of the gate oxide was
critical to the MOSFET’s performance, precautions were
taken to get a high-quality gate oxide. First, during dry
oxidation, some Cl was incorporated into the O2 since
chlorine can remove metal contamination by forming
volatile metal compounds which are readily swept away
from the tube. Therefore, the interface mobile oxide
charge density can be reduced and a desirable threshold
voltage can be achieved. Oxide grown in a chloride
ambient has a better interface with the underlying silicon
and results in a higher breakdown voltage. Furthermore,
after oxidation the wafer was annealed in a nitrogen
ambient at the same temperature for 45 min to decrease
the ﬁxed charge density.
Then, contact windows were opened and a 2500 A

Al
layer was evaporated onto the wafer and patterned as the
contact metal for the MOSFET. The preparation of the
SU-8 layer was performed after aluminum deposition
and patterning for the MOSFET circuit and followed by
aluminum deposition and patterning for the extended
gate electrode. The thickness of the SU-8 layer was
about 11 mm. Via holes through the SU-8 layer were
developed by pure propylene glycol methyl ether acet-
ate (PGMEA), which allows the connection to be made
between the extended electrode and the gate of the
MOSFET. Finally, a 110 mm thick PVDF ﬁlm, supplied
by Measurement Specialties, Inc., was glued onto the
extended gate electrode by using a low-temperature
silver epoxy.
In this process, however, one problem was encoun-
tered due to the thick SU-8 layer. Since the thickness of
the SU-8 layer was 11 mm, while the thickness of the
evaporated metal layer was only around 0.25 mm, it
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Crack size (mm)
Intensity of scattering
Half–thickness crack
Thickness of the cut crack
Figure 13.6
Fourier transform coefﬁcients of the signals reﬂected from the crack plotted against the size of the crack.
su-8
Source Gate
Drain
SiO2
P-Si
+
+
PVDF
Figure 13.7
Cross-section of a PVDF–MOSFET hydrophone.
330
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

turned out to be difﬁcult to make the connection between
the second metal layer with the ﬁrst one through the via
holes. Two means were used in the following steps to solve
this problem. First, during the second metal-deposition
step, the sample was rotated around the top of the evapo-
rator by using a rotatable sample holder. Therefore, the
sidewalls of the via holes could be covered with metal.
Secondly, in the following lithography step, a thick
positive photoresist, AZ 4620, supplied by AZ Electronic
Materials, was used to provide good step coverage over
the already patterned features. In order to protect the
metal deposited on the sidewalls of the via holes, the
resist was dispersed on the surface at a low spin speed.
However, since this photoresist is much more viscous
than the commonly used Shipley 1800 series photoresist,
it is difﬁcult to obtain a uniform layer of AZ 4620 at a
low spin speed. After experimentation, it was found that
a well-coated surface could be obtained by dispersing the
photoresist at a spin speed of 2000 rpm.
The processing of AZ 4620 is very similar to that for
normal positive photoresists, except that it requires
longer times for soft bake and development. For a layer
PVDF
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
p-Si
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
Source
Gate
SU-8
p-Si
p-Si
p-Si
p-Si
p-type silicon substrate
(1) Grow field oxide
(3) Phosphorus predeposition
(5) Open gate windows (mask 2)
(7) Open contact windows (mask 3)
(9) Deposite and pattern SU-8 (mask 5)
(11)  Glue PVDF onto the chip
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
p-Si
(2) Open S/D diffusion windows (mask 1)
(4) Phosphorus drive-in
(6) Grow thin gate  oxide
(8) Deposite and pattern metal A1 (mask 4)
(10) Deposite and pattern  A1 for sensing pad (mask 6)
p-Si
p-Si
p-Si
Source
Gate Drain
Gate oxide
Source
Gate Drain
Source
Gate Drain
Figure 13.8
Process ﬂow for a PVDF-based MEMS hydrophone.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
331

spin-coated at 2000 rpm with a thickness of 10 mm, both
the soft bake and development times are about 3 min. The
developer for this photoresist is a mixture of one part of
AZ400K with four parts of deionized water.
After the PVDF is mounted onto the extended elec-
trode of the device, the chip was glued onto a package
and wire-bonded. Since the hydrophone is used for
underwater acoustic signal detection, choosing the proper
material as the encapsulant is very important. This
material should be an insulator with its acoustic impe-
dance close to that of water. In addition, this material is
also expected to have excellent chemical as well as water
resistance. One class of materials often used to transmit
underwater sound signals are called Rho-C materials.
The acoustic impedance of these Rho-C materials is quite
close to that of water. Therefore, using these materials as
the encapsulant can reduce the sound reﬂection at the
water/encapsulant interface. To prepare the samples,
the two components were ﬁrst thoroughly mixed in the
proper ratio for each material system. For Conathane
EN-4/8, the ratio is 100 g Part A (EN-8) to 17.5 g Part B
(EN-4), while for Conathane EN-1556, the ratio is 100 g
Part A to 33 g Part B. In order to get rid of the bubbles
generated during the mixing process, both materials were
degassed under vacuum for about 4–5 min. Then, the
mixtures were poured into two identical aluminum molds
with an inner diameter of 6.35 cm and cured at 30 C for
more than 16 h until they solidiﬁed.
It has been found that the device encapsulated by Rho-
C rubber loses its function after a few days (usually less
than one week). The reason could be that the mobile ions
penetrate through the SU-8 layer and contaminate the
MOSFET. In order to protect the MOSFET from con-
tamination, a SiN passivation layer was deposited and
patterned right after the pattern of the ﬁrst metal layer
and followed by the spin-casting of the SU-8. Therefore,
a total of seven masks was needed in the whole process.
SiN is a good barrier material to most mobile ions and
solvents. A cross-section of the ﬁnal structure of the
hydrophone device is shown in Figure 13.9.
The system used for the deposition of SiN is a
Vactronic
four-chamber
plasma-enhanced
chemical
vapor deposition (PECVD) system. SiN (300 nm) was
deposited at 250 C with NH3 ﬂowing at a rate of 40 sccm
(standard cubic centimeter per minute) and SiH4 ﬂowing
at a rate of 4 sccm. The processing pressure is 500 m torr
and the plasma power density is 16.5 mW/cm2. After
lithography, SiN was etched in a solution containing one
part of BOE (‘Buffered Oxide Etch’) solution and three
parts of deionized water.
The passivated devices were encapsulated by Rho-C
rubber. No performance degradation was observed when
the devices were examined after two weeks. This shows
that SiN passivation is necessary and effective for
increasing the reliability of the MOSFET.
The experimental set-up for the hydrophone is shown
in Figure 13.10. The sensitivities of devices being devel-
oped with various conﬁgurations are listed in Table 13.1.
MOS1 and MOS2 refer to two different W/L ratios, of
500 and 100, respectively. It can be seen from the data
shown that the sensitivity of the hydrophone with MOS2
is improved by the SU-8 layer. With an 11mm thick SU-8
layer, the average sensitivity improvement is about 15 dB.
In addition, it has also been observed that the noise
level of the passivated device is lower than the unpassi-
vated device. In the latter device, the MOSFET is in direct
contact with the SU-8 layer, which is spin-coated from
solution. Since it is very difﬁcult to completely remove
the solvent from the SU-8, the remaining solvent in the
SU-8 may also contaminate the underneath MOSFET.
Therefore, the unpassivated device generates more noise.
This accounts for the improvement in sensitivity.
13.3 SAW ACCELEROMETER
In this section, the fabrication of a surface acoustic wave
(SAW)-based accelerometer is described [5]. Please
recall that the design of this device has already been
discussed in Chapter 5 (Section 5.3).
PVDF
p-Si
SiO2
SiN
SU-8
Drain
Gate
Source
n+
n+
Figure 13.9
Cross-section of the hydrophone with passivation.
332
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

This uses the Rayleigh wave, a type of surface wave
in which the wave energy is almost completely con-
ﬁned within a distance of one wavelength above the
substrate [6]. In this device, a conductive seismic mass
is placed close to the substrate (at a distance of less
than one acoustic wavelength). This serves to alter the
electrical boundary conditions. The seismic mass con-
sists of a micromachined polysilicon structure which
incorporates reﬂectors and ﬂexible beams. Details of the
seismic mass and reﬂectors are shown in Figure 13.11.
The device functions as follows. An incoming elec-
tromagnetic wave at the IDT causes an RF electrical
ﬁeld between the transducer ﬁngers. By the piezoelectric
effect, mechanical deformations following the signal pro-
pagate along the substrate. The array of reﬂectors reﬂect
Oscilloscope
Hydrophone
RD
Rho-C
rubber
PSU
CEEAM
pluse
tube
4.27 m
Tonpiltz
transducer
DC
power
supply
Amplifier
Figure 13.10
Experimental set-up for characterizing the hydrophone.
Table 13.1
Measured sensitivities of the hydrophones.
Frequency
Sensitivity (dB)
(kHz)
Hydrophone
Hydrophone
with MOSI
with MOS2
Without
With
Without
With
SU-8
SU-8
SU-8
SU-8
4
233.39
233.81
236.48 223.25
5
236.14
234.067
236.77 224.6
6
233.39
233.073
235.6
222.7
7
232.4
232.84
234.99 219.54
8
232.04
230.31
234.47 220.33
9
230.43
229.07
235.39 216.83
10
228.64
228.71
233.85 217.23
Absorber Beam
Polysilicon
seismic mass
IDT
Al
Plezoelectric film
Silicon
Figure 13.11
Schematic of an SAW-based accelerometer.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
333

this wave back to the IDT. The phase of the reﬂected wave
is dependent on the position of the reﬂectors. If the
position of the reﬂectors is altered, then the phase of the
reﬂected wave is also changed. The reﬂectors are part of
the seismic mass. In response to acceleration, the beam
ﬂexes, so causing the reﬂectors to move. This can be
measured as a phase shift of the reﬂected wave. By
calibrating the phase shift measured with respect to the
acceleration, the device can be used as an acceleration
sensor. Alternatively, the measurement can be done in the
time domain, in which case the delay time of the reﬂection
from the reﬂectors is used to sense the acceleration.
The basic elements of this device are the piezoelectric
ﬁlm on which the IDTs are patterned and a set of reﬂectors
and a seismic mass bonded onto this. Silicon with a ZnO
ﬁlm was chosen as the SAW substrate. Figure 13.12 shows
the design dimensions (mm) of the device. The metal
deposition and etching techniques used to pattern the IDTs
are standard in IC processing. Reﬂector arrays were
fabricated
using
silicon
micromachining
techniques.
Flip-chip bonding was chosen in order to reduce the
handling of the substrate and hence maintain the perfor-
mance of the SAW substrate. These steps are detailed in
the following paragraphs.
Figure 13.13 shows the various steps in the fabrication
of the seismic mass. This can be realized by the sacriﬁ-
cial etching of silicon dioxide. The steps are outlined
below:
(1) A sacriﬁcial oxide is thermally grown on the wafer.
(2) Polysilicon (structural layer) is then deposited by
LPCVD on the sacriﬁcial layer. Polysilicon has good
structural properties and is commonly used. This
structural layer is thick enough (1 mm) to support
itself. The polysilicon is patterned and etched with
EDP.
(3) The sacriﬁcial layer is then etched with HF to ﬁnally
release the seismic mass.
(4) The seismic mass is now ready to be ﬂip-chip bonded
to the SAW substrate.
Polysilicon seismic mass with reflectors
Absorber
ZnO film
SAW Wave
Silicon
1.5 µm
0.2 µm
1.5 µm
E field
Adhesive
Silicon substrate
RF in
IDTs
1 µm
Figure 13.12
Design and dimensions of an SAW-based accelerometer.
Creation of air gap
Structural material
Sacrificial layer
Seismic mass with reflectors
Flip chip bonding
Release of seismic mass from substrate
Figure 13.13
Fabrication of the seismic mass for an SAW-based accelerometer.
334
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

After the sacriﬁcial oxide is removed in HF, the wafers
are rinsed in deionized water and dried. The surface tension
of the water under the structures pulls them down to the
surface of the wafer, and in some cases causes them to
stick (permanently). This problem can be avoided by using
thick structural and sacriﬁcial layers, and short structures.
The SAW device consists of a piezoelectric substrate
on which the IDTs are patterned. The IDTs can be etched
by using the lift-off technique. The thickness of the metal
for the IDTs should be at least 2000 A

in order to make an
adequate contact. A very thick layer of metal causes
‘mass-loading’ effects and is detrimental to the device
performance. The metallization ratio used for the IDTs is
0.5. The number of IDTs and their apertures is chosen
such that the IDTs have an impedance of 50 .
The choice of the lithography method depends on the
minimum feature size and adhesion of the selected metal
to the piezoelectric substrate. Fabrication of the IDTs is
essentially a single-mask process. For the lift-off techni-
que, fabrication begins with standard photolithography
using standard equipment like a wet bench, resist spinner,
hotplates and an evaporator. The lithium niobate wafers
are cleaned using acetone, isopropanol and trichloroethy-
lene at about 60 C for about 10 min. The wafers are then
thoroughly rinsed in deionized (DI) water for about 5 min
and subsequently heated at 125 C (on a hot plate) for
about 10 min to remove surface moisture. Upon cooling
the wafer on a heat-sinking plate, Shipley 1813 photo-
resist is then spin coated (at 4000 rpm for 55 s) on the
wafer after soaking the top face with an adhesion agent,
hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS). The wafer is then heated
at 125 C for 2 min (soft-bake). The wafer is then exposed
to UV light (15 mW/cm2) for 1.2 s, such that the regions of
the resist that are exposed become soluble to the developer
(DI water and MF312, in a 1:1 ratio). A negative mask
(whereby the patterns on glass are set against a back-
ground of chrome) is used for this purpose. The wafer is
developed until the sections that have been exposed to UV
light (and therefore soluble) are etched away. The wafer
was then hard-baked at 125 C for 1.5 min. The patterned
wafer was coated with 0.02 mm of chromium (to improve
adhesion of gold to the substrate) using ‘e-gun evapora-
tion’ and immediately coated with 0.12 mm of gold using
thermal evaporation. The wafer was then submerged in
acetone for lift-off.
If two wafers with surface oxide layers are hydrated in
sulfuric and/or nitric acid and then brought into contact
they will stick immediately. If these wafers are subse-
quently annealed at high temperatures, the resulting bond
can be essentially perfect. The quality of the bond
depends upon the type of oxides used, the temperature
and the cleanliness of the process. If the wafers can be
annealed at 1000 C, any common oxide (thermal, PSG,
etc.) will do. This technique is often used in what is
known as a ‘dissolved-wafer process’. Hence, this can be
used for bonding the wafers with the IDTs and the
seismic mass.
The fabrication of the spacer is a two-mask process.
Four different wafers were processed to make one device,
as each spacer height requires a separate wafer. The ﬁrst
step in the process was the creation of a spacer of the
desired height. The next step is the fabrication of the
reﬂector arrays. These two stages are described with
the help of Figures 13.14 and 13.15. The basic steps in
the process involves growth and patterning of an oxide
mask, followed by dry etching of silicon by a plasma:
(1) Four p-type silicon (100) wafers of resistivity
between 2–5  cm were used.
(2) A 500 nm thick silicon dioxide is grown. This oxide
layer is the mask for the dry etching.
(3) The photoresist is spun onto the oxide layer. The
resist is then baked to improve adhesion. The ﬁrst
mask is aligned with respect to the ﬂat of the wafer
and the photoresist is patterned. The oxide is then
developed.
(4) The silicon is dry-etched in a plasma. The four
wafers are etched to different depths, namely 100
and 400 nm and 1 and 2 mm. This step results in the
protected area being raised above the rest by the
amounts indicated above. These raised regions are
called spacers.
(5) The wafers are cleaned and the oxide mask is then
etched away. This completes fabrication of the spacers.
A view of the device after the above steps is shown in
Figure 13.14.
The process steps in the fabrication of the reﬂector
arrays are discussed next:
(1) A thin layer (20 nm) of silicon dioxide is grown in
preparation for ion implantation. This is done to
make the reﬂectors more conductive with respect to
the base of the wafer. Ion implantation uses acceler-
ated ions to implant the surface with the desired
dopant. This high-energy process causes damage to
the surface. The implantation was done through a
LPCVD oxide in order to reduce the surface damage
as surface planarity of the reﬂector is desired.
(2) Boron ions are implanted into the silicon wafer at
150 keV. The concentration of the dopant is 5
1015 cm2. Both the front and back of the wafer
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
335

are ion implanted. This dosage of ions will serve to
make the doped region approximately ten times more
conductive than the undoped region.
(3) The wafers are then annealed to release any stress in
the wafer. This is followed by plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) of a 1 mm
thick oxide layer. This oxide layer will serve as the
mask for the dry-etching step to follow.
(4) The oxide is patterned and developed as described in
the fabrication of the spacers. The second mask is
aligned to alignment marks that were put down
during the fabrication of the spacers. This will ensure
that the spacers and the reﬂectors are properly
aligned with respect to each other.
(5) The silicon is dry-etched in plasma. The depth of the
etch is 1 mm. This results in formation of reﬂectors
1 mm in thickness.
(6) The back side of the wafer is sputtered with alumi-
num (0.6 mm) to allow grounding of the wafer.
(7) The oxide is ﬁnally stripped from the front.
The completed set of reﬂectors is shown in Figure 13.15.
An array consisting of 200 reﬂectors is placed between
the two IDTs. These reﬂectors cover nearly the entire
space between the IDTs. The spacer height was 100 nm.
This allows the reﬂectors to be placed 100 nm above the
substrate on which the Rayleigh wave propagates.
Based on experimental studies it has been concluded
that:
(1) Purely electrical reﬂections due to the suspended
array of reﬂectors can be detected.
(2) The spacer is able to place the reﬂector array
adequately close to the substrate, thus allowing the
electric ﬁeld to interact with the reﬂectors. This is
achieved without perturbing the mechanical bound-
ary conditions.
(3) The reﬂection from the reﬂector array can be easily
determined by using the reﬂection coefﬁcient (S11)
measurement.
The device is characterized by using a network analyzer
to measure the phase shift of the reﬂection coefﬁcient at
the IDT. A linear variation is obtained (see Figure 13.16)
for the range of acceleration values studied here.
13.4 CHEMICAL AND BIOSENSORS
As a branch of chemical sensors, which convert a
chemical or physical property of a speciﬁc analyte into
a measurable signal proportional to the concentration of
the analyte, biosensors employ a biological sensing
system connected to a transducer to recognize biological
Oxide (500 nm)
Photoresist
(2) Spin on photoresist
(4) Plasma etch Si to get
    required spacer height
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
(5) Strip oxide to complete
    spacer fabrication
p-type silicon wafer
Spacer
100 nm, 400 nm,
1 µm, 2 µm
Silicon substrate
Perspective view of device after
first stage of fabrication
p-type silicon wafer
(3) Pattern and develop photoresist 
(1) Oxidation
Figure 13.14
Fabrication of spacers for an SAW-based accelerometer.
336
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

analytes and to produce the measurable signal. Chemical
and biological sensors can use different kinds of trans-
ducers based on the transduction principle. Hence, in this
section a liquid sensor based on surface acoustic wave
(SAW) principles and a glucose sensor that makes use of
the special properties of carbon nanotubes are presented.
13.4.1 SAW-based smart tongue
The basic design principle of a ‘smart tongue’ that uses
surface acoustic wave (SAW) principles has been
described in Chapter 5. Several requirements should be
taken into consideration in the design and fabrication of
this SH-SAW liquid sensor. First, the sizes of the devices
has to be determined. In order to easily measure the delay
time difference between the two delay lines of the SH-
SAW device, long delay lines are desirable (large
devices). However, the sensitivity and rise time due to
thermal properties are improved with smaller devices.
Secondly, the number of transducer ﬁngers for the new
devices had to be determined. The bandwidth of the
sensor output is mainly dependent on this number [7].
Increasing the number of ﬁngers decreases the band-
width. On the other hand, in order to minimize the device
capacitance, the number of ﬁngers should be kept low.
However, to minimize conversion losses, the number of
20 nm oxide
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
p-type silicon wafer
150 keV
Oxide mask
p-type silicon wafer
(1) DIBAR oxidation
PECVD oxide ~1 µm
 (3) PECVD oxidation
 (5) Plasma etch Si 
 (6) Back side Al deposition
 (4) Pattern oxide mask
 (2) Ion implantation – Front and back
 (7) Oxide strip in front
Perspective view of device after 
fabrication
Spacer
Reflectors
reflector array 
1 µm
1 µm
Figure 13.15
Fabrication steps for the reﬂectors in an SAW-based accelerometer.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
337

ﬁngers should be high and diffraction losses can be kept
to a minimum when the aperture is large [8,9]. The
maximum efﬁciency of coupling occurs when the width
of the IDT ﬁngers is equal to a quarter of the wavelength
(W ¼ l=4) and for the waves to be generated over a
distance L (between the centers of the IDTs), the require-
ment for the acoustic aperture is W ¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
L
p
l. Thus, by
choosing the aperture and the number of ﬁnger pairs, the
transducer can be matched to a given input line, thus
giving a low insertion loss for the device. The maximum
relative bandwidth over which the transducer can be
matched is approximately proportional to jK2j, the elec-
tromechanical coupling coefﬁcient, and the optimum
number of ﬁnger pairs N is proportional to jðK2Þ1j to
allow the acoustic and electrical bandwidths to be made
equal [7].
Any piezoelectric material, such as lithium niobate,
lithium tantalite or quartz, could be used as a substrate.
In order to integrate easily with solid-state electronics,
silicon with a ZnO ﬁlm or an Si/diamond/ZnO combina-
tion could also be used. However, to prove the concept
of the usefulness of SAW-based device for this applica-
tion, a low-loss material with a high electromechanical
coupling coefﬁcient was chosen. For efﬁcient generation
and detection of SAWs through the IDTs, a 128 YX
LiNbO3 crystaline wafer was chosen as the substrate
since it is known to excite fewer bulk waves and has a
very high electromechanical coupling coefﬁcient.
These SAW-based sensors can be fabricated by the lift-
off technique. This technique is adequate for a 60 MHz
device that has a minimum feature size of about 7.5 mm.
An initial layer of chromium is deposited as an adhesion
promoter on the lithium niobate substrate prior to coating
with an additional layer of gold. The processed wafers
are subsequently diced and the individual devices were
mounted on a custom-designed PCB and below a PTFE
cell (110 ml volume) that carries the liquid under test. The
liquid cell is positioned accurately over the sensing area
between the IDTs with the aid of guiding pins that ﬁt into
holes in the PCB and rests on the device without any
sealant (Figure 13.17). This enables easy removal of the
cell to clean the device and yet hold the liquid samples
without leaking.
The experimental procedure for SH-SAW devices
involves the measurement of both the phase velocity
and attenuation of the SH-SAW signals propagating on
the delay lines of the sensor. The set-up includes a signal
generator, the SH-SAW sensor and a vector voltmeter
(HP 8505A) (Figure 13.18). In this, an electrical signal is
fed from the signal generator to the input IDTs; the
amplitude ratio and phase difference between the input
and output signals of each delay line were monitored by
Figure 13.16
Measured results from the SAW-based accelero-
meter.
Figure 13.17
Assembled view of an SAW-based chemical
liquid sensor.
Signal generator
SH-SAW sensor
GPIB
Vector voltmeter
(8508A)
Figure 13.18
Experimental set-up for the SH-SAW-based
characterization of liquids.
338
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

the vector voltmeter. The fractional velocity shift and
attenuation change of the SH-SAW can be derived from the
phase difference and the amplitude ratio, respectively [8].
All the experiments conducted in order to test and
characterize the SAW devices were performed under
controlled temperature conditions of 23  0.1 C using
a commercial ‘Dri-Bloc’ heater. Temperature character-
ization of the liquid sensors was performed and a linear
dependence observed with temperature. After the initial
characterization of the devices, experiments were con-
ducted in order to discriminate between very different
liquid samples (i.e. water, orange juice and milk) and,
hence, conﬁrm a ‘generic ﬁngerprinting’ approach in
which the need for biochemical-selective layers, nor-
mally used in liquid sensors, is eliminated. The experi-
ments were performed by dispensing equal volumes
(50 ml) of the different liquids into the micro cell using
a clean, dry microliter syringe. The micro cell and
devices were cleaned after each measurement using DI
water and then dried. Results showing the discrimination
of different liquid samples using the principal compo-
nents analysis (PCA) technique, a linear, supervised,
nonparametric pattern-recognition method used to dis-
criminate between the different samples under test [10],
are presented in Figure 13.19. The principal compo-
nents in this case are derived by using four variables
(sensor responses) measured using the vector voltmeter
set-up, which are the attenuation and phase difference
on the shorted and free delay lines. It has been shown in
Chapter 5 that the measurements performed are directly
related to the fractional change in phase velocity, v/v,
and attenuation change, a. These parameters can be
related to the measured parameters by
v
v ¼  1
360
l
l f
a ¼ Cb
A
l
ð13:4Þ
where l is the length of the delay line and Cb is a
constant.
The fractional change in phase velocity and attenua-
tion change are the result of perturbations of the SH-
SAWs propagating on a substrate surface caused by
mechanical and/or electrical properties of the liquid
under test and, therefore, are functions of these proper-
ties. Thus, the above measured parameters can, in turn,
be related to the viscosity, density, permittivity and
conductivity of the liquid under test, via conductivity–
permittivity charts [11].
13.4.2 CNT-based glucose sensor
Enzyme-immobilized sensors have found various impor-
tant applications in many ﬁelds, such as clinical labora-
tories, fermentation processes and pollution monitoring.
Within the area of biosensor research, immobilized
enzyme-based electrode technology is stimulating active
interest because of its ability to provide reliable, sensi-
tive, accurate, easy-to-handle and low-cost probes. An
enzyme electrode is a kind of electrochemical sensor
obtained by immobilizing a thin layer of enzyme on the
electrode. The concentration of the substrate (or the
1
0.5
–0.5
–1
0
PC2
Full milk
Orange juice
Water
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
PC1
Figure 13.19
Principal component analysis for various liquids with an SAW-based device.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
339

enzyme) can be associated to the electrochemical signal
monitored potentiometrially or amperometrically.
It is expected that by reducing the electrode sizes from
the microscale to the nanoscale will increase the detec-
tion sensitivity. Nanoscale materials, such as gold nanoe-
lectrode ensembles, have proved to dramatically enhance
electrochemical sensitivity over their larger-scale analo-
gues [12,13]. As a new and interesting class of nanoma-
terials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were found to promote
an electron transfer reaction when used as electrode
materials. It has been demonstrated that CNTs reveal
strong electrocatalytic activity and minimization of
surface fouling onto electrochemical devices. Charge-
transfer reactions at carbon nanotubes were found to occur
at a faster rate than those at traditional carbon electrodes
[14]. For SWCNTs, the electrical properties are sensitive
to surface charge transfer and changes in the surrounding
electrostatic environment as since every atom of them is
on the surface, even simple adsorptions of certain mole-
cules or polymers will signiﬁcantly change the properties
[15,16].
In this section, a recent effort on the fabrication of
different functional carbon nanotube-based enzyme bio-
sensors for glucose testing is presented. Multi-walled
carbon nanotubes were synthesized by catalytic micro-
wave chemical vapor deposition [17]. Puriﬁcation was
performed by acid treatment. Oxidized multi-walled
carbon nanotubes (oCNT) were synthesized as described
in Xie et al. [18].
Carbon nanotube-based electrodes were fabricated by
the thick-ﬁlm technique. Figure 13.20 presents a sche-
matic diagram of a nanotube-based electrode structure.
The silver conductive layers were fabricated using silver-
derived paste prepared by the following procedure. Silver
powder (2 g) was mixed with 1 g of 1,6-hexanediol
diacrylate and 0.1 g of ‘Darocur 1173’. The mixture
was tape-cast on a PET transparency substrate under a
mask. After removing the mask, the pattern on the
substrate was UV-cured.
The graphite electrodes were fabricated by using a
graphite-derived paste prepared by the following proce-
dure. Graphite powder (1.2 g) was mixed thoroughly with
10 ml of isophorone solution containing 2 % (w/v) PVC,
2 % (v/v) DBE-4 and 2 % (v/v) DBE-5 until a homo-
geneous paste was achieved. A 10 mL aliquot of this
solution was then cast on the silver electrode surface of
the sensor circle. The graphite electrodes were subse-
quently cured for 1 h (at 120 C) and allowed to cool to
room temperature. An insulator layer was then printed to
cover most of the printed carbon strip, leaving a circle
working area with a diameter of 5.1 mm and a contact
area (on the opposite side). Glucose oxidase was immo-
bilized onto the circular electrode by casting a 10 ml
solution (0.05 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS), pH 7.0)
containing 2 mgml1 GOx and 0.5% Naﬁon and allowing
it to evaporate at room temperature for 1 h. Subsequently,
the surface was rinsed with doubly distilled water and
stored at 4 C.
The pCNT paste was prepared in a similar fashion to
the graphite paste. To provide physical bonding of GOx,
0.18 g of pCNT powder was mixed thoroughly with
1.5 ml of isophorone solution containing 2 % (w/v)
PVC, 2 % (v/v) DBE-4 and 2 % (v/v) DBE-5 until a
homogeneous paste was achieved. Then, 3 ml of DMF
were added and the solution was ultrasonicated for
10 min. A 10 mL aliquot of this solution was cast on the
silver electrode surface of the sensor circle. The pCNT
electrodes were subsequently cured for 1 h (at 120 C)
and allowed to cool to room temperature. An insulator
layer was then printed to cover most of the printed
carbon strip, leaving a circle working area with a dia-
meter of 5.1 mm and a contact area (on the opposite
side). Glucose oxidase was immobilized onto the circle
electrode by casting 10 mL of solution (0.05 M phosphate
buffer, pH 7.0) containing 2 mg ml1 GOx and 0.5 %
Naﬁon and allowing it to evaporate at room temperature
for 1 h. Subsequently, the surface was rinsed with doubly
distilled water and stored at 4 C.
Furthermore, aniline was electrochemically polymer-
ized on the surface of a pCNT electrode. GOx (2mg/ml)
was immobilized by in situ polymerization of aniline
(0.1 M aniline/0.2 M H2SO4/PBS) or by chemical immo-
bilization. In the latter, 10 mL of a PBS solution of GOx,
BSA and GA (2 mg/ml GOx, 4.2 mg/ml BSA and 0.2 %
GA) were placed on the electrode and allowed to react
10 mm
Conductive silver ink
Dielectric ink
Carbon paste
PET substrate
21 mm
3 mm
40 mm
175 µm
Figure 13.20
Conﬁguration of a carbon nanotube-based elec-
trode for glucose biosensing.
340
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

for 12 h. Then, aniline (0.1 M aniline/0.2 M H2SO4/PBS)
was electrochemically polymerized on the surface of a
pCNT electrode containing chemically immobilized
GOx.
Then, 100 mg of PVA-oCNT were dispersed into 5 ml
of PBS and ultrasonicated for 2 h. Next, 2 mg/ml of GOx
was added the solution. A 10 mL aliquot of this solution
was cast on the pCNT electrode surface of the sensor
circle and allowed to evaporate for 12 h. Other electrodes
were prepared by a similar procedure [19].
Measurements were carried out in a phosphate buffer
(0.05 M, pH 7.0)-supporting electrolyte medium, using
an ‘Accumet’ Ag/AgCl reference electrode (double junc-
tion, glass body) from Fisher Scientiﬁc. Cyclic voltam-
mograms and chronoamperograms were recorded with a
‘Solartron’ SI 1280B electrochemical measurement unit.
The working electrode, the Ag/AgCl reference electrode
and nickel wire counter-electrode were inserted into a
20 ml beaker with a magnetic stirrer. Figure 13.21 shows
a schematic diagram of the testing vessel.
Figure 13.22 compares cyclic voltammograms for
glucose. These are expected to be similar to the cyclic
voltammograms obtained for hydrogen peroxide. A gra-
phite electrode without glucose shows a much lower
current (Figure 13.22). The cyclic voltammograms of
graphite electrodes, with or without glucose, in PBS
buffer are compared in Figure 13.22(b). The current for
the graphite electrode without glucose is much lower
because of the non-addition of any Farady current due to
reaction of glucose on the electrode. The oxidized
current of ATPS–oCNT is also counteracted by the
amino group of ATPS (Figure 13.22(c)).
Magnetic stirrer
Reference
electrode
(Ag/AgCl)
Working
electrode 
Counter- 
electrode (Ni)
Phosphate buffer 
Figure 13.21
Schematic of a glucose-testing vessel.
−0.0004
−0.0003
−0.0002
−0.0001
0
0.0001
0.0002
0.0003
0.0004
1
0.6
0.2
−0.2
−0.6
Potential (V)
Current (A)
pCNT
Graphite
(a)
−0.0002
−0.00015
−0.0001
−0.00005
0
0.00005
0.0001
1
0.6
0.2
−0.2
−0.6
Potential (V)
Current (A)
Graphite-PBS
Graphite–4mMGlucose
(b)
−0.0004
−0.0003
−0.0002
−0.0001
0
0.0001
0.0002
0.0003
0.0004
1
0.6
0.2
−0.2
−0.6
Potential (V)
Current (A)
pCNT–chemE–PAN
pCNT
ATPS–oCNT
(c)
Figure 13.22
CV diagrams for using various electrode con-
ﬁgurations for 4 mM glucose in phosphate buffer solutions
(0.05 M, pH 7.0), at a scan rate of 50 mV/s.
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
341

Figure 13.23 compares the hydrodynamic voltammo-
grams (HDVs) for 4 mM of glucose at the pCNT-based
microelectrode and the graphite-based device. The gra-
phite/GOx electrode shows a low response to glucose at
potentials lower than 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), while a gradual
increase of the response is observed at higher potentials.
The CNT/GOx microelectrode, in contrast, responds
favorably to glucose over the entire (0.0–0.6V) potential
range.
Signiﬁcant
oxidation
and
reduction
currents,
switching at around þ 0.20 V, are observed. The substan-
tial lowering of the detection potential observed at the
CNT-based microelectrode is coupled to signiﬁcantly
larger glucose signals.
Figure 13.24 compares the chronoamperograms of
different types of CNT biosensors in 4 mM glucose
phosphate buffer solutions (0.05 M, pH 7.0). The pCNT
electrode displays the highest current. The electrodes
fabricated with functional materials, such as ATPS–
oCNT and PVA–oCNT, also have good responses. Elec-
trodes with physically immobilized GOx present higher
currents than that with chemically immobilized GOx
since chemical immobilization will destroy part of the
activity of GOx (PVA–oCNT and pCNT–PAN). Electro-
polymerized polyaniline can be applied as a diffusion
barrier which dramatically decreased the current of the
biosensor (pCNT–PAN).
This example shows that carbon nanotubes have
potential applications as high performance electrodes
for biosensor applications due to their high surface
area, inertness, extraordinary conductivity, etc. For the
optimization point of view, several nanotube-based elec-
trodes were fabricated with different compositions and
electrochemical testing in a three-electrode electroche-
mical cell was performed. A preliminary comparison
showed that puriﬁed carbon nanotube-based electrodes
exhibit a higher electrochemical activity than others.
13.5 POLYMERIC FABRICATION
OF A MICROFLUIDIC SYSTEM
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is the preferred material
for fabricating micro reactors, especially for biochemical
applications, since it can replicate the ﬁne features of
sub-micron order. Figure 13.25 shows a schematic and a
typical fabrication process of such a micro reactor [20].
These can be fabricated very easily via a micromolding
process. A silicon wafer with a patterned SU-8 photo-
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Potential (V)
Current (µA)
pCNT
Graphite
Figure 13.23
HDVs of pCNT and graphite in 4 mM Glucose
phosphate buffer solutions (0.05 M, pH 7.0).
–80
–70
–60
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
Graphite
pCNT
ATPS–o CNT
PVA–oCNT–physE
PVA–oCNT–chemE
pCNT–physE–PAN
p CNT–chemE–PAN
Electrodes
Current (µA)
Figure 13.24
Chronoamperograms of different types of CNT biosensors in 4 mM glucose phosphate buffer solutions (0.05 M, pH 7.0).
342
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

resist can be used as the ‘mold master’. After patterning,
the prepolymer of PDMS is poured into the mold master
and the cured PDMS is peeled off from the master to be
pasted onto a ﬂat plate of poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) or glass on which access ports for introduction
of the reagents and samples should be drilled in advance.
Another advantage of using PDMS in this context is
attributed to its transparency to visible wavelengths,
since ﬂuorescent dyes are widely used for detection
and quantiﬁcation of molecules in most biochemical
analyses. PDMS also has very good adhesion to ﬂat
surfaces. Functional devices with metal and/or oxide
materials on a glass substrate can also be integrated with
a PDMS–glass hybrid structure [20]. A PDMS–glass
hybrid structure for cell-free protein synthesis is shown
in Figure 13.26. For incubation of the reaction chamber,
indium tin oxide (ITO) transparent electrodes are inte-
grated in a multilayer glass substrate on which the PDMS
chip with an array of reaction chambers is mounted. The
activity of cell-free protein synthesis is dependent on the
temperature. The two layers of integrated ITO electrodes
could work as heater and temperature-sensing devices.
The upper layer is used as a resistive temperature sensor
while the lower layer is used as a heating device.
The concentration process is necessary for various
chemical operations for both detection and puriﬁcation.
A basic design and the prototype of the micro-concen-
trator chip are shown in Figure 13.27 [21]. The chip
consists of a micro reactor chamber divided by an ultra-
ﬁltration
membrane
and
has
an
overall
size
of
8  6  8:5 mm3. The lower part of the micro chamber
is ﬁlled with a high-concentration solution. A built-in
photodiode at the bottom can detect changes in color and
intensity caused by biochemical luminescence. The
transparent nature of the UV-curable polymer structures
enables such characterization. This device is useful in
condensing protein to verify the concentration ability of
biochemical reactions.
The optical transparency of UV-curable polymers can
also facilitate isolation between the photo detector and
the ﬂuids under test, thus potentially enhancing the
Figure 13.25
PDMS-based microchip: (a) top view; (b) cross-sectional view; (c) process ﬂow [20]. Reprinted from Microelectronic
Engineering, vol. 61–62, T. Fujii, PDMS-based microﬂuidic devices for biomedical applications, pp. 907–914, Copyright 2002, with
permission from Elsevier
Inlet
Inlet
Outlet
Outlet
5 mm
PDMS
SiO2
Glass
Heater
Temperature sensor
Reaction chamber
50 µm 20 µm
Electrical
contacts
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.26
PDMS–glass hybrid structure for a single reactor
in an array: (a) top view; (b) side view [20]. Reprinted from
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 61–62, T. Fujii, PDMS-based
microﬂuidic devices for biomedical applications, pp. 907–914,
Copyright 2002, with permission from Elsevier
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
343

lifetime of the sensor [22]. Two such bioreactors are
shown in Figure 13.28. In this valveless design of the
reactor, the ﬂuid ﬂow is controlled by micro channels.
The polymer part is built by a microstereolithography
technique such as the IH process (described in Chapter 11).
The photodiode is ﬁrst fabricated on a silicon wafer by
conventional semiconductor processing which is later
used as the substrate for the polymer structure.
REFERENCES
1. A. Sinha and A. Chandrakasan, ‘Dynamic power manage-
ment in wireless sensor networks’, IEEE Design and Testing
of Computers, 18(2), 62–74 (March/April 2001).
2. G.J. Pottie and W.J. Kaiser, ‘Wireless integrated network
sensors’, Communications of the ACM, 43(5), 51–58 (2000).
3. J-S. Kim, K.J. Vinoy and V.K. Varadan, ‘Wireless health
monitoring of cracks in structures with MEMS–IDT
sensors’, Proceedings of SPIE, 4700, 342–353 (2002).
4. B. Zhu and V.K. Varadan, ‘Integrated MOSFET-based
hydrophone device for underwater applications’, Proceed-
ings of SPIE, 4700, 101–110 (2002).
5. V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan and H. Subramanian, ‘Fabrica-
tion, characterization and testing of wireless MEMS-IDT-
based microaccelerometers’, Sensors and Actuators: Physi-
cal, A90, 7–19 (2001).
6. D.S. Ballantine Jr, R.M. White, S.J. Martin, A.J. Ricco, G.C.
Frye, E.T. Zellers and H. Wohltjen, Acoustic Wave Sensors –
Theory,
Design
and
Physico-Chemical
Applications,
Academic Press, New York NY, USA (1997).
7. A.J. Pointon, ‘Piezoelectric devices’, Proceedings of the
IEE, 129, 298–307, (1982).
8. J.W. Gardner, V.K. Varadan and O.O. Awadelkarim, Micro-
sensors MEMS and Smart Devices, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
Chichester, UK (2001).
9. M. Thompson and D.C. Stone, Surface-Launched Acoustic
Wave Sensors, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA
(1997).
10. J.W. Gardner and P.N. Bartlett, Electronic Noses: Principles
and Applications, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK
(1999).
Pin
(a)
(b)
(A) High-concentration liquid
(B) Filtrated liquid
Inlet
Outlet
Ultra-filtration
membrane
Photo diode
A
B
Figure 13.27
Polymer micro-concentrator chip: (a) schematic view; (b) photograph [21]. K. Ikuta, S. Maruo, T. Fujisawa, A.
Yamada, ‘‘Micro concentrator with opto-sense micro reactor for biochemical IC chip family. 3D composite structure and
experimental veriﬁcation,’’ IEEE Intern. Conf. Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, MEMS ’99,  1999 IEEE
Waste liquid
Sample
liquid
Micro reactor
Elution
liquid
Wash
Photo sensor
Silicon substrate
Assay buffer
Micro reactor
Waste
Wash
Luciferase
Photo sensor
Figure 13.28
Designs of bioreactors integrated with a silicon-
fabricated photo detector [22]. K. Ikuta, S. Maruo, Y. Fukaya,
and T. Fujisawa, ‘‘Biochemical IC chip toward cell free DNA
protein synthesis,’’ Proc. IEEE Intern. Workshop on Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems MEMS 98, 25–29,  1998 IEEE
344
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

11. M.Cole, G. Sehra, J.W. Gardner, and V.K. Varadan, ‘Devel-
opment of smart tongue devices for measurement of liquid
properties’, IEEE Sensors Journal, 4, 543–550 (2004).
12. V.P. Menon and C.R. Martin, ‘Fabrication and evaluation
of nanoelectrode ensembles’, Analytical Chemistry, 67,
1920–1928 (1995).
13. C. R. Martin, ‘Nanomaterials: a membrane-based synthetic
approach’, Science, 266, 1961–1966 (1994).
14. P. J. Britto, K. S. V. Santhanam and P. M. Ajayan, ‘Carbon
nanotube electrode for oxidation of dopamine’, Bioelectro-
chemistry and Bioenergetics, 41, 121–125 (1996).
15. J. Kong, N.R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. Chapline, S. Peng,
K. Cho and H. Dai, ‘Nanotube molecular wires as chemical
sensors’, Science, 287, 622–625 (2000).
16. G. Collins, K. Bradley, M. Ishigami and A. Zettl, ‘Extreme
oxygen sensitivity of electronic properties of carbon nano-
tubes’, Science, 287, 1801–1804 (2000).
17. V.K. Varadan and J. Xie, ‘Large-scale synthesis of multi-
walled carbon nanotubes by microwave CVD’, Smart
Materials and Structures, 11, 610–616 (2002).
18. J. Xie, N. Zhang, M. Guers and V.K Varadan, ‘Ultraviolet-
curable polymers with chemically bonded carbon nanotubes
for microelectromechanical system applications’, Smart
Materials and Structures, 11, 575–580, (2002).
19. N. Zhang, J. Xie and V. K. Varadan, ‘Functional carbon
nanotube material-based enzyme biosensors for glucose
sensing’, Proceedings of SPIE, 5763, 157–166 (2005).
20. T. Fujii, ‘PDMS-based microﬂuidic devices for biomedical
applications’, Microelectronics Engineering, 61–62, 907–914
(2002).
21. K. Ikuta, S. Maruo, T. Fujisawa and A. Yamada, ‘Micro
concentrator with opto-sense micro reactor for biochemi-
cal IC chip family. 3D composite structure and experi-
mental veriﬁcation’, in Proceedings of the IEEE: MEMS’99
Conference, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 376–381
(1999).
22. K. Ikuta, S. Maruo, Y. Fukaya and T. Fujisawa, ‘Biochemical
IC chip toward cell free DNA protein synthesis’, in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Workshop: MEMS’98,
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 131–136 (1998).
Fabrication Examples of Smart Microsystems
345

14
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
14.1 INTRODUCTION
The study involving the monitoring, detection and arrest
of the growth of ﬂaws, such as cracks, constitutes what is
universally termed as Structural Health Monitoring
(SHM). SHM has four levels, which are the following:
Level 1, conﬁrming the presence of damage; Level 2,
determination of the location, size and orientation of the
damage; Level 3, assessing the severity of the damage;
Level 4, controlling the growth of damage. Structural
systems such as aircraft are quite complex, wherein there
are several reasons that affect the structural integrity of
the aerospace structure. The structural integrity of an
aircraft is of paramount importance since any failure
could be highly catastrophic, possibly leading to the loss
of many lives. Hence, an early monitoring/warning
system should be in place for notifying the impending
failure of the system sufﬁciently early. These failures are
normally caused by the presence of cracks, due to
excessive vibrations, or due to the ‘ﬂutter’ phenomenon
caused by aeroelastic instability. Hence, it is necessary to
ﬁnd the regions of instability and place smart devices in
these regions to detect and arrest these instabilities.
These are shown in Figure 14.1. The ﬁgure also shows
an exploded view of the engine where the sensors are
placed for various functionalities.
Aircrafts are also composed of a variety of electronic,
hydraulic and propulsion systems that have to withstand
severe loading conditions. In addition, the whole system
is highly ‘safety-critical’ and suffers degradation even
when not being in service. Such complex systems thus
require continuous monitoring and extended mainte-
nance. Procedures for automated structural health and
condition monitoring with high reliability, low cost and
less power are therefore considerable. The monitoring of
aircraft structures is nowadays still fully performed ‘on-
ground’ using Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) proce-
dures according to prescribed instructions and after
ﬁxed service time intervals. It is generally well known
in the NDT community that inspection redundancy can
often improve the overall probability of detection of
defects. In addition to bulk-wave, surface-wave and
guided-wave
ultrasonic
NDT
techniques,
currently
research is being pursued on a multi-technology program
including MEMS devices and microwave NDT.
This chapter will address some aspects of crack
detection using both bulk and microsensors, while the
topic of vibration suppression and cabin noise control
applications, which are also essential for enhancing the
structural integrity of the structures, is addressed in the
next chapter.
Civil engineering systems like building frames, trusses
or bridges are a complex network of truss, rod, plate and
shell elements. Their length scales may be larger than the
aerospace structural components. The structural health
monitoring of bridge structures for different moving
loads is an area of great importance to increase the
structural integrity of infrastructures and has been pur-
sued in many countries. Damping of earthquake motions
in structures is yet another area which has been taken up
for active research in many seismically active countries.
For such applications, smart devices derived from smart
materials are extensively used. A schematic of a bridge
structure showing the positions of smart sensors and
actuators is shown in Figure 14.2. In this ﬁgure, we see
that ﬁber-optic sensors are used essentially as sensing
devices while PZT or Terfenol-D actuators are normally
used for performing actuations such as vibration isolation
and control.
The sensors and actuators used in these structures
could be in the bulk form or thin-ﬁlm form. With the
availability of RF technology, wireless MEMS devices
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

are also currently being used extensively in sensing and
actuator systems. In this chapter, a few examples of such
wireless MEMS devices for structural health monitoring
are given. In addition, two other examples of locating
damage using bulk magnetostrictive and PZT sensors/
actuators are provided. There also is a section devoted to
vibration control in thin-walled box-beam structures
which are traditionally used as aircraft structural compo-
nents. Towards the end of this chapter, a section on the
reduction of structure-borne cabin noise in helicopters is
given. The examples given in this chapter only point to
the variety of applications where one can use smart
materials. There are many more applications of smart
materials and MEMS that are not covered in this book.
However, the theoretical background given in this book
will serve as a useful tool to handle such problems.
In this chapter, we will address Level 1, Level 3 and
Level 4 of SHM. Level 3 will involve some correlation of
damage parameters with fracture mechanics parameters
such as Stress Intensity Factors (SIFs) or Strain Energy
Release Ratess (SERR). Level 1 will be demonstrated
using both PZT as well as magnetostrictive sensors/
actuators. Levels 3 and 4 will be demonstrated using
only PZT sensors/actuators. In addition to the above,
Figure 14.1
Location of smart devices in an aircraft.
348
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

some of the latest technology on the usage of wireless
MEMS devices for crack detection is discussed.
14.2 STRUCTURAL HEALTH MONITORING
OF COMPOSITE WING-TYPE STRUCTURES
USING MAGNETOSTRICTIVE SENSORS/
ACTUATORS
In this section, the health monitoring concept is demon-
strated both experimentally and numerically in a compo-
site wing-type structure using magentostrictive material
patches. This falls under Level 1 of the SHM. The ﬁnite
element model using the uncoupled magnetostrictive
constitutive model (Chapter 8, Section 8.4.1), is used in
the numerical simulation. The concept is based on the
principle that the open circuit voltage (OCV) developed
across a sensor due to an induced magnetic ﬁeld in an
actuator shows a change in its amplitude due to the
presence of delaminations. Sensitivity studies are per-
formed on two different structures, ﬁrst on a 8-ply
composite beam specimen and secondly on a 2-D tapered
aircraft wing-type plate composite structure. The analysis
is performed by varying the crack (delamination) size
and location with respect to the location of the sensor and
actuator patches. Both surface-mounted and embedded
smart patch conﬁgurations are considered to study the
effect of delamination on the OCV of the sensor over a
wide range of actuating current frequencies. A horseshoe-
type coil arrangement placed exactly over the magnetic
patch is used to induce a magnetic ﬁeld in the specimen.
The damage induced voltage (DIV), which is the differ-
ence between the OCVacross a sensor before and after the
delamination, indicates the presence of damage. This
voltage needs to be of the order of millivolts for mean-
ingful measurement. Extensive experimentation is done on
the beam system and the FE results are validated. Only FE
simulation is done for 2-D models.
The most common form of failure of composites is the
delamination of plies, which can grow rapidly and reduce
the life of the structure. The main objective here is to
detect the onset of delamination, so that corrective
measures can be taken before it is too late to ‘salvage’
the structure. Traditionally, conventional non-destructive
techniques (NDTs), such as ultrasonics, fractography,
thermography or tomography, are extensively used to
detect the presence of damage. However, these techni-
ques require that the position of damage is known a
priori and the region being inspected is readily accessible
[1]. This limitation makes them very expensive for
damage detection in aircraft or spacecraft structures
which need frequent inspection. Therefore, an in-service
damage detection (health monitoring) system is essential,
which with built-in sensors can constantly monitor the
integrity of the structure and also determine the location
and extent of the damage.
Most methods available for damage detection do not
use any smart material. The advantage of using smart
materials is that they give an additional input in the form
of an ‘interrogation signal’, which helps us in detecting
damage more rapidly. These interrogating signals of
practically any proﬁle are easy to generate compared to
mechanical signals. Most of the works reported have
used piezoceramic sensors (PZT) for damage detection.
Figure 14.2
A schematic view of a ‘smart bridge’.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
349

The advantage of using PZT sensors is that by passing a
voltage in the PZT elements, strains are induced, even in
the absence of external forces. These strains change
rapidly with increasing delamination. This property is
used to detect damages. A magnetostrictive material,
such as Terfenol-D, until recently was thought off as an
actuator material [2]. Compared to the PZT material,
they offer a large ‘block force’ and a large ‘free strain’.
In addition, they are available in the powder form, which
makes them possible to be embedded in composites.
Krishnamurthy et al. [3] was perhaps the ﬁrst work
reported on the properties of magnetostrictive particle
layers that would make them useful for sensing purposes.
Kumar and Krishnamurthy [4] demonstrated the use of a
horseshoe-coil arrangement for creating the magnetic
circuit, which is necessary for damage-sensing applica-
tions. The present study will use the above concept to
demonstrate the effectiveness of a magentostrictive mate-
rial for damage-sensing purposes. Here, the health mon-
itoring is based on the concept that when an AC current is
passed to the actuation coil, it generates mechanical
stress (strain). This stress changes not only with the
change in delamination location, but also with its size.
The change in stress produces a change in the magnetic
ﬂux and hence the voltage across the sensing coil.
Measuring the change in the voltage (which is an easily
measurable quantity compared to strains/stresses), before
and after the delamination has taken place, will deter-
mine the condition of the structure.
14.2.1 Experimental study of a through-width
delaminated beam specimen
Experiments are performed on a delaminated composite
beam specimen. The delamination is assumed to be
‘through-width’. The experimental study required two
sets of fabrications: (1) the fabrication of the magnetos-
trictive patch, which acts either as sensor or actuator, and
(2) the fabrication and integration of a smart patch on a
laminated composite beam. The smart patch is fabricated
using a Terfenol-D powder, mixed in a matrix. The
horseshoe coil magnet is mounted over a smart patch
to generate the magnetic ﬁeld and hence the mechanical
strain. The aim of the experiment is to perform sensitivity
studies to determine the effect of delamination size and
location on the OCVacross the sensing coil. Keeping this
in mind, a number of experiments are designed on an
8-ply unidirectional laminated composite beam specimen
of size 200 mm  24 mm  2:4 mm. For these studies,
both surface-bonded and embedded smart magentostric-
tive patches are considered. The size of the smart patch is
made equal to 18 mm  8 mm  0:3 mm. For a single
patch
collocated
sensor–actuator
conﬁguration
(see
Figures 14.3(a) and 14.3(b)), the smart patch is intro-
duced in the second layer. To study the effect of dela-
mination size on the sensitivity of the response, three
beam specimens with delamination sizes of 24 mm,
18 mm and 14 mm, located at 50 mm from the tip smart
patch, are fabricated. For all of these cases, the delami-
nation is introduced between the second and third layer.
For the same collocated conﬁguration, to study the effect
of delamination location length-wise, ﬁve different speci-
mens with delamination locations at 30 mm, 50 mm,
70 mm, 90 mm and 120 mm, respectively, from the sensor
patch are fabricated. Here, the size of the delamination is
made equal to 24 mm and they are again introduced
between the second and third layer. For studying the
depth-wise variation, ﬁve different beam specimens with
delaminations at ﬁve different ply levels are fabricated.
These delaminations are located length-wise at a distance
of 50 mm from the smart patch. For studying the beha-
vior of a non-collocated two-smart-patch conﬁguration
(see Figure 14.3(c)), a second smart patch of the same
size is introduced in the second layer at a distance of
174 mm from the root. Three beam specimens with
delamination of size 24 mm and located at 50 mm,
70 mm and 120 mm, respectively, from the second
patch, are fabricated. All the composite beam specimens
are fabricated using the hand ‘lay-up’ technique. After
the fabrication process, the material properties of the
patch are characterized and this is followed by experi-
mentation. Figure 14.4 shows the laminate with the
horseshoe coil and the overall experimental set-up.
The properties of the beam specimen and the smart
patch are then estimated by using the principle of the
Law of Mixtures. By knowing the volumes or mass
fractions of the constituent materials, one can estimate
the mechanical properties, as discussed in Chapter 6
(Section 6.2). The estimated material properties, using
the Law of Mixtures, are given in Table 14.1. The
magnetic circuit is established when an AC current is
passed through the horseshoe coil arrangement. The
horseshoe-type coil arrangement consists of two legs,
one used as the sensing coil and the other for the purpose
of actuation. This is mounted over the specimen with a
small air gap for the ﬂow of magnetic ﬂux. Care is taken
to position the open end tip of the horseshoe coil above
the composite specimen to touch the ends of the
embedded patch.
The experimental set-up (see Figure 14.4) consists of a
signal generator, power ampliﬁer, ampere meter power
supply and a precision multimeter. An ampere meter is
350
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

connected between the power ampliﬁer and the actuation
coil to measure the current value at the actuation end.
The important parameters in this experiment are the
applied current amplitude and its frequency. The actua-
tion current signal generated (using a signal generator) is
fed to the actuation coil through a power ampliﬁer. The
open circuit voltage (OCV) across the sensing coil is
measured using a precision multimeter. This voltage is
measured for different values of the actuation current
and frequency. The same procedure is followed for every
test, and the experimental results are discussed in the
next section. Table 14.2 shows the parameters considered
for the horseshoe coil conﬁguration and the range of
applied currents and frequencies used in the experimental
work.
Actuation coil
Sensing coil
Collocated
Actuator–sensor
Delamination (Teflon film)
Actuation coil
Actuator
Sensing coil
Sensing coil
Collocated
Actuator–sensor
Delamination (Teflon film)
Actuation coil
Sensor
Delamination (Teflon film)
8-ply laminated composite
8-ply laminated composite
8-ply laminated composite
L1
L2
L3
L
L1
L2
L3
L
L
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 14.3
Laminated composite beam with (a) a surface-bonded patch, (b) a single embedded patch, and (c) two embedded
patches: L ¼ 20 cm; L1 ¼ 2:3 cm; L2 ¼ 4:1 cm; L3 ¼ 6:1 cm; L4 ¼ 17:4 cm; L5 ¼ 19:2 cm.
Table 14.1
Estimated material properties
of the laminated composite and smart patch.
Property
Laminated composite
Smart patch
Ex (GPa)
53.48
32.7
Ey (GPa)
17.92
32.7
Ez (GPa)
17.92
32.7
Gxy (GPa)
8.92
12.57
Gyz (GPa)
8.92
12.57
Gzx (GPa)
3.44
12.57
nxy
0.25
0.3
nyz
0.25
0.3
nxz
0.34
0.3
r (Kg/m3)
1500
2330
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
351

14.2.2 Three-dimensional ﬁnite element modeling
and analysis
The experimental results are veriﬁed using 3-D ﬁnite ele-
ment simulation. The FE model assumes a linear behavior
of the magnetostrictive material and hence an uncoupled
linear constitutive model is used in numerical simulations.
The coupling strains arising due to magneto-mechanical
coupling are converted to block forces and ‘lumped’ onto
the nodes containing the smart patch. The magnetostrictive
material has the following constitutive laws. The ﬁrst law is
the actuation law, while the second is the sensing law:
e ¼ SðHÞs þ dH;
B ¼ ds þ mðsÞH
ð14:1Þ
where e is the induced strain, S is the material compli-
ance measured at constant magnetic ﬁeld H, s is
the induced stress, B is the magnetic ﬂux density and
m is the permeability of the medium measured at
constant H. The details of block force computation
are given below. In the absence of mechanical forces,
the strain and induced stress from the actuation law
become:
eðtÞ ¼ dHðtÞ;
sðtÞ ¼ EeðtÞ ¼ EdHðtÞ
ð14:2Þ
where E is the Young’s modulus of the material.
If A is the cross-sectional area of the smart patch, the
block force experienced by the smart patch due to the
magnetic ﬁeld intensity H is given by:
FðtÞ ¼ EdA HðtÞ
ð14:3Þ
The actuation current is an alternating current ðIÞ, which
generates a magnetic ﬂux (B) while passing through
one arm of the horseshoe coil, also creating a magnetic
ﬁeld in the layer of smart patch, and this current
varies sinusoidally with the time as IðtÞ ¼ Iosin ðWtÞ
where Io is the applied current amplitude and W is the
applied current frequency. The magnetic ﬁeld is related
to the current by the expression HðtÞ ¼ na IðtÞ, where na
is the number of turns in the actuation coil. Using the
above in Equation (14.3), the applied force can be written
as:
FðtÞ ¼ EdA Iona sin ðWtÞ
ð14:4Þ
Figure 14.4
An overview of the experimental set-up for the laminate with a sensor.
Table 14.2
Parameters of the horseshoe coil
conﬁguration and ranges of applied current and
frequency.
Parameter of horseshoe
Value
coil conﬁguration
Number of turns in actuation coil
8000
Number of turns in sensing coil
7100
Air gap between the core
and the laminate
0 mm
Diameter of the horseshoe core
3.6 mm
Length of the core
45 mm
Applied current frequency range
100 Hz–400 Hz
Applied current amplitude range
1 mA–4 mA
Magneto-mechanical coupling
constant
15  106 mm=A
352
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The obtained force is applied as a concentrated force on
the nodes of the patch in the longitudinal direction. This
force will cause stress across the sensing coil. From this,
the nodal ﬁnite element stresses can be computed. The
actual stress is then calculated as:
stotal ¼ snodal þ sinduced ¼ snodal þ EdH
ð14:5Þ
The sensing constitutive law (second part of Equation
(14.1)), in the presence of a pure mechanical load will
become B ¼ dstotal. Knowing the stresses from Equation
(14.5), the ﬂex density can be computed. Using this, the
open circuit voltage can be computed from the relation:
V ¼ ns A dB
dt
ð14:6Þ
where ns is the number of turns in the sensing coil.
The beam of size 200 mm  24 mm  2:4 mm is discre-
tized using 1920 3-D brick elements. The total number
of nodes in the model are 2499. The magnetostrictive
patch is modeled using one 3-D brick element. The
complete ﬁnite element model is shown in Figure 14.5.
The beam is ﬁxed at one end and the equivalent block
force is applied in the longitudinal direction of the
magnetostrictive patch – also shown in Figure 14.5.
Transient dynamic analysis using the ‘Newmark time-
matching’ scheme is employed to compute the response
histories. Stress histories are computed after ‘post-
processing’ the displacement histories and subsequently
using Equation (14.5). From the stress histories, the open
circuit voltage is calculated for different times by using
Equation (14.6). The AC current is applied over a
frequency range of 100 Hz–400 Hz. The current ampli-
tude is varied between 1 mA and 4 mA. In each case, the
open circuit voltage (OCV) is measured and the damage-
induced voltage (DIV), which is given by
DIV ¼ OCVd  OCVh
ð14:7Þ
is computed. Here, OCVd is the OCV in a delaminated
beam and OCVh is the OCV in a healthy beam. All of the
experimental results are validated with ﬁnite element
results.
14.2.3 Composite beam with single smart patch
For the case of a beam with a surface-mounted patch, the
delamination of size 24 mm is located between the
second and the third layer at a distance of 50 mm from
the tip of the sensor patch. OCV histories are obtained for
Figure 14.5
Three-dimensional ﬁnite-element model: (a) plan view; (b) enlarged isometric view of the smart patch; (c) isometric
view of the complete model.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
353

varying current amplitudes and frequencies. Figure 14.6
shows the peak voltage (OCV) as a function of the
current amplitude for a current frequency of 100 Hz.
We see from this ﬁgure that the OCV increases with
the current amplitude and there is excellent agreement
with the results from the ﬁnite element prediction.
Figure 14.7 shows the OCV and DIV time histories for
the same delamination conﬁguration at 200 Hz frequency.
Experiment
FEM           
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0.05
Current (mA)
Peak voltage (V)
Figure 14.6
Comparison of experimental and FEM peak OCVs for a beam with a surface-bonded patch at a frequency of 100 Hz.
Figure 14.7
(a) OCV history and (b) DIV history of a surface-bonded patch as functions of the current amplitude at a frequency of 200Hz.
354
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

This ﬁgure shows that the voltage history exhibits an
inverted cosine proﬁle. This is due to the presence of the
time derivative for computing the magnetic ﬂux intensity
(B).
It is seen that the DIV is of the order of millivolts,
which is easily measurable using normal instrumentation.
The ﬁgure also shows that the DIV increases with
increases in current amplitude and current frequency.
In the embedded smart patch case, three different sets
of experiments are performed. In the ﬁrst set, the dela-
mination sizes are varied for a ﬁxed location of 50 mm
from the smart patch. Three different delamination sizes
of 24 mm, 18 mm and 14 mm, respectively, are consid-
ered for the study. These delaminations are again intro-
duced between the second and third layers and OCV
histories are obtained for these specimens.
Tables 14.3 and 14.4 give the peak DIV values for
18 mm and 14 mm delaminations, computed from the
peak OCV values of delaminated and ‘healthy’ beam
specimens for different current frequencies and current
amplitudes.
From these tables, we see that the magnitude of the
DIV drops with the reduction in delamination size. This
is to be expected since the smaller the delamination size,
the smaller will be the change in the induced stress and
hence the DIV will be smaller. As before, the DIV
increases with the current frequency and amplitude.
The experimental results again match very well with
the FEM computation.
In the second set of experiments on a single-patch
collocated sensor–actuator conﬁguration, the location
of delamination was varied length-wise with respect to
the smart patch for a ﬁxed delamination size of 18 mm.
OCV histories were obtained for ﬁve different locations
of 30 mm, 50 mm, 70 mm, 90 mm and 120 mm from the
smart patch. The peak value of the OCV was plotted as a
function of the current amplitude and delamination
location at a frequency of 100 Hz. The results are
shown in Figure 14.8. We see from these plots that the
peak value of the OCV increases with the current
amplitude and as expected, the maximum value occurs
near the sensor location.
In all of the above studies, both the actuation and
sensing are performed at the same location. It would be
interesting to know the sensor response when the actuator
location is far away from the sensor location. This
experimentation was performed by using two smart
patches.
14.2.4 Composite beam with two smart patches
In this experiment, the second patch is introduced in
the second layer of an 8-ply laminate specimen exactly
in line and at a distance of 120 mm from the ﬁrst patch.
Table 14.3
DIV data for an embedded single patch with a delamination size of 18 mm.
Frequency (Hz)
DIV (mV) (Experiment)
DIV (mV) (FEM)
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
100
45
58
72
87
46
57
71
87
200
54
68
82
99
53
66
80
98
300
64
79
94
112
65
78
92
109
400
76
91
107
126
75
89
104
121
Table 14.4
DIV data for an embedded single patch with a delamination size of 14 mm.
Frequency (Hz)
DIV (mV) (Experiment)
DIV (mV) (FEM)
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
100
32
44
57
71
30
42
54
68
200
41
53
66
83
38
52
62
81
300
50
64
78
95
48
61
76
95
400
62
76
90
108
59
73
91
110
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
355

This patch is used as an actuator. The experiment is
performed for three different delamination locations,
length-wise at 50 mm (far from the sensor), 70 mm and
120 mm (close to the sensor) from the actuator patch.
These distances also exactly correspond to the locations
of delaminations for the single-patch-embedded collo-
cated conﬁguration, for which the experiments were
performed previously. The size of delamination consi-
dered here is 18 mm. Tables 14.5 and 14.6 give the
magnitudes of the peak DIVs for two different delamina-
tion locations. From these tables, we see that the DIV
magnitudes are an order smaller than those predicted by
the collocated conﬁguration.
It is seen that if the delamination is very close to the
sensor (Table 14.5), then peak DIVs are higher than in
the case when the delamination is further away from the
sensor (Table 14.6).
As in the single-patch case, the DIV increases with
increases in the current amplitude and current frequency.
This is because, in the collocated case the sensor and the
actuator locations are at the same point. Due to this, the
sensor experiences more strain and hence a greater open
circuit voltage is induced in the sensing coil. In all of the
above cases, the experimental results compare very well
with the FE solutions. Hence, it can be concluded that
the collocated sensor–actuator conﬁguration predicts a
Figure 14.8
Peak OCV data for different delamination locations along the length of a laminated composite with an embedded
single patch at a frequency of 100 Hz: (a) experimental; (b) FEM.
356
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

higher voltage compared to the non-collocated con-
ﬁguration. Many more parametric studies on this beam
specimen for both single- and two-patch cases are re-
ported in Saida et al. [5].
14.2.5 Two-dimensional wing-type plate structure
The above procedure of determining the presence of
damage is next extended to a 2-D aircraft wing-type
plate structure. In this case, only an FE simulation is
performed. The conﬁguration of the structure with the
location of sensors and actuators is shown in Figure 14.9.
(All dimensions are given in millimeters). The con-
ﬁguration resembles that of a ‘delta wing’. The model
has two sensor patches and a single actuator patch, as
shown in the ﬁgure. The delamination is of a ‘rectangular
type’, coming out from one of the edges, as shown in
Figure 14.9.
Table 14.5
DIV data for two embedded patches with a delamination at 50 mm from the actuator.
Frequency (Hz)
DIV (mV) (Experiment)
DIV (mV) (FEM)
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
100
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
200
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.7
0.9
300
0.5
0.7
0.8
1.1
0.5
0.7
0.7
1.1
400
0.5
0.8
0.9
1.2
0.6
0.8
0.8
1.2
Table 14.6
DIV data for two embedded patches with a delamination at 70 mm from the actuator.
Frequency (Hz)
DIV (mV) (Experiment)
DIV (mV) (FEM)
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
1 mA
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
100
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.7
0.9
200
0.6
0.7
0.9
1.1
0.6
0.7
0.8
1.0
300
0.7
0.8
1.0
1.2
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.1
400
0.7
0.8
1.1
1.2
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.2
L2
L3
L13
L9
L10
L8
L7
L11
L12
L6
L4
L5
L14
z
z
y
x
x
Actuator         Delamination        Sensor II                Sensor I
Figure 14.9
A delta-wing conﬁguration showing locations of the sensors and actuators: L1, 1400 mm; L2, 800 mm; L3, 30 mm; L4,
20 mm; L5, 10 mm; L6, 0.3 mm; L7, 40 mm; L8, 20 mm; L9, 40 mm; L10, 300 mm; L11, 800 mm; L12, 1340 mm; L13, 0.3 mm; L14,
200 mm.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
357

As a ﬁrst exercise, the sensor and actuator posi-
tions are ﬁxed and the delamination location is varied
along the length. The current amplitude is varied from
1 to 4 mA. The sensor is located in the third layer.
The peak DIVs are plotted and these are shown in
Figure 14.10. As in the 1-D case, for higher current
amplitudes the DIV values are higher for all delamina-
tion locations. In addition, higher DIVs are obtained
at locations closer to the actuator. Next, the actuator,
delamination locations and Sensor-I locations are
ﬁxed and the Sensor-II location is varied, as shown
in Figure 14.11. This ﬁgure shows the DIVs predicted
by both Sensor-I and Sensor-II. When Sensor-II is very
close to the actuator, it predicts a DIV as high as
45 mV. Note that this location is also quite close to
the delamination location. Sensor-I predicts a lower
DIV, as it is far away from both the delamination and
actuator.
From these studies, it the use of Terfenol-D as a sensor
material and its use in crack detection has been clearly
demonstrated. It was also shown that the sensitivity of the
sensor varied with the location of the delamination, and
the locations of the actuator and sensor with respect to
the delamination location.
14.3 ASSESMENT OF DAMAGE SEVERITY
AND HEALTH MONITORING USING PZT
SENSORS/ACTUATORS
In this section, we will use a PZT actuator/sensor combi-
nation for the same purpose of detecting the presence of
cracks. The principle of operation is very similar to the
previous case of the magnetostrictive sensor/actuator
combination. That is, by passing a voltage across the
PZT actuator, it induces a strain in the structure, which
changes the stress and hence the voltage across the PZT
sensor. Measuring the voltage before and after the dam-
age will conﬁrm the presence of damage in the structure.
However, our objective here is to establish the severity of
the damage. This can be done if one determines the
fracture parameters, such as the stress intensity factor
(SIF) and strain energy release rate (SERR), and corre-
late these parameters with the output voltage across the
sensor. If plots of the SIF or SERR with the sensor
voltage for various damage conﬁgurations are available,
by measuring the changes in the voltage across the sensor
it will be possible to establish the severity of the ﬂaw.
The numerical model for this problem is done through a
‘self-sensing’ PZT ﬁnite element, as derived in Chapter 8.
Figure 14.10
Peak DIV as a function of delamination location and current amplitude (sensor in the third layer).
358
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

The approach is demonstrated for both static and dyna-
mic loading. The details of this work can be found in
Sastry [6] and Sastry et al. [7].
First, we will introduce some basic deﬁnitions in
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM). It is well-
known that if there is a crack in a body which is
subjected to some loading, the stresses developed in the
region surrounding the crack tip are nearly inﬁnite. That
is, the stress, s ¼ aK=
ﬃﬃr
p , where r is the radial distance
measured from the crack tip and a is some constant. The
parameter K is called the stress intensity factor (SIF). In
fracture mechanics, one is mainly concerned in the
region very close to the crack tip. Hence, it becomes
more practical to deal with those parameters that are
ﬁnite in the region close to the crack tip for quantifying
the extent of fracture. In this context, the parameter K
(SIF) can be used as it is always ﬁnite. Hence, the study
of fracture mechanics always deals with the determina-
tion of the SIF, rather than the stress itself. Another
parameter that is commonly used in fracture studies is the
strain energy release rate (SERR). This is deﬁned as the
energy required for closing the crack. If U is the strain
energy and a is the crack length, then the SERR (G) is
deﬁned as:
G ¼ lim
a!0 dU=da
ð14:8Þ
The SERR is related to the SIF for an isotropic material
structure in a plane-stress condition as G ¼ K2=E .
Similar relations are available for composite structures.
There are different ways to evaluate this parameter.
The most common method of evaluating the SERR is
via the ‘J-integral’ proposed by Rice [8]. This is a
line integral. The improved form of this integral is
called the ‘Equivalent Domain Integral’ (EDI), which is
an area integral [9]. This form is now extensively used
in fracture studies and is also used in this work. Such
Figure 14.11
Peak DIVs in Sensors I and II for different locations of Sensor II as a function of current amplitude (Sensor II in the
third layer).
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
359

an integral is evaluated over an area taken over a
path taken far away from the crack tip, as shown in
Figure 14.12.
In this ﬁgure, r is the radius of the contour path G1
from the crack tip and n and m are the two outward
normals from the contours G0 and G1, respectively. If sij
is the 2-D stress ﬁeld and U and T are the strain and
kinetic energy, respectively, then the J-integral is given
by:
G ¼ J ¼
ð
SðG0¼0Þ

sji
@ui
@x
@Z
@xj
 ðU þ TÞ @Z
@x
þ r €ui
@ui
@x  _ui
@ _ui
@x


dS
ð14:9Þ
In the above equation, ui, _ui and €ui are the displacement,
velocity and acceleration components in the two coordi-
nate directions and Z ¼ r0=r, where r0 is the radius of the
node of a particular element in the surface S.
The next important aspect in fracture mechanics is to
know the modes of failure. There are three modes of
failure, namely, the Opening Mode (Mode-I), Shearing
Mode (Mode-II) and Tearing Mode (Mode-III). These are
schematically shown in Figure 14.13. For 2-D problems,
only Mode-I and Mode-II fractures are possible and
hence the sensing of delamination will be carried out
only under these two modes.
In this study, the FEM developed in Chapter 8 (Section
8.2) is used. Equation (8.30) gives the necessary FEM
equation for the mechanical as well as the electrical
degrees of freedom. These results are ‘post-processed’
to obtain the voltages as follows. We ﬁrst assume that the
surface charge vector fqg remains constant with time due
to an ‘open-circuit’ condition and in the present case it is
assumed to be equal to zero. It is also assumed that there
are no residual stresses and charges in the embedded
piezoelectric patch. We can write the sensor equation as:
fEzg ¼ ½KEE1½KuEfug
ð14:10Þ
The voltage developed across each sensor due to the
deformation-induced electric ﬁeld fEzg acting in the
z-direction is given by:
Vi ¼
X
i
Ezizi
ð14:11Þ
The charge stored and the equivalent voltage are given by:
V ¼
P VQ
P Q ;
Q ¼
ð
Dztdx
ð14:12Þ
z
z
x
x
r
n
S
Sensor
Crack
G1
G0
dG
Figure 14.12
Schematic showing the J-integral contour.
Mode-I
(opening)
Mode-II
(in-plane shear)
Mode-III
(out-of-plane shear)
z
y
x
Figure 14.13
Three modes of fracture.
360
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

All of the parameter deﬁnitions in the above equations
have been deﬁned earlier in Chapter 9. Numerical experi-
ments are now performed to test the formulation.
For this, the double cantilever beam (DCB) shown in
Figure 14.14 is considered.
The model consists of a composite cantilever beam
having an unidirectional (00) ﬁber orientation and made
of graphite–epoxy laminates. Three patches of piezoelectric
materials are embedded in between the composite layers.
The ﬁrst patch is placed exactly at the ‘mid-depth’ of the
section at which the bending stresses due to the externally
applied loads are at a minimum. The other two patches are
placed away from the central patch and towards the free end
of the beam and are also placed symmetrically about the
central longitudinal axis of the beam. In this present study,
the delamination is considered to occur along the central
longitudinal axis at the ‘mid-depth’, which makes the beam
specimen to act like a DCB. The central patch is placed
ahead of the delamination crack tip. In the chosen conﬁg-
uration, the locations of the piezoelectric patches are ﬁxed
and the length of the delamination is varied from 25mm to
50 mm from the free end. The material properties for the
above beam are given in Table 14.7.
The FE model has 540 nodes and 440 elements
(including the sensor patches), which gives an overall
system size of 1068  1068. The above discretization is
for a delamination length of 50 mm. The contour for
computing the J-integral encompasses all three sensors
and is symmetric about the delamination. The objective
of keeping the location of the piezoelectric patches ﬁxed
is to study the effect of the strains developed in the
piezoelectric material and the corresponding voltages
generated on their surfaces as the tip of delamination
approaches the piezoelectric patches. This will give a
distinct correlation of the computed J-integral (hence, the
SIF and other crack tip features) with the sensor output as
the delamination grows towards the sensor group.
For sensing under Mode-I static loading, two static
loads of 50 N are applied at the tip of the beam such that
each load pulls each of the sublaminates to either side.
Due to the symmetries of loading and geometry, the
upper and lower sublaminates undergo the same amount
of deformation and the symmetrical stress conditions
prevail about the central longitudinal axis. About this
axis, the stresses would be minimal, except at a certain
region just ahead of the crack tip. Figure 14.15(a) shows
the variation of the sensed voltage on the surface of the
sensor patch placed at the ‘mid-depth’ and ahead of the
crack tip. The abscissa shows the x-coordinate measured
from the ﬁxed end of the beam. When the delamination
length of the beam is 25 mm, the effects of delamination
and applied load upon the bending of the patch is
minimal as the crack tip location is too far away to affect
the ﬂexural behavior of the patch and the sensed voltage
distribution on its surface is almost constant. As the
delamination length is increased and approaches towards
the patch, a linear increment in the voltage across the
surface from the far end and towards the crack tip can be
observed in the ﬁgure. The same ﬁgure also shows an
increase in the sensed voltage as the delamination length
z
x
z
y
0.2
1.2
1.2
7.5
7.5
15
10
10
45
500
Figure 14.14
Schematic of the double-cantilever beam specimen
(and dimensions (mm)) used for the numerical experiments.
Table 14.7
Material properties of the double-cantilever beam specimen used for the numerical experiments.
Material property
Graphite–epoxy beam
PZT
Young’s modulus, E11 (GPa)
150
63
Young’s modulus, E22 ¼ E33 (GPa)
9
63
Shear modulus, G12 (GPa)
7
24.2
Shear modulus, G23 ¼ G13(GPa)
25
24.2
Poisson’s ratio, n12 ¼ n23 ¼ n13
0.3
0.3
Mass density, r ðkg=m3Þ
1600
7600
Piezoelectric coefﬁcient, d31ð1012 m=VÞ
—
254
Piezoelectric coefﬁcient, d32ð1012 m=VÞ
—
254
Piezoelectric coefﬁcient, d33ð1012 m=VÞ
—
0
Relative permittivity, m11=m0 ¼ m22=m0 ¼ m33=m0
—
1500
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
361

is increased, along with the distribution of voltage across
the length of the patch. However, the effect of the intense
crack tip stress ﬁelds approaching towards this sensor
patch could not be captured. This is captured by the other
two sensor patches.
As the load acts on the beam symmetrically on the
geometrically symmetric DCB specimen (the delamina-
tion axis coinciding with the central longitudinal axis),
the piezoelectric patches placed above and below the
longitudinal axis undergo equal amounts of ﬂexure. Due
to this, symmetrical stress conditions prevail in these
patches and equal amounts of voltage are generated in
these patches. Hence, the voltage distribution is shown
only
for
the
patch
in
the
lower
sublaminate.
Figure 14.15(c) shows the spatial distribution of the
electric voltage along the length of the patch in the
lower sublaminate for various lengths of delamination
and the abscissa is taken as the surface nodal x-coordi-
nate from the ﬁxed end. As can be observed from this
ﬁgure, that when the delamination length is 25 mm, in
which case the near end of the PZT patch is 20 mm away
from the crack tip, the strains in the sensor patch seem to
be almost uniform along the surface, except for a small
length towards the near end of the crack tip.
20
15
10
5
0
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
50 45
40
35
35
30
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
25
20 445
447
449
451
453 455
430
432
434
436
438
440
Voltage (mV)
Voltage (mV)
Delamination length (mm)
Delamination length (mm)
Location of surface node, x (mm)
Location of surface node, x (mm)
5
4
3
2
1
0
100
100
80
80
60
60
40
40
20
20
0
0
50
50
45
45
40
40
35
35
30
30
25
25
Sensitivity, J/Va (V × 104)
4
3
2
1
0
–1
Sensitivity, J/Va (V × 105)
Load (N)
Load (N)
Delamination length (mm)
Delamination length (mm)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 14.15
(a) Peak voltage generated in the central patch; (b) sensitivity in the central patch; (c) peak voltage generated in the
lower patch; (d) sensitivity in the lower patch.
362
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

As such, it can be inferred that the ﬂexure of the beam
is also causing ﬂexure of the sensor patch. When the crack
tip is made to approach the sensor patches in the sub-
laminates, the effect of the crack tip stresses causing ﬂexu-
ral strains in the PZT patches can also be observed to be
causing non-uniform strains and voltages in the PZT
patches. When the delamination length is 45 mm, the near
end of the sensor patch lies just above and below the crack
tip and the high-stress region near the crack tip is observed
to be causing a phenomenal increase in the strains, as well
as in the generated voltages in the sensor patches. When
the delamination length is 50mm, the mid-lengths of the
patches lie above and below the crack tip. The high stresses
at the crack tip mostly affect the mid-length region of the
beam and a sudden jump in the generated voltage can be
observed exactly at the mid-lengths of the sensor patches.
The strains at the surface behind the crack tip again recede
and thereby the voltage also recedes. Thus, the effect of the
damage location upon the sensed voltage can be found and
the sudden variation in the magnitude and proﬁle of the
surface voltage across the length of the sensor patches
indicates a damage in the nearby regions.
Next, the sensitivity of the sensor, deﬁned as the ratio
of the J-integral to the average voltage generated by the
sensor (J/V), is evaluated by computing the J-integral for
each delamination length for different applied loads. The
load is varied from 10 N to 100 N in increments of 10 N.
The average voltage generated is computed as a weighted
average of all the values of voltage along the surface
length of the piezoelectric patch. This is computed using
Equation (14.12). The plots of these for the middle and
bottom sensors are shown in Figures 14.15(b) and 14.15(c),
respectively. When the delamination length is 50 mm, the
J-integral value as well the value of average voltage
shows a considerable increase, as a result of which the
sensitivity value also shows a sudden increase in its value.
The sensitivity is linear for various loads for a particular
crack length and is piece-wise linear for various crack
lengths under a particular load. For delamination lengths
of 40 mm and 50 mm, the value of the J-integral and the
average voltage show considerable increases as the
sensor layers come very close to the high-stress crack-
tip-surrounding zone. For the lower sensor patch, the
nearest delamination tip case (50 mm delamination) is
the most severe. For this case, the patch is highly
sensitive only at the higher loading amplitude. However,
the sensitivity is linear over the entire loading range.
Similar studies are performed for the Mode-II loading
case. For this case, a loading of 100 N is applied at the tip
of the beam such that the sublaminates slide upon each
other in addition to undergoing bending deformation. In
this case, the deformation ﬁeld is not symmetrical as in
the Mode-I loading case and as a result, the upper and lower
patches will generate different voltages. Figures 14.16(a)
20
25
15
10
5
0
–5
Voltage (mV)
445
447
449
451
453
455
Location of surface node, x (mm)
50
50
45
45
40
40
35
35
30
30
25
25
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
Delamination length (mm)
Delamination length (mm)
100
80
60
40
20
20
0
Load (N)
Sensitivity, J/Va (V × 105)
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.16
(a) Peak voltage generated and (b) sensitivity for the lower patch under Mode-II loading.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
363

and 14.16(b) show the voltage generated and the sensitivity
for the lower patch.
One can draw similar inferences as in the Mode-I
loading cases. From these examples, we can conclude
that the sensitivity measure not only conﬁrms the
presence of damage but also indicates its severity.
Hence, this measure can be used in on-line SHM
studies.
14.4 ACTUATION OF DCB SPECIMEN
UNDER MODE-II DYNAMIC LOADING
The main objective of this section is study the effect of
open-loop actuation to control or delay the growth of
cracks. A crack is said to grow if the SIF reaches a
threshold value with increases in the load. This problem
falls under Level 4 of the SHM. The same conﬁguration
of the laminated composite DCB model with embedded
piezoelectric sensor layers used in Section 14.3 for
the purpose of sensing the crack tip stress ﬁelds is also
considered here for distributed actuation to control the
crack tip stresses. In this present study, the locations of
the piezoelectric layers are taken as before; however,
these layers are used for actuation purposes. The idea
is to conduct a feasibility study for possible reduction of
the strain energy release rate (SERR) with the application
of counter-forces (due to smart actuation) to
the
developing crack tip stresses. This can be accomplished
by applying a voltage to these piezoelectric actuator
patches.
The time variation of the applied mechanical load
is deﬁned by PðtÞ ¼ P0 sin ðotÞ where P0 ¼ 100 N
and o ¼ 100 Hz . The load is applied at the free end
of the beam acting vertically downwards, thus allow-
ing relative sliding of the sublaminates over each
other, which forms a Mode-II type of loading. The
SERR is estimated using the J-integral. In this pre-
sent study, the energies associated with computation
of the J-integral are considered from a domain of
radius 1 mm. The applied mechanical load gives
rise to a J-integral history, which is also periodic in
nature. A sinusoidal voltage is then applied to the
three embedded piezoelectric actuators as explained
below. A positive voltage on the top surfaces and
a negative voltage on the bottom surfaces of all of the
three
piezoelectric
actuator
layers
is
applied.
The voltage is described by the function VðtÞ ¼
V0 sin ðotÞ and the same frequency of excitation is
considered, that is, o ¼ 100 Hz. The SIF in a Mode-II
type of deformation is computed by using the for-
mulae given by Bao et al. [10] and the computed SIF
is normalized with Ko ¼ Pmax
ﬃﬃﬃa
p =bh, where a is the
crack length and b and h are the breadth and thick-
ness of the beam. The time history of the normal-
ized KII for various voltage amplitudes is shown in
Figure 14.17.
As can be observed from this ﬁgure, the multiple
peaks of the SIF values are reduced as Vo is increased
and a reduction of about 10–15 % can be observed for
Vo ¼ 750 V. The application of the voltage can be
observed to be useful in generating the force required
2.5
1.5
0.5
0
1
0
0.05
0.15
0.1
0.2
2
0 V
500 V
750 V
Time (s)
K1/K0
Figure 14.17
Normalized SIF for different voltage amplitudes.
364
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

to counteract the forces causing the growth of the
delamination. It can also be observed that the linear
increase in Vo results in a linear decrease in the crack
tip stress values. As the deformations in the actuator
layers have a direct effect on the local conditions near
the crack tip, the mechanical strains developed in the
region between the actuator and the crack faces cause the
composite material to also undergo additional deforma-
tion in the opposite direction in order to satisfy the
geometrical compatibility conditions and hence reduc-
ing the crack tip displacements. In this case, the voltage
is applied in-phase with the mechanical load. It would
be interesting to see what happens to the normalized
SIF if the voltage and the mechanical load are out-of-
phase. That is, the voltage variation is given by VðtÞ ¼
V0 sin ðot þ fÞ, where f is the phase angle. This aspect
is shown in Figure 14.18 for Vo ¼ 750 V for a range of
phase angles.
The plots show an increase in the SIF values for
increases in the phase angles and for f equal to 180 
the
SIF
is
almost
doubled.
Hence,
it
can
be
concluded that an increase in f causes an increase in
the SIF, thereby increasing the early risk of failure.
The examples used in this section show that it is
indeed possible to delay the growth of the ﬂaw by
suitably designing a control system. Although this aspect
was demonstrated using an open-loop control, a more
practical and realistic way would be to design a closed-
loop feedback control for wider applications and more
robust performance.
14.5 WIRELESS MEMS–IDT
MICROSENSORS FOR HEALTH
MONITORING OF STRUCTURES
AND SYSTEMS
The
integration
of
MEMS,
interdigital
transducers
(IDTs) and required microelectronics and conformal
antennas to realize programmable, robust and low-cost
passive microsensors suitable for many military struc-
tures and systems including aircraft and missiles is
presented in this section. The technology is currently
being applied to the structural health monitoring of
critical aircraft components. The approach integrates
acoustic emission, strain gauges, MEMS accelerometers,
gyroscopes and vibration–monitoring devices with signal
processing electronics to provide real-time indicators of
incipient failure of aircraft components with a known
history of catastrophic failure due to fracture. Microma-
chining offers the potential for fabricating a range of
microsensors and MEMS for structural applications,
including load, vibration and acoustics characterization
and monitoring. Such microsensors are extremely small;
they can be embedded into structural materials, can be
mass-produced and are therefore potentially cheap.
Additionally, a range of sensor types can be integrated
onto a single chip with built-in electronics and an
Application-Speciﬁc Integrated Circuit (ASIC), thus pro-
viding low-power microsystems. Smart sensors are being
developed using standard microelectronics and micro-
machining in conjunction with wireless communication
Figure 14.18
Normalized SIF for different phase angles.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
365

systems suitable for condition monitoring of aircraft
structures in-ﬂight. A hybrid accelerometer and gyro-
scope in a single chip suitable for an inertial navigation
system and other microsensors for health monitoring,
condition-based maintenance of structures, drag sensing
and control of aircraft, strain and deﬂection of structures
and systems, etc. are discussed in this section.
The unique combination of technologies (microelec-
tronics, MEMS and IDTs) results in novel conformal
sensors that can be remotely sensed by a wireless com-
munication system with the advantage of ‘no-power
requirements’ at the sensor site (passive sensor). The
sensors presented are simple in construction and easy to
manufacture with existing silicon micromachining and
stereolithography techniques. Programmable sensors can
be achieved with ‘Split-ﬁnger’ IDTs as reﬂecting struc-
tures. If the IDTs are short-circuited or capacitively
loaded, the wave propagates without any reﬂection,
whereas in an open-circuit conﬁguration, the IDTs reﬂect
the incoming signal. Programmable accelerometers,
gyroscopes, strain and deﬂection sensors, etc. can thus
be achieved by using an external circuitry on a semi-
conductor chip using hybrid technology.
IDTs offer a simple and inexpensive means for sensing
applications using surface acoustic waves (SAWs). The
wave velocity and hence the oscillation frequency of a
feedback loop containing an IDT device and a feedback
ampliﬁer are affected by changes in the mechanical or
electrical boundary conditions in the wave path. Very
small changes in the velocity can result in very repeatable
frequency shifts since the stability of the oscillation
frequency is extremely good. The device can also be
attached to a conformal antenna and excited by a remote
RF transceiver. The ﬁdelity of the sensor and its high
sensitivity are achieved by the ﬁve-orders-of-magnitude
difference in wave speed between the acoustic signal and
the RF signal. This mode of operation is particularly
attractive because it is wireless and obviates the need for
a local power supply. As the acoustic energy is conﬁned
to a thin near-surface region of the piezoelectric sub-
strate, MEMS–IDT-based sensors are highly sensitive to
surface perturbations of the propagation medium.
A set of IDT microsensors being developed for SHM is
based on generating Lamb, Love or Rayleigh surface
waves in structures. Lamb waves are 2-D counterparts of
1-D ﬂexural and longitudinal waves. Lamb waves are
proven to be useful for sensing impact damage, cracks,
delamination, ‘kissing bonds’, corrosion and other health
monitoring features of structures. Love waves are found
to be ideal for detection of ice formation, and couple
effectively with acoustic emission signals for monitoring
the onset of crack formation and propagation. Rayleigh
waves are being used for sensing deﬂection, strain,
temperature, humidity, pressure, acceleration and shock.
These waves are generated by IDTs, either microma-
chined, etched or printed on special-cut piezoelectric
wafers or on certain piezoelectric ﬁlms deposited on
silicon using standard microelectronics fabrication tech-
niques and microstereolithography.
Wireless MEMS–IDT devices make use of both SAWs
and traditional MEMS principles. MEMS–IDT-based
microsensors possess typical advantages of MEMS sen-
sors, including the additional beneﬁts of robustness,
excellent sensitivity, surface conformability and durabil-
ity. Compared to conventional ones, these new sensors
have a fewer number of moving mechanical parts,
ultimately giving rise to inherent robustness and dur-
ability. Consequently, there is no electronics to balance
or measure the movement of moving structures, which
leads to even smaller micro devices.
Perhaps the major technical barrier to the acceptance
of new developments in sensor technology is the need for
wired communication between sensors and the electro-
nics needed to drive them, as well as data-processing
units. Retroﬁtting several sensors on an existing system
and ‘hard-wiring’ all of the sensors is often impractical.
Wires are prone to breakage and vandalism. Commu-
nication between moving and ﬁxed systems is another
case when
‘hard-wiring’
is
difﬁcult
or sometimes
impossible. Although advances have been made in
wired communications, these complex assemblies are
essentially similar to test hardware and present numerous
reliability and maintainability limitations if implemented
on a production scale. Cost effectiveness of sensor
technology is also adversely affected by the physical
complexities of moving to ﬁxed system communications.
Considering these limitations, development of a wireless
means of communication, akin to telemetry, could have
dramatic beneﬁcial payoffs for the health monitoring of
rotary and ﬁxed-wing aircraft, machinery with fast mov-
ing parts, and all other applications that preclude wired
sensors. The use of antennas for the telemetry of data
from piezoelectric and other sensors, as well as wireless
NDT using microwave probes, thus deﬁne a new era in
practical NDT applications. It is now possible to use a
wireless telemetry activation system at some distance
from the structure containing the embedded transducer,
and still obtain the pulsing and receiving characteristics
to allow us to determine whether any changes are
taking place in that material. The MEMS–IDT- and
micro-comb-type sensors are most appropriate for this
smart material application because of the simplicity in
366
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

size, manufacture and the overall capability and ﬂexibil-
ity in being able to generate any mode and frequency of
choice by way of controlling the various elements of the
microsensors.
14.5.1 Description of technology
Microsensors are basically silicon, piezoelectric wafer or
polymer devices that convert a mechanical signal into an
electronic one using microelectronics technology. In
smart structures, the electronic signal obtained from the
sensors is ampliﬁed, conditioned and fed to ASIC chips.
Using the intelligence in the electronics, the signal will
be processed by the microprocessor and controller and
then fed to the actuator. By using this type of integrated
or smart sensor, one could achieve many actuation
functions locally or remotely at different locations
using wireless telemetry devices.
Many microsensors for SHM are based on the genera-
tion of Lamb waves, Love waves or Rayleigh waves.
These waves can be generated by interdigital transducers
(IDTs) either micromachined, etched or printed on special-
cut piezoelectric wafers or on certain piezoelectric ﬁlms
deposited on silicon using standard microelectronics
fabrication techniques. The IDT sensors can be inte-
grated with MEMS using the recently developed techni-
ques such as (a) micromechanics ﬁrst and CMOS and
microelectronics second, (b) CMOS and microelectro-
nics ﬁrst and micromechanics second, or (c) ﬂip-chip
bonding which result in a family of novel microsensors.
An MEMS–IDT device is usually a piezoelectric wafer
with a set of interdigital transducers (IDTs) on its sur-
face. The sensor principle is based on the fact that the
wave-traveling time between the IDTs changes with
variation in the physical variables. One of these IDTs
acts as the device input and converts signal voltage
variations into mechanical waves of the types mentioned
above, based on the piezoelectric crystal-cut. The other
IDT is employed as an output receiver to convert the
mechanical waves back into output voltages. These
devices are reciprocal in nature; as a result, signal
voltages can be applied to either IDT with the same
end result. To obtain a high sensitivity, MEMS–IDT
sensors are usually constructed as electric oscillators
using the IDT device as the frequency-control compo-
nent. By accurately measuring the oscillation frequency,
a small change of the physical variables can be detected
by the sensors. A typical IDT oscillator sensor schematic
is shown in Figure 14.19.
An ampliﬁer connects two IDTs on a piezoelectric
wafer so that oscillations result because of the feedback
of the waves propagating from one IDT to the other. The
oscillation frequency satisﬁes the condition that the total
phase shift of the loop equals 2p and varies with the wave
velocity or the distance between the IDTs. The oscillator
includes an ampliﬁer and requires an electrical power
supply and cannot be wireless. The operating frequency
range of such devices is from ten MHz to a few GHz,
which directly matches the frequency ranges of radios
and radar. When an IDT is directly connected to an
antenna, the waves can be excited remotely by electro-
magnetic waves. For remote wireless sensing, the receiv-
ing IDT can be replaced by a set of reﬂectors, as shown
in Figure 14.20.
The reﬂectors can be programed such that each sensor
will have its own ‘bar code’ for identiﬁcation. This kind
of sensor identiﬁcation is particularly attractive when
many microsensors are used at various locations on an
aircraft. The input IDT connects directly to a small
antenna called the device antenna.
This antenna–IDT conﬁguration is able to convert the
microwave signal ‘from the air’ to an IDT signal on the
wafer surface and vice versa. The reading system has a
linear frequency modulated (FM) signal generator. A
system antenna transmits the FM signals. The signals
are received by the device antenna and converted by the
antenna–IDT to waves propagating along the surface of
the wafer and into the structure. The ‘echoes’ from the
reﬂectors are picked up by the antenna–IDT and sent
back to the system antenna. The ‘echo’ signals are
delayed copies of the transmitted FM signal. The delay
times mainly depend on the velocity of the waves and
the distance between the IDT and the reﬂectors. A
mixer, which takes the transmitted FM signal as the
reference signal, outputs the signals of frequency dif-
ference between the echoes and the transmitted sig-
nals. Because the transmitted signal is linear frequency
modulated, the frequency difference is proportional to
the delay time. By using spectrum analysis technique
like FFT, the two echo signals can be separated in the
frequency domain since the delay times are different.
Amplifier 
Frequency 
counter
IDT
IDT
Figure 14.19
Schematic of an oscillator IDT sensor with a
resonator.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
367

The MEMS substructure can be combined with the above
IDT devices to conceive wireless-conformal sensors such
as accelerometers, gyroscope etc. [11].
14.5.2 Wireless-telemetry systems
Figure 14.21 shows a typical layout of a transceiver
telemetry system. This system operates in the range
905 to 925 MHz. The circuit operation is as follows.
The signal is pulse-FM modulated. A pulser can syn-
chronize the DC voltage ramp circuit, voltage-controlled
oscillator (VCO) output and the A/D converter. During
the pulse, the DC voltage ramp circuit would linearly
tune the VCO from 905 to 925 MHz. The VCO output is
controlled by a diode switch, which is then ampliﬁed to
50 mW by a high-isolation ampliﬁer. A coupler diverts a
sample of the signal to the LO input of the mixer. A
circulator sends the transmitted signal to the antenna and
also sends the reﬂected signal through an automatic gain-
control ampliﬁer to the RF input of the mixer. A low-pass
ﬁlter removes any noise and high-frequency signals.
Next, the signal is digitized at 10 Msps and 10 bit
resolution. A programmable DSP chip, such as the TI
TMS320C3X, is used to extract delay information and
compute the desired parameter. This is then output to an
LCD.
     PC 
     FM 
Generator
Mixer
    Phase 
measurement
System antenna
Sensor antenna
IDT transducer effect
Figure 14.20
Schematic of a remote reading sensor system with a passive IDT sensor.
VCO
Switch
Antenna
DC voltage
ramp circuit
Pulser/sync
A/D
LP filter
DSP/FFT
High isolation
amplifier
Coupler
Main
Aux
Mixer
Circulator
IF
Output LCD
AGC amplifier
Figure 14.21
Schematic of a system for remote sensing applications.
368
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

14.5.2.1 Application of technology
For health monitoring of existing aircraft already in
service, the sensor must be ﬂush-mounted with a protec-
tive rain and sand erosion coating and should not affect
the airfoil and aerodynamical design and structural
integrity. A series of low-proﬁle, MEMS–IDT- and
micro-comb-type sensors can be surface mounted and
protected by a thin UV-curable multifuctional polymer
coating [11], as shown in Figure 14.22. The thickness
of the coating is around 100 mm, which will not affect
the airfoil and aerodynamical design. The sensors can
be used to generate a host of bulk, guided, Lamb and
Love waves, as described above. These sensors could
even be mounted inside the composite material during
the fabrication process itself to advance the state-of-the-
art of smart structure application and design for future
aircraft. With availability of the dispersion curves asso-
ciated with guided-wave analysis in both isotropic and
anisotropic media [12–19], procedures for making use of
the wave structure across the thickness of a composite
material for enhanced defect detection and sensitivity
analysis is now possible. As an example, if emphasis was
directed towards the tiny cracks emanating from the outer
surface of the structure, one would select a mode and
frequency from the dispersion curve that has maximum
displacement and/or energy concentration on the surface
of the structure. On the other hand, if one’s primary goal
was the detection of fairly large defects from the surface,
midway through the thickness of the component or
perhaps, defects emanating at the center of the structure,
one would select a wave structure with maximum dis-
placement and/or energy concentration at the center of
the thickness of the component. Since the wave structure
varies along the dispersion curves, computational proce-
dures and the use of elasticity analysis can be used to
select these points of interest.
A micro-comb-type sensor is made up of a number of
ﬁngers, say ﬁve to twenty, that are mounted with gaps
between the elements and all made to oscillate in-phase by
either shock excitation or a tone burst. Frequency varia-
tions can also be accomplished by using a shock-type
excitation, followed by appropriate signal processing.
Wireless telemetry which is custom-built with localized
power and drive circuitry will result in a compact, remo-
tely addressable system. A multiplexing arrangement is
also possible, whereby a single spacing might be used to
control the time-delay sequence in pulsing to allow us
Figure 14.22
Surface-mounted microsensors conﬁned in a thin layer for the health monitoring of aircraft structures.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
369

to move to any point of choice on a dispersion curve to
achieve a special wave-propagation characteristic desired
for a particular application. Utilization of a comb makes
multi-mode inspection possible, whereby defect detection
and classiﬁcation is simpliﬁed. Thus, it is ideal for multi-
site damage detection. It is a well-known fact that redun-
dancy in inspection can improve the overall probability of
detection. Quite often, the features established from the
multi-mode data collection procedures can then be used as
input into a pattern-recognition program, or neural net-
work, for further classiﬁcation and implementation of a
decision algorithm to assist in the material or composite
material
characterization
and
defect-characterization
phase of the work effort. Research studies conducted to
date indicate that the MEMS–IDT- and micro-comb-type
sensors would work well for almost any materials and
structures. A simple description of the approach used is
given below.
Lamb-wave-based sensors
Lamb waves have been
proven to be useful for sensing impact damage cracks,
delamination, ‘kissing bonds’ and corrosion. MEMS–
IDTs for Lamb-wave generation are fabricated either
on piezoelectric ﬁlms deposited on silicon or on piezo-
electric polymers by microstereolithography.
A micro-comb type sensor is made up of a number of
such MEMS–IDT sensors that are mounted with gaps
between the elements and are all made to oscillate in-
phase by either shock excitation, a tone burst or an
external antenna signal. In such a measurement system,
the acoustic wave signals are generated on the surface
by the application of an AC voltage across the IDT
terminals. These acoustic signals travel along the sur-
face of the body and are reﬂected by the edges as well
as by any cracks that are formed in their propagation
paths. These reﬂected signals could then be analyzed
using wireless health monitoring systems. Additional
components and systems are required to make the system
‘wireless’. The ﬁrst step in this direction is on deciding
how to reach the required electrical signals at the
terminals of the IDT. In the block schematic shown in
Figure 14.23, an amplitude-modulation scheme is pro-
posed. Pulses of this amplitude-modulated carrier signal
are transmitted by an antenna in the transmitter section
of the readout unit. The modulation scheme is necessi-
tated by the enormous size of the antenna if the HF
signals were to be transmitted unmodulated. By using a
conveniently higher carrier signal, the antenna size can
be reduced. It would also enable the use of existing
antennas on the structure itself (if available) for the
Carrier
generator
Modulator
915 MHz
3 MHz
Modulating
signal
Power
amplifier
Pulse
generator
Transmitter
antenna
(915 MHz)
Receiver
antenna
(3 MHz)
Reciever signal
processing
Radiated
reflected signal
101DT array
Crack
Lamb-wave propagation
(3 MHz)
Figure 14.23
Wireless MEMS–IDT coﬁguration for monitoring cracks.
370
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

secondary purpose of monitoring itself. Alternately, these
can be located on a separate ground vehicle which would
send out radio-frequency signals for exciting the IDTs
attached to the monitored body. Amplitude modulation
is a very common technique used for telecommunica-
tions, particularly in conventional AM broadcasting.
Depending on the extent of surface area needed to be
covered and the proximity for accessing the IDTs, these
act as antennas for receiving these transmitted signals.
This transmission path is similar to an AM broadcast
system, where the transmitter antennas are much taller
compared to the receiver antennas, which are barely
visible. The ‘demodulation’ takes place at the transducer
itself. The maximum frequency at which the PVDF
transducer can respond is well below the transmitted
radio frequencies. Hence, the acoustic signal on the
surface is at the frequency of the modulating signals.
These, in turn, get reﬂected by the edges and cracks
and are re-transmitted by the IDT. A small receiving
antenna (separate from the transmitter for improved
isolation) picks up the signals, which contain information
about the location and size of cracks and other damage.
The receiver unit contains a pre-ampliﬁer, ﬁlter banks
and an oscilloscope or digitizing units for computer
processing at a later stage. The results presented in
Figure 14.24 are based on the A1 (antisymmetric Mode
1 of the Lamb waves) modes excited at the maximum
point of group velocity. At an operational frequency of
3:145 MHz, both A1 and Ao (antisymmetric Mode 0)
modes are generated. It may be noted that the difference
between the group velocity of the A1 and Ao modes is
not too much. In Figures 14.24(a) and 14.24(b), the
measured time-domain signals are presented for a
structure with and without a crack, respectively. The
reﬂected signal from the crack changes according to
the crack size. It is shown that the intensity of scatter-
ing is closely related to the crack size. The reﬂected
signals from the cracks and edge not only gives infor-
mation about the location of cracks in the time domain
but is also effective in determining the crack size in the
frequency domain.
Love-wave-based sensors
Love waves are found to
be ideal for detection of ice formation and couple
effectively with acoustic emission signals for monitoring
the onset of crack formation and propagation. The SAW
that propagates on a 36 rotated Y-cut X-propagating
LiTaO3 (36YX.LT) is of a ‘leaky-type’ SH mode, which
can detect the effects of mechanical properties, such as
viscosity and mass loading, as well as those of the
electrical properties. These microsensors use interdigital
electrodes (IDEs) or IDTs to generate Love waves at the
interface of the sensor surface and the surrounding
medium. The sensors use a pair of devices; one serves
as a reference, due to the mechanical loading, while the
other measures the electrical properties via the phase
velocity and attenuation information from the sensors.
Acoustic emission (AE) sensors have being fabricated by
using the Love-wave concept, as shown in Figure 14.25.
Acoustic emission is the elastic energy being suddenly
released when materials undergo deformation. It may be
released from the propagation of cracks and/or delamina-
tions, friction, leakage or microscopic deformation or
transformation. Various studies have been performed
during the past decades using AE for monitoring damage
in aircraft structures [20–24]. Some of these studies
report of having even applied AE for in-ﬂight monitor-
ing. This has, however, been limited to either monitoring
an aircraft structure in a ‘rig-test’ performed on ground
under simulated in-ﬂight conditions or implementing an
inertial loading apparatus with a prescribed test specimen
in a ﬂying aircraft.
Other studies have been performed by pressurizing the
cabins of commercial aircraft fuselages for the detection
of fatigue cracks, corrosion, cracked lap joints and cracks
around rivets and in forging and wing slices. The sensors
used are also ‘macrosize’. Thus, they are not suitable for
‘true’ in-ﬂight testing. A ‘true’ in-ﬂight AE sensor can be
Figure 14.24
Reference tone-burst-signal data for (a) without a crack and (b) with a 2 mm crack.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
371

conceived with a Love wave sensor, which will effec-
tively couple with the shear component of the AE signal
from the structure. This modulated signal can be read by
smart electronics built into the sensor or by wireless
means, as shown in Figure 14.25.
Rayleigh-wave-based sensors
Rayleigh surface waves
have been investigated for sensing deﬂection, strain,
temperature, humidity, pressure and acceleration, and in
highly sensitive gyroscopes for aircraft. Here, MEMS–
IDT-based accelerometers, gyroscopes and strain sensing
are described in detail.
14.5.2.2 MEMS–IDT accelerometers and gyroscopes
There is an emerging need for low cost and miniature
accelerometers and gyroscopes for inertial navigation on
a single chip. The inertial navigation system uses both
gyroscopes and accelerometers to measure the state of
motion of a target or a missile by sensing the changes in
that state caused by acceleration. The required features in
many of these applications are high precision, wide
dynamic range and wide frequency range. Essentially,
most accelerometers consist of a suspended seismic mass
that is displaced by the measurand. Thus, the position of
the seismic mass depends on the momentary acceleration
sensed by the device. The design of a microsystem
incorporating both an accelerometer and a gyroscope
on a single silicon chip is shown in Figure 14.26. This
consists of (a) IDTs for generating SAWs and (b) a
ﬂoating seismic mass for sensing acceleration and a
perturbation mass array for sensing the gyroscope
motion. Silicon with a ZnO ﬁlm is chosen as the SAW
substrate. The IDTs are sputtered on the substrate. The
Antenna for
remote interrogation
Interdigital transducer
(TDT) or reflectors
Smart
electronics
EPI
BN
BN
DP
DP
SiN4
Package wear plate
AE event
Outgoing
ultrasonic
waves
Mechanical
part
Figure 14.25
Schematic of an acoustic emission sensor fabricated by using the Love-wave concept.
Gyro sensor
Acceleration
sensor
Input IDTs
Perturbation mass
array for gyro
Seismic mass
for acceleration
Silicon
Reflectors
Piezoelectric
film
Figure 14.26
MEMS–IDT accelerometer and gyroscope on a
single chip.
372
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

fabrication steps involve mask preparation, lithography
and etching. The thickness of the metal for the IDTs
should at least be 2000 A

in order to make an adequate
contact. A very thick layer of metal causes mass loading
effects and is detrimental to the device performance. The
metallization ratio for the IDTs is 0.5. The fabrication of
the seismic mass is realized by the sacriﬁcial etching of
silicon dioxide. The steps involved are as follows: (1) a
sacriﬁcial oxide is thermally grown on a second silicon
wafer; (2) a polysilicon (structural layer) is then depos-
ited by LPCVD onto the sacriﬁcial layer – the polysilicon
is patterned to form the seismic mass and etched with
EDP; (3) the perturbation mass array for gyroscope
sensing is deposited onto this seismic mass; (4) the sacri-
ﬁcial layer is then etched with HF to ﬁnally release the
seismic mass and the perturbation mass array; (5) the
seismic mass is then ﬂip-chip bonded to the SAW silicon
substrate. The ﬂoating reﬂectors (seismic mass) can
move relative to the substrate and this displacement is
proportional to the acceleration of the body the substrate
is attached to. This displacement is then measured as a
phase difference of the reﬂected acoustic wave, which
can be calibrated to measure the acceleration. This phase
shift can be detected at the accelerometer sensor port of
the device [25]. It should also be noted that the strategi-
cally positioned metallic mass arrays on the underside of
the seismic mass would change the coupling between the
SAW at the gyroscope sensor port due to the rotation and
‘Coriolis force generation’. This is sensed as the rate
information for gyroscope. When the electromagnetic
signal is converted to an acoustic signal on the surface
of a piezoelectric material, the wavelength is reduced by
a factor of 105. This allows the dimensions in the realm
of the acoustic wave devices to be compatible with
integrated circuit technology. The main advantage of a
single device for the measurement of angular rate, as well
as the acceleration is the reduction in power require-
ments, signal processing electronics, weight and overall
expenses for many commercial, military and space
applications.
14.5.2.3 MEMS–IDT-based strain sensors
The MEMS–IDT strain sensor system is employed to
study the deﬂection and strain of a ‘ﬂex-beam beam’
-type structure of a helicopter. The concept is based on
the fact that the phase delay is changed because of the
strain of the sensor substrate. The system consists of
remotely readable passive MEMS sensors and a micro-
wave-reading system. The phase difference is sensitive
to the change in the delay times. The phase shift of the
signal is then calibrated with that of the strain by using
a simple cantilever beam model. This is an experiment
that was performed on a scaled model of the ‘Sikorsky
S-76A’ rotor blade, (see Varadan et. al [26]). First,
the strain and the deﬂection were measured remotely
by the antenna communicating with the sensors (via
the built-in antenna) while the blades were stationary
and then when the blades were rotating. The rotational
speed is close to that of an actual helicopter. The results
presented in Figure 14.27 are encouraging for further
research.
In summary, the feature selection on health monitoring
takes place from the physically based domains of guided
Number of measurements
–9
–10
–11
–12
–13
–14
0
10
20
30
40
50
Phase (degrees)
Number of measurements
–9
–10
–11
–12
–13
–14
0
10
20
30
40
50
Phase (degrees)
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.27
Phase shifts and number of strain measurements on a scaled model of a rotor blade: (a) static; (b) rotating.
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
373

waves, MEMS, microwaves, etc. The classiﬁcation will
use state-of-the-art artiﬁcial neural networks. This multi-
technology approach to NDT vastly improves our ability
to monitor the health of aircraft, civil structures and
manufacturing processes. The goal, of course, is to
ﬁnally develop a physically based feature vector for a
complex system from which data fusion can be used in
the development of a decision algorithm for the ‘criti-
cality’ of system performance based on detection, classi-
ﬁcation and sizing. The feature vector that has been
established with this multi-mode and multi-technology
approach is rich and robust. Rather than ﬁlling in
the elements of a feature vector with a long list of
statistically or probabilistic-based features on a single-
modality NDT approach in an attempt to solve the
problem, the approach here with a multimode and
multi-technology approach is to initially have tremen-
dous sensitivity potential, hence improving the overall
probability of detection and decision-algorithm perfor-
mance potential.
Once the feature vector is completely formulated, the
procedures for algorithm development follow traditional
guidelines of pattern recognition whereby probability
density function curves could be plotted to select the
most useful features for the ﬁnal input into a pattern
recognition or neural net algorithm, hence establishing a
decision function with appropriate weights for the phy-
sically based features selected. Thus, the multi-technol-
ogy approach to health monitoring of systems and
processes is not simply a set of disparate and comple-
mentary technologies, but rather a multi-scale inspection
ability that can be combined together for a powerful new
approach to NDT.
REFERENCES
1. S.W. Doebling, C.R. Farrar, M.B. Prime and D.W. Shevitz,
‘Damage identiﬁcation and health monitoring of structural
and mechanical systems from changes in their vibration
characteristics: A literature review’, Los Alamos National
Laboratory, Report LA–13070–MS, Los Alamos, NM, USA
(1996).
2. B. Culshaw, Smart Structures and Materials, Artech House,
Inc., Norwood, MA, USA (1996).
3. A.V. Krishnamurthy, M. Anjanappa, Z. Wang, and X. Chen,
‘Sensing of delaminations in composite laminates using
embedded magnetostrictive particle layers’, Journal of
Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, 10, 825–835
(1999).
4. M. Kumar and A.V. Krishnamurty, ‘Sensing of delamina-
tions in smart composite laminates using a magnetostrictive
particle layer and horseshoe coil arrangement’, Journal of
Aeronautical Society of India, 52, 19–25 (2000).
5. E. Saida, G.N. Naik and S. Gopalakrishnan, ‘An experi-
mental investigation of a smart laminated composite beam
with a magnetostrictive patch for health monitoring applica-
tions’, Structural Health Monitoring, 2, 273–292 (2003).
6. C.V.S. Sastry, ‘Distributed sensing and actuation in delami-
nated smart composite structures’, M.Sc. Thesis, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India (2002).
7. C.V.S. Sastry, D. Roy Mahapatra, S. Gopalakrishnan and
T.S. Ramamurthy, ‘Distributed sensing of static and dynamic
fracture in self-sensing piezoelectric composites: ﬁnite ele-
ment simulations’, International Journal for Intelligent
Materials and Systems, 15, 339–354 (2004).
8. J. R. Rice, ‘A path-independent integral and the approximate
analysis of strain concentration by notches and cracks’,
Journal of Applied Mechanics, Transactions of the ASME,
35, 379–386 (1968).
9. L.B. Freund, Dynamic Fracture Mechanics, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK (1990).
10. G. Bao, S. Ho, Z. Suo and B. Fan, ‘The role of material
orthotropy in fracture specimens for composites’, Interna-
tional Journal of Solids and Structures, 29, 1105–1116
(1992).
11. V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan and X.Q. Bao, ‘Integration of
interdigital transducers, MEMS and antennas for smart
structures’, SPIE Proceedings, 2722, 95–106 (1996).
12. V.K. Varadan and V.V. Varadan, Smart Structures, MEMS
and Smart Electronics for Aircraft, AGARD-LS-205, (1996).
13. V.K. Varadan and V.V. Varadan, ‘Microsensors, actuators,
MEMS and electronics for smart structures’, in Microlitho-
graphy, Micromachining and Microfabrication, P. Rai-
Choudhury, (Ed.), SPIE and IEE Publications, (1997).
14. H. Subramanian, V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan and M.J.
Vellekoop, ‘Design and fabrication of wireless remotely
readable MEMS based microaccelerometers’ Smart Materi-
als and Structures, 6, 730–738 (1997).
15. V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan, X. BaO´ , S. Ramanathan and D.
Piscotty, ‘Wireless-passive IDT microsensor’, Smart Mate-
rials and Structures, 6, 745–751 (1997).
16. V.K. Varadan, Smart Electronics, Eds. V.K. Varadan, 2448,
SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, USA (1995).
17. V.K. Varadan and P.J. McWhorter, Smart Electronics and
MEMS, Eds. V.K. Varadan and P. J. McWhorter, 3046, SPIE
Press, Bellingham, WA, USA (1997).
18. A. Hariz, V.K. Varadan and O. Reinhold, Smart Electronics
and MEMS, Eds. A. Hariz, V.K. Varadan and O. Reinhold,
3242, SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, USA (1997).
19. V.K. Varadan, P.J. McWhorter, R. Singer and M.J. Vellekoop,
Smart Electronics and MEMS, Eds. V.K. Varadan, P.J.
McWhorter, R. Singer and M.J. Vellekoop, 3641, SPIE
Press, Bellingham, WA, USA (1998).
20. C.D. Bailey, ‘Acoustic emission for in-ﬂight monitoring on
aircraft structures’, Materials Evaluation, 34, 165–171 (1976).
21. C.M. Scala, ‘A semi-adaptive approach to in-ﬂight moni-
toring using acoustic emission’, in Proceedings of Review
374
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

of Progress in Quantitative NDE, (Eds), D.O. Thompson and
D.E. Chimenti, 361–369 (1986).
22. J.M.
Carlyle,
‘Acoustic
emission
testing
the
F-111’,
NDT-International, 22, 67–73 (1989).
23. C.P. Fotos, ‘Acoustic emission technique tests aircraft
integrity’, Aviation Week and Space Technology, 76 (August
28, 1989).
24. S. McBride, M. Viner, M.D. Pollard, P.S. MacPhail,
D. Bouwman and D.T. Peters, Acoustic Emission Detection
of Crack Presence and Crack Advance During Flight,
AGARD-CP-462, (1989).
25. H. Subramanian, V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan and M.J.
Vellakoop, ‘Design and fabrication of wireless remotely
readable MEMS based microaccelerometers’, Smart Mate-
rials and Structures, 6, 730–738 (1997).
26. V.K. Varadan, V.V. Varadan, X. Bao, S. Ramanathan and D.
Piscotty, ‘Wireless-passive IDT strain microsensor, Smart
Materials and Structures, 6, 745–751(1997).
Structural Health Monitoring Applications
375

15
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
15.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, vibration and structure-borne noise-
control applications are presented. For longevity of a
structure, whether it is an aircraft wing, a building
structure or a machine element, the amount of vibration
it experiences should be reduced. Vibration reduction
can normally be achieved passively by identifying the
resonant conditions and suitably modifying the geome-
try of the structure such that the natural frequency of
the system is far away from the driving frequency of the
system. Alternatively, one can do a detailed analysis
and identify the regions in a structure having high
vibration levels and design suitable damping mechan-
isms to alleviate the vibrations. However, design con-
straints will always not allow any modiﬁcation to the
existing structure. In such cases, one has to look at
other alternatives, such as adaptive technology, wherein
the desired results can be achieved without any major
deign modiﬁcation. Such methods of reducing vibra-
tions are called active methods. One such methodology
is by using smart materials.
The control of noise generated by vibration of struc-
tural members is yet another application where smart
materials can be used. This application has great impact
in increasing the structural integrity of the structure.
Noise could be air-borne or structure-borne. Air-borne
noises are generated due to the pressure difference
caused by differential ﬂow ﬁelds. One example of this
is the aerodynamic noise generated by a moving aircraft
or a helicopter. Structure-borne noise is generated by
vibrating structural members. These members act as a
conduit for the vibration (disturbance) to propagate
within the structure and are responsible for ‘screeching’
or high-frequency noise. In other words, structure-borne
noise and vibration goes ‘hand-in hand’. In such cases,
reducing the vibration levels will automatically reduce
the structure-borne noise levels.
Smart materials, through their constitutive relations,
can generate extra forces arising due to mechanical
coupling. This extra force will essentially act as a
damping force to alleviate vibration or noise in a struc-
ture. In this chapter, two case-studies are presented. In
the ﬁrst study, vibration levels in a thin-walled box beam
are controlled using PZT sensors/actuators. In this study,
two different control schemes (outlined in Chapter 9)
are employed. In the second study, the reduction of high-
frequency cabin noise caused by the jamming of gears in a
gearbox of a helicopter is addressed. In this study, the
Active Spectral Finite Element Model (ASFEM), again
outlined in Chapter 9, is used.
15.2 ACTIVE VIBRATION CONTROL
IN A THIN-WALLED BOX BEAM
Thin-walled constructions are extensively used in aircraft
structural components due to their inherent advantages
of high stiffness and low weight. They are also used in
many steel structures, such as girders, bridges, scaffolds,
etc. in civil constructions. The analysis of these structures
is more complicated than the conventional structures.
There are many secondary effects, such as warping,
ovaling, etc., which are very important in their behavior.
In addition, thin-walled structures in aircraft
give
coupled motions. That is, for example, bending motion
will give rise to torsional motion or an axial load will
given rise to bending motion. Megson [1] gives a
complete overview of thin-walled structure behavior in
aerospace and civil structures.
The thin-walled box beam FE formulation was studied
in detail in Chapter 8 (Section 8.3). The details of this
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

can also be found in Mitra [2] and Mitra et al. [3]. In
this section, we will use this element to design the
necessary controller to suppress the vibration caused by
multi-modal loading. The output from the designed
controller is veriﬁed both experimentally and numeri-
cally (through the formulated FE). SEREP is used to
reduce the FE model.
15.2.1 Test article and experimental set-up
A glass–epoxy composite box beam with two bimorph
surface-mounted SP5H PZT patches is used for the
experimental study of vibration suppression of the trans-
verse bending modes. The PZT patches act as actuators,
through which both the exciting electrical load and
control signals are applied. Sensing is done through a
Structcel 330 A (PCB Electronics, USA) accelerometer
with a sensitivity of 20.4 mV/m2/s. The material proper-
ties and dimensions of the box beam and PZT patches are
given in Tables 15.1 and 15.2, respectively. The canti-
lever beam has a ply layup of ½03=902=03 on all four
sides. A schematic diagram of this beam is shown in
Figure 15.1. The vibration in the box beam is induced
through a single patch of a PZT actuator by using an
oscillator. The generated vibration is sensed through an
accelerometer (Structcel 330 A, PCB Electronics, USA)
with a sensitivity of 200 mV/g, which is then fed to the
A/D converter after signal conditioning. The PI controller
is implemented in the DSP-based vibration control card.
The card is designed around the ADSP-2181 DSP. The
sensed voltage is proportional to the acceleration of the
ADSP controller, which outputs the calculated control
voltage through the D/A converter channels. The control
voltage is ampliﬁed by a high-voltage ampliﬁer and then
fed into the PZT actuators for bending actuation to
suppress the transverse vibration. The experimental set-
up and its block diagram are given in Figures 15.2 and
15.3, respectively.
15.2.2 DSP-based vibration controller card
The DSP-based vibration controller card is developed for
the implementation of a digital control system. The card
is designed around ADSP-2181 DSP. This card also
contains one ADC with an eight-channel inbuilt multi-
plexer, an eight-channel serial DAC, a UART and a ‘Boot
ﬂash’. Eight analog sensor signals from the input to card
and eight analog channels are the outputs. The ADSP-
2181 DSP from the analog devices has been chosen
to implement vibration control laws and to acquire
sensor inputs. This DSP features high-speed processing,
single cycled instruction execution and multifunction
instructions. The signal-conditioner analog sensor inputs
are connected to respective ADCs. Prior to ADC sam-
pling, all sensor inputs are ﬁltered by a second-order
Butterworth low-pass ﬁlter of 2 kHz cutoff frequency.
Analog outputs (DAC outputs) are buffered and brought
to a connector. One asynchronous serial channel is
provided for downloading the ADSP-2181 programs
and for debugging purposes. Eight general-purpose
inputs/outputs of the DSP are also brought out to a
berg stick connector. The DSP-based vibration controller
Table 15.1
Material properties and dimensions of the glass–epoxy beam.
Material properties
E11 ¼ 23:69 GPa; E22 ¼ 7:63 GPa; G12 ¼ G13 ¼ G23 ¼ 3:37 GPa; n12 ¼ 0:26;  ¼ 1985 kg=m3
Dimensions (in meters)
Length ðLÞ ¼ 0:655; width ð2bÞ ¼ 0:057; depth ð2hÞ ¼ 0:019; ply thickness; tp ¼ 0:00025
Table 15.2
Properties of the SP5H PZT actuators for the test specimen.
Material properties
E (Young’s modulus) ¼ 62.0 GPa; n (Poisson’s ratio) ¼ 0.31; thickness ¼ 0.0005 m; density,  ¼ 7400 kg/m3
Piezoelectric coefﬁcients
d31 ¼ d32 ¼ 166  1012 m=V; d33 ¼ 300  1012 m=V
378
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Glass-epoxy
Sensor 2   (S2)
0.03 m
Sensor 1 (S1)
Actuator 1 
Actuator 2
(A2)
(A1)
box beam
0.019 m
0.655 m
0.03 m
0.045 m
(a)
0.057 m 
0.655 m
A1
A2
S1
S2
(b)
Figure 15.1
Test specimen with actuators and sensors: (a) side view; (b) plan view.
Figure 15.2
Experimental set-up.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
379

card is shown by the block diagram in Figure 15.3 and
the speciﬁcations are given in Tables 15.3, 15.4 and 15.5
for the digital interface, analog inputs and analog out-
puts, respectively.
15.2.3 Closed-loop feedback vibration control
using a PI controller
The design methodology for the PI controller was
explained in Chapter 9 (Section 9.4.1). Here, we will
implement this controller to reduce the vibration in a
thin-walled box beam. First, the closed-loop responses
using the PI controller are obtained experimentally by
using an SISO and single-output–two-input system. The
test specimen is excited in the transverse bending
mode by applying a single-frequency sinusoidal voltage
through the PZT actuators. The experimental results
are correlated with the results simulated via state-space
modeling. Here, the mass and stiffness matrix for the
controller design are generated by using the supercon-
vergent FE formulation for a thin-walled beam explained
in Chapter 8 (Section 8.3). The SEREP technique expl-
ained in Chapter 9 (Section 9.4.3) was used to reduce the
full system model to a 5  5 system. Next, multi-modal
control of the transient response to impulse loading is
PZT bimorph actuator
Signal conditioner
A/D
D/A
PI controller
High-voltage
amplifier
Oscillator
S2
S1
A2
A1
Sensors/accelerometer (Structcel 330 A)
Figure 15.3
Block diagram of the experimental set-up.
Table 15.3
Digital interface speciﬁcations of the DSP
vibration-controller card (DSP ADSP 2181 KS-160).
Feature
Details
Operating frequency
40 MHz
Memory
Data 16  32 (on chip)
Program 16  24
(on chip) Boot
64  8 (external
FP ROM)
Serial channels
One RS 232 port
External ADC
AD 7891, 12 bit, 0–5 V
Digital inputs and outputs
8 ports
Power supply
5 V @ 1 A
Form factor
5.3 in  3.5 in
Table 15.4
Analog channel speciﬁcations for
analog inputs.
Feature
Details
Number of channels
15
Voltage range
 5 V to þ 5 V
Frequency
0.5 Hz to 2 kHz
Signal conditioner
Second-order Butterworth
ﬁlter; cut-off frequency
at 2 kHz
Resolution
12 bit
Interface to DSP
Parallel
380
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

investigated numerically by using the eigenstructure
assignment technique. The state matrix [A] of size
(10  10) of the beam considering ﬁve transverse bend-
ing modes and input matrix [B] of size (10  2) for the
two actuator, A1 and A2 (shown in Figure 15.1(b)), are
then obtained.
Vibration suppression is performed experimentally by
a single and two PI controllers. In both cases, the tip
acceleration is measured and the feedback is given as the
proportional gain KP multiplied by the tip acceleration
€xtip (this is measured by the accelerometer sensor S1 (see
Figure 15.4) and the integral gain KI multiplied by the
velocity _xtip obtained by integrating €xtip. In the ﬁrst case,
using a single PI, a sinusoidal voltage having an ampli-
tude of 95 V and a frequency of 34.5 Hz is applied
through actuator 1 (A1) (see Figure 15.1(b)) and the
control signal is fed back through actuator 2 (A2). In
Figure 15.5(a), the experimental open-loop tip accelera-
tion and the controlled tip acceleration with KP ¼ 1:8
and KI ¼ 0:54 are shown. These KP and KI values used in
the experiment are obtained through tuning using the
Ziegler–Nichols rule described in Chapter 9 (Section
9.4.1). The uncontrolled response has an amplitude of
1.88 V, which is reduced to 0.97 V in the controlled
response. In this ﬁgure, 800 sample points with a sam-
pling interval of 0.000 25 s are shown. Figure 15.6(b)
shows the corresponding simulated results with KP and
KI, the same as that in the experiment. This ﬁgure shows
the steady-state responses between 3.8 and 4.0 s and the
time-step for numerical simulations is 0.0001 s. The
simulated open- and closed-loop amplitudes are 1.93 V
and0.99 V, respectively, giving a netsuppression of 48.7 %.
For a better attenuation, two PI controllers are imple-
mented, with the control signal being applied to both the
PZT patches, namely, actuators 1 and 2, respectively.
The disturbance sinusoidal signal as described earlier is
again applied through actuator 1. The gains used for
the feedback to actuator 2 are K1
P ¼ 1:8 and K1
I ¼ 0:27
Table 15.5
Analog channel speciﬁcations for
analog outputs.
Feature
Details
Number of channels
8 (buffered)
Voltage range
0 V to þ 5 V
Frequency
0.5 Hz to 2 kHz
Resolution
12 bit
Interface to DSP
Serial
CONNECTOR
CONNECTOR
CONNECTOR
LEVEL
TRANSLATOR
SIGNAL
CONDITIONING
BOOT
FLASH
UART
MUX
+
ADC
CLOCK
ADSP-2181
DSP
8 CHANNEL
SERIAL DAC
SIGNAL
CONDITIONING
3
3
8
8
8
8
6
A0-A17
A0-A2
A0-A13
A0-A2
A0-A13
D16-D19
D8-D15
D8-D15
D8-D20
CD-DF
WFW
WFW
RCW
DVSW
WFW
RCW
DVSW
WFW
RCW
DVSW
OBW
CSW
CD-DF
CD-D23
WFW
OBW
CSW
INT
CD-DF
WFW
OBW
CSW
INT
IROB
IROB
DATA BUS
ADDRESS BUS
S
P
O
R
T
D
SCLK
DATAIN
SYNC
Figure 15.4
Block diagram of the DSP-based vibration-controller card.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
381

and that for actuator 1 are K2
P ¼ 5:4 and K2
I ¼ 1:62.
Figure
15.6(a)
shows
the
experimental
open-
and
closed-loop tip acceleration data. The closed-loop ampli-
tude is reduced to 0.31 V or 83.36 % vibration reduction.
The number of sample points plotted is 800 with a
sampling interval of 0.000 25 s. Figure 15.6(b) shows
the
simulated
open-
and
closed-loop
steady-state
responses between 3.8 and 4.0 s with a time step of
0
200
400
600
800
−2.5
−1.5
−0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
Number of samples (sampling interval = 0.00025 s)
The accelaration (V)
The accelaration (V)
Uncontrolled
Controlled
3.8
3.85
3.9
3.95
4
−2.5
−1.5
−0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
Time (s)
Controlled
Uncontrolled
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.5
Uncontrolled and controlled responses of the box beam using a single PI controller: (a) experimental; (b) theoretical.
0
200
400
600
800
−2.5
−1.5
−0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
Number of samples (sampling time = 0.00025 s)
The accelaration (V)
The accelaration (V)
Uncontrolled
Controlled
3.8
3.85
3.9
3.95
4
−2.5
−1.5
−0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
Time (s)
Controlled
Uncontrolled
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.6
Uncontrolled and controlled responses of the box beam using two PI controllers: (a) experimental; (b) theoretical.
382
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

0.0001 s. The controlled response has an amplitude of
0.45 V and the reduction is 76.96 %. Figure 15.7 shows
the open- and closed-loop responses using a single and
two PI controllers in the frequency domain. From these
experiments, we ﬁnd that the formulated smart thin-
walled beam element predicts excellent results under a
control environment.
15.2.4 Multi-modal control of vibration in
a box beam using eigenstructure assignment
The previous example dealt with only a single frequency
excitation and hence only a single mode was controlled.
In the next example, we will consider an example
wherein a forcing function excites multiple modes. For
this example, we will use the eigenstructure assignment
technique to design the controller. The box beam test
specimen, used in the earlier example, is now subjected
to a unit voltage, the time history of which is the same as
that shown in Figure 9.2. That is, the forcing function has
a frequency content of 44 kHz. The load is applied
through actuator A1 (see Figure 15.1). The high-
frequency content of the load will excite many transverse
bending modes. The frequency response corresponding
to this loading is shown in Figure 15.8, with the load
history shown in the inset. As discussed earlier, for
controller design, the model is reduced by using the
SEREP technique to contain only the ﬁrst ﬁve of these
transverse bending modes. As the ﬁrst few modes con-
tribute mainly to the total energy of the system, a
suppression of these modes is expected to give satisfac-
tory vibration reduction.
The eigenstructure assignment is applied to control
the ﬁrst two modes of the beam. The sensing is done
through two accelerometers, and thus four state vari-
ables, which are the acceleration and velocity at two
points, are measurable. Sensor 1 (S1) is placed at the tip
or at node 10 and sensor 2 (S2) is placed at node 4, as
shown in Figure 15.9. The feedback signal is given to
actuator 1 (A1) and actuator 2 (A2). The system thus
has four outputs and two inputs and four eigenvalues
and eigenvectors can be assigned, as described in
Chapter 9 (Section 9.4.2). The sampling time is taken
as 0.001 s. The eigenvalues are assigned such that the
damping ratio of the ﬁrst two modes of the closed-
loop system is 4 times that of the open-loop system.
The eigenvectors for the ﬁrst and second modes are
speciﬁed such that the tip entries are 0.2 and 0.4 times
those of the open-loop eigenvectors, respectively.
The open-loop eigenvalues, lo, of the ﬁrst-order system
(Equation (9.9), Chapter 9), assigned eigenvalues, la, and
closed-loop eigenvalues, lc, in the form a 	 iod, are
given in Table 15.6, where a ¼ on, with  being the
damping ratio, on the natural frequencies (in rad/s) and
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
Uncontrolled
Controlled 1 PI
Controlled 2 PI
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
0
4000
8000
12000
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
Uncontrolled
Controlled 2 PI
Controlled 1 PI
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.7
Uncontrolled and controlled responses of the box beam using PI controllers in the frequency domain: (a) experimental;
(b) theoretical.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
383

od ð¼ on
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1  2
p
Þ the damped natural frequencies
(in rad/s).
It can be seen that the ﬁrst four lc values, correspond-
ing to the ﬁrst and second modes, are exactly equal to the
la and has a damping constant a four times that of lo.
The remaining six unassigned lc values are stable and a
is increased in all cases. Hence, the overall response can
be expected to be suppressed considerably. In Table 15.7,
the corresponding  and on (in Hz) are compared for the
open- and closed-loop systems. Figure 15.10 shows the
10
102
103
104
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
1
10
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude
0
100
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Time (µs)
Figure 15.8
Frequency response of the tip displacement due to the impulse load and impulse load history (inset).
0.045 m
3
1
5
6
10
9
8
7
4
2
0.655 m
0.03 m
0.03 m
Figure 15.9
Experimental box beam showing the ten beam elements and nodes with master degrees of freedom (.).
Table 15.6
Open-loop and closed-loop eigenvalues.
Mode
Eigenvalues, a 	 iod
Uncontrolled
Assigned
Controlled
1
1:87 	 i216:5
7:46 	 i216:5
7:46 	 i216:5
2
12:57 	 i1298:0
50:30 	 i1298:0
50:30 	 i1298:0
3
31:75 	 i3497:2
—
239:61 	 i3489:0
4
55:79 	 i6605:7
—
208:37 	 i6588:7
5
91:48 	 i10 557:0
—
94:51 	 i10 554:0
384
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

controlled and uncontrolled responses of the tip displace-
ment due to a unit impulse load of duration 40 ms applied
to A1. The frequency responses of the tip displacement
show considerable reductions in the 1 and 2 mode
amplitudes. The unspeciﬁed 3rd and 4th modes are also
damped considerably, while there is a small reduction in
the 5th mode.
In summary, it has been effectively demonstrated that
the use of PZT actuators coupled with the formulated
smart FEM can be effectively used to control both single
and multiple frequencies. A similar procedure can be
applied to suppress bridge vibrations in civil structures or
compressor vibrations in air-conditioning equipment.
15.3 ACTIVE NOISE CONTROL
OF STRUCTURE-BORNE VIBRATION
AND NOISE IN A HELICOPTER CABIN
In Chapter 9, we discussed the issues and possible
solutions
for
dealing
with
the
distributed
actuator
dynamics for broadband control. In this section, we focus
onthe issuesandpossible solutionstodealwiththe problem
of controlling multiple-wave transmission in helicopter
gear-box support struts ﬁtted with Terfenol-D packaged
actuators. The ASFEM (discussed in Chapter 9) is used for
numerical simulation of the feedback control performance
and the effect of the sensor–actuator conﬁguration.
Table 15.7
Open-loop and closed-loop damping ratios and natural frequencies.
Mode
Damping ratio, 
Frequency, on (Hz)
Uncontrolled
Controlled
Uncontrolled
Controlled
1
0.0086
0.0344
34.46
34.48
2
0.0097
0.0387
206.59
206.74
3
0.0091
0.0685
556.54
556.60
4
0.0084
0.0316
1051.00
1049.10
5
0.0087
0.0090
1679.30
1679.80
101
102
103
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Frequency (Hz)
Magnitude (m/s)
Uncontrolled
Controlled
Figure 15.10
Uncontrolled and controlled frequency responses of the tip displacement.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
385

Helicopter cabin noise reduction has received consid-
erable attention over the last two decades. With interior
noise reduction, passenger comfort, as well as opera-
tional ease, can be improved, along with enhancement of
structural fatigue life. The main rotor and the gearbox
mechanisms serve as the main sources (see Figure 15.11)
of persistent acoustic disturbances, while quick changes
in gear-teeth movement and aero-elastic events asso-
ciated with maneuver transitions can result in transient
acoustic disturbances. In many helicopters, the entire
gearbox assembly is mounted on a set of vertical and
inclined struts [4,5]. The transient and persistent distur-
bances generated by the gearbox mechanisms, as well as
the main rotor, are transmitted through the struts into the
fuselage; this transmission is one of the main sources of
structure-borne noise in a helicopter cabin. The fre-
quency components associated with this noise are within
the bandwidth extending up to 6 kHz [6,7].
Among many approaches pursued to realize cabin-
noise reduction, the control of waves transmitted through
the ‘noise paths’, such as struts, has been found to be
viable. An early initiative in this regard is due to West-
land Helicopters, Ltd. During the late 1980s, they
demonstrated that considerable reduction of the average
vibration level can be achieved by using an Active
Control of Structural Response (ACSR) system at a
blade-passing frequency of 17.5 Hz [4,5]. An electro-
hydraulic actuator is used in this low-frequency applica-
tion. The application of active wave control in the gear-
box support strut at high frequencies was carried out in a
major group effort as a part of the Reduction of Heli-
copter Interior Noise (RHINO) project. This project
involved Westland Helicopters Ltd., Agusta and others
[6]. As reported in this work, an actual helicopter strut
was tested in a test-rig under realistic loading conditions.
A primary source in the form of a ‘shaker’ was used to
excite the system at the upstream end-plate of the strut
and a group of three secondary sources in the form of
magnetostrictive actuators were mounted in-parallel to
the strut. The choice of the driving voltage inputs (that is,
amplitudes and phases) to the actuators was based on
minimizing the sum of the squared responses, measured
by six error sensors at the downstream end-plate. The
location of the compliant ring for the secondary actuator
group housing was chosen based on earlier studies on
structural wave control in ducts and beams [7–9]. As
reported in the study by Sutton et al. [6], an adaptive
multiple-actuator feed-forward control scheme produced
an energy attenuation of up to 40 dB at the downstream
interface of the strut over different discrete frequencies in
the range extending up to 1.25 kHz. The development of
an Active Noise Control (ANC) system for the S-76
helicopter by the Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation has
also been reported [10,11].
Although active-materials integrated ﬁnite struts have
been used extensively in experimental studies of full-
scale systems, related analytical efforts have primarily
focused on inﬁnite struts. Pelinescu and Balachandran
[12] developed integrated mechanics models for ﬁnite
struts and used them for open-loop studies of longitudinal
and ﬂexural wave transmission. In their models, the strut
is treated as a homogeneous cylindrical waveguide and
the actuators are also modeled as waveguides. In the
related study by Ortel and Balachandran [13] these
models are used to develop closed-loop schemes for
control of ﬂexural wave transmission. Although these
studies represent progress towards analytical develop-
ment of an integrated active system, in order to use them
for realistic conﬁgurations the following features need to
be taken into account in the modeling: (a) effects of
Aerodynamic
forces
Boundary
layer
Fuselage
STRUT
Pilot’s
cabin
Passangers
cabin
Main rotor
Gear mechanisms
Auxiliary
systems
Tail rotor
Figure 15.11
Schematic of a helicopter showing the sources of noise.
386
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

structural boundaries, joints and other local discontinu-
ities that can be important in the high-frequency range,
(b) steady state axial and transverse loading, and (c)
coupling between the longitudinal and ﬂexural waves. In
addition, the developed models need to be amenable for
establishing schemes for controlling wave transmission
over a broad frequency range that includes multiple
spectral peaks, as in the present problem. However,
models of realistic systems inclusive of the above fea-
tures are not amenable to analytical solutions. The efforts
in this work are directed towards using the ASFEM to
analyze and design the active strut system for optimal
performance.
Apart from the ASFEM, other similar Fourier domain
representations and the transfer-function concept have
been developed [14,15]. These transfer-function-based
methods were later extended to the adaptive control of
structural waves for minimizing the transmitted power
ﬂow through a one-dimensional elastic member [16,17].
For distributed structural networks, the concept of low
authority control (LAC) of traveling waves has also been
developed and studied by using a feedback compensator
[18]. However, the aspects of distributed sensing and
actuation and issues, such as actuator dynamics, have not
been addressed in the above studies based on the transfer-
function concept. From the above mentioned studies, it is
noted that as complexity in the structural geometry and
applying the transfer function analysis increases, the
control analysis involves extensive computation. On the
other hand, the ASFEM can be efﬁcient from a computa-
tional viewpoint due to its generalized matrix assembly
procedure and easy ‘post-processing’.
15.3.1 Active strut system
Helicopter gearbox support struts can be idealized as
monolithic cylindrical shells with appropriate end-
sections to support the bearings. As reported in Sutton
et al. [6], the ring frequency of the EH101 strut is
typically 22.5 kHz. A high ring frequency is indicative
of the dominance of torsional and warping modes in the
overall response. Based on the disturbance frequency
range, it was concluded in this study that the torsional
motion is unlikely to be excited and that the resonances
associated with warping motions are too high to affect
the control performance signiﬁcantly. Hence, for simpli-
city, only axial and ﬂexural modes are considered in the
model development following the analytical studies in
Pelinescu and Balachandran [12].
The cylindrical strut is modeled as a beam with a
‘stiffness-equivalent’ solid cross-section. Terfenol-D rod-
type actuators, including the actuator housing, are con-
sidered to be mounted on either the strut ends or on the
surface with the help of a rigid ring. In Roy Mahapatra
[19], an accurate mechanics model of a uniform cylind-
rical strut/tube system is developed and was shown that a
new propagating mode (radial mode) causing strong
dispersiveness in other modes appears above the cut-off
frequency of 8.5 kHz. However, this cut-off can be
considered very high when compared to the major
noise spectrum. In order to allow for the dynamic
boundary conditions, the strut ends are considered to be
under ‘dynamic reaction’ by the gearbox and fuselage
interfaces. As noted in the study by Pelinescu and
Balachandran [12], this conﬁguration is an idealization
made to suit the linear analysis.
In this case study, we have used a feedback scheme
based on responses measured by downstream displace-
ment or strain sensors. This model-based scheme
requires accurate modeling of actuator-induced strain
in the host structure to capture the ‘near-ﬁeld’ effects.
With a good model, it is believed that analysis and
control design efforts may be carried out with a lower
number of actuators than that required in the ‘feed-
forward’ effort.
15.3.2 Numerical simulations
Following the work of Pelinescu and Balachandran
[12], the ﬁnite-length strut considered is a 1.0 m long
hollow cylindrical aluminum strut with a 7.62 cm outer
diameter and a 6.35 cm inner diameter. Harmonic
loads are applied at the strut ends in the longitudinal
and transverse directions. As considered in Pelinescu
and Balachandran [12], such dynamic loading repre-
sents a simpliﬁed model of a high-impedance gearbox
reaction at one end and a reaction from the bearing at
the fuselage interface. A cylindrical magnetostrictive
actuator with a rod-shaped Terfenol-D core is chosen
due to its high force capability. Such an actuator has its
own housing and reaction mass [20]. These aspects can
also be accurately modeled in the ASFEM if the
effective stiffness and mass distributions are known
for packaged actuators. Based on the strut geometry
considered here and the loading conditions to be
considered, it is known that the longitudinal motion is
expected to contribute substantially to the total kinetic
energy at the fuselage interface. The main objective of
numerical simulation here is to reduce the total noise
level of the structure–borne noise. For this to be
accomplished, we need to control the transmitted
waves at the strut–fuselage interface. With these points
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
387

in mind, the ﬁrst case considered below has to do with
the control of longitudinal-wave transmission.
15.3.2.1 Control of longitudinal-wave transmission
In Figure 15.12, an actuator located at the strut–
fuselage interface is shown, along with a point velocity
feedback sensor mounted at a distance xs from the
gearbox end of the strut. This system is described by
two spectral elements, where one is an actuator element
and the other is a strut element. The results obtained in
the uncontrolled and controlled cases are shown in
Figure 15.13. With the actuator, the system resonances
are shifted to lower frequencies and it appears that the
magnitude of the frequency shift increases linearly with
the mode number. A non-dimensional scalar velocity
feedback gain, g, deﬁned as:
g ¼ abg
noIoco
ð15:1Þ
xs
500 N
15 kN
0.075 m
1.0 m
x
Actuator
Sensor
Fuselage
interface
Gearbox
interface
z
Figure 15.12
Schematic of an active strut for the control of longitudinal wave transmission.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−200
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
−80
−60
Frequency (kHz)
Longitudinal displacement at fuselage interface (dB)
Original strut
With dead actuator
g = 3.4
g  = 17.0
g  = 34.0
Figure 15.13
Longitudinal displacement at the strut–fuselage interface showing the controlled and uncontrolled responses for
different control gains.
388
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

is used, where a and b are, respectively, the sensitivity
parameters for the sensor and actuator, as discussed in
Chapter 9 (Section 9.6.2), g is the constant gain, no is the
number of speciﬁc turns in the actuator coil, Io is a
nominal rms coil current and co is the speed of sound in
air. In all of the numerical studies conducted here, the
values of the different quantities are a ¼ 1 and b ¼ 1.
It is seen that the sensor–actuator collocated conﬁg-
uration (Figure 15.12) can be used to attain considerable
displacement response attenuation throughout the fre-
quency bandwidth of interest. A similar displacement
response attenuation at targeted frequencies based on
an analog feed-forward scheme for the same sensor–
actuator conﬁguration was reported in Pelinescu and
Balachandran [12]. Since it may be difﬁcult to exactly
place the sensor at the actuator base, an alternate con-
ﬁguration is used wherein the sensor is placed away from
the actuator base. The results obtained for the conﬁgura-
tions, xs ¼ 0.9 m and xs ¼ 0.8 m for g ¼ 17.0 (optimal
in Figure 15.13), are shown in Figure 15.14, with
no ¼ 1  106 m1, Io ¼ 1 rms and co ¼ 340 m=s. The
sensor is located at the strut–fuselage interface (that is,
xs ¼ 1 m) and the parameter g for velocity feedback is
increased in the range from 3.4 to 34.
It is observed that xs ¼ 0.9 m may be the most prefer-
able sensor location, since for this choice the response
close to the fourth-mode resonance location is comple-
tely suppressed. For the non-collocated case, xs ¼ 0.8 m,
although there is the largest suppression at the frequency
location close to the resonance of the second mode, while
the suppression at the location close to the resonance of
the fourth mode is not as good as that obtained for the
case with xs ¼ 0.9 m. However, in this later case the
suppression at the location near the resonance of the
second mode is not as good as that obtained with
xs ¼ 0.8 m.
In some designs, it may be necessary to use a group
of actuators, rather than one actuator, to realize the
required actuator force. Such actuator groups have been
used in earlier work (e.g. [6]). In this study, the
performances
of
three
secondary
magnetostrictive
actuators in a group (hosted by a steel end-cap) was
studied in an experimental arrangement. Input to the
actuators was decided based on the measurement from
one error sensor located on the upstream side of the
actuator. The actuators were driven in-phase for con-
trolling the longitudinal wave transmission through a
strut and they were not driven in-phase for controlling
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−170
−160
−150
−140
−130
−120
−110
−100
−90
Frequency (kHz)
Longitudinal displacement at fuselage interface (dB)
With dead actuator
xs= 1.0 m
xs = 0.9 m
xs = 0.8 m
Figure 15.14
Longitudinal displacement at the strut–fuselage interface showing the controlled and uncontrolled responses for
different sensor locations.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
389

ﬂexural wave transmission. To illustrate the applicabil-
ity of the ASFEM for actuator group conﬁgurations,
here the active strut illustrated in Figure 15.15(a) is
considered.
There are two actuators in the actuator group here
and these are represented by the spectral elements 3–5
and 4–6 in the modeling, as shown in Figure 15.15(b).
Apart from these two elements, the computational model
consists of four other elements, which includes one
sensor element (2–7) downstream of the actuators. The
‘base ring’ is modeled as a rigid link (4–2–3). Next, the
results generated for this conﬁguration with different
actuator group locations xa, with xs ¼ 0.9 m are shown
in Figure 15.16.
s
a
x
15 kN
1.0 m
  Actuator
Sensor
Gearbox
Interface
z
x
500 N
x
0.075 m
Fuselage
Interface
x
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
(a)
(b)
y
Figure 15.15
(a) Conﬁguration of a strut with two intermediate actuators in a group and (b) spectral-element representation of the
actuators, sensor, strut and base ring.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
−80
−60
Frequency (kHz)
Longitudinal displacement at fuselage interface (dB)
original strut
xa = 0.6 m 
xa = 0.7 m 
xa = 0.8 m 
Figure 15.16
Longitudinal displacement at the strut–fuselage interface for different actuator group locations.
390
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

For each actuator, g ¼ 8.5 (one half of the optimal value
obtained previously for the one-actuator case) and both
of the actuators receive identical inputs. In all cases,
attenuation at the location close to the resonance of the
ﬁrst mode is considerable but less than that obtained at
other frequency locations. In Figure 15.16, a zero (anti-
resonance) is introduced into the closed-loop system
(other zeros lie ‘towards inﬁnity’ along the frequency
axis and are fewer in number than the number of poles,
meaning that the system is a realizable one) at a fre-
quency close to the resonance frequency of the second
mode (or pole) of the open-loop system. Interestingly,
this corresponds to the second root-locus of the open-
loop system transfer-function towards a closed-loop zero
as the control effort is increased (meaning that the mode
is a ‘stabilizable’ one). More parametric studies on this
conﬁguration can be found in Roy Mahapatra et al. [21].
15.3.2.2 Control of ﬂexural-wave transmission
Figure 15.17 shows the active-strut conﬁguration for
control of the ﬂexural-wave transmission where a single-
transverse actuator is placed at xa, as in Pelinescu and
Balachandran [12], and a single-point velocity feedback
sensor is placed downstream of the actuator.
In the study of Ortel and Balachandran [13] and also
here, it was found that the introduction of single and
multiple actuators alters the resonance of the system.
Mechanically, therefore, the presence of a dead actuator
may cause considerable change in the open-loop system
due to the stiffness and inertia of the actuator. The
spectral characteristics also suggest the presence of
secondary axial–ﬂexural coupled modes; these are due
to scattering of the incident ﬂexural wave, producing
additional longitudinal waves at the strut–actuator inter-
face. This observation indicates the need for considering
the dynamics of distributed actuation in similar broad-
band (multiple-tone) structural-control problems.
In Figure 15.18, the responses of the closed-loop
system with different values of g are shown for
xs ¼ 0.6 m and, xa ¼ 1.0 m. Good attenuation is obtained
at all frequency locations except for the ﬁrst mode
resonance close to 5 kHz. The locations of the zeros
observed in the open-loop system also appear to be
unchanged in the closed-loop cases. In Figure 15.18,
the sensor is shifted away from the strut–fuselage inter-
face to xs ¼ 0.9 m. The trends are similar to those seen in
the context of Figure 15.19, except that few zeros
disappear. The results are suggestive of the inability to
achieve response attenuation at the location close to the
ﬁrst resonance location of the open-loop system. This
indicates the requirement of an additional damping
mechanism to absorb the ‘high energy’ that associates
to the ﬁrst mode. However, in most helicopters, such
damping mechanisms already exist, along with elasto-
meric bearings to augment the performance.
15.3.2.3 Control of axial–ﬂexural coupled
wave transmission
One of the main objectives of the numerical study
was coupled axial–ﬂexural wave transmission. A two-
actuator conﬁguration chosen for this purpose is shown
in Figure 15.20.
One of these actuators is inclined at an angle y with
respect to the longitudinal axis of the strut. Control inputs
to both these actuators are based on a single-error sensor
response. Based on the results presented in the earlier
xs
xa
50 N
500 N
0.075 m
1.0 m
x
Actuator
Sensor
Fuselage
interface
Gearbox
interface
z
Figure 15.17
Conﬁguration of an active strut for control of ﬂexural wave transmission.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
391

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−200
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
−80
−60
Frequency (kHz)
Transverse displacement at fuselage interface (dB)
With dead actuator
g = 34
g = 170
g = 340
Figure 15.18
Transverse displacement responses at the fuselage interface for various gain-parameter values.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−200
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
−80
−60
Frequency (kHz)
Transverse displacement at fuselage interface (dB)
With dead actuator
g = 340
g = 1700
g = 3400
Figure 15.19
Transverse displacement responses at the fuselage interface for various gain-parameter values.
392
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

sections, the sensor location is chosen to be xs ¼ 0.9 m,
which was an ‘optimal’ location for the most number of
axial and ﬂexural modes. Uncontrolled and controlled
longitudinal displacements at the strut–fuselage interface
are plotted in Figure 15.21. The appearance of a number
of secondary axial–ﬂexural coupled modes can be seen in
this ﬁgure. It can be noted that the additional secondary
modes do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the axial-
displacement response compared to those due to the
primary modes. However, this is not the case for the
ﬂexural-displacement response, where the primary modal
amplitudes are inﬂuenced considerably by the secondary
coupled modes, leading to shifts in the locations of poles
and zeros of the closed-loop system.
While constructing the closed-loop system, it is
assumed that the sensor outputs corresponding to both
xs
xa
500 N
q
500 N
50 N 
15 kN
x
Actuator
Sensor
Fuselage
interface
Gearbox
interface
z
Figure 15.20
Conﬁguration of an active strut for the control of axial–ﬂexural waves.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
−200
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
−80
−60
Frequency (kHz)
Longitudinal displacement at fuselage interface (dB)
Original Strut
With dead actuators
Closed−loop
Figure 15.21
Longitudinal displacement responses at the fuselage interface for various gain-parameter values: Xs ¼ 0:9 m;
Xa ¼ 0:6 m; y ¼ 90 
.
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
393

of the longitudinal and transverse forced-frequency
responses are available from the chosen sensor location.
The longitudinal and inclined actuators are driven based
on these measured longitudinal and transverse responses,
respectively. Among different sets of parametric values,
considered for velocity feedback gains (gu for the long-
itudinal actuator and gw for the inclined actuator) and xs,
considered earlier for the control of axial and ﬂexural
waves separately, the best results were achieved for
gu ¼ 17.0 and gw ¼ 340.0. From these results, it can
noted that with a constant gain velocity feedback scheme,
an increase in effort to control the ﬂexural waves leads to
less attenuation in the longitudinal response.
The modeling efforts presented here may be used as a
basis for carrying out the ‘path-treatment’ for helicopter
cabin noise. In such cases, it is of interest to know the
level of energy attenuation at the spatial location of
interest; here, the strut–fuselage interface. The kinetic
energy has contributions from longitudinal (primary) and
transverse (secondary) motions. In order to analyze the
distribution of total kinetic energy among its longitudinal
and transverse components in the closed-loop system,
Figure 15.22 is presented. Plots of the normalized spectra
of the relative amplitudes of the kinetic energy, ^Eu, for
the longitudinal motions and ^Ew, for the transverse
motions at the strut–fuselage interface are shown in
this ﬁgure. The corresponding expressions are given by:
^Eu ¼
jð^u0Þ2j
jð^u0Þ2 þ ð^wÞ2j
;
^Ew ¼ 1  ^Eu
ð15:2Þ
where ^u0 and ^w are the spectral amplitudes of the long-
itudinal and transverse displacements, respectively, at the
strut–fuselage interface. From this ﬁgure, it can be said
that the kinetic energy associated with the signiﬁcant
transverse modes is attenuated, except at the frequency
locations close to the ﬁrst transverse resonance mode and
the other three modes associated with resonances near
5.2 and 6.8 kHz.
REFERENCES
1. T.H.G. Megson, Linear Analysis of Thin Walled Elastic
Structures, Surrey University Press, Guildford, UK (1974).
2. Mira Mitra, Active vibration suppression of composite thin
walled structures, M.Sc. Thesis, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India (2003).
3. Mira Mitra, S. Gopalakrishnan and M. Seetharama Bhat,
‘Vibration
control
in
a
composite
box
beam
with
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Frequency (kHz)
Relative amplitude of kinetic energy Eu
Ew
Eu
Uncontrolled
Controlled
Figure 15.22
Distribution of kinetic energy between the longitudinal and transverse components at the fuselage interface for
y ¼ 90 
.
394
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

piezoelectric actuators’, Smart Structures and Materials, 13,
676–690 (2004).
4. A.E. Staple and D.M. Wells, ‘The development and testing
of an active control of structural response system for the
EH101 helicopter’, in Proceedings of the 16th European
Rotorcraft Forum, pp. III.6.1.1–III.6.11 (1990).
5. A.E. Staple and B.A. MacDonald, ‘Active vibration control
system’, US Patent, 5 219 143 (1993).
6. T.J. Sutton, S.J. Elliott, M.J. Brennan, K.H. Heron and
D.A.C. Jessup, ‘Active isolation of multiple structural waves
on a helicopter gearbox support strut’, Journal of Sound and
Vibration, 205, 81–101 (1997).
7. P.A. Nelson and S.J. Elliott, Active Control of Sound,
Academic Press, London, UK (1992)
8. S.J. Elliott and L. Billet, ‘Adaptive control of ﬂexural waves
propagating in a beam’, Journal of Sound and Vibration,
163, 295–310 (1993).
9. M.J. Brennan, S.J. Elliott and R.J. Pennington, ‘The dynamic
coupling between piezoceramic actuators and a beam’,
Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 102, 1931–1942
(1997).
10. C.A. Yorker, Jr, J. Newington, W.A. Welsh, N. Haven and
H. Sheehy, ‘Helicopter active noise control system’, US
Patent, 5 310 137 (1994).
11. T.A. Millot, W.A. Welsh, C.A. Yoerkie, Jr, D.G. MacMartin
and M.W. Davis, ‘Flight test of an active gear-mesh noise
control on the S-76 Aircraft’, in Proceedings of the 54th
Annual Forum of the American Helicopter Society, 1,
pp. 241–249 (1998).
12. I. Pelinescu and B. Balachandran, ‘Analytical study of active
control of wave transmission through cylindrical struts’,
Smart Materials and Structures, 10, 121–136 (2001).
13. D. Ortel and B. Balachandran,‘Control of ﬂexural wave
transmission through struts’, in Proceedings of the SPIE
Smart Structures and Materials Conference on Smart Struc-
tures and Integrated Systems, 3668(2), SPIE, Bellingham,
WA, USA, pp. 567–577 (1999).
14. A.H. von Flotow, ‘Disturbance propagation in structural
networks’, Journal of Sound and Vibration, 106, 433–450
(1986).
15. D.W. Miller and A. von Flotow, ‘A traveling wave approach
to power ﬂow in structural networks’, Journal of Sound and
Vibration, 128, 145–162 (1989).
16. J.
Pan
and
C.H.
Hansen,
‘Active
control
of
total
vibratory power ﬂow in a beam. I: physical system ana-
lysis’, Journal of Acoustical Society of America, 89,
200–209 (1991).
17. P. Gardonio and S.J. Elliott, ‘Active control of wave in a one-
dimensional structure with scattering termination’, Journal
of Sound and Vibration, 192, 701–730 (1996).
18. A.H. von Flotow, ‘Traveling wave control for large
spacecraft structure’, Journal of Guidance and Control, 9,
462–468 (1986).
19. D. Roy Mahapatra, ‘Development of spectral ﬁnite element
models for wave propagation studies, health monitoring and
active control of waves in laminated composite structures’,
Ph.D. Thesis, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
(2003).
20. I.
Pelinescu
and
B.
Balachandran,
‘Analytical
and
experimental investigations into active control of wave
transmission through gearbox struts’, in Proceedings of
the SPIE Smart Structures and Materials Conference on
Smart Structures and Integrated Systems, 3985, SPIE,
Bellingham, WA, USA, pp. 76–85 (2000).
21. D. Roy Mahapatra, S. Gopalakrishnan and B. Balachandran,
‘Active feedback control of multiple waves in helicopter
gearbox support struts’, Smart Structures and Materials, 10,
1046–1058 (2001).
Vibration and Noise-Control Applications
395

Index
Absorber
SAW accelerometer, 89, 334
X-ray lithography, 277
Vibration, 13, 82, 243
Accelerometer
Absorbers, 89, 334
Applications of, 14, 15
integrated with CMOS, 308
with movable gate FET, 54
with SAW IDT
combined with gyroscope, 372
design, 88
fabrication, 333
Acoustic
admittance, 98
aperture, 338
emission sensor, 371
impedance, 86, 332
comparison of properties, 86
PVDF, 60
sensor, 57, 86
wave, 57, 97
Lamb wave, 326
Love wave, 57
sensor, 371
Active control, 212
Composite Beam, 248
Active damping, 11
Actuation law, 114, 187
actuator dynamics
Cantilever beam, 251
Actuator (see also Transducers)
applications of, 14, 15
collocated with sensors, delamination, 356
Comparison of schemes, 83
Control strategies, 247
deﬁnition of, 6
in microﬂuidic systems, 100
in smart systems, 7
magnetostrictive
cantilever with, modeling of, 211
noise control in helicopter, 386
spectral element model of beam with, 213
piezoelectric
modeling of, 188, 189
vibration control with, 378
piezoﬁber composite
modeling of, 212
spectral element model of beam with, 213
polymers for, 27
PZT mounted beam, modeling of, 203
Adaptive
control, 387
ﬁlter, 248
structures, 216
deﬁnition, 4
Adhesion
of sputtered thin ﬁlms, 21
comparison of curing schemes, 33
properties of polymers, 282
AMANDA process, 302
Amorphous thin ﬁlm, 49
Ampliﬁer
charge preampliﬁer, in piezoelectric sensor, 86
differential, in resonant sensor, 53
high isolation, in wireless telemetry, 368
MOSFET, in PVDF hydrophone, 87
power ampliﬁer, in structural health monitoring, 351
Analogies, 64
Anisotropic composite beam, wave equation for, 135
Anisotropic
etchants, 260, 269
etching, 261, 271, 317
nature
composites, 118
piezoelectric substrate, 58, 73
Annealing
after direct bonding, 262
for ion implantation, 271
interfacial stress, 314, 322
Smart Material Systems and MEMS: Design and Development Methodologies V. K. Varadan, K. J. Vinoy and S. Gopalakrishnan
# 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-09361-7

Annealing (continued)
rapid thermal, for stress relief, 308, 337
solgel deposited ﬁlms, 25
sputtered ﬁlms, 25
Anodic bonding, 262
comparison with other schemes, 321
piezoresistive sensors, 50
Anodization, pulse potential, 270
APCVD (atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition), 266
Area coordinates, 161
Array
of reﬂectors in SAW, 89, 334–336
ball-grid, 316
micro-mirror, 317
of perturbation mass, 372
of reaction chamber, 243
of electrodes, 216
of optical ﬁbers, 286
Assay buffer, 344
Axisymmetric model, 213
ball-grid array, 316
bar element, Quadratic, 169, 170
Beam
element, FEM, 160
exact solution, 160
piezoﬁber composite Actuator, spectral element model, 213
spectral element model piezoﬁber composite Actuator, 213
as ﬂexural waveguide, 134
bending modes, 203, 378
composite, 135, 140, 195
active control of, 248
PFC, 252
piezoelectric bimorph, 195
smart, 195, 196, 350
Spectral element modeling, 215
Terfenol-D, 210
Euler–Bernoulli model, 215, 222
isotropic, wave propagation in, 139
laminated composite, wave equations for, 135
modeling of, PZT Actuator, 203
dispersion relation, 142
spectrum relation, 142
Bending
mode wave, 144, 383
moment, 215
rigidity, 152
stiffness, 128
bimorph beam, 195
modes in a beam, 203, 378
bimorph beam, 195
Bending, 195
electrothermal, 80
magnetostrictive, 211
piezoelectric composite, 195, 378
PVDF, 196, 202
bimorph plate, 188
Biomimetic materials, 5
Bonding layer, 217
Bonding, ﬂip chip, 315
hermetic, 317
Boundary conditions, 91, 118, 149, 152
in beams, 153, 252
in coupled analysis, 210
in FEM, 193, 199
in spectral element modeling, 215
Bragg grating, 52
Cantilever beam, 202, 211
distributed actuator, dynamics, 251
dynamics, 244
Cantilever rod, 181
Cantilever, carbon nanotube, 228
Capacitance
analytical model of sensor, 216
deﬂected diaphragm, 46
gate, 55
in electromechanical analogies, 64
PZT, 218
carbon nanotube
composites, 35, 60
Electrical Conductivity, 38
Carrier mobility, 55, 88
Carrier signal, 370
ceramic, Composites, 23
Ceramics, Deposition, 22, 268
Channel, current density, 54
Charge preampliﬁer, in piezoelectric
sensor, 86
Charge
electromechanical analogy, 64
generated in electrostrictive, 76
generated in piezoelectric, 48, 73, 85, 97, 360
stored in electrostatic actuator, 65
in polymerization, 29, 30
Classical ﬁnite difference technique, 150
closed loop control, 10, 232, 384
CNT sensor, CV diagrams, 341
CNT, UV curable polymer composite, 39
comparison
bonding schemes, 321
actuation schemes, 83
Compliance, 63, 64
Composite Beam, 135, 140, 195
active control of, 248
active control, 248
laminated, 135, 140, 353
composite
smart beam, 195, 196, 350
laminated, 120
metal/polymer, 300
piezoelectric, 191
398
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

piezoﬁber, 212
sensors, modeling, 212
smart structure, 188, 192, 205
anisotropic nature, 118
carbon nanotube, 35, 60
ceramic, 23
structural health monitoring, 349
Conductivity, Electrical, 18
Electrical, of carbon nanotube, 38
Conductivity, in liquid sensing, 99
Conductivity, thermal, 18
Control of cracks, open loop, 364
Control strategies, actuator, 247
vibration control, 247
Control variable, 231
Control
Vibration with Piezoelectric actuator, 378
closed loop, 10, 232, 384
open loop, 9, 194, 232, 384
open loop, cracks, 364
active, 212
Adaptive, 387
Controllability, 238, 247
Coriolis force, in SAW sensor, 373
coupled analysis, Boundary conditions, 210
Crack detection, 216, 273, 326, 349, 370
Crack formation, in packages, 315
Crack formation, in structures, 321, 362
Crystal cut, piezoelectric, 57, 85, 367
Crystal growth, silicon, 19, 260
Crystal orientation, 20, 260, 271
Crystal structure, 18, 81
Current density, effect on electrodeposition, 296
Current
CV diagrams of CNT sensor, 341
drain current in FET, 55, 87
electromechanical analogy, 64
in electromagnetic actuator, 69
in electrostatic actuator, 67
in electrostrictive actuator, 76
CVD, 21, 39, 264, 332
of dielectrics, 266
Damping
force, 157, 163, 231, 377
matrix, 159, 164, 168, 171, 234, 242
Data acquisition system, 327
Data fusion, 374
Delamination, actuator, collocated with sensors, 356
Demolding, 297
Deposition, 21
of ceramics, 22, 268
of metal, 20, 264
of polymer thin ﬁlms, 35, 59
of Silicon, 263
Electrochemical, 299
Polysilicon, 268, 273
Pulse laser, 35
Silicon dioxide, 272, 273
Silicon nitride, 331
Sol-gel, 22, 25
Thick ﬁlm, 23
Thin ﬁlm, 22, 25, 263
Diaphragm, 26, 46, 80, 101, 317
capacitance, 46
micro valve, 100
Dielectric polarization, 74
Dielectrics, CVD, 266
Differential Ampliﬁer, in resonant sensor, 53
Dipole moment, 48, 59, 73
Direct bonding, Annealing in, 262
Direct electromechanical analogies, 64
Dispersion angle, 327
Dispersion relation, 129, 135, 182, 326, 369
For beams, 142
Divergence theorem, 113, 155
Dopant selective etching, 260
Double cantilever beam, 361
Drain current in FET, 55, 87
DRIE (deep reactive ion etching), 260
Dry etching, 260
Effective
mass, 77
stress, 217
Eigen structure, 240, 381, 383
Elastic
constant, 48, 58, 75, 115, 124
waves, 57
Electrical conductivity, 18
Electrochemical deposition, 299
Electrochemical
etching, 269
fabrication, 296
polymerization, 27, 282, 340
Electrodeposition, 296
Electrodynamic transducer, 70
Electromagnetic transducer, 68
Electromechanical analogies, 64
Electromechanical coupling coefﬁcient, 99, 338
Electroplating, 21
Electrostatic transducer, 64
Electrostrictive transducer, 74
Electrothermal actuator, 80
Emission sensor, acoustic, 371
Epitaxial deposition, 20
Etch stop, 19, 260, 269, 270
Electrochemical, 269
Polycrystalline, 269
Etchant, 260, 269
anisotropic, 260, 269
Anisotropic, properties, 269
Index
399

Etching, 254, 263
Anisotropic, 260, 261
Eulerian
coordinates, 106
strain tensor, 108
Eutectic bonding, 317, 318
Evaporation, 21, 264
Metal, 21, 264, 289, 335
Exact solution, 151, 160, 183
Excimer laser, 290, 294
Feedback
control, 232, 239, 248, 365, 380
gain, 251, 388
sensor, 250, 391
System, Block Diagram, 248, 327, 343, 378
FEM, 115, 128, 145–185, 234
Superconvergent formulation, 147, 178, 380
ﬁber optic gyro
Open loop conﬁguration, 93
Field Strength, 74, 78
Finite Difference Method, 2
Flexural Plate Waves, 57, 97
Flexural waveguide with beam, 134
Flip chip, bonding, 315
Force balance, 65
Force method, 145
Force –Piezoelectric, 9
Fourier Transform, 129, 182, 233, 243
Friction, 36, 171, 371
Gas damping, 53
Gate capacitance, 55
Hamilton principle, 135, 156, 192
Helicopter noise control, Magnetostrictive actuator, 386
Hermetic bonding, 317, 320
Hermetic package, 312
High aspect ratio
micro-fabrications, 288
micromachining, 301
microstructures, 8, 26, 257, 284, 290
high isolation ampliﬁer, in wireless telemetry, 368
Hookean elastic solid, 114
Hooke’s law, 114
Hot embossing, 289
Hybrid processing, 8
Hybrid technology, 366
hydrophone, MOSFET Ampliﬁer in, 87
IDT accelerometer, 332, 372
IDT accelerometer, 372
Impact damage, 366, 370
induced Strain, 12, 96, 195, 352
Inductor, moving coil, 68
Inertial
constants, 136, 202
coupling, 136
force, 55, 148, 242
frame of reference, 92
loading, 371
navigation system, 366, 372
sensors, 46, 321
space, 92
injection molding, Polycarbonate (PC), 291
Interconnect, 308
Interdigital transducers, 51, 326, 365
interfacial stress, effect of annealing, 314, 322
Inverse Transform, 131
Ion implantation, Annealing for, 271
Isoparametric elements, 167
Isotropic
plasma etching, 26
solids, 118, 119
waveguide, 136
wet etching, 260
Jacobian, 107, 165, 166, 170, 193
matrix, 167
transformation, 193
J-integral, 360
Lagrange equation, 158
Lagrangian
coordinates, 109
strain tensor, 108
variable, 106
Lamb wave, 326
laminated, Composite beam, 135, 140, 353
Lamination, Classical theory, 126
Laser ablation, 25, 268, 290, 309, 317
Laser and electrochemical etching, 26
Laser, excimer, 290, 294
Laser-Doppler effect, 51
Lift off technique, 259
LIGA, process, 8, 257, 269, 274
linear time-invariant System, 240
Liquid crystal display, 288
liquid sensing, by Conductivity, 99
Lithography, 257
masks in, 258
Love wave, 57
sensor, 371
Low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), 266, 272,
321
Lumped-element model
accelerometer, 88
for pressure sensor, 46
Magneto-optic effect, 51
Magnetostrictive actuator, 49, 78, 349
modeling of, 204
Structural health monitoring with, 349
400
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

Metal
Deposition, 20, 264
evaporation of, 21, 264, 289, 335
sputtering of, 21
metal/polymer composite, 300
Metallo organic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD), 21, 265
Micro-channel, 344
Microfabrication, electroplating, 21
Microﬂudic system, 342
Actuation, 100
Micromachining
demolding in, 297
Micromolding, 289
in capillaries (MIMIC), 292
micro-mirror array, 317
Micro-nozzles, 29
Micro-transfer molding, 291
Minority carrier lifetime, 19
Mobility analogies, 64
MOCVD, 265
model, axisymmetric, 213
Modeling of
carbon nanotubes, 35, 219, 340
magnetostrictive actuator, 204
piezoﬁber composite Actuator, 212
PZT mounted beam actuator, 203
piezoelectric actuator, 188, 189
cantilever with Magnetostrictive actuator, 211
Composite, sensors, 212
Molding, Micro-transfer, 291
Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), 20
Monolayers, self assembled, 223
MOSFET Ampliﬁer, in PVDF hydrophone, 87
Movable gate FET, Accelerometer, 54
Multichip modules (MCMs), 311
multilayer packages, 315
Nanocomposite, 39, 221
n-channel MOSFET 55, 86, 328
Negative resists, 258
Nickel electroplating, 296
Open loop, ﬁber optic gyro, 93
open loop Control, 9, 194, 232, 384
Operational ampliﬁer, 54, 86
optical ﬁber array, 286
Optical, glucose sensors, 340
Optimum damping, 82, 233
Organic materials
deposition methods for, 59, 266
nonstandard, 21, 264
patterning of, 31, 257, 259, 297, 330, 335
Organic thin ﬁlms, 35, 59
Oxidation, 265
processes, 266
Packaging, 307–322
Passivation, 50, 321, 332
electrochemical, 269
PCR, 240
PDMS, 37, 289, 292
Passive valve, 100
PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) process
critical dimensions in, 260
line width in, 258, 287, 295
proﬁles in, 37
reactors for, 343
Passivation, 37, 289, 292
Permalloy
electroplating of, 21, 282, 290, 296–298, 300
Permanent magnets, 22
perturbation mass, 372
PFC Beam, 252
Phase modulation, 93
Phospho silicate, 274, 307, 318
Phosphosilicate glass thin ﬁlms, 274, 307
Photo electrochemical (PEC) etching, 8
Photoforming process, 9, 293
Photolithography, 14, 287, 289
Photoresist, 258
as masking layer for implant, 272
deposition of, 31, 290, 335
spin casting of, 332
SU-8, 263, 332, 342
electron-beam, 258
negative, 258
patterning, 31
positive, 258, 331
removal of, 297
Physical vapor deposition, 21, 264
PID control, 239, 240
Piezoelectric actuator, 364
modeling of, 188, 189
vibration control with, 378
bimorph, 195
bimorph, composite, Beam, 195
Piezoelectric coefﬁcient, 85, 187
Piezoelectric composite, 191
Piezoelectric effect, 12, 333
Piezoelectric material, 4, 11, 48, 57, 77, 89, 187, 249, 338
Piezoelectric
sensor, charge preampliﬁer, in, 86
substrate, anisotropic nature, 58, 73
transducer, 73
Crystal cut, 57, 85, 367
Piezoelectricity, 12, 48, 59, 195
Piezoﬁber composite Actuator
modeling of, 212
spectral element model of beam with, 213
Piezoresistive pressure sensor, 94, 267
Piezoresistive sensors, anodic bonding, 50
Planarization, 298, 308
Index
401

Plane stress, 120, 127, 136, 189, 359
Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), 272,
332, 336
Plasma etching, 26, 260, 269, 272
Plasma
in dry etching processes, 260
reactors for, 265, 272, 274
as etchants, 26, 260, 269, 272, 289, 321
etch rates, 260, 269
in deposition techniques, 263, 266, 332
ionization of, 260
Plastics
PMMA (poly( methylmethacrylate)), 18, 277, 343
Polycarbonate (PC), in injection molding, 291
PDMS process in x-ray lithography, 275
Polyethylene (PE), in injection molding,289, 291
PMMA (poly( methylmethacrylate)), 18, 277, 343
Point load, 178, 179, 192
Poisson equation, 118
Polarization, dielectric, 74
Polycarbonate (PC), in injection molding, 291
Polycrystalline silicon, 8, 273
as etch mask for KOH, 260
as etch stop, 269
as masking layer for implant, 317
CVD of, 273
etch rate in KOH, 269
mechanical properties of, 19
PDMS process in x-ray lithography, 275
Polyimide, 60
polymer thin ﬁlms, Deposition, 35, 59
polymerization, Electrochemical, 27, 282, 340
Polymers
actuator for, 27
Polyoxymethylene (paM) resist, 291
properties, 282
Polysilicon, 50, 54,62, 80, 89, 263, 266, 268, 272, 273, 274
deposition, 268, 273
Polystyrene, 36
Polyvinylidene, 86, 102
Positive Photoresist, 258, 331
power ampliﬁer, in structural health monitoring, 351
Principle of Potential energy, 154
Principle of Virtual Work, 115, 147, 254
Projection operator, 244
Projection, 8, 112, 284, 285
Proof mass, 53, 54
properties of polymers, 282
Proportional damping, 159
Proportional, 296, 336
Protein synthesis, 343, 344
Proximity printing, 275
Pulse laser deposition, 35
pulse potential anodization, 270
PVC, 2, 36, 340
PVD, 21, 264, 302
Pyrex, 50
PZT mounted beam actuator, modeling of, 203
PZT, Capacitance, 218
Q_matrix, 126
Quadratic bar element, 169, 170
Quadratic functional, 152
Quadratic rod element, 165
Quadrature, 166, 179
Quantum-well spectrum, 51
Quartzite, 19
Radial-ﬂow, 266
Radiation, 24, 29
Radical-generating photoinitiator, 33
Rain monitors, 14
Rapid thermal annealing (RTA), 307
Rare earth elements, 5
Rate of formation, 33
Reaction chamber, 243
Rectangular element, FEM, 160
Rectangular grid, 106
Refractive index, 92
Refractory material, 21
Residual stress, 51, 91, 273, 360
Resistance change, 50, 95
Resistive heating, 82
Resonant frequency, 100, 233, 320
resonant sensor, differential ampliﬁer in, 53
Resonator, 14, 53, 68, 323, 367
Rod element, FEM, 160
rod, cantilever, 181
Root locus, 237, 238, 239, 248, 391
Rotation rate, 14, 15, 52, 92
Rotational Inertia, 140, 215
Sacriﬁcial layer, 26, 271–277
Sagnac effect, 51, 92
SAW accelerometer, 332, 372
combined with gyroscope, 372
design, 88
fabrication, 333
SCREAM, 26, 269, 271
Screen printing, 314
Second-order system, 135, 161, 232, 237
Self assembled monolayer, 223
Sensitivity analysis, 369
Shape memory alloy (SMA), 3, 5, 22, 81
Shape memory alloy (SMA), in thermal actuators, 81
Shape memory, applications of, 14
Shape memory, effect, 81
Shape memory, phase transformation, 3, 81
Shape memory, stress-induced martensite, 81
Shell
CNT, 38, 221
ﬁnite element, 203
402
Smart Material Systems and MEMS

thermal, 313
Shipley, 331, 335
Silica, 27, 52
Silicon dioxide, 260, 271, 313, 334, 373
deposition, 272, 273
Silicon
growth, 19–20
hardness, 19
in micromachining, 110–111
nitride deposition, 331
[100] orientation, 19, 261, 269
[1l0] orientation, 261, 269
crystalline, 8, 19, 26, 257, 269
deep reactive ion etching, 260
deposition and etching of, 263
lattice planes in, 296
mechanical properties of, 17, 19, 21, 33
orientation of, 19, 261, 269
oxidation of, 265
physical/chemical etching, 260, 269, 271
piezoresistivity, 50
residual stress, 51, 91, 273
resists in, 258
Single crystal silicon, 268, 271
Wet etching, 260
silicon-on-insulator, 262, 318
Single crystal silicon, 268, 271
slotted-quartz, 256, 266
SMA, Crystal structure, 81
Smart composite beam, 195, 196, 350
smart structure, Composite, 188, 192, 205
Smart systems, Actuator, 7
solgel deposited ﬁlms, Annealing, 25
Sol-gel deposition, 22, 25
Space-charge density, 87
Sparse matrix, 173
Spectral element model of beam
with piezoﬁber composite Actuator, 213
with magnetostrictive actuator, 213
Boundary conditions, 215
composite beam, 215
Spectrum relation, 129, 135, 139
spin casting, 332
Spring-mass-damper system, 233, 236
sputtered ﬁlms, Annealing, 25
sputtered thin ﬁlms, Adhesion of, 21
Sputtering, Metal, 21
Stability analysis, 239
State equations, 234, 236
State variables, 65, 71, 76, 81, 234
Stiction, 313
Stiffness coefﬁcients, 124, 137, 183, 199, 252
stiffness, bending, 128
Strain energy, 135, 147, 162, 197
Stress gradient, 164
stress relief, by rapid thermal annealing, 308, 337
Stress
normal, 112
principal, 111
residual, 51, 91, 273
Stress-induccd martensite, 81
Structural health monitoring
with Magnetostrictive transducer, 349
power ampliﬁer in, 351
Structure, modeling of, for control, 189, 248
SU-8
resist, 263, 332, 342
Spin casting, 332
Surface micromachining, 8, 26, 271–275
Surface tension, 273, 335
Synchrotron radiation, 275
System architecture, 8
System, linear time-invariant, 240
System, linear, 232, 237
Terfenol-D, composite, 210
Thermal annealing, 262, 314
Thermal
Conductivity, 18
evaporation, 318
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient, 51, 80, 82, 314, 316
Thermal stress, 314
Thick ﬁlm deposition, 23
Thick ﬁlms, 23
Thin ﬁlm deposition, 22, 25, 263
Thin ﬁlm multilayer packages, 315
Thin ﬁlm sensors, 216
thin ﬁlms, sputtering, adhesion of, 21
Transconductance, 87, 328
Transducer
comb type electrostatic, 68
Electrodynamic, 70
Electromagnetic, 68
electrostatic, 64
Electrostrictive, 74
Electrothermal, 80
Magnetostrictive, 74
Structural health monitoring with, 349
piezoelectric, 73
Transduction factor, 67, 72, 76, 80
transition temperatures, 77, 291
Triangular element, FEM, 160, 161
Tuned system, 286
Tungsten, 21, 264, 273, 307
Ultrasonic actuators, 15
Ultrasonic energy, 312
Ultrasonic NDT techniques, 325, 348
Ultrasonic probe, 39
Ultrasonic transducer, 7, 73, 325, 326
Ultrasonic wire bonding, 313
Ultrasonicated, 340, 341
Index
403

Ultraviolet irradiation, 27, 282
Ultraviolet light, 31
Undercut etching of channels, 274
Undercut of the mask, 272
Unit feed back, 239
Unit gate area, 55
Unmanned carriage system, 13
Unstable system, 237, 239
UV curable polymers, 8, 27, 263, 281
UV curable polymers, with CNT, 39
UV, 258, 291
Vacuum Pressure reservoir, 21, 24, 50, 264
Valence band, 18, 38
Vapor phase etching, 310
Variational methods, 145
Velocity feedback, 251, 394
Velocity of sound, 57, 67, 89
Very low pressure chemical vapor deposition (VLPCVD), 265
Vibration absorber, 13, 82, 243
Virtual work, 114, 154
Viscoelasticity, 105
Wafer bonding, 261, 317–320, 335
wave equation for
anisotropic composite beam, 135
laminated composite beam, 135
wave propagation in
composite beam, 143
isotropic beam, 139
Wet bench, 3, 35
Wet chemical etchant, 271
Wet etching, 50, 260, 269, 310, 317
Wet oxidation, 329
Wetting action, 316
Wheatstone bridge, 45, 50, 95
Wire bonding, 310
Work, virtual, 114, 154
x-ray lithography, 275
404
Smart Material Systems and MEMS
колхоз
10/24/06

