



Mike Barlow
Smart Cities,
Smarter Citizens
Connected Technology Transforms
Living and Working

978-1-491-93973-4
[LSI]
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editors: Susan Conant and Jeff Bleiel
Production Editor: Dan Fauxsmith
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
September 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-09-11: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Smart Cities,
Smarter Citizens, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
An Old Story Unfolding at a Faster Pace                                          1
Smarter Services, Lower Costs                                                           2
Some Assembly Required                                                                   3
Streetwise Data Science                                                                       4
Social Physics, Idea Flow, and Engagement                                     6
Living Laboratories, Made of Steel and Concrete                           8
Underlying Technologies                                                                  10
When Data Is Worth More Than Gold                                           11
Building Cities of the Future, Today                                               14
vii


1 World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352).
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens
In Isaac Asimov’s 1954 science fiction novel, The Caves of Steel,
Earth’s cities have metastasized into huge dome-covered labyrinths,
providing food and shelter—but little else—for billions of miserable
inhabitants.
When Asimov wrote the novel, less than a third of the world’s popu‐
lation actually lived in cities. Today, more than half of us live in cit‐
ies. By 2050, two-thirds of humanity will be city dwellers, and there
will be more than 40 mega-cities boasting populations of at least 10
million.1
What will these cities of the future be like? Will they be lively centers
of culture and innovation? Or will they be grim hubs of despair as
depicted in movies like Metropolis and Blade Runner?
An Old Story Unfolding at a Faster Pace
Urbanization isn’t a new trend; the migration of people from rural to
urban areas has been going on for millennia. What’s different today
is the speed and scale of that migration. Three or four thousand
years ago, you needed an oxcart and a brave heart to make the ardu‐
ous journey from the hinterlands to the nearest walled settlement.
Today, you can take an airplane from practically anywhere and
arrive at the city of your choice in hours.
Why do people choose to live in cities? Here’s an official answer
from the United Nations: Cities are nodes of “economic activity,
1

government, commerce, transportation.” City life is commonly asso‐
ciated with “higher levels of literacy and education, better health,
greater access to social services, and enhanced opportunities for cul‐
tural and political participation,” according to a recent UN report on
global urbanization.
For many people, cities offer an escape from poverty and the every‐
day hazards of rural living. Moreover, cities provide complex serv‐
ices and rich amenities that are considered hallmarks of modern civ‐
ilization, such as mass transit, sanitation, public safety, theater, and
arts.
Figure 1-1. Global urbanization trends (source: United Nations,
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division)
Many of the newest and fastest-growing urban areas will be in
China, India, Brazil, and sub-Saharan Africa. How will those newer
cities acquire the resources necessary for supporting large popula‐
tions?
Providing for the material and spiritual needs of citizens isn’t cheap
or easy. It takes deep pockets to build urban infrastructure and to
pay for municipal services. Vast amounts of energy, material, and
labor are required to keep a city running smoothly.
Smarter Services, Lower Costs
Given the high costs of running a city, it’s not surprising that many
smart city initiatives focus on improving efficiency and reducing
2 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

expenditures wherever possible. Global firms such as GE, Cisco,
IBM, and Siemens are leading the charge to transform cities through
a combination of advanced computer technologies, sensors, high-
speed data networks, predictive analytics, big data, and the Internet
of Things.
San Diego, California, and Jacksonville, Florida, recently announced
trials of a new GE technology that uses LED street lighting to collect
and analyze data. In effect, every lamppost becomes an active node
in a city-wide information network, capturing and relaying data in
real time about what’s going on around it. GE envisions “brilliant”
information networks enabling cities to monitor traffic, manage
parking, find potholes, and keep track of roadwork—mostly by
modifying or enhancing existing municipal infrastructure.
The networked LEDs can also keep track of parking spaces and, in
the future, will be able to notify motorists via text message when a
space is empty or when their meter time is expiring. In addition to
making it easier for motorists to deal with common parking hassles,
these kinds of systems could reduce the need for legions of enforce‐
ment officers patrolling city streets.
Some Assembly Required
Unquestionably, technology will play a critical role in the evolution
of smart cities. But technology is only one thread in a larger tapestry.
“When people talk about smart cities, they’re really talking about
smart energy, smart transportation, smart healthcare, smart educa‐
tion,” says Samta Bansal, marketing and strategy leader for GE’s
Intelligent Cities initiative. “They’re talking about many separate
verticals. But what’s more important is the convergence of those ver‐
ticals into a comprehensive system with citizens at the center.”
Truly “smart” cities combine services and technology to serve their
citizens efficiently and generate new opportunities for them.
“There’s no easy recipe for becoming a smart city,” says Bansal. “New
approaches are necessary to design and implement intelligent city
solutions. In addition to technology and infrastructure, you need
good policy, leadership, and a regulatory framework. You need to
create a thriving environment where innovation can breed.”
In the past, the difficulties of travel constrained migration. When
people were forced to move, they often moved to whichever city was
Some Assembly Required 
| 
3

closest. Today, and for the foreseeable future, cities will have to com‐
pete for educated workers with top-notch skills. Smart cities, says
Bansal, will attract the best and brightest.
“People can choose to live in the cities or countries that offer the
most opportunities,” she says. “As a result, there will be intense com‐
petition among cities to attract the most highly skilled residents and
the best companies.”
But cities can’t merely apply technology superficially and call them‐
selves “smart.” Adding intelligence to infrastructure is one thing;
engaging and involving citizens with intelligent city networks is
quite another. Cities also need long-term strategies for meeting the
increasingly complicated needs of workers, residents, families, and
visitors. Smart city solutions must be flexible enough to address the
needs of private and public organizations.
“Most cities in the U.S. want to be smart cities, but they’re only solv‐
ing one problem at a time. That leads to vertical integration of serv‐
ices, but not to horizontal integration,” she says. Cities like Amster‐
dam, Copenhagen, and Dubai provide smart services that are holis‐
tic and horizontally integrated, such as healthcare, shopping, tele‐
com, transportation, recreation, air quality monitoring, and even
video gaming.
“Understanding how to create intelligent cities is only half the battle.
The other half is figuring out how to turn them into better places for
the people who live in them,” Bansal says.
Streetwise Data Science
Part of the evolving smart cities narrative is built around sexy new
technology. But most of the real work involves data management.
Politicians take credit for the success of their smart city initiatives,
but the nitty-gritty details are invariably handled by data scientists
and people who understand how data science can be used to solve
urban problems.
Michael Flowers is the executive in residence at the NYU Center for
Urban Science and Progress and the chief analytics officer at
Enigma.io, a New York-based firm specializing in public data
analytics.
4 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

Earlier in his career, Flowers worked for the Manhattan district
attorney’s office. After a brief stint in corporate law, he volunteered
to join the team of lawyers working on the trial of Saddam Hussein.
From his office in Baghdad’s Green Zone, he noticed how the mili‐
tary used data science to figure out the best routes for avoiding IEDs
(improvised explosive devices) as they traveled around the city.
After returning to New York, he went to work for the administration
of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. In 2012, he was appointed the
city’s first chief analytics officer.
From his perspective, the smart city movement is less about technol‐
ogy and more about improving the way decisions are made in large
urban areas, where the demand for services is increasing and the
availability of resources is diminishing.
“The great urban migration is placing even higher levels of demand
on basic city infrastructure: water, sewer, fire, police, housing,
healthcare, education, parks…Meanwhile, cities have even fewer
resources to meet those needs,” Flowers writes in Beyond Transpar‐
ency: Open Data and the Future of Civic Innovation, a collection of
essays published in 2012.
Smart cities use data to deliver critical services more efficiently.
They avoid simplistic approaches to apportioning funds and shift to
risk-based resource allocation strategies. They encourage and enable
seamless sharing of information across agencies and departments.
“Being data-driven is not primarily a challenge of technology; it is a
challenge of direction and organizational leadership,” he writes.
The real goal of a smart city is delivering more services with fewer
resources. That means using resources more intelligently. For exam‐
ple, in New York City, there is a strong correlation between property
tax delinquencies and structural fires. In other words, the more a
landlord owes in unpaid property taxes, the greater the likelihood of
a fire breaking out in a building owned by that landlord. So it makes
sense to prioritize inspections of buildings owned by landlords with
tax issues. In addition to saving the lives of tenants and firefighters,
it also makes the fire inspection process more efficient and less
costly.
The key to success, however, is sharing data across multiple agen‐
cies. “We have no shortage of data from which to build a cata‐
strophic risk model,” writes Flowers. The primary obstacle is legacy
Streetwise Data Science 
| 
5

infrastructure. New York City, for instance, has more than 40 agen‐
cies and nearly 300,000 employees.
“There’s an important distinction between collecting data and con‐
necting data,” he writes. “Each agency has its own ontology of terms
and data…which sometimes makes it nearly impossible to connect
that data. One department may use a GIS (geographic information
system) identifier for the location of a downed tree, whereas another
may refer to it by its cross streets.”
Despite the obstacles posed by legacy systems and existing infra‐
structure, you can’t ignore them or simply wish them away. “You
have to understand the bureaucracy and the rhythm that it dances
to,” says Flowers. “You can’t just try to hammer it down. You have to
embrace the bureaucracy and weave the processes of data-driven
decision making into what’s already there. You really don’t have a
choice.”
Flowers points to New York City’s long-awaited Second Avenue Sub‐
way as a prime example of what happens when planners assume that
technology will always find a way to triumph over bureaucracy and
existing legacy infrastructure. The subway line was initially pro‐
posed in 1919 and it’s still under construction. The delays weren’t
caused by technology; people have been digging tunnels for centu‐
ries. The delays resulted from a lack of cooperation between the sur‐
rounding neighborhoods and the various city agencies responsible
for planning and building the subway.
Social Physics, Idea Flow, and Engagement
Alex “Sandy” Pentland is the director of MIT’s Human Dynamics
Laboratory and the MIT Media Lab Entrepreneurship Program. He
advises the World Economic Forum, Nissan Motor Corporation,
and a variety of start-up firms. Pentland is an oft-cited pioneer in
computational social science, organizational engineering, and
mobile computing.
“Studies of primitive human groups reinforce the idea that social
interactions are central to how humans harvest information and
make decisions,” he writes in his 2014 book, Social Physics: How
Social Networks Can Make Us Smarter. Social physics is a quantita‐
tive social science revealing “how ideas flow from person to person
through the mechanism of social learning,” he writes. It’s the idea
6 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

flow that eventually shapes the “norms, productivity, and creative
output of our companies, cities, and societies.”
Smart cities that don’t take idea flow into account are unlikely to
succeed over time, because “the spread and combination of new
ideas is what drives behavior change and innovation,” he writes.
“One of my former students did a study in the UK…He found that
you can predict the health of neighborhoods with startling accuracy
by just looking at their patterns of telephone communication,” says
Pentland. “You can predict infant mortality in a neighborhood just
by looking at phone records.”
A neighborhood’s levels of engagement with the communities
around it and its willingness of its residents to explore other neigh‐
borhoods are also critical, he says. “You can predict crime in a
neighborhood by patterns of movement and by looking at how
many people from other neighborhoods visit. Neighborhoods that
are more engaged with other neighborhoods have less crime; neigh‐
borhoods that are less engaged have more crime.”
For Pentland, engagement means people exchanging ideas, and then
deciding as a community which ideas are good and which are bad.
Exploration means bringing new ideas into the community. “Idea
flow is really the source of human genius,” he says. “The richest
form of communication is face to face.”
Since face-to-face communication is almost always dependent on
travel, a good transportation system will generally contribute more
to a city’s well-being than a high-speed digital communications hub.
In Pentland’s analysis, core services such as sanitation, safety, and
transportation are more important than wireless hotspots and infra‐
red sensors.
“A lot of the smart city projects seem to focus more on technology
than on people,” says Pentland. “They’re not talking about how peo‐
ple actually live. They’re implicitly assuming the structure of life
won’t change and that we’ll just keep waking up in the morning,
sending our kids to school, and going off to work. But the ways we
live and work will change over the next decades.”
People want to live in cities that are resilient, creative, innovative,
adaptive, and supportive. “A city should be robust in the social
sense, providing support to citizens in good times and bad times,” he
says.
Social Physics, Idea Flow, and Engagement 
| 
7

Living Laboratories, Made of Steel
and Concrete
“Local is the perfect scale for smart-technology innovation,” writes
Anthony M. Townsend, author of Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hack‐
ers and the Quest for a New Utopia. In a city, it’s easier to identify
problems, engage interested groups of citizens, and see the impact of
new solutions than in a sprawling suburb or rural landscape. “Each
of these civic laboratories is an opportunity to invent,” he writes.
There are also risks in “remodeling cities in the image of multina‐
tional corporations,” Townsend writes. When a business decides to
kill an unsuccessful product or withdraw from an unprofitable mar‐
ket, it simply writes off its losses and moves on. Writing off or walk‐
ing away from a failed smart city won’t be that easy.
But that hasn’t stopped big companies from marketing the dream of
wonderfully efficient smart cities. “It’s a tough pitch to resist. For a
world that seems increasingly out of kilter, rewiring cities with busi‐
ness technology is a seductive vision of how we can build our way
back to balance,” he writes.
Chris Greer is director of the Smart Grid and Cyber-Physical Sys‐
tems Program Office, and national coordinator for Smart Grid
Interoperability at the National Institute of Standards and Technol‐
ogy (NIST). From his perch at NIST, he sees the smart cities move‐
ment as an important force for technology convergence. “Cities that
want to be environmentally sustainable and resilient to natural dis‐
asters will focus on linking their independent infrastructures. That
creates a very strong driving force for convergence of technologies,”
Greer says.
Greer, like other thought leaders in the emerging Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT), sees horizontal convergence of multiple independ‐
ent technologies as essential to progress on many fronts. “So if
you’re looking for drivers of convergence, smart cities fit the bill,” he
says.
“Typically, the goals of smart cities involve providing social benefits,
such as a sustainable environment, efficient energy, reduced traffic
congestion, and shorter commutes. Achieving those goals requires
integrating many technology platforms. You can’t just look at one
aspect of the challenge and deal with it independently,” Greer says.
8 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

In the past, a city might have looked at its power grid as an inde‐
pendent system. But when you consider the central importance of a
power grid in times of crisis or disaster, it no longer makes sense to
treat it as an isolated system. “We need to start thinking of these sys‐
tems in terms of a broader community infrastructure that includes
many dependent systems,” Greer advises.
Smart cities are “the right starting point for convergence,” he says.
“But I think we’re seeing a market failure, in the sense that most
smart cities are one-offs or custom integrations. That’s not the right
approach. We need cities working together to create interoperable
solutions that can be used anywhere.”
Last year, NIST helped launch the Global City Teams Challenge
(GCTC) to “encourage collaboration and the development of stand‐
ards.” NIST’s partners in the GCTC include US Ignite, the Depart‐
ment of Transportation (DoT), the National Science Foundation
(NSF), the International Trade Administration (ITA), the Depart‐
ment of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Department of
Energy (DoE); and from the private sector, Intel, IBM, Juniper Net‐
works, Extreme Networks, Cisco, Qualcomm, GE, AT&T, and ARM
Holdings.
Ideally, says Greer, a “smart city platform” based on common stand‐
ards will emerge. Such a platform would enable modular or “plug
and play” approaches to deploying smart city services. For some,
that conjures images of cloud-based city services similar to those
offered by SaaS (software-as-a-service) and PaaS (platform-as-a-
service) providers. Cities would choose from menus of cloud-based
services and “pay by the drink,” rather than investing to develop
their own unique platforms. That kind of scenario might avoid the
wasteful “one-off” approach mentioned by Greer, in which each city
is forced to reinvent the wheel in its quest to become smart.
“We need to bring cities together to work on shared solutions,”
Greer says. “If each city develops its own solution, we’re not really
getting closer to solving the big problems.”
The idea of cloud-based smart city services is appealing for a variety
of reasons, including lower development costs, faster deployments,
greater flexibility, and theoretically infinite scalability. On the other
hand, as Townsend notes in Smart Cities, the cloud itself is far from
infallible.
Living Laboratories, Made of Steel and Concrete 
| 
9

“Cloud-computing outages could turn smart cities into zombies,” he
writes. Imagine a smart city that depends on cloud-based biometric
authentication systems to authorize entry and exit from municipal
facilities. If the cloud goes down, it could take the system down with
it. Millions of people might be trapped inside or outside buildings
until the outage is fixed.
Another potential nightmare: An outage in the Global Positioning
System satellite network could paralyze a smart city that depends on
GPS to guide fleets of autonomous cars, taxis, and trucks safely
through traffic, Townsend observes.
Underlying Technologies
Dreams and nightmares aside, the smart cities movement requires a
solid foundation of modern digital technology. In an email, Munish
Khetrapal, managing director for solutions at Cisco’s Smart+Con‐
nected Communities (S+CC) initiative, outlines the basics for a
practical smart city project:
“It’s important that cities roll out an intelligent network platform to
serve as the backbone for any smart city technology ecosystem or
framework. An intelligent network may include both wired, wire‐
less, data, and control capabilities; including sensors, cameras, rout‐
ers, switches, data management (through people and sensors), and
other equipment, as well as the capability to integrate with the
thousands of applications being developed daily for all sorts of pur‐
poses, from water quality to garbage pickup, from transportation
schedules to pothole reporting.
The network enables city agencies to gather information more
quickly from a wide variety of sources, understand it in a relevant
context-based way, and make better decisions based on that new
information. Citizens will benefit by gaining greater transparency
into how their city operates and also have more convenient ways to
engage with city agencies from mobile devices. City visitors can
more easily navigate and access the cities they visit and provide
feedback to enhance the experience. And businesses can tap city
information to fine-tune their efforts, engage with customers, and
respond with agility to new trends as they arise.”
Khetrapal’s laundry list of essential technologies is a reminder that
smart cities are creations of the modern digital era. Pretending
otherwise would be short-sighted. In every city, however, the most
valuable resources are invariably its human residents. Cities are
about people, families, homes, and jobs.
10 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

Smart cities will be inhabited by a new generation of digital natives
who are fully accustomed to interacting with their surrounding
environments through digital apps. The quality and reliability of
those apps will likely determine the success or failure of a smart city.
Maybe smart cities should consider calling themselves “smart app
cities.”
When Data Is Worth More Than Gold
The people who live and work in smart cities aren’t merely consum‐
ers of data—they are also creators of data. The give-and-take
between a city’s digital assets and its citizens will be absolutely fun‐
damental.
In Portland, Oregon, for example, a local startup has launched a
smartphone app called Ride Report that collects bicycle ridership
data, automatically and inexpensively. The point of the app isn’t
merely collecting data; the goal is providing the city leaders with
quantitative information that will help them make better decisions
about managing bicycle traffic in a city where practically everyone
rides a bike.
The system combines Bluetooth technology with cheap sensors to
count passing cyclists. The sensors then relay the information they
gather to a cloud-based system. The technology is cool, but what’s
cooler is how it converts the behavioral patterns of local bicycle rid‐
ers into information that can be analyzed and used to improve city
life.
A Connecticut startup called SeeClickFix began in 2008 as a tool for
dealing with local concerns in New Haven. “We created a tool for
enabling residents and government officials to work together to
solve problems,” says Ben Berkowitz, the firm’s CEO and founder.
“When we looked at the traditional ways that citizens communicate
with government, we saw a missed opportunity to use the social web
as a communications platform for sharing and documenting neigh‐
borhood concerns.”
In the past, city residents typically expressed concerns to govern‐
ment officials by sending letters, making phone calls, or attending
public meetings. Those traditional methods, however, tended to
produce a series of one-to-one conversations between a concerned
resident and a city official. Berkowitz and his team had a gut feeling
When Data Is Worth More Than Gold 
| 
11

that if those conversations took place over a network, they would
create a feedback loop, and better results would follow. Their
instincts proved correct.
“When government officials come to the table on SeeClickFix and
they see the common concerns of residents, they start responding.
And they’re thinking, ‘Those residents aren’t complaining, they’re
actually helping us do our job better.’ And they also see that the resi‐
dents are grateful when problems are solved. All of this wouldn’t be
possible without social web enablement on mobile devices,” says
Berkowitz.
SeeClickFix has grown from an idea into a company with 30
employees. It has expanded its market beyond New Haven, and is
now used in municipalities in Massachusetts, New York, and Cali‐
fornia. In many ways, it’s a model for the future of smart city tech‐
nology.
“Smart cities isn’t just about instrumenting everything and creating
some kind of centralized government control. It’s about getting data
to people and understanding that people are also sources of data,”
says Jennifer Pahlka, founder and executive director of Code for
America, a non-profit organization that has been described as “the
technology world’s equivalent of the Peace Corps.”
Code for America builds open source technology and organizes net‐
works of volunteers “dedicated to making government services sim‐
ple, effective, and easy to use.” For example, Code for America vol‐
unteers partnered with the city of New Orleans to create a website
for tracking the status of properties that had been damaged during
Hurricane Katrina and were still awaiting repair or demolition.
The city had plenty of data about the condition and status of bligh‐
ted properties, but the data was spread out across multiple silos.
Some of the data was in spreadsheets; some was stored on individual
computers used by city inspectors.
The volunteers built BlightStatus, a simple system for aggregating
data and making it accessible to city residents. “Basically, we tied
together a bunch of disparate data sources,” Pahlka says. “BlightSta‐
tus lets residents go online and find out easily what’s going on with
blighted properties in their local communities.”
At the heart of Code for America is the belief that digital govern‐
ment costs less and does a better job of delivering services than tra‐
12 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

ditional government. That makes Code for America and the smart
cities movement a natural fit.
Julia Kloiber of Code for Germany shares Pahlka’s belief that ordi‐
nary citizens can bring extraordinary value to the table. Code for
Germany is a part of the Open Knowledge Foundation of Germany
and partners with Code for America.
“Code for Germany is not so much about Smart Cities as it is about
smart citizens,” says Kloiber. “We’re really about building tools for
neighborhoods and to make sure that information collected by
smart city sensors is made available to the public through APIs
(application programming interfaces) and that the data is open by
default.”
Too often, says Kloiber, public data is stored in formats that are hard
to download or that cannot be easily read by machine learning pro‐
grams. If the public cannot access data easily, is it fair to call that
data “open data?”
Open data should be easily accessible to citizens, and not just for the
sake of political correctness or elevated cool factor. When citizens
have access to city data—when it is genuinely open—they can use it
to help the city provide services that are more effective, more rele‐
vant, and less expensive. For example, Remix, which began as a
Code for America project, is a tech startup specializing in transit
planning. Here’s a brief snippet from the Remix website:
“With Remix, you can sketch out routes in any city and immedi‐
ately understand the cost and demographic impact of a proposed
change. We automatically pull in your existing bus lines onto the
map and let you quickly design different scenarios using the latest
US Census data. When you’re done, you can export to Excel, shape‐
files, or even GTFS. Everything runs in your browser, and works
great with the tools you already have.”
Public-minded startups like Remix are driven by open data. Rather
than seeing data as a source of great wealth—“the new oil,” as
McKinsey famously called it—they tend to see data as the raw mate‐
rial of innovation. This two-minute demo illustrates the appeal of
smart city apps based on open data resources.
Emma Mulqueeny, the founder and CEO of Young Rewired State,
recounts a wonderful story about teaching children in a London
school to build apps for analyzing police data. The students liked the
idea of learning to code. But what they liked even more, she recalls,
When Data Is Worth More Than Gold 
| 
13

was using the police data to plot the safest routes for walking home
from school. For the schoolchildren, the open data was worth more
than gold. It granted them a sense of power, and made them feel
safer in their city.
Building Cities of the Future, Today
Eric McNulty is director of research and professional programs at
the National Preparedness Leadership Initiative (NPLI), a joint ven‐
ture of the Harvard School of Public Health’s Division of Policy
Translation and Leadership Development and the Harvard Kennedy
School’s Center for Public Leadership.
McNulty is the author of “Leading the Future City,” a 2012 white
paper in which he envisions four types of smart cities:
• Legacities
• Technotopias
• McCities
• Cities of Desire
“Rome, London, New York, and Paris are examples of Legacities.
They’ve been around for a long time and they have established
infrastructures that need to be updated rather than built from
scratch,” he says.
Cities like Dubai, Singapore, and Songdo are examples of Technoto‐
pias. “They are newly built urban areas with the latest technology
and infrastructure, which they use to attract talent and compete
aggressively for companies,” he says. “They’ve got the fastest Internet
and the tallest buildings.”
McCities tend to resemble old-fashioned cities of the 1950s, with
endless blocks of similar apartment buildings and office towers.
“They are built to accommodate rapidly growing populations, but
they rely on traditional construction techniques and materials. They
aren’t technology paradises, but they are built with the modern
economy in mind,” McNulty says. “You find McCities in China and
India, where urbanization is transforming society at an astonishing
pace.”
Cities of Desire are sprawling slums and squatter communities.
“They are the favelas of Rio de Janeiro, the Dharavi section of Mum‐
bai, and the outskirts of Shenzhen. Even in those cities, there is often
14 
| 
Smart Cities, Smarter Citizens

less poverty than in rural areas. And despite the density, chaos, and
uncertainty of those cities, they are full of hope and aspiration,” he
says.
The four types of cities McNulty describes might seem very different
on the surface, but their residents share key characteristics: They use
mobile phones, they are digital savants, and they believe that smart
cities offer the best opportunities for building better lives.
“Smart city initiatives are not about technology,” says Khetrapal.
“What makes a city unique is its culture and its people. The technol‐
ogy solution will need to support the systems and processes that
allow that city to retain its uniqueness. Before a city begins a smart
city initiative, its leaders need to identify the challenges the city
faces. They must be ready and willing to look at the way its systems,
services, policies, and procedures are working, or not working. The
right technology solutions will focus on addressing the challenges
defined by that city’s unique nature.”
Building Cities of the Future, Today 
| 
15

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist and author. He is coau‐
thor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media Strategy
(Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT Sales
Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley, 2007). He is
also the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on mar‐
keting strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence, busi‐
ness performance management, collaborative social networking,
cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major U.S. dailies.
Mike is a graduate of Hamilton College. He is a licensed private
pilot, an avid reader, and an enthusiastic ice hockey fan. Mike lives
in Fairfield, Connecticut, with his wife and their two children.

