



Darren Beck
Smart Energy
The Future of Power Storage

978-1-491-93971-0
[LSI]
Smart Energy
by Darren Beck
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc.. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editors: Susan Conant and Jeff Bleiel
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Copyeditor: Kim Cofer
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
November 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-11-04: First Release
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
1. Smart Energy Solution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Enabled by the IoT                                                                               2
Fueled by Advancements in Power Technology                              4
2. Energy Storage: It’s About Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Patterns of Use and Production                                                       10
Improving the Equation for All                                                       12
Energy Storage Options                                                                    14
3. Enter Tesla. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
What Is the Powerwall?                                                                     18
Powerwall’s Partner—The Smart Inverter                                      19
Consumer Benefits                                                                            21
Enterprise Adoption                                                                          22
Why Tesla Is a Game Changer                                                         24
4. Looking Ahead. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
Open Meets Local                                                                              28
Micro Virtual Utilities                                                                       30
Distributed Storage Network                                                           31
Toll-Based Energy Highways                                                           32
The Era of Smart Energy                                                                  34
vii


CHAPTER 1
Smart Energy Solution
Electricity is essential to modern life. More than four-fifths of the
world’s population has access to it according to the International
Energy Agency, and in the US, it is so pervasive we often take it for
granted. Whether we’re preparing our meals, drying our clothes,
charging our mobile phones, or powering our alarm clocks, we’re
using electricity at all hours of the day—often without considering
how it’s made, how much we use, and how else the system could
work. What if that could change?
Imagine having a range of new choices and insights to help you
make smarter decisions about energy use. For instance, would it be
possible to train your house to always know how to achieve the right
temperature whether you’re at home or away? Could you bestow
your office with the ability to provide the right amount of light any‐
where, anytime, in the building, automatically? What about being
able to divine when the cleanest energy was being to transmitted to
you and charge your electronics at those times? Could you even find
a way to capture and store the sun’s energy and then use it at night?
Thanks to advancements in technology and connectivity, our
options for “smart energy” abound. It’s now possible to maintain the
upside of traditional energy (reliability and coverage), while reduc‐
ing its downside (high cost, inefficiencies, and a heavy reliance on
fossil fuels). Internet-enabled devices, the latest in energy produc‐
tion technology, and advancements in power storage solutions are
forming the backbone of a new smart energy marketplace. They are
enabling more of us to take an active role in it. Informed by streams
1

of intelligence and empowered by these resources, we can now pro‐
duce, trade, and consume electricity with more efficiency, lower
cost, and greater sustainability.
Enabled by the IoT
Whether you’re producing electricity or consuming it, making
informed decisions about energy is a lot easier today. A network of
agents—the Internet of Things (IoT)—exists that can help you with
that task. These agents come in the form of meters and sensors
deployed throughout the electrical grid and in homes and busi‐
nesses. They gather a myriad of data, connect to the Internet, and
transmit the data to cloud-based applications where it can be aggre‐
gated, analyzed, and compared with other data sets. The result is
information that can help you to decide how best to power your life
and livelihood while saving money and minimizing impact on the
environment.
For example, most utilities deploy a network of wireless sensors
between their facilities and their customers’ meters to monitor
energy flow. These devices have replaced the “meter men” of old and
provide real-time data on power demand, supply, and outages.
When analyzed along with historical data, it enables utilities to spot
trends. Combine it with third-party intelligence like forecasts on
weather, fuel availability in the commodities market, or population
growth, and it helps them to optimize energy production and adjust
the technology in their portfolio.
This helps utilities to become more energy-efficient, saving them
money and reducing their carbon footprint. Likewise, customers
have an array of IoT solutions to help them achieve the same
“behind the meter.” For example, today you can buy temperature
control systems that are able to learn and adapt. Nest, a residential
solution, and Comfy, a solution geared more toward the business
environment, can automatically adjust indoor heating and cooling
to the desired level. As you teach the systems your preferences, they
quickly adapt, analyzing and making adjustments to the settings on
their own to optimize comfort and energy use.
Another example is intelligent lighting systems, like the commercial
wireless solution offered by Daintree. In a business facility, all spaces
are not occupied equally all of the time. For instance, most offices
only conduct business during the day. These systems can be pro‐
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Smart Energy Solution

grammed to turn on, turn off, or dim lighting at preset times to
accommodate business hours. They also use a variety of sensors,
including motion and thermal detectors, to determine when a con‐
ference room is occupied and lights should be on. In addition, some
systems use ambient light sensors. They determine how much sun‐
shine a room is already receiving and adjust the indoor lighting
accordingly.
Lastly, what if you want to use the cleanest energy available on the
grid at any given time? WattTime, a nonprofit devoted to solving
this challenge, has developed a solution that can be incorporated
into any Internet-enabled product that draws electricity.
“Every time you flip a switch or your equipment turns on, some
power plant has to increase its electricity output right away—the
‘marginal’ plant,” explains Gavin McCormick, co-founder and exec‐
utive director of WattTime. Which power plant is marginal? The
answer is constantly changing, up to every five minutes. “We pro‐
vide a service to sync the moments your smart devices draw energy
to match the moments when your local marginal power plant is a
cleaner one,” said McCormack.
WattTime estimates your local marginal plant and its cleanliness by
matching public power grid information with the U.S. Environmen‐
tal Protection Agency’s Continuous Emissions Monitoring System.
It’s being used today in conjunction with electric vehicle charging
stations sold by eMotorWerks. Another big opportunity McCor‐
mack sees is pairing it with smart thermostats. “In most cases it is
possible to reduce the carbon footprint from electric heat and air
conditioning with essentially zero impact on user comfort or their
energy bill.”
These IoT-based energy solutions provide awareness and optimiza‐
tion. They enable producers to operate more efficiently by offering
insights into real-time demand, analysis for making more accurate
predictions, and automation to adjust power generation accordingly.
They also enable customers to learn when, where, and how much
energy is needed, understand options for sourcing it, and automate
usage to achieve optimal energy efficiency based on personal prefer‐
ence. This intelligence and capability is essential to ushering in a
new era. However, the vision for smart energy only realizes its full
potential when the Internet of Things is combined with advance‐
ments in energy production and storage technologies.
Enabled by the IoT 
| 
3

Fueled by Advancements in Power Technology
We’ve seen how smart energy solutions can help utilities better
anticipate demand and enable customers to pare back energy use.
This creates positive results even in a traditional marketplace where
all of the power is generated by the utilities and is based on fossil
fuels. Each party saves money and benefits from releasing fewer
greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere. The good news is
that there’s even more to be gained by pairing these solutions with
new technologies that empower anyone to produce clean, renewable
energy and use it at the optimal time.
Here’s why clean production is paramount to smart energy. It’s the
most viable path for sustainability, and it addresses the power indus‐
try’s major contribution to global warming. According to the CAIT
Climate Data Explorer, an open source database developed by the
World Resources Institute that contains well-founded data on cli‐
mate change, “Electricity & Heat,” a subsector of Energy, contributed
nearly a third of the global greenhouse gas emissions released in
2012.
This oversized impact is due mostly to the industry’s reliance on fos‐
sil fuels—primarily coal. These limited resources are not renewable
on a human timescale and are comparatively heavy polluters.
Figure 1-1 shows data from the National Renewable Energy Lab
(NREL) study of the life cycle greenhouse gas emissions for select
energy technologies from “cradle to grave.” This table shows the
median emissions estimated for each technology based on public
data, some of which they were able to harmonize. What comes
through clearly is the stark difference between fossil fuels and all
other technologies listed.
Natural gas and coal contribute at least nine times more greenhouse
gas emissions to the atmosphere over their lifetime. When compar‐
ing coal to hydropower, it’s as much as 143 times more. Ideally, these
fossil fuel technologies would be used sparingly, if at all. However,
there are logical reasons they continue to play a major role in power
generation today.
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Smart Energy Solution

Figure 1-1. Life cycle analysis: comparison of select energy technologies
In a separate study NREL considered the capacity factor of different
energy technologies. This is the amount of energy it produces over
time divided by the amount of energy the technology could produce
if its system were at full capacity.
The study shows coal has the highest range of capacity factors along
with nuclear, geothermal, and biopower. They operate at more than
80 percent, making it easy for them to produce the base load (mini‐
mum level of demand) for electricity on the grid. Natural gas and
hydropower have the widest range of capacity factors. In fact, natu‐
ral gas-fired combustion turbines (NGCT) can operate between 10
and 90 percent. So even though it’s one of the dirtiest technologies,
it’s the best match we have today for “marginal plants,” which pro‐
duce power swiftly to meet the grid’s peak energy needs. While wind
and solar are cleaner technologies, they have the lowest range of
Fueled by Advancements in Power Technology 
| 
5

capacity factors. They are subject to varying weather conditions and
the earth’s rotation, and rarely operate beyond 50 percent.
Knowing the pros and cons of these technologies and feeling
increased public scrutiny of its contribution to climate change, the
power industry signaled its interest in greater innovation over the
past few decades. The market responded favorably. New technolo‐
gies arose that enabled utilities to moderately reduce emissions tied
to coal and natural gas–generated electricity. More importantly, util‐
ities diversified into cleaner, renewable energy as those technologies
became more feasible and affordable. Those advancements also led
to a proliferation of solutions in the market to help end users gener‐
ate their own renewable power.
One such solution is solar energy. According the U.S. Department of
Energy, Home Depot, one of the leading home improvement retail‐
ers in North America, only began selling residential solar power sys‐
tems in its stores in 2001. Prior to that, the cost and performance of
this technology did not make solar an attractive option for main‐
stream customers. Since then, the technology has become more effi‐
cient, cheaper to produce, and much less expensive to install.
Today, you can contact a turn-key company, like Solar City, to
install, monitor, and maintain solar photovoltaic (PV) panels for
your home or business. They will also finance them for you and
share any savings that come from reducing the electric bill from
your utility. This has become such a viable option for customers that
by the end of 2014, nearly 645,000 US homes and businesses had
chosen to go solar, according to the Solar Energy Industry Associa‐
tion.
Advancements like these give life to smart energy. They empower
everyone to participate in the market contributing to a sufficient,
reliable supply of electricity through more choice, greater efficiency,
lower cost, and increased sustainability. The latest clean energy tech‐
nologies deliver on this vision in spades, especially when paired with
IoT-enabled solutions. Even so, more opportunity remains.
Without viable energy storage options, all electricity has to be used
when it’s produced. This limits the role that clean energy technolo‐
gies, like solar and wind, can play in the overall power portfolio.
Because they produce energy intermittently, they have less capacity
to generate electricity just as it’s needed. The absence of energy stor‐
age also prevents producers and customers from realizing additional
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Smart Energy Solution

cost savings and efficiencies. Storage is the last piece in the smart
energy puzzle. Fortunately, breakthroughs in technology are making
energy storage more feasible than ever and paving the way for main‐
stream adoption.
Fueled by Advancements in Power Technology 
| 
7


CHAPTER 2
Energy Storage: It’s About Time
A major challenge facing any energy producer is finding a way to
provide power when it’s needed. Here’s the dilemma for electricity.
Demand varies. It’s rarely in sync with the supply that can be gener‐
ated by a single technology. Traditionally, producers align supply
with demand by using a combination of technologies—some con‐
stant, some variable. While this has proven successful, meeting peak
demand in this way drives up cost for producers and price for cus‐
tomers. It also creates an overreliance on fossil fuel.
“The electric power industry is built on the assumption that electric‐
ity cannot be stored and has to be generated exactly according to
demand,” said Randy Perretta. Perretta is owner of RP Consulting, a
life cycle design firm for new products, and a journeyman in the
energy industry. Reflecting on this conventional approach to sync‐
ing supply and demand, he shared, “Energy storage turns that
assumption on its ear.”
Smart energy storage solutions help solve the gap in timing between
supply and demand. They enable producers to generate excess
energy when demand is low, bank it, and then draw from the stored
power supply when demand rises again. There are several types of
energy storage solutions, but it is the latest generation of batteries
that are making storage a much more affordable, feasible option for
consumers, businesses, and utilities alike.
9

Patterns of Use and Production
Under normal circumstances, demand for electricity follows a fairly
predictable cycle. As you might expect, it tracks with our natural
biorhythms. When most of us are asleep, demand is low. Demand is
higher when most of us are at home—waking up and getting ready
for the day and again in the evening after work.
This correlation can be seen in Figure 2-1. The solid black line dis‐
plays the circadian rhythm for an average person who tends to wake
at 6:00 AM and go to sleep at 10:00 PM. It moves between opposing
forces—the propensity to be awake or asleep. The dashed lines show
a snapshot of three weekdays during January in 2013. They show
hourly electricity demand tracked by PJM Interconnection, an orga‐
nization that coordinates movement of wholesale electricity in more
than a dozen states in the Atlantic and East Central regions of the
US.
Figure 2-1. Circadian rhythm compared to actual energy demand
Here are the challenges that this variable demand poses to energy
production technologies with two different profiles:
Constant, predictable supplies of electricity
This includes fossil fuel technologies like coal and natural gas
combined cycles (NGCC). It also includes some clean and/or
renewable energies like nuclear, hydropower, geothermal, and
biopower. As long as you feed them, these technologies can pro‐
duce electricity round-the-clock with high predictability.
10 
| 
Chapter 2: Energy Storage: It’s About Time

The primary challenge with this category is optimization. The
best return on investment and lowest cost comes from con‐
stantly running these technologies near full capacity. However,
if they consistently produced at the peak demand level, more
electricity would be generated than the grid could accommodate
when demand drops, especially at night and midday. That’s why
most are built to deliver the minimum demand for electricity, or
base-load energy.
To meet additional demand, expected or otherwise, utilities rely
on “peaker plants,” usually natural-gas fired combustion tur‐
bines (NGCT). These flexible technologies produce a variable
supply of electricity at a lower marginal cost. However, they’re
also among the heaviest energy polluters. Could we remove the
need for peaker plants? Yes, if there was a way to stash the
excess energy generated by the aforementioned technologies.
Variable, intermittent supplies of electricity
This includes wind, concentrating solar power, and solar PV
technologies. Essentially limitless sources of power, these clean
energy technologies can be used nearly anywhere on the planet
and have some of lightest energy footprints. Nevertheless, their
challenge is delivering energy with constancy.
Solar is available when the sun is shining. It hits peak energy
production near midday as demand tends to dip. Production
can be diminished by clouds and generates next to nothing as
the earth rotates away from the sun each night. Wind can pro‐
duce power any time of the day, but not with predictability
because air flow varies from moment to moment.
This inconsistency in timing and the level of production usually
prevents these renewable power sources from providing base
load energy. Even though many end users are drawn to these
increasing affordable technologies for on-site generation of
marginal power, utilities tend to prefer NGCT peaker plants
because they can generate power on-demand. Solar and wind
technologies would become more viable options, if only they
could store excess energy when their production exceeds
demand.
Patterns of Use and Production 
| 
11

Improving the Equation for All
Energy storage improves the equation for both power technology
profiles mentioned above (constant, predictable supplies, and vari‐
able, intermittent supplies). It also enables producers, big and small,
to capture excess energy when the power generated outpaces
demand. That stored energy can then be tapped as needed when
demand exceeds the supply of power being generated.
As long as the storage option is affordable, scalable, and easy to
charge and discharge without significant energy loss, it can improve
operational cost and efficiency for big producers like utilities that
use constant, predictable energy technologies. Traditionally, their
plants have been undersized in order to meet minimum electricity
demand. With storage in place, these plants can be right-sized to
generate power at a level closer to average demand, saving enough
energy during dips in demand to meet the peaks.
It also helps right-size the overall cost structure for utilities by
reducing reliance on peaker plants. By combining energy storage
with primary energy technologies that produce a constant, predicta‐
ble supply of power, it relegates peaker plants to a backup role.
Much like a diesel generator for your home, a peaker plant is great
for generating electricity on demand. However, both are much more
expensive to operate per kilowatt hour (kWh) than main power
sources. They are best used for rare, unexpected circumstances
when main power source failures outlast stored energy supplies.
Reducing reliance on peaker plants would also benefit the environ‐
ment, under all circumstances except when the alternative is coal.
The good news is that energy storage also opens up a path for mini‐
mizing, or even phasing out, the use of fossil fuels. Variable, inter‐
mittent energy technologies like solar and wind can also be ramped
up to ride out the peaks and valleys of demand when combined with
energy storage. The algorithms for charging and discharging elec‐
trons to and from storage using this technology to meet average
demand will differ from their constant, predictable counterparts.
However, in some locations, this ability to bank energy now enables
solar and wind to compete with fossil fuels for primary power pro‐
duction for the first time. The question is no longer, “Which energy
technology is capable of meeting demand?” It becomes, “Which
technologies are best adapted to producing electricity in a particular
12 
| 
Chapter 2: Energy Storage: It’s About Time

location based on the area’s natural resources and their impact to cli‐
mate change?”
Energy storage is equally beneficial for end users and small produc‐
ers. Today, because of the higher cost of meeting marginal energy
demand, utilities charge end users a premium price for electricity
used during “on-peak” hours. For example, in 2015 Florida Power &
Light charged customers a higher rate per kWh from November 1st
to March 31st on Monday through Friday between 6–10 AM and 6–
10 PM, and from April 1st to October 31st on Monday through Fri‐
day between 12–9 PM (excluding major holidays throughout the
year). Energy storage would enable Florida Power & Light’s end
users to purchase excess energy in “off-peak” hours, when the price
per kWh is lower. They could then draw from that reserve to reduce
reliance on the electric grid when rates rise during “on-peak” hours
like those just mentioned.
The benefits are even more enticing when end users become small
producers—generating some of their own electricity through renew‐
able energy technologies on site. Many government programs offer
economic incentives and financing options to help them reduce or
spread out the cost of buying and installing on-site systems. Also,
through a policy called “net metering,” they can send some of the
excess renewable energy generated back to the grid in exchange for
a 1:1 kWh credit. This system of credits has been adopted in various
forms around the world. As of September 2015, it was available in
all but four states in the US, according to the DSIRE database oper‐
ated by the N.C. Clean Energy Technology Center at North Carolina
State University and funded by the U.S. Department of Energy.
To take advantage of these credits, these small producers must have
a smart meter installed on their premises by the local utility to gauge
the usage and directional flow of energy at any time of day. States
regulate how much energy the utility’s end users (subscribers) can
contribute to the grid through their small production, which pre‐
vents the grid from being overloaded. Together, subscribers may be
limited to contributing no more than a certain percent of a utility’s
historical peak load. This can range from 0.1 percent of the load to
unlimited contributions depending on the state. Individually, sub‐
scribers also may be capped on how much power their system can
produce or how much credit they receive for energy they net meter
back to the grid. Among the states, system capacity limits range
vastly from 10 to 80,000 kilowatts (kW). One of the most progres‐
Improving the Equation for All 
| 
13

sive states, Arizona, only caps net metering credits at 125 percent of
a subscriber’s load.
With all of this mind, it’s clear to see how energy storage can be a
game changer. Big producers can use it to build an infrastructure
that meets demand while reducing reliance on peaker plants, operat‐
ing at lower cost and integrating cleaner energy technology. End
users, at the very least, can use it for backup power or storing low-
cost energy to use when electricity prices are higher. End users, who
become small producers, can also use it to store any excess renewa‐
ble energy generated on-site. With all these benefits, that just leaves
one key question. What options exist for storing energy?
Energy Storage Options
Utilities have deployed a variety of technologies to store excess
energy over the years. They range from the use of gravity and angu‐
lar momentum to compression and thermal absorption. One
method widely adopted by utilities is using some of the energy they
generate during off-peak hours to pump water uphill to a storage
facility. This essentially converts kinetic energy (the pumping) to
potential energy (the stored water). When demand rises and more
power is required, the water is released downhill. Gravity helps con‐
vert the water’s potential energy back into the kinetic energy used to
spin the turbines below and generate electricity.
Turbines can also be propelled by using stored, compressed air. One
example is Highview Power. Using its technology, a producer can
use off-peak electricity to cool air down to –196°C, turning it into a
liquid. This highly compressed air is then stored in large-scale, insu‐
lated, unpressurized vessels. When energy demand increases, this
stored supply can be accessed by opening a valve. As it’s exposed to
ambient temperatures, the air rapidly re-gasifies. Its volume expands
700-fold, driving a turbine to create electricity.
Another mechanical solution is the use of flywheels. Here’s how it
works. Off-peak energy can be used to power motors that start fly‐
wheels in motion. These flywheels, or rotors, spin in a nearly fric‐
tionless enclosure supported by magnetic levitation. Their angular
momentum (or continuous rotation) stores energy, which can be
drawn back out through the motor converting it into an electric
generator.
14 
| 
Chapter 2: Energy Storage: It’s About Time

Thermal storage solutions can also be effective. For example, Aben‐
goa Solar has built a 280-megawatt solar plant southwest of Phoenix,
Arizona. It uses parabolic mirror troughs to concentrate the sun’s
rays on oil that is piped through them. As the oil heats up, its ther‐
mal energy is used to boil water, creating the steam to spin electric
generating turbines. When the plant is running at capacity, the oil’s
heat is transferred to molten salts until it’s needed again. This solu‐
tion stores enough heat to run the plant’s turbines at full capacity for
six hours.
All of these solutions work on a utility-scale. However, it’s unlikely
that they can be replicated at a scale and price that would work for
small to mid-size businesses and consumers. The substantial cost
associated with building and operating these storage solutions has
likely limited adoption by utilities, as well. Only 16 percent of utilit‐
ies surveyed in Black & Veatch’s 2014 Strategic Directions: U.S. Elec‐
tric Industry Report were requiring energy storage for variable gen‐
eration projects or running an energy storage pilot project. Even so,
advancements in another energy storage technology—batteries—are
accelerating adoption in the market.
While storing energy in batteries is nothing new, battery technology
is undergoing a significant transformation. Lead-acid batteries have
been used to store backup power by utilities, businesses, and con‐
sumers for years. They are effective at storing and discharging
energy in large-scale scenarios such as utility substations and corpo‐
rate data centers, even in small-scale deployments for homeowners.
However, the challenge is regularly tapping that energy. In general,
lead-acid batteries can only be deep-cycled—discharging most of the
energy in their reservoir—a few times in their life. While this is suf‐
ficient for occasional backup use, it limits their ability to cost-
effectively address the daily demand of peak energy.
When unveiling the Tesla Powerwall—a battery based on lithium
iron phosphate (LiFePO4) chemistry—the company’s CEO, Elon
Musk, shared a much less generous assessment: “The issue with
existing batteries is that they suck.” Behind him on the stage was a
presentation slide listing their downsides: expensive, unreliable,
poor integration, poor lifetime, low efficiency, not scalable, and
unattractive.
That describes, in a nutshell, why lithium-ion batteries have a leg up
on lead-acid batteries. They can discharge deeply with near-constant
Energy Storage Options 
| 
15

voltage, enabling these batteries to essentially deliver full power until
they are nearly spent—something their lead-acid and even nickel-
based counterparts are unable to do. LiFePO4 batteries have a longer
lifespan. They are significantly lighter in weight. They can also be
charged much more quickly and efficiently. This enables them to
carry a supply of energy that can be accessed much more often, even
if they are not fully charged. Until recently, the main challenge fac‐
ing the lithium-ion battery industry has been producing them at a
price that makes them affordable for the mass market.
Fortunately, those costs are falling. According to a study published
in Nature Climate Change, industry-wide cost estimates for produc‐
ing lithium-ion battery packs for battery electric vehicles (BEV)
dropped approximately 14 percent per year between 2007 and 2014
—from above $1,000/kWh to near $410/kWh. The cost of battery
packs used by market-leading BEV manufacturers, Nissan Motors
for the Leaf and Tesla Motors for the Model S, are lower—$300/
kWh. This cost advantage, now and in the future, is one of the
prime reasons Tesla is poised to lead the development of mobile and
stationary energy storage for years to come.
16 
| 
Chapter 2: Energy Storage: It’s About Time

CHAPTER 3
Enter Tesla
In the spring of 2015, Tesla made a splash by officially announcing
its entrance into the stationary energy storage market. It introduced
the Powerwall and its big brother, the Powerpack—rechargeable
lithium-ion battery solutions that can meet storage needs large and
small. Interestingly, according to Q2 2015 report of the U.S. Energy
Storage Monitor published by GTM Research, there were at least
two dozen energy storage system vendors operating in the US mar‐
ketplace at the time. Considering the healthy competition already in
this space, why would a car manufacturer throw its hat in the ring?
“Tesla already knows how to do this. They’ve been putting LiFePO4
batteries in their cars for years. They have the experience,” said
Randy Perretta. By 2014, Tesla and its supplier, Panasonic Corpora‐
tion, were already producing enough lithium-ion battery packs to
outfit each of the approximately 35,000 vehicles it manufactured
that year. The technology, materials, and know-how necessary to
develop a stationary energy solution are so similar that Tesla is
banking on economies of scale to drive down the cost of production
for car and facility batteries alike as its production ramps up.
Another advantage Tesla had upon entering this market was an
established customer base. Tens of thousands of customers own
Tesla Roadster and Model S electric vehicles (EVs). It’s likely many
of them are interested in charging those EVs at home using renewa‐
ble energy. A 2015 PlugInsights survey of EV drivers located pri‐
marily in the US confirms that assumption. In it, 83 percent said
they had solar panels at home already or would consider installing
17

them in order to get a true zero-emission driving experience.
Because EVs are usually charged at night and solar energy is gener‐
ated during the day, a charging station alone isn’t enough. It also
requires an energy storage solution like the Powerwall to help own‐
ers store energy from the sun for use when the moon is shining.
What Is the Powerwall?
The Tesla Powerwall is a wall-mounted rechargeable lithium-ion
battery designed to help homeowners or small business owners to
store energy. It includes a battery pack, liquid thermal control sys‐
tem, and software that receives dispatch commands from a solar
inverter. The Powerwall is about the size of a 60-inch flat-screen TV
(if it was hung portrait style), and weighs 220 lbs. Unlike competi‐
tors, which tend to emphasize function over form, the Powerwall’s
sleekly sculptured form is Apple-esque, making seem it more like a
luxurious piece of art on the wall (Figure 3-1).
The Powerwall takes two forms. The 10 kWh weekly cycle model is
$3,500 and designed to provide backup power. The 7 kWh daily
cycle model has a $3,000 price point and is designed for load shift‐
ing—charging when electricity demand and rates are lower and dis‐
charging when electricity demand and rates are higher. Both come
with a 10-year guarantee and are sufficient to power most homes
during peak evening hours by delivering 2 kW of continuous power
and as much as 3.3 kW of peak power. The Powerwall is also modu‐
lar. If your home or business needs more energy, multiple units can
be installed together—achieving up to 90 kWh total for the 10 kWh
battery and 63 kWh total for the 7 kWh battery.
18 
| 
Chapter 3: Enter Tesla

Figure 3-1. Tesla Powerwall
Powerwall’s Partner—The Smart Inverter
To unlock the Powerwall’s potential, you’ll need to pair it with a
smart inverter from one of Tesla’s approved partners. Figure 3-2
provides an example of what this looks like for a consumer whose
home has solar PV panels and is linked to the electric grid. The solar
panels are connected on one side of the inverter and feed direct cur‐
rent (DC) into it. The Powerwall is wired to the inverter on that
same side through a separate connection that enables DC power to
flow back and forth. On the other side of the inverter is a connection
to the control panel (the gateway to all electrical wiring inside the
home), followed by a connection to the utility’s smart meter, and
Powerwall’s Partner—The Smart Inverter 
| 
19

followed last by a connection to the grid. All of the wiring between
the inverter and the grid carries alternating current (AC).
Figure 3-2. Electrical network for residence with solar and power
storage
The inverter has two primary jobs. First, it converts power from DC
to AC and back as needed within the home’s network. Using trans‐
formers and circuits, it can convert DC energy, generated by the
solar panels or stored in the Powerwall, into the AC electricity
required to power the home’s appliances or for net metering contri‐
butions to the grid. Because the inverter is bi-directional, it can also
take AC power flowing from the grid and turn it into DC energy for
Powerwall storage.
Second, the inverter acts like a traffic cop. It connects to the Internet
and cloud-based applications with algorithms to determine where
power should flow within the home network and at what pace. It’s a
continuous balancing act—analyzing the home’s energy demands,
how much power the solar panels are contributing, what grid elec‐
tricity currently costs per kWh, how much energy is stored in the
Powerwall, and at what rate the battery should be charged or dis‐
charged.
The inverter seeks to optimize the system so the homeowner uses as
much solar power as possible, draws from the grid when electricity
is cheap, and contributes excess energy to the grid to maximize net
metering credits. Typically, the user can monitor this performance
through a web-based dashboard. It displays ongoing details of
20 
| 
Chapter 3: Enter Tesla

energy production, use, storage, and cost in addition to how well the
inverter, solar panels, and Powerwall are operating.
Consumer Benefits
The easiest way to understand the Powerwall’s potential is by view‐
ing it through a real-life example. To illustrate the benefits a home‐
owner could experience by installing Tesla’s 7 kW energy storage
system, we’ll look at house located on the gulf coast of Florida in
Sarasota County. This 3-bedroom, 2-bath home with 2,000 square
feet already has a solar system installed. The rooftop system includes
22 PV panels with a total power-generating capacity of 5.5 kW. The
homeowner currently has a net metering arrangement with the local
utility, but no energy storage system.
Figure 3-3 highlights energy used during one week of the summer—
August 8–14, 2015. The left column represents the actual use and
energy sources. As you can see, even without the Powerwall in place,
the homeowner is already saving money by producing more than a
quarter of the energy used by the home (112 kWh) from solar. The
rest is being purchased from the local utility during off-peak hours
—9 PM–Noon (190 kWh) at a lower price, or on-peak hours—
Noon–9PM (104 kWh) at a higher price. Because there is no power
storage system on-site, the homeowner is unable to use the excess
solar energy generated and net meters 30 kWh back to the grid.
The righthand column in Figure 3-3 shows the potential that the
Powerwall has to further increase the homeowner’s savings. To
begin, let’s take that 30 kWh of excess solar energy and store it in the
Powerwall, rather than net metering it back to the grid. With that
power stored, it can be used during on-peak hours reducing the
home’s grid-energy demand when prices are highest. For the sake of
simplicity, let’s also assume that each evening the homeowner fully
charges the Powerwall during off-peak hours and discharges it dur‐
ing the next on-peak period. That would shift a total of 49 kWh (7
kWh/day times 7 days). The result is impressive—a 27 percent
increase in solar energy used, a 26 percent increase in off-peak
energy used, and a 76% decrease in on-peak energy used. Over time,
this shift away from on-peak demand will generate a significant
return on investment.
Consumer Benefits 
| 
21

Figure 3-3. Florida Gulf Coast home with 5.5 Kw rooftop solar system:
energy used week of Aug 8–14, 2015
Enterprise Adoption
What if your storage needs go beyond that of a homeowner or small
retail store? Tesla’s answer is the Powerpack—an industrial version
of the Powerwall. It has much more storage capacity, 100 kWh, and
in Elon Musk’s words, “is infinitely scalable.” Also according to
Musk it costs around $250 per kWh, a price tag of apparently
$25,000. Using a cabinet and rack system, Powerpack units can be
combined to achieve up to 500 kWh per cabinet. Cabinets then can
22 
| 
Chapter 3: Enter Tesla

be connected to create up to 10 megawatt hours (MWh) of capacity.
This product can support a wide range of customers from mid-size
businesses to large-scale operations like utilities, data centers, and
manufacturing plants.
From the vantage point of CBRE, the world’s largest commercial real
estate services firm, energy storage is still early in the technology
adoption cycle for businesses. Vice President Elodie Geoffroy-
Michaels oversees Global Energy and Sustainability for CBRE’s
Global Corporate Services division. When asked whether energy
storage fits into the sustainability strategy CBRE recommends for its
clients, she said, “Yes, but this is in its infancy stage. There is little
demand for this product yet.” Even so, Geoffroy-Michaels stated
CBRE does recommend energy storage to clients, primarily to help
them curtail costs associated with peak demand and as backup
power for business continuity.
While other companies consider whether and how to integrate
power storage into their energy plans, Jackson Family Wines (JFW)
and Amazon are already ahead of the curve. Both have deployed
Tesla’s stationary energy storage solution. JFW has been piloting a
prototype of the Tesla Powerpack to help reduce energy use in four
areas that consume the most electricity in their winemaking opera‐
tions: refrigeration/cooling, lighting, compressed air, and process
water treatment. Each battery pack is designed to draw electricity
from the grid or their on-site solar arrays when energy demand is
low. The power is stored for later to smooth out spikes in demand.
“We’re anticipating a 10 percent reduction in our annual electricity
bills as a result mostly of demand shaving,” said Julien Gervreau,
Senior Sustainability Manager for JFW.
Amazon Web Services (AWS), which provides data center services
to startups, large enterprises, and government agencies in 190 coun‐
tries, has a long-term goal to become carbon-neutral by using 100
percent renewable energy. To that end, in the spring of 2015, AWS
announced plans to launch a 4.8 MWh hour pilot of Tesla’s Power‐
packs in its US West Region. “Batteries are important for both data
center reliability and as enablers for the efficient application of
renewable power. They help bridge the gap between intermittent
production, from sources like wind, and the data center’s constant
power demands,” said James Hamilton, Distinguished Engineer at
AWS. “This complements our strategy to use renewable energy to
power our global infrastructure.”
Enterprise Adoption 
| 
23

There are two signs that the adoption rate for this technology is
about to pick up. First, the utilities see the wave coming. In its 2015
Strategic Directions: U.S. Electric Industry Report, the Black &
Veatch Insights Group asked them the following question: “As
demand response becomes more of an operation resource to utilit‐
ies, what emerging trends do you see impacting your business?” In
the top response, 62 percent of utilities said “renewables combined
with battery storage.” Second, consider the response to Tesla’s intro‐
duction of the Powerwall and Powerpack. Just three months after
the unveiling, during Tesla’s 2Q15 earnings call, CEO Musk and
CTO JB Straubel announced they had received orders for 100,000 of
these energy storage products with a total value of about $1 billion.
Why Tesla Is a Game Changer
So what’s the big deal? Tesla wasn’t the first company to introduce a
stationary energy storage system for homeowners. Enphase, one of
the largest manufacturers and distributors of solar inverters in the
world, announced its development and testing of a residential model
six months before Tesla introduced the Powerwall. Also, companies
like Stem have been selling energy storage solutions paired with
robust cloud-based software for data analysis and predictions to
companies for a few years now. So why is it that neither has com‐
manded the same media attention or order demand experienced by
Tesla?
“Tesla is part of the American fabric, and they’re led by a fellow who
sees to the horizon,” said Randy Perretta. “Having Elon Musk in the
game is big. Society sees him as a person lighting the way already. If
he points down a path, society and business will follow, because they
believe in him.” As founder of SpaceX and a cofounder PayPal and
Tesla Motors, Musk has frequently captured the public’s imagination
with his vision of the future and fulfilled it. In doing so, he and his
products attract the sort of adulation once reserved for the late Steve
Jobs and the unveiling of Apple products like the iPhone.
Much like the iPhone, the Powerwall’s design is stylish, warm, and
inviting. It’s easy to imagine how nice it would look inside your
garage next to your Model S. This visual appeal opens it up to the
mainstream market. Also like the original iPhone, the Powerwall is
just a stake in the ground. Its storage capacity, amperage, and price
can all be significantly improved, yet Musk sees this as an opportu‐
24 
| 
Chapter 3: Enter Tesla

nity to whet the public’s appetite with an initial offering. Just as the
original iPhone now seems quaint and archaic compared to the
iPhone 6S, released less than a decade later, the original Powerwall is
destined to be antiquated just as quickly.
That fate will be delivered by Tesla’s own hand via the “Gigafactory”
—a massive battery factory that will have a production capacity of
35 gigawatt-hours (GWh). Tesla, Panasonic, and other strategic
partners, broke ground on this manufacturing plant in June 2014
just outside Sparks, Nevada. They are investing $4.5 billion to make
it a reality. The plans are to have it built and launch production
through the plant in 2017. By 2020, the Gigafactory will reach full
capacity and produce more lithium-ion batteries annually than were
produced worldwide in 2013.
The sheer manufacturing capacity of this plant along with rapid
growth in demand for EV batteries and stationary batteries (like the
Powerwall and Powerpack) will enable Tesla to leverage significant
economies of scale. Based on some estimates, Tesla believes it can
drive down the per kWh cost of its battery pack by more than 30
percent. Production on this scale will also help fund additional
research into increasing the energy density and lifespan of the bat‐
teries. Higher performance, lower cost, and increased competition
that will come as a result (all of Tesla’s patents are open source), will
help drive mass adoption of energy storage. It’s when this technol‐
ogy becomes ubiquitous that things get very interesting. 
Why Tesla Is a Game Changer 
| 
25


CHAPTER 4
Looking Ahead
The market is undergoing an exciting transformation toward smart
energy. As we’ve seen, a key change is the transition away from elec‐
tricity that relies heavily on fossil fuels—a limited resource that con‐
tributes heavily to climate change. Thanks to advances in technol‐
ogy, it’s now viable for utilities, businesses, and homeowners to pro‐
duce clean, renewable energy en masse. Solutions like Tesla’s Power‐
wall and Powerpack take this to the next level. By storing excess
energy produced by intermittent sources like solar and wind, they
help smooth out supply and align it with demand. Together, these
innovations enable renewable energy, once a niche player, to take on
a major role in energy production.
The other critical ingredient for smart energy is the ability to glean
and share information throughout the market with swiftness and
ease. IoT-based solutions are doing just that. Connected devices like
learning thermostats and intelligent lighting systems are helping us
curb our demand for electricity. They recognize when we really need
it then dispatch it accordingly. Smart meters and inverters are help‐
ing us to understand demand in real time and whether to draw
energy locally (e.g., from solar panels or battery storage at home) or
from the grid based on timing, supply, and cost. Solutions like Watt‐
Time can even help us to optimize our environmental footprint by
sourcing electricity from the grid when the cleanest choices for
marginal energy are online.
What we’re beginning to see is a profound reshaping of the market‐
place. Energy production is becoming decentralized. With each
27

passing day, more of us are able to produce and store electricity
affordably on our own. In addition, the Internet has made us more
aware of the demand that exists and what supplies are available to
meet it from moment-to-moment. This is the dawn of what futurist
and economist Jeremy Rifkin refers to as the “energy internet” in his
bestselling book, The Third Industrial Revolution.
In his book, Rifkin asks us to imagine “hundreds of millions of peo‐
ple producing their own green energy in their homes, offices and
factories, and sharing it with each other in an energy internet, just
like we now create and share information online.” This evolution
redefines what it means to be a producer and consumer. Those roles
are no longer black and white. It blurs the lines. However, it enables
new peer-to-peer business models to emerge that improve efficiency
and cost.
Think of successful startups like Uber, where just about anyone with
a car and some free time can supply a ride for someone needing a
lift, or the Lending Club, where individuals can pool their money
with others to easily offer interest-bearing loans to peers who want
to buy a car or pay off a credit card. These epitomize a “sharing
economy” where people and organizations use information technol‐
ogy to determine demand, evaluate their excess capacity, and then
redistribute, share, and reuse it for optimal benefit. That infrastruc‐
ture is beginning to emerge for energy. It’s exciting to ponder what
lies ahead for developers of cloud-based solutions, IoT devices, and
big data analytics as regulations in the energy market begin to relax.
Following are a few examples of future opportunities.
Open Meets Local
Besides being attractive, user-friendly, and one of the lowest cost
lithium-ion solutions for stationary storage on the market per kWh,
Tesla’s Powerwall and Powerpack are unique for another reason.
Like all Tesla technology, their patents are “open source.” CEO Musk
has stated, “Tesla will not initiate patent lawsuits against anyone
who, in good faith, wants to use our technology.” In his blog
announcing this decision, he notes that Tesla, the competition, and
the world would all benefit from a common, rapidly evolving tech‐
nology platform.
Randy Perretta sees that potential, as well. “Open source and local
management are a marriage made in heaven,” he said. Consider the
28 
| 
Chapter 4: Looking Ahead

transition to micro-grids—small energy systems capable of main‐
taining a balance between energy supply and demand within a
defined boundary. Many predict this to naturally arise from the
mass decentralization of electricity production. If so, Perretta envi‐
sions, “By having free standard software interfaces and reusable
code with public access, software developers can and will economi‐
cally provide products to the micro-grids and individual customers
which allow them to better manage this resource and discover new
ways to avail themselves of it.”
This opens the door to greater awareness of what’s happening at the
street level, the building level, and even down to the local environ‐
ment where equipment like the inverter lives. With that awareness
also comes an opportunity for greater local management. Perretta
muses, “The day when local (energy) storage/generation manage‐
ment becomes seamless with building HVAC management, climate
data and financial date will be a breakout moment.”
As an example, he points to three-phase motor starts in inverters.
Three different voltages are applied to these motors all at once to get
them spinning at full speed. Because the motors begin at rest, the
initial current is much higher than full load to get them moving.
These “hard starts” cause wear and tear on motors. However, when
sudden unexpected power surges occur, they really take a toll. As
Perretta notes, “A power pole in the alley can absorb the current hit
of electricity without even noticing it. Utilities put switchable capac‐
itor banks on the pole to offset the power factor issues. However, to
an inverter on a wall in an electrical closet, a number of three-phase
motor starts can seem like being hit by a cannon shell.”
Enterprising developers can create software and algorithms and
deploy wireless sensors to proactively monitor this impact. “Suppose
we watch that from day to day?” Perretta said. “For instance, motor
starts happen on a regular schedule. As time goes on and one of the
motors begins to fail, it starts harder. The change in building current
and power factor over those few seconds every day as the motor fails
can get noticed. With this local building profile analysis, you can
replace or repair the motor before it fails.” As a result, it saves down‐
time and enables the local energy storage and generation equipment
to stay online. Otherwise, the system would revert to the grid to sat‐
isfy its energy needs, incurring a higher cost for electricity during
peak periods of the day.
Open Meets Local 
| 
29

Micro Virtual Utilities
Someday, in the not-so-distant future, landlords of multitenant
properties may find it financially attractive to act as micro virtual
utilities. Because they control the flow of electricity into the com‐
mercial and housing units they lease, they also have the ability to
enhance that service through the use of energy storage and any
renewable energy produced on-site. Landlords could operate like
mini-utilities, providing tenants with power that they’ve purchased
and resold from the grid and/or power that they’ve generated them‐
selves. The only electric bill the tenant would receive is the monthly
invoice from their landlord.
Here’s how it could work with energy storage alone. The 7 kWh
Tesla Powerwall can provide adequate energy storage for the average
home. Because Powerwalls are modular, a landlord with a handful of
adjoined properties could just purchase a few and link them
together. A Powerpack would be best for landlords with larger mul‐
titenant properties. With an energy storage solution in place, they
could then buy cheap energy from the utility during off-peak hours,
store it, and provide the stored energy to tenants during peak hours
when utilities charge the most for electricity. When reselling the
energy during peak hours, the landlord could even charge less than
the utility, because there’s often a sizeable margin between peak and
off-peak rates. This would benefit both parties—tenants would pay
less than the market rate while landlords would still make a nice
profit.  
The “buy low, sell high” approach also works well when on-site solar,
wind, and even biopower are introduced into the mix. Landlords
can profit by continuing to sell their own energy to tenants during
peak periods, even after their stored energy supplies have run out.
Renewable energy also adds two other financial benefits. First, it
enables landlords to get PACE financing for the purchase and instal‐
lation of the power generation and storage equipment. This can
spread the payment out over decades, substantially lowering upfront
cost. Second, it enables landlords to more easily secure LEED certifi‐
cation for a building. That’s a plus, since the U.S. Green Building
Council shows that vacancy rates for green buildings run slightly
lower than for nongreen properties and LEED-certified buildings
continue to command the highest rents.
30 
| 
Chapter 4: Looking Ahead

The key to making this work is an IoT-based billing platform. The
solution would rely on a centralized smart inverter to guide the flow
of energy from the on-site renewable source or the electric grid, to
and from the Powerwall or Powerpacks, and to the tenants. A smart
meter would be installed for each tenant. It would sense local
demand, communicate it to the inverter, and track energy use. All of
this data would be conveyed back to a cloud-based software system
that, among other things, would assign the appropriate billing rate
per kWh based on time of use and provide the landlord with an
administrative dashboard to monitor all energy use throughout the
property and the health of the overall system. It would even offer
tenants a web page—just like the local utility does—where they can
check their energy use, view their bill, and make payments to the
landlord online.
Distributed Storage Network
As more consumers and businesses install energy storage systems in
their homes and facilities, it’s intriguing to consider the collective
impact. Most will likely stay connected to the electric grid, at least
for backup power. Together, all of those connections represent a vast
network of distributed storage. If utilities could control most or
some of that resource, it could help them meet peak energy needs
for all customers while reducing their expenses for infrastructure
and operations. It could also generate financial discounts, incentives,
or income for businesses and homeowners who allow the utilities to
tap into their stored energy supplies.
This strategy is similar to the demand-shaving programs many util‐
ities already have in place. They offer intelligent, programmable
thermostats and installation to customers at little or no cost. In
return, customers voluntarily allow the utilities to adjust indoor
temperature higher or lower, depending on the season, to reduce
overall demand during periods of peak demand. The utilities benefit
by not having to fire up their peaker plants as much, which cost
more to run than their base-load operations. Customers benefit by
receiving new thermostats. They can program these devices to stay
at set temperatures at different times around the clock, curbing
energy use and lowering their electric bill.
Instead of focusing on demand, a voluntary program for shared
energy storage would address the supply side of the equation. Utilit‐
Distributed Storage Network 
| 
31

ies could offer substantial discounts or leasing arrangements to cus‐
tomers who want to acquire and install energy storage systems and
smart inverters. If customers already have approved equipment in
place, the utilities could offer them energy credits or compensation.
All of this would be in exchange for allowing the utility to tap into
the customer’s reservoir of stored energy, within certain parameters
agreed upon in advance.
The benefit for utilities is two-fold. First, they can avoid the cost of
building, maintaining, and operating their own centralized storage
facility. Most of this cost for energy storage is shifted to customers in
the network or an approved partner, like Solar City, that provides,
installs, and finances the equipment for customers. Second, utilities
can reduce their use of peaker plants even further—potentially
decommissioning plants as the capacity and reliability of the dis‐
tributed energy storage network becomes sufficient. Customers ben‐
efit by receiving equipment subsidized by the utilities and from
credits or income generated by each stored kWh they contribute
back to the grid.
All of these benefits can be realized only if there’s an IoT-based solu‐
tion in place. It requires sensors distributed throughout the network
to monitor energy storage levels and demand—at a micro and
macro level. It also requires a cloud-based software system that can
assess demand and supply, then draw just the right amount of
energy from each of these reserves without overloading the grid.
Toll-Based Energy Highways
With the rise of individual energy producers—businesses and
homeowners who generate and store their own power—will eventu‐
ally come the trading and selling of their excess electricity. In time,
this collective supply of individually produced energy may become
so large and well-networked that utilities may decide to scale back
their energy production and diversify into other areas of business.
Utilities have a deep understanding of how to finance, produce, and
distribute energy; forecast and meet market demand; manage risk
and respond to outages; bill and provide customer care for services;
and more. In this new era, they may find it more lucrative to offer
value-added services like the following to individual producers:
32 
| 
Chapter 4: Looking Ahead

• Consultation on technology, operational efficiency, and risk
• Back-office services including customer care and invoicing
• An Uber-like platform for matching supply with demand
• Aggregation services that bundle supplies for large customers
• Brokerage services to help clients compete more effectively
Between now and then, one thing remains certain. There will be
escalating tension over who pays for expanding, upgrading, and
maintaining the grid that makes the distribution of electricity possi‐
ble. Today, this cost is borne by the utilities. They currently produce
the vast majority of energy available in the US. Therefore, they rely
most on the electric grid to get that power out to their customers.
That’s as it should be. Those who benefit most from a system should
carry the largest cost of supporting it. However, what happens when
that balance begins to shift?
Individual producers contribute excess electricity to the grid today.
While it’s a relatively small amount compared to the whole, it’s still
been enough to give utilities pause for concern. This can be seen in
the slow adoption of net metering over the years. As you’ll recall,
four states still do not support it. It’s also apparent in the disparity of
net metering rules between states. While some are encouraging,
many still significantly limit how much energy individual producers
may generate and the net metering credits received in return.
Utilities significantly influence these regulations. While they have a
historical bias toward limiting competition, there’s another primary
reason utilities seek to slow this trend. They don’t want to see their
revenue siphoned off bit by bit while being left to hold the entire bag
on funding the grid’s infrastructure. In that light, it’s easy to begin
seeing individual producers as freeloaders. Unless a system is estab‐
lished for cost sharing, tensions will continue to rise as individual
producers contribute a larger portion of the electricity in the grid.
Here’s one way to solve for it. Develop a smart solution that emu‐
lates a toll road. Just as drivers pay for a minute portion of a high‐
way’s maintenance and upgrades each time they use the road, a sys‐
tem could be created to monitor energy flows into the electric grid
from any producer and assess a toll based on that usage. A nominal
fee paid per kWh would enable the grid’s upkeep and improvements
to be funded proportionally by those who rely on its use. Imple‐
menting this solution would require each gateway controlling the
flow of energy into the grid to have a unique IP address associated
Toll-Based Energy Highways 
| 
33

with the producer. Internet-connected smart meters would track
how much energy each contributes to the grid and communicate it
to a centralized clearinghouse in the cloud. That party would bill
each user on a pro rata basis. It could also use the data to project
many things, including local areas where supply is increasing and
the grid’s capacity should be enhanced.
The Era of Smart Energy
As we’ve seen throughout this report, the energy space is undergo‐
ing an exciting evolution. Advancements in power generation tech‐
nology have paved the way for cleaner production and empowered
businesses and homeowners to produce their own electricity. The
development of affordable power storage solutions, like the Tesla
Powerwall, is accelerating adoption of these technologies, primarily
solar and wind, by evening out their intermittent production. It is
also enabling individual producers to contribute more of their own
energy into the grid.
Lastly, these systems are now connected. Through the deployment
of IoT-based sensors on-site and throughout the grid, we know
much more about how energy is being produced, stored, sourced,
traded, and used. Through this energy internet, we also have the
smart devices, software, and analytics to optimize all of this data for
maximum benefit, regardless of where one fits into the energy mar‐
ketplace. This is giving rise to a range of new business models and
rolling out the welcome mat for innovation. The era of Smart
Energy has arrived.
34 
| 
Chapter 4: Looking Ahead

About the Author
Darren Beck is a professional with more than 25 years of combined
experience in business development, strategy, technology, sustaina‐
bility, and shared value.
In addition to writing about green practices in IoT for O’Reilly
Media, Darren serves as Director of Environmental Initiatives for
Sprint where he has helped the company to gain recognition as the
most eco-focused wireless carrier in the US. At Sprint, he is respon‐
sible for driving innovation that reduces environmental impact
while enhancing the company’s reputation and its bottom line.
Darren is also an Advisory Board Member for DaVinci Global, an
organization designed to be the world’s leading source of insights
into nature-inspired design for innovation, business, and finance.
He holds an MBA from the University of Kansas and a Bachelor’s of
Science in Mass Communications and Business from Baker Univer‐
sity. Follow him on Twitter @DarrenBeck for the latest news on sus‐
tainability, technology, and ideas for making the world a better
place.

