
 
 
 
Smart 
Inventory Solutions 
 
Improving the Management of 
Engineering Materials and Spare Parts 
 
Second Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phillip Slater 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial Press Inc. 
New York, New York 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Slater, Phillip. 
 
 
Smart Inventory Solutions: Improving the Management of Engineering 
Materials and Spare Parts/ Phillip Slater. 
p.cm. 
 
ISBN 978-0-8311-3401-3 
1. Inventory Management.   2. Maintenance.    I. Title 
 
 
 
HD40.S57 2010 
658.7’87—dc22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2010049777 
 
 
Industrial Press, Inc. 
989 Avenue of the Americas 
New York, NY 10018 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2010 by Industrial Press Inc., New York. Printed in the United States of 
America.  All rights reserved.  This book, or any parts thereof, may not be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form without the 
permission of the publisher. 
 
 
Printed in the United States of America 
 
 
 
10      9     8      7      6      5      4      3      2      1 
 

Dedication 
 
 
 
Ask any author about the process of writing 
a book and I am certain that they will tell 
you that it is hard work.  Researching, 
writing, and trying to eliminate ambiguity 
are all more difficult than it might seem.  
However, hard as it is for the author, it is 
undoubtedly harder for the family of the 
author. 
 
By its nature, writing is a solitary pursuit.  
Add in the constant travel when working 
with clients and the pressure of deadlines 
and an author can be become very hard to 
live with! 
 
For 
her 
patience, 
understanding 
and 
turning of the other cheek, I dedicate this 
book to my darling wife, Mercedes. 
 
 

Praise for Smart Inventory Solutions, Second Edition 
This is a well written, practical book.  Phill Slater speaks from experience, and shows that 
critical inventory scrutiny will bring real bottom line savings.  His message is very relevant to 
our studies, and I will be recommending this book to our students. 
Ray Beebe, 
Senior Lecturer,   
Postgraduate Programs in Maintenance and Reliability Engineering 
Monash University 
 
Phillip Slater is a recognized leader in his field and has developed a proven system for 
reviewing and rationalizing spares.  Smart Inventory Solutions is insightful, practical, and 
sometimes controversial and I thoroughly recommend this book to anyone that has an 
interest in reducing their materials and spare parts investment or who just wants to improve 
their materials and spares parts management.  
Steve Turner 
PMO Specialist 
OMCS International 
 
Smart Inventory Solutions is packed with practical ideas on how to improve management of 
inventory “The Forgotten Investment!”. The book not only provides enlightening concepts but 
also a “How to” approach for accomplishing tasks.  Philip Slater makes eloquent arguments 
for the important role that inventory needs to play in today’s competitive environment.  
Zahra Jabiri, PhD, MEng, BEng 
 Adjunct Faculty 
Asia Pacific International College  
 
I have worked in the airline industry for many years and lived through the traps that are 
described herein.  Aircraft parts are extraordinarily expensive, so mismanagement of 
inventory can easily cripple an operation.  Phillip presents the philosophy of real inventory 
optimization in a clear, logical and pragmatic manner, so that everyone in the materials 
management chain can understand and be part of the process.  Following the steps he has 
detailed will certainly give a continuing competitive advantage to any aircraft operator, 
which could be the tipping point for flourishing, when others are just surviving in this 
extremely volatile and cutthroat industry.  I wish I had read this book years ago!   
Thomas H. Carroll III 
Director of Maintenance Technical Services 
NetJets® Services 
 
 
Also by Phillip Slater 
A New Strategy for Continuous Improvement: 10 Steps to Lower Costs and 
Operational Excellence (Industrial Press, 2006) ISBN 978 0 8311 3320 7

v 
Contents 
 
Chapter 1 Introduction to Smart Inventory Solutions 
 
Achieving True Inventory Optimization 
Inventory: The Forgotten Investment 
Inventory Process Optimization™ 
Management, Reduction, or Optimization? 
Generating Lasting Results 
 
1 
 
1 
2 
4 
4 
7 
 
Chapter 2 The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
 
Simple not Simplistic 
Materials or Inventory? 
Relevant Terms and Expressions 
What is the Purpose of Having Inventory? 
Why Spares and Indirect Inventory Is Different 
An Introduction to the Materials & Inventory Management 
Cycle 
Comparison of Theoretical and Actual Inventory 
Management and Control 
Determining the Re-Order Point (ROP) 
Determining the Re-Order Quantity (ROQ) 
A Word on Monte Carlo Simulation 
Do You Hold Too Much Inventory?  Check Your Stock Turn 
Ratio 
9 
 
9 
10 
10 
12 
13 
15 
 
16 
 
19 
26 
29 
29 
Chapter 3 The Financial Impact of Inventory  
 
Don't Overcompensate 
The Inventory Management Tension 
Cash Is King 
A Simple Model of Business Economics 
The Four Financial Reports that You Absolutely Must 
Understand 
How Much Cash Can You Generate? 
33 
 
33 
34 
35 
35 
40 
 
43 

vi 
Chapter 4 People and Processes  
 
The People Factor 
Adopting a Zero Inventory Mindset 
The Influence of Process 
Systems Thinking 
The MIM Cycle in Detail 
49 
 
49 
54 
55 
56 
58 
Chapter 5 Policies & Procedures  
 
When is Critical Really Critical? 
The Spares Stocking Policy 
63 
 
63 
68 
Chapter 6 Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
 
 
Why Inventory Reduction Often Fails 
Cracking the Inventory Code 
5 Myths of Inventory Reduction 
Why You Might Hold More Inventory Than You Really 
Need 
77 
 
77 
78 
82 
89 
 
Chapter 7 The Spare Parts Storeroom  
 
The Central Hub 
Squirrel Stores & Why You Would Be Nuts to Keep Them 
MRO and Engineering Spares: Lean, Mean or Somewhere 
In Between? 
Is Your Storeroom a Pit Stop or a Supermarket? 
97 
 
97 
98 
106 
 
114 
Chapter 8 The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
 
 
The Bath Tub Principle 
Hypothesis Driven Analysis 
Double Loop Learning 
Action #1:  Have Someone Else Hold It and/or Pay For It 
Action #2:  Sell Excess and Obsolete Stock 
Action #3:  Eliminate Duplication  
Action #4:  Change the Factors That Drive Safety Stock 
Action #5:  Reduce Reorder Stock 
Action #6:  More Closely Match Delivery with Usage 
Action #7:  Reduce the Value of Items Held 
117 
 
117 
118 
119 
121 
127 
132 
136 
141
145
149 

 
vii 
Chapter 9 Inventory Process Optimization™  
 
Beware Implicit Assumptions 
 
The Inventory Process Optimization™ Method 
Stream 1: The Individual Parts Review  
• The Inventory Cash Release® Process 
• Getting the Focus Right 
• When to Apply Which Action 
• The Step-By-Step Process 
• Example Application of the ICR® Process 
• Reviewing the Long Tail 
Stream 2: The Management Process Review 
153 
 
153 
155 
158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182 
Chapter 10 Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results
 
 
Selecting Your Inventory Review Champion 
The Role of Your Inventory Review Champion 
Who to Involve in an Inventory Review Program 
The Three Stages of an Inventory Process Optimization™ 
Program 
Measuring Your Progress 
Integrating New Inventory Items  
Integrating Inventory Process Optimization™ with 
Inventory Management 
183 
 
185
187
188 
189 
 
202 
203 
205 
Chapter 11 Case Studies  
  
Case Study 1: Establishing a Materials and Inventory 
Management System  
Case Study 2: Applying the Inventory Process 
Optimization™ Method 
209 
 
211 
 
217 
Chapter 12 Where To From Here? 
225 
Bibliography 
231 
Appendix A: Materials and Inventory Management 
Glossary 
233 
Appendix B: Data Collection Questions  
251 
Index 
255 

viii 
Index of Tables and Figures 
 
Tables 
Chapter 2: The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
2-1 
Relevant Terms and Expressions 
11 
 
Chapter 3: The Financial Impact of Inventory 
3-1 
The Impact of Reduced Inventory 
38 
3-2 
Examples of Actions and Their Impact 
39 
 
Chapter 7: The Spare Parts Storeroom 
7-1 
Comparison of Demand Data 
102 
7-2 
Results for Scenario 1 
105 
 
Chapter 9: Inventory Process Optimization™ 
9-1 
Categories for Spares Inventory 
163 
 
Chapter 11: Case Studies 
11-1 
Issues and Mitigation Actions  
213 
11-2 
Management Issues Identified 
220 
 
 
 
Figures 
 
Chapter 2: The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
2-1 
The Materials and Inventory Management (MIM) 
Cycle 
16 
2-2 
The Classic Theoretical Saw Tooth Diagram 
17 
2-3 
Actual Component Demand/Supply Chart 
18 
2-4 
The Normal or Gaussian Distribution 
23 
2-5 
Example ROP Calculation 
24 
2-6 
The Poisson Distribution 
25 
 
 
 
Chapter 3: The Financial Impact of Inventory 
3-1 
The Traditional Inventory Tension 
34 
3-2 
The Cash Flow Cycle 
37 
3-3 
Example of the Asset Section of a Balance Sheet 
41 
3-4 
Example of a Calculation Sheet 
46 

 
ix 
3-5 
Blank Calculation Sheet 
47 
 
Chapter 4: People and Processes 
4-1 
Simplified Supply Chain 
57 
4-2 
The MIM Cycle 
58 
 
Chapter 5: Policies and Procedures 
5-1 
Confidence Level for Spares Availability 
67 
5-2 
Spares Category Decision Tree 
72 
5-3 
Spares Stocking Policy Checklist 
75 
 
Chapter 7: The Spare Parts Storeroom 
7-1 
Demand Profile Without a Squirrel Store 
103 
7-2 
Demand Profile With a Squirrel Store 
103 
7-3 
Average Inventory Increases 264% with a 
Squirrel Store 
105 
7-4 
The Principles of Lean Thinking 
110 
 
Chapter 8: The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
8-1 
The Bath Tub Principle 
118 
8-2 
Double Loop Vs. Single Loop Learning 
119 
8-3 
The ‘7 Actions for Inventory Reduction’ 
120 
8-4 
Action #1 
122 
8-5 
Action #2 
127 
8-6 
Action #4 
136 
8-7 
Action #5 
142 
8-8 
Action #6 
145 
8-9 
Action #7 
149 
 
Chapter 9: Inventory Process Optimization™ 
9-1 
The Inventory Process Optimization™ Method 
156 
9-2 
Cumulative Value Curve 
160 
9-3 
Pareto Principle Case Study A 
161 
9-4 
Pareto Principle Case Study B 
162 
9-5 
Summary of When to Apply Which Action 
165 
9-6 
The Process Acts as a Decision Making Filter 
166 

x 
9-7 
The Step-by-Step ICR® Process 
168 
9-8 
Typical Inventory Review Spreadsheet 
173 
9-9 
An ICR® List Sorted by Bin Value 
174 
9-10 
Example Cumulative Value Curve 
175 
9-11 
An Expanded Spreadsheet 
176 
9-12 
The Completed Spreadsheet 
177 
9-13 
Software Makes It Easier to Track the Process 
178 
9-14 
Identify the Long Tail of Items that Add No Value 
179 
9-15 
Identifying the Over Stocked Items 
181 
 
Chapter 10: Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
10-1 
The Inventory Review Champion ‘Sweet Spot’ 
186 
10-2 
The Sequence of Activity for an Inventory Review 
Program 
190 
10-3 
Inventory Program Reporting Template 
202 
10-4 
The Stock Decision Checklist for Engineering 
Inventory 
207 
10-5 
The Stock Decision Checklist for General 
Inventory 
208 
 
Chapter 11: Case Studies 
11-1 
Four Stages Implementation Process  
212 
11-2 
Communicating Procedures  
215 
11-3 
The Process Implemented  
218 
11-4 
Pareto Results for Two Locations  
219 
11-5 
Example of Inventory Tracking ‘Dashboard’  
221 
11-6 
Initial Results 
222 
11-7 
Results Achieved Over Time  
223 
 
 

 
xi 
Phillip Slater 
 
 
 
Phillip Slater is a leading authority on materials 
management and specifically, engineering spares 
management.  He regularly speaks at Engineering and 
Asset Management conferences, writes articles for 
magazines worldwide, and provides services to a 
diverse range of clients globally. He has also authored 
several books. 
 
With nearly 25 years of operational improvement 
experience Phillip Slater provides a broad combination 
of skills and experience. 
 
Phillip has been leading organizational turnarounds in maintenance and 
operations since he was 24 years of age and, as a result, was rapidly 
promoted through maintenance into operations and then executive 
management.  
 
A desire to ‘do his own thing’ led Phillip to leave it all behind in 2001 to 
start his own company, Initiate Action.  Over the years Phillip has helped 
many companies improve profits, increase reliability, and reduce working 
capital in many different industries and at least a dozen different countries.  
 
Now Phillip utilizes the expertise and experience built up over nearly 25 
years to assist select clients in operations improvement and inventory 
optimization.   
 
Through his company, Initiate Action, Phillip also licenses his intellectual 
property and processes to other companies for software development and 
service delivery.  
 
You can find further details on Phillip’s services at www.PhillipSlater.com. 
 


 
xiii 
Foreword to the Second Edition 
 
 
Albert Einstein is reported to have said ‘The important 
thing is to not stop questioning.’  The most obvious 
question to ask when considering a second edition of a 
book is:  Didn’t you cover this topic in the first book?  The 
answer to this question is both yes and no. 
 
Yes, because the first book covered the Inventory Cash 
Release® Process and has subsequently helped thousands of 
people better understand that process.   
 
No, because, through application, processes evolve and the 
needs of the readers evolve with them.  It seems that 
publication of the first edition of Smart Inventory Solutions 
raised as many questions as it answered!   
 
Question like: 
• How does this relate to how my store room 
functions?  
• Where does classic inventory management theory 
come in? 
• What steps do I take next? 
• How do I recognize a good consignment deal? 
And so on. 
 
It is now more than four years since I wrote the first edition 
of Smart Inventory Solutions and during that time I have 
continually answered the follow-up questions that have 
been asked by readers, workshop attendees, and clients.  
This has resulted in a whole body of work that was not 
widely published.  As this body of work related directly to 
the issues raised and processes discussed in the first 
edition, it seemed an obvious move to publish an updated 
second edition. 
 

xiv 
This second edition, therefore, is not just a minor review 
but a complete rewrite with many new sections, tables, and 
diagrams — in fact, the content has nearly doubled. 
 
Like the peeling of an onion, I fully expect that this edition 
will produce still further questions; I welcome any 
feedback from readers on issues and queries that this book 
provokes for them. 
 
Keep on improving, 
 
Phillip Slater 

 
1 
Chapter 1 
 
 
Introduction to Smart 
Inventory Solutions 
 
Achieving True Inventory Optimization 
 
 
he optimization of materials and spare parts holdings has, for 
many years, been a goal of inventory managers, operations 
managers, and financial managers.  This is particularly so in industries with 
significant investments in these types of inventory and is often driven by 
both a need for operational support and a need to free up working capital.  
The benefits that come from achieving materials and spares inventory 
optimization are such that the business case for action is irrefutable.   
The problem is that, until now, the techniques that have been applied 
to achieve the optimization of this inventory do not result in a truly optimal 
outcome.  At best they provide short-term changes; at worst they lull people 
into a sense of operational excellence when nothing could be further from the 
truth.  When subject to critical analysis, the reasons for this become quite 
obvious.  Let me explain. 
Traditionally, one of two approaches has been applied:  either undergo 
data analyses using a statistically-based software algorithm, or select a single 
criterion (such as obsolescence) and look for inventory that meets that 
criterion.  Both of these approaches overlook one simple fact. 
High levels of materials and spares inventory are a symptom of the 
broader issues with the way the inventory is controlled, supplied, accessed, 
purchased, and managed.  Inventory levels are determined by a combination 
of supply chain management, internal policies and processes, and people’s 
behavior and training.  These issues involve a wide range of personnel who 
T

Chapter 1 
2 
come from engineering, maintenance, stores, inventory management, 
procurement, and even finance.  Achieving true inventory optimization and 
lasting results requires an understanding of all the behaviors, context, and 
process factors that influence the inventory.  Addressing high levels of 
materials and spares inventory through traditional inventory review and 
‘optimization’ techniques does not address these issues as it rarely involves 
the range of personnel that influence the outcomes and does not improve the 
company systems and knowledge to address these issues in the future.  
Neither software algorithms nor single criterion solutions address the 
full range of possibilities and so they cannot possibly provide true 
optimization.  The short-lived gains they do achieve will, most likely, be 
reversed when the focus is taken off the immediate project and the 
operational processes and behaviors once again influence the inventory 
levels.  
Achieving true inventory optimization requires a new, innovative 
approach that combines knowledge of parts usage, procurement, and supply 
chain issues with a review of behaviors and the management processes that 
drive them.  This approach is known as the Inventory Process 
Optimization™ Method.  
This second edition of Smart Inventory Solutions expands on the key 
material of the first edition to encompass and explain the Inventory Process 
Optimization™ Method.  In doing so it also explores the supply chain, policy, 
process, people, and behavior issues that must be addressed for the 
achievement of true inventory optimization. 
 
 
 
Inventory:  The Forgotten Investment 
 
 
aterials and inventory management is one of the most important 
disciplines in almost every company.  Inventory can provide the 
capability to fulfill a customer need, repair a broken machine, assemble 
products for sale, or just keep production going.  Yet, inventory management 
is widely perceived to be one of the most boring management topics there is.  
Mention inventory management to most people and almost immediately their 
eyes begin to glaze over.  In fact, someone once suggested to me that the title 
of this book should be:  Inventory:  More Exciting Than It Sounds! 
However, consider this:  for manufacturing organizations, inventory 
can account for up to 50% (or more) of the current assets of the business (see 
M

Introduction to Smart Inventory Solutions 
3 
Appendix A for a glossary of terms used in this book).  This means that for 
most manufacturers, up to 50% of their assets that could convert to cash in 
the next 12 months are tied up in inventory.  For retail and wholesale 
businesses, the figure is even higher.  While materials and spares holdings 
typically do not reach these values in terms of percentage of assets, a large 
number of organizations have millions and even tens of millions of dollars 
tied up in this type of inventory.  Some larger organizations with which I 
have worked even have hundreds of millions of dollars tied up in spares.  
The problem is that, unlike cash, the money tied up in this type of 
inventory is not available for any other use.  It cannot be used to fund the 
business or for further investment in other productive assets.  With 
engineering spares, this problem is even more exaggerated as the inventory is 
not purchased with resale in mind.  The funds spent on this type of inventory 
are essentially gone; there is little probability of a genuine return on 
investment. Unlike receivables, this inventory does not represent a defined 
future stream of income.  (The exception to this issue of resale revenue is the 
combination of wholesalers and final suppliers of parts who do sell their 
inventory.  However, the ideas and processes in this book do apply equally to 
them.) 
Despite these obvious financial issues, and the quantum of funds that 
are invested in this inventory, engineering materials and spares inventory 
management isn’t a serious business topic for many people.  This inventory 
is something that trades people and engineers stress over, accountants count, 
or stores people store.  Many people in business concern themselves only 
with strategy or sales or process management or IT solutions because these 
are seen as high profile and ‘sexy.’  At the other extreme, some people 
consider inventory only as a means to an end.  The attitude is to stock more 
‘just in case’ but the cash impact of this is not always fully appreciated.  
Inventory management, it seems, is considered by many to be an activity at 
too low a level to create genuine financial advantage because changes in this 
area don’t directly affect operating budgets or profit.  By definition, the 
working capital tied up in this inventory is a cash expense that does not 
appear on the ‘Profit and Loss’ statement.  Therefore, it gets little attention.  
 
This is why engineering materials and spare parts really are the forgotten 
investment. 
 
 
 

Chapter 1 
4 
Inventory Process Optimization™ 
 
 
he Inventory Process Optimization™ Method aims to cast 
inventory in a different light.  Taking a proactive approach to 
optimizing processes can provide significant financial advantage and enable 
companies to free up millions of dollars in cash.  This is money that has been 
invested in inventory, but which either wasn’t needed in the first place or is 
no longer needed due to a change in the market or operating environment.  
These changes could include a change in the level of demand, a change in the 
ability to supply, or both.  In either case, there is an opportunity to free up 
cash and make alternative investments. 
This book addresses the range of issues faced when managing 
inventory and details an approach to inventory review and reduction that has 
been proven to work and deliver results.  Using the processes presented in 
this book, one company recently achieved an $18M inventory reduction in a 
little over 14 months.  This represented a 36% reduction in the total value of 
their inventory.  Importantly, they generated a $24M improvement in cash 
flow which they then invested in business improvements projects.  These 
benefits were achieved with no loss in operational integrity, no capital 
investment, and no significant use of external resources.  There are few 
investments of time or money that can match that kind of return!  
By following the process and actions set out in this book, you too can 
implement some smart inventory solutions and achieve true inventory 
optimization. 
 
 
 
Management, Reduction, or Optimization? 
 
 
n all fields of management, the language and terms that are used 
evolve and change over time.  Sometimes these changes reflect a 
broadening in expectations, such as the evolution of ‘maintenance’ into 
‘asset management.’  Sometimes it is an innocent confusion that results from 
widespread use.  And sometimes, it is a deliberate obfuscation by people in 
order to gain advantage by making the simple look complex or vice versa.  
In my experience the terms inventory management, inventory 
reduction, and inventory optimization are frequently interchanged and 
T
I

Introduction to Smart Inventory Solutions 
5 
misrepresented.  For the sake of clarity, the following are the ways in which 
these terms are used in this book.  Understanding these terms in context will 
help take us on the first step towards understanding why process 
optimization is the real issue in improving inventory outcomes. 
 
Materials Management 
Think of Materials Management as the top level process for control of 
all materials.  This includes the recognition of need, estimating 
requirements, purchasing, and logistics of supply.  Some materials 
may be purchased for immediate use and so will not end up as 
inventory 
 
Inventory 
Inventory can be defined as:  All materials and spare parts that are 
held for future use without knowing exactly where and/or when the 
item will be used.  This definition is discussed further in Chapter 2. 
 
Inventory Management 
Inventory Management is the activity that ensures the availability of 
inventory items in order to be able to service internal and/or external 
customers.  In an operational environment, the customer will be the 
maintenance and production departments; in a finished goods 
environment, the customer is the external customer.  Inventory 
management involves the coordination of purchasing, manufacturing, 
and demand to ensure the required availability. 
 
As inventory management aims to ensure availability, the focus, 
almost invariably, is on the minimization (or even elimination) of 
stockouts.  That is, minimizing any occurrence where there is not 
sufficient stock to meet demand.  The logic that drives this behavior is 
as follows:  Running out of inventory has consequences and there 
always seems to be a need for blame.  Being blamed for something is 
an unpleasant experience for most people and in extreme cases can be 
seen as ‘career limiting.’  Therefore, any stockout triggers an action, 
not only to restock but also typically to overstock, in order to avoid the 
negative consequences of the stockout.  If the inventory is already 
overstocked, for whatever reason, there may not be a stockout to 
trigger a need to take action.  Therefore, there is no signal that a 
problem exists.  A company may be overstocked and never perceive 
that it has a problem.  Hence, a specific program of activity is required 

Chapter 1 
6 
to identify these items so that their stocking can be adjusted to more 
appropriate levels.  The result of this approach is overstocked 
inventory.   
 
From this description we can already see that the traditional approach 
to inventory management involves processes that drive behaviors that 
systematically overstock inventory.  This is why so many companies 
are overstocked. 
 
Right now, I know that the purists will be saying, ‘Wait a minute, we 
can put in signals to indicate overstocking such slow-moving stock 
indicators.’  However, the practical reality is that these flags are rarely 
acted upon until the overall value becomes too large to ignore! 
 
Inventory Optimization 
Inventory optimization is an analytical technique that uses historical 
data and theoretical formulae to calculate the required level of 
inventory for a desired level of availability.  Inventory Optimization 
can be a very attractive approach because it is ‘fact based.’  However, 
this strength is also its weakness because quality data is so hard to 
achieve (more on this in Chapter 9).   
 
Also, by its very definition, this approach must assume that all of your 
existing conditions and processes are fixed; otherwise, the calculations 
cannot be completed.  This means that Inventory Optimization does 
not and, in fact, cannot address the process and behavior issues that 
actually drive your inventory outcomes.  For these reasons, Inventory 
Optimization can never be a solution to your inventory problems.  It 
can only ever be a tool that is used as part of a wider program of 
review and then it must be used with caution.   
 
Inventory Reduction 
Inventory reduction really is just a goal.  It is not a technique or a 
process.  For example, retailers many have an ‘Inventory Reduction 
Sale’ where they sell unwanted stock at low prices.  With engineering 
materials and spares inventory, the goal might be to reduce the level of 
investment in inventory (that is, the working capital or cash that is tied 
up) without negatively impacting the operational results. 
 
 

Introduction to Smart Inventory Solutions 
7 
Inventory Process Optimization™ 
Inventory Process Optimization™ addresses all of the shortcomings 
from the above.  By combining inventory management fundamentals 
with optimization techniques, and utilizing systems thinking (Chapter 
4), double loop learning (Chapter 8), and hypothesis driven analysis 
(Chapter 8), this approach systematically addresses process and 
behavior issues while identifying the specific inventory items to work 
on to achieve the goals of inventory reduction. 
 
Inventory Process Optimization™ challenges the constraints to 
improvements in inventory to ensure that the result is an improvement 
to ‘what could be,’ not just a recalculation of ‘what is.’  So, while, 
Inventory Management must eventually lead to an over-investment of 
cash in inventory as people seek to eliminate stockouts, Inventory 
Process Optimization™ results in a sustainable and lasting 
minimization of the investment of cash while maintaining the 
availability promise.  Although this difference may seem subtle, the 
impact is significant.  Chapter 9 of this book takes you, in detail, 
through the Inventory Process Optimization™ Method. 
 
 
 
Generating Lasting Results 
 
 
odifying your systems to improve your materials and spares 
inventory management performance is of little value if the 
results don’t last.  In fact, the use of resources in a program that doesn’t 
deliver lasting results could be viewed as a waste of company resources.  
Similarly, an inventory reduction in one year is of only minor value if the 
cash is then put back into inventory in the next year — this is sometimes 
referred to as a ‘yo-yo’ effect.  That is, great initial results and then, without 
other changes in the management of inventory, the initial results are reversed 
as the inventory is restocked.  The yo-yo effect is typically the outcome of 
attempts at inventory reduction that don’t focus on achieving lasting results 
through identifying and changing the real drivers of high inventory levels. 
Ensuring that the gains achieved are lasting and sustainable requires 
the training of your team, consistent application of the process, a review of 
policies, procedures, metrics and measures, and changes in the reporting used 
M

Chapter 1 
8 
for inventory management.  It is only by following this path that a company-
wide, lasting result can be achieved. 
To assist you in achieving lasting results, Chapter 10 works through 
the execution of a program of inventory review and Chapter 11 works 
through some case studies showing short- and long-term results as well as 
some of the hurdles to implementation.  Achieving lasting results requires 
more than just an understanding of Inventory Process Optimization™ 
techniques and processes.  It also requires an understanding of the 
management systems that drive your inventory outcome and the 
implementation and tracking of the actions that you will develop from 
reading this book. 
Henry Ford once said, ‘If you think you can do something and if you 
think you can’t, in either case you are probably right.’  If you genuinely 
believe that no change is possible, then you are unlikely to drive a successful 
result.  Remember, though, that to believe that no change is possible is to 
believe that your system is perfect and unchangeable.  How likely is it that 
this is true? 
If you recognize that past assumptions may no longer be valid, that the 
world changes, and that your own efforts in supply chain or operational 
improvement have changed the dynamics of supply and demand, then the 
Inventory Process Optimization™ Method is for you. 
This book has been designed and written to provide you with the 
insight, understanding, process, and tools to improve your materials and 
spares inventory management performance, free up significant cash, and 
achieve lasting results.  

 
9 
Chapter 2 
 
 
The Mechanics of Inventory 
Management 
 
Simple not Simplistic 
 
 
he purpose of this section is not to provide an in-depth 
understanding of all the mechanics of materials and inventory 
management (there are hundreds of other books that can do that) but rather to 
revisit or recap the mechanics in a way that puts the rest of this book in 
context. 
Certainly this section addresses some basic elements of materials and 
inventory management but, as in many situations, the real value comes from 
looking beyond the basic element and understanding the implications of that 
formula or process that the element represents.  Anyone can look up a 
formula on the Internet; however, it is an understanding of the nuances that 
provides value.  For example, one of the major reasons that organizations 
have so much difficulty with materials and inventory management is that 
they confuse simplistic with simple.  Although the concepts and formula are 
simple — in that they are readily understood — they should not be thought 
of or applied in a manner that is simplistic, that is, free of any complicating 
factors. 
Too often people take the basic concepts and formula and do not think 
through the complicating factors when implementing the concept or formula.  
This does not mean that we need to make things overly complex; it just 
means that we need to understand the implications of our choices.  This 
section aims to provide some insight to assist in that understanding. 
 
T

Chapter 2 
10 
Materials or Inventory? 
 
 
ne of the most common confusions of terms is that between 
materials and inventory.  Many engineers, in particular, concern 
themselves with materials management but show little interest, and 
sometimes don’t want to be involved in, inventory management.  However, 
when subject to some scrutiny this does not make any sense. 
Materials are the physical parts and components and materials 
management is concerned with the logistics associated with the procurement 
and supply of those materials in a timely manner.  Inventory is the gathering 
of those materials in order to provide a ready supply when they are needed.  
Inventory can also be defined as those parts purchased for future use without 
knowing exactly where and/or when the part may be used.  
Inventory management, therefore, is a subset of materials management 
as it is primarily concerned with managing the procurement and supply of 
those materials held as inventory.  Anyone who is involved in materials 
management must therefore have an interest in inventory management if 
their materials are being held for future use.  Inventory management is much 
more than just managing the storeroom. 
 
 
 
Relevant Terms and Expressions 
 
 
efore working through the rest of this book and to ensure a 
common understanding of some relevant terms and expressions, 
review Table 2-1, which shows the most immediately relevant terms and 
expressions, and Appendix A, which contains a comprehensive glossary of 
materials and inventory management terms and expressions. 
 
 
 
 
O
B

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
11 
Term 
Definition 
Cash flow  
The net gain or loss of cash in a business through its 
business cycle. 
Inventory 
Materials and spare parts that are held for future use 
without knowing exactly where and/or when the item 
will be used.   
Lead Time  
Measured from when the ROP is reached to the 
actual physical restock. 
Materials 
All items that are purchased for use in, or for 
supporting, manufacturing and engineering activities.  
 
Max  
In some systems, this is used to determine the reorder 
quantity when the minimum is reached.  
Min  
In some systems, this is both the safety stock level 
and the reorder point.  
Reorder Point  
The trigger point for reordering stock (ROP).  
Reorder Quantity  
The quantity to be reordered when the ROP is 
reached (ROQ).  
Safety Stock  
An allowance for both demand and supply variations 
during the lead time to restock.  
Stock Keeping Unit 
Refers to any individual inventory item; also known 
as an SKU. 
Stock turn  
The number of times in a year that, in theory, the 
inventory is completely repurchased.  Higher is 
better. 
Storeroom 
The area for storing the inventory; sometimes 
referred to as the warehouse or the store. 
Stores  
Sometimes used as a synonym for inventory. 
Working Capital  
The cash invested in inventory. 
 
Table 2-1: Relevant Terms and Expressions 

Chapter 2 
12 
What is the Purpose of Having Inventory? 
 
 
efore moving on to develop an understanding of how to manage 
and optimize inventory, it must first be recognized that inventory 
exists for a purpose.  In fact there are three main reasons that companies 
invest in inventory: 
 
1. To enable supply in a timely manner.   
Companies invest in inventory to ensure that the item is available when 
needed.  The investment is based on an assessment that without the 
inventory there will be a loss of profit due to missed sales.  This is true 
even for spare parts where equipment downtime may ultimately result 
in a lost product sale — obviously not all customers are willing to wait 
for delivery. 
 
2. To provide purchasing/manufacturing efficiencies. 
Order quantities and batch sizes sometimes force companies to buy 
more than they need or want in the short term.  In this case, they invest 
in the inventory in order to avoid the extra cost associated with small 
quantities or batches.  (See also Chapter 6:  Issues, Myths, and a Few 
Home Truths.) 
 
3. As a temporary measure to accumulate stock prior to major 
events/projects. 
The major event or project could be a marketing program or an 
engineering upgrade.  In either case, an investment is made in 
inventory because there is only a small window of opportunity in 
which to use/move the parts and it is considered that the supply chain 
cannot provide the quantity of parts required in that window of 
opportunity. 
 
In all three cases, the real driver for investing in inventory is to 
minimize the risk of other potential costs or losses.  Therefore, it is essential 
to continue to think of inventory as an investment made with the purpose of 
minimizing risk. 
 
 
 
 
B

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
13 
Why Spares and Indirect Inventory Are Different 
 
 
hile the process and actions discussed in this book can be 
widely applied to many types of inventory, they are particularly 
effective on spare parts and indirect inventory.  Indirect inventory can be 
defined as the stock of all the “bought in” materials that companies might 
use.  This includes parts and components (in assembly operations), finished 
goods (for wholesalers), service parts, OEM spares, operating supplies, 
engineering spares, industrial supplies, and MRO (maintenance, repairs, and 
operations) parts.  Conversely, ‘direct inventory’ is those materials that a 
company controls and manages along its own supply chain.  This includes 
work in progress (WIP) and finished goods that are created by the 
manufacturer. 
When most companies (or consultants!) work on improving the 
management of spares and indirect inventory, they typically fall back on the 
solutions that are applicable to direct inventory.  These solutions are well 
known and proven for direct inventory.  However, when it comes to indirect 
inventory they do have one fatal flaw — they are applied in a ‘one size fits 
all’ approach.  This works perfectly well with direct inventory because large 
quantities follow the same supply path and have reasonably predictable 
usage, but this is not the case with spares and indirect inventory. 
There are in fact six reasons why spares and indirect inventory are 
different and why the ‘one size fits all’ approach does not work. 
 
1. The demand is less predictable. 
With most types of inventory, demand forecasting receives a huge 
amount of attention.  With stable and predictable supply chains, an 
accurate forecast is seen as being the best way to manage inventory.  
In these cases a forecast that is wrong by 10–20% can cause 
significant problems.  However, with some spares and indirect 
inventory, the demand could vary by 100% and this would still be 
acceptable.  Consider an engineering spare where the usage is twice 
what was expected or where there has been no demand, yet the item is 
kept in stock.  Managing this order of magnitude difference in 
predictability requires a different approach to spares and indirect 
inventory management. 
 
 
 
W

Chapter 2 
14 
2. There is usually a large number of Stock Keeping Units (SKUs). 
It is common for organizations that are managing spares and indirect 
inventory to have thousands or tens of thousands of SKUs.  There are 
few manufacturing organizations that can claim to have that number of 
SKUs in their direct inventory. 
 
3. The supply characteristics may be different for each and every SKU. 
In addition to the large number of SKUs, another attribute of spares 
and indirect inventory is that the supply characteristics of each and 
every SKU may be different.  The items will, almost certainly, come 
from a wide range of individual suppliers and rarely does an 
organization purchase sufficient quantities of a single item to be able 
to dictate the logistics of supply. 
 
4. The value and volume of SKUs varies greatly. 
Not only is there a large number of SKUs with different supply 
characteristics but also the value of individual items and the volume of 
individual items will vary significantly.  With spares and indirect 
inventory, management must be able to economically order, receive, 
handle, and store components that cost a few dollars and components 
that cost thousands of dollars — all with the same system and 
approach.  Some of those components will be supplied in ones or twos 
and some in the hundreds.  Again there is significantly greater 
variation than with direct inventory. 
 
5. Stockout costs can be disproportionately high. 
When a company runs out of direct inventory, the cost of that stockout 
is generally limited to the profit margin from the sale that is lost.  With 
spares and indirect inventory, stocking out of a two dollar component 
may result in thousands of dollars in lost production.  This potential 
for significantly disproportionate costs for a stockout drives many 
companies to overstock spares and indirect inventory ‘just in case.’  
 
6. In some circumstances a low stock turn may be acceptable. 
A high stock turn rate is a goal for most inventory management.  This 
figure can be used as an indicator of the efficiency of inventory 
management.  However, with spares and indirect inventory, it is 
sometimes acceptable to have very low stock turn rates.  In those 
cases, the low stock turn rate is usually a function of the unpredictable 
demand, the high stockout costs, and long lead times for supply.  

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
15 
Companies should always seek to maximize their stock turns.  But 
they also need to recognize that an acceptable stock turn for one type 
of inventory may not be acceptable for another.  
 
 
The degree to which any one of these issues impacts an organization 
depends upon the organization’s individual circumstance.  However, one 
thing is certain.  With this number of issues to differentiate spares and 
indirect inventory from direct inventory, the solutions used for direct 
inventory management cannot be applied in a ‘one size fits all’ fashion to 
these types of materials. 
 
 
 
An Introduction to the Materials and Inventory 
Management Cycle 
 
 
aterials and inventory management involves much more than 
just reviewing the maximum holding level and checking items 
into and out of a storeroom.  Materials and inventory management involves a 
cycle of activity that starts when the initial need for an item is recognized 
and then works through setting parameters, procurement/ordering, delivery, 
storing, issuing, and reordering.  This Materials and Inventory Management 
(MIM) cycle is shown schematically in Figure 2-1. 
 
Notice that each of the steps in Figure 2-1 has an arrow that feeds back 
into the step in which it originates.  This arrow indicates that an internal 
process exists for that step; it is shown to indicate that at each of these steps 
the decision making is not a simple one dimensional activity.  At each of 
these steps there are a number of internal processes and even individual 
behaviors and biases that can and will affect the outcome of that step.  In 
addition there is the internal activity of Return to Store (RTS) that can short 
circuit the rest of the use–reorder–restock cycle.  Although this figure is a 
simplified representation of the materials and inventory management cycle, it 
demonstrates that inventory management is anything but simplistic.  This 
point is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4: People and Processes. 
 
M

Chapter 2 
16 
 
Figure 2-1: The Materials and Inventory Management (MIM) Cycle 
 
 
 
Comparison of Theoretical and Actual Inventory 
Management and Control 
 
 
nventory management and control refers to the actions associated 
with keeping the stock level of a particular SKU within predefined 
parameters.  Figure 2-2 shows a classic ‘saw tooth’ diagram representing the 
theoretical movements of an SKU as it is used and reordered.  In this 
diagram, the x-axis represents elapsed time and the y-axis represents the 
quantity on hand.  This figure also shows how some of the definitions 
mentioned previously relate to the classic saw tooth representation. 
 
The key simplifying attributes of the theoretical model are linear 
demand (that is, constant and equal demand over time) and instant and 
complete replenishment.  In theory, when demand hits the reorder point 
(ROP), an order is placed for a predetermined quantity without need for 
further reference to the users of the item.  There is then constant 
consumption over the lead time while the items are delivered.  All items are 
delivered in one delivery so the item is completely restocked.  The 
theoretical maximum is the Safety Stock level plus the ROQ.  In the event 
I

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
17 
that delivery takes longer than expected or there is greater demand than 
expected during the lead time period, then the quantity on hand dips into the 
safety stock (which is OK) and the item is completely restocked during 
subsequent cycles. 
 
 
 
Figure 2-2:  The Classic Theoretical Saw Tooth Diagram 
 
 
 
The problem is, of course, that reality almost never looks like 
this.  For engineering and spare parts, the chart in Figure 2-3 is far 
more representative.  This graph has four characteristics that separate 
it from the theoretical profile.  These are noted as A, B, C, and D on 
the chart and explained subsequently. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 
18 
 
 
Figure 2-3:  Actual Component Demand/Supply Chart 
 
 
Point A:  For this particular component the decision was made to set the 
initial parameters with an ROP of zero.  That is, there is no safety stock.  
This level is more common for engineering materials and spare parts than 
many people realize and is not presented here to suggest that this ROP is 
either right or wrong.  It is mentioned because this does not fit the common 
simplistic theoretical model that insists upon safety stock. 
In this specific case, the ROQ was set to 10; hence, the theoretical 
maximum is 10 (ROQ + Safety Stock).  Notice, however, that for the 
majority of the elapsed time in the chart the actual holdings are much higher 
than 10.  Also, as the holdings rarely reach zero, there is nothing to suggest 
that setting the ROP at zero is inappropriate.  Curiously, there are two 
instances where the holding increases without having reached zero — this is 
a clue to what is really going on, which will be discussed shortly.  Thus, a 
traditional review of the ROP and ROQ would provide no improved 
understanding of how to manage this inventory item because the other 
elements of the MIM Cycle have far greater impact on the result than just the 
basic ROP and ROQ settings. 
 
Points B and C:  Notice that for this item there are long periods of no 
movement followed by short periods of multiple movements.  Compare this 
to the theoretical model that assumes a constant and linear usage of items.  
The difference with the actual profile tells us that the average demand value 
that is so often used would vary enormously depending upon the point in the 
timeline at which the snapshot is taken; it is not constant or linear. 

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
19 
It is also interesting to note that the item is expected to be used in sets 
of 10 (hence the 10–0 setting).  Yet of the nine issues of stock within the 
time line, only three are for the full set of 10.  Clearly the management of 
this item requires insight beyond the obvious idea of setting a simplistic 
maximum and minimum. 
 
Point D:  Now notice the large spike in holdings on the right hand side (at 
the end of the timeline).  This is the real issue with this particular component 
that was alluded to previously.  This spike did not result from additional 
purchasing, but from a massive and sudden return to store (RTS) of items 
previously removed.  Thus the apparent cycle of usage at point C was not 
usage at all (although the items were definitely removed from the 
storeroom).  The purchases that were made to replace these items that were 
not actually necessary.  (However, this was not known by those doing the 
purchasing; they were following their process.)  The problem was that the 
maintenance people who removed the items did not advise anyone that they 
were not used (or that they may not be used).  So, when they eventually had 
a cleanup and returned the items to the store they were now overstocked, 
compared to the theoretical maximum, by 21 items or 210%! 
 
 
This example shows that the theoretical model and the actual situation can be 
sufficiently different so as to make the application of simplistic solutions not 
only pointless, but also even dangerous to company finances.  A smart 
inventory solution is to ensure that the influence and complicating factors of 
all the elements of the MIM Cycle are considered for their impact. 
 
 
 
Determining the Re-Order Point (ROP) 
 
 
ow that some limitations of materials and spares inventory 
management theory are recognized, we must also acknowledge 
that someone must at some time determine when to order more stock. 
Deciding when to reorder requires calculation of the Reorder Point or ROP. 
A number of different approaches are used to calculate the ROP, but 
once again a simplistic approach will not provide the best result.  Calculation 
of the ROP requires consideration of a number of characteristics which help 
determine the approach that is best for that specific inventory item.  
N

Chapter 2 
20 
Considering these characteristics is a reality that is missed by many software 
solutions that use just one approach.  (Recall the previous discussion that the 
word inventory is used a collective noun to describe all the items held, 
although an inventory is actually made of many separate items that each have 
their own distinct characteristics).  
In determining the ROP, the three main characteristics to consider are 
the level of demand, frequency of demand, and the probability and impact of 
a stockout. 
 
 
Level of Demand 
 
As we saw in the example above, demand is often represented as a 
perfectly linear equation.  However, a linear outcome is more usually not the 
case.  It is the variability in the level of demand that adds complexity to the 
calculation.  This is why forecasting of many inventory types is such a 
widely-studied discipline.  In order to calculate the ROP, you must 
understand the variability in the demand, not just know the average demand.  
Here’s why. 
If the demand for an item is always for the same quantity on each 
demand event — for example, one electric motor or a set of four spark plugs 
— then a Poisson distribution is the most appropriate statistical model.  (See 
Figures 2-4 and 2-6 for a summary of different statistical models).  Note that 
at this stage we are considering the quantity, not the frequency, of demand. 
If, for any demand event, a variable number of items may be required 
(for example 3 one time, 2 the next time, 5 the next time), then a Gaussian 
(or normal) model would be more appropriate.  Without understanding both 
the level and variability in demand, you cannot select the most appropriate 
method of review. 
 
 
Frequency of Demand 
 
If the item in question has infrequent demand (sometimes referred to 
as slow moving), then there will most likely be insufficient data to use a 
Gaussian model.  Again, a Poisson model will be most appropriate.  
Conversely, high levels of demand will lend themselves to a Gaussian model. 
A word of warning:  be sure to understand the demand pattern over as 
long a period as possible.  As we saw previously, demand data in a short time 
frame can be misleading. 
 

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
21 
Probability and Impact of a Stockout 
 
Strictly speaking the probability and impact of a stockout are two 
characteristics, but here they are treated as one decision variable because 
they actually give each other context and are often misused. 
 
The probability/impact decision is often used by practitioners as a 
reason (or excuse) for overstocking their inventory.  The argument that is 
most often used is that the impact of a stockout is so costly that it overrides 
any consideration of the cost of the items stocked.  This is especially so in 
industries where the cost of operational downtime is high.  However, 
stocking more than might be needed based on physical limits or probability 
is pointless and a waste of money.  (See also the section in Chapter 5:  When 
is Critical Really Critical?)  In terms of calculating the ROP, the 
probability/impact decision affects the service factor component of the 
calculation.  It is, in effect, a risk decision. 
Using a Gaussian model, the service factor is a part of the safety stock 
calculation (see Figure 2-4) and the values can readily be looked up in 
widely published tables. Figure 2-5 shows a sample calculation of the ROP 
using a Gaussian model. 
Using a Poisson model (Figure 2-6), there is no explicit service factor 
and the risk element is accounted for in the probability part of the model.  
Here’s how that works.  The Poisson function calculates the probability of a 
certain level of demand over a period of time.  If you set that quantity as your 
ROP, then the probability can be treated as your service factor.  Your risk of 
a stockout is 100 minus the probability of that level of demand.   
So, if you look at Figure 2-6, the probability of 7 or fewer demands is 
96.4%.  Therefore, the risk of a stockout, if you have a reorder point of 7, 
that is — the risk that there will be more than 7 demands during the lead time 
for restocking — is: 
 
100 – 94.9 = 5.1%. 
 
The major issue though with the probability/impact decision is the 
Service Factor Trap.  The service factor is the percent of time that the 
storeroom can supply the required item when it is needed.  So a theoretical 
service factor of, say, 97% sounds high, but in reality for engineering 
materials and spares, this may not be acceptable. 

Chapter 2 
22 
First, if measured across the entire inventory, no one will care about 
the 97% figure if the 3% includes critical parts and your plant is shut for a 
week while they get air-freighted in! 
Second, you can have a high overall service level and still be 
significantly overstocked in individual items, meaning that you have still 
spent money on items that are not needed. 
This is the Service Factor Trap.  It can be misleading in terms of the 
inventory being able to fulfill its actual requirements and in terms of how 
efficiently money has been invested in inventory.  Sweeping statements 
relating to service factors are convenient and reassuring, but add no real 
value to the practice of materials and inventory management. 
The impact characteristic also depends upon where are you located.  
Consider a situation where a machine will not run without a specific part.  
Without doubt, this part would be considered critical and the impact of a 
stockout significant.  However, if you are in an urban center with lots of 
suppliers close by you, may be able to convince one to hold the part for you 
and then get the required part delivered within an acceptable time frame – for 
instance while you remove the failed part.  However, if you are located in a 
remote area where delivery takes days, then the stockout has more significant 
implications.  Both situations have the same probability of failure and at one 
level the same impact — that level is the plant stops.  However, the real 
impact is different if the full materials management cycle is taken into 
account.  The one size fits all solutions that get rolled out to every situation 
do not bring the required results. 
Location, culture, operating mode, financial status, reliability, and risk 
tolerance are all things that need to be taken into consideration when 
determining the ROP.  
 
 
 
 

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
23 
 
 
Figure 2-4: The Normal or Gaussian Distribution 
 
 

Chapter 2 
24 
 
 
Notes:  
1. This calculation uses a Mean Average Deviation (MAD) 
rather than a Standard Deviation.  MAD is a simplified 
way of determining the deviation and is calculated by 
determining the average value by which demand 
deviates from the mean, in absolute terms. 
 
2. The Customer Service Factor is based on a MAD scale, 
not the Standard Deviation of a Normal curve. 
 
Figure 2-5: Example ROP Calculation 
 
 

 
Figure 22-6: The Poisson Distrib
The Mec
25 
 
bution 
chanics of Inventory Management 
 
 

Chapter 2
Deter
 
 
ROQ is 
more, im
point at 
up work
calculati
 
 
W
O
D
Ite
H
 
 
Althoug
 
1. Th
O
de
di
ef
so
us
a 
sto
th
yo
T
2 
rmining th
he other 
manageme
usually not so
mpact on the 
which a com
king capital is
ing the ‘econo
Where: 
rder Cost      
emand Rate  
em Cost        
olding Cost  =
h simple in co
he order cost 
f the four va
etermine beca
ifferent for ev
fficiency, loc
ome compani
se an estimate
simplistic ca
ores departm
his assumes 1
ou choose, th
T
he Re-Ord
key decisio
ent is to calc
o highly discu
quantity of i
mpany actuall
s when the it
omic’ ROQ is
= the compan
issuing pu
= the expecte
= the purchas
costs. 
= the financia
Chapter 3
oncept, there 
is crucial to t
ariables in th
ause there is 
very company
al pay rates,
ies use an Ac
e such as $10
alculation suc
ments divided 
100% capacit
he key is to 
26 
der Quant
on for mate
culate the Re
ussed as the R
inventory that
ly commits to
tems are orde
s as follows:
ny internal co
urchase order
ed demand ov
se cost of the 
al charge for h
3: The Financ
are some com
the calculatio
he calculation
no set rate.  
y and is depe
and so on. 
ctivity Based 
0 per order.  N
ch as the tota
by the num
ty utilization.
understand th
tity (ROQ
erials and s
eorder Quant
ROP but it ha
t is held.  Th
o holding inv
ered.  The cla
ost for process
rs and receivi
ver a year. 
item, includin
holding inven
cial Impact of
mplications in
n. 
n, this is the
The actual o
endent upon i
 To calculat
Costing app
Note that it is
al cost of the
mber of orders
.  No matter 
he impact of
Q) 
spares inven
ity (ROQ).  
as as much, if
his is because
ventory and ty
assic formula
sing requisitio
ng deliveries
ng delivery 
ntory (see 
f Inventory). 
n practice. 
e least simpl
order cost wil
internal comp
te the order c
proach; some 
s a mistake to
e purchasing 
s placed bec
which appro
f an error in 
ntory 
The 
f not 
e the 
ying 
a for 
 
ons, 
. 
le to 
ll be 
pany 
cost, 
just 
o use 
and 
ause 
oach 
this 

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
27 
value.  From the formula you can see that the ROQ varies directly with 
the square root of the order cost.  So, if your estimate of order cost is 
two times the actual order cost, you will be ordering 41% too much 
stock and that could be a lot of money.  (Recall that the square root of 
2 is 1.41.)  This estimation error is simple to make.  Let’s say the real 
order cost is $50 per order, but you decide to use $100, just to be sure 
that everything is covered.  This doesn’t seem like much, but will add 
41% to the quantity of inventory purchased. 
 
2. The formula assumes that the order cost is fixed. 
Your actual order cost may vary due to efficiencies related to the 
supplier.  This could include extra costs at your end due to the supplier 
being inefficient, losing paperwork, hard to contact, requiring follow 
up, and order expediting.  Or the costs could be less due to acceptance 
of blanket orders, use of electronic methods, and so on.  A blanket 
approach could result in significant overstocking and the calculated 
ROQ should be reviewed for any orders of a significant value. 
 
3. The formula assumes that the demand is constant. 
We have already seen an example where the demand varies 
significantly over time.  If the calculation is performed when the 
demand is high, the calculated ROQ value will be high and you will be 
overstocked. 
 
4. The formula assumes one delivery per order, no allowance for 
scheduling or batching.  
Not all orders are delivered in one delivery and each delivery costs 
you money in terms of workload.   
 
 
When faced with determining the factors used to calculate the ROQ, it 
is suggested that values are used that minimize the order quantity rather than 
maximize the order quantity as this is the lesser of two evils. 
If you overestimate, you will spend too much on stock and 
unnecessarily tie up money or, worse, spend money on items that might 
never be used.  This type of error is rarely addressed because it does not 
automatically trigger any action.  However, if you underestimate your ROQ 
— and assuming that your ROP is appropriately set — then you will only 
end up ordering more frequently and this can trigger the need for a review.  

Chapter 2
You can
different
 
 
1.
 
 
 
2.
 
Th
ROQ is 
$100.  T
per year/
2 
n then set th
t order costs i
 Assume th
Order Co
Demand
Item Cos
Holding 
ROQ = 
 
 
 
= 
 
Therefor
This mea
times pe
 Let’s look 
Order Co
Demand
Item Cos
Holding 
ROQ = 
 
 
 
= 
 
herefore, if t
only 200 item
This means th
/ 200 per orde
he ROQ at a
is shown belo
at: 
ost = $100 
d = 1,000 per y
st = $10 
Cost = 25%
283 
re, the ‘econo
ans that this i
r year (1,000 
at the impact
ost = $50 
d = 1,000 per y
st = $10 
Cost = 25%
200 
the order cos
ms – approxi
hat this item 
er). 
2 x $100
$10 x
2 x $50 
$10 x
28 
a more appr
ow. 
year 
omic’ ROQ is
item will be o
per year/ 283
t of changing 
year 
st is really $
mately 30% 
will be order
0 x 1,000
x 0.25
x 1,000
x 0.25
opriate level
 283 items. 
ordered, on av
3 per order).
the Order Co
$50 per order
lower than if
red five times
.  The effec
verage, 3.5 
ost.  Assume t
r the ‘econom
f the order co
s per year (1
ct of 
that: 
mic’ 
ost is 
,000 

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
29 
A Word on Monte Carlo Simulation 
 
 
onte Carlo simulation is a complex analytical technique that 
uses random numbers as input variables and applies them to a 
known function (or formula).  It is reportedly named after the random inputs 
that occur in table games, such as roulette, at the casinos in Monte Carlo. 
With inventory analysis, it removes the constraint of having to make 
assumptions about the frequency or level of demand as these would be 
randomly generated values.  When used in a computerized simulation, the 
technique can run through a high number of cycles to demonstrate under 
which scenarios supply would not be available.  From this perspective, it 
appears to be an attractive option for inventory review and is widely used in 
the academic analysis of inventory management. 
The technique does, however, suffer from the same shortfall in 
practice that limits most analytical approaches — it does not easily enable 
consideration of the entire materials and spares inventory management 
process.  Instead, it focuses solely on the mathematical evaluation of the 
ROP and ROQ settings. 
 
 
 
Do You Hold Too Much Inventory?  
Check Your Stock Turn Ratio 
 
 
here are a number of measures that get used for tracking inventory 
performance. One of the most popular measures is stockouts.  A 
stockout occurs when there is demand for an inventory item but there is no 
stock. 
It is essential to measure the availability of stock.  After all, that is 
why the investment is made in the first place.  However, measuring stockouts 
can be a limiting way to measure inventory as it only measures one 
dimension of inventory, that is, availability.  This approach is limiting 
because one way to ensure a low number of stockouts is to overinvest in 
inventory so that stock is always available no matter what.  This is 
sometimes referred to as ‘just in case’ inventory. 
 
 
M
T

Chapter 2 
30 
What Is a ‘Stock Turn’? 
 
Because inventory requires a significant financial investment and that 
investment involves significant ongoing costs, it is also important to measure 
the financial performance.  Tracking the value of inventory is important for 
cash management purposes.  However, an additional financial measure that 
often gets overlooked is the stock turn ratio. 
The stock turn is calculated by dividing the annual usage of the 
inventory (in dollars) by the value of the inventory held (also in dollars).  
 
Stock Turn = 
Annual Usage 
  
 
 Value Held 
 
For example, if a company holds $5M worth of inventory and issues 
$2.5M worth of that inventory in a year, the stock turn ratio is 2.5/5.0 = 0.5.  
That is, the company turns over its inventory at the rate of one half per year.  
Obviously, the higher the stock turn ratio, the better. 
 
 
What Stock Turns Tell You 
 
Stock turns measures the efficiency of the inventory investment by 
telling you whether you have overinvested in inventory and whether you 
have the right mix of inventory.  (Note, however, that it won’t tell you about 
specific inventory items.)  For example, if the number of stockouts is low 
(which is good) and the stock turn ratio is also low (which is bad), you have 
an indicator that there may be an overinvestment in inventory.  If the number 
of stockouts is high (which is bad) and the stock turn ratio is low (which is 
also bad), then you may have invested in the wrong inventory.  That is, your 
money is tied up in stock that doesn’t turn over and you hold too little of the 
stock that is in demand. 
 
 
Stock Turn Targets 
 
An appropriate target for stock turns in your business will be 
influenced by a range of issues, some within your control and others outside 
of your control.  For example, if you have spares that are imported from 
somewhere far away or you are in a remote and isolated area, then you are 
likely to hold more safety stock and, therefore, have a lower stock turn.  

The Mechanics of Inventory Management 
31 
Conversely, if you are located in a densely-populated area surrounded by 
similar industry and many suppliers, you should be able to achieve a high 
stock turn.  But this isn’t the whole story because if your processes don’t 
adequately control decision making on materials and spares inventory 
stocking, you are also likely have a low stock turn. 
 
 
Using Stock Turns as a Key Measure 
 
The key thing to remember when using a stock turn ratio is that it must 
be applied across the entire inventory.  You cannot ‘cherry pick’ elements of 
inventory.  The reason for this is that some inventory items will naturally 
have a high turnover and some will be low.  The aim of the ratio is to 
measure the overall efficiency of the inventory investment.  
In one recent case, an inventory manager tried to justify the size of his 
inventory by pointing out that one section of inventory had a stock turn of 5 
(very good in his circumstance) and that another section had a stock turn of 
0.2 (very bad).  The justification was that insurance spares caused the low 
stock turn and, therefore, nothing further could be done.  This analysis, 
however, ignored a large component of inventory that could be managed 
down and it ignored the possibility of consignment stock for the fast movers. 
As mentioned above, stock turns is also a great measure to use when 
you have multiple sites or locations within the one company.  As an internal 
benchmark, stock turns readily shows which sites have better control over 
their inventory. 
Stock turns is an essential measure of inventory performance because 
it measures the inventory efficiency.  When used in conjunction with other 
measures such as stockouts, the overall performance of your inventory 
investment can be determined. 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
33 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
The Financial Impact of 
Inventory 
 
Don’t Overcompensate 
 
 
ow often have you heard someone say, ‘Without this inventory, 
production will stop’ or ‘We are merchandisers; we need our 
inventory or we won’t make sales.’  These statements represent the typical 
view of inventory—more is better!  It is true that without the right inventory 
some sales may be missed or a production line may stop.  Both are outcomes 
that may result in lost revenue.  It is also true that too much inventory costs a 
business even if it is the right type of inventory.  It costs money to buy 
inventory, it costs money to store inventory, and it costs money to finance 
inventory.  
Often people say that the real issue is one of balance—that is, 
balancing the cost of inventory investment with the potential gain (or loss) 
from not making the investment.  However, this view is overly simplistic.  It 
can be misleading if applied universally.  The goal should be to ensure that 
you don’t overcompensate for uncertainty by stocking materials that you just 
won’t need and to avoid overinvesting in the inventory that you do need. 
 
In many cases, the ongoing level of investment that companies make 
in their inventory just does not make sense.  These are the cases where stock 
minimums are never reached.  Perhaps months of supply are held when 
weeks (or days) will do.  Or the inventory is just not needed, but is not sold 
H

Chapter 3 
34 
off or otherwise removed from the system.  These are the cases where the 
ongoing cost of the inventory just cannot be justified.   
The Inventory Management Tension 
 
 
he conflicting needs of meeting demand expectations and 
minimizing the financial investment in inventory sets up a tension 
between Operations and Financial Management. This inventory tension is 
shown in Figure 3-1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3-1:  The Traditional Inventory Tension 
 
 
Financial managers such as Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) and 
accountants will typically seek to minimize the working capital that is tied up 
in a business.  Working capital includes inventory.  But if these managers 
take an approach that is based solely on the dollars invested, it is likely that 
the investment will end up being made in the wrong inventory.  Why?  
Because the aim is to reduce the dollars invested, not to meet demand 
expectations.  
 
The accountant’s approach will result in inventory being cut in any 
way possible to drive a working capital outcome.  This approach is most 
likely going to be the case if the performance of the financial manager is 
T

The Financial Impact of Inventory 
35 
measured solely by financial outcomes such as working capital, not 
operational or sales outcomes. 
Conversely, operations managers typically seek to maintain a high 
level of investment in inventory.  Their goal is to ensure that inventory will 
be available to meet demand.  As a result, there is likely to be an 
overinvestment in inventory; there may be high levels of obsolescence, and, 
in some cases, high product spoilage.  These outcomes occur because 
operations managers are typically measured by plant performance or Profit 
and Loss metrics (P&L — sometimes referred to as the Statement of 
Financial Performance) such as revenue, cost, and EBIT (Earnings Before 
Interest and Tax).  Inventory is a balance sheet item (see below) and does not 
impact the P&L. Therefore, minimizing inventory is typically of little 
concern to operations managers. 
Resolving this inventory tension requires an approach to materials and 
spares inventory management that strips away the excess and ensures that a 
company only stocks the right amount of the right inventory.  The first step 
to achieving this is to understand the financial aspects of materials and 
inventory management. 
 
 
 
Cash Is King 
 
 
here is an old saying in business that ‘Cash is King.’  What this 
means is that cash is the lifeblood of all business.  No cash, no 
business.  Spending money on materials that end up in inventory ties up cash 
and diverts it from other potentially revenue-generating or cost-saving uses.  
The aim, therefore, should be to minimize the inventory investment for a 
particular level of customer service.  The approach taken should ensure that 
the target level of service is met while also minimizing the cash investment.  
In turn, this approach will maximize the overall benefit for the company. 
 
 
 
A Simple Model of Business Economics 
 
 
nderstanding the importance of cash requires having a basic 
understanding of business economics.  To help explain this, turn 
T
u

Chapter 3 
36 
to Figure 3-2, which represents a simple cash flow cycle. 
 
(1) Starting at (1), the 12 o’clock position, this business has some ‘Cash 
on Hand’ with which to operate.  The cash might have come from 
investors or it might have been borrowed from the bank. 
 
(2) In either case, the investors or the bank will want a return for making 
the money available.  The return will be either interest for the bank 
or dividends for the investor.  In a real business, some of this cash 
would be used for investment in plant, equipment, and buildings.  
But for simplicity, in this example we will assume that that type of 
investment is complete and requires no further funding. 
 
(3) The business spends its cash on buying raw materials, spares, labor, 
and utilities so that it can make products. 
 
(4)  Typically the business will need to hold inventory of the raw 
materials and spares in order to be able to provide a buffer between 
supply of these materials and the demand from their production 
department.  The buffer is necessary because the rate of demand is 
usually greater than the ability to supply.  In order to accumulate 
inventory for this buffer, they need to buy more than they will 
actually need in the short term.  
 
(5) The raw materials are then used to make product.  After the product 
is made, it will be put into inventory, again to act as a buffer between 
supply and demand.  Again, to accumulate the inventory for the 
buffer, the business must make more than is needed in the short term. 
 
(6) When these products sell, the buyer pays the company; the payment 
provides an input, or receipt, of cash to enable the company to 
recommence the cycle. 
 
While the cash flow cycle continues, the company will need to spend 
cash on overheads, new investment, interest on money borrowed, repayment 
of money borrowed, and dividends to shareholders. 
A company’s cash flow is the difference between all the cash that goes 
out (buying raw materials, spares, utilities, labor, overheads, investment, 
dividends, interest, and loan payments) and the money that comes in 
(receipts from customers). 

 
 
Figure 3
 
 
If 
out’, the
buy sup
business
said to b
use to re
H
company
invested
improve
flow.  T
interest 
borrowin
manage 
M
all comp
cash and
-2:  The Cash
f the cash flow
e company w
pplies, labor, 
s.  If the ‘cash
be positive.  T
epay borrowin
ere is where 
y is able to re
d in the buffe
ement then re
The extra cash
bills or it c
ng more mon
its cash — fr
Minimizing the
panies as the
d an ongoing
h Flow Cycle
w is negative
will need to bo
utilities, etc
h in’ is greate
The business 
ngs. 
materials an
educe its level
rs between su
educes the ‘ca
h can then be
can be used
ney.  This is 
ree up the cash
e investment 
y improve ca
g reduction i
T
37 
, that is, the ‘
orrow more m
.  As mentio
er than the ‘c
will have ex
nd inventory 
l of inventory
uppliers, prod
ash out’ and 
e used to pay
d for further
the most eff
h that it has a
in inventory
ash flow.  It 
in costs.  Ta
The Financial Im
‘cash in’ is le
money or it w
oned previou
cash out’ then
cess cash it c
management
y, it can free u
duction, and 
helps provid
y back borrow
r capital inve
fective way f
already invest
y is good busi
produces bo
able 3-1 show
mpact of Inven
ess than the ‘
will be unabl
usly, no cash
n the cash flo
can then inve
t comes in:  
up the cash th
customers.  T
de a positive 
wings and red
estment, with
for a compan
ted in itself. 
iness practice
th an increas
ws how redu
ntory 
 
cash 
le to 
h, no 
ow is 
st or 
if a 
hat is 
This 
cash 
duce 
hout 
ny to 
e for 
se in 
ucing 

Chapter 3 
38 
inventory has a positive impact on the key business measures of cash flow, 
ROFE (Return on Funds Employed), and EBIT. 
There are a number of actions that can be taken to reduce inventory; 
these are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.  However, to demonstrate the cash 
effect, Table 3-2 shows some of the generic actions that can be taken and 
their specific business impact.  The key point to remember is that ‘cash is 
king’ and that excessive inventories are an unproductive use of cash. 
 
 
Business 
Measure 
Impact of Reduced Inventory 
Cash Flow 
• Reduces the outflow of cash because items are not 
purchased for restocking 
• Delays expenditure until an item is more likely to be 
needed 
• Frees up cash for other uses such as capital upgrades or 
repaying borrowings 
ROFE 
• By reducing the investment base, the return on funds 
employed (ROFE) increases 
• By increasing ROFE, the company becomes a more 
attractive investment 
• The impact of this change is likely to be an increase in 
share price 
EBIT 
• By freeing up cash to pay back borrowings and/or 
minimizing the amount of borrowings, the company 
saves on interest payments and holding costs.  This adds 
directly to the company’s earnings 
 
Table 3-1:  The Impact of Reduced Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Financial Impact of Inventory 
39 
Example Actions 
Impact 
Remove obsolete 
stock 
• Scrapping stock will provide a tax benefit in 
most countries. 
• Sale of items will provide an inflow of cash 
(and may produce a profit). 
 
Reduce reorder stock 
• A delay in spending cash retains cash in the 
business (improving cash flow). 
• Lower reorder quantities reduce the stock held 
value and associated costs. 
 
Reduce maximum 
holdings 
• Reduces the stock held value and associated 
holding costs. 
 
Remove overstocked 
items 
• If removed by natural attrition, the impact is to 
reduce the stock held value and associated 
costs. 
• If written off, the impact is the difference 
between held value and revenue if sold. 
 
Reduce quantity held 
• In addition to the obvious reduction in 
inventory, the impact will be to reduce the 
costs of counting, maintaining, moving, 
storing, etc. 
 
 
Table 3-2:  Examples of Actions and Their Impact 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 3 
40 
The Four Financial Reports that You Absolutely 
Must Understand 
 
 
ow that you understand the business impact that inventory has on 
an organization, it is important to understand the financial 
reporting that relates to inventory. There are four levels of reporting that you 
absolutely must understand: 
 
1. The Cash Flow Statement 
2. The Balance Sheet 
3. The Profit and Loss Statement 
4. The Operating Statement 
 
Each of these reports relates to financial outcomes.  However, the type 
of expenditure and the time frame that they address vary.  Understanding 
these distinctions is crucial to appropriate materials and spares inventory 
management. 
 
 
1. The Cash Flow Statement 
As described in the Cash Flow Cycle (see Figure 3-2), businesses have 
cash that comes in (capital raising, loans, revenue from sales, etc.) and 
cash that goes out (capital purchases, payments to suppliers, wages 
and salaries, dividends, etc.).  The Cash Flow Statement is simply an 
accounting of each of these inputs and outputs so that we can readily 
see where money came from and where it was spent.  The Cash Flow 
Statement typically classifies the transactions in cash flows relating to 
operating activities, financing activities, and investment activities.  
Money that is spent on materials and spares will appear on the cash 
flow statement as an outflow of cash in the ‘operating activities’ 
section under a title such as Payments to Suppliers. 
 
 
2. The Balance Sheet 
The Balance Sheet is sometimes now referred to as the Statement of 
Financial Position because it is a snapshot of the financial assets and 
liabilities of a company.  As a snapshot, it describes the state of the 
business on the day that the report represents.  The content of the 
balance sheet, or at least the items represented and their meaning, is 
N

sta
le
re
 
M
an
3)
w
in
‘c
sh
 
 
 
 
Fi
 
 
A
ty
fis
andardized th
gal reportin
equirements m
Materials purch
n asset becaus
).  They could
with raw mate
nventory mate
capital accoun
heet items. 
igure 3-3: Exa
lthough comp
ypically produ
scal year end
hrough intern
ng requireme
may vary sligh
hased as inve
se, in theory,
d be sold to ra
erials, WIP, a
erials are pu
nt’ which is l
ample of the A
panies can ge
uced (or publi
d reporting.  F
T
41 
national accou
ents for all
htly from cou
entory will ap
 they have a 
aise cash (wh
and finished 
urchased, thei
like a cost ce
Asset Section
enerate a balan
ished) twice a
From this we
The Financial Im
unting standa
l companies
untry to countr
ppear on the 
financial val
hich of course
goods invent
ir cost is rec
enter or cost 
n of a Balance
nce sheet at a
a year:  the fi
e can see that
mpact of Inven
ards that form
s (although 
ry). 
Balance Shee
ue (see Figur
e is what happ
tory).  When
corded again
code for bala
 
e Sheet 
any time, they
iscal midyear
t, if the inven
ntory 
m the 
the 
et as 
re 3-
pens 
n the 
nst a 
ance 
y are 
r and 
ntory 

Chapter 3 
42 
on the balance sheet is only reported twice a year, it may only get 
highlighted and receive attention twice a year.  Is it any wonder then 
that it becomes the forgotten investment!  When accountants comment 
that a company holds too much inventory, they are typically referring 
to the value on the balance sheet rather than the physical holdings of 
any specific item. 
 
 
3. The Profit and Loss Statement 
The Profit & Loss (P&L) Statement is sometimes now referred to as 
the Statement of Financial Performance.  Although the Balance Sheet 
shows the state of affairs at a particular point in time, the P&L 
compares income with expenses over a period of time.  This could be a 
month, quarter, or year. 
 
The P&L does not include Balance Sheet items such as property, plant 
and equipment, and other assets, such as inventory.  This is because 
the money spent on capital items and inventory is expected to be 
consumed over several (or many) reporting periods, rather than in one 
period.  The attribute that it is not used in the same period in which it 
is purchased is an important factor for identifying inventory.  Thus, the 
P&L does not record the level of inventory held or, overtly, the change 
in the level of inventory. 
 
Because most operational personnel are concerned with operational 
expenses and generating company profit, they may be familiar with 
the P&L but many do not realize that it does not help with inventory 
management. 
 
 
4. The Operating Statement 
The typical operating statement details only the expenses over a period 
of time.  This statement might also be referred to as a Cost Center 
Report, Expenditure Report, or Departmental Report.  The Operating 
Statement does not include revenue; it only includes costs and might 
be issued weekly, monthly, quarterly, or annually (or all four!).  The 
statement includes items such as labor costs, overtime, and material 
costs, by department. 
 
Engineering materials and spares are only included if their purchase 
cost is recorded against one of the cost centers included in the report.  

The Financial Impact of Inventory 
43 
This means that they are purchased directly against an operating cost 
center or are ‘booked out’ or ‘issued’ from the storeroom against that 
cost center.  This action moves the cost of the item from the capital 
account on the balance sheet to the P&L and Operating Statement. 
 
 
 
How Much Cash Can You Generate? 
 
 
ow let’s try and put some numbers together to get an 
understanding of the magnitude of the benefits that you might 
realize by implementing an appropriate inventory review.  This is important 
for two reasons.  First, goal setting is an important element of any 
improvement program.  An appropriate goal provides direction and 
motivation—a ‘yard stick’ for measuring progress.  Second, goal setting can 
assist in justifying an investment in the resources required to achieve the 
benefits.  There are few things more frustrating than seeing value-adding 
opportunities and not being able to justify the investment required to achieve 
them because the benefits are difficult to quantify. 
On page 47 there is a calculation sheet for you to use to calculate the 
benefits you could realize from a well-implemented program.  However, 
before you complete that form, work through the example on page 46; it will 
help explain the elements of the calculation.  Turning to Figure 3-4 you will 
see that the sheet is divided into two sections, Inventory Costs and Potential 
Savings.   
 
Step 1:  Let’s first look at the Inventory Costs.  The topmost number 
on Figure 3-4 is the current inventory value.  In this example it is 
$5,000,000.  For your organization, this number might be more or it might be 
less.  The important thing is that you record the value as reported by your 
Finance Department—don’t guess. 
 
Step 2:  The next line down reads Estimated WACC.  The cost of 
financing working capital is much more than just the interest rate that 
businesses pay on borrowings.  In business finance, there is a term called the 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (or WACC, pronounced wack).  The 
WACC will be different for every company because it is based on the 
sources of capital, such as shareholder funds, borrowings from banks, bond 
issues, and so on.  Because this book isn’t a business finance text, I won’t be 
N

Chapter 3 
44 
explaining this concept further except to say that for most companies the 
WACC generally ranges from 10–15%.  To be conservative, the calculation 
in the example will use 10%.  You should ask your Chief Financial Officer 
(CFO) what WACC to use for your company. 
 
Step 3:  The next line is for estimating the value of obsolescence and 
spoilage as well as the costs of managing and storing your inventory, as a 
percentage of the total inventory value.  It is fair to say that this is usually the 
most difficult number to estimate.  Some companies estimate that this cost 
could be as much as 25% of the total investment in inventory per year.  
However, for general use, a value of 10% is recommended as a suitable rule 
of thumb.   
 
Step 4:  Now by adding together the values from Steps 2 and 3, you 
get what I call the Inventory Cost Ratio.  This ratio represents the annual 
percentage cost for just having the inventory available.  This does not include 
the cost of actually purchasing the materials.  In this example, the Inventory 
Cost Ratio is 20%. 
 
Step 5: Multiply the Value of Inventory by the Inventory Cost Ratio to 
determine the Total Annual Cost of Inventory.  In this case, $5,000,000 x 
20% = $1,000,000.  This is the annual dollar cost just for having the 
inventory available.  It does not include the cost of actually purchasing the 
materials.  Instead, this is how much it costs simply to hold this inventory 
each and every year. 
 
Now calculate the benefits of an inventory reduction program. 
 
Step 6:  To calculate the benefit, the first thing to do is to estimate a 
target.  Elsewhere in this book you will find case studies where companies 
have achieved results as high as nearly a 50% reduction.  However, in my 
experience, the average is somewhere around 25%, so let’s use that value. 
 
Step 7: To calculate how much cash you can potentially realize, 
multiply the Inventory Value by the Reduction Target.  In this example, this 
is $5,000,000 x 25% = $1,250,000 and is shown as the Potential Cash 
Release.  This calculation indicates that a program of inventory reduction 
with these values could realize a cash benefit of $1,250,000.  That’s a lot of 
capital! 
 

The Financial Impact of Inventory 
45 
Step 8: In addition to the cash savings, you can also generate an 
ongoing saving because the cash generated in Step 7 no longer needs 
financing or will result in obsolescence.  This means that you generate 
annual savings equal to the Potential Cash Release multiplied by the 
Inventory Cost Ratio.  In this example, this is $1,250,000 x 20% = $250,000.  
This amount is in addition to the Potential Cash Release and will be saved 
each and every year. 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 3 
46 
Inventory Costs 
 
Current Inventory Value  
 
$5,000,000 
 
 
Estimated WACC 
 
10.0 % 
Estimated % Cost of Obsolescence, Spoilage, 
Managing, and Storing Inventory 
 
10.0 % 
Inventory Cost Ratio  
20.0 % 
 
 
 
Total Annual Cost of Inventory 
 
 
$ 1,000,000 
 
This is how much it costs to hold this inventory 
each and every year. 
 
 
Potential Cash Release and Ongoing Savings 
 
Reduction Target  
25 % 
 
 
Potential Cash Release 
Inventory Value x Reduction Target=
$ 1,250,000 
 
 
Potential Ongoing Savings 
Cash Release x Inventory Cost Ratio=
$ 250,000 
 
Per year 
 
 
Figure 3-4: Example of a Calculation Sheet 
 
 

The Financial Impact of Inventory 
47 
 
Basic Inventory Data 
 
 
Current Inventory Value  
$ 
 
 
Estimated WACC 
 
% 
Estimated % Cost of Obsolescence, Spoilage, 
Managing, and Storing Inventory 
 
% 
Inventory Cost Ratio 
 
% 
 
 
 
Total Annual Cost of Inventory 
 
 
$ 
 
This is how much it costs to hold this inventory 
each and every year. 
 
 
Potential Cash Release and Ongoing Savings 
 
Reduction Target  
% 
 
 
Potential Cash Release 
Inventory Value x Reduction Target=
$ 
 
 
Potential Ongoing Savings 
Cash Release x Inventory Cost Ratio =
$ 
 
Per year 
 
 
Figure 3-5 Blank Calculation Sheet 
 


 
49 
Chapter 4 
 
 
People and Processes 
 
The People Factor 
 
 
sk most people which three factors have the greatest impact on 
their inventory holdings and they will most likely respond by 
identifying factors that are largely independent of people and processes, such 
as: 
• Usage 
• Risk 
• Cost of a stockout 
 
The reality, however, is that most inventory issues are caused by 
people and management processes.  The three factors that have the greatest 
impact on inventory holdings really are: 
 
1. People 
2. Management systems 
3. Accountabilities 
 
Management systems and accountabilities are dealt with later in this 
chapter; this section focuses on the people factor. 
 
 
The Importance of People 
 
It seems self evident to say that people are the backbone of any 
materials and spares inventory management system.  Sure there may be 
software and computer systems, defined processes and procedures, corporate 
A

Chapter 4 
50 
policies, geographic constraints, equipment types, supplier terms, and many 
other influences, but the one thing that ties all these together is people. 
It is your people who interpret situations, make decisions, and execute 
plans.  It is your people who don’t complete the paperwork, delay ordering, 
over order, take excess quantities from the storeroom only to return them 
later, hide spares in their own squirrel stores, decide to hold ‘just in case’ 
inventory, make forecasts, fail to plan, and forget to ring, write, or email.  It 
is your people who set conflicting priorities, set measures and targets that 
influence behaviors, ask for meaningless reports, and fail to hold others 
accountable for their actions.  It is beyond all reasonable doubt that people 
have the single most important influence on inventory holdings.  Yet this is 
the factor that gets the least attention.  Why?  Because people are complex.  
Sometimes they hold perceptions that not everyone understands, and 
sometimes they are motivated by things that are not always clear. 
However, people are also the key to success.  Once your people 
understand why something is important and how their decisions and actions 
influence the outcome, they then start to take actions that are aligned with the 
inventory goals.  Let me tell you about Brian. 
Quite a number of years ago I used to work with a guy named Brian 
(although for obvious reasons that’s not his real name).  Brian was the 
materials manager at a company at which I was the maintenance engineer.  
Brian was a terrific guy.  Everyone liked Brian.  He always seemed to 
know what was going on.  People used to say that he had his ‘finger on the 
pulse.’  In fact, whenever we had a problem with shortage of inventory, late 
deliveries, or ‘missing’ items that were tucked up in someone’s ‘squirrel 
store,’ Brian could find it or fix it.  Brian took pride in his work and was 
known to remark occasionally on how much money he and his team had 
saved the company by the way they responded to the various emergencies 
that cropped up. 
Then one day Brian announced that he was leaving.  His work had 
been noticed and he had been ‘head hunted’ into a more senior role at a 
bigger organization with a substantial pay rise.  Everyone was sad to see 
Brian go and we all knew that Brian’s replacement had, as they say, big 
shoes to fill. 
Brian’s replacement (let’s just call him the New Guy) started soon 
after Brian left and something unexpected happened — the number of 
emergencies went down and became the rare exceptions rather than the 
norm. 
Of course this didn’t happen straight away.  In the beginning, things 
were worse than ever.  It seemed that Brian didn’t just keep his finger on the 

People and Processes 
51 
pulse; he kept a tight rein on his team.  None of them would (or perhaps even 
could) do anything without Brian’s input.  Brian made himself the center of 
everything. 
 
When the New Guy started, he didn’t want this so he worked with the 
team to set guidelines for decision making and new policies and procedures.  
They could then operate with some greater autonomy.  He wanted them to 
know both what to do and what was expected of them.  It is an overused term 
these days, but the New Guy empowered his team. 
The result of this was improved materials and inventory management 
and fewer emergencies.  Plus, there was another interesting side effect — the 
accident rate in the storeroom and warehouse halved within six months! 
So what was going on?  Was this just about policy and procedures?  
Of course not.  The real issue was a combination of people, ego, and 
adrenaline. 
Brian was an adrenaline junkie.  He received an adrenaline boost every 
time there was an emergency.  In turn, these emergencies had the great ego 
payoff of him being the one that solved the problem.  The instant 
gratification of being reactive had kept Brian from being proactive and 
working out how to prevent problems that arose, rather than just solving 
them. 
This is why being proactive is so hard to implement.  Being proactive 
eliminates the immediate feel-good factor and adrenaline rush.  In a well set-
up system, there are fewer emergencies (I would never say none!).  
Furthermore, there is no instant gratification for solving the problem.  In a 
well-managed system, you get the warm glow of a job well done not, the 
instant rush of adrenaline.  In a well-managed system, people know what to 
do and what is expected of them. 
Although Brian and I worked together many years ago, I still see many 
people like Brian in the work that I do with companies all around the world.  
Where do you stand in your operations — are you like Brian? 
 
 
It’s Really All About Culture 
 
Culture can be defined as: the prevailing behaviors that determine how 
a company’s people respond in a particular circumstance. 
Culture can be local, as in applying to the team in a single storeroom.  
It can also be global in that everyone across a business responds in the same 
way.  Some companies have a safety culture, some a customer service 
culture, some a ‘can-do’ culture, and some a ‘see-what-you-can-get-away-

Chapter 4 
52 
with’ culture.  With materials and engineering spares, you need a ‘let’s-not-
spend-more-than-is-absolutely-necessary’ culture. 
Recently I reviewed the materials and engineering management for an 
organization that had five major sites with independent storerooms.  This 
organization had company-wide policies and procedures; it consistently used 
a well-known enterprise resource planning (ERP) software system.  In 
theory, the differences in their inventory holdings should have been limited 
to local conditions.  For four of the five locations, this was the case.  
However, one location was not just a little better, but was far superior to the 
others.  We could only identify one reason for this — the site manager 
considered it important to truly optimize their inventory holdings. 
This attitude was fostered throughout everyone involved in materials 
and inventory decision making at that site.  As a result, everyone responded 
and acted in a way that was consistent with the ‘let’s-not-spend-more-than-
is-absolutely-necessary’ culture.  
 
 
People Are Biased 
 
One of the reasons that people sometimes make decisions that are not 
consistent with expectations or obvious to everyone is that they are biased.  
Research has shown that there are seven biases that people exhibit with 
investment decision making (such as buying stocks and shares) and it is 
worth reviewing these with respect to materials and spares inventory-related 
decision making. 
 
The seven biases are: 
 
• Overconfidence Bias — this is when you overrate your own skill and 
ability in a particular area.  Problems arise because you don’t know 
what you don’t know, leading to substandard decision making. 
 
• Loss Aversion Bias — we all dislike losses, but people most dislike 
losing face — that is, appearing to be wrong.  Operationally this is 
exhibited when we continue with a strategy or action even though it 
is not working out.  What we say is ‘it is just about to pay off, just 
give it more time.’ 
 
• Confirmation Bias — this occurs when a positive outcome is seen to 
reinforce the appropriate nature of some activity, even if the outcome 

People and Processes 
53 
was not caused by that activity.  It may have been caused by 
something else or just be coincidental. 
 
• Framing Bias — the response to addressing an operational issue is 
often guided by the options that appear to exist rather than the range 
of options that are available.  This often happens unconsciously 
because we assume that the options we see represent the range of 
solutions available. 
 
• Anchoring Bias — this is where you focus on a specific outcome to 
use as a comparison for success.  This bias occurs a lot with 
benchmarking where a number is determined and is then used as a 
reason not to take any further action because ‘we are near the 
benchmark.’  As a result, many genuine opportunities can be left 
unrealized. 
 
• Status Quo Bias — related somewhat to the Loss Aversion bias, we 
often prefer to maintain the status quo rather than risk some potential 
loss (say of time) by changing to something new.  
 
• Myopic Loss Aversion Bias — taking a short term view of the world 
can limit real success in the long term. 
 
Chapter 12 includes a case study where these biases were clearly 
present in materials and inventory management. 
 
To overcome these biases there are several things you can do. 
 
First, be aware of the biases and when you may be falling into the trap 
of one or another.  Next, be rational and not reactive in your decision 
making; recognize any assumptions and test those assumptions against facts.  
Finally, reflect on your decisions.  The carpenter’s rule is to ‘measure twice 
and cut once.’  If you revisit your decisions before acting, you may uncover 
new information or recognize other prior experience.  And if you really want 
to reflect on your biases, seek external advice.  Sometimes an independent 
third party can identify issues with assumptions and decision making that we 
just don’t see ourselves because we are too close. 
 
 

Chapter 4 
54 
Adopting a Zero Inventory Mindset 
 
 
n an ideal world, there would be instant replenishment and zero 
inventory.  Instant replenishment would mean that whenever an 
item is needed it would be instantly available.  Companies would hold no 
stock because they could get delivery in the required quantity, in an 
acceptable time frame, all the time. 
But you don’t live in an ideal world and you can’t get instant 
replenishment.  What you can do, however, is take an approach to inventory 
that questions the need for the inventory or the investment.  Adopting a zero 
inventory mindset is not an action; it is a perspective or framework for your 
entire future decision making.  The key is to ask three questions before 
making any commitment to hold or add to inventory: 
 
1. Question whether the stock is really needed.  
What are the alternatives to actually holding the stock?  Could it be 
supplied on sufficiently short notice or substituted with another item?  
Would the user be prepared to wait for delivery without the wait 
impacting your competitive position?  For engineering spares, is there 
an alternative processing path that could be used while the spare is 
delivered?  Do not forget that all inventory costs money.  By 
questioning the real necessity of adding an item to inventory, you are 
questioning whether an investment should be made in that inventory.  
 
This is the point at which most inventory thinking stops—do we need 
it?  Yes.  Then go and order some.  But good materials and spares 
inventory management goes beyond this level of thinking and asks 
further questions before deciding how much to invest. 
 
2. Question who should make the investment. 
Once it is determined that access to an item is required with no notice, 
it almost invariably follows that people assume that their company 
should be the one to make the investment.  A far better alternative 
would be to have someone else make the investment.  From a cash 
perspective, having someone else make the investment means that you 
delay any payment until actually needing the item.  Many suppliers are 
willing to make the investment as it guarantees that they maintain 
continuing business with your company.  Before committing to an 
I

People and Processes 
55 
inventory investment, you should always explore the possibilities of 
consignment stock.  
 
3. Determine how planning and process redesign can minimize the 
investment. 
If it is determined that an item is needed and that the supplier is not 
prepared to support their ongoing relationship with your business 
through consignment, then you need to determine what actions you 
can take to minimize the investment in inventory.  There are many 
actions that can be taken to minimize the investment and these are 
detailed in Chapter 8:  The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction.   
 
It is by asking and answering these questions every time an inventory 
decision is made that you start to shape a zero inventory mindset.  Ultimately 
a zero inventory mindset is not about achieving zero inventories, but about 
not accepting that you must hold or invest in excess inventory. 
A zero inventory mindset is about exploring the opportunities for 
reducing the inventory investment rather than accepting that inventory is a 
given.  A good parallel is with the approach that many companies take these 
days with safety.  Many companies adopt safety policies such as ‘no injuries 
to anyone ever.’  Do they believe that they will prevent all possible 
accidents?  Of course not.  Will they do everything they can to prevent 
accidents and injuries?  Yes.  It is the same with inventory.  Will you need to 
hold some inventory?  Most probably.  Should you do everything possible to 
minimize that investment?  Of course! 
 
 
 
The Influence of Process 
 
 
n professional sport these days it is not unusual to hear players and 
coaches talking about process.  They talk about focusing on the 
process and following the process.  Rarely do they talk about scoring a goal, 
a touchdown, a home run, a point, or achieving a good shot.  It’s all about 
process.  So what do they mean by this?  What they mean by focusing on the 
process is that they focus on the actions they need to take in order to achieve 
their desired result.  They don’t focus on the result itself.  The reasoning here 
is that if you follow the steps required, then the result will look after itself.  
This is one of the big differences between professional and amateur 
I

Chapter 4 
56 
sportspeople.  Amateurs often focus on the result and forget about doing all 
the things that would almost automatically lead to the result. 
 Let me use golf as an example.  When golfers step up to hit a golf 
shot, they know that, generally speaking, the closer to the hole, the better the 
result.  They also know that the faster the club head is moving when they hit 
the ball, the further the ball will fly.  This is where the professional and 
amateur often take a different approach.  Amateurs will try to hit the ball as 
hard as possible in order to go as far as possible.  They focus on the result of 
hitting the ball a long way.  When they do this, they often mis-hit the ball or 
lose control.  Professionals don’t think about hitting the ball as far as 
possible; they think about getting the process right.  They think about the 
way they stand, the swing, the rhythm, and their own routine.  Professionals 
don’t seek to hit the ball hard; they try to hit it correctly.  The irony here is 
that, as a result, they hit the ball a long way and with great control.  So why 
doesn’t every golfer just do this?  Good question.  The reason, I believe, is 
that no matter what the amateurs do, they get a result.  The ball moves closer 
to the hole — maybe not as close as it could be or in as good a position, but a 
result none the less.  And most amateurs are happy with this, which is 
precisely why they are amateurs! 
  
What does this have to do with inventory? 
  
Well, with inventory management the same thinking applies.  There is 
a process and there is a result.  Some people follow the process and get great 
results.  Others try to shortcut the process, they focus on the result and they 
get something less than great results.  More important, however, they lose the 
opportunity to deliver a great result.  Often they don’t even realize that they 
have underachieved because the results are not as clear cut as they are on the 
golf course!  To understand the influence of process, we need to understand 
systems thinking. 
 
 
 
Systems Thinking 
 
 
ystems Thinking was first described by management thinker Peter 
Senge in his iconic book, The Fifth Discipline (published in 1992). 
In this book, Senge describes how any outcome results from the inputs and 
processes that drive the outcome — just like our pro golfer example above.  
S

People and Processes 
57 
Systems Thinking can be described thus: 
 
“The outcome that is achieved from any 
process is a direct result of the policies, 
procedures, measures and reporting that 
manage that process” 
  
In the case of inventory, think of the outcome as the problems that are 
created with inventory, such as the existence of excess inventory or a 
shortage of inventory.  These problems are the direct result of the policies, 
procedures, measures, and reporting that are applied to managing that 
inventory — these are the inputs and processes that drive the inventory 
outcome.  Taking a Systems Thinking view guides you to a more complete 
review of the things that you must influence if you are to improve your 
inventory results.  For example, many people use optimization software to 
recalculate their ROP and ROQ.  However, as explained previously, this 
approach ignores the systems effect of other inputs and processes that 
influence our results.   
Figure 4-1 is a simplified version of the inventory supply chain 
showing the input of supply and the pull of demand on an SKU.  In practice 
it is easy to ignore the factors that influence the supply, demand, and SKU 
management, but this would be a mistake.  Factors of supply, such as the 
lead time, frequency of ordering, quantity ordered, the timing of delivery, 
and price are not fixed.  Similarly the internal processes for SKU 
management and factors of demand are not fixed.  It’s just that sometimes it 
appears to be more convenient to assume that they are.  This is thinking that 
ignores the systems in which inventory management must operate. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4-1 Simplified Supply Chain 
 

Chapter 4 
58 
The MIM Cycle in Detail 
 
 
et’s expand on the process discussion by turning our attention 
back to the MIM Cycle diagram introduced in Chapter 2.  This is 
replicated here as Figure 4-2.  For each step of the process there is a 
feedback loop that represents the actions that are taken at that point in the 
process.  This feedback not only informs that step, but also influences the 
results of subsequent steps and the results that are ultimately achieved — this 
is the essence of Systems Thinking.  To fully understand the influence of the 
steps in the process, let’s break this diagram down into its basic elements. 
 
 
 
Figure 4-2:  MIM Cycle 
 
 
Need Arises 
There will always be some initiating event that results in a need to 
consider holding inventory.  For engineering materials and spares, this 
might typically be the installation of new equipment.  It might also be 
the recognition that a particular spare is required, if it were not 
previously recognized.  One influence here is the choice of equipment 
that might be different to that already in place, resulting in a need for 
different spares.  Another influence is the timing of the recognition of 
need.  Is there time to plan or is the need only recognized when a 
L

People and Processes 
59 
breakdown occurs?  This will obviously influence the extent of review 
for the next few steps.  In an emergency, we place more attention on 
getting what we need and less attention on whether we are buying the 
right quantity for future needs. 
 
Planning and Set Parameters 
As a result of the initiating event, there will need to be some planning 
and the setting of parameters for managing and ordering the parts.  At 
this point in the process, estimates are made of the quantity that might 
be used and the frequency of demand.  For engineering materials and 
spare parts, inputs should come from designers, engineers, and 
maintenance planners.  The results ultimately achieved will be very 
dependent upon whether these groups have input and/or responsibility 
for the outcome.  With engineering spares we often rely on the data 
provided by the equipment suppliers, but their data is usually generic 
and does not take into account your situation.  Unfortunately, spares 
management of new equipment is usually a last minute thought that is 
poorly defined and managed.  Without good planning and 
appropriately set parameters, the result will be the establishment of 
parameters that commit the organization to over- or under-stocking of 
parts from day one. 
 
Procure/Order 
Once the parameters are set, an initial order is placed.  In most systems 
this is also the first of the recurrent elements — that is, further orders 
are placed as required.  As this is the first recurrent element, it is not 
typical that the reorder parameters are revisited, yet needs may have 
changed.  Also, there may be procurement procedures that dictate the 
way in which the items are purchased or the quantity purchased.  The 
impact of these is not always reviewed in the context of the total 
system — just the individual procurement ‘silo’ in which the 
procedures are written.  Containing the approach to the individual 
‘silo’ can result in ongoing overstocking.  Another issue with this step 
is timing.  If the time it takes to internally process an order is 
excessive, then the quantity of parts required to be held in inventory 
will be greater because the process time increases the overall lead 
time.   
 
 
 

Chapter 4 
60 
Delivery 
Just as ordering timeliness is an issue so is the timeliness of entering a 
delivery into the inventory management system — this is in addition 
to the time it takes for the supplier to deliver the order.  Consider what 
happens when an order is delivered to your site.  Is it quickly 
processed and entered into the system so that it appears on the 
computer as being available?  Or does it wait some time until this 
important administration task is completed?  You should not assume 
that items are quickly processed. 
 
Store 
How well is the store room set up?  Is it easy to find items?  Is the 
inventory count accurate?  Are items put away in correct locations?  
Are items stored in a manner that preserves them so that they are fit 
for purpose when required?  Are item removals accurately recorded?  
Each of these issues has a big impact on your inventory management 
results.  
 
Issue/Demand 
What behaviors are evident in the demand for parts?  Chapter 7 
discusses the phenomenon of induced volatility, which occurs when 
people take more of an SKU than they really need at that time and, as 
a result, the data used for calculation of holding parameters are 
misleading.  When the additional items are later returned to store, it 
also has an impact on the data (see Return To Store below).   
 
Reached ROP? 
How quickly are the need to reorder recognized and the purchase 
requisition raised?  A slow reaction will result in greater inventory 
holdings. 
 
Return To Store 
As we saw from Figure 2-3, improper management of the Return to 
Store process can have a significant impact on the quantity of an SKU 
that is held.  The impact comes about from two different effects.  First, 
if the items have already been reordered, then the stock that is 
subsequently held will be greater than needed or planned.  Second, the 
removal of items without corresponding need (hence the subsequent 
return to store) means that the data that are used for calculation of 

People and Processes 
61 
holding parameters will be misleading.  Use of this data will result in 
systematic overstocking. 
 
Once Systems Thinking is understood, the influence of process on 
materials inventory outcomes is easy to see.  Addressing process issues must 
then surely be the most likely approach to drive lasting and economically 
sustainable materials and spares inventory management outcomes. 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
63 
Chapter 5 
 
 
Policies & Procedures 
 
 
f people are the key players in materials and spare parts 
management, then the policies and procedures are the rules of the 
game.  It is the policies and procedures that communicate the expectations 
and set the guidelines for action.  Most sophisticated organizations will have 
corporate policies (those high-level guidelines that operate as a statement of 
intent) and operating level procedures (how to reorder items, conduct stock 
takes, etc.); both are important.  However, the missing element is usually the 
specific guidelines on how much to order or hold (or at least how to decide 
that value) and how to store items to ensure their integrity.  There is some 
irony in this because these missing guidelines are the ones that influence the 
actual level of inventory.  Whether your goal is availability or minimal 
investment, the level of inventory is your most important factor. 
This section discusses the development of a spares stocking policy, the 
need for categorization of spares, and that most important of all questions, 
‘when is critical really critical?’ 
 
 
 
When Is Critical Really Critical? 
 
 
There is an old saying that goes something like ‘a maintenance 
engineer never met a spare he didn’t like.’  But perhaps maintenance 
engineers should not like their meta-spares quite so much.  What’s a meta-
spare?  I’ll get to that. 
I

Chapter 5 
64 
In my work helping companies optimize their engineering materials 
and spares inventory management, I am almost always greeted at a new 
client with the exclamation ‘you can’t do anything about that spare; it is 
critical.’  Critical spares are held in high regard and treated as untouchables.  
However, whether or not a spare is critical is not the point when it comes to 
inventory review.  You can still hold too much of a critical item.  In my 
opinion, the comments I hear on critical spares are usually more emotional 
than scientific.  Let me explain that. 
The goal of any maintenance program is to minimize the frequency 
and consequence of equipment failure.  Spare parts availability plays an 
important role in minimizing the consequences of failure by reducing the 
downtime associated with the failure.  Spares, of course, do nothing to 
impact the actual occurrence of the failure.  (Yes, we could have a discussion 
on the quality of spares used so let’s just assume that here we are discussing 
parts of suitable quality.) 
A critical spare can be defined as a component that, if unavailable, 
would prevent the plant from operating.  So if the absence of that item would 
prevent the plant from operating, then the item is critical.  In most plants, 
however, this definition covers a wider number of items than those defined 
as critical within the plant’s inventory system.   
The first point to recognize is that truly critical spares are likely to be 
far more widespread than your system currently defines. 
Engineers will happily (well, not happily) review items that are not 
classified as critical but which actually are critical, just not classified as such.  
Yet they will shy away from reviewing items that are officially defined as 
critical.  In this case, any review is driven by the classification rather than the 
opportunity or cost benefit.  Nobody would use this approach in reviewing 
any other capital investment. 
The second point is that not all items classified as critical are 
genuinely critical.  In a recent example, a company had 24 compressor 
valves defined as critical items.  It was true that the compressor would not 
run without these valves.  However, the company separately held pins, 
plates, and springs for these valves.  In practice, this meant that the valves 
were never needed.  If there was a failure between planned valve 
maintenance activities, then the pins, plates, and springs would be used, not 
the spare valves.  Based on this practice, it could be argued that the pins, 
plates, and springs were critical, even though they were actually not 
classified as such.  
Perhaps what this really means is that the definition of critical needs to 
be expanded to include the words ‘for which there is no viable alternative.’  

Policies and Procedures 
65 
Therefore, our definition of critical is now ‘a component that, if unavailable, 
would prevent the plant from operating and for which there is no viable 
alternative.’ 
No matter what definition is used, classifying an item as critical tells 
us that we need to have ready access to the item when it is required.  It 
doesn’t tell us how many need to be carried, nor does it tell us whether they 
need to be owned prior to needing the item.  
 
Let’s examine those statements for a moment. 
 
Ready access:  means that it is available when we need it.  It doesn’t 
mean that it must be in our store or on our site but that we must be able to 
readily access the part when needed, in a timeframe that is acceptable. 
It doesn’t tell us how many we need:  classifying the items as critical 
tells us is that we will need the item.  Whether we stock more than the 
minimum required is dependent upon the usual usage, ordering, and supply 
issues. 
Nor does it tell us whether they need to be owned by us:  classifying 
an item as critical says nothing about ownership.  Why can’t someone else 
own the item just as long as we control the item? 
 
 
What about the second spare? 
 
The management of engineering materials and spare parts (in 
particular) is typically conservative, so let’s say that you really do want to 
have the item in stock in your store room, sitting there waiting for you.  Let’s 
look at some further issues that you can address. 
The decision to hold that first spare is usually based on the 
determination that the spare is critical and, therefore, required.  However, 
what about the second spare?  The decision to hold a second spare is based 
on the probability (and consequence) of a failure during the time it takes to 
restock the first spare.  This is of course a very limited time.  The 
requirement for a third spare is based on the probability of two failures 
during the restocking period of the first spare.  (The Poisson Distribution in 
Chapter 2 shows the probabilities quite well.) 
Let’s call these second, third (and subsequent) spares, meta-spares — 
literally spares for your spare.  The second spare that you hold is a spare for 
your spare.  The third spare is a spare for your spare’s spare.  As you can see 

Chapter 5 
66 
the function of these spares is to be available while your first spare is 
restocked. 
So, if critical really means ‘available’, there may be a number of 
actions that you can take that allow you to have availability but with lower 
costs and fewer meta-spares.  These actions might include consignment 
stocking, identifying effective duplication, and reviewing supply chain 
opportunities. 
In another example, a company that had steadfastly used sea freight 
for overseas-sourced components (because the freight cost is lower) realized 
that the total cost of ownership for some items was less if they used 
airfreight.  This was because they could then hold fewer meta-spares.  They 
still had ready access to the items; they just changed their supply chain. 
When most engineers say to me ‘you can’t do anything about that 
spare, it is critical’ what they are really suggesting is that because the spare is 
classified as critical they cannot hold any fewer than they already do.  Yet as 
we have just seen, this cannot be allowed to go unchallenged.  If the above 
arguments don’t convince you to include a review of your critical spares in 
any spares review, consider the following. 
Engineers often justify critical spares by saying that the cost of failure 
so outweighs the cost of holding the spare that the cost of the spare doesn’t 
matter.  Although based on a degree of financial sense, this is largely an 
emotional argument.  Logically, when you reach 100% service coverage you 
don’t need any further spares.  Unfortunately many companies hold more 
than they need for 100% service coverage. 
Figure 5-1 represents the confidence level of spare parts availability 
plotted against the number of spares held.  In this example, if the company 
holds X number of spares their confidence of availability will be 100%.  
Obviously there cannot be greater than 100% so if they hold more than X 
spares the confidence level will still be 100%.  Therefore, purchasing more 
than X spares is a total waste of money!  It doesn’t even matter whether or 
not the spare is critical; holding more than the 100% level produces no 
benefit.  
 
 
 
 

 
Fi
 
 
Cost Be
 
Th
individu
The addi
 
Still not 
Conside
 
• 
 
• 
 
igure 5-1: Con
nefits are No
he cost bene
ual item.  The 
itional benefi
convinced th
r these issues
What if th
needs have
still carry ju
What if th
identify if 
appropriate
that it won’
nfidence Lev
ot Universal
efit of holdi
probability o
it diminishes t
hat you should
s.  
e spare is no
 changed but 
ust as many, o
he spare is n
f the spare i
e care.  Imag
’t perform! 
67 
vel for Spares 
ng spares is
of usage redu
to zero as the
d review your
o longer criti
no one has u
or any at all?
no longer usa
tself has det
gine needing 
Policies 
Availability
s not univers
ces for each s
e number of sp
r critical spare
cal?  Perhap
updated your d
able?  Perhap
teriorated thr
the critical s
and Procedu
 
sal, even for
subsequent sp
pares increase
es?  
s the operati
data.  Should 
ps a review 
rough a lack
spare and fin
ures 
r an 
pare.  
e. 
ional 
you 
will 
k of 
ding 

Chapter 5 
68 
• 
What if the equipment that the spare is for has been modified?  
Recently I saw a situation where a gearbox could no longer be 
used in its intended location because the connections and motor 
had been changed.  This gearbox was still regarded as a critical 
spare! 
 
So it appears that not all critical spares are equal. Not all spares 
classified as critical are actually critical, and some spares not classified as 
critical may actually be critical! 
Confused?  For engineering materials and spare parts management, 
this confusion means that defining a spare as critical is not an excuse for not 
including the spare in your inventory review.  Even with critical spares, it is 
possible that too many are being held.  With appropriate thinking and 
judgment, critical spares may actually provide a significant opportunity for 
your inventory review.  Furthermore, a review of the associated inventory 
management processes could deliver significant benefits.  
 
 
 
The Spares Stocking Policy 
 
 
ompanies these days are awash with policies.  They have 
environmental policies, safety policies, purchasing policies, 
contract management policies, audit policies, corporate policies, expense 
policies, travel policies, maintenance policies, and some even have internet 
usage and blogging policies.  When it comes to engineering materials and 
spare parts management, companies often have inventory policies, stock 
taking policies, cataloging policies, warehouse policies, issues and usage 
policies, and disposal policies. 
With all this corporate red tape, why would you need (or want) one 
more policy?  The answer to this question lies in the benefits you get in 
return.   
Imagine an organization that spends millions of dollars on materials to 
support their maintenance activities.  Imagine having no budgetary limits or 
constraints on how much they spend.  Imagine a situation where the only 
time this is an issue is when someone finally says ‘Hey, what’s going on 
here?’  Imagine that when that someone finally notices, it is too late — the 
money has been spent. 
C

Policies and Procedures 
69 
Sound familiar?  It should because this situation describes the 
engineering materials and spare parts management of many industrial 
organizations today.  (Of course they have budgets for actual maintenance 
expenditure, but not often for how much inventory they carry.  Recall also 
the discussion in Chapter 3:  The Financial Impact of inventory.)  The one 
policy that helps to sensibly control and contain this expenditure is a Spares 
Stocking Policy.  The benefits for having a well thought out and well-defined 
Spares Stocking Policy (that is implemented) include: 
 
• 
Preventing the excessive purchase of items 
• 
Improving the timeliness of availability of items 
• 
Reducing the level of obsolesce and write downs 
• 
Faster recognition and clean up of the few items that do become 
obsolete 
 
In short, a Spares Stocking Policy saves money through reduced 
expenditure and improves reliability through reduced downtime. 
 
Now that we can see how important this policy is, let’s look at how to 
develop a high performing parts policy. 
A policy can be defined as ‘a deliberate plan of action to guide 
decisions and achieve rational outcomes.’  So a Spares Stocking Policy will 
provide your team with guidance on how much and when to purchase in 
order that you achieve the availability you need without over-expenditure.  In 
addition, by comparing actual outcomes to the policy, you can use the policy 
as a key part of the feedback to identify problems and issues with 
engineering materials and spare parts inventory management.  Your policy 
provides an internal benchmark against which you can compare 
performance. 
Your Spares Stocking Policy will not tell you what to purchase.  That 
is, after all, an engineering decision based on your equipment needs and 
selected approach to maintenance — your maintenance policy!  What your 
Spares Stocking Policy must do is: 
 
1. Identify the categories (or types) of engineering materials and 
spare parts inventory that you carry 
2. Provide guidance on the quantity to carry and how to calculate it 
(based on the above categories) 
3. Provide guidance on the timing of purchases (for example, with 
shutdown programs or routine replacement) 

Chapter 5 
70 
4. Identify storage issues and/or locations 
5. Provide purchasing and/or price information 
 
Let’s look at these individually. 
 
1. Identify the Categories 
It is important to realize that not all Spares Stocking Policies are the 
same.  The policy must be specific to the spare category and your situation.  
The key to developing your categories is that they must be MECE — that is, 
Mutually Exclusive and Completely Exhaustive (pronounced mee see).  Let 
me explain that. 
Mutually Exclusive means that each category must be independent to 
the others in a way that items cannot be assigned to more than one category.  
For example, if you used a category called Breakdown Spares and another 
called Fast Moving, these two categories are not mutually exclusive.  A spare 
part could be required for breakdown repairs and, if used regularly, could 
also be fast moving.  This confuses your use of categories and limits your 
opportunity to review and analyze your spares holding.  You can see from 
this example that the categories must be linked conceptually.  A breakdown 
category refers to an event whereas a fast-moving category refers to 
frequency of usage.  Mixing the concept in the definition results in poor 
categorization and, therefore, limits the benefits of categorization. 
Completely Exhaustive refers to covering all of the possibilities.  
Continuing the above example, if you only used Breakdown and Fast 
Moving, aside from not being mutually exclusive, these two categories have 
clearly not covered the slow-moving items, so there may be items that do not 
fit either category.  To be Completely Exhaustive, your categories must 
cover all possibilities. 
 
Some types of categories that you might consider include: 
 
• 
Spare Parts:  Parts that, if unavailable, would not prevent the plant 
from operating and/or where usage could be planned.  This might 
include subcategories such as fast-moving parts that turn over 
regularly, slow-moving parts that turn over occasionally, routine 
maintenance parts that are used only for specific regular 
maintenance events (and therefore can be planned), and project 
spares that are placed in inventory in preparation for specific 
projects which are one off events (and so can also be planned). 
 

Policies and Procedures 
71 
• 
Critical Spares:  These have previously been defined as 
components that, if unavailable, would prevent the plant from 
operating and for which there is no viable alternative.  These 
spares may also be subdivided as fast, slow, or routine. 
 
• 
Consumables:  Likely to be very high usage, but relatively low-
cost items that may be directly expensed to a cost center as a 
means of minimizing the administration associated with the level 
of usage.  The key attribute of a consumable is that it is consumed 
when used and, therefore, can only be used once. 
 
• 
Bulk Commodities:  Items that are essentially consumable, but 
where their supply, storage, and usage requirements set them apart 
from other consumables (such as fuel and oil). 
 
• 
Capital/Insurance Spares: Capital/Insurance spares are usually very 
high value items that are peculiar to a specific asset.  Because of 
this, they can be defined in the accounting system as Property, 
Plant, and Equipment rather than inventory (ask your CFO about 
this definition).  The term Capital Spares is also often used to 
cover spares supplied as part of an initial capital purchase rather 
than those purchased subsequent to the capital purchase.  In either 
case, they usually are not counted as part of the financial value of 
inventory, but they do need definition in order to clarify what they 
are and whether they should be counted. 
 
You can see that these categories are MECE because they are initially 
divided on the basis of unique attributes.  It is, therefore, unlikely that any 
one item could be included in more than one category.  Also these categories 
cover all potential inventory types.  Figure 5-2 shows a simple decision 
process to help identify into which of these categories an item may fit. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 5
 
Figure 5
 
 
N
aspects t
 
 
2. Pro
Th
reviews;
quantity
requirem
As has b
5 
5-2: Spares Ca
ow that the c
that make up 
ovide Guidan
he quantity to
; a number o
.  For examp
ments and, the
been discusse
ategory Decis
categories are
the policy.  
nce on the Qu
o carry is the 
of different 
ple, you may
erefore, base 
ed extensively
72 
sion Tree 
 defined, you
uantity to Ca
issue that ge
techniques c
y choose to u
your policy o
y in other cha
u need to thin
arry and How
ets the most fo
can be used 
use software t
on the output
apters, this ap
 
nk about the o
w to Calcula
focus in inven
to calculate 
to calculate y
t of that softw
pproach has b
other 
te It 
ntory 
this 
your 
ware.  
both 

Policies and Procedures 
73 
pros and cons.  On the one hand, the software is convenient.  However, if 
your data is inaccurate or incomplete, or you do not fully understand the 
assumptions in the algorithm used, and the constraints that it imposes, then 
you are likely to overinvest, create a poor inventory mix, and sub-optimize 
your outcomes.  Alternatively, you may choose to use a process-based 
approach (such as Inventory Process Optimization™ — see Chapter 9); this 
approach overcomes the data issues, assumptions, and constraints by tackling 
them head on and providing guidance based on optimizing your management 
processes.  Whichever approach you choose, your Spares Stocking Policy 
must clearly state the process or rules to be used. 
Here are some further rules of thumb to look out for and comments 
that might help in determining the quantity to carry and how to calculate it. 
 
• 
The less critical the part and the shorter the lead time, the fewer 
items that need to be held. 
• 
Conversely, the more critical the item and the longer the lead time, 
the more items that need to be held. 
• 
You should always strive to hold the minimum quantity required, 
don’t manage to the maximum. 
• 
The more predictable the usage the better the delivery can be timed 
to suit usage. 
• 
Be aware that data does not always reflect what you think it does. 
• 
Demand for parts is often driven by the behavior of the team rather 
than the failure characteristics of the equipment. 
• 
Similarly, supply lead times are often driven by the procurement, 
receiving, and storage procedures.  
• 
Sometimes ‘calculation averaging’ leaves you short of the one-
time usage requirements. 
• 
You do not necessarily have to fill all the storage space (for 
example, with bulk commodities). 
• 
Simple protocols and criteria make both the initial decision and the 
subsequent review of that decision easier. 
• 
There is no ‘one size fits all’ calculation that can be applied.  
Everyone’s circumstance and process is different, and so 
requirements are different. 
 
3. Provide guidance on the timing of purchases 
For some categories it is sufficient to set your quantities via an ROP 
and ROQ.  However, for the categories that relate to parts where there is a 
degree of predictability in usage, it is important to provide guidance on the 

Chapter 5 
74 
timing of purchases.  For routine maintenance or project spares, the planned 
timing will be known in advance.  Therefore, your policy should include 
setting the criteria for ordering and delivery.  For example, you may say that 
all shutdown spares should be ordered for delivery to occur in the month 
preceding the shutdown.  This criterion can be applied no matter whether 
the part has a six-month lead time or a one-week lead time.  The important 
principle here is that the cost of inventory includes the time value of money 
for the time that you hold it.  The shorter the holding time, the lower the 
overall holding cost. 
 
4. Identify storage issues and/or locations 
It may be that your storeroom is organized in a way that separates the 
inventory categories.  It may be that some of your spares require special 
treatment for their own care and to improve their longevity.  In either case, it 
is worthwhile setting out your expectations so that people will not have to 
guess! 
 
 
5. Provide purchasing and/or price information 
Similar to number 4, your policy may include guidance on 
procurement or pricing.  For example, some items may need to go through a 
central contract arrangement whereas others may be purchased locally.  
Making these requirements clear will help ensure that the right price is paid 
for the items that are purchased. 
 
 
A Checklist for Development 
 
Figure 5-3 shows a checklist that you can use to review your progress 
in developing your Spares Stocking Policy.  This is a quick and easy tool to 
see whether you have all the issues covered. 
 
In addition, here are a few other thoughts on setting your Spares Stocking 
Policy. 
 
• 
Your Spares Stocking Policy does not have to be a highly detailed 
and complex document.  As a starting point, try setting a few 
simple guidelines. 

• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
Figure 5
 
 
The best 
establishing
these in pla
The respon
with the In
managemen
involve all 
includes: 
procuremen
Any policy
be prepared
on its use. 
Once your 
your policy
 
5-3: Spares St
time to de
g your storer
ace, then the b
nsibility for e
nventory Ma
nt processes.
of the key p
 storeroom
nt, finance, an
y is worthless
d to commun
policy is dev
y in order to id
ocking Policy
 
75 
termine you
room or inve
best time to d
establishing a
anager or wh
.  However, 
people that in
m personnel, 
nd inventory m
s if it is not fo
nicate the new
veloped, com
dentify gaps a
y Checklist 
Policies 
ur policy is 
entory.  If y
determine you
a Spares Stoc
hoever contro
it is recomm
nfluence your
maintenanc
management.
ollowed.  The
w expectation
mpare your cu
and opportun
and Procedu
when you 
you already h
ur policy is no
cking Policy 
ols the inven
mended that 
r inventory.  
ce, engineer
. 
erefore, you m
ns and follow
urrent holding
nities. 
 
ures 
are 
have 
ow! 
lies 
ntory 
you 
This 
ring, 
must 
w up 
gs to 

Chapter 5 
76 
You Need To Be More than Just a Good Administrator 
 
The key reason to develop a Spares Stocking Policy is that it sets the 
expectation of how and when inventory is to be ordered and how it is to be 
stored.  The Spares Stocking Policy is different from your inventory 
management procedures as these procedures usually relate to the 
administration of the inventory — that is, who does the ordering, how items 
are booked out, and so on.  Many organizations have good and robust 
inventory management procedures and, as such, are good inventory 
administrators.  This is not, however, enough.  It is only by the adoption of 
an appropriate Spares Stocking Policy that companies become good 
inventory managers. 
Previously in this section it was stated that a Spares Stocking Policy 
saves money through reduced expenditure and improves reliability through 
reduced downtime.  This alone makes a Spares Stocking Policy the one 
policy that you may not have but that you really do need. 
 
 
 
 

 
77 
Chapter 6 
 
 
Issues, Myths, and a Few 
Home Truths 
 
 
ow that we have worked through a recap of the basics and 
understand the impact of people, process, policy, and procedures, 
we need to consider some of the impediments to inventory management 
success.  These are a combination of issues, myths, and home truths that 
seem to be forgotten.  An understanding of these issues, myths, and home 
truths is of enormous value in working your way through potential solutions 
and their application to your situation.  This understanding enables you to 
address objections by your team, evaluate solutions put forward by vendors, 
and recognize behavioral issues that need to be addressed. 
 
 
 
 
Why Inventory Reduction Often Fails 
 
 
efore reviewing what works in materials and spares inventory 
management, let’s first understand why efforts in the area of 
inventory reduction often fail.  There are two key reasons that the usual 
approaches to inventory reduction fail to deliver sustainable results: 
 
1. The focus is often on high-priced items that are seen as 
providing the greatest impact. 
N
B

Chapter 6 
78 
2. The focus is on high turnover items as any change in this area is 
likely to be realized more quickly. 
 
Both of these approaches are flawed.  
 
The first approach neglects the total investment made in a line of 
inventory, that is, the total dollar value invested — the value per item 
multiplied by the number of items.  The total dollar value invested is 
important because it represents how much cash is tied up, not how much the 
item costs.  If the goal is to reduce the inventory investment, then you must 
always follow the cash. 
The second approach — focus on high turnover items — ignores 
slower moving items and often results in an imbalance of inventory.  How 
often have you been faced with having plenty of inventory, but none of the 
right items in stock?  Correcting a focus on high turnover items requires a 
process aimed at the cash investment rather than just the inventory activity. 
 
 
 
Cracking the Inventory Code 
 
 
aterials and spares inventory management brings with it a whole 
new language and a dizzying array of acronyms – ABC, EOQ, 
ICR®, IPO, GSE, JIT, MRO, MRP, SOS, SKU, RCS, ROP, and ROQ to 
name just a few!  And like all jargon and acronyms, the meaning and purpose 
is not always clear.  So, how do you know what is what?  How do you 
determine if a suggested solution is right for your situation?  How do you 
bridge the gap created by jargon to ensure that you resolve your materials 
and spares inventory management issues in a way that is sustainable?  To do 
this, you need to crack the inventory code.  Cracking the inventory code is 
not about focusing on acronyms, nor does it require a secret code book.  It 
does require an understanding of a few inventory home truths. 
 
 
Home Truth #1:  Inventory Does Not Exist in Isolation 
 
Often inventory is treated as if it exists independently of other 
operational and environmental factors.  However, this is not the case.  For 
example, the level of engineering spares inventory that is actually carried (as 
M

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
79 
opposed to the quantity recommended by the stocking policy) is influenced 
by a wide range of factors, most of which you can change and some that you 
cannot.  Some of these factors are: 
 
• 
The equipment types and number in service (difficult to change) 
• 
The plant network (difficult to change) 
• 
The equipment reliability (improving this is the aim of your 
reliability program) 
• 
Inventory and other company policies (can be changed) 
• 
Inventory, purchasing and maintenance procedures (can be 
changed) 
• 
Human behaviors (can be changed) 
• 
The supply chain (can be changed) 
• 
Supply chain reliability (can be changed) 
• 
Reporting structures (can be changed) 
• 
Storeroom management (can be changed) 
• 
Metrics and measurement (can be changed) 
 
Someone once said that ‘all problems end up in inventory.’  What they 
meant by this was that problems with any of the above factors can result in 
excess inventory holdings.  The key is to realize that by changing some of 
these operational and environmental factors you will have a significant, 
positive, and lasting impact on your inventory stock levels.  Changing only 
the planned levels does not drive these outcomes. 
 
 
Home Truth #2:  There is No Universal Solution 
 
The next thing to understand is that indirect inventory has 
characteristics that make it different from the direct inventory that is held for 
making products for sale (e.g., raw materials, WIP, and finished goods).  A 
major trap for most people seeking to improve their engineering materials 
and spares inventory performance is that they fall back on solutions that are 
applicable to the relatively stable and predictable demands of direct 
inventory. 
For example, let’s look at the philosophy of Just In Time (JIT), 
perhaps the most widely known inventory management technique.  The JIT 
approach was developed in a production environment to improve process 
flow and eliminate the planning function.  JIT relies on the use of a Kan Ban 
to regulate demand and supply so that products are ‘pulled’ through the 

Chapter 6 
80 
manufacturing process based on demand at the next stage.  This focus on 
process full and demand pull makes the JIT philosophy an all-pervading 
aspect of production management because it influences the way people think 
and behave, and the way that they manage their processes.  Contrary to 
popular belief, JIT is not a technique but an outcome that results from the 
application of other techniques.  It is not a universal solution for inventory 
reduction. 
In addition, it is important to remember that inventory is not a single 
homogenous ‘thing.’  Inventory is made up of many hundreds or thousands 
of largely independent SKUs.  Treating inventory as a singular item is a bit 
like treating other assets as a single item.  For example, nobody has a plan to 
maintain a power station, they have plans to maintain the components that 
when assembled together become a power station.  Each component is 
different and has different characteristics and needs.  It is exactly the same 
with inventory.  It makes no sense to apply a single tool or technique to the 
entire inventory as if it were a ‘thing’ and to think that it will resolve all 
issues or produce the best overall result.   
To crack the inventory code you need to ensure that the tool or 
technique being considered is applicable to the type of inventory you are 
reviewing and is not just a so-called universal technique.  
 
 
Home Truth #3: There Are Only Two Outcomes of Concern 
 
Although inventory is influenced by many factors and is made up of 
many different components, it is important to realize that at a fundamental 
level there are just two outcomes that are of concern.  There is either too 
little, resulting in stock outs; or there is too much, resulting in overstocking, 
slow moving stock, and obsolescence.  Often people will say that they have a 
mix problem, but all this really means is that some items are overstocked and 
some items are understocked.  
Overstocking and understocking are obviously two very different 
outcomes, but it may not be so obvious that the solutions for each may also 
be different.  For example, overstocking could be a result of setting incorrect 
inventory levels.  But is also almost certainly a result of the influence of the 
operational and environmental factors mentioned previously.  Understocking 
could be addressed by reviewing the above factors, but will almost certainly 
be improved by recalculating the required ROP.  The emphasis is quite 
different.  You cannot apply one approach and expect it to resolve both 
problems.  Yet this is precisely what people do! 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
81 
To crack the inventory code you need to identify the outcome you are 
trying to influence and apply the appropriate solution.  In engineering, no 
one would advocate driving in a screw with a hammer, but this is the 
equivalent of solving an overstock problem with a technique better suited to 
an under-stock problem.  
 
 
Home Truth #4:  The Important Characteristics Are Not Always the 
Most Obvious 
 
When managing inventory it is convenient to segment the inventory 
using descriptions such as fast- or slow-moving as this helps with setting 
stocking policies (see Chapter 5).  However, these segmentations often focus 
on the frequency of demand.  Although frequency is an obvious 
characteristic, it is not always the most important characteristic.  When 
reviewing minimum stockholdings, a more significant factor is the variation 
in the quantity of each demand.  This less obvious factor tells you which 
review approach to use. 
For example, if an item, such as an electric motor, is only ever used as 
a single item, then the appropriate holding should be calculated using a 
Poisson function.  If the item has demand that varies (say 1 this time, 5 next 
time, 3 the time after), a Gaussian function is more appropriate.  It is not the 
obvious characteristic of how frequently the item moves that counts, but how 
many might move at each demand.  (Both of these functions are discussed in 
Chapter 2). 
 
 
Every Company is Unique 
 
Every company’s inventory situation is unique because of the 
combination of issues that impact their inventory.  For example, a steel 
producer in Illinois and a steel producer in Southern Australia face unique 
challenges because of their location, proximity to suppliers, local culture, age 
of plant and equipment, workforce relations, physical layouts, management 
style, and so on.  Equally, a parts supplier is different from a parts 
manufacturer because of where they sit in the supply chain.  A company that 
is overstocked faces different challenges to one that is understocked.  In all 
of these examples, the characteristics that you must focus on vary, depending 
upon your purpose and intent. 

Chapter 6 
82 
It is by understanding these home truths that you can avoid many of 
the issues that result in underperforming materials and spares inventory 
management.  Better than that, though, by cracking the inventory code, you 
can identify which of the range of possible solutions are best suited to your 
situation. 
 
 
 
5 Myths of Inventory Reduction 
 
 
n Chapter 3 it was established that a program of inventory reduction 
can be one of the most powerful and value-adding activities that a 
company can undertake.  This is because inventory reduction generates cash, 
just as sales or cost reduction activities generate cash.  This cash is just as 
real and just as valuable to the company as cash that is generated through 
sales or cost reduction.  
When the inventory being held is indirect inventory (that is, it is not 
being held for manufacture and, therefore, automatically moving through the 
supply chain), then the benefit is even greater.  With engineering materials 
and spare parts inventory, it is possible that some inventory will never be 
used and will only ever be a cash drain on the company.  So why do so many 
companies allow their engineering materials and spare parts inventory to be a 
‘fat and lazy’ investment?  Why do they not apply a simple process that 
safely minimizes their investment?  There may be several reasons.   
First, there may be limited knowledge of the alternatives.  Many 
companies think that optimization using software is the only solution.  
However, companies that do apply optimization software may be achieving 
less than 1/7th of their inventory reduction potential. 
There may also be a lack of resources to conduct an inventory 
reduction program.  However, in the author’s experience, once the potential 
to generate cash with zero capital investment is understood, then the 
resources can always be found. 
However, it is most likely that companies are prevented from taking 
action because of the beliefs and assumptions that they make about 
inventory.  These beliefs and assumptions are truisms that can (and do) 
destroy a company’s wealth by allowing an over-investment in inventory.  
Five common truisms have been identified; these are called the 5 Myths of 
Inventory Reduction.  To successfully effect an inventory reduction program, 
I

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
83 
a company must recognize these myths and challenge them whenever they 
are raised as the reason for inaction or lack of progress.  
Like all good truisms, they are each based on an element of truth, but 
they are not universally true.  And like all management myths, they work to 
prevent effective action.  The impact of these myths is that they limit the 
ability to fully realize the potential opportunity of inventory reduction.  
Therefore, they limit the cash that may be realized through delivering a 
successful program.  Recognizing these myths and applying appropriate 
management solutions to overcome them will help you to achieve true 
inventory optimization. 
 
The Five Myths of Inventory Reduction are: 
 
1. Economic quantities save money. 
2. Risk must be re-evaluated to reduce inventory. 
3. Consignment stocks must cost more. 
4. Software will solve the problem. 
5. Putting items into inventory shares the cost. 
 
 
Myth #1:  Economic Quantities Save Money.  
 
In engineering materials and spare parts inventory management, items 
often get ordered in an economic quantity so that the cost per item is at a 
minimum.  This way of ordering is seen to be economic because the 
subsequent issue cost of the item is at a minimum and the business, 
operational, or project budget subsequently records a lower cost.  The term 
economic order quantity is often used. 
Ordering in this way is not economic, however, in situations where the 
items are not used, where they are written down as slow moving, or where 
the holding cost ultimately exceeds the procurement saving.  
Determining the true economic position of holding spares requires a 
consideration of the total company cash cost, not just the departmental or 
project charge. 
 
Example 
In a manufacturing operation, it is decided that a special widget is 
needed as a spare.  The set-up costs for making the widget are such 

Chapter 6 
84 
that the first widget would cost $2,000.  However, once set up, the 
supplier will provide five widgets for $3,000. 
 
If five widgets are purchased, the purchase cost would be $600 each 
— an apparent saving of $1,400 over the single widget cost.  On the 
surface, this prospect is quite appealing. 
 
But what if the other widgets are not used and are written down as 
slow moving after, say, 4 years?  The so-called economic approach 
really costs the company the original $3,000 plus the annual cost of 
holding the four widgets in inventory (at a conservative 20% per year 
this is $2,400 x 20% x 4 years = $1,920).  The total cost over the four 
years could be as high as $4,920.  
 
Therefore, while the operational budget showed only a $600 expense 
when the only part that was needed was issued by the storeroom, the 
company incurred a $4,920 cost.  Purchasing just a single widget 
would have cost the company just $2,000. 
 
Furthermore, in the event that the $2000 widget was seen to be too 
expensive, an alternative solution might have been found.  
 
 
Myth #2:  Risk Must Be Re-Evaluated To Reduce Inventory.  
 
Reducing holding quantities in inventory is often seen as requiring a 
corresponding increase in operational or financial risk.  The risk might be the 
risk of a lost sale or, in manufacturing, the risk of extended downtime.  How 
often have you heard someone say ‘We need our inventory or we won’t 
make sales’ or ‘We need our inventory or our downtime will go through the 
roof’?  Some companies believe that inventory can only be reduced when 
their maintenance systems are sufficiently sophisticated that they can predict 
demand or they have eliminated unplanned failure.  (Many consultants and 
vendors also work hard to perpetuate this myth.)  
Both of these positions implicitly assume that the existing holdings are 
as lean as they can be in the current operational dynamic.  Although it is 
possible that this is true, experience shows that it is unlikely.  Consider some 
of the issues that might result in a need to change inventory holdings: 
 
• The initial parameters were set without any history of usage and, 
therefore, may not have been correct.  Typically, incorrect settings 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
85 
are only reviewed when a stockout occurs.  A stockout is when 
there is demand for an item, but none in stock.  An overstocked 
item may not ever have been reviewed. 
 
• Suppliers have implemented supply chain initiatives.  In the past ten 
or so years, supply chain improvement has been the focus of most 
distribution activity.  Initial assumptions about supplier capability 
may now be outdated and may not have been revisited, especially if 
the capability of your inventory management software to recalculate 
values is turned off. 
 
• Continuous improvement in your own systems.  Initial assumptions 
about your own capability and demand requirements may have 
changed in an incremental way through continuous improvement.  
For example, improvements in your own receipting process may not 
yet have translated into lower holdings. 
 
• Opportunities for consignment stock.  Shifting market dynamics 
may have resulted in new opportunities for consignment stock that 
were not previously available. 
 
These are just some of the issues.  In each of these examples, the 
actual risk will have reduced significantly compared to the initial 
assumptions.  If the tolerance for risk has not changed, then reviewing these 
issues will, at worst, reset the system to the tolerable level of risk.  In the 
case of consignment stock, the risk level should remain unchanged.  (Note 
that there is a difference between the level of risk and the level of direct 
control.  Consignment stock reduces direct control.)  Addressing these issues 
requires a consideration of the demand and supply dynamics and how these 
dynamics may have changed over time. 
 
 
Myth #3:  Consignment Stock Must Cost More. 
 
Arranging to pay for items only at the time they are issued for use is 
referred to as consignment stocking.  With consignment stocking, the 
supplier owns the items, even on your premises, until your team issues or 
uses them.  Typically a monthly review of the quantity issued drives 
invoicing.  

Chapter 6 
86 
As the supplier must now finance the stock and accept the inventory 
risk, it is often believed that additional costs will be passed on to the 
purchaser.  This is not, however, always the case.  Gaining control of 
stocking gives the supplier many more options to be proactive in the 
management of the supply chain.  For example, they can schedule 
manufacturing and deliveries to suit their timetable rather than be reactive to 
your purchase orders, or they can draw on a wider network to manage safety 
stocks.  They may even decide to draw against your holding to supply other 
customers.  The flexibility of consignment stocking can provide the supplier 
the opportunity to reduce supply costs through improved manufacturing and 
supply chain efficiencies.  
Spares suppliers make their profit from the sale of material.  They 
don’t want stock sitting idle.  Therefore, they will have a greater interest in 
redirecting items that become slow moving.  As a supplier, they obviously 
have direct access to the market in order to arrange the sale of items that are 
not moving at your site.  This greater market access enables a degree of 
flexibility in managing stock that is not readily available to the typical end 
user and reduces the carrying risk of the inventory. 
Some suppliers will try to charge more for consignment stock, citing 
the investment cost and risk as the key reason.  However, a sensible approach 
to consignment stocking that identifies the supply chain opportunities can 
result in the double benefit of reduced inventory and reduced costs.  (See 
Chapter 8:  The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction). 
 
Example 
In this example the user company held a large supply of hydraulic 
hoses.  They had tried using a call-out service to provide a hose when 
needed.  However, they found this arrangement unsatisfactory because 
they sometimes had to wait too long for the service van to arrive. 
 
In negotiating a consignment deal, the supplier agreed to consignment 
stocking on the basis that: 
 
• The company would monitor holdings (and would be 
responsible for shortages). 
• The supplier could restock at its convenience (hence, it became 
fill-in work). 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
87 
• They could draw on the stock for other local emergencies if 
required. 
 
Under these arrangements the supplier was able to gain several 
efficiencies in working with the company.  As a result, it was not 
under pressure to increase its prices. In this win-win situation, the user 
company gained a $100,000 inventory reduction with no increase in 
their risk. 
 
 
Myth #4:  Software Will Solve The Problem. 
 
Almost everybody realizes that software alone does not provide a 
solution.  Yet, many companies, when faced with an inventory reduction 
program, see the need for new software as a key prerequisite.  Sometimes 
this software is inventory management software and sometimes it is the use 
of a new tool such as optimization software. 
Software provides data availability and visibility.  Both are key 
requirements of an inventory review program, but the software itself is only a 
tool.  Like all tools, it needs to be used properly and in the proper context.  
Ongoing inventory reduction is achieved by a combination of culture, 
knowledge, and data availability. 
Here is the problem:  if addressing the culture and approach to 
materials and spares inventory management can drive an improvement in 
performance, then conceding that these need to be addressed is the 
equivalent to admitting to an initial failure on the part of management.  
Psychologically, this type of admission is difficult and can be both a 
challenge and a humbling experience.  As a result, a new tool is seen as the 
way to effect change as this provides the reason that new outcomes can be 
achieved (that is, because we have new tools, not because we didn’t 
originally do our jobs properly). 
There are a number of examples where the same software exists in 
different parts of the same company, under the same policies and procedures, 
and yet vastly different results are achieved.  There are also examples where 
companies buy a new optimization tool, but achieve no sustainable change.  
Clearly the issue is not the availability of the software, but rather the culture 
and measures within which it is applied.   
By understanding the dynamics of materials and spares inventory 
management, and providing appropriate measuring and reporting systems, a 

Chapter 6 
88 
company can ensure an ongoing focus on inventory reduction.  This ongoing 
focus will last long after the software implementation is forgotten. 
 
 
Myth #5:  Putting Items into Inventory Saves Money. 
 
Adding an item to inventory is sometimes seen as a way of spreading 
the cost of the item so that the original purchasers can get a lower charge to 
their budget.  Managing budgets in this way is particularly relevant with 
project and engineering items that have a minimum order quantity. 
Myth #5 is similar to Myth#1:  Economic Quantities Save Money, 
except that the focus here is not on purchasing efficiencies, but rather on 
operational or project budgets.  Ordering items where the delivery is in 
excess of needs and having the excess put into inventory reduces the direct 
cost to the immediate budget.  Managing the purchase in this way has the 
impact of appearing to save money, but it does not change the actual cash 
cost to the company. 
A mismatch between the authority to assign items to inventory and the 
responsibility for the inventory investment can result in inventory being used 
as a dumping ground for excess parts, with the apparent impact of reducing 
operational or project costs.  For the company, this is a false economy. 
 
Example 
For a particular project a special type of electrical cable was ordered.  
The project only required 100m of cable, but the minimum delivery 
was 1,000m.  The excess 900m was transferred to inventory.  The total 
cost of the cable was $200,000.  
 
As the project used only 10% of the cable, the project was charged 
$20,000.  An ‘investment’ in inventory of $180,000 was made, despite 
there being no further need for that cable.  The project manager 
believed that he had saved the company money because he got the 
cable for his project for only $20,000.  
 
The company had, however, spent $200,000.  This expenditure was 
not immediately recognized because it did not appear in the profit and 
loss statement or project budget.  Had the project been made to 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
89 
recognize the entire cost of the cable, then perhaps a different solution 
would have been found.  
 
 
These Myths Have A Dual Impact 
 
Achieving 
sustainable 
inventory 
reduction 
relies 
upon 
the 
implementation of new management practices, measures, and reporting to 
drive new behavior.  As in most areas of management, however, there are 
truisms that often prevent action, or worse, give the appearance of action but 
no sustainable benefit.  These are called the 5 Myths of Inventory Reduction. 
These myths have the dual impact of adding to the inventory 
investment and preventing action to achieve sustainable reduction.  
Overcoming these myths requires a universal recognition of the cash impact 
of inventory and an understanding of the behavioral issues that impact 
management decisions.  Only after these myths are recognized and overcome 
can true inventory optimization be achieved. 
 
 
 
Why You Might Hold More Inventory Than You 
Really Need 
 
 
n all materials and spares inventory management systems, excessive 
inventory is created by a combination of systemic and structural 
issues and changes in circumstance.  In fact, at least twelve major reasons 
why you might hold more inventory than you really need have been 
identified.  Three of these reasons relate to change that may not have been 
recognized and nine relate to systemic and structural issues in your business.  
 
Change-Related Issues 
 
There are three main issues that relate to change: 
 
1. The initial max-min is based on a best guess, which is not 
revisited unless a stockout occurs. 
 
I

Chapter 6 
90 
2. Improvements in supply chain efficiencies have not flowed onto 
inventory holdings. 
 
3. It is assumed that you must make the inventory investment and 
little effort has gone into minimizing that investment. 
 
In each of these cases, an initial inventory stocking decision was made 
based on the best understanding of the situation at that time.  Perhaps with 
little or no information or history, assumptions had to be made about supply, 
demand, and the reorder point requirements.  The supply chain capability 
may have been quite limited or inflexible, or suppliers may not have been 
willing to support their business through consignment stock. 
However, it is entirely possible that the original circumstance has now 
changed and that the original decisions have not been revisited.  With the 
busy-ness of managing materials, spares, and operations, these decisions are 
unlikely to have been revisited if the changes have not resulted in a stockout, 
which of course would be a trigger for action. 
In the period of time since the original parameters were set, it is likely 
that:  
 
• You now have a better understanding of the demand requirements.  
• You have worked to improve the supply chain or your suppliers 
have. 
• The commercial environment has changed so that suppliers may be 
prepared to invest to support their ongoing relationship with your 
business. 
 
In reviewing the opportunities for inventory reduction, it is necessary 
to ensure that the issues relating to these types of change are understood.  
This must include both where change has occurred, but has not yet been 
recognized, and where you could change the future result through positive 
action today. 
 
Systemic and Structural Issues 
 
The systemic/structural causes of excess inventory can be harder to 
influence than the change-related causes, but should be understood none the 
less.  
 
 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
91 
1. Misaligned Responsibilities 
Based on years of working with companies in different industries and 
all over the world, it is my opinion that the misalignment of 
responsibilities is the number one reason why companies hold more 
inventory than they really need.  The level of inventory that is held is 
almost always a function of who is responsible for determining what 
should be held and who is responsible for the level of investment.  
Fundamentally, these are two very different considerations and form 
the basis of the inventory tension discussed in Chapter 1. 
 
If one person has the authority to add an item to inventory, but is not 
responsible for the financial impact on the company of that decision, 
then it is likely that the inventory will be overstocked.  This 
overstocking is not driven by any malice or poor intent.  It is driven by 
basic human nature that seeks to maximize our personally measured 
outcomes.  For example, managers responsible for sales and gross 
margin are unlikely to be motivated to minimize inventory if they 
believe that more inventory gives them more opportunity to make 
more sales.  Similarly, engineers responsible for keeping a factory 
producing are unlikely to be motivated to reduce inventory if they are 
not held accountable for the dollar value invested and if they believe 
that they can minimize their own risk of equipment failure by stocking 
up on inventory. 
 
It is by aligning both the responsibilities and the authorities relating to 
materials and spares inventory management that an appropriate focus 
on true inventory optimization can be maintained. 
 
 
2. Management Systems 
The way that companies are set up to process the issue of materials 
and spares from their storeroom or warehouse, and place orders to 
replenish materials and spares, can have a significant impact on 
inventory holdings.  Unfortunately, many companies fail to recognize 
the impact that their own systems have on their overall materials and 
spares inventory management.  They tend to think only about the 
external supply chain and its implications.  By including a review of 
their own internal processes, they can make significant gains in 
reducing the replenishment cycle. 
 

Chapter 6 
92 
When an item is sold or used, how long is it until the inventory system 
recognizes the movement of the item and takes corrective action?  A 
slow system will require an increase in the quantity of safety stock 
required, as the ROP calculations are based on the entire lead time or 
replenishment cycle.  Examples where long cycles are particularly 
obvious include where there is a significant period between 
replenishment reviews or where there is an overly long reorder 
process. 
 
For example, one company that operated without a computerized 
system reviewed its reorder requirements once a week (on Wednesday 
mornings).  This weekly approach meant that any item that reached a 
reorder point on Wednesday afternoon would not be reviewed for a 
full seven days.  If requirements were reviewed and reordered daily, 
the company would save a full week’s stock holding.  If they operated 
with an average holding of 10 weeks stock, they would drive a 10% 
reduction in inventory! 
 
Another company, which was computerized and could essentially 
review their needs instantly (if they so chose), had a purchasing 
process that often took a week or more before the actual order was 
placed.  Again, streamlining the ordering process would save that 
company five or six days of stock holding and a significant level of its 
investment. 
 
A third company was slow to receipt their deliveries into the 
storeroom and enter them into the computer.  This delay also adds to 
the restocking lead time and increases the inventory held. 
 
 
3. The Number and Location of Stores 
The more locations that exist for storing an item, the greater the 
quantity will be stored.  The generation of greater quantities from 
having more locations is primarily driven by the perceived need for 
safety stock at each location.  Obviously, then, if there are fewer 
locations, there will be less inventory.  The savings that can be 
generated in safety stock is the main driver behind companies 
centralizing warehousing and inventory holdings (in addition to the 
real estate costs!). 
 
 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
93 
As a rule of thumb, the safety stock requirements increase with the 
square root of the number of stores.  So, an organization with two 
inventory stores will hold 41% more safety stock than if they had only 
one.  (The square root of 2 is 1.41).  If they had three stores they 
would hold 73% more safety stock; four stores 100% more safety 
stock, and so on. 
 
In addition to the number of inventory stores, the location of those 
stores also systematically drives inventory levels.  A location in a 
remote rural area is likely to need relatively higher levels of safety 
stock than a location in a major city.  The additional safety stock 
reflects the likely proximity to suppliers and the extended lead-time 
for supply.  Great care should be taken to select an inventory location 
in order to get the best balance of customer service, inventory cost, 
and logistics costs. 
 
 
4. High Safety Stock Levels 
Previously it was discussed that changes may occur in the supply or 
demand for a product that would enable a change in safety stock 
holdings.  The key there was to be aware of the change and make the 
necessary adjustments. 
 
In some circumstances though, safety stock levels are set across a 
range of products on a rule-of-thumb basis.  Setting safety stock in this 
way assumes that all items exhibit the same attributes when it comes 
to inventory requirements.  These are usually the attributes of the item 
requiring the greatest level of inventory and so will systematically 
overstock all the other items.  Setting safety stock levels with a broad 
brush approach is another example of the problems with a ‘one size 
fits all’ approach to inventory management.  Getting the most out of 
your inventory investment requires inventory setting to be done on an 
item-by-item basis. 
 
 
5. Economic Order Quantity 
Previously this chapter discussed the 5 Myths of Inventory Reduction, 
including the myth that Economic Order Quantities save money.  The 
central argument here is that economic order quantities are only 
economic if enough of the product is used or sold. 

Chapter 6 
94 
In addition, order quantities are sometimes described as being 
economic, but are really just for convenience.  For example, orders 
may be placed for three or six months stock because it saves having to 
place another order in that period.  However, in the current age of 
technology and administrative automation, ordering items for the sake 
of convenience rather than to minimize investment would seem to be 
out of place. 
 
Today there is automated ordering, electronic delivery acceptance, and 
electronic funds transfer for payment.  If the volume of traffic through 
these systems were doubled, the costs may increase marginally due to 
server or bandwidth issues, but they would be far outweighed by the 
savings from an inventory reduction. 
 
 
6. Unrecognized Obsolescence 
Accounting standards require that once an item is recognized as 
obsolete, its value is written down to zero.  The problem, of course, is 
that the item needs to be recognized as obsolete first.  It is not unusual 
for an item to become obsolete, but not be recognized as such. 
 
This is because most inventory systems drive people to manage active 
stock; thus, obsolete stock is likely to go unnoticed until or unless it 
appears on an aged item or non-moving stock report.  However, items 
do not get into these reports until it is too late to proactively manage 
obsolete stock. 
 
In some cases, companies operate reward systems that effectively 
‘punish’ people for accumulating obsolete stock.  This has the 
unwanted consequence of inadvertently encouraging inventory 
managers not to recognize obsolete stock.  The intent is well meaning 
in that it is supposed to discourage purchasing items that become 
obsolete.  However, in practice, these systems don’t allow the 
admission of a mistake or for the natural occurrence that some items 
are likely to become obsolete.  Managing obsolescence in this way 
drives a behavior to not recognize obsolescence as the recognition 
impacts the individual’s recognition or rewards. 
 
 
 

Issues, Myths and a Few Home Truths 
95 
7. Product and Range Complexity 
Imagine if you ran a business with only one stock item and that item 
only came in black.  Then, your inventory management would be 
simple and (hopefully) your holding would be minimal. 
 
Holding a range of items means that the inventory holding will by 
necessity increase because each item will have batch and safety stock 
requirements.  The increase in inventory will occur whether the 
complexity is a wide range of different products or spares or a wide 
range of options on a similar product or spares.  For example, a 
hardware store will hold a wide range of product to attract customers; 
a wire manufacturer will hold a wide range of sizes and tensile 
strengths of wire.  This also occurs with maintenance materials and 
spares inventory when a company has a wide range of different 
machines. 
 
Once it is recognized that product or range complexity is a key reason 
for the level of inventory, efforts can be focused to minimize the 
complexity.  Actions might include rationalizing the range, increasing 
scrutiny on individual products rather than applying a ‘one size fits all’ 
policy, or standardizing equipment. 
 
 
8. Project and Special Inventory 
Previously it was discussed that one of the main reasons for holding 
inventory is to act as a temporary measure to accumulate stock prior to 
major projects.  Holding inventory in this way occurs particularly in 
businesses with seasonal activities, rolling projects, major sales 
periods, maintenance shutdowns, and so on. 
 
These events mean that they regularly hold higher-than-standard levels 
of stock in anticipation of usage in a particular time frame.  Often 
people say ‘Our inventory would be fine if it weren’t for these events.’  
The fact is that these events are likely to be a key part of your business 
and, rather than be an excuse for holding excess stock, they should be 
a target for closer management to ensure that the investment is 
minimized. 
 
Managing these events efficiently requires an approach to match 
supply more closely with demand and a method of clearing stock that 

Chapter 6 
96 
is not used in the ‘window.’  That is, inventory that is not used for the 
purpose for which it was purchased should be disposed of.  Typically 
people say, ‘We might use it later’ and then never do.  Companies 
should bite the bullet and take care of the excess inventory sooner 
rather than later. 
 
 
9. Operating Requirements of Supply 
Almost all manufacturing and supply systems operate at some level on 
batching quantities.  This could be the minimum quantity for a 
machine set up and production run, the minimum quantity for efficient 
shipping/transport, or the minimum quantity for the time and effort 
involved in actually purchasing the item. 
 
Having minimum inventory levels that are based on supply rather than 
demand almost invariably means that inventory will be held at some 
point in the supply chain.  One way to minimize the quantity of 
inventory that is affected by this is to minimize the batches that are 
required at the bottleneck that causes the inventory to be held.  In 
many situations, making changes to bottlenecks will be difficult and 
could be expensive if it requires major equipment upgrades. 
 
However, operating efficiently within your existing system requires an 
approach that ensures operating to the absolute limits of the existing 
bottlenecks.  To operate to the limits of the existing bottleneck, you 
need to understand whether the bottleneck is real, imagined, or a result 
of tradition (‘We always do it that way!’).  Breakthroughs occur when 
changes are made not only to eliminate these bottlenecks, but also to 
minimize their impact by working the system to its limits rather than 
accepting the problem.  
 
 
 
 

 
97 
Chapter 7 
 
 
The Spare Parts Storeroom 
 
 
The Central Hub 
 
 
he spare parts storeroom is the central hub of materials and spares 
management activity.  It is, of course, where the spares are stored 
(unless you allow squirrel stores).  It is where they are supplied from when 
needed, and where they are delivered to when ordered.  The management of 
the storeroom and the process therein can have a significant impact on your 
materials and engineering spares outcomes.  Think about the impact of a 
storeroom that: 
 
• 
Is slow to receive goods into the stores system. 
• 
Is poorly laid out, making it difficult to find items. 
• 
Is poorly labeled, making it difficult to identify items. 
• 
Exerts control over holding levels without reference to their 
customers, the end users. 
• 
Is slow to reorder items. 
• 
Doesn’t seek to protect the items in the store from environmental 
effects. 
• 
Makes it difficult to record items removed ‘after hours’. 
• 
Doesn’t inspect inwards goods to ensure quality. 
• 
Doesn’t conduct cycle counts to ensure accuracy. 
• 
Doesn’t maintain its catalogue to ensure visibility of items. 
 
The result of these actions (or inactions) is a materials and spares 
management system that fails to deliver the right parts, in the right place, at 
the right time, for the right reason.  And this is just a selection of the 
problems that can be found in storerooms all over the world! 
T

Chapter 7 
98 
Although each of the above is important, most can be dealt with quite 
readily when they are identified by responsible management.  This section of 
the book is dedicated to addressing some issues that are less obvious and 
require some difficult action to correct.  The so-called ‘squirrel stores’ are a 
cultural and behavioral issue that is not addressed solely by changing 
process.  Lean Thinking has been applied across many areas of 
manufacturing, but does not yet appear to have made its way into the 
storeroom.  The idea of organizing the storeroom to suit the customer is not 
implemented as widely as it probably should — in fact maintenance is 
sometimes seen as the enemy of the storeroom rather than the customer.  
Addressing these more difficult issues will take you further along the path of 
achieving and implementing smart inventory solutions. 
 
 
 
Squirrel Stores and Why You Would Be Nuts to 
Keep Them 
 
 
reaking the locks was the only option.  It was 2am 
and Line 1 had stopped completely.  The good 
news was that we knew exactly what the problem was 
and how to fix it.  We also knew that the spare part 
we needed had been in the storeroom earlier in the 
day — I had seen it there myself.  The bad news was 
that it was no longer there and we didn’t know who 
had taken it or where they put it.  We were pretty 
sure that one of the dayshift crew had taken it and 
put it in his locker.  Waiting was not an option so locks 
had to be broken.  We just hoped that we found the 
part before doing too much damage. 
 
 
Sound familiar?  This scene is played out in maintenance workshops 
all over the world.  Maintenance team members take parts and put them 
away in their own stores and sometimes, when really needed, the part cannot 
be found.  The team members do this either because they think it is 
convenient or that it saves time.  Convenient and time saving for them, but 
what about the rest of us! 
Let’s face it, reliability and maintenance people are different.  They 
have a unique position in the world.  We all know that when things go 
B

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
99 
wrong, maintenance gets the blame.  But when things go right, production 
gets the credit.  As a result, maintenance people hoard spare parts, like 
squirrels keeping nuts for the winter.  That’s why these unofficial stores are 
often referred to as ‘squirrel stores’.  Look around almost any workshop and 
you will find spare parts that are being held in squirrel stores, ‘just in case’.   
The problem with this, as demonstrated above, is that when parts are 
held outside of the official storeroom or inventory management system, they 
actually impact the rest of your inventory holding for that part.  Not only in 
the obvious ways of poor availability and access, but also in less obvious 
ways relating to inventory levels, operational expenditure, and even your 
reliability program — more on that in a moment. 
First, let’s understand why these stores exist.  The main reason is trust.  
That is, trust that your official store will have the required parts when they 
are needed.  If your storeroom management is unreliable, this erodes trust in 
the system.  Also, if team members know that other team members are 
squirreling away parts, then they might do the same — just in case.  No one 
wants to be caught short.  Not only does it let the plant down, but it is 
personally inconvenient. 
More than just being inconvenient, not having the spare part can be a 
real hassle.  If the plant is down at 2:00 am and it is your job to fix it, but 
there is no spare, then you get the hassle from production — even though it 
is not your fault.  Most people would believe that it is better to avoid all 
those problems and keep your own little emergency squirrel store — again, 
just in case. 
A third reason is a personal rationalization that squirrel stores improve 
service (or at least reduce downtime) by reducing the time needed to go and 
get the spare from the official store.  Squirrel stores are usually held closer to 
the plant (or at least closer to the team member) than the official store; hence, 
the time to access the store is reduced.  
No matter what the logic or reason, squirrel stores are ultimately a 
cultural issue and they need to be managed on that basis.  This requires 
building trust in the system, communicating the negative impact of 
squirreling, modeling and encouraging the right behavior, and not allowing 
any exceptions. 
Now, how do squirrel stores really impact your inventory levels, 
operational expenditure, and reliability program?  Also, why would you be 
nuts to allow your team to keep squirrel stores?  Here are six reasons: 
 
 
 

Chapter 7 
100 
1. You will hold more inventory. 
Duplicating the parts being held in your official store by holding parts 
in a squirrel store obviously adds to your inventory.  However, it is the flow 
on effects of squirrel stores that can be much, much worse.  You might be 
surprised to realize that in addition to duplicating your inventory, squirrel 
stores can also significantly increase the level of spares held in your official 
store.  How?  Through a mechanism that I call Induced Demand Volatility 
(IDV).  
IDV occurs when your team takes more spares than are actually 
required so that they can put some into their squirrel store.  This behavior 
produces false data on usage and shows higher volatility than is really the 
case.  This higher volatility then results in a need to hold more safety stock 
— after all the reason that you hold safety stock is to account for volatility.  
The following section ‘How Much Do Squirrel Store Really Cost?’ shows a 
situation where induced demand volatility could increase spares holdings by 
264%!   
 
2. You will spend more money. 
Obviously, the parts in the squirrel store and the extra parts in the 
official store have to be paid for.  Therefore, much more cash is tied up than 
would otherwise be the case.  What many people don’t consider is that this 
situation diverts funds from other and more useful purposes.  Still waiting for 
that tool to make your life easier?  Perhaps the money that you need is tied 
up in your squirrel store! 
 
3. You will spend more on your operating budget and skew your 
reporting. 
When your team removes more items from the store than they really 
need at that time, the costs have to be charged somewhere.  Guess where — 
one of your operating budgets!  Not only does this limit your ability to 
manage and improve your reliability (with what will already be a tight or 
underfunded budget), but also it skews your reporting of costs by bringing 
forward costs that you could have incurred later.  In many cases you may 
even be paying for parts that never get used, which leads to the next point. 
 
4. You will have increased obsolescence. 
Is anyone really keeping track of those squirrel stores?  Of course not.  
So, you have spent the money and when the item eventually becomes 
obsolete (as everything does), the squirrel stores will contain items that 
should have been used or should not even have been purchased!  The only 

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
101 
time they will be cleaned out is when someone decides to tidy up their 
squirrel store or workshop and you know that they will then just throw the 
parts in the trash. 
 
5. You will increase your downtime. 
This is perhaps the worst part of the squirrel stores phenomenon.  If 
the ‘unofficial’ parts are held in a locker or tool kit so that only the ‘owner’ 
can access them, then the rest of your team cannot access them.  If you have 
a breakdown and need that part right away, you might not be able to get to it 
or might not even know that it is there!  The irony here is that the part was 
being held in order to improve service and the approach actually made things 
worse.  The result of this scenario is an increase in ‘official’ holdings, 
increasing expenditure even further. 
 
6. Your reliability program will be endangered. 
As mentioned previously, when your team keeps squirrel stores, they 
skew the data on usage.  But this doesn’t just impact your expenditure.  It 
also means that your official records will show higher demand than actual at 
some times and lower demand than actual at others.  If you are trying to 
perform any sort of analysis to understand your failure patterns, this data will 
be useless at best and, at worst, misleading.  All that money spent on 
reliability training, software, gadgets, and cultural change could be wasted 
because of a failure to control squirrel stores. 
 
Unfortunately squirrel stores are almost a fixture of maintenance 
departments.  They result from the mindset of reliability and maintenance 
professionals who are passionate about reducing downtime and take 
equipment failure personally.  This drives them to hoard items that they can 
use later and to short cut the system to try to improve response times.  
However, this approach does not work.  Squirrel stores are a blight in your 
system.  They can have a significant and detrimental impact on your 
expenditure and your reliability program.  You would be nuts to allow or 
endorse them. 
 
 
How Much Do Squirrel Stores Really Cost? 
 
The following example demonstrates the inventory effect of squirrel 
stores.  For this example, let’s consider a part that is used weekly and 
therefore has an average demand of 1 unit per week.  This type of part is a 

Chapter 7 
102 
major target for squirrel stores as holding them reduces the number of trips to 
the storeroom.   
 
Let’s compare two situations: 
 
1. No Squirrel Store:  The item is removed from the storeroom as 
needed — 1 per week. 
2. Squirrel Store:  The item is removed 2 at a time with movement 
every 2 weeks. 
 
The demand data for these two situations is shown in Table 7-1 and the 
demand profile for these two different situations is shown in Figures 7-1 and 
7-2. 
 
 
Week 
Demand Data 
No Squirrel 
Store 
With 
Squirrel 
Store 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
0 
3 
1 
2 
4 
1 
0 
5 
1 
2 
6 
1 
0 
7 
1 
2 
And so on… 
 
Table 7-1: Comparison of Demand Data 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Fi
 
 
Figure 7-1: D
igure 7-2: Dem
Demand Profil
mand Profile 
103 
le Without a 
With a Squir
The Spa
Squirrel Store
rrel Store 
are Parts Storer
e 
room 
 
 

Chapter 7 
104 
It is clear from Figures 7-1 and 7-2 that, while in each case the average 
is one demand per week, the demand profile is not just different, it is 
completely opposite. 
A common way to calculate the inventory needs in this situation is by 
using a Gaussian distribution.  This approach is familiar to most people as it 
can be represented by the formula: 
 
Reorder Point = (Usage rate x lead time) + safety stock 
 
Alternatively: 
 
ROP = (D x LT) + csf x MAD x  (LT) 
 
Where, 
RP  
= reorder point 
D  
= average demand per week (for our example this is 1 per 
week) 
LT  
= Lead time in weeks (let’s assume 4 weeks) 
csf 
= customer service factor (or availability factor) 
  
   (here we will use a csf of 2.56; this assumes a 98% 
availability) 
MAD  
= Mean Average Deviation — a measure of demand 
variation.  In this example with no squirrel store, this 
measure is 0 (there is no variation); with the squirrel store 
the MAD is 1. 
   
= square root 
 
 
 
Results 
 
Scenario 1:  Using the above formula and data. 
 
Most people are surprised when they see the result of holding 
inventory in a squirrel store — the Reorder Point in your official store can be 
more than double the Reorder Point without the squirrel store.  Table 7-2 
shows the results for this scenario. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Th
official s
holding 
items he
(IDV) th
the calcu
much inv
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Me
Re Ord
Average
Table 7-2: Re
his result then
store, if you 
without the 
eld in the squ
hat the squirre
ulation of saf
ventory. 
Figure 7-3: A
easure 
der Point 
e Inventory 
esults for Sce
n means that 
allow a squir
squirrel store
uirrel store b
el store create
fety stock in t
Average Inven
105 
No Squirrel
Store 
4 
2.5 
nario 1 
the average l
rrel store, is 2
e (see Figure 
but due to th
es in your off
the above for
ntory Increase
The Spa
l 
With Squ
Store
10
9.1
level of inven
264% greater 
7-3).  This 
he Induced D
ficial store.  T
rmula, leading
es 264% with
are Parts Storer
uirrel 
e 
ntory held in y
than the ave
is not due to
Demand Volat
The IDV chan
g you to hold
 
h a Squirrel St
room 
your 
rage 
o the 
tility 
nges 
d too 
tore 

Chapter 7 
106 
Scenario 2:  Override the calculation and manually set your reorder 
point to 4 for both scenarios. 
 
Let’s now assume that you understand the impact of the IDV on your 
calculation and decide to manually set the reorder level for both situations to 
4, knowing that you only ever use 4 items during the lead time for supply.  In 
this scenario, the average for the squirrel inventory holding reduces to 3.5 
items (including the items held in the squirrel store).   
 
This is still 40% higher than the situation without the squirrel store! 
 
Do you still think that squirrel stores don’t cost much? 
 
 
 
MRO and Engineering Spares:  Lean, Mean, or 
Somewhere In Between? 
 
 
ean Manufacturing (or ‘Lean’ as it has become widely known) 
gained worldwide recognition after being acknowledged as the 
philosophy that helped make the Japanese auto industry the industrial 
powerhouse that it has been for the past several decades. The publication of 
books such as Toyota Production System, The Machine That Changed the 
World, and Lean Thinking helped make the philosophy accessible to tens or 
even hundreds of thousands of companies worldwide.   
Although originally developed as a way of embedding higher quality 
and lower costs in manufacturing organizations, Lean principles have since 
been applied in many different organizations and management situations.  
One of these is the Engineering Materials and Spares Storeroom. 
One of the key benefits of becoming Lean in a manufacturing 
organization is savings in inventory and working capital.  Therefore, it is 
perhaps ironic that many organizations applying Lean to their storeroom 
activities end up being mean rather than lean.  Similar to the earlier 
discussion on JIT, lean techniques were developed to manage a production 
environment.  By applying the immediate and linear thinking associated with 
production line management to the timelines and complexity of the 
storeroom, companies can miss real opportunities to embed quality and 
reduce costs in their storeroom activities.  In an effort to appear efficient, the 
methods used in Lean are ‘cherry picked’ and applied without adopting the 
L

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
107 
whole philosophy.  This approach can result in the achievement of working 
capital (or financial) targets while holding too much of the wrong inventory 
and too little of the right inventory.  This really is ‘mean’ thinking!  
The key to applying Lean is described in the forward to the book 
Toyota Production System by Taiichi Ohno: 
 
To understand its tremendous success, one has to 
grasp the philosophy behind it without being 
sidetracked by particular aspects of the system…if 
the system is introduced without being part of a 
total philosophy… problems will ensue.’ 
Muramatsu Rintaro 
 Faculty of Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
 
According to Taiichi Ohno, the philosophy behind lean is based on the 
absolute elimination of waste.  This philosophy is embodied in the 7 Wastes 
identified in Toyota Production System.  Before moving on to explain these 
and how they can be applied to the Engineering Materials and Spares 
Storeroom, we must first understand the principles of lean. 
 
 
The Principles of Lean 
 
Developing a lean storeroom involves much more that applying the 
process review of value stream mapping or adopting Kan Ban style 
techniques.  It is about applying the principles that support the concept of 
lean.   
In the late 1980s, a team from MIT undertook a major research project 
to investigate and understand different manufacturing techniques for 
automobiles.  For this study, the authors visited 90 automotive assembly 
plants in 17 countries.  This research resulted in the book The Machine That 
Changed the World.  This book documented the effect of Lean Production.  
However, it was only when the authors wrote the book Lean Thinking that 
they clarified the principles for relentlessly eliminating waste. 
 
 
The five key principles and their application to MRO and engineering spares 
are: 
 
 

Chapter 7 
108 
1. Specify Value:  Value must be as defined by the customer.  
The MRO and engineering spares storeroom has, in effect, two 
customers:  the users of the spares and the financers of the spares.  The 
users specify value as having the right spare available, at the right 
time.  The users only care about spare parts sitting on the shelf to the 
extent that this helps assure them that the parts will be available when 
required.  Having parts on the shelf adds no real value to the user — 
only its availability when required adds value.  This is a subtle yet 
important difference. 
 
Similarly, the financier sees value as only financing the minimum 
required value of spares to operate the plant.  This means having the 
right spares there for the right reason.  Underinvesting in the right 
spares adds no value to the financier because it impacts plant 
operation.   
 
So the user wants the right spare available at the right time and the 
financier wants the right spares stocked for the right reason.  The needs 
of the user and financier are often seen as being in conflict, but they 
are actually far more aligned than many people realize.  
 
 
2. Identify the Value Stream:  Define the value adding steps and 
eliminate the waste.   
Managing engineering materials and spares is a complex task primarily 
because of the number of spares held and the fact that they may all 
have different attributes relating to supply and demand.  Couple this 
with the physical activity of managing a storeroom and there is plenty 
of room both to misunderstand the value stream and for waste to occur.  
Examples of the 7 Wastes will be covered shortly. 
 
 
3. Flow:  Eliminate bottle necks and keep the product moving. 
This is the most obvious aspect of lean thinking and it relates as much 
to keeping spare parts, people, and information moving through the 
system as it does to keeping manufactured parts moving in a 
manufacturing system.  However, when spares are sitting on the shelf, 
they are not flowing.  Having spares sitting on shelves for long periods 
might be hard to change because of the nature of some spares, such as 

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
109 
insurance spares.  This idea can just as readily be applied to the people 
and information involved with the management of the inventory. 
 
 
4. Pull:  Base activity on the demand from the next step. 
This principle is central to lean thinking and the application of this 
principle to spares management requires the matching of supply with 
use.  At first glance the existence of a random failure pattern (as 
oppose to production demand patterns) in spares management makes 
this principle difficult to implement.  However, by working with both 
suppliers and the users, it is not impossible.  It does, however, require 
teamwork. 
 
 
5. Perfection:  Pursue perfection through continuous improvement. 
MRO and engineering spares have previously in this book been 
referred to as the ‘forgotten investment’.  Companies often decide their 
holding requirements in a ‘set and forget’ manner —this means that the 
spares holdings are not reviewed unless a stockout occurs.  Similarly, 
the practices associated with supply and fulfillment are not reviewed 
unless there is an external driver such as a system upgrade.  As a 
result, little continuous improvement in stock holding is achieved, 
making it difficult to implement Lean Thinking. 
 
 
The application of Lean requires that these five principles are applied in a 
systematic and continuous way.  This is shown schematically in Figure 7-4. 
 
 

Chapter 7
 
Figure 7
 
 
 
Applyin
 
Th
quality a
support t
V
identify 
operatio
Toyota 
improve
parts. 
Fo
each of w
the step
mapping
7 
7-4: The Princ
ng the 7 Wast
he Toyota Pr
and reducing
this system, T
alue Stream 
opportunities
ns.  However
Production 
ed (and waste 
or example, c
which may ha
s being mapp
g to each part 
ciples of Lean
tes to MRO a
roduction Sy
g costs throug
Toyota identif
Mapping is t
s for eliminat
r, for spare pa
System, Taii
eliminated) a
consider a sto
ave a differen
ped will be m
is possible b
110 
n Thinking 
and Enginee
ystem is base
gh the absolu
fied 7 Wastes
the technique
ting waste.  It
arts there are 
ichi Ohno s
at each step; t
oreroom with
nt supply and
many and va
but unrealistic
ering Spare P
ed on the ide
ute eliminatio
s to be elimin
e that is mos
t can be appl
some complic
ays that effi
this is a comp
h several thou
d demand patt
aried.  Apply
c.  A more pra
Parts 
ea of buildin
on of waste. 
ated.   
st widely use
ied to store r
cating factors
ficiency must
plication for s
usand spare p
tern.  In this c
ying value str
agmatic appro
 
ng in 
 To 
ed to 
oom 
s.  In 
t be 
pare 
parts, 
case, 
ream 
oach 

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
111 
is to apply value stream mapping to the physical and informational storeroom 
activities and utilize the 7 Wastes more generally for reviewing the actual 
supply and management of spares.   
Other complications include the dichotomy between the philosophy of 
just in time (JIT) and the need for slow moving and insurance spares, as well 
as the mismatch that often occurs between demand or usage quantities and 
minimum order quantities when commercial terms are dictated by the 
supplier.  These complications don’t prevent the opportunity to identify and 
eliminate waste by applying Toyota’s 7 Wastes.  They just require a 
perspective that understands their unique attributes.  The following is 
provided as a thought starter on how waste occurs and can be eliminated in 
spares management. 
 
 
1. Waste Through Mistakes 
One of the main insights of lean is that most costs are assigned when a 
product and/or a process is designed.  With respect to spares, this 
translates to the decisions that are made during the Plan and Set 
Parameters stage and then included in the storeroom (see Figure 7-1, 
The Materials and Inventory Management Cycle).  This is the design 
point for spares management, the point at which decisions are made 
that affect the spares holding for years to come.  Yet often these ‘Day 
one decisions’ are paid too little attention.  Many subsequent spares 
issues could actually be prevented through greater focus at this time. 
 
Other mistakes that result in spare parts waste include:  poor parts 
selection, having the wrong parts in stock, and paperwork/keying 
errors that result in inaccurate data. 
 
 
2. Waste in Process 
Traditionally this applies to process issues such as set-up time and 
excessive processing.  In spare parts management, this translates to 
excessive bureaucracy and excessive process steps to create, order, and 
manage spares.  Often these issues are created by a desire for control, 
a lack of teamwork in determining appropriate approaches, and 
inadequate policy and procedures.  Eliminating this waste requires 
giving people the skills and knowledge required so that they may 
efficiently complete their tasks without undue supervision or control.  
 

Chapter 7 
112 
 
3. Waste in Over Producing 
There are two types of ‘over production’ in spares management.  One 
is over ordering of stock, which usually occurs when economic order 
quantities are pursued inappropriately.  It must be recognized that 
economic quantities are not always economic, especially if the full 
quantity ordered is not used in a timely manner or is ultimately written 
off (see Chapter 6, The Five Myths of Inventory Reduction).  This 
type of waste can be eliminated by implementing appropriate stocking 
policies to provide ordering guidelines. 
 
The second example of ‘over production’ occurs when users remove 
more items from the storeroom than they really need.  Sometimes this 
happens for ‘just in case’ reasons; often it is a matter of wanting to 
have their own spares supply in their own tool kit.  In either case, this 
action results in the over ordering of spares and creates inaccuracies in 
data, both in usage levels and in volatility, and renders software-based 
optimization useless.  Eliminating this waste requires a cultural shift 
and the development of trust that the system will provide the 
availability of spares as required. 
 
 
4. Waste Through Storage 
Lean management seeks to eliminate storage buffers; this is one of the 
outcomes from using a Kan Ban system.  Spares management 
invariably relies on inventory buffers and it is unlikely that these will 
be eliminated in all cases.  However, setting safety stocks too high 
creates a bigger buffer than necessary.  This bigger buffer is a waste 
that can be eliminated. 
 
In addition, many tradespeople have the habit of creating their own 
spares squirrel stores, thereby duplicating holdings.  This habit creates 
another waste that can be eliminated.  As mentioned above, 
eliminating this waste requires a shift in culture rather than a shift in 
process. 
 
 
5. Waste in Transportation 
Good storeroom management requires that storerooms are laid out in a 
manner ensuring that the high demand items are located closer to the 

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
113 
entry/exit (and closer to the floor in high rise layouts) than the slow 
moving items.  This approach to layout of the storeroom eliminates 
much of the travel for personnel in storing and retrieving items and is 
a clear elimination of waste.  (See also the next section, Is Your 
Storeroom a Pit Stop or a Supermarket?) 
 
 
6. Waste in Time Spent Waiting 
The timely processing of the receipt of goods into the storeroom can 
have a significant impact on the level of inventory held and the 
visibility of that inventory to the user.  Companies that are tardy in this 
area (usually on the basis that ‘it is there if it is needed’) fail to realize 
that this practice adds to their effective lead time (increasing safety 
stock), Furthermore, if users check the stock on hand using a 
computer, they will not see the items waiting to be processed.  
Tolerating a situation where the users must visit the store to check 
holdings, because they know that items aren’t processed, embeds the 
waste in the system.  This waste can be eliminated by applying 
appropriate process discipline and receipting goods in a timely 
manner. 
 
 
7. Wasted Movements 
The ultimate wasted movement in spares management is the selection, 
cataloguing, ordering, receiving, storing, and stocktaking of items that 
are not ever used.  This doesn’t apply to insurance or critical items that 
are held in the actual hope that they are not ever used.  It does apply, 
however, to those items that are ordered without sufficient forethought 
or planning — items that eventually are written off and scrapped.  
 
Another wasted movement occurs when too many items are removed 
for (say) a preventive maintenance task and then some items are 
returned to the store.  This results in extra work for everyone.  That is 
not to say that the return to store is a waste.  After all, the alternative is 
stock held outside the store system.  But waste is created when the 
initial selection of too many items happens in lieu of proper planning.  
In both of these examples, the waste can be eliminated by appropriate 
forethought and planning. 
 
 

Chapter 7 
114 
 
Correct Application Enables Efficient Operations 
 
The documentation of the Toyota Production System and the 
subsequent development of lean thinking have, for more than 30 years, 
enabled companies in many different industries to eliminate waste and 
improve their operating outcomes.  The principles of lean are well 
understood.  However, their application to MRO and engineering spare parts 
inventory is often hampered by the linear thinking associated with 
manufacturing processes.  This has led to instances where the inventory 
holding is more mean than lean.  
Correctly applying lean principles to maintenance store rooms and 
MRO and engineering spares enables more efficient operations.  It also helps 
to eliminate excess and unnecessary spares holdings, resulting in greater 
stock turns and improved availability.  
 
 
 
Is Your Storeroom a Pit Stop or a Supermarket? 
 
 
ver worked in or visited a facility with a very large spare parts 
storeroom?  While walking through and understanding how they 
operate, you can sometimes actually feel like being in a local low-cost 
suburban supermarket rather than in the storeroom of a high tech 
manufacturing facility.  By that I mean that there may be long aisles that are 
not clearly marked, high use materials not always near the user’s entry/exit, 
and boxes in the aisles waiting to be unpacked.  To make the picture 
complete, you may even see a maintenance guy walking up and down an 
aisle saying, ‘Where do they keep the pump gaskets?’ 
Now compare this scenario with the cool efficiency of the pit crews in 
the Formula 1 racing when a car comes in for fuel, tires, and so on.  Of 
course a pit crew has it relatively easy because they know exactly what is 
required at each visit.  Still, it is interesting to think about how the large 
industrial storeroom (and maybe even your own storeroom) could be 
improved and made more efficient.  As with almost all things in operations, 
the starting point is to focus on the customer.  In this case, think of 
Maintenance as the Storeroom’s customer.  Storerooms exist to enable spares 
to be available to the maintenance team so that they can do their work.  It is 
reasonable to expect that the customer will want: 
E

The Spare Parts Storeroom 
115 
 
• 
Parts available as per the agreed stocking policy. 
• 
Parts in the places that the system says that they are. 
• 
Easy identification of parts and their stock codes (assuming that this 
must be noted when the part is removed). 
• 
Quick and easy retrieval of parts. 
 
Most people understand the concepts and relationships between layout 
and workflow so I won’t repeat them here.  I will say, however, that that one 
key to implementing these concepts is to ensure that the layout works for the 
customer — that is, the maintenance team.  Therefore, if your storeroom 
allows direct entry by the maintenance team, then the layout should work for 
them.  Even if you do not allow direct access, the above issues apply because 
this is what minimizes the time spent by the maintenance team while waiting 
for parts to be retrieved.   
 
Too often storerooms are set up for the convenience of the storeroom 
personnel.  The workflow is set up based on their receipt and issue of parts, 
not to maximize the customer outcome.  Sometimes it is appropriate to 
sacrifice a little of the storeroom time efficiency if it then improves the time 
efficiency for the maintenance crew.  
 
A couple of other techniques and their potential issues are: 
 
• 
Storing items for one type of plant or machine together can seem like 
a good idea.  But it also can mean that both high usage and low 
usage items are stored together.  Mixing items in this way can then 
lead to storing other high usage items in a less optimal location — 
the optimal location is taken up by storing the low usage items of a 
type of plant or machine together with the high usage items for that 
plant of machine. 
 
• 
Storing all like items together (e.g., bearings) also seems like a good 
idea.  But doing so can result in confusion in parts and numbers, 
incorrect stocking (similar parts in the wrong bin), problems with 
returns to store if they are not controlled by the store personnel, and, 
of course, the co-location of high and low usage items, as mentioned 
above. 
 

Chapter 7 
116 
So what is your storeroom:  an F1 pit stop or a supermarket?  The closer you 
can get to being a pit stop, the less down time you will have and the more 
productive your maintenance team will be. 
 

 
117 
Chapter 8 
 
 
The 7 Actions for Inventory 
Reduction 
 
The Bathtub Principle 
 
 
efore moving on to explain the 7 Actions for Inventory 
Reduction, it is important to understand them in the context of the 
‘bathtub principle’.  To effect a change in the water level in a bathtub, either 
up or down, you need to change either the input or the output, that is, either 
adjust the faucet or the drain.  With materials and spares inventory 
management, the issue is very similar.  To effect a reduction in your 
inventory level, you need to either increase the output or reduce the input.  
This is what is known as the Bathtub Principle. 
Applying this principle to materials and spares inventory management 
means that the actions you can take will fall into one of two categories: 
 
1. Take more items out – remove items from inventory 
2. Put fewer items in – don’t put items into the inventory 
 
Recognizing the Bathtub Principle enables you to cut through all of 
the jargon and over-complication that gets written and discussed as part of 
inventory management.  At a fundamental level there are only two strategies 
for inventory reduction; all actions are variations of those strategies.  This is 
a key concept because many people find inventory reduction to be a complex 
exercise involving supply chain review and initiatives, IT installation, and 
major operational change.  At the heart of that though, you are only trying to 
find ways to take more items out, or put fewer items in.  The Bathtub 
Principle is demonstrated in Figure 8-1.   
B

Chapter 8
 
O
actually 
yourself
Simple a
 
 
Fi
 
 
A
for Inve
that the
(sometim
Double L
 
 
Hypot
 
 
hypothes
hypothes
developm
approach
 
 
H
8 
nce you und
make change
f, ‘Will this 
as that. 
igure 8-1:  Th
lthough the B
ntory Reduct
e actions a
mes called M
Loop Learnin
thesis Dri
ypothesis 
developm
ses about th
ses.  The hyp
ment.  To dev
h was applied
H
derstand that 
e happen, you
action take 
he Bathtub Pr
Bath Tub Pri
tion, two othe
are mutually
MECE).  The
ng. 
iven Anal
Driven An
ment for more
he subject an
potheses that 
velop the 7 A
d to a manage
118 
this is the m
u can take all 
more items 
inciple 
inciple is sim
er scientific a
y exclusive 
ese are Hyp
lysis 
nalysis has b
e than 200 y
nd then eithe
are proven th
Actions for Inv
ement discipli
mechanism th
decisions in t
out or put f
mple and guid
approaches ar
and comple
pothesis Driv
been the ba
years.  It invo
er proving o
hen form the b
ventory Redu
ine—inventor
hat is require
that context.  
fewer items 
des the 7 Act
re used to en
etely exhaus
en Analysis 
asis of scien
olves develop
r disproving 
basis for ong
uction, a scien
ry reduction. 
ed to 
Ask 
in?’  
 
tions 
nsure 
stive 
and 
ntific 
ping 
the 
oing 
ntific 

Doubl
 
 
of probl
real.  He
Th
never im
governin
these co
constrain
challeng
Argyris 
Loop Le
W
Actions 
in most 
were foc
A
the alter
are 100%
Inventor
most co
Actions 
describe
 
 
Figure 8
D
le Loop L
ouble Lo
Professor 
lem solving p
e called this ap
here are two 
mprove beyo
ng variables).
onstraints on
nts).  Achiev
ge to the con
called this D
earning extend
When developi
for Inventory
inventory m
cused on the c
s a result, th
rnatives that c
% complete.  
ry Cash Relea
omplete appro
for Inventor
ed in Chapter 
8-2: Double L
D
earning 
op Learning 
Chris Argyr
people work w
pproach to pr
problems w
nd your self
.  Second, yo
n your think
ving breakthro
nstraints inhe
Double Loop 
ds the thinkin
ing both the I
y Reduction, w
management t
cash rather th
he 7 Actions 
can be addres
They are the 
ase® Process i
oach to inve
ry Reduction
9. 
Loop Vs. Sing
The 7
119 
was develop
is, who recog
within constr
roblem solvin
ith Single Lo
f-imposed co
ou may not r
king (otherwi
ough improve
erent in the 
Learning.  F
ng of Single L
Inventory Ca
we first chall
thinking and 
an the SKU. 
for Inventory
ssed to achiev
only 7 action
is simultaneo
entory reduct
; the Invento
gle Loop Lear
7 Actions for In
ped in the 19
gnized that in
raints that ma
ng Single Loo
oop Learning
nstraints (Ar
realize that y
ise they are
ements in any
original thin
Figure 8-2 sho
Loop Learning
sh Release® P
lenged the co
then created
y Reduction 
ve inventory 
ns that can be
ously both the
tion.  Figure
ory Cash Rel
rning 
nventory Reduc
970s by Harv
n almost any 
ay or may no
op Learning. 
g.  First, you 
rgyris calls th
you are impo
e unlikely to
y field requir
nking.  Profe
ows how Do
g. 
Process and t
nstraints inhe
d hypotheses 
encompass a
reduction.  T
e taken.  Thus
e simplest and
e 8-3 lists th
lease® Proces
 
ction 
vard 
type 
ot be 
can 
hese 
osing 
o be 
res a 
essor 
uble 
the 7 
erent 
that 
ll of 
They 
s the 
d the 
he 7 
ss is 

Chapter 8 
120 
 
 
Take More Items Out 
Action #1: Have someone else hold it and/or pay for 
it 
Action #2: Sell excess and obsolete stock 
Action #3: Eliminate duplication 
 
Put Fewer Items In 
Action #4: Change the factors that drive safety stock 
Action #5: Reduce reorder stock 
Action #6: More closely match delivery with usage 
Action #7: Reduce value of items held 
 
 
Figure 8-3: The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
121 
Action #1: Have Someone Else Hold It  
and/or Pay For It 
 
 
he best way to reduce the investment in inventory is to eliminate 
the investment altogether.  Reducing inventory in this way can be 
achieved without risk and with full access to the inventory by having 
someone else hold and/or pay for the inventory.  This approach, sometimes 
known as consignment stocking, transfers both the ownership and the 
management of replenishment of the inventory to the vendors.  Your 
company only pays for what it uses, when it uses it.   
By entering into a consignment stock arrangement, the investment in 
inventory is shifted to the vendors.  They are also responsible for managing 
orders and replenishment, generally with the requirement that they meet an 
agreed service level.  This service level might be an availability level or it 
could be that they never have less than x number of units in stock. 
Yet consignment stock is often thought to be too expensive.  (See 
Chapter 6:  The Five Myths of Inventory Reduction.)  The theory is that the 
vendors will, in time, seek to recover the cost of holding the stock through 
price increases.  But assuming that there is still competition for your 
business, if a price increase happened, you could still switch vendors or 
move out of the consignment arrangement.  Setting up a consignment 
arrangement does require careful contract development. 
A slightly less effective approach is called Vendor Managed Inventory 
(VMI).  With VMI, you pay for the inventory upfront, but transfer 
replenishment and management of the inventory to the vendors.  VMI gives 
the vendors greater visibility of stock usage which, in turn, means that they 
should then be able to better manage the supply chain to minimize your 
investment in inventory.  Figure 8-4 compares the characteristics of 
consignment stock and vendor managed inventory. 
One of the key benefits to the vendor of both consignment and vendor 
managed arrangements is that they provide full visibility of the supply chain 
through to your customers and users.  Rather than seeing only your order, 
which will cover requirements for some period (which could be a month or 
several months), they will be able to see actual user demand.  This extra 
visibility will enable them to better time their production and supply chain 
activities to produce a better result for both parties.  
Another key benefit for the vendors is sole supplier status.  This status 
guarantees your business until you decide to change the arrangement.  
 
T

Chapter 8
 
 
Figure 8
 
 
In
power.  
independ
a group.
consignm
parts of 
Se
effort.  
/procure
issues th
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
8 
8-4:  Action #1
n applying th
Larger comp
dent operation
.  In some c
ment arrange
the company.
etting up a 
Input is re
ement team a
hat need to be
When does
Who takes 
Who takes 
Who pays f
1 
hese arrangem
panies that a
ns often do n
ases, one par
ement, but no
. 
consignment
equired from
and legal and
 resolved incl
s ownership ch
the risk assoc
the risk of ob
for the cost of
122 
ments, be su
are made up 
not take advan
rt of the com
ot passed thi
t arrangemen
m the vendor
d finance dep
lude: 
hange? 
ciated with st
bsolescence?
f funding the 
ure to maxim
of a number
ntage of their 
mpany may h
is information
nt usually ta
r and your 
partments.  S
orage? 
stock? 
mize your buy
r of separate 
buying powe
have negotiate
n onto the o
kes consider
own purcha
Some of the 
 
ying 
and 
er as 
ed a 
other 
rable 
asing 
key 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
123 
• 
What checking procedures are to be used? 
 
Resolving these issues requires a cooperative approach from both 
parties.  Consignment stocking should be a win–win situation.  Demanding 
that vendors make a sudden and significant investment to replace all of your 
stock is likely to be met with an argument relating to cost.  But seeking to 
run down your existing stocks and bringing the vendors on-line gradually 
enables them to spread their investment over time.  They can also gain an 
understanding of the demand issues and fine tune their approach accordingly. 
 
There is considerable effort involved in setting up consignment and 
vendor managed arrangements that work, but the rewards are just as great.  
As the example below shows, a well-structured consignment arrangement 
can deliver a 100% stock reduction and ongoing operational savings. 
 
Implementation Checklist 8-1 shows the actions to consider with the 
implementation of Action #1. 
 
 
How to Recognize a Good Consignment Deal 
 
One of the key questions that people ask me at workshops and 
seminars is:  ‘What does a good consignment deal look like?’  Of course, a 
consignment deal will result in a shift of inventory ownership from your 
company to the supplier’s; otherwise, it is not a consignment deal.  The deal 
would be preferable if there was a price reduction, but this is not an absolute 
requirement for a good deal.  In fact, there probably are no absolutes for a 
good deal because each company and supplier relationship is different.  
However, here are three issues to consider and to help decide if a 
consignment deal is a good one: 
 
1. Change in the Supply Chain.  
A good consignment deal should result in some changes in the supply 
chain dynamics that provide an overall cost benefit.  Otherwise, all the 
deal does is shift the inventory cost and risk from one party to another.  
Suppliers may accept a shift without cost savings in order to be certain 
about winning your business.  But in the medium term, they are just as 
likely to resent the shift and try to claw back some costs through price 
increases. 
 

Chapter 8 
124 
Changes in the supply chain can be many and varied.  Here are some 
examples: 
 
• Manufacturing efficiencies:  Because suppliers are no longer 
responding to your purchase orders (which may be erratic in terms 
of timing), they may be better able to schedule the production or 
internal ordering of the components they supply.  This will reduce 
their manufacturing costs. 
 
• Transport efficiencies:  Again, because they are not responding to 
your purchase orders, suppliers may be able to opportunistically use 
transport options.  For example, they may have a half load going 
close to your location and choose to fill the truck to make the 
delivery of both loads more efficient. 
 
• Order management efficiencies:  Not having to process a continuing 
stream of purchase orders, raise occasional invoices, and so on 
saves expense in these areas. 
 
• Inventory efficiencies:  Often a supplier will hold stock for a major 
customer while the customer also holds stock; this combination 
doubles up on the inventory that is held.  A good consignment deal 
might be able to reduce the overall inventory that is jointly held. 
 
 
2. Risk Management 
The number one fear that companies have with consignment deals is 
that the supplier will not hold sufficient stock for their needs.  
Therefore, if a stockout occurs, they are left stuck without the item 
they need when someone else was controlling the inventory.  
Managing the situation where someone else manages the inventory 
requires appropriate monitoring systems to review stock levels and 
associated risk.  The key here is to realize that consignment does not 
mean that you, as the consignee, give up all responsibility — you need 
to put in place risk management processes for monitoring stock levels 
and ensuring that appropriate quantities are held.  This is no different 
than how you might review the holdings of your own inventory. 
 
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
125 
3. Financial Control Mechanisms 
Aligned with but different from risk management is the requirement 
for financial control mechanisms — that is, the way that stock usage is 
recorded and invoices raised.  A good consignment deal will make this 
process seamless with your own internal systems so that 1) there is 
little or no extra burden and 2) there is confidence that the charges 
reflect actual usage. 
 
 
Example of Action #1 
 
Most examples of consignment stock are straightforward.  A deal is 
done, transition effected, and a 100% reduction in inventory results. 
 
In a recent case, though, there was an extra benefit.  The supplier 
took advantage of the new visibility of demand and its opportunity to 
produce and deliver to its own timetable.  They also used the 
customer’s premises as a storage location (there was plenty of room) 
and occasionally drew down on the stock that was stored there.  
 
As a result, the supplier was able to cut it costs and subsequently its 
price to the company by 4%.  The company held $2M of inventory 
and used $4M per year of the product.  As a result of the 
arrangement, they not only reduced their inventory investment by 
$2M, they also benefited from an ongoing cost reduction of 
$160,000 per year. 
 
 
 

Chapter 8 
126 
Implementation Checklist 8-1 
 
 
Action #1: Have Someone Else Hold and/or  
Pay For It 
  Identify current and potential suppliers. 
  Check if similar consignment deals exist elsewhere in 
the company. 
  Discuss opportunity with purchasing department. 
  Check current contractual arrangements. 
  Identify potential bundling for consignment. 
  Contact suppliers and request quote. 
  Collate supplier responses. 
  Select preferred supplier. 
  Develop changeover plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of changeover plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor changeover. 
  Confirm final handover of inventory.  
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
127 
Action #2:  Sell Excess and Obsolete Stock 
 
 
nother great way to eliminate the investment in inventory is 
simply to sell off items that are excess or obsolete.  
Operationally, excess and obsolete items generate little interest because they 
do not create emergencies.  As discussed previously, the focus tends to be on 
items that stock out or, at the least, need reordering.  Items that are excess or 
obsolete do not fit either of these categories so only tend to get reviewed if 
there is a review program undertaken.  Excess and obsolete items add no 
value to your business and so should be eliminated.  Figure 8-5 shows 
diagrammatically how excess and obsolete stocks relate to your value adding 
inventory. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8-5:  Action #2 
 
 
For obsolete items, there are accounting standards that require that any 
item that becomes obsolete be written down when it is recognized as being 
A

Chapter 8 
128 
obsolete.  In many cases, though, items become obsolete, but this is not 
recognized because there is no systematic approach to identify them.  If they 
become obsolete and you don’t recognize this, they add to the value of your 
inventory, but don’t add value to your business.  Also, because accounting 
standards write down excess and write off obsolete inventory, it is tempting 
and easy to leave these items on ‘auto pilot’ and not manage them 
proactively.  Although it may seem that the problem will just go away, the 
reality is that the company has spent its cash on these items and received 
nothing in return.  In effect, this is a complete waste of money!  Looking at 
excess and obsolete inventory as a potential waste of money completely 
changes the perspective of managing inventory. 
For those times when you come across items that have not yet been 
confirmed as obsolete, but which are suspected to be identified as obsolete, a 
new term has been identified — probsolete.  Probsolete means that you think 
that the item is obsolete, but that it needs further investigation, that is, 
probably obsolete.  This term helps categorize the items without placing an 
accounting constraint until obsolescence is confirmed. 
In effecting an inventory reduction, there is an argument that says 
removing written down items from inventory adds no value as the item is 
already written down.  There are, however, four key reasons why removing 
obsolete items is important. 
 
1. It ensures a discipline that you don’t just bury your mistakes by 
making them obsolete.  You can learn from the items that become 
obsolete and perhaps change your future buying patterns to minimize 
future obsolescence. 
 
2. It costs money to store, count, and sometimes maintain obsolete items.  
The fewer items you have, the lower your inventory management 
costs. 
 
3. If you can sell the item, you can actually retrieve some value.  The 
value may be minimal compared to the original or book cost, but on a 
cash basis, every dollar of income is better than zero sitting in 
inventory. 
 
4. There may be tax gains from removing obsolete stock.  In some 
countries, a company that removes obsolete stock can gain a tax offset 
equal to the value of the stock multiplied by the company tax rate.  
The tax offset is usually only available when the item is physically 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
129 
removed from the company’s premises and ownership.  On a cash 
basis, this tax break is equivalent to receiving revenue of the same 
value.  Please note that this observation is no substitute for accounting 
advice; you should take separate advice from your accountant before 
planning in taking up a tax offset. 
 
Excess items occur for a number of reasons.  You may have simply 
ordered too much.  There may be returns that came in after restocking.  Or, 
you may have applied Action #5, adjusted the safety stock level, and created 
excess stock.  Generally people are slow to react to excess stock because 
there is a belief that the items will get used or sold eventually.  The key 
question is, when is eventually? 
Although a standard definition of excess is ‘stock held beyond the set 
maximum holding,’ it may or may not make sense to sell off that stock if it 
can be used in a suitable period.  Defining what is suitable will be a matter of 
specific company circumstance.  In determining a suitable period, it is 
important to realize two things: 
First, the longer the time frame, the greater the risk of deterioration or 
obsolescence, in which case, the value may deteriorate rapidly. 
Second, holding onto an item costs money.  At a minimum, 
stockholding costs about 10% of the stock value per year.  However, as 
discussed previously, it can be argued that holding stock costs more than 
20% per year.  Using the lower value of 10%, if excess stock of $100,000 is 
held for three years, the cost could be $30,000!  This is a cost that will not be 
seen in the operating budget but it is, none the less, a cost to the company. 
Adopting an approach to manage both excess and obsolete stock in a 
rigorous and timely manner occasionally results in a need to make difficult 
decisions to remove or scrap excess or obsolete stock.  However, in the long 
term, adopting this approach is likely to result in reduced obsolescence and 
lower holding costs. 
 
Implementation Checklist 8-2 shows the actions to consider with the 
implementation of Action #2. 
 
Example of Action #2 
This company operated a well-known ERP system and the inventory 
managers were convinced that they had good control and little to 
gain.  But they were only partially right.  They did have good control 

Chapter 8 
130 
over the items that moved regularly; however, they still gained 
significant benefits from Action #2. 
 
The company had $7.5M in inventory and from this they identified: 
 
• 
$400,000 in obsolete items not previously provisioned 
• 
$350,000 in items no longer required by them but that could 
be sold or transferred to another business in their group 
• 
$1,400,000 in items that were overstocked and could then be 
preferentially used, limiting the expense of purchasing other 
items 
 
This is a total $2,100,000 in reductions, equal to 28% of the 
inventory holding! 
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
131 
Implementation Checklist 8-2 
 
 
Action #2:  Sell Excess and Obsolete Stock 
 
  Review if item is in excess. 
  Review if item may be obsolete. 
  Confirm excess or obsolete status and quantity. 
  Discuss with purchasing if they can assist with sale. 
  Identify potential buyers. 
  Negotiate deal and select buyer. 
  Discuss disposal of obsolete stock with Finance 
Department. 
  Develop disposal plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of disposal plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor disposal. 
  Confirm final disposal of inventory. 
 
 

Chapter 8 
132 
Action #3:   Eliminate Duplication 
 
 
he third action relating to ‘taking items out’ is to eliminate 
duplication.  By definition, duplicated items add no value and so 
should be a prime candidate for inventory reduction.  There are a number of 
ways that items can be duplicated in an inventory system.  Within a single 
store, the same or similar items may be held as different item numbers.  
Across a network of stores, the same or similar items may be duplicated 
when a shared access might be preferable.  
 
Examples of duplication include: 
 
• Specifying new SKUs that are only marginally different from 
those in stock. 
 
• Holding the same item specified by different equipment 
suppliers using their own inventory codes.  This is particularly 
the case where the OEM supplies the inventory. 
 
• Holding hold stock at two (or more) locations with safety stock 
at each. 
 
• Holding safety stock when your supplier holds safety stock as 
well. 
 
Despite the advantages of computerization, inventories that consist of 
thousands of SKUs can be unwieldy to manage.  It is unlikely that anyone 
knows everything that is held.  It is also possible that more than one person is 
making recommendations on what ought to be held.  With this degree of 
complexity, it is not just possible; it is likely that duplication will occur.  The 
message here is simple:  seek to identify and eliminate duplication.  
The issue with duplication is not just that the item is held twice; it is 
that duplication increases the safety stock that is held.  (Recall that the safety 
stock requirements increase by the square root of the number of holding 
points.)  Therefore, eliminating duplication doesn’t eliminate the duplicated 
inventory; it eliminates the safety stock that results from the duplication. 
Previously it was discussed that reducing the number of holding points 
helps reduce safety stock.  Action #3 is similar.  However, in this case, the 
duplication may not be across a network, but within a single store! 
T

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
133 
The advantage of eliminating duplication is not just limited to safety 
stock.  Eliminating items helps simplify the range to be stored, counted, and 
managed.  It reduces the inventory management costs. 
The impact of eliminating duplication is also highly dependent upon 
the variability of demand and the circumstance in which the stock is held.  If 
the items turn over quickly and have reordering parameters set appropriately, 
the gain may be small.  If the items are slow moving, savings can be 
significant. 
Consider this extreme example.  If two items both turn over 10 per 
week and each has overnight replenishment, it is likely that almost no safety 
stock will be held.  If the items are combined, the one item now turns over 20 
items a week and still has overnight replenishment.  Again almost no safety 
stock would be held.  The main advantage here is in simplification of 
management and the reduction in procurement administration. 
However, if the items are slow moving, say one demand per quarter, 
but still have a short replenishment time, there will be opportunities for 
inventory reductions.  For example, if two items meet the above profile but 
are held separately, it is likely that a minimum of one of each would be held.  
By combining the items, it would be acceptable to hold only one in stock, a 
saving of 50% in inventory investment.  The effect of this reduction if the 
item has a high dollar value is obvious. 
One tip on reviewing items for duplication is to use the supplier’s 
representatives to review your stock.  No supplier would want to miss an 
opportunity to eliminate a competitor’s stock and substitute their own, so 
they will usually review your stock for you for free.  Just make sure you 
select your preferred supplier! 
 
Implementation Checklist 8-3 shows the actions to consider with the 
implementation of Action #3. 
 
 
 

Chapter 8 
134 
Example of Action #3 
Using the slow-moving example from above, let’s assume that 
items A and B are identical, but held as separate items from 
separate suppliers in the same inventory. 
 
Item A is typically used or sold at a rate of 1 per month, has a 
safety stock of 1, a reorder quantity of 3, and a replenishment time 
of 1 day.  Item B is typically used or sold at a rate of 2 per month, 
has a safety stock of 1, also a reorder quantity of 3, and a 
replenishment time of 1 day. 
 
As two separate items, the average holding of A and B will be 5 
items (Safety plus half reorder stock—this equation is explained 
more fully under Action #5).  
 
If rationalized to one item, there will now be usage of 3 per month 
and could probably still have safety stock of 1, and a minimum 
reorder of 3.  The average holding would now be 2.5 items. 
 
This is a 50% reduction in average inventory. 
 
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
135 
Implementation Checklist 8-3 
 
 
Action #3:  Eliminate Duplication 
 
  Check if item is held across other stores. 
  Check if supplier holds significant stocks locally. 
  Review if it is possible to adjust internal or external 
holdings. 
  Confirm duplication to eliminate. 
  Confirm location(s) to hold stock. 
  Develop change over plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of change over plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor changeover. 
  Confirm final handover of inventory. 

Chapter 8
Action
 
A
 
 
of reple
represen
In
time and
replenish
lead-tim
the safet
 
 
 
Figure 8
 
I
8 
n # 4:  Cha
Sto
ction #4 is the
t was discus
buffer betwe
enishment cy
nts the safety s
n this example
d demand, the
hment.  But w
me longer than
ty stock.  
8-6:  Action #4
I
ange the
ock 
e first of the a
ssed previous
een supply an
ycles for a p
stock.  The ho
e, the safety s
e stock usage 
what happens
n expected?  
4 
136 
 Factors 
actions relatin
sly that safet
nd demand.  
product.  In 
orizontal line
stock is set so
reaches the s
s when deman
As shown, th
That Driv
ng to ‘put few
ty stock is us
Figure 8-6 re
this figure, 
 represents th
o that, with th
afety stock le
nd is greater 
he inventory 
ve Safety
wer items in.’ 
sed to act as
epresents a se
the shaded 
he reorder poi
he expected l
evel at the tim
than expecte
level goes be
y 
s the 
eries 
area 
int. 
lead-
me of 
ed or 
elow 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
137 
 
This example demonstrates that safety stock has a definite purpose and 
must be managed to ensure that it fulfills its purpose.  There are ways, 
however, of reducing the investment in safety stock without impacting the 
availability of stock or the ability to provide the required buffer.  In fact, 
there are five ways to reduce safety stock: 
 
1. Increase the speed and reliability of replenishment. 
In the example shown in Figure 8-6, you can see that extending the 
lead-time for replenishment results in using safety stock.  The 
replenishment time and the variation in that time partially drive the 
quantity of safety stock required.  
 
By taking actions to shorten both the replenishment time and the 
variation in replenishment time, you can hold less safety stock.  These 
actions could include reviewing your own processes (remember the 
example where the order took a week to process) or working with 
suppliers on improving their response.  Increasing the speed and 
reliability of replenishment has formed the basis of most supply chain 
improvements in the past ten years.  The key difference here is that 
you know exactly the value of the SKU you are seeking to reduce and 
can easily determine the viability of making any change and at what 
point it does or does not make sense. 
 
 
2. Smooth the demand pattern. 
The other driver of safety stock is demand fluctuation.  In the example 
shown above, we saw that an increase in demand resulted in a usage of 
safety stock.  By taking actions to smooth the demand pattern, you can 
safely reduce the level of safety stock.  This is particularly relevant in 
situations where demand is driven by artificial factors such as month 
end accounting and terms of business or, for engineering spares, the 
usage of items in a factory.  The example at the end of this section 
demonstrates both these circumstances. 
 
 
3. Hold only the right amount of stock. 
In earlier chapters it was discussed that inventory that does not stock 
out rarely gets attention for review.  Similarly, it is also likely that 
safety stock levels have been based on an initial estimate of 

Chapter 8 
138 
requirements.  If that estimate was high and the item never stocks out, 
it is unlikely that safety stock would be revisited. 
 
One way to minimize the safety stock is simply to review the required 
holding based on historical data once sufficient time has passed to 
provide a sound basis for review (being sure to check the validity of 
your data).  Depending upon the volatility of the product, collecting 
the required data could take anywhere from 6–12 months or longer. 
 
 
4. Identify changed circumstances. 
Supply chain improvement has been the buzz word of industry since 
the early 1990s.  Even if your company has not made major advances 
in supply chain management, it is entirely likely that your suppliers 
have.  They may have a vastly improved capability, but you are not 
taking advantage of their good work.  Of course, if your company has 
made advances in supply chain management, make sure that you take 
advantage of that also. 
 
It is also possible that demand patterns have changed.  In engineering, 
there may have been major maintenance improvements aimed at 
increasing reliability, but with the flow-on effect of enabling a 
reduction in spares holdings.  For direct inventory items such as raw 
materials and finished goods, the demand may have slowed or 
changed in characteristic, meaning different demands on your plant 
and equipment. 
 
By reviewing the current circumstance for an item you can reset the 
holding parameters and reduce inventory holdings. 
 
 
5. Have fewer stock holding points. 
It has been mentioned a few times that there is a rule of thumb that 
safety stock increases with the square root of the number of stocking 
points.  For example, if there are two stocking points, 41% more 
inventory will be required than if there was one.  For three points, 
73%.  In theory, reducing from five stocking points to three would 
enable a 22% reduction in safety stock. 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
139 
Review the locations at which inventory is held and question whether 
the number of holding points is still logical. 
 
Implementation Checklist 8-4 shows the actions to consider with the 
implementation of Action #4. 
 
 
Example of Action #4 
Modifying Demand for Consumable Spares 
 
In this case, the item was a high usage consumable used in the 
manufacturing process.  This particular consumable was used in a 
regular and predictable fashion with almost constant and even 
demand. 
 
The tradesmen who use the item always sign out two or more 
weeks of stock at any one time as a way of minimizing the number 
of visits to the central store.  They do this despite the fact that they 
visit the store on an almost daily basis.  Signing out the item in this 
way had the impact of creating artificial demand spikes for an item 
with flat and predictable usage.  This in turn resulted in increasing 
the quantity that the firm held at any one time (although much of 
that was expensed when booked out of the store) and increased 
safety stock due to the demand spikes. 
 
By applying a limit of, say, two days usage to be booked out at any 
one time, the company would not only reduce the total quantity on 
hand, it would also be able to substantially reduce its safety stock. 
 
 
 

Chapter 8 
140 
Implementation Checklist 8-4 
 
 
Action #4:  Change The Factors That Drive  
Safety Stock 
 
  Identify the real level of safety stock for this item. 
  Identify the drivers of safety stock for this item. 
  Identify the mechanism by which safety stock could 
be reduced. 
  Engage internal personnel responsible safety stock 
need. 
  Contact suppliers responsible for driving safety stock 
levels. 
  Confirm changes that can be made. 
  Identify the viability and risk impact of reduction. 
  Develop change over plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of change over plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor changeover. 
  Confirm reduction of inventory. 
 
 
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
141 
Action #5:  Reduce Reorder Stock 
 
 
e have seen in Action #4 that the safety stock level has a major 
impact on stock holdings.  However, this is only part of the 
equation. The other key factor is the reorder quantity.  In the classic saw 
tooth representation, the average quantity of stock held across a period of 
time is a function of both the safety stock level and the reorder quantity.  
Action #5 focuses on the reorder quantity to reduce the average stock 
holding. 
In Figure 8-7, the shaded area once again represents safety stock.  On 
the left side of Figure 8-7, there is a situation similar to that shown for 
Action #4.  On the right side of Figure 8-7, the reorder quantity is reduced by 
half.  This change has had the effect not only of reducing the average stock 
holding but also increasing the required frequency of delivery.  Assuming 
that the delivery increase is not onerous, then changing the inventory 
ordering in this way is a very effective way to quickly reduce stock holdings 
with no increase in risk.  The horizontal lines represent the average stock 
holding under each scenario. 
With this classic saw tooth pattern, it is a simple mathematical 
calculation to determine the average stock holding.  That is, average stock 
equals the safety stock plus half the reorder quantity. 
The reason that there is no increase in risk is that Action #5 works on 
the cycle stock part of the Gaussian equation.  Chapter 2 discussed 
calculating the ROP for a normal distribution using the formula: 
 
ROP = (Demand x Lead Time) + Safety Stock 
 
Action #5 does not change any of the elements of this calculation.  
Therefore, your risk has not changed. 
Recall from the beginning of this chapter that one of the only two 
strategies that can apply to inventory reduction is to put fewer items in.  The 
point at which you can act on the decision to put fewer items in is when you 
reorder stock.  Therefore, this is the point in the cycle at which you have 
greatest influence over the stock holding for the next cycle.  By reducing 
reorder quantities, you will significantly impact stock holding. 
It is also worth considering the logic applied when using a maximum 
and minimum approach to setting levels of stock holding.  Many companies 
set a minimum based on their level of comfort at meeting expected demand 
with that level of stock.  The minimum is based on demand characteristics.  
W

Chapter 8
They the
the lev
characte
holdings
W
minimum
investme
 
Impleme
impleme
. 
 
 
Figure 8
 
 
 
 
8 
en manage the
el of stock
eristics.  Man
s to the maxim
Why not chan
m is the lev
ent in invento
entation Che
entation of Ac
8-7:  Action #5
eir stock hold
k they are 
aging their st
mum. 
nge the appro
vel that will
ory. 
ecklist 8-5 s
ction #5. 
5 
 
142 
ding to their m
comfortable 
tock holding 
oach and ma
l meet dema
shows the a
 
maximum stoc
holding ba
in this way d
anage to the 
and and also
ctions to co
ck setting, tha
ased on sup
drives their s
minimum?  
o minimizes 
onsider with 
at is, 
pply 
tock 
The 
the 
the 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
143 
Examples of Action #5 
The practical impact of Action #5 action is dependent upon the 
relative level of safety stock compared to operating stock.  Two 
examples are given to show the relative impact. 
 
Low Safety Stock 
 
This company orders 12 weeks supply of an SKU that takes one 
week to be restocked.  Let’s assume that they hold two weeks 
supply as their safety stock. 
 
The average stock  
=  safety stock + (ROQ/2) 
= 2 + (12/2) = 8 weeks stock 
 
Now, assume that they change the reorder quantity to 4 weeks and 
reorder every month. 
 
The average is now = 2 + (4/2) = 4 weeks stock 
 
This simple change produces a 50% reduction in the average 
holding of that SKU. 
 
 
High Safety Stock 
 
This company orders 4 weeks supply of an SKU that takes one 
week to deliver.  In this case, the demand is highly volatile and 
they hold 4 weeks supply as safety stock. 
 
The average is now = 4 + (4/2) = 6 weeks stock 
 
Now assume that they change their reorder quantity to 2 weeks and 
order every fortnight but still hold the same level of safety stock. 
 
The average is now = 4 + (2/2) = 5 weeks stock. 
 
Even in this more extreme example, the average stock reduction is 
16%! 
 
 

Chapter 8 
144 
Implementation Checklist 8-5 
 
 
Action #5: Reduce Reorder Stock 
 
  Review current reorder quantity and frequency. 
  Identify probable causes/reasons for current quantity 
and frequency. 
  Contact suppliers to discuss impact of changing 
quantity and frequency. 
  Confirm changes that can be made. 
  Develop change over plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of change over plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor changeover. 
  Confirm reduction of inventory. 

Action
 
 
variables
inventor
the work
the time 
Re
putting f
in which
inventor
diagram
 
 
 
Fi
 
 
 
E
n #6:  Mor
ach of the
reduce the
s that drive t
ry.  This repre
king capital r
value of mon
educing the 
fewer items in
h you hold th
ry holding an
matically in F
igure 8-8:  Ac
E
re Closely
e actions disc
e physical num
the cost of ho
esents the amo
required to bu
ney).   
time that you
n.  This is be
he inventory,
nd directly i
Figure 8-8. 
ction #6 
The 7
145 
y Match D
cussed so far 
mber of item
olding invent
ount of time t
uy the invent
u hold inven
ecause if you 
, you can sig
impact the h
7 Actions for In
Delivery w
has been loo
ms held.  How
tory is how lo
that you migh
tory (sometim
ntory has the
can shorten t
gnificantly red
holding cost. 
nventory Reduc
with Usag
oking at way
wever, one of
ong you hold
ht have to fina
mes referred t
 same impac
the length of t
duce the ave
 This is sh
ction 
ge 
ys to 
f the 
d the 
ance 
to as 
ct as 
time 
erage 
hown 
 

Chapter 8 
146 
In many cases it may be hard enough to predict how much of an item 
you need, let alone get the timing of delivery right.  After all, you hold 
inventory as a buffer between supply and demand.  There are some cases, 
however, where you can make decisions about timing without impacting the 
risk.  These are cases where you have project stock, regular frequency use 
items in engineering, or sale/special event stock in wholesale of parts. 
In each of these cases, the usage/requirement date is reasonably well 
known.  By planning the supply of that inventory close to the event, the 
average inventory holding is reduced substantially.  
Figure 8-8 represents a fixed frequency of usage.  On the left, the item 
is restocked immediately after use.  Here you can see that the stock then 
waits until the next usage before going quickly through a usage/restock 
cycle. 
On the right of Figure 8-8, the same item is restocked just prior to 
being used.  Here there is no stock for long periods when the item is not 
required.  You can see from the amount of white space on the right that the 
average holding will be very much lower.  The example on the next page 
quantifies this. 
This philosophy is a central part of a JIT approach to inventory 
management and often is thought to need sophisticated MRP controls or Kan 
Ban systems.  The approach can be applied, though, with just a little 
forethought on the inventory needs and the requirements of demand. 
One warning:  Some companies operate reservations systems whereby 
stock can be held for a particular use or customer.  If these systems are 
applied indiscriminately or don’t recognize the acceptable level of risk, they 
can cause overstocking.  For example, assume that an item will only be 
reordered when it reaches a minimum quantity of 5.  This means that it has 
been previously determined that 5 items are sufficient to cover the restocking 
cycle.  If there are 10 in stock and someone reserves 5, a poorly tuned 
reservation system will order a restock even though the minimum has not 
been physically reached.  Reordering the stock in this way would result in 
stock being brought in weeks ahead of when it will be required.  If the full 
quantity of reserved stock is not used (as often happens), then the item will 
be overstocked and you will have invested in inventory that you do not yet 
need.   
Poorly tuned reservations systems are a common issue in 
manufacturing and production environments. 
 
Implementation Checklist 8-6 shows the actions to consider with the 
implementation of Action #6. 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
147 
Example of Action #6 
 
A company replaces a wearing part in its plant every 12 weeks.  
The part is held as a stores item in order to eliminate any need to 
actually plan usage. 
 
Assume that the item costs $1000 and takes just one week to be 
restocked. 
 
If the items is restocked immediately after the part in stock is used 
(the pattern on the left of Figure 8-8), the part will be in stock for 
11 out of 12 weeks or approximately 47 weeks of the year.  At a 
conservative holding cost of 10%, this would cost the company 
$90.00 per year to hold.  [(47/52) x $1000 x 10%] 
 
If the item is ordered to be restocked, one week before being 
required, (the pattern on the right of Figure 8-8) the item will be in 
stock for 1 out of 12 weeks.  The holding cost will now be $8.33 
per year, a reduction of 90%! 
 
Now translate that saving to the thousands of items that might 
benefit from this approach and the saving will be massive. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 8 
148 
Implementation Checklist 8-6 
 
 
Action #6: More Closely Match Delivery With 
Usage 
 
  Identify the triggers for demand of the item. 
  Determine if triggers can be reliably predicted. 
  Engage internal personnel responsible for identifying 
need. 
  Contact suppliers and determine minimum lead time 
for supply. 
  Confirm that changes can be made. 
  Develop change over plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of change over plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor changeover. 
  Confirm reduction of inventory. 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
149 
Action #7:  Reduce the Value of Items Held 
 
 
educing the cost of items held is the last of the 7 Actions and is 
probably the most obvious, but perhaps because of that the most 
overlooked.  Most cost reduction actions are aimed at reducing the cost of an 
item for the obvious profit and loss impact.  However, cost reductions also 
have an impact on working capital and the investment required for inventory. 
The other six actions discussed in this book are aimed at reducing the 
quantity held in stock or the time for which it is held.  Action #7 works on 
reducing the purchase cost and, therefore, the overall value held. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8-9:  Action #7 
 
There is no reason why the approach would be different from a normal 
cost reduction exercise — it’s just that the initial starting point is different.  
The target may not even be the actual unit price, but could be the delivery 
costs.  For example, can delivery be consolidated without impacting 
R

Chapter 8 
150 
inventory holdings?  Do you pay for fast delivery when slower delivery will 
do?   
Here are some of the approaches that can be applied to review the 
purchase cost of inventory: 
 
• 
Volume concentration—across sites or with suppliers 
• 
Product specification review 
• 
Joint process improvement 
• 
Bundling 
• 
Unbundling 
• 
Expanding the supplier base to increase competition 
• 
Concentrating the supplier base to drive greater surety with 
vendors 
 
Or just plain old renegotiate! 
 
Action #7 is not advocating a comprehensive strategic sourcing review, 
but a targeted price review aimed at specific SKUs that are high value held 
items.  From this perspective, this action becomes a very manageable task to 
undertake. 
Be wary, however, of trading off inventory holding for cost 
reductions, that is, buying more of an item to get a cost reduction.  As we 
have seen in the 5 Myths of Inventory Reduction, this approach may not 
actually provide an economic benefit.  There needs to be a clear economic 
benefit for any change. 
 
Implementation Checklist 8-7 shows the actions to consider with the 
implementation of Action #7. 
 
 
 

The 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction 
151 
Implementation Checklist 8-7 
 
 
Action #7:  Reduce Value of Items Held 
 
  Engage with purchasing for pricing review. 
  Identify current and potential suppliers. 
  Identify mechanism by which price could be reduced. 
  Determine economic viability and impact on 
inventory reduction. 
  Contact suppliers and request quote. 
  Collate supplier responses. 
  Select preferred supplier. 
  Develop changeover plan and timetable. 
  Advise store(s) of changeover plan and timetable. 
  Implement planned actions. 
  Ensure IT adjustments made. 
  Monitor changeover. 
  Confirm reduction in inventory value. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
153 
Chapter 9 
 
 
Inventory Process 
Optimization™ 
 
Beware Implicit Assumptions 
 
 
hen presented with the need to review inventory, many 
organizations immediately seek out one of the many inventory 
optimization software programs on the market.  They do this with the belief 
that optimization is the ultimate outcome.  Although the belief is correct, the 
problem is that the optimization software doesn’t really optimize your 
inventory. 
Optimization is one of the most overused words in management today.  
But what is optimization?  The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines 
optimization as ‘the most favorable condition; the best compromise between 
opposing tendencies; best or most favorable.’ 
Using the above definition of optimization, it can be said that typical 
optimization software does calculate the ‘compromise between the opposing 
tendencies of cost and availability.’  However, the outcome is achieved only 
by recalculating the required holding and safety stock based solely on 
historical data.   
The fact that optimization software programs base their calculations 
on hard data such as usage history makes the approach particularly appealing 
to some people.  The claim is usually made that with this kind of solid input, 
the results must be right. 
 
But this is not the case.  
 
W

Chapter 9 
154 
 
Historical data, no matter how accurate and clean it is, only tells us 
what has been.  When it comes to your inventory investment, you should be 
more interested in what could be.  What software does not do, and cannot do, 
is consider the alternatives.  Software does not and cannot recognize whether 
the outcome you have experienced is a result of your own behavior or 
whether something has changed that you can take advantage of. 
Using only the historical data approach forces you to make 
assumptions about the characteristics of both demand and supply for your 
inventory.  It does not force you to challenge those assumptions.  Even 
though many people don’t realize it, the historical data approach forces you 
to assume that: 
 
1) What happened in the past will happen in the future. 
2) You cannot change these outcomes or the behaviors influencing them.  
 
The approach used by the so-called optimization software forces you 
to work within constraints that may or may not be real.  It is an example of 
Single Loop Learning.  This is why the software optimization approach 
doesn’t truly optimize.  It almost never involves consideration of the broader 
issues that influence your inventory holdings.  It does not utilize all seven 
actions for inventory reduction and does not constitute double loop learning.  
At best, it only recalculates within a set of assumed constraints; it doesn’t 
challenge those constraints.  
There is one other failing of the software optimization approach.  It 
can be misleadingly inefficient. 
With a few simple keystrokes, software can analyze thousands of 
inventory items in just a few minutes.  Although the attraction of this may 
seem obvious, the key question is:  What happens next?  The all-
encompassing approach of software analysis is indiscriminate when it is 
applied to the entire inventory just because it can be.  The broad brush 
approach seems efficient because everything gets reviewed.  However, what 
this also means is that your team then spends their time and energy reviewing 
and deliberating over inventory items that may have little or no impact on 
your inventory reduction target.  This because the software treats all 
inventory the same — no matter what its value.  You do not gain the benefits 
of ‘maximum result, minimum effort’ that is achieved through the Inventory 
Process Optimization™ Method. 
 
 
 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
155 
The Inventory Process Optimization™ Method 
 
 
his book has explored many aspects of engineering materials and 
spares inventory management, including the mechanics of 
inventory management, the MIM cycle, the financial impact of inventory, the 
influence of people, processes, policies and procedures, issues and myths, the 
operation of the storeroom, and the 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction.  Now 
we need a framework  in which to apply this knowledge and understanding 
— this is the Inventory Process Optimization™ Method. 
The Inventory Process Optimization™ Method combines knowledge 
of parts usage, procurement, and supply chain issues with a review of 
behaviors and the management processes that drive them.  The method has 
been specifically developed for application with MRO, engineering spares, 
and other indirect inventory and materials management.  It recognizes and 
understands the impact of people on inventory outcomes.  Therefore, its 
application involves training a wide range of personnel and influencers to 
ensure a consistent understanding is developed by those who will ultimately 
drive the results. 
To achieve this, the method is divided into two streams of activity:  
an Individual Parts Review and a Management Process Review.  These two 
streams are summarized in the following pages and then explained in detail 
after that.  The application of the two streams is shown in Figure 9-1. 
 
 
Stream 1:  Individual Parts Review 
 
Stream 1 is an Individual Parts Review using the Inventory Cash 
Release® Process and it comprises three key elements. 
 
1. Focus on the high dollar value items. 
In every single review of MRO and engineering materials and spares 
inventory that I have seen, the inventory value adheres to the 80:20 
rule.  That is that 80% of the value is tied up in 20% of the inventory 
items.  This means that reductions in working capital can be achieved 
by reviewing a small percentage of the items in stock, saving a lot of 
time, energy, and money in conducting a review and implementing 
improvements.  Software solutions will usually include the entire 
inventory and so at least 80% of the effort is wasted on items that will 
have little or no impact on your problem. 
T

Chapter 9
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
2. U
Th
N
re
of
th
m
 
Ra
fo
Pr
th
fo
on
th
In
ite
fir
9 
9-1: The Inven
tilize 7 Actio
he previous c
ow the Inven
eview on its h
f specific inve
he Inventory C
method. 
ather than usi
or inventory t
rocess starts b
he solution to 
ocus is on the
nly a small p
he items that w
n addition, thi
em attributes
rst principles 
ntory Process
ons for Inven
chapter discus
ntory Proces
head by match
entory items. 
Cash Release
ing a single c
that matches t
by looking a
the attributes
e high dollar 
proportion of 
will have the 
is approach e
.  This is be
to identify th
156 
 Optimization
ntory Reduct
ssed the 7 act
s Optimizatio
hing the requ
 This applica
e® Process an
riterion (such
the criterion, 
at individual i
s of the item.
values only. 
the inventory
greatest impa
nsures that th
cause the 7 A
he steps for in
n™ Method 
ion. 
tions for Inve
on™ Method
uired action w
ation of the 7 
nd is a key su
h as obsolesce
the Inventory
inventory item
.  This is pos
 Therefore, w
y, but that re
act on overall
he solutions a
Actions were
nventory redu
entory Reduct
d turns inven
with the attrib
Actions is ca
ub-process of
ence) and look
y Cash Relea
ms and match
ssible because
we are review
eview focuse
l inventory va
are specific to
e developed f
uction that ca
 
tion.  
ntory 
butes 
alled 
f the 
king 
ase® 
hing 
e the 
wing 
s on 
alue.  
o the 
from 
an be 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
157 
taken in the areas of supply chain, procurement, and inventory 
management and so we know that all possible solutions are 
considered. 
 
3. Involve a wide team and build their skills. 
The key to the ongoing application of the Inventory Cash Release® 
Process is training your team and working with them in the application 
of the process.  This step has two effects.  First, it engages the team in 
the solution so that they gain ownership of the outcomes and are better 
placed to champion the changes that may be necessary.  Second, it 
builds the team’s skills and knowledge in this area so that they can 
continue addressing inventory issues on an ongoing basis. 
 
 
Stream 2:  Management Process Review.   
 
This review involves understanding your current management 
practices and behaviors and identifying those that have a negative impact on 
your inventory holdings.  The steps are: 
 
1. Appraisal of your current inventory management practices. 
2. Identification and agreement with the team on the issues and 
behaviors that have a negative impact on inventory levels. 
3. Identification and agreement with the team on the actions 
required for achieving lasting results. 
 
The output of the Management Process Review is an action plan and 
timetable to address issues and behaviors. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 9 
158 
 
Stream 1:  The Individual Parts Review 
 
 
The Inventory Cash Release® Process 
 
he Inventory Cash Release® Process is a step-by-step approach 
that is used as part of Stream 1:  The Individual Parts Review in 
the Inventory Process Optimization™ method.  As already mentioned, the 
process helps companies to improve their materials management and safely, 
selectively, and efficiently reduce their expenditure on materials and spare 
parts.  The process uses the Pareto Principle to focus on items with the 
greatest value tied up in inventory; it then applies supply chain and process 
review principles to what is commonly thought of in either mathematical or 
technical terms.  This different emphasis achieves significant results because 
it identifies opportunities that traditional optimization does not and, in fact, 
cannot achieve.   
The objective of all inventory reduction is to reduce inventory without 
disrupting the customer supply promise.  That is also true with this method.  
That means you must not lose sight of the need to continue to meet demand.  
Otherwise, your inventory review will be deemed a failure and all your work 
will ultimately be undone.  Experience shows that there are usually sufficient 
opportunities for genuine, risk-free reduction that you will not need to risk 
supply to achieve your goals (see Chapter 11:  Case Studies).  
 
 
Getting the Right Focus: The Pareto Principle 
 
Vilfredo Pareto was an Italian economist who was born in 1848 and 
died in 1923.  He is most famous for developing the ‘law of the vital few,’ 
which is also known as the Pareto Principle or the 80:20 rule.  More correctly 
stated the Pareto Principle is: 
 
A minority of inputs produces the majority of results. 
 
To develop his ideas, Pareto studied the spread of wealth in Italian 
society at the end of the 19th century and concluded that a minority of people 
held the majority of the wealth.  Subsequently, it was observed that the 
Pareto Principle held for more than just the distribution of Italian wealth.  
Examples of the Pareto Principal at work in modern business include: 
 
T

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
159 
• 
80% of sales comes from 20% of product 
• 
80% of downtime is caused by 20% of equipment 
 
The Pareto Principle is of great importance when reviewing any 
business issue, but is particularly helpful when reviewing inventory.  
However, using the Pareto Principle in inventory is not new.  For many 
years, it has been advocated as an approach to use for the A, B, C analysis of 
inventory.  The Pareto Principle has also been used to evaluate demand for 
inventory.  Neither of these approaches helps us, however, with the task of 
inventory reduction. 
For inventory reduction, you need to focus on the value of inventory 
held.  Put simply, the Pareto Principle tells us that the majority of inventory 
value will be held in a minority of items.  That is, a small percentage of 
inventory items will actually be accountable for the vast majority of the 
investment.  For you this means that rather than work through your entire 
catalogue at a detailed level, the greatest impact in achieving an inventory 
reduction can be achieved by reviewing the vital few items that add most to 
the dollar value invested in inventory. 
To determine how your inventory splits by the Pareto Principle, you 
need to develop a Cumulative Value Curve similar to that shown in Figure 9-
2.  In this figure, the horizontal axis represents the SKUs held in inventory, 
sorted by the dollar value held, that is the number of the SKU multiplied by 
the cost of the SKU.  The vertical axis represents the cumulative value of 
these items as you move along the horizontal axis.  In this example, 20% of 
the items account for 80% of the dollars invested in inventory. 
 
Appropriate use of the Pareto Principle clearly demonstrates that 
trying to address all inventory items is not efficient, even if software is used.  
Maximum efficiency comes by focusing on these vital few items. 
For clarity, the key to this idea is to focus on the ‘high dollar value 
held’ items.  These are not the SKUs with the greatest individual value, but 
rather the SKUs where the total dollar value held is the greatest, that is, the 
cost of the SKU multiplied by the number of items held.  For example, an 
SKU valued at $10,000 with a single item in stock requires the same 
investment as an SKU valued at $100 with 100 items in stock.  
 

Chapter 9
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
 
U
do
ke
m
va
 
 
 
Th
concentr
focus on
first and
Pareto P
takes the
review a
 
Fi
practice.
 
In
After ap
9 
9-2:  Cumulati
se of the
ollar value
ey for the
must be u
alue from a
he focus on
rate on the ite
n these items 
d foremost, to
Principle as d
e same time a
a high dollar v
igures 9-3 an
. 
n Figure 9-3 
pplying the 
ive Value Cu
 Pareto P
’ items tha
e Inventory
nderstood 
an invento
n ‘high doll
ems that tie u
as the purpo
o reduce the i
described ma
and effort to r
value SKU. 
nd 9-4 show f
Company A 
Pareto Prin
160 
rve 
Principle to
at really m
y Cash Re
in order 
ry reductio
lar value he
up the bulk o
ose of any inv
investment o
kes your effo
review a low 
further examp
had inventor
nciple in the
o identify 
matter is an
elease® Pro
to gain 
on program
eld’ items e
of the cash.  I
ventory reduc
f cash.  In ad
forts more eff
dollar value S
ples of the Pa
ry that includ
e method de
the ‘high 
n absolute 
ocess and 
maximum 
m. 
nsures that 
It makes sens
ction program
ddition, using
ficient becaus
SKU as it doe
areto Principl
ded 4,879 SK
escribed, it 
 
you 
se to 
m is, 
g the 
se it 
es to 
le in 
KUs.  
was 

recomm
slightly 
their SK
reductio
In
61% of 
(Again t
Bo
SKUs an
seemed a
 
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
Th
Pareto re
of time. 
recomm
progress
 
ended that th
more than ha
KUs.  In term
n in workload
n Figure 9-4 C
the value of 
the focus was 
oth these orga
nd embark o
almost impos
9-3:  Pareto Pr
here is no ha
eview.  A rev
 Some com
ended that yo
s from there. 
hey focus on 
alf of the dol
ms of their eff
d of 95%. 
Company B h
their invento
on was on th
anizations we
on an invento
ssible. 
rinciple Case 
ard and fast 
view of 250 S
mpanies base 
ou commence
I
161 
just the top 2
llar value of t
fort, using th
had an even m
ory was held 
he top 250 item
ere able now t
ory reduction 
Study A 
rule about w
SKUs is very
their review 
e by reviewin
nventory Proce
250 items.  T
their inventor
he Pareto Prin
more dramatic
in just 2% o
ms by value.)
to concentrat
program tha
where to draw
y manageable 
on the top 5
ng the top 250
ess Optimizatio
These represe
ry but just 5%
nciple provid
c result: for th
of the line ite
) 
e on the vital
at had previo
w the line for
in a short pe
500 SKUs.  
0 SKUs and 
on™ 
nted 
% of 
ded a 
hem, 
ems!  
 few 
ously 
 
r the 
eriod 
It is 
then 

Chapter 9
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
To
your inv
highest d
The dec
inventor
potential
reviewin
them, th
benefit. 
$100,00
in invent
H
Actions 
apply a 
segment
Inventor
Ca
fast mov
because 
logic is 
Althoug
stockout
contain 
phantom
9 
9-4: Pareto Pri
o apply the P
ventory based
dollar value h
ision on whe
ry, their value
l return on e
ng SKUs unti
his was the 
 Their revie
0 in labor and
tory reduction
aving identifi
for Inventory
little easier, 
ted the item
ry).  
ategorization 
ving items.  
they seem to
that if you s
h the mechan
ts.  It also ig
low turnove
m stock entrie
inciple Case S
Pareto Princip
d on the dolla
held SKU and
ere to stop rea
e, and the tim
each incremen
il they got do
point where 
ew to this l
d overtime pa
n — a paybac
fied the key S
y Reduction. 
it helps if, b
ms that are 
also helps to
As explained
o represent the
stop ordering 
nics of this ap
gnores the fa
er, slow mo
s.  Depending
162 
Study B 
ple successfu
ar value held.
d work your 
ally depends 
me that you a
ntal item.  O
own to a ‘doll
they felt th
evel took se
ayments but r
ck on expense
SKUs to work
 To make th
before you be
in the high 
o ensure that 
d previously, 
e shortest pat
fast movers,
pproach are tr
act that the h
oving, possib
g upon the ap
ully, you mus
.  Then start 
way down th
on the range
are prepared 
One company 
lar value held
hat the effort
everal month
realized more
e of 30:1! 
k on, you will
e selection o
egin, you hav
value segm
you don’t fo
fast movers 
th to inventor
, your stock 
rue, it is risky
high value se
bly obsolete, 
pproach taken
st create a lis
by reviewing
he list from th
 of items in y
to invest for
decided to k
d’ of $1,000. 
t outweighed
hs and cost 
e than $3,000
l next apply t
f which actio
ve categorize
ment (the Pa
ocus solely on
become a fo
ry reduction.  
will fall quic
y as it may lea
egment will 
and potent
n, these items
 
st of 
g the 
here.  
your 
r the 
keep 
 For 
d the 
over 
,000 
the 7 
on to 
ed or 
areto 
n the 
focus 
The 
ckly.  
ad to 
also 
ially 
s can 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
163 
also quickly reduce the actual and book value of investment in inventory.  
Note that the categorization here differs from that required for developing 
stocking policies.  The categories required here are based, typically, on 
inventory movements and help identify which of the 7 actions to apply and 
the likely time frame for benefit realization.  Table 9-1 defines some 
categories that might apply to MRO inventory. 
The actual categories for your business and inventory types might be 
different than these, as might the time frames used to define high turnover 
and low turnover items.  In the section When to Apply Which Actions (see 
below) the definitions in Table 9-1 are used to demonstrate how categories 
help determine which of the 7 Actions to apply.  You should check that these 
categories apply to your situation and interpret the data accordingly.  
 
 
Category 
Definition 
Potential Sub Element 
High 
Turnover 
+3 movements per 
annum 
Excess — in 
excess of 2 
years stock 
held. 
Surplus — 
current stock 
is above 
control level 
Low 
Turnover 
At least one movement 
in 4 years (but less than 
3 per annum) 
Slow Moving 
No movement in 4 
years 
Obsolete 
No longer required 
 
Phantom 
Part and/or location unknown 
 
Table 9-1:  Categories for Spares Inventory 
 
 
When to Apply Which Action 
 
There is one more insight that will help you to minimize your efforts 
in the application of the 7 Actions and it is this:  Because of the nature of the 
actions and the nature of inventory, it is relatively easy to predict which 
actions would most likely be applied to which categories of inventory. 
Using the categories from Table 9-1, the 7 Actions and the type of 
inventory to which each might be applied is summarized in Figure 9-5.  
Down the left hand side are listed the various types of inventory as per the 
previous definitions.  Across the top are the actions that can be applied.  Note 

Chapter 9 
164 
 
that it is entirely possible that more than one action could be taken for any 
particular inventory item.  The X marks indicate that the particular action is 
most definitely applicable to the inventory type and that the action is likely to 
have a timely impact.  The shaded squares indicate that the action may be 
applicable and/or may take some time to take effect.  If you have developed a 
list of inventory types that is specific to your business, you should now 
prepare your own reference table to help guide when to use which action. 
Once you have your inventory data and have identified your inventory 
categories, the chart can be read in two ways.  First, you can read across 
from the inventory type to see which actions may be applicable.  For 
example, High/Low Turnover inventory can be influenced by almost all of 
the actions; you can expect these actions to have an impact in a reasonable 
time frame (depending on how quickly the items move).  However, you can 
see that Action #2 does not impact inventory unless it is overstocked. 
Similarly, for Slow Moving stock you are less likely to do a 
consignment deal; Actions #4 and #5 will take some time to have an impact.  
The best course of action for Slow Moving stock will be to Eliminate 
Duplication (Action #3) or More Closely Match Delivery With Usage 
(Action #6). 
The other way to read the chart is down from the action type.  This 
approach helps when you are assigning actions for review by members of 
your team.  For example, Action #1 is likely to need the direct input from 
your purchasing/procurement team members.  Therefore, they know that they 
should pay attention to what can be done for the items classified High/Low 
Turnover.  Similarly, appropriate individuals can now be assigned to 
Eliminate Duplication and so on.  Using the categories in this way helps to 
further break down the workload for the individuals.  Instead of reviewing 
(say) 5,000 items, the focus moved to 250 items.  By using the chart to focus 
the specific action of individual team members, they may need to focus only 
on 30 or 40 items. 
Finally, the inventory type of Phantom is included despite the fact that 
there is little that you can do about Phantom inventory.  Phantom items are 
where the item has already been used or sold but has not been signed out of 
your inventory.  The only course of action that you can take is to expense the 
item.  (In the table, we have chosen to include expensing the item under 
Action #2, Sell Excess and Obsolete Stock.)  Expensing the items might 
create some short-term budgetary pain, but should be used as an opportunity 
to highlight systematic problems in your inventory management. 
 
 

 
Figure 9
 
The Step
 
Th
acts as a
items, it 
The use 
the item
through 
produces
differenc
9-6.   
O
Inventor
appeal to
the proc
applicab
you may
 
 
 
9-5:  Summary
p-By-Step Pr
he Inventory 
a decision ma
seems that an
of the Pareto
ms to review
the applicat
s a smaller 
ce to your inv
ne of the m
ry Cash Rele
o them.  You
cess but also
ble.  The risk 
y not have tho
y of When to 
rocess 
Cash Releas
aking filter.  W
n inventory re
o Principle re
w and the de
ion of one o
number of 
ventory holdin
major mistake
ase® Process 
u absolutely m
o means that
is that you w
ought of.   
I
165 
Apply Which
 
se® Process i
When there ar
eview require
educes this th
ecisions requi
or more of t
focused deci
ngs.  This is s
es that peop
is that they 
must not do t
t you are pre
will miss out o
nventory Proce
h Action 
is a step-by-
re a large num
es a large num
hrough consid
ired are then
the 7 Action
isions that w
shown schem
ple make wh
‘cherry pick
this.  Cherry 
e-deciding w
on other real o
ess Optimizatio
 
step process 
mber of inven
mber of decisi
dered selectio
n further ref
ns.  This pro
will make a 
matically in Fi
hen applying 
’ the actions 
picking short
which actions
opportunities 
on™ 
that 
ntory 
ions.  
on of 
fined 
ocess 
real 
gure 
the 
that 
tcuts 
 are 
that 

Chapter 9
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
To expla
refers to
 
A: H
an
SK
m
 
You now
you dev
help you
B: N
yo
th
to
 
C: N
ac
Ea
us
 
9 
9-6: The Proce
ain the Inven
 Figure 9-7.  
Having compil
nd drawn you
KU at the top
most funds inv
w determine t
veloped previo
u to determine
Now consider 
ou don’t need
hink it is a pos
o C; if the answ
Now you shou
ction or the im
arlier in this b
se as the basis
ess Acts as a 
ntory Cash R
Start at the po
led your list o
ur Pareto curv
p of your list
vested.  
he category o
ously.  (Later
e which of the
if you can ap
d to definitiv
ssibility worth
wer if ‘no,’ m
uld identify y
mplementatio
book, there w
s of your plan
166 
Decision Mak
Release® Proc
osition marke
of SKUs bas
ve, you start t
t.  This is the
of the SKU ba
r you will se
e 7 Actions m
pply Action #
vely know th
h pursuing.  I
move on to E.
your plan to 
on of the acti
were checklist
ns. 
king Filter 
ess, the follo
ed as A. 
ed on the ‘do
the review by
e SKU in wh
ased on the ca
ee how this c
may be most a
#1 to this SK
e answer.  Ju
If the answer 
review the a
ion if you hav
ts for each ac
 
owing descrip
ollar valued h
y focusing on
hich you have
ategory types
ategorization
applicable.) 
KU.  At this s
ust decide if 
is ‘yes,’ mov
application of
ve definite id
ction that you
ption 
held’ 
n the 
e the 
 that 
 can 
stage 
you 
ve on 
f the 
deas.  
u can 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
167 
D: Now consider if further actions can be applied to this SKU.  If the 
answer is ‘yes,’ move on to E; if the answer is ‘no,’ move onto G. 
 
E: Now repeat the logic of steps B, C, and D for each of the 7 Actions.  
This will systematically work you through each of the 7 Actions and 
their applicability to this specific SKU.  Remember that at this stage 
you are still considering just the one SKU. 
 
F: After you have considered each of the 7 Actions, you might realize that 
no action can be taken — this is OK.  One of the misconceptions about 
inventory reviews is that you must reduce your holdings of each SKU 
by a little bit.  The reality is that most reviews identify big 
opportunities with a small number of items. 
 
G: By the time you reach step G you will have considered all of the 
opportunities for the SKU in question.  At this point you should 
document your decisions and actions determined thus far. 
 
H: Now turn your attention to the next SKU on the list and consider if the 
value of the SKU is sufficient for further effort to be spent on scrutiny.  
In the beginning of your review, the SKUs will have sufficient funds 
tied up to warrant further review.  However, you will reach a point 
where you decide that the time and expense spent in review is greater 
than the benefit that could be realized.  
 
If the decision is that the value is sufficient for further scrutiny, then go 
back to step B and restart the process for the next SKU. 
 
If the decision is that the value is not sufficient for further scrutiny, then 
move onto step I. 
 
I: By this step you will have reviewed all of the SKUs that matter and the 
application of each of the 7 Actions.  Now you should compile your 
overall plan for implementation, including time lines, responsibilities 
and reporting on progress.  Now you can get on with implementation. 
 

Chapter 9
 
 
 
Figure 9
9 
9-7: The Step-by-Step ICR®
168 
® Process
 
 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
169 
Example:  Application of the ICR® Process 
 
The Inventory Cash Release® Process provides a systematic approach 
to identify the vital few items for attention, and then address those items with 
one (or more) of the 7 Actions for Inventory Reduction.  Applying the 
Inventory Cash Release® Process requires the collation of appropriate data 
and some decision making.  Typically this involves developing a spreadsheet 
to lay out the relevant data and record the action to be taken. 
To complete this chapter, we are going to go step-by-step through an 
example.  Included here are several pages that show each step in the process.  
These are labeled as Figures 9-8, 9-9, 9-10, 9-11, and 9-12.  The example 
here is for engineering spares, but the spreadsheet could be equally applied to 
other types of inventory 
 
Here goes! 
 
Once you have been assigned the job of reviewing your inventory, the 
first step that everyone takes is to create a spreadsheet.  If you are like most 
people who approach this task without applying the Inventory Cash Release® 
Process, you may well have created a spreadsheet like the one in Figure 9-8. 
Take a minute or two to review Figure 9-8.  It has several columns:  
Item No., Stock Code, Description, Quantity on Hand, and Item Value.  For 
the purpose of this example, Figure 9-8 is sorted by both Stock Code and 
Item Value. 
In most cases, people sort their inventory by some classification (such 
as Stock Code or Item Value).  Their logic is that the Stock Code sort will 
enable them to hand over the list to the key users responsible for that 
inventory and have them do a review.  In this case, the users might be the 
engineers responsible for specific spares inventory.  This approach leads 
people down the path of reviewing the high value items first; as we now 
know, this is not appropriate for an effective and efficient process. 
Sorting by Stock Code and assigning a review based on this sort, 
potentially results in the review of low-value items or stock where there is 
only a small inventory investment.  As it takes as much time to review items 
with a low inventory investment as it does items with a high inventory 
investment, you should focus your time and limited resources where the 
higher investment exists. 
However, sorting by item value is not the answer.  It can result in 
looking at the cost of each item rather than the total investment.  Again, the 
use of time and resources in this way will be less efficient. 

Chapter 9 
170 
 
Now turn to Figure 9-9.  In this figure the table has been sorted by 
‘Bin Value’.  To calculate this value, multiply the Quantity on Hand by the 
Item Value.  In Figure 9-9, the table has been sorted by Bin Value from 
highest to lowest.  You can see that the first two items have significantly 
lower individual item values than the third item, but involve a larger number 
of components and subsequently a higher total investment.  We know that we 
are now focusing on the items where our cash is tied up! 
Although these first two items have significant item value, notice that 
the fourth item on the list has a relatively low item value.  Again, because 
there are a large number of items, this item represents a significant total 
dollar held.  Accordingly, it should be near the top of our considerations. 
 
Now turn to Figure 9-10. 
 
In this figure the data is sorted by total dollar value held.  You can 
generate a Cumulative Value Curve like the one shown in Figure 9-10.  To 
do this, you need to include another column (not shown here) and use that 
column to calculate the cumulative value of the inventory as you go down 
the list.  
 
For this column, row 1 will be $48,000  
Row 2 will be $94,000 ($48,000 + $46,000) 
Row 3 will be $114,000 ($94,000 + $20,000), and so on.  
 
Figure 9-10 demonstrates clearly that the majority of inventory value 
is held in a minority of items (the Pareto Inventory).  This is where to focus 
your attention.  You can use this curve to help convert any doubters in your 
business. 
 
Now turn to Figure 9-11. 
 
We have now added two more columns to the previous spreadsheet:  
Category and Action to Apply.  The first step in working through the list is to 
identify the category in which each item fits.  As per the discussion above, 
identifying the category helps guide us in knowing which action to apply.  It 
will also help understand the potential time frame for implementation.  
Realistically, a slow-moving item may have its reorder parameters changed, 
but because it is slow moving it may take months or years for the change to 
have a real impact. 

Inventory Process Optimization™ 
171 
You now need to consider which action to apply to each item.  
Remember, it is possible that you can apply more than one action to an item.  
For this example, however, we have applied only one action to each item. 
Working from the top down, each item is considered in turn and the 
appropriate action determined.  (Don’t worry if the item descriptions are 
unfamiliar to you.  It is the process that matters.) 
 
For example: 
 
Item 1 is a Delivery Valve where the turnover is low.  But in this case, 
the full set of 24 items is considered as critical.  It has been decided to take 
no action on item 1.  The same goes for Items 2 and 3. 
Item 4 is a Thyristor device.  These are a high turnover item and so 
may be suitable for consignment stocking from the vendor.  This is noted in 
the table. 
Item 5 is an item that is thought to be OK in terms of inventory level. 
Item 6 is a Pump that is categorized as slow moving.  We notice that 
there are 3 of them in stock.  Holding 3 may be too many and so this item is 
noted as likely to be sold as overstocked. 
Moving down the list, Item 9 is a coupling where the usage is quite 
predictable, so perhaps they don’t need so many on hand.  They decided to 
work to matching delivery more closely with usage. 
 
And so on. 
 
I trust that you can see how the combination of classifying the item 
and deciding which action to apply can help you then to assign to the 
appropriate team members the tasks of reviewing the inventory and 
negotiating with suppliers. 
 
Now turn to Figure 9-12. 
 
Now we have added three more columns:  Comment, Projected Value, 
and Inventory Reduction. 
The Comment column allows you to include a comment or define the 
action required.  In this example, the column is included as a summary.  It 
should not be seen as a replacement for properly documenting the tasks, the 
responsibility, and the time frame. 
Read down this column and you will notice that none of the actions 
are extreme.  Look through the data and comments; consider the 

Chapter 9 
172 
 
circumstance of each item.  You will notice that in each case the action 
appears to be quite reasonable.  This is because the actions are taken in 
context of any changed circumstance and are designed to reduce inventory 
without impacting risk. 
The Projected Value column is the predicted value of the inventory 
once the tasks assigned for reducing the inventory are complete. 
The Inventory Reduction column is the difference between the Bin 
Value and the Projected Value; it tells us by how much the inventory is 
projected to reduce. 
Obviously this spreadsheet is simplified.  For our purpose, this 
spreadsheet is designed to show how the process is applied.  When working 
through a real spreadsheet, though, any number of other columns could be 
added.  They might include: 
 
• Other data such as the maximum and minimum holdings to highlight 
overstock and high safety stocks 
• More detail on the action to be taken, by whom, and when 
• The potential timing of the impact of the action 
• Whether the action will affect the book value of the inventory 
 
The spreadsheet shown is only meant to be a summary.  It should not 
replace a more complete tracking of actions or even a time line that shows 
the period over which the inventory reduction will occur.  
 
Finally, look at Figure 9-13. 
 
This figure is a screen shot of software that has been developed 
specifically to support the application of the Inventory Cash Release® 
Process.  This software helps with both data and project management; it is 
much simpler to use than a series of separate spreadsheets.  Details can be 
found at the website www.PhillipSlater.com, or by contacting the author 
directly.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 9
 
 
 
9-8: Typical Inventory Rev
 
I
173 
view Spreadsh
nventory Proce
heet 
ess Optimization™ 
 

Chapter 9
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
 
 
9 
9-9:  An ICR® List Sorted b
174 
by Bin Value
 
 

 
 
Figure 9
 
9-10:  Example Cumulative
I
175 
 
 
 
e Value Curve
nventory Proce
e 
ess Optimization™ 

Chapter 9
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
9 
9-11:  An Expanded Spread
176 
 
dsheet 

 
Figure 9
 
9-12:  The Completed Spre
I
177 
eadsheet 
nventory Process Optimization™ 

Chapter 9
 
 
 
 
Figure 9
9 
9-13:  Software Makes It E
178 
Easier to Track the Process

Reviewi
 
Th
of your 
problem
Howeve
in and re
filter ap
reviewed
primarily
there wil
Th
as that d
the dyna
identifie
The app
sales of 
total dol
 
 
 
Figure 9
 
 
Th
is to us
ing the Long
he ‘long tail’ 
Pareto items
matic because
er, this does n
eview these i
pplied to ens
d.  This filter
y these will b
ll be items tha
he process by
discussed prev
amics of supp
ed, the approa
proach could 
excess stock
llar value. 
9-14:  Identify
here are two w
se your inven
 Tail 
refers to the 
s (see Figure
e, by definit
not mean that 
items on a on
ure that only
r is to identif
be the items 
at are obsolet
y which item
viously—retu
ply and deman
ach to manag
include allow
k.  As always
y the Long Ta
ways that ove
ntory manag
I
179 
remaining in
e 9-14).  Wo
tion, they ar
they should b
ne-by-one bas
y those that 
fy those items
that are over
te. 
ms become ov
urns, aggressi
nd.  Once the 
ging the quan
wing natural 
s, prioritize th
ail of Items th
erstocked item
gement system
nventory Proce
nventory item
orking throug
re of relativ
be ignored.  R
sis, there need
present real
s that we kno
rstocked.  It i
verstocked is 
ive re-orderin
items that are
ntity down ca
attrition, pre
he items to w
hat Add No Va
ms can be ide
m to generat
ess Optimizatio
ms that lay out
gh these item
vely little va
Rather than ju
ds to be a fur
l opportunity
ow add no va
is also likely 
exactly the s
ng, and chang
e overstocked
an be determi
eferential use
work on based
alue 
entified.  The 
te a ‘stock 
on™ 
tside 
ms is 
alue.  
ump 
rther 
y are 
alue; 
that 
same 
ge to 
d are 
ined.  
e, or 
d on 
 
first 
over 

Chapter 9 
180 
 
maximum’ report.  This report should identify all those items where the stock 
currently held is in excess of the predetermined or natural maximum.   
A predetermined maximum exists if your system uses a max-min 
approach for managing inventory.  A natural maximum exists if you use an 
ROP/ROQ approach. The natural maximum is your ROP + ROQ.  In theory, 
you should never hold more than this number. 
The second way to identify overstocked items is to generate a ‘dead 
stock’ report.  This report identifies where the SKU in question has never 
reached zero in stock.  Figure 9-15 shows both stock over max and dead 
stock situations. 
Potentially obsolete (or probsolete) stock is identified by reviewing 
those items with no turnover for some period.  This period for review 
depends upon the quantity involved and the effectiveness of your normal 
review on obsolete stock.  If the normal demand on your stock is generally 
high, you may set the review target at, say, no movement for 1 year.  If you 
routinely have items that don’t move for long periods, as in an engineering 
situation, you may set this target at 4 or more years.  The obsolete items are 
managed as described previously. 
When you generate either (or both) reports, you then need to apply 
almost exactly the same process as for the Pareto inventory.  The difference 
is that here you have more choice.  You can either sort your list by bin value 
(as for the Pareto inventory) or you can sort it by the size of the opportunity, 
that is, the amount of overstock or dead stock.  Obviously obsolete items 
should be sorted by bin value (by definition the bin value will be the size of 
the opportunity). 
Now that you have a refined list that is sorted by value, you can once 
again begin working from the high value/opportunity items and one-by-one 
decide your actions. 
 
Example of Long Tail Inventory Reduction 
Stock Over Max. 
 
Out of an inventory comprising nearly 8,000 items, this company 
targeted the top 450 items in their inventory as their Pareto review.  
They then ran a report that identified a further 1,200 items which 
were overstocked.  The combined value of the overstocked quantity 
was nearly $3M! 
 

 
 
 
Figure 9
 
While revie
prize of $3M
to review an
9-15:  Identify
ewing 1,200 i
M for success
nd the approp
ying Overstoc
I
181 
items is a big
sful completio
priate resource
 
 
cked Items 
nventory Proce
g task, knowi
on helps prior
es to apply. 
ess Optimizatio
ing that there 
ritize which it
 
 
on™ 
is a 
tems 

Chapter 9 
182 
 
Stream 2:  The Management Process Review 
 
 
he previous sections have discussed the Individual Parts Review 
associated with Inventory Process Optimization™.  However, 
having established what changes are required for individual parts, it is 
important to now review, understand, and address the management processes 
that will have an ongoing impact on your materials and inventory 
management results.  This is achieved in Stream 2:  the Management Process 
Review. 
The importance of this stream lays in two concepts discussed 
previously:  Systems Thinking, discussed in Chapter 4; and Home Truth #1 
(Inventory Does Not Exist in Isolation), discussed in Chapter 6.  At stake 
here is the sustainability of your inventory review.  By sustainability, I mean 
the ability of your results to be sustained over a significant period of time.  
Ideally, you want to make a complete culture change so that the problems do 
not return at all; this is where you start to make those kinds of changes stick. 
 
The key steps of the Management Process Review are: 
 
1. Appraisal of your current inventory management practices  
2. Review of the issues identified 
3. Confirmation and agreement with your team  
4. Development of your action plan 
5. Implementation 
 
The interaction of these steps in the total process is shown in Figure 9-1. 
 
One of the major challenges with this type of review is that it relies on 
the experience and ability of the reviewer in recognizing problems and 
issues.  This experience is not something that you will get from just reading a 
book; this is something that comes from practice and application.  It is 
suggested, therefore, that you study the issues addressed in the first half of 
this book and then practice by observing them in your own workplace.  
Because this part of the Inventory Process Optimization Method is less 
process driven, further discussion on undertaking a Management Process 
Review is included in Chapter 10, Execution:  Taking Action to Achieve 
Results. 
 
 
T

 
183 
Chapter 10 
 
 
Execution:  Taking Action 
to Achieve Results 
 
 
ere is perhaps the most important statement in this book:  
Everything that you have reviewed and learned so far will 
amount to nothing if you do not take steps to implement changes in your 
materials and inventory management.  While improving knowledge is 
important, knowledge without action adds little or no value.  Execution 
requires more than just rolling out the steps detailed in this book.  It involves 
managing the process of the roll out (that is, scheduling, training, follow up, 
documentation, and so forth) and managing the change associated with the 
roll out (attitudes, ideas, policy, procedures, metrics, and acceptance).  
Unless the process and change are managed correctly, you will be unlikely to 
achieve true inventory optimization. 
This chapter deals primarily with the process of execution and is not 
intended to provide insight into managing the change — that is a whole book 
topic on its own and there are plenty of good books that deal with that.  This 
chapter will, however, take you through a known and proven process and 
provide some guidelines for implementation. 
Before embarking on an implementation program, there are three 
questions that you need to know the answers to:  
 
1. Can you measure your inventory investment?   
Some companies expense items when they are purchased and, 
therefore, do not have a separate allocation that identifies inventory.  
To apply the Inventory Cash Release® Process successfully, your 
H

Chapter 10 
184 
 
company must have identified its investment in inventory as a separate 
allocation (i.e., it must be capitalized or at least traceable). 
 
 
2. Are your systems capable of generating the required data?   
As you know by now, collecting the right data is important for 
completing your Pareto review.  Therefore, not only will you need to 
be able to collect the inventory data, but also you will need to have a 
means of readily sorting the inventory data.  Most computer-based 
systems will enable the user to sort the inventory data in the required 
fashion; if you can measure your inventory investment, you can 
probably also sort it.  Best to double check before you commence. 
 
If you cannot collect the right data, then your ability to apply the 
process will be limited.  You will still be able to apply the Stock 
Decision Checklist in this chapter and make better decisions about the 
inventory you hold.  However, your efficiency and effectiveness will 
be reduced as these fundamentally come from the initial data 
collection. 
 
 
3. Do you have the right level of support for an inventory reduction 
program?   
That is, does the program have support at the right levels to ensure that 
the participants prioritize their involvement?  If you do not have 
support, then you should work on internally selling the idea of a 
program before trying to commence one. 
 
One way to generate management interest in applying the process is to 
understand just how much cash your company could generate through 
an inventory reduction program.  To assist you, a calculation template 
is included on page 47.  This template will help you to identify the 
cash potential from implementing an inventory reduction program in 
your company.  By completing this template, you will understand just 
how much your company could gain through application of this 
process.  This information will help you to sell the idea of the program 
to senior management. 
 
 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
185 
If you can answer ‘yes’ to all three questions, then you are in a 
position to undertake an inventory reduction program.  If your answer is ‘no’ 
to any question, then you need to do some further work before commencing 
the process.  
Finally, 
before 
commencing 
with 
the 
Inventory 
Process 
Optimization™ Method, it is important that you and your management are 
prepared to commit to making this process work.  The Inventory Cash 
Release® Process is proven and will deliver a lasting result if the actions are 
followed.  However, along the way, there may be some difficult decisions to 
be made and some bitter pills to swallow (such as writing off unnecessary 
inventory).  The Management Process Review requires honest and impartial 
evaluation of your policies, procedures and behaviors. Commitment and 
follow through are required if you are to achieve the greatest benefit.   
 
 
 
Selecting Your Inventory Review Champion 
 
 
aving decided that you are in a position to commence the 
program, the next step is to identify someone not only to run the 
program but also to champion the program — your Inventory Review 
Champion.  This person takes responsibility for ensuring that the Inventory 
Process Optimization™ Method is implemented properly and followed up 
rigorously.  Choosing a champion is perhaps the most important decision that 
you will make when implementing this or any other program.  Choose the 
wrong champion and your program will underachieve or falter.  Choose the 
right champion and your program will have greater chance of success and 
delivery of a long-term result. 
 
There are three attributes that champions must have if they are to 
succeed: 
 
1. Coordination 
Champions need to be able to coordinate and manage a group of 
people.  This means being able to negotiate attendance at workshops 
and meetings, schedule the workshop or meeting, and make sure that 
everything in their control happens as it should.  The ability to 
coordinate is often assumed to be a ‘given’; after all, how hard can it 
H

Chapter 1
 
be
ch
2. Pa
C
an
th
sh
at
3. In
C
th
th
da
te
de
 
Th
shown d
 
 
 
Figure 1
10 
e?  But it is 
hampion shou
 
assion 
hampions ne
nd spares inv
he program is
hort-term resu
ttitude and yo
 
nfluence 
hampions nee
he work requi
hey interact w
ay activity.  I
am for the c
eliver the prog
he ideal cham
diagrammatica
0-1: The Inve
actually not
uld be careful
ed to have p
ventory mana
s not worthw
ult, then the r
ur program w
ed to be able 
ired and achi
with people an
Influence also
champion an
gram. 
mpion has th
ally in Figure
entory Review
186 
t a universal 
ly considered
passion for de
agement impr
while or that 
rest of the pa
will under-del
to influence 
eve the goals
nd understand 
o comes from
nd their abilit
e right mix o
e 10-1. 
w Champion 
skill and the
d. 
elivering sust
rovements.  I
they can ga
articipants wil
iver. 
other people 
s.  Influence 
the issues the
m respect — t
ty to interpr
of each of th
‘Sweet Spot’
e ability of y
tainable mate
If they think 
ain kudos wi
ll pick up on 
in the team t
involves the 
ey face in day
the respect of
et situations 
hese attributes
 
your 
erials 
that 
ith a 
this 
o do 
way 
y-to-
f the 
and 
s, as 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
187 
 
Consider the consequences of champions not having these attributes: 
 
• Champions who can coordinate but have no passion or influence 
will set meetings, but not care if people don’t attend. 
 
• Champions with passion but poor coordination or influence will 
make plenty of noise, will have little or no respect, and will be 
unlikely to get any momentum in the program.  They usually 
default to doing all the work themselves. 
 
• Champions with influence but no passion for the project might 
lead your team down the wrong path! 
 
Selecting your champion is important.  The champion is not just 
someone with the time to do the job.  The champion is also someone who 
sees the value in the program, wants the team to improve, has the influence 
with the team, and can make it all happen! 
 
 
 
The Role of Your Inventory Review Champion 
 
 
t is important to realize that the champion’s role is not to complete 
all the analytical work and implement the changes.  Instead, the 
champion’s role is to facilitate the development of your team and the 
application of the Inventory Process Optimization™ Method.  
 
Therefore, the role is required to: 
 
• 
Manage the process. 
• 
Set the timetable and organize any training and workshops. 
• 
Coordinate group discussions. 
• 
Document the consensus reached by the team. 
• 
Support the team and follow up on agreed actions. 
• 
Identify roadblocks and assist the team in overcoming them. 
• 
Identify existing principles, policies, measures, and reporting. 
I

Chapter 10 
188 
 
• 
Work with the team to develop new principles, policy, measures, 
and reporting. 
• 
Report on progress/issues to the senior management that is 
sponsoring the program. 
 
Champions do not need to be a professional consultant, but they must 
have an understanding of inventory management and the issues discussed in 
this book.  
Once you have selected your champion, you will need to ensure that 
the right people are involved in your program. 
 
 
 
Who to Involve in an Inventory Review Program 
 
 
o be successful your program will require a mix of skills and 
input.  One of the key challenges with materials and spares 
inventory management is that it is one of the truly cross-functional activities 
that a company undertakes; it involves a mix of technical, financial, 
purchasing, and stores personnel.  This means that inventory management 
often falls between the cracks of technical management and working capital 
management.  As a result, there is often a misalignment between those that 
decide what is held in inventory and those who know how much it really 
costs or how much should be invested.  Your program will need to overcome 
these issues by including: 
 
• 
At least one representative for each location participating in the 
program.  These people will need to be able to complete the step-
by-step 
Inventory 
Cash 
Release® 
Process 
and 
identify 
opportunities.  
 
• 
At least one decision maker who can say yes or no to decisions to 
change inventory levels.  This may be the same person as above or 
it may not.  This person may also be called upon to make decisions 
on new policy, measures, and reporting. 
 
• 
Any key support people who have an impact on the ability to 
actually implement decisions.  For example, these could be IT or 
procurement personnel. 
T

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
189 
 
 
• 
A representative of your financial management team (you may call 
them Finance or Accounts depending on which country you are 
from).  This person will need to be able to access financial data on 
your inventory as well as your depreciation and write down 
policies. 
 
• 
A representative of the users of your inventory.  The users will 
need to know that your review has been thorough so you may as 
well invite them along for the journey.  For spare parts, this 
representative may be an engineer responsible for production.  
 
• 
Your Inventory Review Champion.   
 
 
 
The Three Stages of an Inventory Process 
Optimization™ Program 
 
 
nce 
you 
decide 
to 
implement 
an 
Inventory 
Process 
Optimization™ program the obvious goal is to reduce your 
inventory investment.  However, achieving this goal requires you to consider 
the process and changes that need to be put in place for the long-term 
outcome to be different from today’s outcome.  To achieve a result that can 
be sustained over the long term, your inventory review program needs to 
have the following implementation goals.  These are: 
 
1. Educate your team on inventory review techniques. 
2. Kick start the application of these techniques so that your company 
starts to gain the benefits as soon as possible. 
3. Establish the principles, policies, measures, and reporting to make 
your inventory reduction sustainable. 
 
To achieve these implementation goals, divide your program into three 
stages:  Preparation, Stream 1, and Stream 2 (as per the process discussed in 
the previous chapter).  The overall process and the sequencing of activities 
for an implementation program are shown in Figure 10-2 and the 
O

Chapter 1
 
impleme
pages. 
In
over a 1
an appr
required
shortene
their tas
program
A
may not
the proc
continue
 
 
 
 
Figure 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
entation of th
n the author’s 
4-week perio
ropriate balan
d work done, 
ed, there will 
sks and do th
m typically los
t the conclus
t have achieve
cess of chang
e your efforts 
0-2:  The Seq
hese stages 
experience, t
od.  A timefra
nce of time 
and regular 
be insufficie
heir regular 
ses focus and 
sion of the pr
ed all of your
e; you will h
and achieve y
quence of Act
190 
is discussed 
the suggested
ame of 14 we
between tra
contact to m
nt opportunit
day jobs.  I
elements may
rogram stages
r inventory g
have in place 
your goals on
tivity for an I
separately o
d program sho
eeks will allow
aining/worksh
maintain focus
ty for particip
f the time is
y need to be r
s laid out in 
goals but you 
all the elem
n a sustainable
Inventory Rev
on the follow
ould be condu
w you to ach
hops, getting 
s.  If the tim
pants to comp
s lengthened,
repeated. 
Figure 10-2, 
will have sta
ents necessar
e basis. 
view Program
wing 
ucted 
hieve 
the 
me is 
plete 
, the 
you 
arted 
ry to 
 
m 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
191 
Preparation Stage 
 
The two keys to a successful program are: having willing participants 
and collecting good data to show what is possible.  The Preparation Stage is 
where this is established. 
 
Purpose 
 
The purpose of the Preparation Stage is to: 
 
  Ensure that the likely workshop participants and their 
supervisors/managers understand the goals of the program and 
the commitment required.  The aim here is to generate their ‘buy 
in’ so that the program can continue without undue interruption. 
 
  To review the existing inventory and collect data on the 
inventory holding.  The Champion will use this information to 
help guide the team and show them what is possible in 
inventory reduction.  For example, many people are amazed 
when shown that the Pareto principle holds true for their 
inventory.  The Champion should be prepared to demonstrate 
this in the first meeting/workshop. 
 
Who Is Involved 
 
• The Champion 
• The likely team members 
• Key influencers – the supervisors/managers of the workshop 
participants 
 
Key Steps and Actions 
 
Site Visits 
If possible, visit each location that will be involved in the program.  
These visits give Champions a feel for the environment, size, standard 
of housekeeping, quality of processes, level of resources, and busyness 
for each location.  This book is not intended to train Champions in all 
aspects of inventory management so it is assumed they can recognize 
the good, the bad, and the ugly when visiting a site. 
 

Chapter 10 
192 
 
Introductory Meetings 
Introductory meetings with the key influencers give Champions the 
opportunity to explain the program and its goals and to answer any 
questions or concerns.  Note that the key influencers may not always 
be the program participants.  Often key influencers are the program 
participant’s immediate supervisors or managers.  It is these people 
who influence how individual team members spend their time and how 
important the program is perceived to be.  Champions must work with 
these people to ensure cooperation and team member focus. 
 
Data Collection 
Champions should collect the basic inventory data so that they can 
conduct their own Pareto review in Stream 1. The success of the 
program often hinges on the initial data collection by the Champions.  
Included in this book as Appendix B is a Data Collection Guide that 
contains 28 questions that will help the Champions to understand the 
way in which the inventory is managed.  This will be most important 
when considering reduction issues and options plus when determining 
policy and measurement decisions.    
 
Expected Outcomes 
 
At the conclusion of this stage, champions should be in a position to 
prepare confidently for the following streams.  They will have 
identified all of the program participants and will have scheduled at 
least the first team meeting/workshop.  They will also have answered 
questions for the key influencers and have them aligned with the 
program goals. 
 
Stream 1: The Individual Parts Review 
 
Stream 1 is where the key training is conducted and the use of the 
material begins.  In this stage, the Champions and the team members will 
also establish their inventory reduction targets. 
 
Purpose 
 
The purpose of the Stream 1 is to: 
 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
193 
• Conduct the training so that the team understands the Inventory 
Cash Release® Process and its application 
• Commence the planning and execution of some actions to get 
early gains.  Achieving early gains is important because this will 
give the program some momentum.  Nothing provides 
encouragement more than success. 
 
Who Is Involved 
 
• The Champion 
• The Team Members 
 
Key Steps and Actions 
 
Meeting/Workshop Preparation 
This is the opportunity to check that everything is in readiness before 
the champions get the team together for the first meeting/workshop.  
Key questions to ask are: 
 
• Is the data organized? 
• How is the data to be presented (data projector)? 
• Are the materials prepared for the chosen method? 
• Is the agenda organized? 
• Do the Champions understand the material? 
• What will you provide to the attendees by way of handouts? 
• Is the venue OK (e.g., is it big enough)? 
• Is lunch organized?  (Don’t laugh; I have seen places where this 
has been completely forgotten!) 
 
Initial Training 
This is where the program participants get exposure to the process and 
the other content of this book.  This training should be divided into 
two sessions.  The first session focuses on reviewing the process and 
other material.  The second session gives everyone a chance to plan 
how they will actually apply the material. Both sessions may be run in 
a single day or they may be on separate days — just not too far apart! 
 
At the conclusion of the training you will require two outcomes.  First, 
everyone will have some actions to follow up.  Second, the 
representatives from each location will need to begin applying the 

Chapter 10 
194 
 
step-by-step process to their inventory and identifying opportunities.  
It is recommended that each location be asked to begin by reviewing 
the top 250 items on their Pareto list. 
 
Application 
Following the initial training, Champions should give all participants a 
few days to begin their tasks and then follow up with everyone on 
their progress, hurdles, issues, and so forth.  It is the Champions’ job 
to make sure that the Pareto analysis and 7 Actions are being applied 
correctly and thoroughly.  Success relies on objectivity.  Watch out for 
people applying the approach in a way that suits them rather than 
following the process as laid out herein.  Sometimes people will ignore 
this approach and apply some other process more comfortable to them.  
This is a trap for those who have not previously experienced this 
approach.  If progress is not being made, your champion may have to 
follow up more directly.   
 
During this time, champions should also be preparing a master list of 
opportunities and the likely timing of their impact.  Specialist software 
has been developed to help manage this activity and to track the 
implementation.  Details can be found at the back of this book, at the 
Web site www.InitiateAction.com, or by contacting the author directly. 
 
First Review 
This review is essentially an opportunity for everyone to demonstrate 
their progress.  The real value, however, comes from team members 
seeing the actions of their peers and learning from each other.  
Conduct this review as a workshop so that any significant hurdles and 
issues can be identified and corrective actions assigned. 
 
Application 2 
Following the first review, the champions should once again give all 
participants a few days to begin their tasks and then follow up with 
everyone on their progress, hurdles, and issues.  It is at this stage that 
the champions will need to decide whether to be more involved to help 
people through the process.  It often helps to visit each site again to 
ensure that any site specific issues and hurdles can be addressed and 
that the process is fully understood by all participants. 
 
 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
195 
Expected Outcomes 
 
At the conclusion of this stream, each participating location should 
have a comprehensive list of opportunities and should have made 
some progress in implementing them.  Remember that inventory often 
takes time to work out of the system, so do not expect overnight 
results.  The master list should also be up to date; you may even be 
able to forecast the total inventory reduction target that the actions will 
deliver. 
 
 
Stream 2: The Management Process review 
 
Stream 2 is where the team undertakes the Management Process 
Review, creates the implementation plan and establishes the principles, 
policies, measures, and reporting for ongoing activity and a sustainable 
result. 
 
Purpose 
 
The purpose of the Stream is to: 
 
• Establish at least a first draft of the principles, policies, 
measures, and reporting that will enable a sustainable result.  
Remember that your past inventory outcomes have been a result 
of the existing principles, policies, measures and reporting.  If 
you are to deliver a different result over the long term, then 
these will need to change. 
• Continue the process of identifying and implementing 
opportunities. 
• Identify the requirements for implementing changes and who 
needs to be involved in communicating the new approach. 
 
Who Is Involved 
 
• The Champion 
• The Team Members 
 
 
 

Chapter 10 
196 
 
Key Steps and Actions 
 
Appraisal  
This step is where you identify any issues and behaviors associated 
with your current inventory management practices that have a negative 
impact on inventory levels.  To do this you need to undertake both a 
qualitative review (that is a review of practices, knowledge, and 
behaviors) and a quantitative review (that is a review of data). 
 
Qualitative Review 
 
• Identify issues such as a misalignment of responsibilities that 
the categories used for stocking policies are MECE, and 
whether policies and procedures actually exist. 
 
• Collect and become familiar with all relevant policies and 
procedures, ensuring that you understand who is responsible for 
which actions.  Do these all make sense?  Are there any obvious 
gaps in policy and procedure?  Don’t forget accounting policies. 
 
• Develop an interview guide or questionnaire.  If you are going 
to interview a number of people, it is best to develop a set of 
questions to ensure that you are consistent in your discussions 
and constantly direct your queries at the key issues.  Appendix 
B contains a 28-question Data Collection Guide that you could 
use as a starting point.  As already mentioned, you should also 
draw your inspiration from the issues raised previously in this 
book. 
 
• Visit the Relevant Sites.  If possible, visit each location that will 
be involved in the program.  These visits give you a feel for the 
environment, size, standard of housekeeping, quality of 
processes, level of resources, and busyness for each location; 
they enable you to look for anomalies in execution and 
differences between what people say they do and what they 
actually do. 
 
 
 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
197 
Quantitative Review 
 
• Conduct an independent analysis of the relevant inventory data 
to identify any issues that might not otherwise come to light.  
This might include: 
• 
Stock turns 
• 
Systematic overstocks 
• 
A large number of items with no stock control limits 
• 
Stock held above their natural maximum 
• 
Apparent overuse of just one stock category (i.e., 
most SKUs are critical) 
• 
General quality of the data — whether it is up to 
date 
• 
Value of recent provisions and write downs 
 
• The patterns and issues that are identified here are those that can 
only be identified by a global view rather than the specific item 
view as in the Stream 1 activity.  These are generally driven by 
management and process issues. 
 
• Also try to coordinate what is seen and heard in the Qualitative 
Review with what is found in the Quantitative Review. 
 
 
Review of Issues 
Before preceding you must work through with the key players on your 
inventory review team any issues that the independent review 
identifies.  Be sure to engage those who are involved in managing or 
executing the activity with which there is an issue.  Failure to 
complete this step may result in pursuing issues that result from a 
misunderstanding and will make the task of building team buy-in of 
the solution more difficult. 
 
The best way to conduct this review is to view a meeting/workshop 
with the team members.  This meeting/workshop should begin with an 
update on progress by each of the locations.  After this you can move 
onto discussing issues and then principles, policies, measures, and 
reporting.  It is important to remember that you need to encourage 
discussion and actually get the participants to participate. 
 

Chapter 10 
198 
 
Confirmation  
Having reviewed the issues with the personnel involved, you must 
now confirm and agree on them with the rest of the team, including the 
supervisors and managers responsible.  This may be an iterative 
process because people often need to see evidence and understand the 
impact of the issues before they start to take ownership.  It is also now 
time to assign someone the task of creating the first draft of any new 
principles, policies, measures, and reporting.  Relying on a room of 
people to develop the draft is asking for trouble!  
 
Develop Your Action Plan 
Action plans take many and varied forms in different companies and 
you should use the format that is most familiar to your team. 
 
The champions should by now be able to finalize the master list of 
opportunities, the likely timing of their impact, and who will be 
responsible for taking action.  It is also a good idea to collate 
additional actions that may need to be undertaken.  For example, 
additional analysis may be needed or the Pareto analysis extended. 
 
This is the final meeting/workshop in this part of your program so you 
should now: 
 
• Confirm the list of opportunities 
• Review your ‘first draft’ principles, policies, measures, and 
reporting 
• Review any implementation issues 
• Develop your communications plan 
• Identify any further actions 
 
Although this is the end of the initial process, it should not be the end 
of your program.  Companies that continue to work on implementation 
on an ongoing basis achieve greater success than those that don’t.  
Typically this is done by having the location representatives meet on a 
monthly basis to review their progress and the implementation of their 
new principles, policies, measures, and reporting. 
 
Report 
If this program has been running under the direction of a program 
sponsor (typically a senior manager), it is always good to provide a 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
199 
written report on the outcomes. Of course, you should keep them up to 
date during the program, but a final report is always good practice. 
 
Implementation 
Many people say that this is where the real work begins.  Having 
reached agreement is one thing, actually getting people to change the 
way they do things is something else entirely. 
 
Implementation involves two key activities: 
 
1. Problem solving 
2. Change management 
 
Problem solving is usually a term associated with an analytical 
process, but it is also a prime element of implementation.  This is 
because ‘the plan’ will not be perfect.  Often companies try to 
anticipate every hurdle and every issue.  They try to have a plan that 
will require no correction when commenced—it must work first time.  
Yet in any journey, there will always be a need to make course 
corrections.   
 
Problem solving is required as you encounter hurdles and issues that 
you had not considered.  In any implementation, expect problems.  
Expect issues to arise that you had not thought of.  Expect issues to 
arise that you had thought of, but had not resolved.  You can also 
expect some things that you thought might be issues to not be issues at 
all! 
 
Change management is the other key activity in implementation and, 
like problem solving, is a big topic on its own.  There have been plenty 
of books written that deal with this topic extensively; however, in the 
space available here I am going to present a summary of the issues that 
you need to understand. 
 
The main point is that change management requires an understanding 
of the human issues faced by you and your team.  That’s right; 
implementation is a human process, not a scheduling process.  
Planning and scheduling are tools that help manage the human 
process; they do not replace it. 
 

Chapter 10 
200 
 
There are many models of the process for change.  They usually 
include words such as stagnation, grieving, acceptance, relief, reality, 
resistance, confrontation, critical mass, and point of no return 
(typically in that order).  Because of the human element in change 
management, these models are based on psychology and the words 
used often have little meaning in this context to the average manager. 
 
Here is a much simpler approach that works.  No matter which change 
model you subscribe to, the key issues that you need to address are 
communication, taking action, and reinforcement.  Here are my four 
key actions: 
 
1. Communicate the vision and new process. 
2. Take action—actually do the new activities. 
3. Reinforce the desired behavior. 
4. Manage the tension between the old and the new. 
 
Communicating the vision and the process to achieve that vision 
requires at least three times more effort than most companies put into 
this step!  Too often companies leap into the ‘just do it’ approach; the 
only people who really understand why new things are happening and 
where this is all going are the ones who wrote the plan.  People need to 
understand where they are going and how they are expected to get 
there. 
 
Taking action requires you to get others involved and actually start 
doing something different—preferably executing the actions in your 
plan. 
 
Once you take action, you must then reinforce the desired behavior.  
Positive reinforcement is clearly preferred, but behavior correction and 
follow up also have a place, not in a berating sense, but in a ‘that’s not 
the way we do things anymore’ sense.  
 
Furthermore, do not underestimate the power of regular review 
meetings with those assigned responsibility.  They provide a forum to 
air issues that arise.  They can be the catalyst for problem solving, an 
opportunity for positive reinforcement, and a chance for behavior 
correction.  The implementation of the plan must be seen as important 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
201 
and can be achieved by demonstrating the willingness of senior 
personnel to dedicate time to these meetings. 
 
Measurement systems are a must and keeping score is important.  
However, you need to track and measure actions, not just outcomes.  
Let me explain this.   
 
In many situations, outcomes such as reduced inventory can be 
achieved in a number of ways, including some that are just not 
sustainable.  For example, an apparent reduction in inventory can be 
achieved by stopping the reordering of fast moving items.  This action 
will produce a short-term result, but not necessarily a sustainable 
outcome.  For a sustainable outcome you should manage 
implementation by tracking that you have ‘done action A’ rather than 
just ‘achieved outcome X.’ 
 
Change ultimately requires a transition.  In turn, this transition creates 
a tension between the old culture, where people know what to do and 
are generally comfortable, and the new culture, where there may be 
uncertainty and people are not yet comfortable.  As a rule of thumb, 
most people prefer what they know.  There is less risk and uncertainty.  
 
This tension shows itself as a resistance to change.  What you must do 
in implementing change is manage this tension.  That is, understand 
that it exists, that it is normal, and that the way to relieve the tension is 
to move people step by step towards the new.  The more people 
understand as they progress, the less fear and uncertainty they will 
have about the change. 
 
What you must not do is allow the old culture to design the new way 
of doing things.  Invariably, this approach manages the tension of 
change by designing something that is not too different to the current 
situation or requires everyone else to change (blame shifting).  
 
Expected Outcomes 
 
At the conclusion of this stage you should be executing your actions 
and predicting your inventory reduction outcome with confidence.  It 
may take a year (or more) to achieve this goal, but you should now be 
able to project the timing and total quantum of your opportunity.  You 

Chapter 1
 
sh
m
in
 
 
Measu
 
manner 
that you 
 
Figure 1
O
10 
hould also b
measures, and 
ndeed improve
uring You
ne of the k
measure p
to the highes
can use for th
10-3: Invent
O
be able to i
reporting tha
e upon it, for 
ur Progre
key features o
progress but 
st level possi
his purpose. 
ory Program
202 
implement th
at will enable
many years t
ess 
of successful 
also report 
ible. Figure 1
m Reporting 
he new prin
e you to susta
to come. 
programs is 
progress in 
10-3 shows a 
Template 
nciples, polic
ain the result, 
that you not 
a highly vis
sample temp
cies, 
and 
only 
sible 
plate 
 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
203 
 
The key elements of this template are: 
 
1. Using charts to track the trends. 
Snapshots of these types of data are rarely of much value as they lack 
a basis of comparison, so you must use a chart to track the trend.  
There is a saying in consulting that ‘the trend is your friend’ and with 
inventory this is especially so. 
 
 
2. Measure inventory efficiency and control. 
Measuring just inventory levels is not sufficient as it provides no 
information about investment efficiency or control.  For example, a 
large reduction in inventory might be impressive, but less so if the 
stock turn is still very low or comes only from fast movers.  (In this 
case, you would notice that the stock over max or dead stock values 
won’t change.)  The measures suggested here are stock turns, stock 
over max, dead stock, and provisions.  You should select measures 
that you feel are right for your situation. 
 
3. Track achievement against planned initiatives. 
The reductions and trends over time should be compared to the 
expected impact of the planned initiatives.  After all, significant effort 
has gone into the plan.  Variations should be explainable at the 
initiative level. 
 
 
 
Integrating New Inventory Items 
 
 
or many companies, their inventory really is the forgotten 
investment.  That is, they have forgotten that the inventory is an 
investment.  These companies may expense their inventory or may not have 
in place any system to manage their inventory.  In either case, their issue is 
not inventory reduction.  Instead, these companies are faced with the 
challenge of setting up an inventory management system.  What they need is 
a way to minimize the likelihood that today’s decisions become tomorrow’s 
problems.  After all, inventory review is only a way to recognize and correct 
problems that are now evident from past decisions. 
F

Chapter 10 
204 
 
The other challenge, even if you have an inventory management 
system, is how to decide what to hold when new items are needed.  After all, 
most organizations will add new inventory items every year.  This inventory 
could be new stock lines in sales, new spares for an OEM, new engineering 
spares for new capital equipment, or just the recognition of a need for 
something that was not previously included as inventory.  The problem is 
that, when deciding what items to put into inventory, many companies limit 
their thinking and limited thinking results in being overstocked. 
They often ask themselves only one question, ‘Does this item need to 
be available at short notice?’  If the answer to this question is ‘yes,’ they put 
the item into inventory.  The company is then committed not only to the 
initial expenditure, but also to an ongoing investment.  The thinking stops 
here and administration processes take over. 
So how do you use what you have learned in this book to help make 
better decisions for new inventory? 
The starting point is mindset.  If you start with a mindset that says 
availability = reliability or that availability = sales, then you will overinvest 
in spares because you will justify everything on a false premise.  
Your starting point should be to adopt a Zero Inventory Mindset.  This 
does not mean that you hold zero inventory.  Instead, it means that you start 
with a mindset that inventory = cash.  You seek to minimize your cash 
investment 
without 
jeopardizing 
your 
minimum 
requirements 
for 
availability. 
Adopting a zero inventory mindset is especially important because any 
decision you make on Day 1 is unlikely to be reviewed for some years.  
Therefore, that decision commits your company to an investment that may 
not be corrected for years to come.  If that investment was for capital 
equipment rather than working capital, then I am certain that the decision 
process would be very different.  Adopting a sound approach to these early 
inventory decisions may prevent the need for future rationalization!  
After asking whether an item needs to be available at short notice, two 
further questions should be asked before any item is taken up in inventory.  
First, do we have to make the investment?  Second, if so, how can we 
minimize the investment? 
In asking both of these questions, you are seeking to be smart about 
how you spend and invest your cash. 
Asking ‘Do we have to make the investment?’ seeks to avoid making 
any investment by either finding a substitute or getting someone else to make 
the investment on a consignment basis.  A consignment arrangement is 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
205 
always the preferred option if demand can be satisfied at an acceptable 
service level. 
If no one else is prepared to invest or there are no substitutes, then you 
must ask ‘How can we minimize the investment?’  In other words, how can 
you spend as little of your cash as possible and still have the items available?  
The focus is now on setting up the dynamics of supply to minimize the cash 
you need to invest.  Options include matching delivery with usage, 
minimizing the reorder quantity, reducing the replenishment time, or simply 
buying the lowest total cost item.  These are the inventory reduction actions 
associated with ‘taking more items out.’ 
Two checklists are included at the end of the chapter to help you make 
better Day 1 decisions.  The first, Figure 10-4, is for engineering inventory 
and the second, Figure 10-5, is for general inventory items.  The key 
difference is in the sub-questions that you ask rather than the three key 
questions discussed above. 
These checklists are not meant to be perfect for all situations; they are 
meant to guide you in the development of your own checklist.  What you can 
then do is make that checklist a compulsory part of your process for adding 
new inventory items.  Using a checklist doesn’t ensure that mistakes won’t 
be made.  However, it does provoke the thinking of your team, helps 
establish that Zero Inventory Mindset, and establishes achieving true 
inventory optimization as a part of your culture. 
 
 
Integrating Inventory Process Optimization™ with 
Inventory Management 
 
 
uccessful and sustainable inventory reduction is as much a result 
of the culture relating to inventory in your organization as it is a 
result of applying the right process.  Culture is the way that your company 
does business.  It is the attitude towards inventory that the company as a 
whole adopts.  In a sales organization, is inventory measured in terms of the 
margin that it can produce?  In maintenance, is inventory measured by 
availability?  In both of these examples, the culture leads to an over-
investment in inventory. 
The purpose of reviewing policies, processes, measures, and reporting 
is to be able to influence the culture over an extended period of time (it won’t 
change overnight).  If you limit your inventory review program to a project 
S

Chapter 10 
206 
 
that lasts just the 14 weeks of training and initial application you will send a 
signal that inventory review is something that happens every now and then, 
but not as a part of ‘how we do business’.  The challenge is to be able to 
integrate your inventory review actions with your ongoing inventory 
management.  To do this, you need to be sure that some actions become part 
of your regular ongoing activity and it is suggested that: 
 
• 
Your team complete a Pareto review on an annual basis. 
• 
All items of inventory be reviewed within the time frame before 
your accounting system says that they should begin being written 
down.  The timeframe for reviewing all items will therefore 
depend on your local tax rules and company policy. 
• 
New items being added to inventory need to be reviewed, as per 
the process discussed in the previous section.  
• 
Your reporting on inventory needs to continue to reinforce the 
processes that you are now putting in place. 
 
In short, inventory review should not be thought of as a project that is 
completed after 14 weeks.  Inventory review is a culture—an attitude—and it 
needs to integrate with your ongoing inventory management and become a 
part of the way you do business. 
 
 

Execution: Taking Action to Achieve Results 
207 
 
Questions to Ask 
Yes 
No 
1. Must the item actually be stocked? 
If the failure occurs is there an alternative which does not 
jeopardize: 
• 
Safety 
• 
The environment 
• 
The supply promise 
• 
Quality  
Could the potential failure be detected and managed in a cost 
efficient manner before actual failure occurs?  
Could the item be repaired in a suitable timeframe? 
Could the item already be supplied rapidly by a local vendor? 
Can you use something that you already have? 
• 
Substitution 
• 
Duplication 
• 
Rationalization  
If you answer yes to any of the above, then follow that option before 
progressing. 
2. Will someone else make the investment? 
Can you get someone else to pay for the item? 
• 
Consignment 
• 
VMI 
• 
Shared ownership/pooling  
 
 
If you answer yes to this question, then follow that option before progressing. 
3.  How can you minimize the investment? 
Review the factors that drive safety stock.  
Reduce the reorder quantity.  
Match delivery with usage.  
Reduce the value of the item.  
If you answer yes to any of the above, then follow that option when creating a 
new stock item. 
 
Figure 10-4:  The Stock Decision Checklist For Engineering Inventory 

Chapter 10 
208 
 
 Questions to Ask  
Yes  
No  
1. Must the item actually be stocked?  
If there is demand but no stock, will the customer wait for 
the item?  
 
 
Could the item already be supplied rapidly by a local vendor?  
Can you use something that you already have? 
• 
Substitution 
• 
Duplication 
• 
Rationalization  
 
 
If you answer yes to any of the above, then follow that option before 
progressing. 
2. Will someone else make the investment? 
Can you get someone else to pay for the item? 
• 
Consignment 
• 
VMI 
• 
Shared ownership/pooling  
 
 
If you answer yes to this question, then follow that option before progressing. 
3.  How can you minimize the investment? 
Review the factors that drive safety stock.  
Reduce the reorder quantity.  
Match delivery with usage.  
Reduce the value of the item.  
If you answer yes to any of the above, then follow that option when creating a 
new stock item. 
 
Figure 10-5:  The Stock Decision Checklist For General Inventory 
 
 

 
209 
Chapter 11 
 
 
Case Studies 
 
 
his chapter contains two case studies that demonstrate the 
application of several different processes and concepts discussed 
within this book.  The case studies are presented here in simple formats that 
progress from background information, to the process undertaken, to findings 
and issues, and then results.  The details are shown with a combination of 
commentary, charts, and figures relating to key aspects of each case.  The 
charts and figures included are, for the most part, those that were used by the 
companies themselves while undertaking and reporting their programs. 
However, information that might specifically identify the companies has 
been deleted. 
The first case study, Establishing a Materials and Inventory 
Management System, addresses the important issue of people and processes 
in materials and inventory management.  This covers the materials discussed 
in Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7.  In this case study, the company had recently taken 
ownership of another company and that company had little in the way of 
established policies and procedures.  In order to move them along the path 
towards achieving smart inventory solutions, they needed to develop and 
implement a full range of policies and procedures, including: 
 
• 
Corporate level policy requiring board-level approval 
• 
Operational procedures for use on a daily basis 
• 
Stocking policies 
• 
Storeroom organization guidelines 
• 
Storage guidelines 
 
T

Chapter 11 
210 
 
The 
second 
case 
study, 
Applying 
the 
Inventory 
Process 
Optimization™ Method, shows the application of the Inventory Process 
Optimization™ Method in the steel industry.  Although the method and 
related concepts have been applied in almost all parts of the steel industry 
manufacturing and delivery supply chain two example locations are chosen 
for this demonstration.  Similarly, the method has been successfully applied 
across many different industries but, due to space limitations, just the steel 
industry was chosen for inclusion here.  This case study uses the method 
described in Chapter 9 as well as the material discussed in Chapters 6, 7, and 
10.   
 
There are three important issues raised by this case study: 
 
1. The Pareto Principle holds firm for all inventories — at least the 
ones that I have seen! 
2. The management issues are similar across most businesses and you 
will most probably see your own issues in the lists shown. 
3. The full results are achieved over time.  The case study shows 
results at both the conclusion of the initial consulting program and 
the results that were achieved through continued application of the 
process over several years. 
 
 
 
 
 

Case Studies 
211 
Case Study 1:  Establishing a Materials and 
Inventory Management System 
 
Background 
This case study shows the process applied to establish policies and 
procedures for materials and inventory management and the issues faced 
during program implementation.  The company concerned, which had taken 
over another organization, needed to ensure appropriate management and 
governance of their inventory investment across 25 individual locations.  
 
The key issues they faced included: 
 
• 
No reliable records of the quantity, quality, or location of spares 
held 
• 
No tracking of usage 
• 
No standards for storage 
• 
No identification of critical items 
• 
Poor control of repairable spares 
• 
Imminent implementation of a new Computerized Maintenance 
Management System (CMMS)  
 
They needed a materials inventory management system that provided 
appropriate control and integrated with the new CMMS.  Key questions for 
this company were: 
 
1. Are current inventory arrangements appropriate to the types and 
value of the inventory? 
2. What actions, if any, could be taken to improve the management 
and governance of the inventory investment?  
 
 
The Process 
Following an initial Snapshot Review, a four-stage process was 
designed and implemented.  A Snapshot Review evaluates capability, 
accountability, and systems, showing how and where a company needs to 

Chapter 1
 
improve
and quan
are cov
opportun
 
 
Figure 1
 
 
The key 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
11 
e in order to a
ntitative analy
vered.  The 
nity for ‘buy i
1-1:  Four-St
activities inc
Establish a 
Review gov
Manage int
process. 
Develop sto
Conduct a p
Visit a ‘bes
Develop sta
Coordinate
Develop an
Approve po
Review inf
infrastructu
Review CM
Conduct aw
achieve its go
yses to ensur
four-stage p
in’ by all staf
tage Impleme
cluded the foll
steering com
verning accou
ternal commu
ocktake proce
pilot stocktak
st practice’ sit
andards for m
e clean-up of l
nd document n
olicies and pr
frastructure ne
ure improvem
MMS capabili
wareness train
212 
oals.  The pro
e that all aspe
process was 
ff during the i
entation Proce
lowing steps:
mmittee. 
unting standa
unications on 
esses and doc
ke, followed b
te to review it
materials stora
locations  
new policies 
rocedures at b
eeds and deve
ments. 
ity and implem
ning for key p
ocess involves
ects of invent
designed to
implementatio
ess 
 
ards and their 
the project pr
cumentation.
by a company
ts infrastructu
age and storer
and procedur
board and exe
elop an initial
mentation iss
personnel. 
s both qualita
tory managem
o provide ev
on (Figure 11
implications.
rogress and 
y-wide stockta
ure and practi
room/yard lay
res. 
cutive level. 
l budget for 
ues. 
ative 
ment 
very 
-1). 
 
 
ake. 
ices. 
yout. 

Case Studies 
213 
Issues Faced During Implementation 
During the development and implementation of the policies and procedures, 
a number of relatively common issues were faced.  Table 11-1 summarizes 
these and the mitigation actions. 
 
Table 11-1: Issues and Mitigation Actions 
 
Issue 
Mitigation 
Lack of ‘buy in’ by 
middle management.  
 
• Maintain Senior Management support and develop 
support at the ‘coal face’ (working around the mid 
level). 
• Continue communication with mid-level 
management, including demonstrating benefits. 
• Establish auditable procedures and standards. 
• Establish personal implementation-related KPIs 
for key managers.  
 
During the program, 
the initial champion 
for materials 
management moved 
on in the 
organization. 
 
• Executive level ‘buy in’ used to continue the push 
of the program. 
• Local champions established at each location as 
people showed interest.  
 
Little organizational 
understanding of 
‘good practice’. 
• Visited an external ‘good practice’ location to 
demonstrate what ‘good practice’ looked like and 
that it was possible to achieve in their industry. 
• Development of written standards which included 
(where appropriate) photos of good practice. 
• Establishment of an internal ‘good practice’ 
location that was used as a role model for other 
locations. 
 

Chapter 11 
214 
 
Insufficient data to 
establish reordering 
parameters. 
• Development of a decision making model which 
used known information to establish the most 
appropriate calculation approach and then 
provided a sensitivity analysis to model the effect 
of different estimates of requirements. 
 
Need to establish 
ordering parameters 
for a large number 
of items. 
 
• Establish a Materials Usage Review Group to 
identify critical items and ensure sufficient 
procurement while data for automated reordering 
was being established. 
 
Lack of trust that the 
new system will 
ensure availability of 
the required 
materials. 
• Materials Usage Review Group monitored levels 
while trust in the system was established. 
• Issues and concerns relating to trust were 
proactively identified and followed up. 
 
Inadequate storage 
infrastructure  
• Established an infrastructure plan with the aim to 
gain funding approval and establish the required 
infrastructure over several years. 
 
 
 
Table 11-1:  Issues and Mitigation Actions (continued) 
 
 
 

The dev
success. 
presenta
each acti
 
 
Figure 1
 
Results 
 
At the ti
appropri
investme
 
elopment of p
 Figure 11-2 
ation of proced
ion.   
1-2:  Commu
me of writing
iate systems f
ent had been 
policies and p
shows how ‘
dures and cla
unicating Proc
g, the program
for manageme
established, i
215 
procedures wa
swimming po
arify the respo
cedures 
m was still un
ent and gover
ncluding: 
as critical to t
ool’ charts he
onsibility and 
derway.  How
rnance of inve
Case Stu
the program’s
elp simplify th
sequence for
 
wever, the 
entory 
udies 
s 
he 
r 
 

Chapter 11 
216 
 
• 
Materials Management Policy and Procedures developed and 
implemented. 
• 
Systems established for recording and tracking materials usage. 
• 
Procedures established for conducting stock takes. 
• 
Standards established for labeling and storage. 
• 
Guidelines established to identify critical and other spares types. 
• 
Guidelines established for establishing stock levels and reordering 
of materials.  
• 
Guidelines established for improved control of repairable spares. 
• 
CMMS implementation coordinated with materials management 
improvements. 
• 
Full transparency of stock holdings at all locations established. 
• 
More than 100 staff trained in application of new policies and 
procedures. 
 
By a) tackling their issues relating to people, processes, policies, and 
procedures, b) identifying and addressing internal myths, and c) formalizing 
their approach to managing the spare parts store room, this organization has 
set itself up to achieve long-term success with its materials and engineering 
spares management.   
 
 
 
 
 

Case Studies 
217 
Case Study 2: Applying the Inventory Process 
Optimization™ Method 
 
Background 
The Inventory Process Optimization™ method has been applied in many 
segments of steel production and processing, including: 
 
• 
Blast furnace 
• 
BOS steelmaking 
• 
Coke ovens 
• 
EAF ‘Mini Mill’ 
• 
Billet casters 
• 
Slab casters 
• 
Structural steel mills 
• 
Rod and bar mills 
• 
Wire mills 
• 
Pipe and tube mills  
 
This case study includes results from two sites. 
 
The Process 
In each case the process applied was as described in this book, including the 
14-week program of training and initial implementation discussed in Chapter 
10, Execution:  Taking Action to Achieve Results. A summary of the method 
is shown in Figure 11-3. 
 
Review teams included people from the different disciplines that have an 
impact on inventory holdings: 
 
• 
Maintenance 
• 
Operations 
• 
Procurement/Supply 
• 
Storeroom/Spares Officers  
• 
Engineering 
• 
Finance 

Chapter 1
 
 
The mix
managem
process a
 
 
 
Figure 11-
 
11 
x of person
ment.  Local 
and actions.  
-3:  The Proc
nel included
champions w
ess Implemen
 
218 
d people from
were appointe
nted 
m both the 
ed to ensure 
shop floor 
ownership of
and 
f the 
 

Case Studies 
219 
Findings 
In all cases, the Pareto Principle held true as a majority of inventory value 
was tied up in a small number of items.  For the two sites in this case study, 
the effect was even more pronounced (Figure 11-4): 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11-4:  Pareto Results for Two Locations 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 11 
220 
 
The management reviews identified a range of inventory management issues 
(Table 11-2): 
 
 
Site 1 
Site 2 
 
• Conflicting priorities with plant 
personnel 
• Lack of 
ownership/accountability 
• No consequences for those 
making stocking decisions 
• No financial measure of the 
benefits 
• No clear reporting structure 
around spares 
• Production/availability focus 
• Too much access to charge out 
stock 
• Poor risk assessment 
• Setting of max-mins — wider 
input required 
• Reorder quantities too high 
• System forces order of parts not 
yet required 
• Perception that supplier lead 
time is longer than it actually is 
• Lead times not revisited 
 
• No history on usage 
• Initial stock decisions not 
revisited 
• Suspect master data – especially 
lead times and splitting repair 
items from new 
• System drives long lead times — 
all suppliers 
• Process drives the non 
identification of obsolete items 
— if item made obsolete then it 
hits the R&M budget 
• Alignment of responsibilities — 
financial responsibility vs. 
setting stock level 
• Plant reliability drives 
breakdowns and the need for 
emergency spares 
• Risk assessment is non-existent 
 
Table 11-2:  Management Issues Identified  
 

Results 
Selected
was repo
 
 
 
Figure 1
 
d KPIs were m
orted to an ex
1-5:  Exampl
measured usin
xecutive level 
le of Inventor
 
221 
ng an inventor
(Figure 11-5
ry Tracking ‘D
ry tracking ‘d
). 
Dashboard’ 
Case Stu
dashboard’ tha
udies 
at 
 

Chapter 11 
222 
 
Initial Results 
During the programs, the teams identified acceptable but not aggressive 
levels of inventory reduction (Figure 11-6). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11-6:  Initial Results 
 
 
 
 

Final Re
Howeve
significa
 
 
 
Figure 1
 
 
esults 
er, by continui
antly greater (
1-7:  Results 
ing to apply t
(and sustainab
Achieved Ov
 
223 
the method ov
ble) reduction
 
 
ver Time 
ver time, the t
ns (Figure 11-
Case Stu
teams deliver
-7). 
 
udies 
red 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
225 
Chapter 12 
 
 
Where To From Here? 
 
 
ydney Australia is perfect for a picture postcard.  The natural 
beauty of the harbor is complemented by the design brilliance of 
the opera house and this is all framed by the majestic Sydney Harbor Bridge 
(which is affectionately referred to locally as the ‘coat hanger’ because of its 
steel arch construction). 
As you drive west from this famous scene, the landscape changes into 
a fairly generic hinterland reminiscent of the industry that surrounds almost 
every major city.  Sydney’s industrial hinterland includes oil and gas 
refineries, steel mills, paper plants, and major manufacturing locations for 
global brand names producing everything from biscuits to chemicals, glass, 
pharmaceuticals, valves, and everything in between.  As you can imagine, I 
have visited this region often for my consulting work. 
One clear and cold spring morning, I parked my rental car in the car 
park of a typical western Sydney facility.  This facility was a small part of a 
very large company with global operations.  The CEO of that company had 
engaged me to help the organization achieve true inventory optimization; this 
stop was one of two dozen similar facilities that I was in the process of 
visiting.  My appointment was with the site’s Manager of Operations and 
Maintenance — the most senior onsite engineer.  On walking into reception, 
I signed in as a visitor and the receptionist told me that ‘they’ were waiting 
for me in the training room in the next building.  She asked if I would mind 
finding my own way there.  At this point I sensed that this was not going to 
be a typical first meeting. 
Finding the training room, I knocked on the door and entered.  The 
room was a standard corporate training room with a projector screen and 
white board at one end, a projector suspended from the ceiling in the middle, 
S

Chapter 12 
226 
and under that a series of tables all joined together to form one long table.  
What was less typical was that my contact and all of his direct reports, all ten 
of them, were seated on one side of the table, facing the door, with their arms 
crossed!  It looked and felt like I had walked into a panel style interrogation. 
Of course everyone was quite civil; Australians are friendly in that 
way.  However, the attitude and position were clear — we don’t want you 
here, we don’t need you here, we don’t have any problems with our 
engineering spare parts.  I asked why they were so certain of this and the 
answer was universal:  They almost never had a stockout and, therefore, in 
their view, they didn’t have a problem.  As you will see, they had fallen into 
the Service Factor Trap. 
Theirs was a textbook example of the biases that are described in this 
book (page 52) and which represent one of the greatest hurdles in 
implementing a successful inventory review program.  This group, which 
meant well, was demonstrating almost every bias discussed.  The members: 
 
• 
Were overconfident in the ability of their systems to provide true 
optimization. 
• 
Believed that bringing in outside assistance was a loss of face on 
their part and showed a lack of confidence in them by the head 
office. 
• 
Framed their options by only looking at solutions relating to parts 
supply, and not inventory investment. 
• 
Anchored their beliefs in the idea that a stockout was the only 
measure that counted. 
• 
Were concerned about any changes that would alter the status quo. 
 
The only way to overcome these biases was to forge ahead with the 
agreed program so that they could discover for themselves what they needed 
to do.  Here’s some of what we found using the data collection guide found 
in Appendix C: 
 
• 
Stockouts were not actually measured! 
• 
Only one person had any type of stores or inventory performance 
measure (which was the stockout measure) but, as mentioned, this 
was not actually measured. 
• 
No one was responsible for the level of financial investment in 
inventory. 
• 
Their stock turn ratio was 1.1; this level was below the stock turn 
average of 1.25 across their sister facilities. 

Where to From Here? 
227 
• 
Although there was a main central store, there were seven official 
but uncontrolled other stores across the site. 
• 
There were no standard definitions to classify items or from which 
to set stocking policies. 
• 
In their own words, ‘not a lot of science’ went into setting the ROP 
and ROQ for new items. Even then, it was ‘set and forget, unless 
we run out’. 
• 
The stock control function of their ERP was not turned on. 
• 
Obsolescence was managed ‘if someone happens to notice’.  
Notifying the Storeroom of newly obsolete items was officially the 
responsibility of any engineer uninstalling equipment but it was 
not normally done. 
• 
Their storeroom personnel failed to receipt items consistently, if at 
all. 
• 
There were no storeroom KPIs. 
• 
The central storeroom had poor housekeeping with items routinely 
stored in the aisle, making it difficult to move around. 
 
Once Stream 1 of the program started and the training commenced, the 
manager of Operations and Maintenance — to his credit — immediately 
asked me to present another workshop involving a wider group of personnel 
as well as their onsite executive committee.  He had realized that there were 
actually many issues and that the task was a bigger one, involving more than 
just his team.  Subsequently: 
 
• 
Write downs for the preceding 12 months were identified to be 
approximately 9% of the inventory value (based on an existing 
accounting policy). 
• 
Their Pareto review showed that 70% of their dollar value was tied 
up in less than 5% of their inventory, meaning that they actually 
needed to focus on just 500 items to have a major impact. 
• 
Reviewing those 500 items identified: 
• A single opportunity valued at $425,000 from just one SKU, 
where the stock level had not been adjusted following reduced 
usage. 
• Another single SKU with $200,000 in stock was identified as 
obsolete and a further $200,000 in outstanding orders for that 
item were cancelled.  (Yes!  An obsolete item had been 
reordered!) 
• A single SKU where $50,000 had been ordered ‘by accident’. 

Chapter 12 
228 
• A further 45 individual opportunities to reduce inventory by 
more than $10,000 each (some worth as much as $70,000). 
• 
It was estimated that 30% of the items removed from their central 
storeroom were not officially signed out.  Therefore, they had no 
official record of their usage and their existing records were 
unreliable. 
 
After working through the program described herein, their spares and 
stores holding fell by 45%, over a period of 16 months.  They then remained 
at that level for the next two years.  Accordingly, their stock turn went from 
1.1 to 1.9 over the same period. 
Although the inventory reduction is impressive enough, the fact that it 
remained low over the subsequent years demonstrates that they were not 
adversely affected by this reduction.  In fact, it is safe to say that prior to this 
program they had in effect spent millions of dollars on items that they really 
didn’t need to support their operational outcomes. 
So what does this mean to you? 
First, the ideas, tools, and processes discussed in this book work.  
They just do.  If you are serious about achieving true inventory optimization, 
then apply these ideas, tools, and processes to your organization.  Don’t 
cherry pick those that you like or agree with — stick with the program and 
results will follow. 
Second, take action.  Don’t be delayed or deflected by discussions and 
arguments that ‘everything is OK’.  It isn’t.  The ideas, tools, and processes 
in this book have been applied in plants and facilities of all different types 
and sizes all over the world.  From oil and gas processing to steel, aluminum, 
and metals processes; to power generation and other utilities; to railways and 
transport.  From industrial spare parts to titanium hip joints.  From the 
Middle East to Asia and the Pacific to the Americas.  You are not so unique 
that this will not work for you.  Every single place has at least one person 
who says ‘nothing needs to change,’ yet I have yet to see one single 
application of the ideas, tools, and processes in this book that has not 
delivered significant benefits for the organization applying them. 
Third, begin today.  You have invested time and energy to read this 
book and learn about achieving true inventory optimization; why not get on 
with it?  Even if you cannot get a full program going, start influencing the 
people who can collect information, produce your Pareto curve, review 
storeroom management, use the data collection guide, build a picture of the 
issues and hurdles you face, identify and quantify the potential benefits, ask 
questions, dispel myths, and challenge assumptions.  Just start. 

Where to From Here? 
229 
Implementing smart inventory solutions to achieve true inventory 
optimization is a journey that is personally satisfying.  But more than that, it 
is a journey that can be truly valuable to your organization.  Get on with it. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
231 
Bibliography 
 
 
The following are books and articles that I have found to be helpful in 
developing the material in this book.  In some cases the book or article is 
directly referenced. 
 
 
A Decision Making Framework for Managing Maintenance Spare Parts; S. 
Cavalieri, M. Garetti, M. Macchi, and R Pinto; Production Planning 
and Control; 19:4 379-396, 2008. 
 
The Concise Oxford Dictionary, Edited by J.B Sykes, Oxford University 
Press, 1982. 
 
The Fifth Discipline, Peter Senge, Random House, 1992. 
 
Issues in Financial Accounting, Fifth Edition, Scott Henderson and Graham 
Peirson, Longman Cheshire, 1992. 
 
Lean Thinking, James Womack and Daniel Jones, Simon and Shuster, 1996. 
 
The Machine That Changed the World; James Womack, Daniel Jones, and 
Daniel Roos, HarperCollins, 1991. 
 
Maintenance Management, Revised Edition, Lawrence Mann, Jr., Lexington 
Books, 1982. 
 
MRO Inventory Reduction — Challenges and Management: A Case Study of 
the Tennessee Valley Authority, G.J. Bailey and M.M. Helms, 
Production Planning and Control, 18:3 261-270, 2007. 
 
Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists, Second Edition, 
Walpole and Myers, 1978, Macmillan Publishing. 
 
Toyota Production System, Taiichi Ohno, Productivity Press, 1988. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
233 
Appendix A 
Materials and Inventory 
Management Glossary 
 
A 
 
ABC Analysis 
 
An ABC analysis divides the inventory items 
into categories and helps identify which items 
are more important.  Typically A is more 
important than B and B is more important than 
C.  For most inventories, the criterion for the 
division is stock turn, but this is of little value 
for ABC analysis of MRO and engineering 
inventory. 
 
Accounting Standards 
 
A regulation that governs the way in which 
accounting and financial data are to be 
interpreted with respect to a company’s 
financial position. 
 
Active Stock 
Inventory items with regular demand/usage. 
 
Aged Item 
An item that has had no demand/usage for a 
predefined period.  In engineering spares, this 
could be as long as four years. 
 
Automated Ordering 
Computer-generated 
purchasing 
that 
is 
triggered by stock levels and requires no human 
intervention. 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
234 
B 
 
Balance Sheet 
 
A financial report that shows the relative status 
of 
a 
company’s 
assets, 
liabilities, 
and 
shareholder equity.  Sometimes now referred to 
as the Statement of Financial Position. 
 
Bandwidth 
The capacity of a computing system to transfer 
data. 
 
Batch size 
A minimum quantity in which an item is made 
and/or delivered. 
 
Bottleneck 
A constraint on process flow.  Typically the 
point at which things happen most slowly. 
 
Brainstorm 
A 
process 
of 
capturing 
ideas 
without 
questioning their value in advance. 
 
Breakthrough 
The recognition of a change that needs to occur 
in order to effect an improvement. 
 
Buffer 
A reserve of stock that enables continued 
supply when the timing of supply and demand 
are mismatched. 
 
Business Environment 
The economic and social conditions within 
which a business operates. 
C 
 
Capital Investment 
 
An outlay of money to acquire or improve a 
capital asset such as equipment or buildings. 
 
Capital Spares 
Spares purchased with a new capital investment 
such as plant and equipment.  Typically carried 
at nil value as expense is capitalized with the 
investment. 
 
Cash Flow 
A measure of the accumulation or expenditure 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
235 
of cash as a result of a company doing 
business.  A positive cash flow means that 
more cash came in than went out; a negative 
cash flow means that more cash went out than 
came in. 
 
Circumstantially 
Overstocked 
Overstock that occurs due to a particular set of 
events or circumstances rather than the specific 
systems that may be in place. 
 
Consignment Inventory System where the vendor owns the inventory, 
but we hold it for our use.  The vendor charges 
for the inventory only when the item is used or 
consumed. 
 
Consumable Spare 
A spare part that is worn out or otherwise used 
up in the environment in which it is used. 
 
Continuous 
Improvement 
Creating incremental changes that improve the 
operation or business outcomes. 
  
Critical Inventory 
Spares expected to be used in the normal 
operation of plant and equipment which, if 
unavailable, would prevent the plant from 
operating. 
 
Culture 
The prevailing behaviors that determine how a 
company’s 
people 
respond 
in 
particular 
circumstances, e.g., a proactive culture, a 
reactive culture.  
 
Cumulative Value 
The value of all items on a list taken from the 
beginning to the point at which the cumulative 
value is determined. 
 
Current Assets 
 
Assets such as cash, accounts receivable, and 
inventory that are likely to be able to be 
converted to cash within a year. 
 
Customer Service 
A measure of success in meeting a customer 

Appendix A 
236 
Level 
supply promise.  Usually measured in % as in 
99% of the time we meet the customer supply 
promise. 
 
Customer Supply 
Promise 
The implicit or explicit promise made that a 
supplier will provide goods or services within a 
certain time frame. 
 
D 
 
Dead Stock 
 
The component of an active inventory item that 
has no movement over a predefined period, 
typically two years.  This period must be long 
enough to account for the full range of 
volatility in demand and supply.   
 
For example, an item may have regular usage 
and replenishment, but has never had fewer 
than 3 items in stock over two years.  These 3 
items are effectively dead stock as they are 
unlikely to be used at any time. 
 
Demand 
A customer order that requires an item to be 
supplied from inventory. 
 
Depreciable Spares 
A spare that is unique to a specific asset and is 
depreciated over the life of the asset.  
Sometimes called a Unique Spare. 
 
Depreciation 
A non-cash accounting entry that allows a 
company to spread the cost of an item across its 
useful life. 
 
Distribution 
Requirements Planning 
An approach to managing distribution that is 
similar to Materials Requirements Planning.  
Essentially the same logic is used, but it is 
applied to a series of store or warehouse 
locations. 
 
Dividends 
Payment of company earnings to stockholders. 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
237 
Dollar Value Held 
The total investment made in a single line of 
inventory.  Usually the number of items 
multiplied by the value per item. 
 
Dollar Value Invested 
See Dollar Value Held. 
 
DRP 
See Distribution Requirements Planning. 
 
E 
 
Economic Order 
Quantity (EOQ) 
 
The purchase quantity that represents the 
minimum cost point between spare parts 
holding and purchasing costs.  EOQ is often 
misunderstood to be the quantity providing the 
lowest purchase cost per unit; as a result, many 
organizations 
actually 
overstock 
their 
inventory.  However, when costs such as 
obsolescence are taken into account the best 
purchase quantity may not be that with the 
lowest purchase cost per unit. 
 
Electronic Delivery 
Acceptance 
The use of computerized systems to process 
and acknowledge a delivery of goods. 
  
Electronic Funds 
Transfer 
The use of computerized systems to transfer 
money from one bank account to another. 
 
Engineering Spares 
Items held to assist in repairing equipment if it 
breaks down. 
 
EOQ 
See Economic Order Quantity. 
 
Excess Stock 
There are typically two uses for this term: 
 
1) Inventory that is in excess of the amount 
needed to cover a predefined period, typically 
two years, or 2) a level of inventory that is 
greater than the predetermined maximum. 
Expediting 
Taking action outside of the normal routine and 
priority to make sure that goods are delivered 

Appendix A 
238 
F 
 
False Economy 
 
An action that appears to provide an economic 
benefit, but which when looked at broadly does 
not provide a benefit. 
 
Finished Goods 
Items that require no further processing before 
being dispatched to a customer. 
 
Forecast Accuracy 
The degree to which an actual outcome 
matches 
a 
prediction 
of 
that 
outcome.  
Typically used when predicting sales or 
demand. 
 
Forecasting 
Predicting an outcome.  Typically used for 
sales or demand. 
 
G 
 
Gross Margin 
 
The net revenue from sales minus the cost of 
sales.  This excludes overhead costs. 
 
H 
 
High Turn Over 
 
Items that have a stock turn, that is, at least 
twice the average for the inventory. 
 
Holding Cost 
A term used to identify the annual percentage 
cost of owning inventory.  See also Total Cost 
Ratio. 
 
Human Dynamics 
The normal behavioral characteristics of 
people. 
 
I 
 
ICR® 
 
See Inventory Cash Release® 
 
Implementation 
 
Changing management activity and processes 
so that a different outcome results. 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
239 
Indirect Inventory 
This term covers all inventories that are not 
used directly in production.  This includes all 
‘bought in’ inventories such as parts and 
components, finished goods, service parts, 
OEM spares, MRO inventory, engineering 
spares and industrial supplies.  Sometimes 
referred to as Indirect Stock. 
 
Individual Parts 
Review 
Stream 
1 
of 
the 
Inventory 
Process 
Optimization™ Method.  Uses the Pareto 
Principle to focus on the items with the greatest 
value tied up in inventory and then applies 
supply chain and process review principles to 
what is commonly thought of in either 
mathematical or technical terms.   
 
Insurance Spares 
An item that would not be expected to be used 
in the normal life of plant and equipment but, if 
not available when needed, would result in 
significant losses. 
 
Interest 
Payment to a lender to compensate for the 
funds borrowed.  Usually measured as a 
percentage of the funds borrowed. 
 
Inventory 
Items that are held in the expectation of future 
sale or use.  Also referred to as stores and 
stock. 
 
Inventory Cash 
Release® 
A structured step-by-step inventory review 
technique that guides users through the 
application of different management methods to 
match the method with the inventory and so 
produce the most optimal inventory result.  The 
ICR® technique is supported by a purpose-built 
software 
program 
provided 
by 
OMCS 
International. 
 
Inventory Management 
The processes used to control, issue, and order 
inventory. 

Appendix A 
240 
Inventory Management 
X-Ray 
The Inventory Management X-Ray is a 
diagnostic tool that enables an objective review 
and evaluation of inventory management 
approaches and outcomes.  The tool examines 
52 attributes of inventory performance in 8 
different areas of inventory management, then 
builds an objective profile of the inventory 
management.  By comparing the current 
approach to four predetermined levels of 
performance, the tool can pin point both 
strengths and weaknesses. 
 
Inventory Process 
Optimization™ 
Inventory Process Optimization™ is a two-
stream process that has been specifically 
designed for application with MRO and 
engineering spares.  The technique involves an 
individual parts review using the Inventory 
Cash 
Release® 
(ICR®) 
technique 
and 
a 
management process review that identifies the 
factors and behaviors that have a negative 
impact on inventory levels. 
 
Inventory Risk 
The risk that an item in inventory may spoil or 
become obsolete. 
 
Investment 
An outlay of money to acquire an asset.   
See also Capital Investment. 
 
Issue Cost 
The price that is charged to a cost center when 
an item is released from inventory 
  
J 
 
JIT 
 
See Just In Time. 
 
Just in Time (JIT) 
Just In Time is perhaps the term most often 
quoted in inventory management.  In short, JIT 
seeks to ensure that items are made available 
only at the time when they are needed.  The 
approach minimizes or eliminates waiting time 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
241 
and can significantly reduce or even eliminate 
inventory holdings.  Unfortunately it is 
misunderstood to be a technique when it is 
really a philosophy and an outcome that results 
from the application of other techniques (such 
as the use of Kan Bans) and the development of 
highly responsive supply lines.  
 
K 
 
Kan Ban 
 
Kan Ban is perhaps the term second most 
commonly used in inventory management (after 
Just in Time).  A Kan Ban is simply a signal 
that more of an item is required.  It could be in 
the form of an order ticket or a bin to be filled.  
A Kan Ban ensures that items are supplied only 
when they are needed and works best in 
production environments where the stock is 
used quickly.  In spares management, a two-bin 
system may be considered to be a Kan Ban, but 
it would not guarantee the lowest inventory 
level. 
 
L 
 
Lead Time 
 
The time it takes to replenish an item.  
Typically measured from the time the trigger 
point is reached to the time the item is 
physically restocked. 
 
Lean Thinking 
Originally developed as a way of embedding 
higher quality and lower costs in manufacturing 
organizations, Lean principles have since been 
applied in many different organizations and 
management situations.  One of these is the 
Engineering Materials and Spares Storeroom. 
 
Logistics 
The organization and management of the 
movement of goods. 

Appendix A 
242 
Low Turnover 
Inventory items that have a stock turn that is 
less than one quarter of the average. 
 
M 
 
Maintenance System 
 
A management approach that aims to ensure 
that 
production 
equipment 
achieves 
a 
predetermined level of availability. 
 
Management Process 
Review 
This review involves understanding your 
current management practices and behaviors 
and identifying those that have a negative 
impact on your inventory holdings.   
 
Materials Resource 
Planning 
MRP — a technique that is applicable to items 
that have dependant demand, that is, when the 
quantity required for an item is dependent upon 
the quantity of another item.  For example, if 
we were making cars we would need to ensure 
that we had 4 wheels for every car and this 
could be set up in a plan.  MRPs have little use 
in MRO and engineering inventory except 
perhaps in kitting situations. 
 
Max–Min 
An approach to inventory management that 
aims to maintain the quantity in inventory 
between a minimum and maximum level. 
Maximum 
The maximum quantity of an item that is 
expected to be held in inventory.  The 
maximum is also used to determine the reorder 
quantity when the minimum is reached. 
 
Minimum 
In a max-min system, the quantity in stock at 
which replenishment is ordered.  In some cases, 
this is equal to the safety stock quantity.  See 
also Reorder Point and Trigger Point. 
 
Minimum Order 
Quantity 
The lowest quantity of an item that a supplier 
will supply. 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
243 
Momentum 
In this instance, refers to an organization 
having the energy, focus, and direction to 
ensure that a series of actions is implemented. 
 
Monte Carlo 
Simulation 
An analytical technique that uses random 
numbers as input variables and applies them to 
a known function (or formula) to identify 
possible outcomes.  It is named after the 
random inputs that occur in table games, such 
as roulette, at the casinos in Monte Carlo. 
 
MRO 
Maintenance Repairs and Operations.  This 
term refers to the inventory that is not converted 
to finished goods in a manufacturing process.  It 
includes spare parts and consumables. 
  
MRP 
See Materials Resource Planning. 
 
N 
 
Non-Cash Cost 
 
A charge against the Profit & Loss (P&L) that 
is an accounting entry rather than an 
expenditure of cash. 
Non-Moving Stock 
Inventory that has no demand or issue over a 
predefined period of time. 
 
Non-Trading Stock 
All inventory that is used to support production 
but is not ultimately for sale, e.g., spares and 
stores.  Sometimes referred to as Indirect Stock. 
Non Value Adding 
An action or investment that does not result in 
an improved outcome as a result of the action 
or investment. 
 
O 
 
Obsolete 
 
An item that is no longer required for its 
original purpose. 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
244 
Obsolete Stock 
Any inventory that will no longer be used as a 
result of plant closure, product replacement, or 
end of life. 
  
Operating Stock 
All raw materials, WIP, and finished goods that 
are 
intended 
for 
production 
and 
sale.  
Sometimes referred to as Trading Stock. 
 
Operational Budget 
The financial plan for a company’s production 
or service delivery function. 
 
Optimization 
Optimization is perhaps the most misused term 
in inventory management.  Optimization is the 
tradeoff of one condition against another to find 
the best position.  It is usually incorrectly 
assumed that optimization is absolute and 
cannot be improved.  This is not the case as 
improvements can be achieved if the elements 
being optimized are changed.  This is why 
process optimization is the key to improved 
inventory performance. 
Overheads 
The costs of a business that are not directly 
associated with the manufacture and sale of 
goods or services. 
 
P 
 
Pareto Principle 
 
Literally, a minority of inputs produces a 
majority of results.  Sometimes referred to as 
the 80:20 rule. 
Per Annum 
Per year. 
 
Phantom Stock 
Inventory that appears on the official record, 
but which does not actually exist.  Usually 
results from poor record keeping. 
 
Planned Inventory 
Inventory that is not usually held, but which is 
accumulated for a special project or event. 
 
 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
245 
Policies 
Course of action adopted to address an issue 
based on the rules of conduct or principle. 
 
Principles 
Rules of conduct that define how we will 
behave or respond. 
 
Probsolete Stock 
Any stock that is suspected of being obsolete, 
but which requires further investigation before 
obsolescence is confirmed. 
 
Procedures 
A way of performing a task; a series of actions 
conducted in a certain order or manner. 
 
Product Complexity 
Applies where there may be a large number of 
variations in style or type for a single basic 
product. 
 
Profit and Loss (P&L) 
A 
financial 
report 
that 
summarizes 
a 
company’s revenues and costs.  This report can 
include non-cash costs and is not a report of 
cash flow.  This sometimes now referred to as 
the Statement of Financial Performance. 
 
Project Budget 
The financial plan for a special activity that is 
not usually part of the normal operating 
expenditure. 
Project stock 
Inventory that is accumulated for a particular 
project or event. 
 
Purchase Order 
A document gives authority to a supplier to 
supply goods and invoice for them. 
Purchasing Efficiency 
An 
approach 
aimed 
at 
minimizing 
the 
paperwork or administrative activity associated 
with purchasing or procurement. 
 
R 
 
Range Complexity 
 
Occurs when there are a large number of 
different items in inventory. 
 

Appendix A 
246 
Raw Materials 
Materials from which products are made. 
 
RCS 
See Reliability Centered Spares. 
Reliability Centered 
Spares 
Reliability Centered Spares is a technique for 
determining the appropriate spares level based 
on expected performance of a reliability 
program.  The approach asks several questions 
to guide the thinking.  The major weaknesses 
are that it requires significant data and does not 
seek to address the many factors that influence 
inventory outcomes.  However, if the data is 
available, it can be useful for setting initial 
targets and these can then be improved through 
the use of process optimization. 
Reorder Point 
The level of inventory at which replenishment 
is triggered.  Also referred to as the trigger 
point.  See also Minimum. 
 
Reorder Quantity 
The predetermined quantity to be reordered 
when the Reorder Point is reached. 
 
Replenishment 
The act of ordering and physically receiving 
inventory. 
 
Replenishment Cycle 
The activity involved in identifying that stock 
is low, ordering the stock, and making the new 
stock available for use. 
 
 
Reservation Systems 
 
A process that enables an item to be held for 
use only by the person who makes the 
reservation. 
Reward System 
The process by which people are rewarded for 
achievement or positive outcomes. 
 
Risk 
Exposure to the chance that something will be 
lost as a result of some action or inaction. 
 
ROP 
See Reorder Point. 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
247 
ROQ 
See Reorder Quantity. 
 
Rule of Thumb 
A rule that approximates an outcome, but 
generally cannot be proven to be accurate. 
 
S 
 
Safety Stock 
 
Items held as an allowance for mismatches 
between demand and supply during the lead 
time to restock. 
 
Salvaged Stock 
Inventory 
that 
is 
retained 
for 
potential 
cannibalization, but where any other potential 
use/sale is unlikely.  Typically held at nil value. 
 
Service Level 
The service level is the percentage of times that 
a request for an item is filled in an acceptable 
time frame; e.g., a 95% service level means that 
5% of the time the request is not fulfilled. 
 
SKU 
Stock Keeping Unit - Refers to any individual 
inventory item 
 
Slow Moving 
Inventory 
Inventory that has had no use/consumption for 
a predefined time frame.  In many cases, this 
time frame is 4 years; however, this may vary 
by country/company. 
 
Software 
A computer program. 
 
Square Root 
A number which, when multiplied by itself, 
generates the number of which it is the square 
root, e.g.  2 x 2 =4; 2 is the square root of 4. 
 
Squirrel Stores 
The unofficial hoarding of parts outside of the 
official stores system.  Typically these parts are 
uncontrolled. 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
248 
Stock 
Items that are held in the expectation of future 
sale or use.  Also referred to as Inventory and 
Stores. 
 
Stockholding Costs 
The combination of costs that are incurred as a 
result of owning inventory.  Typically these 
include interest on the funds invested; labor to 
manage, clean, count, maintain, move, and 
otherwise process the inventory; buildings in 
which to house the inventory; and obsolescence 
or spoilage of the inventory. 
 
Stock Keeping Unit 
See SKU 
 
Stock Out 
Occurs when there is demand for an item, but 
no inventory of that item in stock. 
 
Stock Over Maximum 
Any inventory where the quantity held is in 
excess of the set maximum levels.  Typically 
used in the SAP software. 
 
Stock Turn 
Stock turn measures inventory efficiency by 
measuring the rate at which the inventory is 
used.  The stock turn is calculated by dividing 
the dollar value of stock issued in a year by the 
dollar value of stock held.  For example, an 
item with annual demand of $1000 and a stock 
holding equal to $500 has a stock turn of 2. 
 
Store 
A place that is used to hold inventory.  Also 
referred to as a Warehouse or Storeroom. 
 
Stores 
Items that are held in the expectation of future 
sale or use.  Also referred to as Inventory and 
Stock. 
 
Structure 
Used to define organizational relationships 
within a company. 
 
Supply Chain 
The series of companies and activities that must 

Materials and Inventory Management Glossary 
249 
interact in order for an item to be created, 
moved, stored, sold/used, and ultimately 
delivered to the end user. 
 
T 
 
Tolerance for Risk 
 
The ability of an organization to accept the 
risks associated with not holding stock. 
 
Total Cost Ratio 
The combined total percentage of finance and 
other holding costs for inventory. 
 
Trading Stock 
All raw materials, WIP, and finished goods that 
are 
intended 
for 
production 
and 
sale.  
Sometimes referred to as Operating Stock. 
    
Trigger Point 
The level of inventory at which replenishment 
is triggered.  Also referred to as the reorder 
point.  See also Minimum. 
 
Turnover 
 
This has two general uses.  In inventory, it is 
similar to stock turn (see above).  It is also used 
to describe the sales revenue of a company, 
e.g., Company XYZ has a turnover of $20M. 
 
U 
 
Unique Spares 
 
A spare which is only used on a specific asset 
and which is depreciated over the life of that 
asset.  Sometimes called a Depreciable Spare. 
 
Unit Price 
The price of a single item, even though the 
items may be bought in multiples. 
 
Utilities 
Gas, water, and electricity charges. 
 
V 
 
Vendor Managed 
Inventory 
 
Inventory where the vendor decides on 
appropriate quantities and replenishment, but 

Appendix A 
250 
our company owns the inventory. 
 
W 
 
Weeks of Stock 
 
The number of weeks supply held of an item, 
based on the average demand per week, e.g., 
when an item has 10 demands per week on 
average and we hold 100 items, then we have 
10 weeks of stock 
 
WIP 
See Work In Progress. 
 
Work in Progress 
Inventory 
that 
is 
partway 
through 
a 
manufacturing process.  It is no longer raw 
material, but not yet finished goods. 
 
Working Capital 
The funds invested in a company’s cash, 
inventory, and accounts receivable.  Net 
working capital equals current assets minus 
current liabilities.  These are the funds that are 
required to finance the purchase of raw 
materials, conversion into finished goods, and 
the time until paid by customers. 
   
Written Down Value 
The book value of an item after depreciation or 
other non-cash costs are taken into account.  
For example, an item that cost $1000 but has 
$400 of depreciation has a written down value 
of $600. 
 
 
 
Z 
 
Zero Inventory Mindset 
 
An approach to inventory management that 
seeks to minimize the investment in inventory 
and requires that all inventory above zero be 
justified. 
 

 
251 
Appendix B 
Data Collection Questions 
 
Organization 
 
1. How many stores locations are there in this company / on this site? 
  
Check for different businesses/divisions and different store 
types. 
 
2. How is inventory classified and organized? 
  
Machine/process 
  
Type:  mechanical or electrical 
  
Active, inactive, obsolete 
  
A, B, C 
 
3. What are the organizational structure and responsibilities for inventory? 
  
Draw out the organizational chart—to whom does this function 
report? 
  
What is the relationship with purchasing/supply? 
  
What are the responsibilities for both financial and customer 
promise outcomes? 
 
4. What training in stock management have the inventory personnel 
received? 
 
5. Is the staff remuneration linked to inventory performance?  How? 
 
 
Management and Control 
 
6. How are items added to inventory and how is the recommended holding 
determined? 
  
Max–Min 
  
Reorder point 

Appendix B 
252 
  
Reorder quantity 
  
Safety stock 
  
History 
 
7. What process is used to review stock holding targets and when were the 
targets last reviewed? 
  
Cycle count 
  
Order by order 
  
Usage analysis 
 
8. Is there a quality system for inventory management? 
 
9. Does your computer system only record stock movements or is it also 
used to control stock quantities? 
 
10. What approach is used to value stock 
  
Average 
  
Latest price 
  
FIFO/LIFO 
 
11.  How are  the stock level and availability controlled? 
  
Max–Min 
  
Visual management 
  
Cycle count 
  
A,B,C classification 
 
12.  How is obsolescence managed? 
 
13.  How are item movements recorded?  
  
Is this system followed? 
 
14.  Who has access to the store? 
 
15.  What KPIs are used to monitor stores performance? 
  
Availability/service level 
  
$ Value 
  
Turnover 
  
Stock turns 
 

Data Collection Questions 
253 
16.  What is the current value of these KPIs, actual vs. budget? 
 
17.  How and to whom are these KPIs reported? 
 
18. How is the availability policy set? 
 
19.  What current other plans are there to reduce inventory? 
  
Supply chain initiatives 
  
Stores rationalization 
  
Spares rationalization 
 
Activity Data 
 
20.  What is the annual transactional value by store and category? 
 
21.  What is the current value of stock by store and category and how does 
this compare to budget? 
 
22.  How many purchase orders are raised per day or week for inventory 
items? 
 
23.  Is there any planned inventory held as stock build for project or 
marketing initiatives? 
 
24.  What benchmarking data do you use? 
 
Reordering Process 
 
25.  Are orders ‘rolled up’ in order to manage purchasing? 
 
26.  Are local suppliers identified and/or favored? 
 
27.  Are orders shared with other stores? 
 
28.  What is the process for reordering and restocking stores items? 
  
Need to understand the internal lead time 
  
Need process and times from ‘flag to restock’ 

 
 
 
 

 
255 
Index 
 
Accounting Standards 41, 94,127, 
128 
Actions for Inventory Reduction 
Active Stock 94, 233 
 
Balance Sheet 40, 41, 234 
Bath Tub Principle 117-118 
Biases 15, 52, 226 
Buffer 36, 37, 112, 136, 146, 234 
Business Economics 35 
 
Case Studies 18, 46, 83, 86, 88, 
102, 125, 129, 134, 139, 143, 
147, 161, 162, 169, 180, 209-
217 
Cash Flow 11, 35-39, 234 
 
Statement 40 
Cash Is King 35 
Cash Release Calculation 46 
Categories 70-72, 163 
Champion 
 
Selecting 185 
 
Role of 187 
Checklists 75, 126, 131, 135, 140, 
144, 148, 151, 207, 208 
Confidence Level 67 
Consignment 55, 85-87, 121-126, 
235 
Critical Inventory 63-68, 235 
Culture 51-52, 235 
Cumulative Value Curve 160, 175 
Cycle, Materials and Inventory 
Management 15-16, 58-61 
 
Dead Stock 180-181, 236 
Decision Tree 72 
Dollar Value Held 159-162, 170, 
237 
Double Loop Learning 119 
Duplication 132-135 
 
Economic Order Quantity see 
EOQ 
Engineering Spares 3, 13, 52, 54, 
59, 78, 97, 106, 137, 155, 169, 
205, 217  
EOQ 83, 93, 112, 237 
Excess Inventory 55, 57, 79, 90-
96, 127 
Execution 183-209 
 
Financial Management 33-49 
Financial reports 40-43 
Forecasting 12, 20, 238 
 
Glossary 234-252 
Gaussian Distribution 20-24, 81, 
104 
 
Holding Cost 26, 28, 43-47, 74, 
145, 238 
 
ICR 78, 168-178, 238 
Implementation 183-209 212-224, 
238 
Implementation checklist 126, 
131, 135, 140, 144, 148, 151 
Indirect Inventory 13-15, 79, 82, 
155 
Individual Parts Review 155-182, 
239 
Insurance Spares 31, 71, 109, 111, 
239 
Interest 36-37, 43, 239 
Interest Rate 11 
 

Index 
256 
Inventory 
Cash Release 119, 155-181, 
183, 188, 193, 239 
Cost Ratio 44-47 
Management 5, 9-32, 34, 37, 
205, 211, 239 
Management Cycle 15-16, 58-
61 
Optimization 1-2, 6 
Process Optimization 4, 153-
182, 189, 205 
Purpose of 12  
Reduction 77, 82, 117-151, 
158, 159, 172, 180 
Risk 21, 49, 84, 124, 240 
Tension 34 
 
Just In Time 79, 111, 240 
 
Kan Ban 79, 112, 241 
 
Lead Time 11, 17, 23, 73, 241 
Lean Thinking 106-114, 241 
Long Tail, The 179, 181 
 
Management Cycle 15-16, 58-61 
Management Process Review 157, 
182, 185, 195-203, 242 
Materials Resource Planning 242 
Maximum (theoretical) 16 
Measuring Progress 202-203 
Monte Carlo Simulation 29, 243 
MRO 13, 106, 243 
MRP 243 
Myths 82-89 
 
New Inventory 203-205 
Normal Distribution 141, see also 
Gaussian Distribution 
 
Obsolete 94-95, 100-101, 127-
131, 163, 243 
Operating Statement 42 
Optimization 1-2, 6 
Optimization Software 57, 82, 
153-154 
 
Pareto Principle 158-163, 244 
People 49-53 
Phantom Stock 163-164 
Poisson Distribution 20-25 
Policies 63-76, 245 
Principles 107, 117-118, 158, 245 
Procedures 63-76, 245 
Process 55-62 
Process Optimization 152-182 
Procurement 2, 10, 15, 59, 73, 75, 
83, 122, 133, 155, 157, 164, 
188, 217 
Profit and Loss 42 
 
Reorder Point 19-25 
Reorder Quantity 26-28 
Reservation Systems 1, 46, 246 
Risk 21, 49, 84, 124, 246 
ROP 19-25 
ROQ 26-28 
 
Safety Stock 11, 17-18, 93, 104, 
132, 136-140, 247 
Saw Tooth Diagram 17 
Single Loop Learning 119 
SKU 11, 247 
Slow Moving Inventory 20, 80, 
111, 133, 162-165, 247 
Software 178, 248, see also 
Optimization Software 
Spare Parts 63-70, 97-116 
Squirrel Stores 98-106 
Stock Decision Checklist 207-208 

Index 
257 
Stocking Policy 68-76 
Stock Keeping Unit see SKU 
Stock Out 80, 137, 248 
Stock Over Maximum 179-181, 
248 
Stock Turn 11, 14, 29-31, 248 
Storeroom 97-116 
Supply Chain 1, 2, 8, 12, 13, 66, 
79, 81, 85, 86, 90, 91, 96, 121, 
123, 124, 137, 138, 155, 157, 
158, 210, 248 
 
Theory 16-19 
Turnover see Stockturn 
 
Vendor Managed Inventory 121-
126, 249 
 
WACC 43-44, 46-47 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital 
see WACC 
WIP 79, 250 
Work in Progress see WIP 
Working Capital 1, 3, 36, 11, 26, 
34, 43, 106, 107, 145, 149, 
155, 188, 205 
Written Down Value 250 
 
Zero Inventory Mindset 54-55, 
250 

 
 
Need More Information? 
 
 
Phillip Slater provides the services and tools to help 
companies achieve their engineering materials and 
spare parts goals and get the right parts, in the right 
place, at the right time, for the right reason. 
 
For more information on: 
 
  
Achieving true inventory optimization 
  
Minimizing materials and inventory 
management risk 
  
Developing materials and inventory 
management policies and procedures  
  
Accessing inventory management tools and 
techniques that work 
  
Accessing practical materials and inventory and 
stores management advice 
  
Program implementation and training      
  
The Inventory Cash Release® Software 
 
contact Phillip Slater via his website: 
 
www.PhillipSlater.com 
 
 
 
Initiate Action Pty Ltd 
Melbourne, Australia 
 
Ph: 
+ 61 3 9331 3181 
Fax: 
+ 61 3 9331 3180 

