
Smart Phone and Next-Generation
Mobile Computing

The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Networking
Series Editor, David Clark, M.I.T.
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Pei Zheng and Lionel Ni
GMPLS: Architecture and Applications
Adrian Farrel and Igor Bryskin
Network Security: A Practical Approach
Jan L. Harrington
Content Networking: Architecture, Protocols, and Practice
Markus Hofmann and Leland R. Beaumont
Network Algorithmics: An Interdisciplinary Approach to
Designing Fast Networked Devices
George Varghese
Network Recovery: Protection and Restoration of Optical,
SONET-SDH, IP, and MPLS
Jean Philippe Vasseur, Mario Pickavet,
and Piet Demeester
Routing, Flow, and Capacity Design in Communication
and Computer Networks
Michal Pióro and Deepankar Medhi
Wireless Sensor Networks: An Information
Processing Approach
Feng Zhao and Leonidas Guibas
Communication Networking: An Analytical Approach
Anurag Kumar, D. Manjunath, and Joy Kuri
The Internet and Its Protocols: A Comparative Approach
Adrian Farrel
Modern Cable Television Technology: Video, Voice,
and Data Communications, 2e
Walter Ciciora, James Farmer, David Large,
and Michael Adams
Bluetooth Application Programming with the Java APIs
C. Bala Kumar, Paul J. Kline, and
Timothy J. Thompson
Policy-Based Network Management: Solutions for the
Next Generation
John Strassner
Computer Networks: A Systems Approach, 3e
Larry L. Peterson and Bruce S. Davie
Network Architecture, Analysis, and Design, 2e
James D. McCabe
MPLS Network Management: MIBs, Tools, and Techniques
Thomas D. Nadeau
Developing IP-Based Services: Solutions for Service
Providers and Vendors
Monique Morrow and Kateel Vijayananda
Telecommunications Law in the Internet Age
Sharon K. Black
Optical Networks: A Practical Perspective, 2e
Rajiv Ramaswami and Kumar N. Sivarajan
Internet QoS: Architectures and Mechanisms
Zheng Wang
TCP/IP Sockets in Java: Practical Guide for Programmers
Michael J. Donahoo and Kenneth L. Calvert
TCP/IP Sockets in C: Practical Guide for Programmers
Kenneth L. Calvert and Michael J. Donahoo
Multicast Communication: Protocols, Programming,
and Applications
Ralph Wittmann and Martina Zitterbart
MPLS: Technology and Applications
Bruce Davie and Yakov Rekhter
High-Performance Communication Networks, 2e
Jean Walrand and Pravin Varaiya
Internetworking Multimedia
Jon Crowcroft, Mark Handley, and Ian Wakeman
Understanding Networked Applications: A First Course
David G. Messerschmitt
Integrated Management of Networked Systems: Concepts,
Architectures, and their Operational Application
Heinz-Gerd Hegering, Sebastian Abeck,
and Bernhard Neumair
Virtual Private Networks: Making the Right Connection
Dennis Fowler
Networked Applications: A Guide to the New
Computing Infrastructure
David G. Messerschmitt
Wide Area Network Design: Concepts and Tools
for Optimization
Robert S. Cahn
For further information on these books and for a list of
forthcoming titles, please visit our Web site at
http://www.mkp.com.

Smart Phone and
Next-Generation
Mobile Computing
Pei Zheng
Lionel Ni
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is an imprint of Elsevier

Senior Editor
Rick Adams
Acquisitions Editor
Rick Adams
Assistant Editor
Rachel Roumeliotis
Publishing Services Manager
Simon Crump
Senior Production Editor
Paul Gottehrer
Cover Design
Side-by-Side Design
Composition
Cepha Imaging Pvt. Ltd.
Interior printer
Maple-Vail Book Manufacturing Group
Cover printer
Phoenix Color Corp.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is an imprint of Elsevier.
500 Sansome Street, Suite 400, San Francisco, CA 94111
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
© 2006 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks or
registered trademarks. In all instances in which Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is aware of a claim,
the product names appear in initial capital or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact
the appropriate companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, scanning, or otherwise-without
prior written permission of the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights
Department in Oxford, UK: phone: (+44) 1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333,
E-mail: permissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line
via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.com), by selecting “Support & Contact”
then “Copyright and Permission” and then “Obtaining Permissions.”
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN 13: 978-0-12-088560-2
ISBN 10: 0-12-088560-3
For information on all Morgan Kaufmann publications,
visit our Web site at www.mkp.com or www.books.elsevier.com
Printed in the United States of America
05
06
06
07
08
5
4
3
2
1

Contents
About the Authors
xvii
Preface
xix
Acknowledgment
xxvii
1
Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
1
1.1
Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
2
1.1.1
Deﬁnitions
2
1.1.2
Smart Phone: The Universal Mobile Terminal
6
1.2
Emerging Mobile Technologies and Applications
11
1.2.1
Cellular Networks
11
1.2.2
802.11 Wireless LAN
12
1.2.3
Wireless Mesh Network
13
1.2.4
WiMax
13
1.2.5
Wireless Sensor Network
14
1.2.6
RFID
14
1.2.7
WPAN
15
1.3
Issues and Challenges
16
1.3.1
Mobile Localization and Location-Based Services
16
v

vi
Contents
1.3.2
Ad Hoc Networks
16
1.3.3
Integration of Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
17
1.3.4
Security and Privacy
17
1.3.5
Multimedia on Mobile Devices
17
1.3.6
Smart Devices and Smart Space
18
1.3.7
Context-Aware Computing
19
1.3.8
HCI and Middleware
19
1.4
Summary
20
References
20
2
The Next Wave of Computing
23
2.1
The Evolution of Cellular Networks and Cell Phones
23
2.1.1
The History of Cellular Systems
24
2.1.2
The Evolution of Cell Phones
32
2.2
The Evolution of PDAs
35
2.2.1
Apple Newton
36
2.2.2
The History of PDAs
37
2.3
PDAs Versus Cell Phones
42
2.4
The Convergence of Mobile Devices
44
2.4.1
The Convergence of PDAs and Cell Phones
44
2.4.2
The Convergence of Cell Phones and Mobile
Entertainment Devices
46
2.4.3
Smart Phone: The Universal Mobile Terminal
49
2.5
Smart Phone Applications and Services
51
2.5.1
First-Generation Smart Phone Applications
51
2.5.2
Second-Generation Smart Phone Applications
53

Contents
vii
2.6
The Vision of Next-Generation Mobile Computing
56
2.6.1
Pervasive Computing
57
2.6.2
Convergence of Mobile Access
62
2.6.3
Limitations of Convergence
64
2.6.4
Pervasiveness of Mobile Intelligence
65
2.7
Mobile Computing Challenges
68
2.7.1
Integration of Wireless and Wired Networks
69
2.7.2
Mobile Security and Privacy
73
2.7.3
Location-Awareness Mobile Computing
77
2.7.4
Human-Computer Interface of Mobile Applications
79
2.7.5
Context-Aware Software Design
82
2.7.6
Low-Power Mobile Computing
85
2.8
Notable Mobile Computing Projects
87
2.8.1
Oxygen
87
2.8.2
Smart Dust
89
2.8.3
AURA
90
2.8.4
Wireless Grid
91
2.9
Summary
92
Further Reading
93
References
95
3
Supporting Wireless Technologies
99
3.1
The Frequency Spectrum
99
3.1.1
Public Media Broadcasting
101
3.1.2
Cellular Communication
104
3.1.3
Wireless Data Communication
104
3.1.4
Other Fixed or Mobile Wireless Communications
105

viii
Contents
3.2
Wireless Communication Primer
106
3.2.1
Signal Propagation
106
3.2.2
Modulation
109
3.2.3
Multiplexing
112
3.3
Spread Spectrum
114
3.3.1
Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum
116
3.3.2
Frequency-Hopping Spread Spectrum
116
3.3.3
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing
118
3.4
Global System for Mobile and General Packet
Radio Service
118
3.4.1
Global System for Mobile
119
3.4.2
General Packet Radio Service
126
3.5
Code-Division Multiple Access
132
3.5.1
Code-Division Multiple Access Concept
132
3.5.2
IS-95
133
3.5.3
Software Handoff
134
3.5.4
Road to 4G
135
3.6
GSM Versus CDMA
137
3.7
3G Cellular Systems
137
3.7.1
UMTS/WCDMA Versus cdma2000
140
3.7.2
UMTS/WCDMA
140
3.7.3
cdma2000
142
3.7.4
4G Cellular Systems
144
3.8
2G Mobile Wireless Services
145
3.8.1
WAP and iMode
145
3.8.2
Short Message Service
147

Contents
ix
3.9
Wireless Technologies Landscape
149
3.10 802.11 Wireless LANs
151
3.10.1 Architecture and Protocols
152
3.10.2 Frame Format
156
3.10.3 Beacon Frame
158
3.10.4 Roaming in a Wireless LAN
159
3.10.5 IEEE 802.11 Family
161
3.10.6 Security in Wireless LANs
164
3.11 Bluetooth
164
3.11.1 Architecture and Protocols
164
3.11.2 Bluetooth Overview
165
3.11.3 Bluetooth Architecture
166
3.11.4 Radio and Baseband
169
3.11.5 L2CAP and Frame Format
170
3.11.6 RFCOMM
171
3.11.7 SDP
172
3.11.8 Bluetooth Evolution
173
3.12 Ultra-Wideband
174
3.12.1 UWB Standards
176
3.12.2 UWB Applications
176
3.13 Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation
177
3.13.1 RFID System
178
3.13.2 RFID Applications
179
3.14 Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks
182
3.14.1 Wireless Broadband: IEEE 802.16
183
3.14.2 WiMax
185

x
Contents
3.15 Satellite
188
3.15.1 Satellite Communication
188
3.15.2 Satellite Systems
188
3.16 Wireless Sensor Networks
190
3.16.1 WSN Applications
191
3.16.2 Wireless Sensor Node
193
3.16.3 Self-Organized Networks
194
3.16.4 ZigBee
196
3.17 Standardization in the Wireless World
197
3.17.1 Cellular Standard Groups
199
3.17.2 IEEE Standards
199
3.17.3 Standards War
201
3.18 Summary
202
Further Reading
203
References
204
4
Mobile Terminal Platforms
207
4.1
Mobile Hardware
207
4.1.1
Mobile Processors
208
4.1.2
Mobile Processor Performance
212
4.1.3
Memory and Storage
213
4.1.4
Extension Interfaces
215
4.2
Software Platforms
220
4.3
Symbian
222
4.4
Palm OS
224

Contents
xi
4.5
Microsoft Windows Mobile
227
4.5.1
Windows Mobile
228
4.5.2
.Net Compact Framework for Mobile Devices
231
4.6
Embedded Linux
232
4.7
Java 2 Micro Edition (J2ME)
234
4.7.1
Java Primer
235
4.7.2
J2ME Conﬁgurations
237
4.8
BREW
240
4.9
Comparisons of Mobile Software Platforms
241
4.10 Supporting Tools
243
4.10.1 Mobile Web and Markup Languages
243
4.10.2 Mobile Device Emulators and Simulators
245
4.11 Summary
246
Further Reading
248
References
249
5
Mobile Networking Challenges
251
5.1
Mobile IP
252
5.1.1
Mobile IPv6
253
5.2
Wireless TCP
255
5.2.1
Wireless TCP Challenges
256
5.2.2
Wireless TCP Protocols
257
5.3
Convergence of Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
260
5.3.1
Integration of Cellular Network and
Wireless LANs
260

xii
Contents
5.3.2
Internetworking Systems Architecture
262
5.3.3
Integration of UMTS Networks and Wireless LANs
265
5.3.4
Integration of cdma2000 Networks and
Wireless LANs
270
5.3.5
Integration of Wireless LANs and Cellular Networks
for Enterprise
272
5.3.6
Integration of Wireless LANs and Corporate
IP PBX
274
5.4
Wireless LAN and Bluetooth Coexistence
275
5.4.1
Frequency Overlapping
275
5.4.2
PTA and Adaptive Frequency Hopping
276
5.5
Mobile Next-Generation Networks
278
5.5.1
Mobile IP for Macromobility
279
5.5.2
Mobile IP for Micromobility
280
5.5.3
Link Layer Mobility Management
282
5.6
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
284
5.6.1
MANET Categories
286
5.6.2
Topology Control in a MANET
287
5.6.3
Routing in MANET
293
5.6.4
Service Discovery
308
5.6.5
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks in the Real World
313
5.7
Quality of Service in Mobile Computing
315
5.7.1
An Overview of QoS
316
5.7.2
End-to-End QoS Support in Mobile Computing
320
5.8
Summary
327
Further Reading
327
References
329

Contents
xiii
6
Mobile Security and Privacy
335
6.1
Security Primer
336
6.1.1
Ciphers and Message Conﬁdentiality
341
6.1.2
Cryptographic Hash Algorithms and
Message Integrity
344
6.1.3
Authentication
348
6.1.4
Key Management
352
6.1.5
Nonrepudiation
355
6.1.6
Network Security Protocols
356
6.1.7
General Considerations of Mobile Security
and Privacy
360
6.2
Cellular Network Security
362
6.2.1
Secure Wireless Transmission
362
6.2.2
Secure Wireless Transaction
366
6.3
Wireless LAN Security
370
6.3.1
Common 802.11 Security Myths
371
6.3.2
WEP Vulnerability
373
6.3.3
802.11 Authentication Vulnerabilities
375
6.3.4
802.1X, WPA, and 802.11i
376
6.4
Bluetooth Security
380
6.4.1
Bluetooth Security Architecture
380
6.4.2
Bluetooth Weakness and Attacks
383
6.5
Ad Hoc Network Security
385
6.5.1
Link Layer Ad Hoc Security
386
6.5.2
Key Management
386
6.5.3
Wireless Sensor Network Security
389

xiv
Contents
6.6
Mobile Privacy
392
6.6.1
Identity and Anonymity
393
6.6.2
Location Privacy
397
6.7
Summary
400
Further Reading
401
References
402
7
Mobile Application Challenges
407
7.1
Location-Aware Mobile Computing
408
7.1.1
Location Representation
409
7.1.2
Localization Techniques
410
7.1.3
Global Positioning System
415
7.1.4
Cellular Network Triangulation
417
7.1.5
Indoor Location Sensing
417
7.1.6
Wireless Sensor Location Sensing
425
7.1.7
Localization Analysis in Mobile Computing
427
7.1.8
Localization Techniques Comparison
430
7.1.9
Building Location-Based Services
432
7.2
Mobile Messaging
438
7.2.1
Short Message Service Applications
439
7.2.2
Instant Messaging
440
7.2.3
SIP/SIMPLE Versus XMPP
444
7.2.4
Mobile Instant Messaging
449
7.3
Mobile Multimedia Streaming
453
7.3.1
Multimedia Primer
455
7.3.2
Packet-Switched Streaming in 3GPP
458
7.3.3
Mobile Broadcasting and Multicasting
462

Contents
xv
7.4
M-Commerce
465
7.4.1
M-Commerce Applications
466
7.4.2
M-Commerce Architecture
469
7.4.3
M-Commerce Client Issues
471
7.4.4
Network Infrastructure Issues
478
7.4.5
M-Commerce Systems and Services
480
7.5
Mobile Enterprise
489
7.5.1
Mobile Enterprise Overview
489
7.5.2
Mobile Enterprise Applications
492
7.6
Wireless Application Gateway
495
7.6.1
Wireless Application Gateway Architecture
496
7.6.2
Wireless Application Models
498
7.6.3
Device-Independent Content Adaptation
499
7.7
Telematics
502
7.7.1
Telematics Systems
503
7.7.2
Telematics Issues
504
7.8
Summary
505
7.9
What’s Ahead
507
Further Reading
509
References
510
Index
513

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

About the Authors
Pei Zheng was an assistant professor in the Computer Science
Department at Arcadia University and a consultant working in the
areas of mobile computing and distributed systems during the writ-
ing of this book. Dr. Zheng received his Ph.D. degree in Computer
Science from Michigan State University in 2003. He was a Member of
Technical Staff in Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies. He joined
Microsoft in 2005. His research interests include distributed systems,
network simulation and emulation, and mobile computing.
Lionel M. Ni is Professor and Head of the Computer Science
Department at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Dr. Ni earned his Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, in 1981. He was professor
in Computer Science and Engineering Department at Michigan State
University, where he started his academic career in 1981. He has been
involved in many projects related to wireless technologies, 2.5G/3G
cellular phones, and embedded systems. He is the co-author of the
book Interconnection Networks: An Engineering Approach published by
Morgan Kaufmann in 2002.
xvii

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Preface
What will be the next wave of computing? What will be the driving
force behind the constantly changing mobile wireless systems and
applications? To answer these questions, let us ﬁrst look into the his-
tory of computing. The ﬁrst wave of computing was the wide use
of Personal Computers (PC) that enabled the general public to take
advantage of computing power for business operations or personal
use. Before the ﬁrst wave, computers were generally used by large
companies and governments for mission critical purposes. The sec-
ond wave of computing was the amazing Internet, which greatly
empowered people with unprecedented levels of information sharing
and data access via computer networks. Many believe the third wave
of computing will be the advent of mobile computing that eventu-
ally liberates people from relying on a computing or communication
device at a ﬁxed location to access the network. Thanks to the remark-
able advances in a broad set of wireless technologies, in the micro-
processor and storage technologies, in the convergence of network
infrastructure, and in the pervasive computing facilities, people will
soon be able to access and consume information anytime, anywhere,
from any device. As the most widely used computing device, a cell
phone or a new-generation smart phone, will likely play a signiﬁcant
role in future mobile computing paradigm. This vision also encom-
passes a broad range of emerging mobile wireless technologies and
xix

xx
Preface
novel services and applications. Needless to say, in order to realize
this vision there are still many challenges—and opportunities—in
almost every aspect of the mobile computing realm.
Scope and Outline of the Book
The book provides an in-depth coverage of next-generation mobile
computing
paradigm,
including
mobile
wireless
technologies,
mobile services and applications, and research and development
challenges surrounding backend systems, network infrastructure,
and mobile terminals including smart phones and other mobile
devices. It substantially emphasizes the following components.
Part I: A Detailed Survey of Emerging Mobile Wireless Technologies
As the ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus of Ephesus pointed out,
“Change is the only thing in the world that is unchanging.” This is
downright true especially in the mobile computing domain. New
mobile wireless technologies continue to show up; even the old
voice-centric cellular networks are undergoing fundamental changes.
This book will provide state-of-the-art coverage of these technologies
that show a strong potential to deeply change people’s life, such as 3G
cellular networks, wireless LAN, Bluetooth, Ultra Wide Band, WiMax,
ZigBee, sensor networks, battery for mobile devices, mobile display
technology, among others. Moreover, the coexistence and integra-
tion issues of these technologies are so important that a signiﬁcant
portion of the book is devoted to it.
Chapter 2 to Chapter 4 discusses the trend of convergence and
integration in mobile wireless networks and emerging wireless tech-
nologies. Major software platforms such as Symbian, Microsoft
Windows Mobile for Smartphone and Palm OS are also introduced
brieﬂy. Topics covered in Part I is the basis for readers to move forward
to the remaining chapters.

Preface
xxi
Chapter 2, “The Next Wave of Computing,” is concerned with the
trend in mobile computing and related technical issues. The chapter
ﬁrst looks back into the evolution of the cell phone and PDA, as well
as some handheld computers. Based on that, the chapter introduces
the trend of the convergence between the cell phone and PDA, and
between the cell phone and a mobile entertainment device. A smart
phone, a converged mobile device, will likely be used as the univer-
sal mobile terminal alongside with the trend of convergence. Hence
the chapter continues to identify a range of smart phone applica-
tions and services for consumers and businesses. The chapter moves
forward beyond next-generation mobile devices to some fundamen-
tal challenges and opportunities that will turn the vision of mobile
computing and pervasive computing into everyday reality.
Chapter 3,
“Supporting Wireless Technologies,”
provides an
extensive study of existing mobile wireless technologies. Much of
the emphasis is on the highly anticipated 3G cellular networks and
widely deployed wireless LANs, as the next-generation smart phone
will likely offer at least these two types of wireless connectivity.
Other wireless technologies, which either have already been com-
mercialized, or still are in the intensive research and standardization
stage, will be covered as well. Additionally, in order to explain
how standards and politics play important roles in wireless industry,
a summary of worldwide partnership groups, major competitors,
and governmental policy makers is presented.
Chapter 4, “Mobile Terminal Platforms,” focuses on the platforms
for mobile terminal devices, including mobile embedded processors,
memory and storage, extension interfaces, and display. On top of
mobile hardware, a wide range of mobile software platforms are
competing with each other. These mobile platforms are, to name
a few, Symbian, Palm OS, Microsoft Windows Mobile, and embed-
ded Linux, as well as middleware runtime such as J2ME and BREW.
An overview of each competing operating system and correspond-
ing software development platform is presented. The chapter also
introduces various software emulators of those platforms and mobile
markup languages.

xxii
Preface
Part II: An In-Depth Discussion of Mobile Computing Challenges
and Approaches
To fulﬁll the need for mobile and pervasive computing, researchers
and practitioners have to face many challenges encountered in both
design and implementation of a viable application or service. To help
the readers quickly gain an insightful understanding of the mobile
computing paradigm, the book identiﬁes a list of compelling and
crucial research and technical issues, and then discusses some of the
novel approaches to these problems, as well as highlighting future
research directions in those ﬁelds. For each issue, the role of a smart
phone will always be taken into consideration. As mentioned, the
book will primarily focus on networking- and application design-
related issues.
The history of the computer industry shows that services and
applications utilizing whatever advanced technologies must satisfy
business or consumer needs in a timely manner in order to survive
and become widespread. Therefore, the utmost concern of service
providers is, what do the users really want? The last chapter of Part II
tries to answer this question by looking at a collection of mobile
wireless application scenarios in different industries and trying to
ﬁnd the general guidelines to designing and implementing a viable
application or service. Common software building blocks of mobile
applications and services are brieﬂy discussed as well.
Chapter 5 to Chapter 7 emphasizes the challenging issues for
the future of mobile computing. These issues mainly fall into three
categories: mobile network infrastructure design issues, mobile ter-
minal hardware and software design issues, and application-speciﬁc
issues. Each covered issue is concisely described and then thoroughly
discussed with some real-world examples. The authors’ view and
ideas on these issues are also presented.
Chapter 5, “Mobile Networking Challenges,” concerns a number
of critical issues in the research and development of heterogeneous
mobile wireless networks that a smart phone will interface, includ-
ing next generation mobile networks, integration of wireless LAN
and cellular networks, Mobile IPv6, wireless TCP, mobile ad hoc

Preface
xxiii
networks, mobile Quality of Services, and so on. The chapter pro-
vides a glimpse into the latest development of those challenges in
both academia and the wireless and computing industry. Overall
we intend to identify the motivation of building those wireless sys-
tems, and then discuss surrounding technical challenges and some
prototype or commercial systems if any.
Chapter 6, “Mobile Security and Privacy,” discusses the security
problems and solutions in mobile computing, with emphasis on
the issues of heterogeneous network authentication, authorization,
accounting, and wireless LAN security. Privacy is probably another
major concern that may impede the deployment of mobile technolo-
gies using smart phones, especially when pervasive mobile devices
are becoming part of the environment. The chapter will describe keys
issues of mobile privacy, and then highlight looming privacy-related
issues in next-generation mobile computing paradigm.
Chapter 7, “Mobile Applications Challenges,” introduces some of
the interesting problems in designing next-generation smart phone-
based mobile services, such as wireless Web, m-commerce, location-
aware computing, and mobile wireless multimedia. These examples
represent state of the art in this broad area. It talks about the plan-
ning and architectural design of smart phone mobile applications for
enterprise and consumers. It does so by highlighting available tech-
nical building blocks and general guidelines to mobile application
design, and by discussing some examples of such existing applica-
tions in the real world. It covers a full spectrum of software and
hardware components of mobile applications, ranging from XML
web services, to wireless application gateway, to mobile enterprise
solutions, as well as a list of potential applications of smart phone in
various scenarios. These may motivate the yet-to-come “killer app”
in the wireless world and open up huge business opportunities in
the next several years. We also introduce some commercial systems
and prototypes in each category as examples to show how it can help
business and the end user.
On the other hand, the book is NOT a mobile software pro-
gramming guide, nor is a reference book of wireless communication
concepts and theories. It does highlight existing software platforms

xxiv
Preface
and development tools, but only on a very high level. The book will
introduce some wireless communication fundamentals, but clearly
the focus is on the computing side, especially on networking and
application issues. Readers interested with those areas can easily ﬁnd
many books with excellent coverage.
Audience
The book’s audience may belong to diverse groups in industry and
academia. Potential readers are industrial professionals, including
technical managers, software architects and developers, and aca-
demic researchers who are willing to know more about mobile
computing and smart phone technologies, potential services, appli-
cations, and future technical trends. The book should also appeal to
students taking senior- or graduate-level mobile computing courses,
assuming they have a general knowledge of computer networks.
Industry Technical Managers and Software Architects and Engineers
Technical managers in the mobile wireless industry may ﬁnd the
book useful in providing a thorough coverage of emerging mobile
and wireless technologies that can be incorporated into the design
of next-generation mobile applications and services targeting smart
phones. Even for software developers working on the programming
with smart phones and other handheld devices, a comprehensive
and solid understanding of the concepts, technologies and archi-
tectural design of the whole system would deﬁnitely be invaluable.
Moreover, the book’s coverage and analysis on common software
building blocks of mobile applications will help architects design and
implement a new mobile application.
Technology Evangelists, Strategists, and Analysts
In conjunction with an in-depth discussion of technical details and
research issues surrounding mobile computing and smart phones,

Preface
xxv
the book also explores conceivable and potentially viable mobile
applications and services based on technical and market trend in the
mobile wireless industry. In this book, the coverage of mobile wireless
technologies mostly concludes with a brief summary of its business
perspective, status quo and trend of the market, and a standardiza-
tion process if any. Technical analysts, strategists and evangelists
who want to ﬁnd out how the wireless technologies and applications
will evolve and what the new market for growth is will particularly
beneﬁt from reading these sections.
Academic Researchers
For academic researchers such as faculties and students in the mobile
wireless research community, this book serves as a full-coverage guide
by examining almost all the important aspects of mobile comput-
ing and pervasive computing. Those academic researchers who have
been actively involved in the research of speciﬁc areas in mobile com-
puting may read corresponding sections of the book to grasp major
ideas and approaches, as well as future research directions, in those
areas. Students and instructors will ﬁnd the book an excellent text or
reference for mobile computing courses.
In all cases, to assist readers to probe further, the “References” and
“Further Reading” sections at the end of each chapter offer pointers to
a collection of carefully selected research projects, papers, standards,
and market analyses. Please also see the URL www.books.elsevier.
com/computerscience?isbn=0120885603.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Acknowledgments
Many of our colleagues in academics and industry have made sig-
niﬁcant contributions to the writing of this book. We would like to
thank Anand Tripathi (University of Minnesota), Baijian Yang (Ball
State University), Dapeng Wu (University of Florida), and Paul Huang
(Sun Microsystems) for their insightful suggestions.
We would like to thank our employers, Arcadia University, USA,
and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology for their
support on the book project. We gratefully thank our manuscript
reviewers, Lisa Phifer and Tim Thompson, for their insightful and
detailed comment and suggestions on the structure of the book,
topics to be covered, and presentations.
Our special thanks go to Rick Adams for his generous sup-
port throughout the writing and production of the book. Thanks
are also due to Paul Gottehrer and Rachel Roumeliotis at Morgan
Kaufman/Elsevier for their wonderful work.
Pei Zheng and Lionel M. Ni
Hong Kong
December 2005
xxvii

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

1
Introduction to Smart Phone
and Mobile Computing
You have probably heard the term smart phones when people talk
about some fancy gadgets that look like a combination of a cell
phone and a personal digital assistant (PDA), and you must have
heard the term wireless many times, mostly from advertisements of
cell phones and service plans by big wireless service providers. If you
are working in the wireless industry or computer industry, then you
should be familiar with the notion of mobile computing and should
have some idea of the concept of pervasive computing. What exactly
do these terms refer to? What are the similarities and differences
between them? Furthermore, what are the cutting-edge technologies
and emerging applications of the next generation of mobile comput-
ing? What are some of the challenging issues in this domain? Before
we embark on an exciting journey into the fantastic world of mobile
computing, we should answer these questions.
The ﬁrst chapter serves as an introduction to the remainder of the
book. It begins by deﬁning a number of key terms and concepts used
throughout the book, such as smart phone, wireless communication,
nomadic computing, and mobile computing, and continues with an
overall discussion of the next wave of computing and the role of
smart phones in that context. The ﬁrst chapter brieﬂy introduces a
range of mobile wireless technologies and applications, as well as key
issues and challenges in this ﬁeld.
1

2
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
1.1 Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
The next generation of mobile computing will foster the convergence
of communication, computing, and consumer electronics, three
traditionally distinct industries with quite low interoperability. On
the front end, a smart phone is likely to become a universal mobile
terminal carrying integrated functionalities augmented by mobility
and ubiquitous network access.
1.1.1
Deﬁnitions
First off, what is a smart phone? What are the differences between a
smart phone and a cell phone? What are the implications of mobile
computing? How does mobile computing relate to wireless commu-
nication? People hear these terms, but very often they are being used
by the media quite vaguely. A signiﬁcant amount of literature from
both academia and industry discusses research and development
topics regarding smart phones and mobile computing, but some of
these articles have confused the key terms in this domain, especially
mobile and wireless. In many cases, these two terms are regarded as
being the same and are used interchangeably; however, they are not
identical.
1.1.1.1
Mobile Computing
Mobile computing refers to a broad set of computing operations that
allow a user to access information from portable devices such as
laptop computers, PDAs, cell phones, handheld computers, music
players, portable game devices, and so on. The two operational modes
in mobile computing are disconnected mode and connected mode.
In the disconnected mode, information access on a mobile device
is local, such as when someone uses a PDA to manage a schedule
and an address book. In connected mode, the mobile device sup-
plies one or more types of wireless or wired network connectivity to
enable network access. In the disconnected mode, a user can synchro-
nize data on a mobile device with a computer. The synchronization
may involve both download from and upload to the host computer.

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
3
In the connected mode, applications on a mobile device are able to
communicate directly with other mobile devices or back-end systems
via a network connection. As mobile wireless technologies mature
and provide a higher data rate at a lower cost, we will be able to
take advantage of a new range of mobile devices that allow network
mode operations, fulﬁlling the need for ubiquitous mobile access
anywhere, anytime.
In wired mobile computing, network access from a mobile device
is enabled via a wired network. For example, people bring their
laptop computers to conferences, ofﬁces, and hotels and then con-
nect to wired networks, such as a local area network (LAN), or they
connect to the Internet via asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL),
cable modem, or dialup. Wireless mobile computing (or mobile wire-
less computing) emerged and proliferated at a staggering pace as
a result of the dramatic advancements of an assortment of wire-
less technologies, such as cellular wireless networks, wireless LAN,
Bluetooth, infrared, and wireless sensor networks. These wireless
technologies essentially make it possible for a user to enjoy such
mobility that the location of a mobile device user no longer has to be
ﬁxed to maintain a network connection. The advantage is obvious:
Tasks that had to be performed on a computer at a ﬁxed location can
now be done on the move.
The ﬂexibility offered by mobile computing and its natural inte-
gration with heterogeneous network access have given rise to a large
number of novel business and consumer applications and services
utilizing voice, messaging, and data communication. Looking a
few years down the road, as wireless data technologies continue to
evolve, mobile network operators and service providers have begun
to leverage powerful, wireless-enabled, always-on mobile devices
and high-bandwidth, ubiquitous network access to provide a new
spectrum of applications and services that effectively provide an
unprecedented level of information access and assistance anywhere,
anytime, from any device.
The notion of nomadic computing refers to a special case of mobile
computing — using a mobile device to connect to a wired or wire-
less network intermittently from place to place with support for

4
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
high-level mobility. A typical application of nomadic computing
would be traveling salespersons and technical professionals who con-
nect to a corporate network from ofﬁce, homes, customer sites,
hotels, airports, and so on, being able to consume the same set of
services provided by the network transparently and conveniently
regardless of location. An always-on, active network connection is
not required in nomadic computing.
1.1.1.2
Wireless Communication
As the term wireless implies, no wires are attached to devices in
the wireless domain; instead, various radio transmission techniques
are utilized to connect either two devices or a device and a shared
infrastructure. Numerous wireless technologies have been utilized
by mobile computing to enhance a user’s experience with regard to
both user mobility and device mobility. Wireless does not necessarily
mean mobile, however, because some wireless technologies, notably
cable-replacement wireless technologies, can only be used when one
or both of the parties are ﬁxed or barely move during the wireless sig-
nal transmission, such as the short-range Bluetooth or infrared and
long-range WiMax.
To summarize, some mobile applications do not require wireless
technologies but some wireless applications are not mobile. Clearly,
wireless communication places an emphasis on the radio layer and
link layer of the network protocol stack (e.g., how the signal is trans-
mitted and received), whereas mobile computing takes advantage
of ubiquitous wireless communications to build applications and
services. In reality, the notion of wireless has been generally used
(or abused?) to refer to cellular services provided by major wireless
service providers such as Cingular Wireless, T-Mobile, or Sprint.
1.1.1.3
Smart Phone
The term smart phone was initially coined by unknown market-
ing strategists to refer to a then-new class of cell phones that
could facilitate data access and processing with signiﬁcant com-
puting power. In addition to traditional voice communication and
messaging functionality, a smart phone usually provides personal

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
5
information management (PIM) applications and some wireless com-
munication capability. Roughly speaking, a smart phone is like a
small, networked computer in the form of a cell phone. The very
ﬁrst generation of cell phones, despite their large size, could barely
offer anything other than making phone calls. Later on, because of
astounding advances in semiconductor technology, cell phones were
generally equipped with far more powerful processors, larger stor-
age, and a liquid-crystal display (LCD) screen that made it possible to
perform some computing tasks locally. Common cell phone applica-
tions, collectively referred to as PIM applications, include calendar,
address book, organizer, and calculator functions. Data network-
ing capabilities are generally very limited on these cell phones. In
essence, this generation of cell phones can be considered a combina-
tion of voice-centric cell phone and PDA. As the need for mobile
data access on a cell phone became evident, the next generation
of cell phones — smart phones — emerged. A smart phone usu-
ally supports one or more short-range wireless technologies such as
Bluetooth and infrared, making it possible to transfer data via these
wireless connections in addition to cellular data connections. It is
the smart phone that can provide computer mobility, ubiquitous
data access, and pervasive intelligence for almost every aspect of
business processes and people’s daily lives. Aside from traditional
cell phone PIM applications, other typical smart phone applications
include simple games, built-in camera, audio/video playback and
recording, instant messaging, e-mail, and wireless Internet, among
others. In addition, smart phones can be used as a mobile terminal
for e-commerce, enterprise applications, and value-added, location-
based services. In a word, the smart phone is the future of today’s
cell phone, as it offers dramatically enhanced wireless capability,
computing power, and on-board storage. This book uses the terms
cell phone and mobile phone interchangeably when referring to a
voice-centric cellular wireless device.
Today, the general public perceives of smart phones as high-end,
multifunctional, business-centric cell phones with high-resolution
color displays and fast mobile processors which are unaffordable to
ordinary consumers due to the cost of the phone device (hundreds

6
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
of dollars) and wireless data services ($30 to $60 per month). Like
many other popular computing devices, however, smart phones will
certainly follow the same track and be embraced by the mass market
as a result of ever-dropping hardware and service prices and emerging
killer applications.
The vision of “anytime, anywhere, from any device” for mobile
computing naturally leads to the issue of building a universal mobile
platform for reliable and high-performance computing with hetero-
geneous, seamless wireless access via limited computing resources.
Smart phones are generally considered to be one of the promising
candidate for such purposes.
1.1.2
Smart Phone: The Universal Mobile Terminal
Today’s smart phone packages a potpourri of wireless technologies
and applications, and many more are being considered to become
integral parts of a smart phone. Indeed, usage of a smart phone is
actually driven by the convergence of the different network infra-
structures of computing and communication. In addition, we will
see functional components of some consumer electronics devices on
a smart phone, as well as mobile applications that bridge these other-
wise largely independent components: computing, communication,
and consumer electronics (3 C’s). Moreover, the computing and com-
munication environment is moving to interact with the physical
environment or even become a part of it. Looking several years ahead,
we can envision the convergence of computing, communication,
and consumer electronics, dubbed digital convergence (Figure 1.1), in
a pervasive way, with the smart phone as the front end — the univer-
sal mobile terminal. No doubt this vision of next-generation mobile
computing poses a challenge to the design of a smart phone and its
application, as well as raising networking infrastructure issues.
1.1.2.1
Convergence of Computing and Communication
The future of communications,
as many industry profession-
als envisage,
will involve the convergence of computing and

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
7
Communication
(Communication Networks)
Consumer Electronics
(Audio/Video Devices and
Contents)
Computing
(Computer Networks)
Next-Generation Mobile
Computing
(Integration of
Heterogeneous Networks)
Figure 1.1
Digital convergence.
communications in almost every aspect of information technol-
ogy, thus allowing information access anywhere, anytime, from any
device. This trend will have a huge impact on everyday life and how
enterprises, organizations, and government operate. Tomorrow’s
unwired world will encompass advances in emerging mobile wire-
less communication networks (the infrastructure), intelligent mobile
devices (the terminal), and novel valuable services and applications
(the applications).
With regard to the network infrastructure,
the remarkable
advances in the link bandwidths of wired networks over the last
10 years are an excellent example of how technologies can evolve
beyond our expectation. Recall that the early 10-Mbps Ethernet
utilized coaxial cable and twisted pair cable, and then came the
100-Mbps fast Ethernet, the gigabit Ethernet, and today’s OC192
10-Gbps ﬁber in the Internet backbone. Network access evolved from
14.4-kbp or 33.6-kbp modems to 64-kbp integrated services digital
network (ISDN) channels to ADSL and cable modems and, soon,
to wireless LAN and WiMax. The wired network not only supplies
an increasingly higher link capacity but has also managed to reach
almost everywhere in the world. People are connected via computer
networks more than ever before. Similarly, the wireless networks,
despite the current poor bandwidth of data transmission, are likely
to follow the same journey of wired networks with respect to link
data rate and scale. In fact, wireless networks are poised to have a

8
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
greater impact on our society than wired networks. The traditional
voice-centric, circuit-switching, cellular networks are being replaced
by data-centric, packet-switching 2.5 G and 3 G networks. Wireless
LANs are being deployed in ofﬁce buildings, residences, hotels,
coffee shops, restaurants, and airports. WiMax, arguably a better
“last-mile” solution for wireless broadband network access compared
to cable modem or DSL, is likely to be rolled out on a large scale very
soon; satellite digital television and radio are reaching an increas-
ing number of subscribers. All of these wireless networks, coupled
with the underlying wired networks, offer mobility and portabil-
ity with sufﬁciently large bandwidth and high-quality wireless data
transmission.
With regard to the mobile terminal aspect, it is clear that a mobile
device will no longer be considered merely as a communication
handset; rather, by providing more powerful computing features
such as high-performance mobile processors and large ﬂash mem-
ory, a mobile device will be able to accomplish more intensive and
intelligent computing tasks such as multimedia processing and data
logistics. In particular, the cell phone and PDA are beginning to con-
verge into a single device — a smart phone — that offers a full set
of applications, including the necessary optimized wireless commu-
nication facilities and computing components, seamlessly integrated
for an entirely new collection of business and consumer applications.
For example, a smart phone may be able to utilize voice over wire-
less LAN to allow long-distance calls and roaming between wireless
LAN and cellular networks. Also, a user could play a location-based,
multiplayer mobile game via Bluetooth during a boring conference
session; the locations of the gamers could be determined using the
location-sensing capability of the smart phone. For example, the
location sensing system can utilize radio-frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) readers, and RFIDs embedded in the conference badges. In
fact, some of these applications have already been demonstrated by
researchers using customized phone devices. Indeed, the converged
universal mobile terminal provides an open and powerful platform
for ubiquitous computing and communication to facilitate a variety
of applications that otherwise could not be realized.

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
9
No matter how the network infrastructure is built and how the
converged device is designed and manufactured, the technology
must include desired applications and services to reach users. To
this end, mobile network operators, service providers, and software
providers must design applications and services with what people
really want in mind. Moreover, the convergence of communication
and computing makes the applications and services more complex in
terms of interfacing heterogeneous networks and dealing with inter-
operation among different computing units. Nevertheless, many
believe that as the enabling wireless technologies continue to mature,
“killer apps” offered by the next-generation mobile wireless networks
will eventually surface to enjoy widespread acceptance.
Aside from the convergence of computing and communication,
a broader vision of convergence, dubbed digital convergence, paints
an ambitious picture of a future wireless world. In this vision,
not only are the computing (computer, data network, and soft-
ware vendors) and communication (wireless network and service
providers) industries involved but also the consumer-electronics
industry. Digital convergence involves the same opportunities and
challenges of mobile computing but creates many more that could
ultimately alter these three industries. As an example, imagine a
home network where the computers, televisions, DVD players, game
devices, mobile phones, and cordless phones are all connected to a
wireless network for communication.
1.1.2.2
Pervasive Computing
Existing mobile and wireless technologies have been, and continue
to be, the core building blocks of mobile applications and services;
however, an entirely new array of wireless technologies has already
emerged from pioneering academia and research laboratories. As a
consequence, the new vision of the future of computing blurs the
borders of human environment and the computer to produce perva-
sive or ubiquitous computing. Some researchers have considered the
“anytime, anywhere” goal of mobile computing to be a reactive
approach to the need for information access, whereas pervasive com-
puting is perceived as a proactive approach with the vision of “all the

10
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
time everywhere” [1]. The fundamental distinction between perva-
sive computing and any other computing framework is the way the
user interacts with the computing facility. The traditional computing
framework allows users to utilize computers and networks to perform
tasks by running programs (a piece of software) in a virtual logic
environment that has nothing to do with the users’ physical environ-
ment. In contrast, pervasive computing promises to build software,
devices, and networks that are deeply embedded in the user’s physical
environment. In fact, users may not even notice that they are dealing
with a computing environment because the facilities are seamlessly
and naturally integrated with the physical environment.
In addition to those technologies in the domain of mobile com-
puting, the development of new enabling technologies for pervasive
computing is gaining the attention of researchers and practitioners.
Some examples include wireless sensors, actuators, wireless sen-
sor networks, wearable computers, and large with ﬂexible dis-
plays. A unique characteristic of pervasive computing is that its
applications and services should disappear into the physical envi-
ronment, as Mark Weiser envisaged more than 20 years ago [2].
Whether accomplishing this is a Holy Grail or an achievable real-
ity may remain the subject of debate over the long time required for
pervasive computing to mature.
In the context of pervasive computing, smart phones may assume
even more tightly integrated functionalities than in the context of
mobile computing. Augmented by the ubiquitous, heterogeneous,
and always-on wireless communications and intelligent sensing of
both the device and the environment, smart phones, as a universal
mobile terminal, will ﬁnally become an integral part of the phys-
ical environment. This book discusses smart-phone-related mobile
wireless technologies, issues, challenges, and innovative applica-
tions and services in the context of mobile computing and pervasive
computing.
A conceptual diagram of some notions related to mobile com-
puting is shown in Figure 1.2. As it shows, nomadic computing
can be considered a subset of mobile computing, which is in turn
a subset of pervasive computing. Applications and services within

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
11
Pervasive
Computing
Wireless
Communications
Mobile Computing
Nomadic
Computing
Figure 1.2
Some notions of mobile computing.
these three computing domains, for the most part, leverage wireless
communications to provide mobility support on various scales. It
is worth noting that the notion of wireless often encompasses both
ﬁxed and mobile wireless technologies and systems.
1.2 Emerging Mobile Technologies and Applications
Despite
economic
conditions
in
the
ﬁrst
few
years
of
the
21st century and slowdowns in the computer and communication
industries, new mobile and wireless technologies have never stopped
evolving and have paved the way for an intelligent and perva-
sive mobile environment. The following is a brief survey of those
emerging technologies.
1.2.1
Cellular Networks
The second generation (2G) of digital cellular networks and services
is an unprecedented success worldwide. Voice-centric mobile wireless
communication services successfully capitalized on the mobile net-
work operators’ (MNOs) huge investment in the purchasing of spec-
trum frequency and the wireless network infrastructure. For example,

12
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2.5 G wireless data services such as GPRS and EDGE are being used
by a large number of subscribers in Asia and Europe. UMTS/WCDMA
and WCDMA2000, the long-awaited 3 G networks and services, are
expected to deliver high bandwidth and reliable and secure data
access with a data rate of several megabits per second. 3 G services
available in the United States include cdma2000 1x-EVDO (Veri-
zon) and WCDMA/UMTS (Cingular/AT&T Wireless), among others.
In Europe, where UMTS/WCDMA dominates the market, Vodafone
and Orange began to provide 3 G data services in selected cities
in 2004. In Asia, Japan’s NTT DoCoMo (WCDMA) and Korea’s SK
Telecom (cdma2000 1x-EVDO) were the ﬁrst to launch 3 G mobile
services, in 2001 and 2002. (For a complete list of 3 G services
available worldwide, see http://www.3gtoday.com/operators/index.
html.)
Furthermore, some European and Asian MNOs are considering
building 4 G networks, which have demonstrated a data rate around
300 Mbit/sec in ﬁeld trail. No matter which mobile technology will
win in the future, one thing is for sure: The cellular network will
continue to be a core component of the service package on smart
phones, for both technological and economical reasons.
1.2.2
802.11 Wireless LAN
The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) 802.11
wireless LAN technology is a perfect example of a technology that
initially maintains a low proﬁle yet experiences explosive growth in
the residential network market. A survey conducted by IDC in 2003
found that 34% of those who responded connect to a wireless LAN
network at home, compared with 27% at work, and network oper-
ators are expected to install more than 55,000 new hot spots in the
United States over the next 5 years.
Such a huge success is largely due to the ﬂexibility in setting
up a wireless LAN, and the low cost of the wireless LAN devices.
In the United States, the IEEE 802.11 b and 802.11 g standards
operate on the unlicensed 2.4-GHz industrial, science, and media
(ISM) band and can provide data rates of 11 Mbit/s and 54 Mbit/s,

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
13
respectively, whereas the IEEE 802.11 a standard uses the 5-GHz
unlicensed national information infrastructure (U-NII) band and
can deliver a data rate up to 54 Mbit/sec. Despite its growth in
the residential market and in some enterprises, many government
departments and large companies have banned the use of this tech-
nology due to security concerns; both the initial wired equivalent
privacy (WEP) and interim Wi-Fi protected access (WPA) protocols
have been proven to have serious security ﬂaws [3,4]. IEEE has formed
several work groups to address these security issues, as well as other
open issues including quality of service and interference with other
wireless technologies operating at the same band. For example, in
2004, IEEE ratiﬁed the 802.11i security standard for wireless LANs.
1.2.3
Wireless Mesh Network
Because of the remarkable popularity of wireless LAN technology
and the considerably higher bandwidth it can provide for wireless
data access as compared to cellular networks, a few upstarts are build-
ing citywide and even nationwide wireless LAN networks that allow
seamless roaming between access points on a large scale, effectively
creating a wireless mesh network. A key characteristic of a wireless
mesh network is that it is a peer-to-peer, self-conﬁguring system in
which each mesh node can relay messages on behalf of others, thus
increasing the coverage, available bandwidth, and system reliability.
Numerous wireless mesh network routers are currently in the market.
IEEE has formed an ESS Mesh Networking Task Group (802.11s) in
an effort to standardize future wireless mesh network protocols and
interoperability.
1.2.4
WiMax
Another example of wireless LAN is WiMax (Worldwide Interoper-
ability for Microwave Access). WiMax is an industry forum formed
to promote point-to-point broadband wireless access to home and
mobile users. The WiMax technology is based on IEEE 802.16 and
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) HIPERLAN.

14
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
It has two forms of wireless service: line of sight (between backhaul
towers) and non-line of sight (to residences and business users). It has
the potential to achieve a range of 31 miles and can provide a band-
width of up to 70 Mbit/sec, which is equivalent to dozens of T1 lines
and Internet access of well over a few hundred using DSL or cable
model. Intel is the strongest supporter of WiMax. As of this writing,
Internet service providers in some major cities are in the process of
conducting ﬁeld tests. The large-scale rollout of WiMax services to
end users may begin within the next 1 to 2 years.
1.2.5
Wireless Sensor Network
A sensor is a tiny, low-cost, low-power device that can sense ﬁelds and
forces in the physical world and translate stimuli, such as motion,
heat, light, sound, or pressure, into numerical data. With radio capa-
bility, a wireless sensor node can transmit data regarding a state
change to other nodes. Tens of thousands of inexpensive wireless
sensors can essentially form a wireless sensor network that, once
deployed to urban environments or inhospitable terrains, will allow
coordination of information gathering and processing in a fully self-
organized fashion over a long period of time. The wireless sensor
network technology is a key component of pervasive computing
because it allows computing facilities to deeply immerse themselves
in the physical environment. Some applications of wireless sensor
networks include environmental monitoring, habitat monitoring,
and trafﬁc control. Ongoing research on the marriage of sensors
and mobile devices such as PDAs and smart phones has revealed
many interesting potential applications. The challenges of wireless
sensor networks include query-informed routing, in-network query
processing, security and privacy issues, and sensor system design
issues.
1.2.6
RFID
A radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tag is a small integrated cir-
cuit that can respond to an interrogating signal with some simple

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
15
data using an on-board antenna. The RF data transmission does not
require line of sight. Passive RFID tags do not require batteries for data
transmission, whereas active RFID tags with more complex circuits
do requires batteries to operate. In a typical application scenario, an
RF reader is able to collect data from many RFID tags wirelessly and
even update data on those RF tags. This makes the RFID technology
extremely compelling for asset and people tracking, inventory mon-
itoring, access control and ticketing, etc. As a sign of the ultimate
widespread use of RFID tags, Wal-Mart asked its top 100 suppliers to
initiate use of RFID tags on cases and pallets of consumer goods by
January 2005. Most of these top 100 suppliers have developed RFID
solutions in order to comply with this mandate. Security concerns,
privacy issues, and the lack of standards, however, have effectively
slowed down the deployment of RFID tags.
1.2.7
WPAN
The wireless personal area network (WPAN) is a collection of short-
range, low-power, low-cost wireless technologies, including infrared
(IR), Bluetooth, and ultra-wideband (UWB). Infrared is a point-
to-point cable replacement technology commonly used on laptop
computers and portal devices. Its operating range is quite limited
at less than 6 feet, and the effective bandwidth is not suitable for
large ﬁle transfers. Bluetooth is already widely used in cell phones
and PDAs for wireless synchronization within a range of 30 feet
using the unlicensed 2.4-GHz spectrum. It also has the potential to
build an ad hoc piconet for group communication. The latest addi-
tion to the WPAN family, and probably the most revolutionary one,
is UWB. UWB offers very high bandwidth data transmission: up to
480 Mbit/sec within a range of up of 6 feet and 110 Mbit/sec within
30 feet. The beauty of UWB is that it can coexist with technolo-
gies on the same spectrum, thanks to its unique radio characteristics.
UWB is still in its infancy; however, it may eventually replace Blue-
tooth as the prevalent WPAN solution on mobile devices in the next
few years.

16
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
1.3 Issues and Challenges
The relentless evolution of mobile wireless technologies has given
rise to novel applications and services to satisfy the needs of busi-
nesses for cost-effective, highly efﬁcient, and robust operations and
to provide a rich experience for consumers. These developments in
turn raise research issues and challenges yet to be addressed.
1.3.1
Mobile Localization and Location-Based Services
Not until the era of mobile computing did physical location become
a signiﬁcant issue for mobile applications and services. The questions
pertinent to a user’s location include: Where am I? What information
is available in the vicinity? What is happening in those places I am
interested in? How do I get there? Where are the other people I know
or I want to know? In some cases, the network operator may be asked
to report the location of a user with a mobile device. These challeng-
ing questions effectively spur the convergence of mobile positioning
and tracking techniques, either indoor or outdoor, with geograph-
ical information databases to create an adaptive virtual world for
each user.
1.3.2
Ad Hoc Networks
An ad hoc network is a self-organized group of nodes without a ﬁxed
infrastructure. Each node in an ad hoc network relies on its neigh-
boring nodes to communicate and cooperate with anyone else in a
fully distributed way. The topology of the network may constantly
change if the nodes are free to move around, thus creating a mobile
ad hoc network. Potential applications of ad hoc communication
and collaboration among mobile devices include battleﬁelds, con-
ference, sports stadiums, disaster relief efforts, and even classrooms.
The absence of a ﬁxed infrastructure in an ad hoc network introduces
some challenging issues, such as dynamic network conﬁguration, ser-
vice discovery, and multihop routing. Because nodes in the network
may constantly move, both the moving nodes and the affected sta-
ble nodes must adapt to this change in terms of addressing and

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
17
topology updates. Furthermore, a node must conduct a reliable and
fast discovery procedure to determine which resources or services are
available on which nodes while moving around. To access a resource
and service shared by some nodes outside of its transmission range,
the node will rely on an efﬁcient multihop routing mechanism to
reach the destination node.
1.3.3
Integration of Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
The aforementioned trend of convergence of computing and com-
munication faces a few challenges in the technological and business
domains. Heterogeneous network infrastructures have to coexist and
operate with each other to support internetwork roaming and hand-
off and must be transparent to users. Some trial tests of wireless LAN
and cellular integration by wireless operators are already underway.
Uniﬁed mobility support and seamless handoff in hybrid wired and
wireless networks and among multiple wireless networks have been
explored by academic researchers.
1.3.4
Security and Privacy
As mobile computing works its way into every aspect of daily life,
security and privacy concerns are becoming more widespread. With-
out a well-designed security mechanism, reliable applications and
services are not possible. Speciﬁcally, in the wireless world, the
theme of security is authentication, authorization, and accounting;
we want the technologies to assist us in our business and in daily
lives, not expose our privacy to others. It is of paramount impor-
tance to design a highly secure mobile system that does not carry
the risk of exposing sensitive privacy data. No doubt these mobile
computing security and privacy issues will spur further research into
their resolution.
1.3.5
Multimedia on Mobile Devices
Multimedia applications for mobile devices are surfacing due
to improvements in the data transmission rates of 2.5 G and

18
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3 G services. MNOs are seeking “killer apps” for these data ser-
vices,
and multimedia applications such as image/video mes-
saging and mobile television are being considered. In contrast
to text-based communication, mobile audio and video commu-
nication targeting mobile devices (such as smart phones) must
maintain both adaptability and high performance while coping
with fundamental design limitations such as power consump-
tion, form factor, wireless connection bandwidth, and mobility.
Some of these problems may be addressed by applying peer-to-peer
technology.
1.3.6
Smart Devices and Smart Space
Given the diversity of wireless technologies, a mobile device such
as a smart phone must be able to integrate multiple types of radio
access. In particular, as the universal mobile terminal, a smart
phone must be smart enough to discover which radio access is
most suitable for the underlying application and then switch to
it on the ﬂy without the user’s intervention. Each type of radio
access must be optimized on a smart phone to mitigate over-
all interference. To this end, software radio, a technology that
employs the same radio for various wireless protocols, may be the
answer. Aside from being adaptive to various radio connections,
a smart phone will also adjust its power consumption, display
light, and wireless link bandwidth in favor of a long operation
time when the battery is about to drain out. Smart space fur-
ther improves the power of mobile computing by extending the
adaptability of a smart device to everywhere in the physical envi-
ronment. Embedded computers, information appliance, sensors,
and people wearing mobile computers or smart phones constitute
the smart space, which is able to systematically organize and coor-
dinate those components. The vision of smart devices and smart
space requires breakthroughs in a number of ﬁelds, including chip
design, communication protocol design, middleware, and informa-
tion retrieval.

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
19
1.3.7
Context-Aware Computing
In the mobile computing paradigm, context is deﬁned as a collec-
tion of varying conditions and situations that exist or occur in
the computing, physical, and social environment of a user, such
as user location, user movement, environmental noise, temperature,
user activity, and any sensing data from accessible devices or other
users. Context-aware computing is an effort to taking advantages of
this contextual information to automatically adapt the operations
of computing services for the user. A classic example of context-
aware applications is using a cell phone in a movie theater. The cell
phone is equipped with wireless sensors that are able to detect the
dimmed light, high ambient noise, and slight body movement of the
user, and it silently switches itself into vibration mode. Challenges in
the domain of context aware computing include context discovery
and sensing, context data modeling and interpretation, contextual
adaptation, and augmented context cognition.
1.3.8
HCI and Middleware
A key issue in mobile computing is human–computer interaction
(HCI) on a mobile device, which requires research into such areas
as speech recognition and processing, advanced computer vision,
graphic user interface design, and interaction modeling. Middleware
is another key component in the mobile computing framework, as it
mediates interactions with the networking kernel on the user’s behalf
and will keep users immersed in the pervasive computing space [1].
Indeed, the challenging issues of next-generation mobile com-
puting mentioned brieﬂy here do not include every aspect of this
extremely broad ﬁeld. Certainly some issues have been left out.
For instance, quality of service (QoS) in wireless networks has been
actively researched in the networking community for years. In the
mobile world, QoS implies building a networking infrastructure,
mobile terminals, and software that as a whole offer reliable and
adaptive connectivity in accordance with a set of performance met-
rics. The big picture of next-generation mobile computing calls for

20
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
dramatic advances in the research and development of a number
of research ﬁelds, including mobile hardware, wireless sensing, net-
working, software design, middleware, and HCI. Needless to say, it is
literally impossible to cover all of the challenges in these fast chang-
ing areas. This book focuses on networking-related issues, as well as
service and application design issues, by using the smart phone as
a vehicle for discussion and analysis of terminal design and service
delivery.
1.4 Summary
As explained in this chapter, mobile computing is an enormously
broad area, encompassing enabling wireless technologies, evolving
wireless networks, novel service and applications, standardization,
and of course business perspectives and opportunities. This book
approaches this fast-paced, diverse domain by concentrating on
state-of-the-art advancements in mobile computing research and
development in both industry and academia, aiming at bridging
the gap between mobile computing research and business-centric
commercial mobile application and service development. We have
included a brief summary of industry practice and recent commer-
cial developments to provide some insight for industry professionals
who have grasped the key ideas and want to see how they work in the
real world. A solid understanding of the technical foundations (such
as protocols and algorithms) of current technologies, systems, and
networks is essential for everyone working in this ﬁeld; therefore, for
each topic covered in the remaining chapters, an in-depth discussion
of these foundations is presented in such a way that the reader with
an average background in computing technologies will gain from it.
References
[1] D. Saha and A. Mukherjee. Pervasive computing: a paradigm for
the 21st century, IEEE Computer, 36:25–31, 2004.

Introduction to Smart Phone and Mobile Computing
21
[2] M. Weiser. The computer of the 21st century, Scientiﬁc American,
265(3):94–104, 1991.
[3] S. Fluhrer, I. Mantin, and A. Shamir. Weaknesses in the key sched-
ule algorithm of RC4, in Proceedings of the 4th Annual Workshop
on Selected Areas of Cryptography, 2001.
[4] V. Moen, H. Raddum, and K. J. Hole. Weaknesses in the tem-
poral key hash of WPA, ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and
Communication Review, 8(2):76–83, 2004.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

2
The Next Wave of Computing
The next wave of computing, many believe, will be mobile comput-
ing. Mobile computing does not simply imply using a cell phone
on the move and checking schedules, e-mails, weather, and news
occasionally with a laptop computer or a PDA. In fact, future mobile
computing reﬂects a far broader and deeper vision than our current
perception of using mobile devices to access cellular wireless net-
works and services, which represents just one of the components of
the mobile computing paradigm. The rapid evolution of enabling
mobile wireless technologies and the need for information access to
be available “anytime, anywhere, from any device” and, even more
aggressively, “all the time, everywhere, from all devices” have nat-
urally raised a few key questions regarding technical trends in the
mobile arena, enabling technologies, and the role of cell phones in
the future. This chapter aims to answer these questions by look-
ing into the evolution of cellular technologies, PDAs, and other
mobile devices. The chapter discusses the rise of smart phones, the
increasingly popular converged mobile device, and then moves the
discussion a step further to identify the trend of convergence within
the broader context of general computing, as well as research and
development directions in both industry and academia.
2.1 The Evolution of Cellular Networks and Cell Phones
Cellular communication is by far the most widely used wire-
less communication technology worldwide.
A study by EMC
(Hopkinton, MA) in 2004 showed there were about 1.5 billion cell
phone users worldwide, and the number is expected to surpass
23

24
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2.45 billion by 2009. Today, cell phones have become so popu-
lar around the world that in some places such as Singapore it has
reportedly replaced traditional landline Public Switched Telephone
Network (PSTN) telephones as the ﬁrst choice of communication.
The U.S. mobile wireless market will hit $158.6 billion in 2005 and
$212.5 billion by 2008, according to a Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) study. Cellular networks and cell phones are by all
means a tremendous success. The evolution of cellular networks, ser-
vices, standards, and cell phones will reveal future directions in the
mobile wireless world.
2.1.1
The History of Cellular Systems
The ﬁrst commercial cellular network system, the Advanced Mobile
Phone System (AMPS), was designed by researchers at Bell Laborato-
ries in 1982; however, the key technology of the ﬁrst analog cellular
systems and current digital systems has its origins back in the 1940s,
as shown in Figure 1.1. The cellular concept was ﬁrst proposed by
D. H. Ring and his colleagues in an internal Bell Labs memorandum
in 1947. The notion of cell comes from the concept of frequency
reuse that divides a geographical area into small hexagonal cells. A
relatively low-powered base station transceiver in each cell uses radio
frequencies unused by its neighboring cells to service cell phones
within its own range. Those base stations, as well as other network
components, constitute a cellular network infrastructure. Another
key concept in cellular systems is handoff, which enables mobile users
to move across different cells without experiencing communication
interruption. Some sophisticated handoff techniques are employed
in a cellular system to allow almost unnoticed switching of base sta-
tions and frequencies. To increase the capacity of a cellular system,
a cell can be further split into smaller areas.
Cellular communication between a mobile station (in this book,
we use the terms mobile station, cell phone, and mobile phone inter-
changeably) and its associated base stations is in the form of two-way
radio, as the mobile station transmits and receives signals in two dif-
ferent frequencies (channels) to achieve full duplex communication.

The Next Wave of Computing
25
As a result, the capacity of a system, or the maximum number of
cell phone users a system can accommodate, is largely determined
by the allocated frequencies for the cells. More details of the cellular
technology are presented in the next chapter.
The frequency spectrum is generally considered a public asset;
thus, the government has to control the allocation of nongovern-
mental uses of frequency bands and signal power to avoid inter-
ference. For cellular mobile network operators or mobile network
operators (sometimes also called carriers) to build cellular networks
and provide mobile communication service to the public, they must
obtain approval of the use of a licensed frequency band from a
regulatory agency of the government, such as the Federal Communi-
cations Commission (FCC) in the United States. Because of scarce
frequencies available for business operations, the FCC holds auc-
tions where mobile network operators bid for a license, resulting in
high license fees. Therefore, even before mobile network operators
begin to build a cellular network infrastructure, they have already
made a considerable investment in their business plan. Whether or
not it is a good strategy for the government to hold bids for the
use of available frequencies is highly debatable. While the auction
essentially leads to the efﬁcient use of frequencies because only com-
panies with deep pockets can bid, it does place a huge burden onto
mobile network operators because of the gigantic initial investment
that is required, and it may hamper such companies from moving
forward to provide mobile services. For that reason, some counties
are very cautious about allocating frequencies to third-generation
systems (explained below). A timeline of cellular technologies and
commercial developments is shown in Figure 2.1.
2.1.1.1
First-Generation (1G) Systems
In the 1960s, the Improved Mobile Telephone System (IMTS), the
ﬁrst-generation analog cellular network using only 23 channels, was
approved by the FCC. It was implemented in several places but
never received much attention due to its low capacity. In 1982,
AMPS went into operation. It utilized frequency-division multiplex-
ing access (FDMA) over as many as 832 channels in the 800-MHz

26
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
1994 
TDMA IS-136 (a.k.a DAMPS) released
1992 
First GSM went into operation in Finland
1999 
First GPRS network went into operation
1996 
CDMA IS-95 went into operation
1996 
GSM was available in the US
2002 
Verizon began 3G service (CDMA2000 EV-DO)
2001
NTT DoCoMo began to operate W-CDMA 3G service (FOMA)
1978
Martin Cooper made the first cell phone call from an Motorola DynaTAC
1948 
Bell Labs introduced the concept of cell
1964 
Bell Labs introduced IMTS
1969
The first commercial frequency-reuse cellular system went into operation
by Bell System.  It used payphones on a train
1979 
NTT began operation of the world's first commercial cellular network
1978 
AT&T conducted public trial of the first cellular network in Chicago
1982 
FCC approved commerical cellular service
1983 
Ameritech began to provide AMPS
1987 
Cell phone subscribers exceeded one million
1982-1992 
First Generation Systems
1992-2001 
Second Generation Systems
2001
Third Generation Systems
2005 
The number of 3G CDMA service subscribers reaches 203 million
Figure 2.1
Evolution of cellular networks.

The Next Wave of Computing
27
band, thus greatly improving the capacity. The ﬁrst-generation sys-
tems also included the Total Access Communication System (TACS)
in the United Kingdom, and the Nordic Mobile Telephony (NMT)
in Scandinavia nations. Cell phone roaming among different ﬁrst-
generation systems was not possible, and a lack of standardization
substantially impeded development of these systems.
2.1.1.2
Second-Generation (2G) Systems
To accommodate the ever-growing number of subscribers, mobile
network operators of the ﬁrst-generation systems soon realized that
a more efﬁcient use of the allocated frequency bands was needed, as
the FDMA-based ﬁrst-generation systems could not fulﬁll the need
for greater capacity. Also, the ﬁrst-generation cellular systems did
not offer any security mechanism, effectively making the signal wide
open to interception and eavesdropping. To address these issues, a
new set of cellular systems was standardized and rolled out in the
early 1990s. The 2G cellular systems are digital rather than analog.
Two major types of 2G communication networks are global system
for mobile (GSM) communication and code-division multiple access
(CDMA). The GSM system was originally proposed by European
nations as an effort to design a single pan-European mobile commu-
nication system across the continent. The multiple-access method in
GSM systems is time-division multiple access (TDMA), which enables
the same frequency to be used by multiple users simultaneously but
each sequentially over a very short interval only in their own time
slots. Such a scheme allows eight users to share a single 200-KHz
channel in a time-division manner. GSM operates on the 900-MHz
and 1800-MHz frequency bands in Europe and Asia.
The CDMA standard was developed and promoted primarily by
Qualcomm (San Diego, CA), based on the IS-95 standard (now com-
monly referred to as cdmaOne). The major difference between GSM
and CDMA lies in the spectrum-spreading technique in the radio
layer of the wireless network. In short, GSM uses FDM to divide
the spectrum into channels, and then uses TDM to further divide
channels into time slots, whereas in CDMA, the entire spectrum

28
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
could possibly be used by an individual node, thanks to a sophisti-
cated spread-spectrum theory. In effect, high-spectrum efﬁciency and
dynamic allocation of bandwidth are considered two major advan-
tages of CDMA over GSM. At the same time, aside from GSM and
CDMA, AMPS evolved to D-AMPS, which is essentially a digitized
AMPS system.
It was not until the second-generation cellular systems that world-
wide roaming of mobile services became a reality, although it was
only possible within the same type of systems. To cope with dif-
ferent frequency bands used in different countries within the same
system, such as 900-MHz for GSM in Europe and Asia but 1900-MHz
for GSM in the United States, dual-band cell phones became avail-
able. A dual-mode cell phone may operate in both analog (AMPS) and
digital (GSM or CDMA) networks. Some cell phones even support
both GSM and CDMA. The second-generation cellular systems and
business operations turned out to be a huge success and exceeded
everyone’s expectations.
The next chapter will introduce some technological concepts and
general ideas of GSM and CDMA within the context of mobile com-
puting. The technical details of CDMA and GSM are beyond the
scope of the book. Interested readers may refer to other books on
wireless communications for more in-depth discussions; for exam-
ple, more details about CDMA and GSM are discussed in Glisic and
Leppanen [1].
The ﬁrst- and second-generation cellular networks were predom-
inantly designed for mobile telephony utilizing circuit switching.
In addition, paging services were generally provided as a one-way
communication service. These services seemed sufﬁcient to satisfy
people’s needs for mobile person-to-person communication until the
late 1990s, when wired networks and the Internet exploded onto
the scene. The revolutionary Internet signiﬁcantly extended peo-
ple’s information access capability by bringing the World Wide Web
as well as other feature-rich applications to nearly every desktop
computer via a large array of networking technologies. In response,
the wireless world saw the opportunity to move beyond voice and
paging services by offering data access in cellular networks, mainly

The Next Wave of Computing
29
to business professionals, in the hopes of riding another wave of
rapid user growth. To achieve this goal, new data-centric applica-
tions had to be introduced, and the cellular network itself had to
be upgraded to provide a higher data transmission rate. To this
end, GSM systems offered short message service (SMS), a pilot data
service that allows the exchange of short messages of less than
160 characters. Interestingly, SMS turned out to be a phenomenal
success in Asia and Europe, partly due to the billing models and
for some cultural reasons. Still, GSM suffers from a low data rate
of around 14.4 Kbps imposed by the underlying circuit-switching
transmission scheme.
On the road toward the third-generation, high-data-rate, digital,
cellular networks, some interim systems were developed to fulﬁll
the need for mobile data service without deploying an entirely new
system and to fully leverage the legacy systems. These so-called
2.5G systems, such as GPRS, EDGE, and CDMA 2000 1x, for the
most part are compatible with their 2G base systems because opera-
tors wanted to make the most out of the existing networks. GPRS
overlays GSM networks, providing a data rate that is equivalent
to a landline dial-up connection. One of the most important fea-
tures of GPRS is its “always-on” service; that is, the connection
stays open without further dial-ups. Both D-AMPS and GSM can
be updated to GPRS without a major overhaul. EDGE is a further
improvement over GSM with respect to data rate. It is sometimes
categorized as a third-generation mobile communication system. On
the cdmaOne side, the 2.5G systems are called cdam2000 1x and
offer a packet data rate up to 144 kbps. With regard to the D-AMPS
system, mobile network operators chose to move toward EDGE and
to the 3G systems. Here, our focus is on presenting a big picture of
2G and 3G systems. The evolutionary relationships between these
systems are further illustrated in Chapter 3 (Supporting Wireless
Technologies).
The applications offered by 2.5G systems include wireless access
protocol (WAP)-based wireless Internet, text messaging, voice and
picture e-mail services, and instant messaging, among others. As a
result, the cell phones used for 2.5G services must be designed to

30
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
support these applications. The evolution of cell phones is discussed
later in this chapter.
2.1.1.3
Third- and Fourth-Generation Systems
Along the winding way toward third-generation (3G) cellular net-
works, standards bodies are playing increasingly important roles.
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU), known as CCITT
prior to 1993, is a United Nations organization responsible for coordi-
nating global telecommunication standardization. In response to the
advent of 3G cellular systems, in 1999 the ITU approved an indus-
try standard known as International Mobile Telecommunications-
2000 (IMT-2000) [2]. This standard deﬁned the general data rate
requirements for 3G services, including:
• 2 Mbps in ﬁxed or in-building environments
• 384 kbps in pedestrian or urban environments
• 144 kbps in wide area mobile environments
It
ofﬁcially
recognized
ﬁve
industry
standards
as
3G
ser-
vices: WCDMA, cdma2000, TD-SCDMA, UWC-136, and DECT+.
Among these, the dominant standards are UMTS/WCDMA (wide-
band CDMA) and cdma2000. UMTS/WCDMA is the evolution of
GPRS/EDGE, whereas cdma2000 is the next generation of cdmaOne.
cdma2000 can be further divided into such systems as cdma2000 1x
(a 2.5G system), cdma2000 1xEV-DO (Evolution-Data Optimized),
cdma2000 1xEV-DV (Evolution-Data Voice), and cdma2000 3x.
Except for cdam2000 1x, the other types of cdma2000 are able to
offer data rates higher than 2 Mbps.
As of this writing, 3G cellular systems have been commercialized
in many counties, using either WCDMA or cdma2000, but the dom-
inant systems worldwide are still 2G systems. Some mobile network
operators, as well as standards bodies, foresee a relentless demand
for higher data rates for such emerging applications as real-time
multimedia communications and therefore are considering the next
generation of cellular networks (4G), which are expected to provide

The Next Wave of Computing
31
a bandwidth of up to 100 Mbps. Unlike 3G networks, the 4G systems
are completely packet switched. As 3G systems are being rolled out,
4G research is already underway.
2.1.1.4
The Theme of Technological Advances in the
Wireless Industry
The three generations of cellular systems are excellent representa-
tions of the theme of technological advances in the wireless industry
during the 1980s and 1990s. As shown in Figure 2.2 the shift between
the generations took place in three important areas: voice signal sam-
pling, transmission or switching, and major payload in the system,
all closely intertwined at each shift. Value-added applications and
services such as wireless e-mailing and SMS subscription gradually
began to account for more trafﬁc in the system and a larger portion
of the total revenue. The penetration of voice-centric cell phones
in most developed countries is so great that growth has been rather
Voice
Point-to-Point
Thin Data
Rich Data
Analog
Digital Analog
Combined
Full Digital
Circuit Switching
Packet Switching Circuit 
Switching Combined
Packet Switching 
Signal
Payload
Transmission
1G
2G
3G
4G
Figure 2.2
The theme of technology advances in the cellular network domain.

32
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
stagnant and largely, if not completely, dependent on the upgrade
of cell phone devices. In some sense, these value-added applications
and services fall into the domain of computing rather than commu-
nication, thus calling for an entirely new design model of the cell
phones to facilitate computing services.
2.1.2
The Evolution of Cell Phones
The terms cell phone, cellular phone, mobile phone, and wireless phone all
refer to the same type of voice-centric mobile device that has become
the essential personal communication tool everywhere. Sometimes
the term handset is used instead of cell phone, which usually has
a monochrome or color screen display, a built-in antenna, and a
keypad. The inventor of cell phone is Dr. Martin Cooper, then a
Motorola engineer, who set up the ﬁrst base station in New York and
used the world’s ﬁrst cell phone, the Motorola DynaTac, to place the
ﬁrst cell phone call on April 13, 1978, while walking on a street of
New York City. The DynaTac was typical of the ﬁrst-generation ana-
log cell phones in that it resembled a brick in terms of shape, size,
and weight (Figure 2.3). Power consumption of these cell phones was
fairly high and they had to be recharged frequently. Accordingly, the
ﬁrst-generation cell phones were indeed mobile or, more precisely
movable, but they were not very convenient to use, which limited
the number of users of ﬁrst-generation systems.
On the heels of second-generation digital cellular systems such as
GSM, cdmaOne, and TDMA came the digital cell phones in 1990s.
Thanks to quickly advancing integrated circuit technologies, digital
cell phones are very small and lightweight, around 200 g (about 7
oz.) or less and offer longer talk time and standby time. These cell
phones also have a small monochrome LCD screen display to show
phone numbers, dialing status, and signal strength, as well as some
simple information regarding advanced applications such as phone
book, call log, voice messages, and so forth. In addition to the plain
palm-like cell phones, some “clamshell” cell phones began to appear;
this type of phones typically put the screen display on the back of the
cover pane to save space. Not long after that, 2.5G cellular systems

The Next Wave of Computing
33
Figure 2.3
The ﬁrst cell phone: Motorola’s DynaTAC 8000x (http://www.i4u.com/article421
.html. © Copyright 1994–2005 Motorola, Inc. Courtesy of Motorola, Inc.).
went into operations, which in turn brought about a dramatic change
in cell phone design with regard to a better user interface and sup-
port for short-range network connectivity. Among their features are a
brightly colored screen, sharp images and text display, ease of use text
input, synchronization with computers, and Personal Area Network
(PAN) capability such as IrDA or Bluetooth. These cell phones
account for most of the cell phone units used in the world today.
Smart phones were developed by mobile network operators and
cell phone manufacturers in late 1990s as a response to the need for
a converged personal communication and assistant tool. Powered
by the latest mobile processors such as Intel XScale and featuring
comparatively large and high-resolution color liquid-crystal display
(LCD) screen displays and large memory capacities, smart phones

34
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
are capable of performing more computing tasks than any other
cell phones. One way to leverage the computing capability of a
smart phone is to use it as a mobile terminal interacting with
wireless-enabled devices, equipment, computers, and even a physical
environment embedded with sensors. Imagine a smart phone that
communicates with Bluetooth-enabled automated teller machines
(ATMs), radiofrequency identiﬁcation (RFID)-tagged products in a
retail store, or an infrared-enabled parking lot gate. These appli-
cations transform the smart phone into a general computing and
communication device for data collection and processing, in addi-
tion to enhancing the user’s interactions with other people and other
computing systems. Moreover, a smart phone can also work as a con-
sumer electronics device such as a music player or a digital camera.
Despite the small 4% share of the entire cell phone market in terms of
number of shipped phones in 2003 (The Yankee Group, 2004), smart
phones are widely expected to become popular in the mass market
over the next several years.
Table 2.1 provides a general comparison of cell phones along
with the three generation of cellular systems. Notice that, while
cell phones are becoming smaller and lighter, they are more pow-
erful and sophisticated and can perform a wide variety of operations.
Not surprisingly, this trend is in line with the evolution of personal
computers. Smart phones are not speciﬁcally for 2.5G or 3G net-
works; in fact, many cell phone manufacturer identify their products
as smart phones because these cell phones use an advanced operat-
ing system on which customized mobile computer applications and
services are based. At the time of this writing, the major providers of
mobile operating systems for advanced cell phones and smart phones
are Symbian OS®, Palm OS®, and Microsoft Windows Mobile® for
Smartphone. The market leader is clearly Symbian OS developed
by the Symbian Company, a privately held, independent company
founded by Ericsson, Nokia, Motorola, and Psion in 1998. Palm OS
was developed by Palm, Inc., the company that invented the ﬁrst suc-
cessful personal digital assistant (PDA), the Palm Pilot®. Palm split
into two companies in 2002: Palm Source, Inc., which continues
to make Palm OS, and Palm One, Inc. (later renamed as Palm, Inc.),

The Next Wave of Computing
35
Table 2.1
Evolution of Cell Phones
Category
Analog
Digital
Smart Phone
Size
“Brick”
“Palm”, “clamshell”, or
“candy bar”
“palm”, “clamshell”, or
“candy bar”
Weight
1 to 2 lb
6 to 8 oz.
< 5 oz.
Display
N/A
Monochrome or color,
small, 172 × 120 pixels
Color, 320 × 240 pixels
Processor
For very basic
communication
tasks
For preliminary tasks
For some advanced tasks
such as multimedia
playback
Memory
Only to store
phone numbers
Several megabytes
64 MB or more, plus ﬂash
memory
Noncellular
interfaces
N/A
Sync with computers
Bluetooth, WiFi, GPS, etc.
Battery
Short talk time and
standby time
Longer talk time and
standby time
Longer talk time and
standby time
Price
Several thousand
dollars
A wide range, from free to
several hundred dollars
Several hundred dollars
or less
which focuses on PDAs and smart phone devices such as the Palm V™,
Treo™, Tungsten, and Zire™series. The Windows CE-based Microsoft
Windows Mobile for Smartphone, or Microsoft Smartphone, is new
to the smart phone OS market. Aside from these general-purpose
operating systems, another strong competitor that deserves mention
is RIM’s BlackBerry™. BlackBerry devices were traditionally wireless
data devices that allowed business people to stay connected with
wireless e-mails. Along with the rise of smart phones, RIM began
to add voice and web access to newer BlackBerry devices. Chapter 4
(Mobile Terminal Platforms) provides a detailed discussion of these
software platforms.
2.2 The Evolution of PDAs
The personal digital assistant, sometimes referred to as a handheld in
the computer industry, commonly refers to a palm-size, lightweight,
battery-powered electronic device for personal information manage-
ment (PIM). Despite the rise of smart phones among business users,

36
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Figure 2.4
Apple Newton MessagePad. (Courtesy of Apple Computer, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA.
© Copyright 2005 Apple Computers, Inc.)
PDAs still hold a strong position in the market. The term personal
digital assistant was coined by John Sculley, then CEO of Apple
Computers, at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in 1992, when
the computer company decided to develop a product for the con-
sumer electronics market after the success of Apple’s Mac II. In 1993,
Apple released the world’s ﬁrst PDA, the Newton MessagePad, which
was manufactured by Sharp (Figure 2.4). The Newton MessagePad
had an ARM610 20-MHz processor, 4 MB of ROM, 640 k of SRAM,
and a 336 × 240 monochrome screen, all compacked into a 7.25 ×
4.5 × 0.75 case running the Newton operating system.
2.2.1
Apple Newton
Apple Newton essentially deﬁned a set of core functions that a PDA
should offer, including a personal organizer, an address book, quick

The Next Wave of Computing
37
notes, infrared beaming capability, and some utility tools. It can
also send e-mail and faxes with optional extension cards. All these
applications are based on handwriting-recognition technology, a key
technology in the domain of pen-based computing. Users write with
a stylus on the screen using “digital ink” technology, as opposed
to using keypads or a keyboard to input English letters. Almost
all PDAs today rely on the same design philosophy of pen-based
computing. The recent tablet PC is a new platform of portable com-
puters that employ pen-based handwriting recognition technology.
Another feature of Newton, as well as most its siblings, is that it
does not use any persistent block-based storage such as a hard disk.
Instead, it offers some amount of ﬂash memory for user storage,
which is much faster than traditional hard disk or tape devices in
terms of data access rate. Such a choice was based partly on the
design objective that a PDA should be highly responsive while inter-
acting with users. Power consumption was another factor because
hard disks or tapes consume far more power than ﬂash memory.
2.2.2
The History of PDAs
Figure 2.5 depicts some of the milestones of PDA history. The entire
PDA industry could be traced back to late 1980s, when pen-based
computing was considered to be the next big thing. In 1987, a
company named Go created an operating system for pen-based com-
puters. The idea of using a pen rather than a keyboard on a computer
was apparently innovative to investors as well as large companies
such as Microsoft, AT&T, and IBM. Although Go went bankrupt in
1994 due to ﬁnancial problems, its competitors carried on. First,
Apple (Newton), then Casio (Zoom), IBM (Simon), and Microsoft
(WinPad) all announced the release of their PDA products within
a few years, but none of them became very popular. In 1996, Palm
released Palm Pilot, which became a really big hit. Unlike other PDAs
in the market at that time, Palm Pilot did not focus on the problem
of free-form handwriting recognition and wireless communication;
rather, it identiﬁed a key feature that had been largely ignored by
other PDA vendors: easy synchronization with a desktop computer.

38
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
1998 
RIM released BlackBerry 950, a wireless email handheld
2003 
Palm and Handspring merged
2004 
12.2 million PDAs sold in 2004. Palm, HP, and RIM were market leaders
2002 
HP and Compaq merged. Compaq iPaq became HP iPaq
1999
The first PDA with wireless Internet access, Palm VII, was released
2000 
Compaq announced iPaQ Pocket PC
1996 
Palm Pilot was released
1992 
John Sculley coins the term “Personal Digital Assistant”
Apple released Newton MessagePad
1992
Palm Inc was founded by Jeff Hawkings
2003 
10 million PDAs sold, falling from previous year’s 12.6 million.
Figure 2.5
Evolution of PDAs.
Palm Pilot allows a user to synchronize with a computer by pressing a
single button on the cradle, as shown in Figure 2.6 Some researchers
noted that the correct problem framing of the PDA resulted in the
success of the Palm Pilot [3]. The Palm Pilot was designed with the
vision that a PDA should not be a compact portable version of a
desktop computer, thus it should never attempt to provide a com-
plete clone of the set of applications available on a desktop computer.

The Next Wave of Computing
39
Figure 2.6
Palm Pilot. (Courtesy of Palm, Inc. © Copyright 2005 Palm, Inc.)
The applications running on the Palm Pilot have been carefully
selected and tailored to take advantage of portability, the feature
that sets PDAs apart from desktop computers. Because computing
requirements were signiﬁcantly reduced, the initial price of the Palm
Pilot was very competitive compared to other PDAs. After the release
of this pioneering and successful model, several PDA products from
other vendors came into play. Almost all of them followed the same
design model deﬁned by Palm Pilot.
Along the road to today’s PDAs, a handful of computing tech-
nologies substantially facilitated the widespread acceptance of these
small mobile devices. Below is a summary of key PDA technologies.
2.2.2.1
Handwriting Recognition
The ﬁrst handwriting recognition engine, dubbed “Calligrapher,” did
not help the Newton MessagePad at all. It allowed too much freestyle

40
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
writing anywhere on the screen, and recognition was rather poor. As
a result, the general public, not surprisingly, showed little conﬁdence
and interest in early versions of Newtons. Even a character in the well-
known TV show “The Simpsons,” a school bully called Nelson, was
disappointed by the ineffectiveness of the handwriting recognition
of Newton. In a show ﬁrst aired in November 1994, the boy told
his buddy to write “Beat up Martin” on the screen of a Newton, but
the handwriting recognition engine came up with “Eat up Martha.”
Irritated, Nelson chose to use the device as a weapon when he threw
the Newton at Martin’s head.
Palm Pilot introduced a much better handwriting engine, Grafﬁti,
which only allows a user to write within a small rectangular area,
and freeform writing is not acceptable; instead, users have to learn
to write letters and punctuation according to a set of deﬁned shapes
for the characters. It turned out that these restrictions have effec-
tively eased the otherwise cumbersome process of handwriting on a
Palm Pilot.
Most PDAs are equipped with a stylus for handwriting recognition.
Only a small portion of PDAs have a tiny keyboard for data entry, and
they are primarily targeted for business applications, such as point-
of-sale (POS). An exception is BlackBerry’s wireless e-mail handset,
which uses an integrated PC-style 33-key QWERTY keyboard to facili-
tate datacentric applications such as e-mail, PIM, and wireless web.
Compared with PDAs, cell phones and smart phones are inherently
phone based, meaning that a phone keypad (1 through 9 number
keys, each representing three English letters) is most frequently used.
2.2.2.2
Communication Interfaces
The ﬁrst model in the Newton MessagePad series released in 1993
does not include any wireless communication interface. An optional
9.6-Kbps modem was the only way to transfer data to and from
this device. It also had a Personal Computer Memory Card Inter-
national Association (PCMCIA) slot for extra storage, but the Newton
MessagePad was not designed for frequent data migration. Later
models in the same series, beginning with MessagePad 120, were
equipped with an infrared beam capability and a serial port. Infrared

The Next Wave of Computing
41
beaming allows a Newton MessagePad to communicate conveniently
with infrared enabled printers, laptop computers, or another Newton
MessagePad within a short range of several feet. The infrared tech-
nology later has become a de facto standard component for mobile
computers and PDAs.
The next big leap in terms of the communication capability of
PDAs has been synchronization with a computer via a serial port
or a USB port, ﬁrst available on Palm Pilot PDAs. Simply push the
“sync” button on the device cradle, all data on the PDA will be
synchronized with the hosting computer. After establishing a com-
panion relationship between the PDA and the host computer, a user
is able to conduct more frequent data updates to the PDA, thereby
extending the use of the device, especially in a business environment.
Serial communication was ﬁrst introduced as the synchronization
interface. It provides a data rate of only a few hundred bits per
second, which is obviously not fast enough for large data transfer.
USB was designed to replace the serial interface on computers with
two practical advantages: high data rate up to 12 Mbps and ease
of communication setup. Two standards, USB 1.x and 2.0 (up to
480 Mbps), have subsequently been developed and are widely used
in computing devices, including PDAs, music players, and personal
computers.
With easy-to-use synchronization and point-to-point infrared
beaming, the capabilities of PDAs have been greatly expanded. The
host computer acts as a proxy for the PDA for information access
over a network. The information that can be pushed to a PDA over
synchronization includes news, stock quotes, ﬂight schedules, restau-
rant reviews, etc. An example of this kind of proxying application is
AvantGo. Initially, the PDA did not provide direct communication
capability for data access to a network. This was not a big problem in
mid-1990s, as the Internet and wired networking technologies were
still it their infancy and were not available to general public. When
the Internet exploded in late 1990s and most computers were online,
the need to have direct network access, be it the Internet or a local
area network (LAN), became imperative. As a consequence, wireless
technologies such as wireless cellular access, wireless LAN access, and

42
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Bluetooth, started to become a necessary communication interface
on PDAs. To date the most frequently included wireless interfaces on
a PDA are Bluetooth and wireless LAN.
The evolution of PDAs has followed a course similar to that of
cell phones in many respects, from monochrome screens to color
screens; from low computing capabilities to state-of-the-art, high-
performance mobile processors; from IrDA to Bluetooth and Wireless
LAN. Because a PDA remains by and large a standalone computing
device without direct network access, it has evolved primarily in
the hardware components and supported functions. On the other
hand, a cell phone relies heavily on the cellular network to operate,
thus the evolution of cell phones has paralleled that of cellular net-
works. Nonetheless, the fundamental difference between PDAs and
cell phones is that a PDA is a pure computing device and a cell phone
is primarily a communication device.
Worldwide PDA shipments experienced a sharp decline in 2002
and later after more than 10 years of growth. Aside from world-
wide economic downturn, another major factor contributing to the
decline of PDA sales was probably competition from cell phones that
have built-in wireless Internet access and common PDA functions -
in other words, smart phones.
2.3 PDAs Versus Cell Phones
The success of Palm in the past 10 years sheds some light on the
future of PDAs. As always, the key issue for any business is to iden-
tify what users really want and how much they will pay for it. Back
in the late 1980s and early 1990s, wireless communication was still
in the research-and-development stage in research laboratories and
academia, and references to the wired Internet were not heard very
often. It was becoming clear that a small handheld portable device
with easy-to-use applications and a simple communication interface
could gain some ground with people who were tired of the increas-
ingly time-consuming personal data management and would like

The Next Wave of Computing
43
to get rid of paper organizers and calendars. It was also becoming
evident that portability or mobility was an important issue with
regard to the design of mobile computing devices.
Cell phones, on the other hand, are voice communication devices
with mobility support enabled by the cellular networks. Due to the
inherent resource constraint nature of cell phones, many sophisti-
cated communication tasks are performed on the backend network
infrastructure. The functionality of a cell phone is diverse but none is
computing intensive or requires large memory. On the other hand,
radio communication consumes far much power than common com-
puting tasks. Table 2.2 provides a brief head-to-head comparison of
PDAs and cell phones and some low-end smart phones.
The distinction between a PDA and a voice-centric cell phone is
evident in almost all respects; however, both PDAs and cell phones
are undergoing drastic changes in terms of offered functionality.
A multifunction mobile device that can do both and more is a nat-
ural direction; consequently, the boundaries between these types of
mobile devices continues to blur and may eventually melt away.
Table 2.2
PDA Versus Cell Phone
Category
PDAs
Cell Phone (Voice Only)
Major use
Personal information management
Mobile telephony and messaging
Size
Larger, postcard
Smaller, palm size
Weight
6 to 9 oz.
6 to 8 oz.
Display
Monochrome or color, large,
240 × 320 or higher
Monochrome or Color, small,
172 × 120
Processor
ARM, StrongARM, DragonBall,
several hundred MHz
Proprietary processors of several
hundred MHz
Memory
64 Mb or more
4- to 8-Mb SRAM with an 8- or
16-Mb NOR Flash
Interfaces
USB, serial, IrDA, Bluetooth, Wireless
LAN
Bluetooth
Battery
Very long working time
A few hours of talk time
Price
Ranging from less than $100 to
several hundred dollars
Comparatively inexpensive or even
free

44
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2.4 The Convergence of Mobile Devices
When it comes to mobile, the need for convergence is evident.
Nobody wants to carry around a handful of mobile devices. Con-
verged mobile devices stand a good chance of becoming popular,
because in a mobile scenario, size, weight, functions, wireless com-
munication capability, and of course price are often equally impor-
tant to end users. If two mobile devices can merge into one and work
well in both application scenarios, it would clearly be unnecessary to
use both. Also, a converged mobile device may offer the functionality
of data integration and interoperation, which are otherwise difﬁcult
to achieve with two separate devices.
2.4.1
The Convergence of PDAs and Cell Phones
Only a few years ago, a PDA was usually considered a small, easy-to-
use electronic organizer that did not offer too much beyond replacing
paper organizers. Communication capabilities of a PDA were limited
to synchronization with a host computer. Once disconnected from
the host computer, operations of a PDA are totally dependent on
its locally maintained snapshot of data until the next synchroniza-
tion. Real-time data access and processing are rather difﬁcult, if not
impossible.
When cell phones become ubiquitous, voice communication via
the cellular networks with mobility support became not only a means
of personal communication but also an element of lifestyle, bearing
social and cultural implications. In contrast to PDAs, cell phones are
real-time communication tools. The high penetration of base stations
in urban areas operated by various wireless carriers effectively makes
it possible for cell phone users to access the backend cellular networks
anytime they want.
Both of these two types of mobile devices are indispensable for
many people who have a strong need for communication and per-
sonal information management. Both of them can comfortably ﬁt
into a pocket, but it is undoubtedly cumbersome to try to cram both
in one pocket. On the other hand, some of the functions provided by

The Next Wave of Computing
45
PDAs and cell phones actually overlap, such as the phone book and
calendar. Thus, a question has been raised by many business profes-
sionals: Can we have the best of both worlds with a single device?
Or, even more intriguing, can we use a single device to do the things
that are otherwise impossible on either of them?
The concept of smart phones is the answer to these questions. In
essence, a smart phone is a converged mobile device that supplies
a rich set of datacentric computing and communication applica-
tions and services in addition to conventional voice communication.
Smart phones are generally designed to seamlessly integrate PDAs
and cell phones into a single set of hardware components. An exam-
ple is the Motorola MPX 200 smart phone. As many other smart
phones enter the market, the Motorola MPX 200 will allow users to
check e-mails, manage address books and calendars, play music and
video clips, and surf the web. It should be noted that PDAs and cell
phones possess some conﬂicting design goals. PDA functionality gen-
erally requires a fairly big screen display and a stylus-based method
of operation, which has resulted in PDA-centric smart phone such as
Microsoft’s Pocket PC Phone edition, which is bigger than regular cell
phones and has poor phone functionality. Very often smart phone
designers have to sacriﬁce some PDA functionality in exchange for
a usable smart phone. This situation may change as display tech-
nology, human-computer interface technology, and semiconductor
technology evolve to provide better solutions to these conﬂicting
requirements.
The ﬁrst generation of smart phones is simply a multifunction cell
phone with PIM support. All smart phones at the time of this writ-
ing fall into this category. The second generation of smart phones is
likely to support many other wireless data networks such as wireless
LAN, ultra-wideband (UWB), and wireless sensing, thereby allowing
extensive data access and cooperation between the smart phone and
various wireless networks. In addition to voice communication and
personal information management, an entirely new set of applica-
tions and services will be available for the next generation of smart
phones. The design philosophy is that rather than cramming mul-
tiple separated functions into a single device, a smart phone should

46
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
leverage the surrounding wireless environment as much as possible to
provide a new dimension of applications for convenient information
access, personal and group communication, and human-machine
and human-environment interactions.
Microsoft’s use of another term, “Smartphone,” represents some-
thing totally different from a smart phone (even if the only difference
is the space between the two words). Smartphone is Microsoft’s
software platform for cell phones.
2.4.2
The Convergence of Cell Phones and Mobile Entertainment Devices
Mobile entertainment devices refer to handheld audio, video, and
graphics entertainment systems such as music players, video play-
ers, handheld televisions, and gaming devices. Mobile entertainment
devices are extremely popular among teenagers. For example, world-
wide sales of mp3 players doubled in units and dollars in 2003 to
more than 24 million units and $3 billion, as reported by research
ﬁrm In-Stat/MDR. The ﬁrm also predicted that, by 2009, mobile gam-
ing services in the United States will generate $1.8 billion in sales
annually. Most of the mobile entertainment devices do not require
wireless data connections to operate. Multimedia contents are down-
loaded into the device’s storage via USB or are stored in a removable
media Memory card. For example, portable mp3 player users usu-
ally collect music on a computer, and transfer their selections to
their mp3 players through a USB connection. An example of such
a device is the popular Apple iPod, shown in Figure 2.7 which has
been closely bundled with Apple’s iTunes online music store. Simi-
lar needs are also evident in mobile gaming. In addition to allowing
gamers to obtain games from somewhere online, more compelling
is to enable multiplayer mobile gaming via wireless networks. More-
over, gaming experiences can be enriched dramatically by a wide
array of services and applications, such as location-based gaming
and ad hoc gaming, supplied by underlying wireless networks. At the
same time, the mobile gaming device can also work as a cell phone
or PDA. Nokia’s N-Gage QD Game Deck, shown in Figure 2.8 is such
a device.

The Next Wave of Computing
47
Figure 2.7
Apple iPod. (Courtesy of Apple Computer, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA. © Copyright 2005
Apple Computer, Inc. http://www.apple.com/ipod/.)
Personal digital assistants and cell phones also offer an assort-
ment of entertainment applications as part of the software package.
Needless to say the quality of these applications and the entertaining
experiences they can provide are nowhere close to those dedicated
mobile entertainment devices, primarily due to their limited comput-
ing capabilities and the form factor. However, PDA and cell phone
users want to be able to enjoy simple forms of entertainment that are
optimized for such devices.
Like cell phone services, mobile entertainment services have the
potential to become another subscription-based multibillion dollar
market. While communication among cell phones is primarily com-
prised of voice and text messaging, mobile entertainment users will

48
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Figure 2.8
Nokia’s N-Gage QD Game Deck. (Courtesy of Nokia Corporation, Espoo, Finland. ©
Copyright 2005 Nokia Corp.)
be supplied with a variety of data communication methods, ranging
from infrastructure-based music download, to peer-to-peer multi-
player gaming, to multicast multimedia streaming, etc. A number
of parties, including consumer electronics manufacturers, PDA and
cell phone or smart phone manufacturers, mobile network oper-
ators, software providers, and traditional game device providers,
have demonstrated their interest in this phenomenal opportunity.
No matter which industry segment will take the lead in the new
frontier, it must ﬁrst address two fundamental issues in the mobile
entertainment domain: (1) how to leverage emerging mobile wire-
less technologies for online/ofﬂine entertainment with a converged
mobile device, and (2) identifying what mobile entertainment appli-
cations and services best ﬁt into this market. In the near term, we
probably will see different parties cooperate with each other to lever-
age the stronghold of each one. For example, cell phones may be
able to access online music store such as Apple iTunes via wireless
data connections and play high-quality music through its earphones.
In the long run, companies from one sector may encroach on each
other’s strongholds. Imagine an iPod-like smart phone (the iPhone?)
or a Palm-based online multiplayer mobile gaming device.

The Next Wave of Computing
49
Aside from convergence among cell phones, PDAs, and mobile
entertainment devices, some other applications such as consumer
electronics, industrial handheld equipment, and home automa-
tion are expected to converge to a universal mobile device as well.
Consider remote controls for televisions, digital videodisc (DVD)
players, and stereo systems. These small wireless devices only dif-
fer in the frequency used. Moreover, other electronic devices may
also be remotely controlled, either from within a small room using
direct wireless communication or from a remote site via a network.
For example, a digital surveillance camera with a built-in motion
detection sensor or a temperature sensor can possibly send images,
data, or full motion video back to a remote site or a cell phone via
cellular networks whenever a predeﬁned condition of sensing data
has been met. Users may use a cell phone to control the camera and
the sensors or directly control some wireless-enabled devices in the
monitored environment.
2.4.3
Smart Phone: The Universal Mobile Terminal
It is clear that cell phones and PDAs will converge to a single mobile
device, a smart phone. It is also evident that a smart phone will
incorporate some functions of mobile entertainment devices and
other consumer electronic wireless devices. In essence, a smart phone
will be a universal mobile terminal in the future mobile computing
realm. It is not only a communication device, but also a computing
device, powered by the next generation of wireless networks rang-
ing from wireless PAN to worldwide cellular networks. In addition,
a smart phone may be used as a wireless control device to allow
uniﬁed monitoring, positioning, and control over consumer elec-
tronics devices. These function sets are not merely crammed into
a smart phone using separate hardware and software components;
rather, they are systematically integrated to allow data sharing and
interoperability.
From the mobile network operator’s point of view, the success
of smart phones hinges on the degree to which smart phones can

50
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
replace these single-function mobile devices. In order to be universal,
the following challenging issues have to be resolved ﬁrst:
• Power consumption of a smart phone will increase as a result
of more hardware components used and more wireless transmis-
sion. Battery life becomes a critical problem. To date, there are
three types of cell phone batteries — NiMH (nickel-metal hydride),
Li-ion (lithium-ion), and Li-polymer, all of which support a few
hours of talk time and a week of standby time. New battery tech-
nologies for mobile devices such as fuel cell batteries have emerged
but are not in mass production.
• The form factor of a smart phone makes it impractical to watch
television or video on the small screen even if wireless link band-
width is sufﬁciently large. Breakthroughs in display technology
are highly anticipated. Both clamshell-like cell phones and regular
“candy bar” cell phones now provide 2-inch TFT thin-ﬁlm tran-
sistor (TFT) displays with more than 64 k colors with 128 × 160
or 176 × 220 resolution. Some have even better QVGA display
(320 × 240).
• The common use of ﬂash memory on mobile devices may even-
tually give way to large-capacity, low-cost persistent storage such
as micro hard disks so as to accommodate increasing demand for
greater storage space. Offering very large ﬂash memory is not eco-
nomically feasible due to its high cost. Many cell phones now
provide a secure digital (SD) interface that allows stamp-size SD
memory cards to be used for extensive storage. Another stan-
dard, multimedia card (MMC), is also supported by many cell
phones. These memory extensions can support up to 1 Gb or larger
add-on memory. The SD interface may also be used for communi-
cation, such as SDIO Bluetooth cards. Details of mobile memory
technologies are introduced in Chapter 4.
• Wireless interference is a critical issue, as a smart phone will
deal with heterogeneous wireless networks in different ranges,
especially when many of these wireless networks operate on the

The Next Wave of Computing
51
unlicensed spectrum. Bluetooth, some types of wireless LANs, and
most microwave ovens use the same unlicensed 2.4-GHz spec-
trum band. Although the underlying radio frequency schemes
are different, interference may occur in some cases. For exam-
ple, it has been reported that a Bluetooth-enabled cell phone may
turn on an electronic shaver. On the other hand, wireless LANs
are considerably faster than cellular access, thus Internet access
from a cell phone or smart phone could go through a wireless
LAN hotspot if available, rather than always connecting to cel-
lular networks. In the long run, with mobile access becoming
more ubiquitous, a systematic approach to heterogeneous wireless
networks is needed.
2.5 Smart Phone Applications and Services
The trend of convergence in the mobile device domain calls for
a combination of mobile applications and services that used to
be offered by cell phones, PDAs, or mobile entertainment devices
separately. New applications and services will also surface as a result
of the ever-increasing wireless link bandwidth, ubiquitous wireless
access, or simply a novel business model.
2.5.1
First-Generation Smart Phone Applications
First-generation smart phone applications are mostly natural exten-
sions of PDA and cell phone functionality. Most of these applications
are available as of 2005. Below is a list of ﬁrst-generation smart phone
applications:
• Mobile telephony is the traditional cellular telephony service
including phone call and voice mail services. Some phones sup-
port voice dialing. Mobile telephony is, and will likely remain, the
most important application in the mobile wireless realm.

52
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Short message service (SMS) enables sending and receiving text
messages to and from a phone number. According to the GSM
Association, about 30 billion SMS messages are sent globally every
month, primarily in Europe and Asia.
• Enhanced message service (EMS) and multimedia message service
(MMS) — EMS allows a user to send formatted text, animations,
images, and simple melodies in a message, whereas MMS supports
polyphonic melodies, large images, and audio and video clips.
• Cell phone positioning complies with government regulations. In
the United States, the FCC requires mobile network operators to
implement E911 service to position a cell phone in case of emer-
gency. For accurate outdoor positioning, the global positioning
system (GPS) is the best choice. Some GPS receivers can be plugged
into a smart phone’s extension slot (compact ﬂash), and some
smart phones even have a built-in GPS. Chapter 3 will discuss
GPS technology in more detail.
• Navigation systems with trafﬁc information and geographic informa-
tion system (GIS) — Location services are facilitated by GPS, cellular
networks, or other wireless technologies such as WiFi hotspots.
Driving directions are provided with respect to real-time trafﬁc
information.
• Instant messaging (IM) is real-time text messaging service via a
directory server. Unlike SMS, users can engage in one-to-one or
group chat sessions. Some well-known desktop IM services have
been made accessible from cell phones, such as AOL instant
messaging and MSN messaging.
• E-mail, calendar, organizer, and notepad are typical PIM applica-
tions. Web-based PIM services such as Yahoo! allow users to
synchronize personal data, including e-mail, personal calendars,
organizers, address books, etc., from the web to PDAs or cell
phones.
• Address book is another common PIM application that can inter-
operate with mobile telephony applications.

The Next Wave of Computing
53
• Wireless Internet browsing — Web access is a core function of a
smart phone. The website a user visits from a smart phone could be
a set of specially designed wireless web pages or regular web pages.
• Data synchronization with a computer or another mobile device —
Interfaces of this application can include USB, Bluetooth, IrDA,
or Wireless LAN.
• Information push service — News, weather, movie show time,
games, blogs, and ﬁnancial data can be downloaded on a timely
basis to a cell phone and are viewed via specially designed
programs.
• Audio/video/television streaming service — Such services are enabled
by 2.5G or 3G cellular networks and wireless broadcasting net-
works. Online music subscription services are also available for
cell phone users in the United States.
2.5.2
Second-Generation Smart Phone Applications
The rapid advancements in wireless technologies have resulted in
a broader spectrum of data-centric applications and services. Some
of them have been commercialized in a few countries; many more
remain in the research or trial stages. Many second-generation smart
phone applications require signiﬁcantly higher data rates than ﬁrst-
generation smart phone applications. Below is a list of these smart
phone applications and services.
• Voice over IP (VoIP) or voice over wireless IP (VoWIP) — VoIP refers to
the packet switching telephony technology used on the Internet.
Compared with conventional landline PSTN phone service, VoIP
is more cost effective and has larger capacity. VoIP has already
been used extensively in today’s telephone networks. For mobile
wireless communications, instead of using cellular networks (e.g.,
base stations, mobile switching centers, etc.) to transmit digital
voice, VoWIP utilizes wireless LANs and wireless Metropolitan
Area Network MANs for the same purpose. Such services mainly

54
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
target enterprises that are interested in using an existing wireless
IP infrastructure to reduce the cost of phone calls.
• Mobile commerce includes online shopping, stock transaction,
location-based advertisement, location-based in-store shopping
assistance, location-based travel assistance, and so on. Mobile
commerce can be transactional or merely adaptive information
provision, where the adaptability lies in location information,
user’s business proﬁle, and related business logic. A number
of service vendors are already in the increasingly hot wireless
advertising market, such as Vindigo, Skygo, and AdvantGo.
• Mobile enterprise — Companies with a large portion of mobile
workers can use cell phones or smart phones to improve pro-
ductivity. Mobile workers generally refer to people frequently on
the go during work hours, such as employees of shipping and
delivery companies, police forces, pet control workers, and who-
ever needs to hit the road often. Usually mobile workers can
only update assignments at the ofﬁce. The only means of com-
munication on the road is via phone calls back to the ofﬁce. It
would be more efﬁcient if mobile workers could have real-time
access to backend business information so they can take advan-
tage of dynamic scheduling. Moreover, an intelligent application
running on a smart handheld used by mobile workers can auto-
matically determine the most suitable assignment for a worker,
thus lowering the cost of transportation and labor. For example, a
taxi company in Singapore uses a location-based wireless system
to dispatch cab drivers to the nearest customers in real time [4].
This is likely to occur in a variety of business sectors that are con-
cerned with dynamic scheduling of workers as an effort to reduce
operational cost.
• Mobile gaming — The mobile multiplayer gaming service may have
a good chance to mature when 3G is widely deployed, or ad hoc
gaming utilizing ad hoc wireless networks is technically and eco-
nomically possible. In spite of the fact that a few critical issues
remain to be resolved, such as the small cell phone display, the
mobile gaming market is poised to grow rapidly. According to

The Next Wave of Computing
55
an estimate by Frost & Sullivan in 2003, the European mobile
gaming market is expected to increase from a little more than
$800 million to a massive $7 billion by 2006. Despite the unsuc-
cessful launch of Nokia’s N-Gage, other newer models in this series
have managed to gain substantial ground among mobile gamers.
In addition, the two leading game device vendors, Nintendo and
Sony, have announced the release of portal game devices, both
with some sort of built-in wireless network capability.
• Mobile music — Motivated by the enormous success of online
music subscription services, some mobile network operators,
cell phone manufacturers, and Internet content providers have
teamed up to offer music download services for cell phone users.
The quality of audio playback on cell phones will be improved
as well.
• Remote access provides secure access to a remote network, such
as enterprise networks, or allows the user to watch and control
a remote site through a virtual private network (VPN) or other
secure transports.
• Remote monitoring — Sensors embedded in the environment at a
remote site will be able to respond to wireless signals. An industry
forum, ZigBee [5], has been formed for the standardization of such
applications.
• Mobile wallet and mobile ticketing — In this application scenario, a
smart phone serves as a payment device. It can be used to order
electronic tickets by sending an SMS to a service number, or the
user can simply wave it at a wireless enabled POS for small pur-
chases. For example, in Helsinki, Finland, people commuting by
the city transport system can use SMS to buy tickets from a GSM
cell phone. A special code is sent back to the cell phone and used
for validation at the entrance of the transport system. Similar sys-
tems are used in Japan, where the electronic ticket is a dot-matrix
bar code. SK Telecom, the largest mobile network operator in
South Korea, offers some cell phones that can be used to purchase
beverages from vending machines and pay for gasoline.

56
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Mobile social networking applications may leverage the mobile wire-
less capability of cell phones to augment person-to-person com-
munication or group communication and collaboration within
a community. For example, location-based social networking
applications can ﬁnd physically proximate people sharing similar
interests.
• Mobile ID/key is a cell phone that can be used as a personal elec-
tronic ID, such as student ID, company ID, conference badge,
driver license, door key, or car key; to gain access to a building
or parking lot; to automatically log in to a computer system; to
borrow books from a library; and so on. User’s identity data can be
stored in a smart card or in the phone’s secure storage. As for iden-
tify authentication, in addition to the traditional PIN/password
approach, some biometric schemes such as ﬁngerprint matching
and iris matching have become available on some PDAs. Some
software vendors offer voiceprint applications for mobile devices.
The applications and services listed above suggest that smart
phones can play a signiﬁcant role in realizing those otherwise impos-
sible tasks or next generation mobile computing. With quite a few
ﬂedging wireless technologies on the horizon, more applications and
services are destined to appear in the mobile world and bestow free-
dom of communication and computing to the next unprecedented
degree.
2.6 The Vision of Next-Generation Mobile Computing
The discussion on smart phones and the trend of convergence in the
preceding section focuses on the mobile device side in association
with a range of applications and services regarding ﬁrst-generation
(multifunction) and second-generation (cellular plus PAN access)
smart phones. How will mobile wireless networks evolve in the
next 5 to 10 years? What is the impact of ubiquitous wireless net-
works on our daily life? To answer these questions, researchers

The Next Wave of Computing
57
and practitioners are looking into new-generation mobile computing
systems, communication networks, and applications and services.
2.6.1
Pervasive Computing
The concept of pervasive computing has been brieﬂy introduced in
Chapter 1. Pervasive computing is the future of mobile computing.
The fundamental difference that separates pervasive computing from
other visions of computing is that it emphasizes the relationships
between three basic entities: people, computers, and environments.
People are working or living in environments with large quantities
of connected computers, visible or invisible. The use of these mobile
or ﬁxed computers is so natural and unobtrusive that we do not even
notice their existence. Not only do environments assist us in accom-
plishing our tasks in an automatic and well-coordinated way, but we
also inﬂuence the characteristics and dynamics of our environments.
The following is a list of key conceptual components of pervasive
computing:
• Embedded computing — Our physical environment is embedded
with many small intelligent computing devices, spreading to
nearly every corner of our daily life. Here the notion of “embed-
ded” implies a more general meaning of functional integration
and interoperation as opposed to the common understanding of
embedded systems. In the realm of pervasive computing, we do
not adapt to the space surrounding us; we do not need to know
which application to use, where they are, what they can do, and
how they can do what they do. Instead, the space adapts to us.
• Ubiquitous data access — Wireless and wired connectivity are
always available anywhere from any mobile devices. Because
knowledge of embedded devices is not required in order for us to
take advantage of them, the focus is shifted from smart devices
to smart objects, which embody data models that encapsulate
attributes, patterns, and any other relevant information of various
operations a user may perform.

58
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Mobility and adaptability — Both smart devices and their users are
mobile; the geographical locations may change dynamically at
varying speeds and in diverse scopes. In addition, other factors
to pervasive computing may also change, such as environmen-
tal context and user’s physical and psychological conditions.
The computing systems embedded in the user and environments
have to facilitate undisruptive mobility and adapt to internal
and external physical and computing dynamics expeditiously and
inconspicuously.
• Extensibility and scalability — Open interfaces between smart
devices and networks allow the computing environment to be
extended and intelligently cooperate with newly deployed devices
and services. Data objects are frequently transferred and converted
automatically to allow information sharing on a very large scale
enabled by widely used open data service platforms such as Web
Services.
No doubt this brave vision of pervasive computing poses a num-
ber of challenges to researchers in both the wireless industry and
academia. Some of the interesting issues pertaining to the aforemen-
tioned conceptual components are listed below:
• Embedding a huge number of smart computing devices in envi-
ronments requires rethinking of system design with regard to
power consumption, user interface, network capability, storage,
and software architecture.
• Ubiquitous data access calls for integration of various wireless and
wired networks and open data access interfaces. Taking advan-
tage with multiple wireless links from different data sources at
the same time, one will be able to obtain rich data from different
circumstances, enriching the user’s experience.
• The objective of context aware should be maintained throughout
the design of mobile wireless networks, systems, and smart devices
to support mobility and adaptability.

The Next Wave of Computing
59
• The software infrastructure of pervasive computing must be open
and extensible to allow convenient and effective interpersonal and
inter-device communication, as well as scalable data collection,
processing, and dissemination.
Pervasive computing is a very broad area that subsumes many dis-
ciplines of computer science. In the context of smart-phone-based
mobile computing, the focus of the book is on the role of a smart
phone in the future mobile world and how it will engage in a large
set of applications and services with emerging wireless technologies
and networks. Among those smart computing devices that will exist
and cooperate with each other in the pervasive computing paradigm,
smart phones are most likely to be able to become a universal com-
puting and communication platform for potential mobile wireless
services and applications, thereby gaining enormous popularity in
people’s daily lives. The following discussion is centered on the tech-
nological trend of smart phones and related issues in the context of
next-generation mobile computing.
A smart phone, or a universal mobile terminal, relies on its sur-
rounding wireless networks, such as cellular networks, wireless LANs,
Bluetooth PAN, wireless MANs, and wireless sensor networks, to
operate. Thus, building reliable, high-performance, and secure wire-
less networks becomes an issue equally important as the issue of
mobile terminal design. Additionally, both wireless networks and
mobile terminals would be completely useless if no viable appli-
cations and services were offered to the user or subscriber. The
three components of network infrastructure, mobile terminals, and
applications and services comprise a tripod of mobile computing.
As shown in the preceding sections, each component of mobile
computing itself is undergoing drastic changes. Nonetheless, the
vision of next-generation mobile computing is quite clear and can
be summarized as follows (Figure 2.9):
• Convergence of mobile access — We will see a blend of wireless tech-
nologies being used in the business world and people’s daily lives.
More signiﬁcantly, system components and network elements

60
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Cellular Networks
Wireless LAN
Access Point
Sensor 
networks
Ultra Wide 
Band
Cellular
InfraRed
WiMax
GPS
Zigbee
Figure 2.9
The vision of mobile computing.
utilizing those technologies will be well coordinated and inter-
operable, prompting the use of some converged mobile terminals
that are able to provide applications and services with a set of
systematically integrated hardware and software components.
• Pervasiveness of mobile intelligence — Because wireless is every-
where, access to backend systems and networks will become
ubiquitous. In addition to providing always-on, always-available
network connectivity, a key challenge in this regard is that the
services and applications must be unobtrusive, meaning that the

The Next Wave of Computing
61
system of well-coordinated wireless components must be smart
enough to choose the best way to accommodate a user’s needs,
and this process must be completely transparent to the user. In
other words, the user will not need to explicitly use the system
any more; instead, the system will help the user achieve a task
automatically and intelligently.
The inner circle in Figure 2.9 depicts a few wireless technologies
that may interface to the center of the picture, a smart phone. The
outer circle shows surrounding environments of the smart phone,
whereby mobile devices, consumer electronics, sensory devices,
wired network devices, and wireless infrastructures interconnect with
each other through a range of wireless networks. Devices in this big
picture can be categorized into a number of classes as follows:
• Mobile devices, including smart phones, PDAs, cell phones, lap-
top computers, handheld PCs, table PCs, and specialized mobile
devices used in various industries
• Instrumental devices, including wireless sensors, actuators, RFID
tags, in-car sensors, and so on
• Wired network devices, including networked desktop computers,
network switches, routers, printers, scanners, wireless access
points, wireless switches, interface adaptors, and specialized
computers used in various industries
• Consumer electronics, including televisions, DVD players, cam-
corders, digital cameras, VCRs, stereo systems, set-top boxes,
home theaters, audio recorders, portable music players, portable
game devices, mobile game devices, and watches, among others
• Home appliance, including microwave ovens, refrigerators, cook-
ers, washing machines, dishwashers, coffee makers, heaters, air
conditioners, vacuum cleaners, clocks, lamps, security systems,
landline telephones, cordless phones, and so on.
The trend of convergence of mobile access suggests uniﬁed access
from a smart phone to surrounding wireless devices, whereas the

62
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
pervasiveness of mobile intelligence represents how data are col-
lected, processed, and disseminated among all the components in
a mobile environment.
2.6.2
Convergence of Mobile Access
Mobile communication and computing are usually considered two
different arenas. In the business world, they are two industries.
The mobile communication industry provides voice communica-
tion using cell phones via the backend cellular networks. Parties
in the mobile communication industry are mobile network opera-
tors, mobile device manufacturers, and mobile software vendors. The
mobile computing industry is part of the general computer industry,
offering a portable computing platform and data access using hand-
held devices, laptop computers, and tablet computers that may or
may not need to access wired and wireless data networks. Internet
protocol (IP) is the dominant network protocol over almost all phys-
ical networks. The mobile computing industry consists of nearly all
sectors in the computer industry, including computer hardware man-
ufacturers, software vendors, IP network device manufacturers, and
IP network access providers.
In the more general technological terminology, mobile commu-
nication and computing are still two distinct areas. Mobile com-
munication or, strictly speaking, mobile wireless communication
concentrates on the communication aspect, primarily on the phys-
ical and data link layers, and enabling hardware technologies in
chip design. Mobile wireless networks range from cellular networks
to wireless LANs to Bluetooth to any other networks utilizing radio
signals. Conversely, mobile computing is primarily concerned with
issues at the network and transport layers and with mobile appli-
cations and services. It emphasizes building computing systems to
support mobility at a variety of scales.
The rapid advancements of communication and computing tech-
nologies eventually led to the convergence of communication
and computing, which is currently taking place across the entire
mobile computing paradigm. Communication networks and IP data

The Next Wave of Computing
63
networks are converging into a logically uniﬁed mobile network that
allows vertical handoff and tight data integration. For example, inte-
gration of cellular networks and wireless LANs essentially makes it
possible for wireless phone calls to be handled more ﬂexibly and cost
effectively via wireless LAN hotspots. Cellular data services are nec-
essary to ensure wide area wireless Internet access when a wireless
LAN hotspot is not available close by. The coexistence of Bluetooth,
wireless LAN, and other WPAN networks is technically conceivable.
Research on challenging issues in this domain such as mobility sup-
port, distributed resource management, service discovery, signaling
protocols, QoS provisions, and billing and accounting is underway.
A general mobile access abstraction layer, arguably mobile IP, is
needed to enable mobility across different wireless networks.
Moreover, handheld mobile devices will converge to leverage
mobility. Smart phones will become the universal mobile terminal to
interface with both communication and computing networks on-the
go. The functionality supplied by a smart phone will be far richer
than a simple combination of phone calls and PDA organizers. On
the hardware side, rather than simply laying out many chips for dif-
ferent radios on the handset, a smart phone will be able to engage in
a number of wireless networks with the very same radio chip set. On
the software side, smart phone software will be designed to take full
advantage of the convergence of communication and computing to
make the smart phone more adaptable to changing environments.
Applications and services in mobile computing are also set to con-
verge in many respects. Voice communication will be augmented by
instant messaging, e-mail, videoconferencing, landline telephony
services, and mobile gaming. Mobile payment services can be an
essential element of music download applications, online television,
sports broadcasting services, and digital art and document sale ser-
vices. A mobile application will be able to post text and photographs
taken by a built-in camera to web blogs and wiki web sites. (Wiki
is a web application server technology that allows web surfers to
directly edit hosted web pages using a web browser and can be
used as a web-based collaboration tool among web users; the most
famous wiki site is wikipedia [http://www.wikipedia.org/].) The very

64
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
same application can also pull in the latest news, weather, stock
quotes, enterprise calendar, and location-based business information
via really simple syndication (RSS), a lightweight XML-based content
syndication protocol. Interoperability of applications and services on
multiple mobile terminals is likely to be enabled by XML-based web
services.
The convergence of mobile wireless networks, mobile terminals,
and mobile applications and services has begun to have a tremen-
dous impact on the way we perceive mobile wireless environments.
Regardless of the underlying wireless networks, mobile terminals, or
applications and services, optimized mobile access for a particular
operation is always needed and should always be available. Wired
networks will also be involved in the converged mobile computing
paradigm, serving as a substantial backhaul of the IP networks.
2.6.3
Limitations of Convergence
Convergence of mobile access is not a cure for everything. It has its
inherent technical and nontechnical limitations. On the mobile ter-
minal side, simply juxtaposing quite a few function sets into the same
device may not always result in sizable business success. In many
cases, simple and easy-to-use single-function models are preferred by
users over multifunction combos. Likewise, converged networks and
applications may cause inﬂexibility and reliability issues, particularly
in the mobile wireless domain. In addition, the needs of people from
different cultures and social background are sometimes too diverse to
allow the use of converged systems, making it practically impossible
to build converged systems and networks in a cost-effective way. The
key to overcoming these limitations is to strike a balance between
diversity and convergence based on relevant technical factors and
user analyses. To achieve this goal, design tradeoffs are inevitable, as
has been the case in the evolution of many other technological seg-
ments. Chapter 7 (Mobile Application Challenges) addresses these
issues in more detail.

The Next Wave of Computing
65
2.6.4
Pervasiveness of Mobile Intelligence
Another trend in mobile computing is mobile intelligence deeply
immersed in the computing environment.
Mobile intelligence
refers to the schemes and techniques incorporated into the mobile
application and service architecture that utilize a wide range of
datasets in surrounding wireless networks to facilitate context
awareness, decision making, location awareness, and user pro-
ﬁle awareness. Convergence in mobile access makes it easy for
an application or a service to connect to various wireless net-
works, whereas pervasive mobile intelligence harnesses ubiquitous
mobile access to assist users in adapting to the surrounding envi-
ronment, interacting with others, and enriching their personal
experiences. In some sense, the trend of pervasiveness of mobile
intelligence can be attributed to the evolution of pervasive com-
puting, which, as explained in Chapter 1, is to extend mobile
computing into a broader vision dealing with the physical envi-
ronments of numerous wireless computing devices and providing
ubiquitous mobile access. Because of the massive, highly vary-
ing data available in different wireless networks, it is not feasible
to capture every aspect of each mobile computing operation; the
data has to be collected, interpreted, and exchanged in a way that
adapts to the user’s context; on the other hand, such a hetero-
geneous computing environment, along with varying physical envi-
ronments, may provide a valuable opportunity for an application
or a service to leverage immersive computing and communica-
tion embedded in physical environments, an apparent Holy Grail
that could nevertheless have a phenomenal impact on people’s
lives.
Pervasive mobile intelligence can be applied to many scenarios,
including enabling ubiquitous mobile access, context-aware infor-
mation retrieval and processing, and large-scale data collection and
dissemination. In each case, the mobile software infrastructure on
both the network side and terminal side embodies the intelligence
that is invisible to the end user.

66
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2.6.4.1
Enabling Ubiquitous Mobile Access
The coexistence and integration of heterogeneous wireless networks
require a reliable and efﬁcient system to support ubiquitous mobile
access, as well as mobility and authentication, authorization, and
accounting (AAA). Moreover, such a system should be unobtrusive
to the user. Imagine a saleswoman with a smart phone walking into
a technical conference session while text-messaging her boss back
at the company’s headquarters. The smart phone will be able to
quickly ﬁnd all conference attendees who are current customers of
the company (assuming they agree to expose this information to
other conference attendees). At the same time, the saleswomen may
use the smart phone to pull in other useful information, such as
which conference sessions they have attended and what questions
they have raised during those sessions. With a little help from the
customer relation management (CRM) software at the company’s
headquarters, the saleswoman could come up with a business plan
that incorporates issues raised during the conference sessions and
products of the company. She may then send messages or voice mails
to selected customers in the room asking for a brief meeting sometime
later. This application scenario may take place in a location where
many wireless technologies such as cellular networks, wireless LAN,
and Bluetooth are being used in a more systematic way. The software
on the mobile terminal scans the data ﬂowing among these wireless
networks to ﬁnd the most likely sales targets and presents to the user
accordingly. Challenging issues in this regard are privacy and possi-
ble spamming; there must be a well-deﬁned mechanism that allows
users to decide whether or not to expose speciﬁc personal or sensi-
tive business data to others or to receive unsolicited messages from
others. (Mobile privacy issues are discussed in Chapter 5.) Moreover,
this decision-making process itself must be unobtrusive.
2.6.4.2
Context-Aware Information Retrieval and Processing
The notion of context awareness was brieﬂy discussed in Chapter 1.
Context-aware information retrieval and processing deals primarily
with determining the most appropriate context proﬁle based on a
collection of knowledge and data in the computing, communication,

The Next Wave of Computing
67
and physical environment. A list of suggested actions is made avail-
able to the user afterwards. The need for context-aware information
retrieval and processing originates from the desire to make use of
vast quantities of pervasive information and knowledge for effective
decision-making. For example, when a user with a smart phone is
driving down a highway, the smart phone will be able to detect that
the user is moving at a speed of more than 60 miles per hour. The
context will be identiﬁed as “driving” in this case. For safety reasons,
whenever there is an incoming phone call, the smart phone will
automatically turn on the car’s microphone and speaker and will
use them as input and output components (they are connected to
the smart phone over some wireless connections), instead of using
the smart phone’s built-in microphone and speaker. In this exam-
ple, the context is determined quite easily, but in the real world it is
often difﬁcult to accurately and quickly determine the context based
on uncertain factors.
2.6.4.3
Large-Scale Data Collection and Dissemination
Large-scale data collection and dissemination are very common in
a pervasive computing environment, where many small wireless
devices such as sensors, actuators, and RFID tags, as well as smart
phones and computers form a very large, heterogeneous distributed
database. Numerous wireless networks are interconnected with each
other to allow query processing over the large distributed database.
To make this procedure more efﬁcient and scalable, in-network query
processing with coordinated nodes in the networks is necessary.
These interconnected wireless networks are also referred to as a wire-
less grid [6]. Data can be collected locally or remotely from a wide
range of wireless devices in different settings as diverse as wireless sen-
sors in a terrestrial area, ad hoc smart phones within an urban area,
RFIDs of products and palettes in a huge warehouse, consumer infor-
mation appliances in a home data network, and even from people
with wearable computers.
Figure 2.10 highlights the relationship between the two directions
of next-generation mobile computing. Many aspects, including those
of pervasive computing, are still in the very early stages of research

68
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Converged 
Mobile
Access
Converged 
Network 
Infrastructure 
Support
Converged 
Mobile 
Terminal 
Support
Converged 
Application 
and Services 
Support
Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
(WPAN, WLAN, WWAN, the Internet, …)
Context Aware Information 
Retrieval, processing, and 
Operations
Ubiquitous 
Access
Large Scale Data
Collection,
Dissemination
Wireless Internet Applications
Remote Access and Control
Location Based Services
Mobile Multimedia 
Mobile Commerce
Mobile Commerce
Pervasive Mobile Intelligence
Figure 2.10 Conceptual diagram of the vision of mobile computing.
and development and are far from maturity. While mobile comput-
ing promises to offer robust, unobtrusive, and open access to any
data from any devices, everywhere, all the time, the ﬁrst practical
step, particularly for the mobile wireless industry in the near term,
is to combine existing wireless networks and mobile devices into an
interoperable computing and communication environment to allow
open access to relevant data and to offer feature-rich applications
and services on converged smart phones that satisfy the need for
high productivity of mobile professionals.
2.7 Mobile Computing Challenges
The research and development of next-generation mobile computing
is at a crucial stage. The answer to the question of whether the vision
is solely hype or a potential step toward augmented user experience
and improved productivity remains unclear as many challenging

The Next Wave of Computing
69
issues in this domain have yet to be addressed. To this end, the
vision of next-generation mobile computing essentially encompasses
cutting-edge research and development in a number of directions.
Some of these efforts have demonstrated dramatic achievements and
that are being commercialized by industry practitioners. The last sec-
tion of this chapter presents a summary of these research directions,
as well as some emerging mobile wireless applications that utilize
smart phones to operate in a variety of circumstances. The empha-
sis here is on the need and motivation of the technological trend,
rather than the technical details of these research issues, which are
thoroughly discussed in the next chapter. The remaining chapters
will further discuss these issues.
2.7.1
Integration of Wireless and Wired Networks
The notion of networks in the context of computing technology
has a very broad meaning beyond common IP-based data networks
and cellular networks. Let’s ﬁrst take a look at the networks cur-
rently available. On a very large scale, the Internet, of course, is
the most widely used network. The Internet is actually a network
of networks around the globe. Other networks include the cellular
networks, such as the 2G cdmaOne, GSM, DAMPS, 2.5G GPRS and
EDGE, and early 3G networks, which have managed to attract bil-
lions of subscribers collectively. There are numerous civilian radio
networks such as ham (amateur) radio and the two-way radios used
by law enforcement personnel. There are also many commercial and
home wireless LANs that allow people to connect to the Internet.
Wireless sensor networks have been deployed to islands, forests, and
even glaciers to monitor the environment and inhabitants. Security
surveillance video networks are commonly used to monitor streets,
buildings, stores, and other critical areas. Television cable networks
send analog and digital programs to home users. PSTN provides the
very basic means of voice communication via landline telephones.
Communication satellites are used to transmit voice, data, radio, and
video to receivers throughout the world, and are used for militant
purposes as well. The vision of next-generation mobile computing

70
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
foresees that not only will all these networks be interconnected but
also those devices that currently do not have any network inter-
faces will be connected and possibly remotely controlled. Though
this scenario seems overwhelmingly far from reality, some portion
of it has begun to take place in our daily lives. As an example, an
obvious trend in the mobile wireless industry is the integration of
two of the most popular networks: cellular networks and wireless
LANs hotspots.
There has been some confusion with regard to WiFi and wireless
LAN among industry professionals and the general public. In fact,
many people think WiFi and Wireless LAN are the same, but they are
not. The term WiFi refers to the WiFi Alliance, which is a nonproﬁt
international association formed in 1999 to certify the interoper-
ability of wireless LAN products based on IEEE 802.11 speciﬁcations
[7]. The year 2003 witnessed the great success of the free-spectrum,
high-bandwidth WiFi technology. As of 2005, WiFi has become the
predominant wireless home networking technology, thanks to the
dropping prices of 802.11b and 802.11a wireless access points and
WiFi interface cards. Many small businesses consider WiFi as an
alternative to wired enterprise networking solutions.
Wireless LAN technology is inherently a local area network tech-
nology because the 802.11 protocols are essentially designed to clone
Ethernet protocols in a wireless environment. The typical opera-
tional mode of a wireless LAN network is infrastructure based, where
every mobile terminal communicates with a wireless access point
that in turn connects to the Internet. The WiFi network used by
the general public commonly works in this operational mode. In
the United States, many such small-scale WiFi networks (also known
as WiFi hotspots) have been established in airports, hotels, coffee
shops, hospitals, schools, shopping malls, ofﬁce buildings, and res-
idences. For example, Chicago’s Sears Tower, the highest building
in the United States, will soon have WiFi access on all ﬂoors within
the 110-story skyscraper. Another operational model of a wireless
LAN is ad hoc based in that two mobile terminals communicate
with each other directly without a central access point. Moreover,
a number of mobile terminals in ad hoc mode can coordinate with

The Next Wave of Computing
71
each other and self-organize into multihop communities (namely,
a wireless mesh), in which mobile terminals must rely on others to
relay messages.
WiFi has become the ﬁrst choice of mobile data access solution
for people on the go. As a consequence, many laptop computers now
have built-in WiFi support. It is also not unusual to see PDAs shipped
with a built-in WiFi interface. Smart phones will deﬁnitely follow
the same trend (already some models provide built-in WiFi capabil-
ity). Internet access can be achieved using either WiFi hotspot access
or cellular data access. For voice communications, besides cellular
network access, voice over wireless LAN technology has emerged to
replace traditional PBX within some enterprise networks. To com-
plement the service offerings, mobile network operators have begun
to consider integrating cellular networks with WiFi hotspots to allow
cell phones users to roam freely between these two types of networks.
This is a strategy of mobile network operators striving to maintain a
good position in competition with WiFi data access providers (i.e.,
Wireless Internet Service Providers, or WISPs) that may offer voice
communication in the future. The beneﬁt of integrating cellular
networks and WiFi hotspots are summarized below:
• The bandwidth of WiFi Internet access (11 Mbps for 802.11b and
54 Mbps for 802.11a and g) is much higher than what 2.5G and
3G cellular networks can provide. As long as a user stays within
the transmission range of an access point, WiFi is apparently a
better choice for Internet access than cellular data access. Tak-
ing into account the volume-based billing model of cellular data
access versus the simple ﬂat rate of the WiFi hotspot model, users
are more likely to prefer WiFi data access that resembles wired
Internet access in many ways. Of course, this is a subtle issue
largely affected by a number of nontechnical factors such as WiFi
infrastructure costs and billing plans.
• The security concerns of WiFi can be mitigated by combining cel-
lular network security mechanism with WiFi. Wireless LAN stan-
dards are well known to have security vulnerabilities in their key
generation and distribution mechanisms, which has considerably

72
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
hindered the use of wireless LANs in critical environments. (The
IEEE 802.11i security standard for 802.11 wireless LAN addresses
wireless LAN security.) Cellular networks, on the other hand, can
provide a high level of encryption and authentication. The ubiq-
uity of cellular networks will further help WiFi to be accepted by
more companies and organizations.
• VoWIP has the potential to complement or compete with cellular
communications, and the cost will be signiﬁcantly lower than cel-
lular communications for an enterprise or for consumers making
long distance calls via a wireless mesh network. Roaming among
WiFi hotspots on a very large scale poses a signiﬁcant challenge
to VoWIP providers, though.
Open issues with regard to the integration of cellular networks
and WiFi hotspots are, to name a few, seamless voice and data access
roaming between WiFi hotspots and cellular base stations, cell phone
dual connection management, and AAA integration. As most WiFi
hotspots connect to a backend wired network, some dedicated gate-
way servers are required at the border of cellular networks and wired
networks to manage mobility-related data of a mobile terminal. In
addition, voice communication services of wireless mesh networks
can be fused with cellular services as well. These interesting issues sur-
rounding the integration of cellular networks and WiFi are discussed
further in Chapter 5 (Mobile Networking Challenges).
Aside from the integration of cellular and WiFi hotspots, some
researchers have proposed integrating cellular- and ad hoc-based wire-
less LANs to eliminate any wireless LAN access points. Such an idea
can be applied to a range of application scenarios for data access, such
as sports stadiums, battleﬁelds, and remote areas where it is more or
less impractical to establish a centralized network infrastructure and
the majority of communication is performed among mobile termi-
nals within the ad hoc network. Instead of establishing an outbound
Internet connection from each mobile terminal, a more efﬁcient
scheme is to choose some mobile terminals to serve as the designated
proxy for Internet access and let others use this proxy for Internet

The Next Wave of Computing
73
access. Research issues regarding this scenario include how to choose
mobile terminals as proxies and how to manage them to achieve sys-
tem optimality that could be quantiﬁed using some metrics for in
terms of high performance, fairness, and fault tolerance.
Other wireless networks may also be integrated to allow cross-
network communication and cooperation. For example, the coex-
istence of Bluetooth and 802.11b wireless LANs is very common in
a WPAN. Because they both use the unlicensed 2.4-GHz spectrum
band, interference may occur in some cases when simultaneous radio
transmissions are underway.
A galaxy of new applications and services will emerge to leverage
these heterogeneous networks to deliver ubiquitous mobile access,
monitoring, control, and analysis for consumers. Those applications
that are impossible prior to this wave of mobile computing for either
technical or economical reasons may ﬁnally become a reality. Among
these, mobile multimedia and mobile commerce have already begun
to reach the general public; nevertheless, many challenging issues
still exist with regard at the network layer and application layer. We
will revisit these issues in the next chapter.
2.7.2
Mobile Security and Privacy
Security in mobile computing is always a hot issue. 2G and 3G cel-
lular systems are designed to be secure to some extent for voice
communication, due to the encryption that makes eavesdropping
quite difﬁcult. Because data service is about to take off in the mobile
wireless world with the highly anticipated forthcoming 3G deploy-
ments, security problems that we have experienced on the Internet
will appear in the mobile world. An example is the malicious e-mail
virus attack on 110 million cell phones operated by NTT DoCoMo as
early as 2001. In this incident, cell phones that were infected by open-
ing an e-mail continuously dialed national emergency numbers or
froze up. In August 2004, Bradoor became the ﬁrst Windows Mobile
worm to infect ARM-based Pocket PCs. Once infected, the device is
fully under the control of the attacker, who can issue commands

74
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
remotely, display messages on the screen, or download and upload
ﬁles. Worms targeting other operating systems have also been found,
such as Cabir against some Symbian cell phones and LibertyCrack
against Palm OS. SMS spam has reportedly grown signiﬁcantly in
some countries where mobile users rely more heavily on SMS than
voice calls. Other wireless technologies also have security problems.
Wireless LANs have long been criticized for the incredibly weak
security mechanism, which ironically boosted its wide acceptance.
Many Bluetooth-enabled cell phones are reported to be vulnerable
to certain short-range network attacks.
Security issues in mobile computing can be divided into four
major categories:
• Message interception and falsiﬁcation — Using sniffer software to
monitor and analyze wireless trafﬁc and inject falsiﬁed packets
into a stream to gain network access or affect legitimate commu-
nication
• Impersonation, identity theft and fraud — Using technical or social
engineering techniques to obtain authentication credentials of
legitimate users
• Mobile virus and device hijacking - Surreptitiously installing viruses,
worms, or Trojans into a mobile device such that the device can
be fully exposed to the attacker and controlled remotely
• Mobile network attack — Utilizing a number of compromised
mobile devices to launch a DOS attack against the wireless
network, effectively making the network unable to provide service
• Spamming — Sending a large volume of unsolicited SMS messages
or IM messages to users
• Phishing — An attack against e-mail users in order to steal sensitive
information; phishers usually send an e-mail to a user in which
they falsely claim to be an established, legitimate company such
as a credit card company or a bank, and; the embedded links in
the e-mail direct the user to a bogus website that looks very similar
to the legitimate company’s website

The Next Wave of Computing
75
The heterogeneous mobile wireless networks in place today make
it extremely difﬁcult to establish a common security framework to
address all the potential problems. In reality, security issues are
approached in a number of ways. Wireless network operators should
take the responsibility to secure communication channels for mes-
sage transfer and to offer strong authentication schemes for mobile
terminals and users. Mobile devices such as smart phones and PDAs,
along with their system software, should incorporate system-level
security to defeat viruses and network attacks. Services and appli-
cations offered by mobile network operators should be considered
as performing in a very likely insecure mobile environment and be
subject to strong authorization, authentication, and accounting pro-
cedures. In many cases, just as in the wired networks, addressing
security problems in the mobile world also involves nontechnical
issues, such as business strategies, political and culture concerns, and
social engineering.
Cryptography can help to ensure message conﬁdentiality by
applying encryption to the message. It can be done end-to-end, such
as in IPSec, or in the network. The problem of end-to-end encryption
is the overhead on mobile terminals. Because mobile devices do not
have computing power comparable to that of a desktop computer, it
would be impractical to apply the same end-to-end encryption used
on desktop computers to mobile devices.
Digital signatures can be used to ensure data integrity and authen-
tication. Usually the digital signature is generated by ﬁrst applying a
one-way hashing functions to the message body. If public-key cryp-
tography is used, the result (namely the hash code or hash) will be
signed with the private key of the sender. The digital signature will
then be appended to the message and sent to the recipient. To check
the integrity of the message, the recipient must ﬁrst use the pub-
lic key of sender to decrypt the digital signature. Any modiﬁcation
to the message body will cause a mismatch between the decrypted
digital signature and newly computed hash code. If secret-key cryp-
tography is used, then the sender will use a secret key to sign the
hash code, and the recipient will use the same secret key to regener-
ate the hash code. Message digest works in a similar but simpler way,

76
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
without providing encryption to the hash code. Nevertheless, the
one-way hash algorithms serve as the core of the approaches widely
used in the wired and wireless networks. Unfortunately, MD4, MD5,
SHA-0, and even SHA-1 have been reported to occasionally collide;
that is, two messages are hashed into the same code [8]. Although it
is still theoretically impractical to ﬁnd an alternative message for an
arbitrary hash code, the recent advancements of cryptography have
demonstrated that it might become possible someday.
Another signiﬁcant issue in the domain of mobile security is
authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA). Multiple ser-
vice providers might be involved in the process of dealing with these
issues for a mobile terminal. To date, a SIM card is widely used on
GSM cell phones as a unique ID that carries AAA information of the
user. Handling the AAA of a cell phone user is not a critical issue, as
the SIM card is always in the phone; however, the problem becomes
more difﬁcult to solve within the context of integrated heterogeneous
networks operated by different parties. Moreover, as mobile ad hoc
networks emerge to become a practical service in the future, issues
of AAA transition and transaction among mobile terminals will also
have to be addressed.
Mobile privacy is not the same as mobile security. A mobile sys-
tem may be secure at the expense of the user’s privacy. In essence,
mobile privacy refers to the total control of users over their personal
data that may be exposed to, collected, and used by other persons or
parties for a variety of reasons. Mobile privacy has become a major
concern in mobile computing, even more so when mobile wireless
networks and systems begin to be more pervasive in people’s daily
life. To this end, mobile privacy has been regarded as the Achilles
heel of pervasive computing [9]. Interestingly, some of the promis-
ing mobile services and applications tend to utilize more personal
information such as user’s location, history data, and user’s actions.
Mobile privacy could be a key barrier for the adoption of such services
if users are aware of these privacy threats (although they should be
informed anyway). The fundamental question, then, is how to draw
a line between full exposure of a user’s personal data and interactive
informed data sharing such that both mobile privacy and system

The Next Wave of Computing
77
design objectives can be fulﬁlled. Mobile security and privacy issues
are discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
2.7.3
Location-Awareness Mobile Computing
The freedom of mobility offered by mobile computing presents enor-
mous opportunities for innovative business services and applications.
One of the most promising opportunities is location-aware mobile
computing, which uses the mobile terminal or user’s geographic loca-
tion to provide value-added location-based services utilizing a wide
variety of wireless and wired technologies. For example, the world-
wide location-based services market is expected to rise to 3.6 billion
by the end of 2009, according to the research ﬁrm ABI.
The heart of location-aware mobile computing lies in mobile posi-
tioning, tracking, and analysis schemes based on various wireless
technologies. The term positioning in the context of location-aware
mobile computing refers to techniques for determining the geograph-
ical location of a mobile device or a user, indoors or outdoors. The
past, present, and estimated future positions of a mobile device or a
user are monitored by location-based services that combine position
data with other location-related information to enable context-aware
operations. The following is a list of location based mobile services
that are available or being deployed very soon.
• Emergency, such as E911 in the United States or E411 in Europe
• Authorized mobile user positioning, such as tracking the location
of a child
• Navigation, in association with GIS (Geographic Information
System)
• Real-time trafﬁc information updates, coupled with maps and
navigation
• Mobile workforce monitoring (i.e., logistical telematics) and real-
time scheduling, such as delivery service tracking, scheduling,
routing, and road assistance services

78
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Asset management, such as product tracking and positioning
• Location-based business searches in conjunction with mobile
advertisement
• Location-based message services, such as SMS within proximity
• Location-based computing service discovery and automatic con-
ﬁguration, such as ﬁnding the nearest WiFi hotspot or ad hoc
gaming network and making use of them.
When mobile users actively initiate a location-based service from
a mobile device, it is very likely that these users want to obtain
location-based information within their proximity. On the other
hand, mobile users could be passively tracked by a wireless network
that would indicate their position to someone. In both cases, the
mobile device must be location aware, and the network must have
an efﬁcient way to collect, compute, and analyze the locations of a
large number of mobile devices. For example, a smart phone with a
built-in GPS (such as the Motorola i730) will extend its use to another
level, especially for trip planning and driving assistance. With a built-
in WiFi interface on a smart phone, a user may be able to conduct
indoor mobile device positioning and ﬁnd WiFi-enabled printers in
a building.
Enabling positioning technologies for location-aware mobile
computing include cellular networks for outdoor positioning, GPS
for outdoor positioning, and a few indoor positioning approaches
utilizing various sensing technologies such as radiofrequency tags,
ultrasonics, wireless LAN, Bluetooth, and wireless sensor networks.
It should be noted that the positioning of a network device or a user
is also a complex issue in ﬁxed wired networks. Because IP addresses
normally serve as unique identiﬁers of computers in a wired network,
location-dependent IP address allocation information can be used to
locate the computer holding a speciﬁc IP address. Such a scheme
is also applicable in the mobile world, where IP plays a key role
in identifying mobile devices. Some of these positioning and track-
ing schemes are discussed further in Chapter 7 (Mobile Application
Challenges).

The Next Wave of Computing
79
Depending on the requirements of a location-aware application
and wireless networks infrastructure in place, one or more position-
ing techniques may be combined to allow both indoor and outdoor
positioning with desirable accuracy and response time at modest cost.
Furthermore, because a mobile user’s location is also context data,
location-based services can be fused with other context-aware opera-
tions, services, and applications to improve adaptability over context
changes. For example, a smart phone roaming into the range of a
wireless Internet web proxy server may silently switch to it for better
web access performance.
Location-aware mobile computing usually utilizes GIS to enrich its
applications and services. A GIS essentially consists of a multidimen-
sional map with numerous information overlays for a geographic
area. Like a telephone directory, GIS is a location-based information
database for mobile users. Any location-dependent information can
be compiled into a GIS for special purposes as diverse as business
strategies, political voting estimates, investment risk analysis, and
demography, among others.
2.7.4
Human-Computer Interface of Mobile Applications
Mobile computing imposes another profound level of challenges
on human-computer interfaces (HCIs). Because applications and
services are predominantly used on the move,
the interaction
between the user and the mobile terminal and between the user and
a backend service system must be sufﬁciently simple, convenient,
intuitive, ﬂexible, and efﬁcient. In addition, the user interface has to
be designed to save power if at all possible. The human-computer
interface incorporates far more than GUI design. Unlike desktop
computers that use a standard keyboard and a mouse as the pre-
dominant input devices and a monitor for display, user interfaces
of mobile terminals may support more input and display methods
such as keypad input or voice recognition, and other means of feed-
back, including LEDs, sound, and handset vibrations, in addition
to visual images and texts. More importantly, for desktop computers
HCI has been isolated from the variances of input and output devices

80
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
such that a word processor application on a desktop computer is
designed to work well with a monitor regardless of the monitor type
or size. This is not the case for mobile terminals. For example, a
smart phone may have a small keyboard as the input device. The
keyboard could have one letter per key or could have two or three
letters shared by one key. Or, the device may use a stylus for hand-
writing recognition, so users can write anywhere on the screen or
only within a text input area on the screen. Voice recognition is also
possible for device-based and network-based backend service inter-
actions. A mobile terminal may also have the capability to use the
built-in speaker or LED ﬂashlights to notify the user of state changes.
Beyond conventional means of HCI, recent research has addressed
multimodal interfaces, which combine two or more input modes of
body languages, such as body gestures, facial expression, and eyeball
movements, to facilitate effective communication between a user and
the computer. A wide range of recognition technologies are incor-
porated into multimodal interfaces, including speech recognition,
vision recognition, and biometrics. Furthermore, researchers in the
HCI area envisage futuristic multibiometric-multimodal-multisensor
(M3) systems that could interpret and respond to natural language
and user behaviors [10]. As multimodal interfaces continue to mature
and computation overhead keeps being reduced, applying these
approaches to mobile HCI is just a matter of time.
Key issues in the context of HCI are as follows:
• User interface design on a mobile device — A number of interleaved
factors that are intrinsic to mobile wireless networks and mobile
devices will affect the design of a user interface for a mobile appli-
cation. These factors are size, color depth, and resolution of the
display, battery time, weight of the device, wireless connection
bandwidth, link reliability, processor, capacity, etc.
• Coherent user interface design across multiple mobile devices — Due
to the lack of standardized representation layer of input and
output devices, a user interface has to be designed and imple-
mented on each type of targeting device. The layout of the GUI

The Next Wave of Computing
81
components and the operational logic must be consistent to allow
easy navigation and intuitive operations.
• Adaptive user interface design — The application and supporting
system software on a mobile device must be able to dynamically
optimize the user interface on the device, based on the hardware
conﬁguration of the mobile device and context of the running
application.
In contrast to the well-established design philosophy of desktop
application interfaces, in the mobile world no such guidelines exist.
Depending on the nature of an application or a service, different
aspects of the requirements are likely to be prioritized in favor of
design goals. As a universal mobile terminal, future smart phones
may simplify the user interface design by supplying a converged
hardware platform with a ﬂexible software infrastructure that allows
adaptive conﬁguration to meet the needs of disparate applications
and services. The software infrastructure is able to coalesce knowl-
edge and information obtained from diverse operations and represent
them as ﬁne-grained smart data objects to applications and services
in a coherent manner.
The traditional taxonomy of mobile devices treats a smart phone
as simply a multifunction cell phone with scarce data integration.
Such a conceptual understanding is too rigid to be applied to the
user interface design for future smart phones, as it fails to facili-
tate systematic and efﬁcient use of data gathering from users, other
devices, networks, and the surrounding environment. For example,
a smart phone that can download and play mp3 songs is not just a
combination of a cell phone and an mp3 player with distinct user
interfaces; rather, it may allow the user to ﬁnd people in adjacent
areas who are likely to share the same interest in a musical artist
by looking at a music download database. Then, the user may use
the integrated user interface to send instant messages, e-mails, or
whatever type of communication SMS to these people. In this sense,
a virtual mobile community can be built with data objects from
various sources.

82
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2.7.5
Context-Aware Software Design
The notion of context has a very broad meaning across many circum-
stances. It is generally deﬁned as any interrelated information, data,
knowledge, or event that represents a condition with respect to tem-
poral, spatial, and state change. Context is an extremely important
factor in mobile computing, as it well denotes the dynamic charac-
teristics of mobile computing, such as a mobile user’s location, status
of an operation, noise of the physical environment, etc. The idea of
context-aware mobile computing is to design systems, applications,
and services that take advantage of detected and inferred context data
to meet users’ needs in a more intelligent and unobtrusive fashion.
The following is a list of categories of context information generally
exposed in the domain of mobile computing:
• The environmental context includes such variables as temperature,
humidity, height, light, weather, noise, surrounding buildings
and objects, trafﬁc conditions, demographic information, and
history.
• The computing context includes static and dynamic computing
contexts. Static computing context includes computer identity,
CPU speed, capacity, storage space, display size, speaker volume,
device weight, remaining battery power, program size, wireless
connections, etc. Dynamic context includes free memory and
storage, network bandwidth and delay, available mobile access
points and their signal strength, adjacent mobile neighbors, com-
putational operation history, audio/video compression ratios and
transmission rate, CPU load, I/O rates, etc.
• The user context includes the user’s identity, geographic location,
body temperature, body and face proﬁle, gestures, social status,
and relationships, among others.
• The service context includes service level agreement,
billing
information, user account balance, usage patterns, and statis-
tics, etc.

The Next Wave of Computing
83
Context data from different categories may pertain to each
other. For example, the amount of transferred wireless data in the
computing category of context directly relates to the wireless data
quota deﬁned as part of the service contract, and the environmental
temperature, either indoor or outdoor, will obviously affect the user’s
body temperature, the power consumption of a mobile device, and
even wireless signal strength.
Context-aware mobile applications and service have been inten-
sively researched for many years. A number of prototypes have been
developed by researchers and industry practitioners. Earlier experi-
ments showed that context-aware mobile applications and services
may have a strong potential to be widely accepted by the masses.
Below are some examples of context-aware mobile applications and
services:
• Smart homes (context-aware home networks and systems) - The
network or system is able to adapt to the needs of the residents
for computing, communication, and entertainment by constantly
monitoring changes in their identities, behaviors, and comput-
ing operations. Perhaps the best example of a smart home is
Bill Gates’ “home of the future,” which reportedly can sense a
person entering a room and adjust the light, temperature, and
even the wall-mounted entertainment system for that person.
• Smart phones — A smart phone is able to leverage sensing tech-
nologies to detect a user’s surrounding environment, such as in a
movie theater or on the street, and to change its operations accord-
ingly. In addition, services and applications on a smart phone can
make use of a user’s computing proﬁle to provide personalized
information or user interfaces.
• Smart conferences (including smart display, smart presentation,
and smart meeting) — A sensory badge or a smart phone can be
used to identify a conference attendee. When an attendee walks
close to a display, preauthorized personal information regarding
the attendee will be shown on the screen, as well as information
regarding others he or she knows. Before a presentation, when the

84
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
presenter enters the room, the projector will display the presen-
ter’s information. Information about attendees who are asking the
presenter questions can be displayed as well. People chatting casu-
ally in the venue will be able to ﬁnd out more about each other
through the use of their smart phones. Some of these applications
were demonstrated at the 2004 Pervasive Computing conference.
• Location-based services — The location of a mobile device or a
mobile user is deﬁnitely a key context. Location-based services
incorporate such context data to provide personalized, geograph-
ically dependent services.
The quest of context-aware mobile computing lies primarily in
dealing with pertinent context data according to the needs of an
application or a service. Because of the vast amount of context data in
a mobile computing environment, context-aware systems, applica-
tions, and services must be able to address the following fundamental
issues:
• Accurately identify which context data sets are needed.
• Collect desired context data efﬁciently.
• Process context data against some patterns or rules.
• Adapt to context change or present options to the user.
To solve these problems, a good model of context data for a spe-
ciﬁc application or a service is needed. The model should determine
what context datasets are needed and by what means they should be
collected, as well as the underlying logic to determine the most appro-
priate context based on predeﬁned or self-learned rules. Like HCI in
mobile computing, context-aware applications and services also rely
heavily on the software infrastructure of a mobile device to operate.
Smart phones are expected to be among the ﬁrst mobile devices to
have context-aware applications and services implemented, partly
because it is by far the most pervasive mobile computing device in
our daily life.

The Next Wave of Computing
85
2.7.6
Low-Power Mobile Computing
The success of mobile computing hinges on battery and power con-
sumption technologies to a large extent. For a smart phone, the
talk time and standby time are always two of the most important
specs users are concerned with. After all, people choose to use mobile
devices because they can be used on the move, thus a power charge
may be possible only intermittently. The dominant power source for
mobile devices is a rechargeable battery. The types of mobile bat-
tery include Ni–Cd, Li–ion, Li–polymer, and the emerging fuel cell.
Unfortunately, throughout the history of computing, even though
many segments have demonstrated an amazing increase in com-
puting power, bandwidth, or capacity, battery technology has not
improved at the same pace. Within the box of a desktop computer
or a PDA are hardware components that are far more powerful than
they were only a few years ago. CPU speed, hard-disk capacity, and
network bandwidth are the most evident examples. For example,
it takes about 5 years to double the capacity of a hard disk and
3 years to double CPU processor speed. In contrast, battery technol-
ogy does not change that much over time: it has taken 30 years for
Ni–Cd battery to double its power. However, we may be on the verge
of a breakthrough in battery technology; some chemical, electrical
engineering, and interdisciplinary scholars have demonstrated the
use of some innovative materials and techniques to improve battery
life, such as using nuclear microbatteries that harness an incredi-
ble amount of energy released naturally from tiny bits of radioactive
material [11].
Table 2.3 provides a list of batteries commonly used for portable
devices. Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries are the most widely used bat-
teries in cell phones and PDAs. A Li-ion battery can usually supply
a talk time of about 3 to 5 hours. Fuel cell batteries have shown
the highest gravimetric and volumetric density in laboratories, but
commercial use is still at the very early stage.
Research shows on a laptop computer, about one third of the
power is consumed by the display, and another third by the CPU,
and 12% by the hard disks. On a cell phone or a smart phone,

86
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 2.3
Battery Technologies.
Battery Type
Used Since
Energy Density
Volume
Recharge
Charge and
(Wh/kg)
Density
Time
Discharge
(Wh/L)
(hours)
Cycle Life
Alkaline (AA)
1949
80–150
350
N/A
N/A
Rechargeable
1992
80
200–300
2–3
25–100
Alkaline
Sealed lead acid
1970
30
50–100
8–16
200–500
NiMH
1990
50–80
100
2–4
500
Ni–Cd
1950
40–60
50–100
1–1.5
1500
Li–ion
1991
100
250–300
3–4
500–1000
Li–polymer
1999
150–200
300–450
8–15
100–150
Fuel cell
2005
300–1000
600–1500
Simply use a
N/A
new cartridge
Source: Data from Buchmann [12] and Wikipedia [13].
wireless radio becomes a major factor. To tackle the power constraints
from the perspective of mobile computing, researchers have been
concentrating in two directions: low power computing and power
management.
2.7.6.1
Low-Power Mobile Computing
A signiﬁcant amount of effort has been devoted to reducing the power
consumptions of individual hardware components and applications
by incorporating low-power techniques into the design, develop-
ment, and implementation of mobile devices and applications. The
mobile device, constrained by the limited battery time, must be
power aware; it should be able to dynamically adjust the power
consumption of hardware components to extend operation time.
Also, mobile applications are designed with low power in mind
and should be power aware too. Applications should automatically
change, pause, or terminate power-intensive operations in order to
extend operation time. For example, when the battery of a smart
phone is quickly being drained by continuous wireless Internet access
via cellular networks, the wireless Internet application should switch

The Next Wave of Computing
87
to low-power mode, if any, to download text only, and start to use
more aggressive caching scheme for the mobile browser.
2.7.6.2
Power Management in Mobile Computing
Power management in mobile computing is concerned with, given
a limited power supply, making better use of limited battery power
by orchestrating the power usage of various hardware components
and corresponding applications. The goal of power management is
the overall systematic efﬁcient use of battery power, which can be
performed at the system and application levels. In both cases, a good
model that accurately proﬁles each component is necessary. Many
wireless network protocols in mobile computing have been designed
with power management in mind such as power-aware mobile ad hoc
routing protocols (Chapter 5 will talk about mobile ad hoc routing
in detail); in addition, a device can be put into power-save mode or
sleep mode after some idle time.
2.8 Notable Mobile Computing Projects
For years researchers and industry practitioners have actively been
working to develop pioneering prototype mobile computing systems
and networks in a number of interesting projects. Although some
of them are not directly related to smart phones and most are far
from being mature, they all invariably make use of emerging mobile
wireless technologies to enhance the user’s experience. Moreover,
these projects represent important research-and-development efforts
to identify the enormous potentials and fundamental limitations of
wireless technologies in the foreseeable future.
2.8.1
Oxygen
MIT Oxygen (http://oxygen.lcs.mit.edu/) is an effort geared toward
a human-centered, pervasive computing vision. Oxygen aims at

88
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
using a spectrum of technologies for the following themes:
• Distribution and mobility of user, data, and services
• Semantic content and related services
• Adaptation and change in response to whatever dynamics in a
network or a physical environment
• Information personalities in terms of privacy, security, and cus-
tomization
Oxygen identiﬁes three classes of devices in a mobile environ-
ment: embedded devices, called Enviro21s (E21s), which are embed-
ded in our homes, ofﬁces, and cars and are able to sense and affect our
immediate environment; handheld devices, called Handy21s (H21s),
which allow anywhere, anytime communication by various means;
and dynamic, self-conﬁguring networks (N21s) that effectively and
reliably connect those devices and other networks, as well as people,
services, and resources. Oxygen software that adapts to changes in
the physical environment and computing environment or in user
requirements (O2S) provides control and planning of abstraction
of mechanisms in response to these changes as well as leveraging
changes. Oxygen’s perceptual technologies are based on speech and
vision for interaction in a multimodal fashion.
A prototype Oxygen handheld device (H21) is equipped with a
microphone, a speaker, a camera, an accelerometer, and a display for
use with perceptual interfaces. It utilizes several hardware and com-
piler technologies to achieve low power computation. For example,
StreamIt is a language and high-performance compiler designed to
facilitate data streaming applications in Oxygen.
Oxygen’s network technologies include the Cricket indoor loca-
tion sensing system,
Intentional Naming System (INS), Self-
Certifying System (SFS), and Cooperative File System (CFS). Cricket
uses ultrasound sensing devices to position moving objects with very
high accuracy. Details of Cricket will be discussed in Chapter 7. INS
focuses on on-demand resource discovery and management; SFS and

The Next Wave of Computing
89
CFS provide secure access to a remote site over insecure networks
without introducing centralized control servers.
Similar projects focusing on building intelligent environment
with a variety of wireless technologies and perceptual/display tech-
nologies include Stanford iWork (http://iwork.stanford.edu/) and
Microsoft
EasyLiving
(http://research.microsoft.com/easyliving/).
A key function in such systems is localization and tracking of object
in an indoor environment. Aside from ultrasonic sensors used in
Cricket, 802.11 wireless LANs, Bluetooth, and RFID tags can also be
used in different settings under various constraints. It is also conceiv-
able that combining multiple wireless sensing technologies may yield
improve accuracy. Examples of such systems include Active Badge
(infrared based; http://www.uk.research.att.com/ab.html), Microsoft
RADAR (802.11 signal ﬁngerprint based) [14], and LANDMARC (RFID
based) [15]. Chapter 7 discusses these location sensing systems in
more detail.
2.8.2
Smart Dust
A major research direction of pervasive computing is wireless sen-
sor networks that potentially could be integrated into a general
wireless network infrastructure. The goal of the Smart Dust project
at the University of California, Berkeley, is to create massively dis-
tributed wireless sensor networks consisting of hundreds to many
thousands of tiny sensor nodes (motes) and some number of inter-
rogators to query the network and retrieve in-network processed
sensor data of interest [16,17]. The sensor nodes will be completely
autonomous in the sense that they coordinate with each other to
form an intelligent distributed network. Each mote will contain an
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) sensor, optical transceiver,
signal processing and control circuitry, and a power supply based
on thick-ﬁlm batteries and solar cells, all in a package the size of
a cubic millimeter. Because of their extremely small size and light
weight, some motes can even ﬂoat in the air, buoyed by air currents.
The motes can directly communicate with a base station or work in
a peer-to-peer fashion. The base station can be ﬁxed or attached to

90
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
a handheld device. The challenges of building Smart Dust systems
lies in two categories: power consumption and free space network-
ing. To achieve extremely low-power operation on a mote, intelligent
control of hardware subsystems and applications are needed. In a
centralized single-hop routing scheme, every mote communicates
directly with a base station. A base station uses a corner-cube retrore-
ﬂector (CCD) image sensory array or complementary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) camera to accommodate sensor data trans-
mission from many motes at the same time. For those motes that
do not have line of sight to the base station, multihop routing can
be used.
A large number of motes can be deployed in an environment
randomly to monitor environmental changes, object movements,
and any other classes of information that can be sensed. Examples
of Smart Dust applications include instrumentation of semiconduc-
tor processing chambers, wind tunnels, air pollution monitoring,
and unmanned spying in a hostile environment. It is also possible
to make use of motes for localization and tracking of objects in an
instrumented environment, provided a Smart Dust system is able to
offer ﬁne-grained node localization in the ﬁrst place. On the other
hand, location information can also help to direct queries to those
motes geographically located in a region of interest.
2.8.3
AURA
Microsoft’s Advanced User Resource Annotation (AURA) system
(http://aura.research.microsoft.com/) is a wireless system for digitally
identifying and annotating physical objects and sharing these anno-
tations using a cell phone or a PDA equipped with an ID reader device
to capture and annotate user interactions with the physical world.
The ID reader can be a widely used bar code reader, an RFID reader,
or even a ﬁngerprint scanner. With AURA, a user can associate text,
threaded conversations, audio, images, video, or other data with spe-
ciﬁc tags (such as a bar code of a CD) and submit them to a database.
This is the same idea of blogging, but it uses bar codes or any other
ID code to uniquely identify an item of interest. In addition, AURA is
designed to collect and disseminate users’ annotations. Other users

The Next Wave of Computing
91
who encounter an object may use the mobile device to scan the bar
code, feed it into online Aura applications, and obtain annotations
of the object in real time. For example, AURA can be used to retrieve
detailed annotations (most likely readers’ comments) of books while
browsing a bookstore.
The goal of the AURA project is to “annotate the planet.” Not
only objects with a bar code but also anything that can be uniquely
identiﬁed could be potentially annotated. On one hand, the aggres-
sive vision of AURA has the potential to bring tagged information
sharing to an unprecedented level; on the other hand, this vision
naturally leads to humans being annotated, as it is feasible to use bio-
metric features to identify a person. To this end, privacy protection
will certainly present a big challenge.
2.8.4
Wireless Grid
Wireless Grid (http://wirelessgrids.net/) is a research project sup-
ported by National Science Foundation NSF aimed at investigating
issues surrounding wireless grids and opportunities utilizing wireless
grids. A wireless grid is a network of ad hoc networks in nature. Like a
power grid, the goal of Wireless Grid is to enable ﬂexible, secure, and
distributed resource sharing and service provision among heteroge-
neous wired, ﬁxed wireless, or ad hoc networks and mobile, nomadic,
and ﬁxed devices. The challenges of wireless grids encompass three
related computing paradigms that all undergo rapid development:
grid computing, peer-to-peer computing, and web services [6]. Grid
computing essentially allows wired networks of computers to share
resources with others in the grid. Peer-to-peer networks provide a way
to offer scalable and efﬁcient resource sharing on an overlay network.
Web services enable machine-to-machine communication in a self-
contained manner, utilizing XML message passing and ﬂexible Web
Service Deﬁnition Language (WSDL). The Wireless Grid system thus
is able to apply the three computing frameworks to a heterogeneous
network environment.
As a proof-of-concept wireless grid application, the Wireless Grid
research team at Syracuse University developed a distributed audio
recording and sharing system call DARC (Distributed Ad hoc Resource

92
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Coordination). Individual mobile devices in DARC can act as mixers
or recorders. An audio stream is sent from a recorder to a mixer ser-
vice on a selected peer. By harnessing collective capabilities of many
recorders and mixers in a speciﬁc environment, a group of people
can engage into distributed music authoring and sharing. The wire-
less grid project team has also designed applications used in medical
and warehousing monitoring with an integrated wireless and wired
grid [18]. In both cases, wireless sensor networks at distinct locations
are seamlessly integrated with other wireless networks and the wired
grid such that data collection, ﬁltering, aggregation, and storage can
be accomplished across diverse networks of sensors, mobile devices,
and computers. For example, in a medical wireless grid, grid nodes
may include patient monitoring sensors (blood pressure, heart beat
rate, level of oxygen saturation in the blood, etc.), doctors’ or nurses’
mobile devices (with sensor readers), and emergency medical techni-
cian (EMT) mobile devices. In a warehouse monitoring wireless grid,
pallet sensors, Smart Dusts, and a range of mobile or ﬁxed sensor
readers can be used.
2.9 Summary
The next wave of mobile computing embodies a far broader spec-
trum than traditional voice-centric mobile wireless communication
with cell phones. The trend of convergence of communication, com-
puting, and consumer electronics is reﬂected by the strong demand
of converged multifunctional smart phones that incorporate cell
phone, PDA functions, and protable audio/video device into a sin-
gle device, which in turn opens up enormous opportunities with
regard to business and consumer applications and services. How-
ever, the vision of next-generation mobile computing encompasses
more profound changes to people’s daily life. First, the future wireless
network infrastructure will be a systematic integration of a variety
of heterogeneous wireless technologies ranging from personal area
networks to global wide area networks. This wireless world will even-
tually enable ubiquitous mobile access anytime, anywhere, from

The Next Wave of Computing
93
any devices. Second, a galaxy of “smart” wireless mobile devices
will be deeply embedded into environments to enable pervasive
mobile intelligence everywhere. In particular, smart phones per-
haps will play an important role as the universal mobile terminal
in tomorrow’s mobile computing paradigm, primarily due to their
unparalleled popularity among computing devices. A number of
innovative mobile applications and services are being explored to
take advantage of this ubiquitous access and pervasive intelligence,
such as location-based services, mobile commerce, mobile gaming,
and mobile social networking, to name a few.
Challenges within the domain of next-generation mobile comput-
ing calls for dramatic advances in almost every discipline of computer
science and engineering, including mobile processors, smart displays,
mobile operating systems, and communications protocols, context-
aware mobile computing, and human interface design. Moreover,
power consumption and security issues are particularly important in
the mobile computing realm.
This chapter was designated to give the reader a vision of next-
generation mobile computing, a big picture of today and tomorrow’s
mobile world, and a brief survey on promising applications and
challenging issues. Rather than elaborate on the details of research
and development in this broad area, this chapter has emphasized
the motivation behind and impact of these trends, challenges, and
research outcomes. The next two chapters will introduce supporting
wireless technologies and hardware and software platforms, respec-
tively, as they are the building blocks for future mobile wireless
systems, services, and applications.
Further Reading
The Evolution of Cellular Systems
Mobile Telephony: Wide Area Coverage, Bell Laboratories Technical
Memorandum, December 1947.
W. R. Young, Advanced mobile phone service: introduction, back-
ground, and objectives, Bell System Tech. J., January, 1979.

94
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Mobile
telephone
history,
http://www.privateline.com/PCS/
history.htm.
The Evolution of PDA and Pen Computing
J. Hawkins, creator of Palm Pilot, On Intelligence, Time Books,
New York, October, 2004.
The Concept of PDA, Apple Museum, http://www.theapplemuseum
.com/index.php?id=tam&page=pda.
The Vision of Next-Generation Mobile Computing
S. Baker et al., Big Bang!, Business Week, June 21, 2004 (http://www.
businessweek.com/magazine/content/04_25/b3888601.htm).
W. Gates, Keynote speech, 2004 Mobile Developers Conference
(http://www.microsoft.com/billgates/speeches/2004/03-24-
VSLive.asp).
S. Levy, The next frontiers. I. The wireless revolution, Newsweek, June
7, 2004 (http://msnbc.msn.com/id/5092820/site/newsweek/).
M. Copeland, How to ride the ﬁfth wave, Business 2.0, June 15, 2005
(http://www.business2.com/b2/web/articles/0,17863,1071030,
00.html).
R. Berger, Open Spectrum: A Path to Ubiquitous Connectivity, ACM
Queue,
May 2003 (http://www.acmqueue.com/modules.php?
name=Content&pa=showpage&pid=37).
B. Zenel and A. Toy,
Enterprise-Grade wireless,
ACM Queue,
May
2005
(http://www.acmqueue.com/modules.php?name=
Content&pa=showpage&pid=301).
Daily Wireless (http://www.dailywireless.org/): an excellent website
for wireless technologies and state-of-the-art industry devel-
opment. For WiFi and cellular integration, see http://www.
dailywireless.org/modules.php?name=News&ﬁle=article&sid=
225. For the latest development of WiFi based ID tracking,
see
http://www.dailywireless.org/modules.php?name=News&
ﬁle=article&sid=4070.

The Next Wave of Computing
95
Howard Rheingold’s blog (http://www.smartmobs.com/) has many
insightful comments on the development of mobile commu-
nication technologies, pervasive computing, and their social
implications.
G. Abowd and L. Iftode, The smart phone - a ﬁrst platform for per-
vasive computing, IEEE Pervasive Computing, April-June 2005
(Vol. 4, No. 2). This issues features several papers on a vari-
ety of pervasive computing applications using smart phones,
such as “Social Serendipity: Mobilizing Social Software” by
N. Eagle and A. Pentland, and “ContextPhone: A Prototyping
Platform for Context-Aware Mobile Applications” by M. Raento,
A. Oulasvirta, R. Petit, and H. Toivonen.
Tim Berners-Lee, who invented the Web in early ’90s, talked about
how web page design hampers the usability of wireless Web,
March 2005 (http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7218432/).
Google mobile services,
including web search,
location based
search, mobile web search, blog for mobile, and Google SMS,
http://mobile.google.com/
MSN mobile services including Hotmail, MSN Messager, mobile web,
and MSN alerts, http://mobile.msn.com/
Yahoo mobile services, including Yahoo messager, Yahoo mail, SMS
from a PC, blog for mobile, mobile games, web search, SMS
search, mobile web, and mobile alerts, http://mobile.yahoo.
com/
Mapquest mobile services,
including mobile maps,
GPS locat-
ing service,
and trafﬁc maps,
http://www.mapquest.com/
features/main.adp?page=slashmobile
References
[1] S. G. Glisic and P. A. Leppanen, Wireless Communications: TDMA
vs. CDMA, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1997.

96
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
[2] IMT,
IMT-2000,
International
Mobile
Communications,
Geneva,
Switzerland,
2003
(http://www.itu.int/home/
imt.html).
[3] J. P. Allen, Who shapes the future? Problem framings and the
development of handheld computers, in Proceedings of the Ethics
and Social Impact Component on Shaping Policy in the Information
Age, May 1998, Washington, DC.
[4] Z. Liao, Real-time taxi dispatching using global positioning
systems, Commun. ACM, 46(5):81–83, 2003.
[5] ZigBee Alliance, San Ramon, CA, 2004 (http://www.zigbee.org).
(http://www.zigbee.org/,” 2004.
[6] L. W. McKnight and J. Howison, Wireless grids: distributed
resource sharing by mobile, nomadic, and ﬁxed devices, IEEE
Internet Computing., Vol. 8, No. 4, July/August, 2004.
[7] WiFi Alliance, 2004 (http://www.wi-ﬁ.org/).
[8] X. Wang, D. Feng, X. Lai, and H. Yu, Collisions for hash func-
tions MD4, MD5, HAVAL-128, and RIPEMD, Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Report 2004/199, 2004.
[9] M. Satyanarayanan, Privacy: the Achilles heel of pervasive
computing?, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 2:2–3, 2004.
[10] S. Oviatt, T. Darrell, and M. Flickner, Multimodal interfaces
that ﬂex,
adapt,
and persist,
Commun. ACM, 47(1):30–33,
2004.
[11] A. LaL and J. Blanchard, The daintiest dynamos, IEEE Spectrum,
September 2004.
[12] I. Buchmann, Batteries in a Portable World: A Handbook on
Rechargeable Batteries for Non-Engineers, 2nd ed., Cadex Electron-
ics, Richmond, British Columbia, 2001.
[13] Wikipedia, 2004 (http://en.wikipedia.org).

The Next Wave of Computing
97
[14] P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan, RADAR: an in-building RF-
based user location and tracking system, in Proceedings of IEEE
INFOCOM ’00, March 2000, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
[15] L. M. Ni, Y. Liu, Y. C. Lau, and A. P. Patil, LANDMARC: indoor
location sensing using active RFID, in Proceedings of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication
(PERCOM ’03), March 2003, Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas.
[16] J. M. Kahn, R. H. Katz, and K. S. J. Pister, Next century challenges:
mobile networking for smart dust, in Proceedings of MobiCom ’99,
1999, August 15–19, 1999, Seattle, Washington.
[17] B. Warneke, M. Last, B. Liebowitz, and K. S. J. Pister, Smart
dust: communicating with a cubic-millimeter computer, IEEE
Comput., 34(1):44–51, 2001.
[18] M. Gaynor, S. L. Moulton, M. Welsh, E. LaCombe, A. Rowan,
and J. Wynne, Integrating wireless sensor networks with the
grid, IEEE Internet Draft, 8(4):32–39, 2004.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

3
Supporting Wireless
Technologies
This chapter provides extensive coverage of existing mobile wireless
technologies. Much of the emphasis is on the highly anticipated
3G cellular networks and widely deployed wireless local area net-
works (LANs), as the next-generation smart phones are likely to offer
at least these two types of connectivity. Other wireless technolo-
gies that either have already been commercialized or are undergoing
active research and standardization are introduced as well. Because
standardization plays a crucial role in developing a new technology
and a market, throughout the discussion standards organizations and
industry forums or consortiums of some technologies are introduced.
In addition, the last section of this chapter presents a list of standards
in the wireless arena.
3.1 The Frequency Spectrum
The fundamental principle of wireless communication is electro-
magnetic wave transmission between a transmitter and a receiver.
Signals are characterized by their frequencies in use. Multiple sig-
nals or noises of the same frequency will cause interference at the
receiver. To avoid interference, various wireless technologies use
distinct frequency bands with well-controlled signal power which
are portions of the so-called frequency spectrum. As a scarce public
resource, the frequency spectrum is strictly regulated by governments
of countries around the world. In the United States, the Federal
99

100
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Communications Commission (FCC) has the responsibility of reg-
ulating civil broadcast and electronic communications, including
the use of the frequency spectrum, and the National Telecom-
munications and Information Administration (NITA) administers
the frequency use of the federal government. In Europe, the fre-
quency spectrum is managed on a national basis, and European
Union (EU) members coordinate via the European Conference of Post
and Telecommunications Administrations (ECPT) and the Electronic
Communications Committee (ECC). Worldwide uniﬁed regulation
of wireless communication is understandably difﬁcult to achieve for
various technological, economic, and political reasons. To this end,
the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) has been formed
as an international organization of the United Nations. The ITU
allows governments and private sectors to coordinate development
of telecommunication systems, services, and standards. In almost
all countries, portions of the frequency spectrum have been desig-
nated as “unlicensed,” meaning that a government license is not
required for wireless systems operating at these bands. In effect, wire-
less system manufacturers and service providers are required to obtain
an exclusive license for a frequency band from regulatory bodies
or resort to the use of the unlicensed spectrum. In either case, the
emitted power of the wireless systems must comply with the power
constraints associated with the regulations in question. In addition,
frequency allocations of a country may change over time. (For the lat-
est information regarding frequency allocation in the United States,
see http://www.ntia.doc.gov/osmhome/allochrt.html.)
A radio signal is characterized by wavelength and frequency. In
a vacuum, the product of wavelength and frequency is the speed of
light (about 3 × 108 meters per second); in general, a higher fre-
quency means shorter wavelength. For example, visible light is in
the frequency band of 4.3 × 1014 to 7.5 × 1014 Hz, with wavelengths
ranging from 0.35 to 0.9 µm. FM radio broadcasts operate within
the frequency range of 30 to 300 MHz at wavelengths between 10
and 1 m.
The frequency spectrum can be divided into the following cat-
egories: very low frequency (VLF), low frequency (LF), medium

Supporting Wireless Technologies
101
frequency (MF), high frequency (HF), very high frequency (VHF),
ultra-high frequency (UHF), super-high frequency (SHF), extremely
high frequency (EHF), infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, x-ray,
gamma-ray, and cosmic ray, each of which represents a frequency
band. Figure 3.1 shows the frequency spectrum up to the visible
light band. Notice that in the context of electronic communication,
there are two categories of transmission medium: guided medium
(e.g., copper coaxial cable and twisted pair) and unguided medium
(for wireless communication in the air). The guided medium car-
ries signals or waves between a transmitter and a receiver, whereas
the unguided medium typically carries wireless signals between an
antenna and a receiver (which may also be an antenna). Neverthe-
less, each medium operates at a speciﬁc frequency band of various
bandwidth determined by its physical characteristics. For example,
coaxial cable uses many portions of frequencies between 1 KHz and
1 GHz for different purposes: television channels 2, 3, and 4 operate
at frequencies from 54 to 72 MHz; channels 5 and 6, 76 to 88 MHz;
and channels 7 to 13, 174 to 216 MHz. The optical ﬁber uses visible
or infrared light as the carrier and operates at frequencies between
100 and 1000 THz.
Wireless communication operates at frequencies in the so-called
radio spectrum, which is further divided into VLF, LF, MF, HF, VHF,
UHF, SHF, and EHF. In addition, infrared data association (IrDA)
is also used for short-range wireless communication. The follow-
ing text discusses frequency bands at which existing mobile wireless
technologies operate; notice that very often the frequency regula-
tions enforce emitted power restrictions to avoid interference among
wireless devices operating at the same frequency band.
3.1.1
Public Media Broadcasting
• AM radio: Amplitude modulation (AM) radio stations operate at a
frequency band between 520 and 1605.5 KHz.
• FM radio: Frequency modulation (FM) radio uses the frequency
band between 87.5 and 108 MHz.

102
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
ELF
30Hz
300Hz
3kHz
30kHz 300kHz
3GHz 30GHz 300GHz
3MHz 30MHz 300MHz
VF
VLF
LF
MF
HF
VHF
UHF
SHF
EHF
Voice and Sound Wave
Radio
Visible
Light
AM
Radio
FM Radio
and TV
Microwave,
Terrestrial, and
Satellite
Unlicensed
ISM
Unlicensed
3G Cellular
GSM
900MHz
and
1800MHz
NII
Digital TV
Direct
Broadcast
Satellite
Figure 3.1
The frequency spectrum (refer to the text for the exact frequency band allocated to
each system).

Supporting Wireless Technologies
103
• SW radio: Shortwave (SW) radio uses frequencies between 5.9
and 26.1 MHz within the HF band. The transmission of short-
wave radio over a long distance is made possible by ionosphere
reﬂection. HAM amateur radio, a popular activity enjoyed by over
3 million fans worldwide, relies on the HF band to communicate
across the world.
• Conventional analog television: A quite small slice of VHF (30
to 300 MHz) and UHF (300 to 3000 MHz) has been allocated for
analog television broadcasting. In the United States, each channel
occupies a 6-MHz band. The ﬁrst VHF channel, channel 2, oper-
ates at 54 to 60 MHz, whereas the last UHF channel, channel 69,
operates at 800 to 806 MHz.
• Cable television: The frequency bands of channels 2 to 13 are
exactly the same for both conventional television and cable televi-
sion. Beyond those channels, cable television requires frequencies
from 120 to 552 MHz for channels 13 to 78.
• Digital cable television: Channels 79 and above are reserved
for digital cable broadcasting at frequencies between 552 and
750 MHz.
• Digital audio broadcasting (DAB): DAB is a standard developed
by the European Union for CD-quality audio transmission at fre-
quencies from 174 to 240 MHz and from 1452 to 1492 MHz. In
the United States, a technique called in-band on-channel (IBOC)
is used to transmit digital audio and analog radio signals simulta-
neously with the same frequency band. The resulting services are
generally marketed as high-deﬁnition radio.
• Direct broadcast satellite (DBS): The upper portion of the
microwave Ku band (10.9 to 12.75 GHz) is used for direct satellite-
to-receiver video and audio broadcasting. See Section 3.13 for
more details regarding satellite communication.
• Satellite radio: Frequencies from 2320 to 2345 MHz have been
allotted for satellite radio services in the United States. See
Section 3.13 for more details regarding satellite communication.

104
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3.1.2
Cellular Communication
• Global system for mobile (GSM): The two frequency bands used by
GSM are 890 to 960 MHz and 1710 to 1880 MHz. They are some-
times referred to as the 900-MHz band and the 1800-MHz band.
• Code-division multiple access (CDMA): The IS-95 standard deﬁnes
the use of the 800- and 1900-MHz bands for CDMA cellular
systems.
• 3G wideband CDMA (WCDMA)/universal mobile telecommuni-
cations system (UMTS): Three frequency bands are allocated for
3G UMTS services: 1900 to 1980 MHz, 2020 to 2025 MHz, and
2110 to 2190 MHz.
• 3G CDMA 2000: This system reuses existing CDMA frequency
bands.
3.1.3
Wireless Data Communication
• Wireless LANs: IEEE 802.11b operates at 902 to 928 MHz and 2400
to 2483 MHz, and the industrial, scientiﬁc, and medical (ISM)
radio bands operate at 2.4 GHz band in the United States. The
IEEE 802.11b operates at 2400 to 2483 MHz in Europe, and at
2400 to 2497 MHz in Japan. IEEE 802.11a and HiperLAN2 use
5150 to 5350 MHz and 5725 to 5825 MHz, and the unlicensed
national information infrastructure (U-NII) band operates at 5.8
GHz in the United States. They operate at 5150 to 5350 MHz and
5470 to 5725 MHz in Europe, and at 5150 to 5250 MHz in Japan.
Section 3.10 discusses wireless LANs in more detail.
• Bluetooth: Seventy-nine 1-MHz channels are allocated from the
unlicensed 2.402 to 2.480 GHz in the United States and Europe
for Bluetooth signal transmission. Other countries may have fewer
channels but all fall into the 2.4-GHz band. Section 3.11 talks more
about the Bluetooth technology.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
105
• WiMax: A wide range from 2 to 11 GHz that includes both licensed
and unlicensed bands will be used for 802.116a, and 11 to 66 GHz
can possibly be used by 802.116c. Section 3.14 introduces WiMax
as part of the wireless MANs section.
• Ultra-wideband (UWB): In the United States, the FCC mandates
that UWB can operate from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz. UWB is further
discussed in Section 3.12.
• Radiofrequency identiﬁcation (RFID): RFID tags operate at the
frequency bands of LF (120–140 KHz), HF (13.56 MHz), UHF
(868–956 Mhz), and microwave (2.4 GHz). Section 3.13 explains
RFID technology and its applications.
• Infrared data association (IrDA): IrDA uses frequencies around
100 GHz for short-range data communication.
• Wireless sensors: Sensor motes support tunable frequencies in the
range of 300 to 1000 MHz and the 2.4-GHz ISM band. In particu-
lar, ZigBee, the remote sensor control technology, operates at the
868-MHz band in Europe, 915-MHz band in the United States and
Asia, and 2.4-GHz band worldwide.
3.1.4
Other Fixed or Mobile Wireless Communications
• Digital cordless phone: The Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecom-
munications (DECT) standard in Europe deﬁnes the use of the
frequency band 1880 to 1990 MHz for digital cordless phone
communication. In the United States, cordless phones use three
frequency bands: 900 MHz, 2.4 GHz, and 5.8 GHz, each of which
is also intensively used by other short-range wireless communica-
tion technologies.
• Global positioning system (GPS): GPS satellites use the frequency
bands 1575.42 MHz (referred to as L1) and 1227.60 MHz (L2) to
transmit signals.
• Meteorological satellite services: The UHF band from 1530 to
1650 MHz (the L band) is commonly used by meteorological

106
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
satellites, as well as some global environmental monitoring satel-
lites. Part of the UHF and SHF bands are used for military satellite
communication.
• Radio frequency remote control, such as remote keyless entry sys-
tems and garage door openers. These short-range wireless system
commonly used for automobiles operates at 27 MHz, 128 MHz,
418 MHz, 433 MHz, and 868 MHz in the United States; 315 MHz
and 915 MHz in Europe; and 426 MHz and 868 MHz in Japan.
3.2 Wireless Communication Primer
For our in-depth discussion of the many sophisticated mobile wireless
network technologies, a basic understanding of wireless communi-
cations is necessary. Here, a primer of concepts within the domain
of wireless communication is presented. Readers who are inter-
ested in further details are referred to Stallings’ book on wireless
communications and networks [1].
3.2.1
Signal Propagation
A radio signal can be described in three domains: time domain,
frequency domain, and phase domain. In the time domain, the
amplitude of the signal varies with time; in the frequency domain,
the amplitude of the signal varies with frequency; and, in the phase
domain, the amplitude and phase of the signal are shown on polar
coordinates. According to Fourier’s theorem, any periodic signal is
composed of a superposition of a series of pure sine waves and cosine
waves whose frequencies are harmonics (multiples) of the fundamen-
tal frequency of the signal; therefore, any periodic signal, no matter
how it was originally produced, can be reproduced using a sufﬁcient
number of pure waves.
Electronic signals for wireless communication must be converted
into electromagnetic waves by an antenna for transmission. Con-
versely, an antenna at the receiver side is responsible for converting

Supporting Wireless Technologies
107
electromagnetic waves into electronic signals. An antenna can be
omnidirectional or directional, depending on speciﬁc usage scenar-
ios. For an antenna to be effective, it must be of a size consistent
with the wavelength of the signals being transmitted or received.
Antennas used in cell phones are omnidirectional and can be a
short rod on the handset or hidden within the handset. A recent
advancement in antenna technology is the multiple-in, multiple out
(MIMO) antenna, or smart antenna, which combines spatially sepa-
rated small antennas to provide high bandwidth without consuming
more power or spectrum. To take advantage of multipath propa-
gation (explained in the next section), these small antennas must
be separated by at least half of the wavelength of the signal being
transmitted or received.
A signal emitted by an antenna travels in the air following three
types of propagation modes: ground-wave propagation, sky-wave
propagation, and line-of-sight (LOS) propagation. AM radio is a kind
of ground-wave propagation, where signals follow the contour of the
Earth to reach a receiver. SW radio and HAM amateur radio are exam-
ples of sky-wave propagation, where radio signals are reﬂected by
ionosphere and the ground along the way. Beyond 30 MHz, line-of-
sight propagation dominates, meaning that signal waves propagate
on a direct, straight path in the air. It is noteworthy that radio sig-
nals of line-of-sight propagation can also penetrate objects, especially
signals of large wavelength (and thus low frequency). Satellite links,
infrared light, and communication between base stations of a cellular
network are examples of line-of-sight propagation.
3.2.1.1
Attenuation
The strength or power of wireless signals decreases when they prop-
agate in the air, just as visible light does. As soon as radio waves
leave the transmitter’s antenna, some amount of energy will be lost
as the electromagnetic ﬁeld propagates. The effect will become more
evident over a long distance as the signal disperses in space; there-
fore, the received power of the signal is invariably less than the
signal power at the transmitting antenna. In the most ideal circum-
stances (i.e., in vacuum), signal power attenuation is proportional

108
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
to d2, where d denotes the distance between the transmitter and
the receiver. This effect is sometimes referred to as free space loss.
In reality, beside free space loss, a number of other factors have
to be considered to determine signal attenuation, such as weather
conditions, atmospheric absorption, and space rays. In addition,
signal attenuation is more severe in high frequencies than in low
frequencies, resulting in signal distortion.
When it encounters obstacles along the path, a signal may experi-
ence more complex attenuation than power reduction. For example,
for visible light we are well aware of the following effects: shadowing,
reﬂection, and refraction. Likewise, for high-frequency wireless signals,
such effects also exist. Shadowing and reﬂection occur when a sig-
nal encounters an object that is much larger than its wavelength.
Though the reﬂected signal and the shadowed signal are compar-
atively weak, they in effect help to propagate the signal to spaces
where line-of-sight is impossible. For example, when reﬂection and
shadowing are caused by buildings in an urban area, signals from
an antenna of a base station may be able to reach cell phone users
within a building in the area, although it might be a good idea for
the user to walk close to the window for better signal strength (per-
ceived as a number of “bars” displayed on the cell phone screen).
Refraction (bending) occurs when a wave passes across the boundary
of two media. Moreover, wireless signals are also subject to scatter-
ing and diffraction. Speciﬁcally, when the size of an obstacle is on the
order of the signal wavelength or less, the signal will be scattered into
a number of weaker pieces. Diffraction occurs when a signal hits the
edge of an obstacle and is deﬂected into a number of directions.
3.2.1.2
Noise
The receiver of a wireless communication system must be able to
detect transmitted (most likely attenuated and distorted) signals from
unwanted noises. Common types of noise are thermal noise (white
noise) produced by any electronic circuitry; intermodulation noise,
which occurs when two frequencies of signals are modulated and
transmitted over the same medium; crosstalk between two chan-
nels; and impulse noise generated by instantaneous electromagnetic

Supporting Wireless Technologies
109
changes. To cope with noises in received signals, a wireless system
has to ensure that the transmitted signals are sufﬁciently stronger
than the noises. Another approach is to employ spread spectrum
schemes (explained below) that convert a signal over a wide range of
frequencies of low power density as random noise. Wireless signals
are subject to various impairments or distortion along the way from
the transmitter to the receiver. To quantify these effects, the signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) is used to represent the ratio of the power in a
signal to the power of the noise. SNR is usually computed in decibels
as the product of 10 and the logarithm of the raw power ratio.
3.2.1.3
Multi-Path Propagation
The receiver of a wireless system is exposed to all radio waves in
its surrounding environment; therefore, it may receive indirect sig-
nals from different paths, such as reﬂected signals, shadowed signals,
and refracted signals, as well as signals generated by other means
of propagation, all carrying the same signal with different levels of
attenuation and distortion. These signals may impose some negative
effect on the direct signal to a great extent. The most severe effect of
multipath propagation is intersymbol interference (ISI). Intersymbol
interference is caused by overlapping of delayed multipath pulses
(of a primary pulse) and subsequent primary LOS pulses, where
one or multiple pulses represent a bit. The degree of attenuation of
these pulses may vary from time to time due to path changes or
environmental disturbances, making it more difﬁcult to recover the
transmitted bits. To prevent intersymbol interference from occur-
ring, the ﬁrst primary pulse and the second have to be separated by
a sufﬁcient time difference such that the delayed multipath pulses of
the ﬁrst can be differentiated from the second LOS pulse. This implies
that the symbol rate of the signal and bandwidth of the radio channel
are limited by multipath propagation.
3.2.2
Modulation
Signal modulation is a technique used to combine a signal being
transmitted with a carrier signal for transmission. The receiver

110
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
demodulates the transmitted signal and regenerates the original sig-
nal. Normally the carrier signal is a sine wave of a high frequency. The
input signal could be digital (digital modulation) or analog (analog
modulation). In either case, the three basic characteristics of a signal
are utilized for modulation. The device that performs this modula-
tion and demodulation is the modem. Modulation is often referred to
as signal encoding. Analog signals can be modulated by the following
methods.
3.2.2.1
Amplitude Modulation
For AM signals, the output signal is a multiplication of the input
signal with a carrier wave. The amplitude of the carrier wave is deter-
mined by the input analog signal. The frequency of the resulting
output signal is centered at the frequency of the carrier. As its name
implies, AM radio that operates in the frequency band of 520 to
1605.5 KHz uses amplitude modulation.
3.2.2.2
Frequency Modulation
Rather than vary the amplitude of the carrier wave, frequency mod-
ulation alters the transient frequency of the carrier according to
the input signal. Again, as its name implies, FM radio that oper-
ates within the frequency band of 87.5 to 108 MHz uses frequency
modulation.
3.2.2.3
Phase Modulation
In phase modulation (PM), the phase of the carrier signal is used to
encode the input signal. Like AM, FM and PM shift the frequency
of the input signal to a band centered at the carrier frequency. Both
FM and PM require higher bandwidths. Analog modulation is nec-
essary for transmitting a wireless analog signal such as voice over a
long distance. Directly transmitting the signal itself to the receiver
without applying modulation would require a large antenna to be
effective, as the frequency of voice signals falls into the range of
30 to 3000 Hz. For digital data, if the medium only facilitates ana-
log transmission (e.g., air), some digital modulation techniques will
have to be employed. A carrier wave is also used to carry binary

Supporting Wireless Technologies
111
streams being transmitted, according to some keying schemes in
digital modulation. Below is a list of digital modulation schemes:
• Amplitude-shift keying (ASK) —ASK uses presence of a carrier wave
to represent a binary one and its absence to indicate a binary zero.
While ASK is simple to implement, it is highly susceptible to noise
and multipath propagation effects. Because of that, ASK is primar-
ily used in wired networks, especially in optical networks where
the bit error rate (BER) is considerably lower than that of wireless
environments.
• Frequency-shift keying (FSK) — Similar to frequency modulation,
FSK uses two or more frequencies of a carrier wave to represent dig-
ital data. Binary FSK (BFSK), which employs two carrier frequencies
for 0 and 1, is the most commonly used FSK. The resulting signal
can be mathematically deﬁned as the sum of two amplitude-
modulated signals of different carrier frequencies. If more than
two carrier frequencies are used for modulation, each frequency
may represent more than one bit, thereby providing a higher
bandwidth than ASK.
• Phase-shift keying (PSK) — PSK uses the phase of a carrier wave
to encode digital data. Binary PSK simply reverses phase when
the data bits change. Multilevel PSKs use more evenly distributed
phases in the phase domain, with each phase representing two or
more bits. One of most commonly used PSK schemes is quadrature
PSK, in which the four phases of 0, π/2, π, and 3π/2 are used to
encode two digits. PSK can be implemented in two ways. The
ﬁrst is to produce a reference signal at the receiver side and then
compare it with the received signal to decide the phase shift. This
method somewhat complicates things at the receiver end, as the
transmitter and the receiver must be synchronized periodically
to ensure that the reference signal is being generated correctly.
Another method is differential PSK (DPSK). In DPSK, the reference
signal is not a separated signal but is the one preceding the current
wave in question. One of the second-generation cellular systems,
Digital-Advanced Mobile Phone Service (DAMPS), uses DPSK.

112
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Amplitude-shift keying and PSK can be combined to offer more vari-
ations of phase shifts on the phase domain. Quadrature amplitude
modulation (QAM) is such a scheme in which multiple levels of
amplitudes coupled with several phases provide far more unique sym-
bol shifts over the same bandwidth than used by PSK over the same
bandwidth. QAM is widely used in today’s modems.
Apart from analog and digital modulation, another category of
modulation that should be discussed for wireless communication is
analog-to-digital data modulation, a procedure sometimes referred to
as digitization. Two major digitization schemes are pulse-code mod-
ulation (PCM) and delta modulation. PCM samples an input analog
signal in short intervals, and each sample is converted into a sym-
bol representing a code. To reconstruct the original input signal from
samples, the sampling rate must be higher than twice the highest fre-
quency of the input signal. In other words, given a sample rate of fs,
a frequency higher than 2fs in the input signal will not be recovered
in the reconstruction. Delta modulation uses a staircase-like sample
function to approximate the input signal. The resulting digital data
are comprised of a series of 1’s and 0’s indicating the ups and downs,
respectively, of the staircase function.
In the wireless world, signals transmitted through the air are
primarily high-frequency analog signals. In wireless voice commu-
nication, the user’s voice is digitalized into digital data and then
modulated to analog based band signals (digital modulation), which
are ﬁnally modulated with a carrier wave for transmission. For wire-
less data transmission, the ﬁrst step of this procedure is not necessary.
In either case, the receiver takes the reverse order of these steps to
recover the transmitted data or voice.
3.2.3
Multiplexing
Modulations of analog signals or digital data is concerned with a
single input signal to be converted efﬁciently into other forms. In
contrast, multiplexing is a collection of schemes that address the
issue of transmitting multiple signals simultaneously in a wireless

Supporting Wireless Technologies
113
system in the hopes of maximizing the capacity of the system. The
devices for multiplexing and demultiplexing are multiplexers and
demultiplexers, respectively. If signals of the same frequency are spa-
tially separated from each other such that no frequency overlapping
occurs at any given place, then multiple signals of different fre-
quencies can be transmitted and received without a problem. Radio
stations are an excellent example of this spatial division multiplexing:
AM and FM radio signals only cover the area in which the radio sta-
tions are located, and they cannot interfere with other radio signals
on the same frequency in adjacent areas. Apart from spatial division
multiplexing, three prominent schemes of multiplexing have been
devised.
3.2.3.1
Frequency-Division Multiplexing
In frequency-division multiplexing (FDM), signals from a transmit-
ter are modulated to a ﬁxed frequency band centered at a carrier
frequency (i.e., a channel). To avoid inference, these channels have
to be separated by a sufﬁciently large gap (i.e., a guard band) in the
frequency domain; hence, transmission and reception of signals in
multiple channels can be performed simultaneously but indepen-
dently. Analog cellular systems use FDM; in these systems, calls are
separated by frequency.
3.2.3.2
Time-Division Multiplexing
Time-division multiplexing (TDM) allows multiple channels to
occupy the same frequency band but in small alternating slices
of time following a sequence known to both the transmitter and
the receiver. Each channel makes full use of the bandwidth of the
medium but only contributes a portion of the overall data rate. Coor-
dination among the transmitters is necessary to prevent conﬂicting
use of the frequency band. When applied to digital signals, TDM can
be done on a bit level, byte level, block level, or levels of larger quan-
tities. GSM and D-AMPS both use TDM but in different ways. TDM
and FDM can be combined to increase the robustness of the system.
In this case, signals from a transmitter are modulated onto different
carriers for a certain amount of time and jump to another carrier,
effectively creating a “frequency hopping” phenomenon.

114
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3.2.3.3
Code-Division Multiplexing
Code-division multiplexing (CDM) makes better use of a frequency
band than FDM and TDM. Signals from different transmitters are
transmitted on the same frequency band at the same time but each
has a code to uniquely identify itself. The orthogonal codes mathe-
matically ensure that signals cannot interfere with each other at the
receiver. CDM effectively converts the problem of limited frequency
space into ample code space but adds the overhead of implementa-
tion complexity. The transmitter and receiver must be synchronized
such that individual signals can be correctly received and decoded.
Compared to FDM, CDM provides greater security against signal tap-
ping because transmitted signals appear as noise if the receiver does
not know the code. CDM is the underlying multiplexing scheme of
orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM). CDMA cellular
systems use similar CDM schemes to provide multiple wireless com-
munication channels access to the same frequency band. Another
multiplexing scheme, wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), is
very common in optical networks using ﬁber as the transmission
medium. It is actually FDM for ﬁber, which offers an extremely
high bandwidth. In WDM, a ﬁber can be divided into a number
of wavelengths (nanometers), each of which can be assigned to
a transmission channel. Dense wavelength-division multiplexing
(DWDM) systems support eight or more wavelengths. Because of
their high data rate, WDM and DWDM are the predominant mul-
tiplexing schemes used by optical networks in the wired Internet
backbone.
3.3 Spread Spectrum
Wireless systems transmit data over a speciﬁc, quite narrow frequency
band that allows a transmitter and a receiver to differentiate the
intended signal from background noise when the signal quality is
sufﬁcient. Narrowband interference can be avoided by ﬁltering out
any other frequencies except the designated ones at the receiver. The
major advantage of narrowband signal transmission is, as the term

Supporting Wireless Technologies
115
implies, its efﬁcient use of frequency due to only a small frequency
band being used for one signal transmission. Its drawback is evi-
dent, though, as it requires well-coordinated frequency allocation
for different signals, and it is quite vulnerable to signal jamming and
interception.
Spread spectrum takes another approach. Instead of applying all
transmitting power to a narrow frequency channel, spread spectrum
converts the narrowband signals to signals of much wider band with
comparatively lower power density, according to a speciﬁc signal
spreading scheme. Because of the low power density (power per fre-
quency), the converted signal appears to be background noise to
others who are unaware of the spreading scheme; only the desig-
nated receiver is able to reconstruct the original signal. For data
transmission with multiple channels using frequency modulation,
narrowband signals in each channel can be applied with the spread
spectrum technique. To be able to differentiate these channels and
reconstruct those signals afterwards, each channel is assigned a code
with sufﬁciently large distance separating it from others in the code
space, and the codes are made known to the designated receiver only.
The advantages of spread spectrum are as follows:
• Code-division multiplexing has greatly improved channel capac-
ity (i.e., the number of signals that can be transmitted at the same
time over a given frequency band) as compared to the narrowband
spectrum.
• Spread spectrum offers high resistance against narrowband inter-
ference and tolerates narrowband interference because the signal
is transmitted over a wide band. Even though some portion of the
frequencies is distorted, the original signal can still be recovered
with the error detection and correction techniques of the coding
mechanism.
• Security against tapping and jamming is greater compared to nar-
rowband spectrum techniques. Signals of spread spectrum are
indistinguishable from background noise to anyone who does not
know the coding scheme (language).

116
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
The disadvantage of spread spectrum is its relatively high com-
plexity of the coding mechanism, which results in complex radio
hardware designs and higher cost. Nonetheless, because of its remark-
able advantages, spread spectrum has been adopted by many wireless
technologies, such as CDMA and wireless LANs. Depending on the
way the frequency spectrum is used, three types of spread spec-
trum systems are currently in place: direct-sequence spread spectrum
(DSSS), frequency-hopping spread spectrum (FHSS), and orthogonal
frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM).
3.3.1
Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum
The direct-sequence spread spectrum spreads a signal over a much
broader frequency band. It employs a “chipping” technique to con-
vert a user signal into a spread signal. Given a user data bit, an XOR
computation is performed with the user bit and a special chipping
sequence code (digital modulation), which is a series of carefully
selected pulses that are shorter than the duration of user bits. The
resulting signal (the chipping sequence) is then modulated (radio
modulation) with a carrier signal and sent out. On the receiver side,
after demodulation, the same chipping sequence code is used to
decode the original user bits. The chipping sequence essentially deter-
mines how the user signal is spread as pseudorandom noise over a
large frequency band. The ratio of the spreading (i.e., the spreading
factor) varies for different spread spectrum systems. The longer the
chipping sequence, the more likely a user signal can be recovered.
A transmitter and a receiver have to stay synchronized during the
spreading and despreading.
3.3.2
Frequency-Hopping Spread Spectrum
Frequency-hopping spread spectrum uses a frequency-hopping
sequence to spread a user signal that is known to both the transmitter
and the receiver. User data is ﬁrst modulated to narrowband signals,
then a second modulation takes place — a signal with a hopping
sequence of frequency is used as the radio carrier. The resulting spread

Supporting Wireless Technologies
117
signal is then sent to the receiver. On the receiver side, two steps
of modulations are required: (1) use the same frequency-hopping
sequence to recover the narrowband signal, and (2) demodulate the
narrowband signal. In effect, the transmitter and the receiver follow
the same pattern of synchronized frequency hopping. As a result,
only if the hopping sequence is made known to the receiver can it
recover the original user data bits; otherwise, the transmitted sig-
nals will appear as background noise. FHSS does not take up the
entire allotted frequency band for transmission. Instead, at any given
moment, only a portion of it is used for hopping. The two types
of frequency hopping systems in use are fast hopping systems and
slow hopping systems. Fast hopping systems change frequency sev-
eral times when transmitting a single bit, whereas in slow hopping
systems each hop may transmit multiple bits.
Interestingly, the concept of frequency hopping was invented by
a Hollywood actress, Hedy Lamarr, and composer George Antheil
during World War II. The idea was to use a piano-roll sequence to
hop between 88 channels to make decoding of radio-guided tor-
pedo communications more difﬁcult by enemies. Their idea was not
implemented because the U.S. Navy refused to consider developing a
military technology based on a musical technique. As George Antheil
put it, “The reverend and brass-headed gentlemen in Washington
who examined our invention read no further than the words ‘player
piano.’ ‘My god,’ I can see them saying, ‘we shall put a player piano in
a torpedo.” (source: American Heritage of Invention & Technology,
Spring 1997, Volume 12/Number 4)
For both DSSS and FHSS, multiple signals with different sequence
codes (either chipping-sequence code or frequency-hopping code)
can be multiplexed by CDM. To compare, FHSS is relatively simpler
to implement than DSSS, but DSSS makes it much more difﬁcult to
recover the signal without knowing the chipping code and is more
robust to signal distortion and multipath effects. Both are widely used
by a large array of wireless technologies operating on the unlicensed
spectrum. For example, the IEEE 802.11b standard for wireless LAN
employs DSSS over the 2.4-GHz free spectrum, whereas the Bluetooth
standard uses FHSS for simplicity.

118
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3.3.3
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing
Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing is a modulation tech-
nique that utilizes multiple subcarriers in parallel to transmit user
data. These subcarriers are orthogonal in that they are modulated
with their own data independently. OFDM was ﬁrst conceived of
in the 1960s in an effort to minimize interference among adjacent
channels in a frequency band. Because of multicarrier parallelism,
OFDM offers a much higher data rate than single-carrier modulation
techniques. In addition, because subcarriers are orthogonal, multi-
path interference can be largely reduced. In reality, some OFDM
systems are actually code OFDM (COFDM), which combines error-
control channel coding schemes with OFDM modulation. COFDM
has some nice properties, such as being resistant against phase dis-
tortion, signal fading, and burst noise. OFDM is used in asymmetric
digital subscriber line (ADSL), IEEE 802.11a/g wireless LANs, and the
broadband wireless data access technology WiMax. COFDM is pre-
dominantly used in Europe for digital audio broadcast (DAB) and
digital video broadcasting (DVB).
3.4 Global System for Mobile and General Packet Radio
Service
The preceding chapter gave an overview of the evolution of
cellular systems,
from ﬁrst-generation analog systems — the
advanced mobile phone system (AMPS) and total access commu-
nication system (TACS) — to the second-generation GSM and
CDMA to the third-generation WCDMA and cdma2000. Although
the world of wireless telecommunication experienced remarkable
growth in terms of number of subscribers at the beginning of
the 21st century, some mobile wireless operators soon realized
that mobile voice service was not enough.
The industry has
evolved from analog voice to digital voice, and now it is time to
leverage
high-speed
data
access
provided
by
2.5G
and
3G

Supporting Wireless Technologies
119
Table 3.1
2G Cellular Systems.
2G Cellular System Category
2G Cellular Systems
Time-division multiple access (TDMA)
Global system for mobile (GSM)
Digitized advanced mobile phone system (D-AMPS)
(IS-136)
Packet data cellular (PDC)
Code-division multiple access (CDMA)
CDMA (IS-95)
cellular networks for data-centric applications and services. Second-
generation cellular systems can be divided into two categories accord-
ing to the multiplexing access scheme of the radio interface: TDMA
or CDMA. The TDMA systems include GSM, D-AMPS (also referred to
as IS-136 to supersede IS-54), and packet data cellular (PDC, used in
Japan). The CDMA category is fairly straightforward in that the cel-
lular systems utilizing CDMA are also called CDMA systems and they
comply with the IS-95 standard. In this section, we ﬁrst review two
second-generation cellular systems, GSM and CDMA (see Table 3.1),
then discuss 2.5 G data services and 3 G cellular networks being rolled
out worldwide. The introduction to GSM and CDMA focuses on the
functional components and key operations. Security issues of these
systems are discussed in Chapter 6 (Mobile Security and Privacy).
3.4.1
Global System for Mobile
The ﬁrst-generation analog cellular systems are based on frequency-
division multiple access (FDMA), where each cell supports a number
of channels of equal bandwidth and each mobile connection takes
two channels (one up and one down) for full-duplex communication.
A user with a mobile device takes up the two channels exclusively
over the connection time. The capacity of the ﬁrst-generation cellular
systems is largely limited by the static channel allocation scheme.
GSM is a solution to this problem.
GSM can be regarded as a TDMA-based, circuit-switching, digi-
tal cellular system in that the channels allocated to a cell are shared

120
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
by several mobile connections in a TDM fashion. A mobile connec-
tion will use two such simplex channels, each of which is 200 KHz
wide, for a time slot of 577 µsec to transmit a 148-bit data frame (see
Figure 3.2). Eight such data frames make up a TDM frame of 1250
bits that is sent every 4.615 msec. A multiframe is comprised of 26
TDM frames, 24 of which are used for data trafﬁc. One of the other
two is a control frame and the other is a slot reserved for future use.
Accordingly, a shared channel offers a data rate of 270 Kbps, so each
user is able to access 1/8 of it, or 33.85 Kbps.
The frequency bands of the ﬁrst European GSM systems, namely
GSM 900, are between 890.2 and 914.8 MHz for cell phone transmis-
sions and between 935.2 and 960.8 MHz for base-station transmis-
sions. Both of these frequency bands are designated for 124 200-KHz
channels. Because the frequencies used in adjacent cells cannot over-
lap in the frequency domain, the total number of channels available
in each cell is much smaller than the total number of channels avail-
able within the allocated frequency bands. Other GSM systems, such
as the digital cellular system (DCS) 1800, personal communication
system (PCS) 1900, and GSM 400, have been deployed in different
148-bit
Data Frame
148-bit
Data Frame
8 Data
Frames
1250-bit
TDM Frame
1250-bit
TDM Frame
26 TDM
Frames
A Multiframe
Figure 3.2
GSM data frame structure.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
121
Table 3.2
Frequency Bands of GSM Systems.
GSM
Allocated Frequency Band (MHz)
Deployment
Systems
Uplink
Downlink
GSM 900
890–915
935–960
Europe, Asia
DCS 1800
1710–1785
1805–1880
United Kingdom
PCS 1900
1850–1910
1930–1990
North America
GSM 400
450–457/478–486
460–467/488–496
Nordic countries
regions. Table 3.2 outlines the frequency bands of these systems and
their deployment worldwide.
Speech coding of GSM employs the regular pulse excited–linear
predictive coder (RPE-LPC), which generates a 260-bit block every
20 msec. The modulation scheme of GSM is Gaussian minimum shift
keying (GMSK), in which a symbol represents a single bit.
3.4.1.1
GSM Network Architecture
A GSM network has three components: mobile station, base-station
subsystem, and network system (see Figure 3.3). The mobile station is
comprised of cell phones or other portal communication devices that
can interface with the base-station subsystem. Each GSM cell phone
essentially has two functional components: a mobile environment
and a subscriber identity module (SIM) card. A mobile environment
is a collection of physical elements for radio transmission and digital
signal processing. A SIM card is a small chip that stores the identi-
ﬁcation of a user (subscriber) and service network information, as
well as other data necessary for access authentication and authoriza-
tion. A SIM card is not built into the cell phone handset; instead,
it can be taken out and plugged into other GSM cell phones. As for
almost all cellular systems, coverage areas are divided into cell sites. A
mobile station in a cell directly communicates with a base transceiver
station (BTS), which is responsible for handling all mobile stations
within the cell site. The base-station subsystem has one or more BTSs
and a base station controller (BSC). Handoffs among BTSs in the same
base-station subsystem are controlled by the BSC.

122
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Base Station Subsystem
BTS
BTS
BTS
BSC
Network Subsystem
VLR
HLR
MSC
EIR
AuC
A interface
Abis
interface
MS (with SIM)
Um interface
PSTN/ISDN
Figure 3.3
GSM architecture.
To cover a large area, a GSM network will build many base-station
subsystems, each of which services mobile stations in a smaller area.
The network subsystem connects the cellular network to the pub-
lic switched telecommunication network (PSTN) by means of the
mobile switching center (MSC), which also facilitates handoffs of
mobile stations among different BSCs. BSCs in an area connect to
the responsible MSC, which in turn connects to other MSCs.
The operation of an MSC relies on the home location register
(HLR), visitor location register (VLR), authentication center (AuC),
and equipment identity register (EIR). The HLR is a central database of
mobile stations that maintains updated records of a mobile station’s
location area and its serving BSC, as well as the mobile subscriber’s
identiﬁcation number and subscribed services. The VLR stores a sub-
scriber’s current location in terms of a serving MSC. Note that a sub-
scriber always has a home switching center, in which the VLR keeps
track of other switching centers (visited switching centers) in the
vicinity of the subscriber at that moment. The AuC controls access
to user data and encryption keys of subscribers in the HLR and VLR,
as data transfer in GSM systems is encrypted. The EIR is a database
of mobile station device identiﬁcations, particularly for stolen and
malfunction devices. In addition to MSCs and these databases, an
operation maintenance center (OMC) is set up to monitor and
control MSCs in a region. It generates trafﬁc statistics, failure alerts,
and security-related reports.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
123
The communication between a MSC and a BSC is deﬁned in the
Signaling System No. 7 (SS7). SS7 is a set of protocols of control sig-
naling for circuit switching networks. In a GSM system, many control
signaling are based on SS7.
3.4.1.2
Location Area Update
A mobile subscriber is uniquely identiﬁed by the phone number,
formally known as the mobile station international ISDN number
(MSISDN). An MSISDN number is comprised of three portions: a
country code, such as 1 for the United States and 44 for the United
Kingdom; a national destination code; and a subscriber number.
Within a GSM system, an internal number, the internal mobile sub-
scriber identity (IMSI), is used to identify a mobile subscriber. This
number is stored in the SIM card.
A mobile station constantly monitors broadcast messages from its
serving BTS. Once a change has been noticed, an update request,
together with the subscriber’s IMSI and 4-byte temporal mobile sub-
scriber identity (TMSI) number, is sent to the new VLR via the new
MSC. A temporary mobile station roaming number (MSRN) is allo-
cated and mapped to the mobile’s IMSI by the new VLR and sent
to the mobile station’s HLR. This number contains the new MSC,
the subscriber number, and two other codes of the country. Upon
receiving the MSRN, the HLR of the mobile station notiﬁes the old
VLR to eliminate the previous record of the mobile station. Finally,
a new TMSI is allocated and sent to the mobile station to identify it
in future paging or call-initiation requests. Throughout this location
area update procedure, the MSISDN number of the mobile station is
not used at all.
3.4.1.3
Call Routing
Call routing in GSM systems is performed by a procedure similar
to that of location area update. There are two cases: mobile termi-
nated call (MTC) and mobile originated call (MOC). An MTC could
be initiated by a landline telephone, a cell phone of other cellular
networks such as CDMA, or another GSM mobile station. In the
ﬁrst and second cases, a gateway MSC (GMSC) will take the dialed

124
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
MSISDN number and determine the HLR of that number. The GMSC
then uses the MSISDN number to query the HLR, which returns the
current MSRN of the dialed number that identiﬁes the current loca-
tion. Then, the GMSC is able to route the call to the current MSC
of the dialed number. Upon receiving notiﬁcation of an incoming
call to a mobile station currently within its control, the MSC queries
its VLR for the TMSI of the mobile station by the MSRN number.
After that, a paging message is broadcast among all BSCs of the MSC.
The BSC that is serving the desired mobile station will reply to the
MSC. Finally, two parties of the call are indirectly located, and the
call can proceed. If the call is initiated from one mobile station to
another (MOC), a GMSC is no longer necessary; instead, the MSC
of the caller will take over, and the remaining procedures are the
same. An MOC may target a landline phone number or a cell phone
number. In this case, a GMSC that connects two types of networks
will link the two parties. In either case, the MSC involved must per-
form additional tasks so as to validate that the mobile subscribers are
allowed to utilize the service.
3.4.1.4
Handoff
The mobility of mobile stations requires that a handoff occur
when the subscriber carrying the mobile station moves across cells.
Depending on the BTS and MSC arrangement of the ﬁxed cellular
network infrastructure, the handoff may occur in the following ﬁve
scenarios, based on the movement of a mobile station: (1) intracell,
(2) intercell but intra-BSC, (3) inter-BSC but intro-MSC, (4) inter-MSC
but intranetwork, and (5) internetwork.
Intracell handoff is performed when the channels of a mobile
station are changed to prevent narrowband interference. This is man-
aged by the BSC and reported to the MSC. Intra-BSC handoff is the
most common type and involves two BTSs in the same BSC. During
an intra-MSC handoff, two BSCs within the same MSC manage to
allocate channels to the mobile station in the new cell and release old
channels used in the previous cell. Intranetwork handoff is carried
out when the mobile station moves across the border of cells man-
aged by two MSCs. As long as the mobile station remains in the same

Supporting Wireless Technologies
125
network, handoff is transparent to the subscriber, and no commu-
nication interruption should occur. For internetwork handoffs, such
as roaming across GSM networks of two wireless operators, real-time
communication will be interrupted and the connection will have to
be reestablished. These ﬁve scenarios deal with GSM networks only. A
handoff between two entities of the same type of network is referred
to as a horizontal handoff for micromobility. Conversely, a vertical hand-
off for macromobility refers to handoffs between two different types of
networks such as handoff between a GSM network and a CDMA net-
work. Supporting vertical handoff is a critical issue in next-generation
mobile computing when heterogeneous networks converge to allow
ubiquitous mobile access.
Issues surrounding mobile station handoff within GSM networks
can be summarized as follows.
• When should the handoff be performed? Typically, some periodic
measurement is done on the serving BTS of the mobile station to
monitor the signal strength between them. Generally, a gradual
reduction of signal strength might indicate the mobile station is
moving away from the BTS. A number of handoff strategies have
been devised to make this procedure smooth yet fast. Thresholds
and handoff margins are used to determine if a handoff is imme-
diately needed and can be done without frequent back-and-forth
handoffs. In addition to signal strength, sometimes a set of per-
formance statistics of a cell is also used to decide if a handoff is
necessary for better signal quality. In particular, when the call-
blocking probability of a cell is considerably high due to heavy
trafﬁc load in a cell, the mobile station may choose to handoff to
a neighboring cell.
• How fast is a handoff? The duration of a handoff is dependent on
several factors, including movement speed of the mobile station,
signal strength measurement and reporting interval, and hand-
off thresholds. Handoff may change the frequency and possibly
MSRN of the mobile station, yet all necessary operations have to
be done without being noticed by the user during a voice call.

126
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
The GSM standard requires a maximum duration of 60 msec for a
handoff.
3.4.2
General Packet Radio Service
Global system for mobile (GSM) was designed for digital voice com-
munication. As the need for data services such as e-mail, web
browsing, and text messaging started to grow substantially, the lim-
ited data rate of 9.6 to 14.4 Kbps of GSM systems could not meet the
increasing bandwidth demands of these applications. Those readers
who have used the very ﬁrst generation of dial-up modems have some
idea of how slow the GSM data rate is. Aimed at leveraging the widely
deployed existing GSM systems, general packet radio service (GPRS)
has been implemented as a 2.5G cellular system for value-added data
services.
3.4.2.1
Packet Switching
Basically, GSM is circuit-switching based, as are landline telephone
networks, meaning that when a channel (one of the eight time slots
in TDM) is assigned to a user at the beginning of a connection, it will
be exclusively used by the user throughput the connection and will
not be shared with others, even if there is really nothing going on for
some period of time. For voice communications, this is not a serious
problem. After all, people will keep talking during a phone call, and
the reserved channels (GSM uses two channels for each connection)
facilitate reliable voice communication for the two sides; however,
data communication is characterized by bursty transmissions rather
than steady streams. For example, if a user visits a website, it is very
likely that a few hyperlinked web pages will be downloaded from the
web server sequentially but not continuously, as the user will take
some time to read a page and decide which page to download next.
Allocating a channel for a series of intermittent, bursty data trans-
missions would obviously be wasteful in terms of system utilization
and costs.
On the other hand,
the maximum data rate of a channel
is signiﬁcantly lower than what the wired Internet can provide,

Supporting Wireless Technologies
127
thereby affecting the acceptance of mobile data applications such as
wireless application protocol (WAP), which is a standard set of
protocols enabling wireless web applications on a cell phone. Sim-
ple aggregation of multiple channels for a data transmission will
increase the data rate, but it also means that more system capacity is
underutilized due to the characteristics of data transmission.
In contrast, GPRS takes a packet-oriented approach for data trans-
mission and a dynamic, on-demand, bundled time-slot allocation
approach for a higher data rate. Because it is unnecessary to reserve
a channel, no connection has to be established before data transmis-
sion and the air interface for data appears to be always on as long as
the mobile station remains active in a GSM network. This is one of
the most important and marketable features of GRPS. A data-transfer
operation from a mobile station to a speciﬁc destination could be
spread to multiple time slots within a TDM frame, and several such
data-transfer operations could possibly share the same eight time slot.
Uplinks and downlinks are allocated separately. The GSM standard
deﬁnes four channel coding schemes: CS-1 of 9.05 Kbps, CS-2 of
13.4 Kbps, CS-3 of 15.6 Kbps, and CS-4 of 21.4 Kbps. The lower the
data rate, the higher the error detection and correction capability. If
all eight logical channels are used with CS-1 for a GPRS data transmis-
sion, the aggregate data rate will reach 72.4 Kbps. GRPS is designed to
coexist with traditional voice services, thus in reality the number of
logical channels available for GPRS is always restricted by system load
in addition to demanding data transmission. The characteristics of
asynchronous data trafﬁc further limits the number of logical chan-
nels for uplink data transmission. Furthermore, power consumption
will increase rapidly as the data rate of the transmitter on the mobile
terminal increases.
3.4.2.2
GPRS Architecture
Two new components have been added to the GSM network architec-
ture for GPRS: Serving GPRS support node (SGSN) and gateway GPRS
support node (GGSN) (see Figure 3.4). Like MSCs and BSCs, a GSM
network generally has many SGSNs and GGSNs, which constitute
a GPRS core network. All other existing GSM components are also

128
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Base Station Subsystem
BTS
BTS
BTS
BSC
Network Subsystem
VLR
HLR
MSC
EIR
AuC
A interface
Abis
interface
MS (with SIM)
Um interface
PDN (Packet
Data Network)
SGSN
GGSN
Gi interface
Gb interface
Figure 3.4
GPRS architecture.
involved. Additionally, to support GPRS, the mobile station has to
incorporate the GPRS terminal functionality. Ideally, for a BTS, only
a software upgrade is necessary to enable voice and data communica-
tion via the same radio interface, and it can be done remotely. This
way the large amount of BTS hardware and the number of antennas
do not have to be changed.
On the BSC, a packet control unit (PCU) device is added to deal
with data packets from BTSs. It has two functions: (1) separate packet-
switched trafﬁc from circuit-switched trafﬁc originating from mobile
stations, and (2) multiplex circuit-switched trafﬁc from the GSM core
network and packet-switched trafﬁc from the GPRS core network into
an intermingled data frame to serving cells. Packet-switched trafﬁc
from a PCU on an MSC is sent to the corresponding SGSN, which
keeps track of all serving mobile stations. GGSNs directly connected
to packet data networks (PDNs) such as X.25 or the Internet. To the
external networks, a GGSN appears to be an IP router that takes
responsibility for converting and forwarding data packets to desti-
nation mobile stations. It achieves this by performing translation
between external network node addresses and GRPS mobile addresses
and forwarding data to the SGSN responsible for the mobile station
in question according to a GPRS tunneling protocol (GTP). Because
GRPS data transmission is always initiated from a mobile station, for
those mobile stations currently engaged in GPRS data transmission,

Supporting Wireless Technologies
129
a GGSN is able to maintain a list of records that map these mobile
stations to their serving SGSNs. In reality, IP dominates both the
external PDNs and the GPRS core network. GPRS supports both IPv4
and IPv6. The GTP is an IP-based protocol with TCP (Transmission
Control Protocol) and UDP (User Datagram Protocol) as transport.
As a consequence, the address translation conducted on a GGSN
is actually IP network address translation (NAT) that allows mobile
stations to use private IP addresses within the GPRS core network.
For all mobile stations known to a GGSN, upon leaving the GPRS
core network their private IP addresses will be translated into glob-
ally unique, routable IP addresses. The GPRS core network may also
implement DHCP (Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Protocol) servers
and DNS (Domain Name System) servers for dynamic IP assignment
and domain name mapping, respectively. The GGSN also performs
authentication and collects trafﬁc volume of each subscriber for
billing.
3.4.2.3
GPRS Services
General packet radio service supports both point-to-point (PTP)
packet transfer services and point-to-multipoint (PTM) services. The
PTP service provides both connectionless mode of PTP connection-
less network service (PTP-CLNS) for IP-based data applications and
connection-oriented mode of PTP connection-oriented network ser-
vice (PTP-CONS) for X.25. The PTC-CONS supplies a virtual circuit
regardless of the mobile station’s location, realized by serving SGSNs
and GGSNs. The PTM service essentially offers multicasting among
mobile stations in a certain geographic area. To support point-to-
multipoint features, a point-to-multipoint service center (PTM-SC)
must be added as well.
3.4.2.4
GPRS Terminals
For mobile stations to use GPRS services, a GPRS terminal that han-
dles packet data transmission via the radio interface is required.
A GSM/GPRS cell phone has built-in GPRS terminals. Depending on
how these two types of services are offered, three classes of terminals
have been deﬁned: class A, which can handle both data and voice

130
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
simultaneously; class B, which can handle either one but not both at
any given time; and class C, which can only attach to one aspect of
the services. To date, due to the high cost of class A terminals, most
GRPS cell phones are class B terminals on which GPRS data service
is suspended during voice calls and short message service (SMS) and
resume afterwards. Data-only terminals do not support voice, such
as GPRS PCMCIA cards for laptop computers and PDAs.
To identify the capability of a GPRS terminal to use multiple logical
channels, 12 multislot classes of GPRS terminals have been deﬁned.
Each multislot class speciﬁes the maximum achievable data rates in
both uplink and downlink of a data transmission. Written as d+u, the
ﬁrst number (d) indicates the number of downlink timeslots, and
the second number (u) represents the number of uplink timeslots.
A third number, the active slots, speciﬁes the total number of time
slots that can be used simultaneously for both uplink and downlink
data transmission. For example, class 10 represents 4 downlink slots,
3 uplink slots, and 5 active slots. A multislot class and a terminal
service class make up a speciﬁcation of a GPRS terminal. Follow-
ing the abovementioned example, the class 10/class B designation
means that the terminal supports class 10 as the multislot class and
can handle both data and voice services but not at the same time
(class B).
3.4.2.5
Packet Data Protocol Context
For a mobile station to start a new GPRS session such as WAP brows-
ing, it must obtain a packet data protocol (PDP) address used in
the PDN. If the external PDN is the Internet, the mobile station
is likely to contact a DHCP server to obtain a dynamic IP address.
The key data structure used to map a PDP to the identiﬁcation of
the mobile station is referred to as a PDP context, which consists
of the PDP type (e.g., IPv4, or x.25); the PDP address assigned to
the mobile station; the requested QoS proﬁle, which speciﬁes the
desired service level in terms of delay, throughput, and reliability;
and the address of a GGSN that serves as the access point to the
PDN for the mobile station. A PDP context is session speciﬁc, and is
stored in the mobile station, the SGSN, and the GGSN. The mapping

Supporting Wireless Technologies
131
between the PDP and IMSI of a mobile station allows the GGSN
to locate the mobile station with the help of MSCs. For each data
session, a different PDP context must be created to allow parallel
access to multiple PDNs.
3.4.2.6
Enhanced Data Rates for Global Evolution
Enhanced data rates for global evolution (EDGE) is a further step
toward 3G cellular systems by GSM. The objective of EDGE is a high
data rate compared to GRPS. EDGE is also known as GSM384, as
it can provide a data rate up to 384 Kbps if all eight time slots
are used. Recall that GSM/GPRS uses GMSK modulation. EDGE is
based on a new modulation scheme, called 8-PSK, that allows a
much higher bit rate. In 8-PSK, each symbol transmitted through
the air interface carries three bits instead of only one, as in GMSK,
thereby greatly improving the data rate. EDGE deﬁnes nine coding
schemes of different bit data rates. By monitoring the channel-
to-interference ratio (C/I), EDGE can automatically switch coding
schemes in favor of a higher data rate or reliable transmission. EDGE
is also designed to make the convergence of GSM and IS-136 TDMA
(D-AMPS) smoother. A major obstacle of this foreseeable conver-
gence is channel bandwidth mismatch. TDMA channels are 30 KHz
wide, whereas GSM channels are 200 KHz wide. Compact EDGE was
introduced to solve this problem. It uses much fewer frequencies
than classic EDGE but has a wider 200-KHz channel. Compact EDGE
uses the same modulation scheme as EDGE classic does, with some
key exceptions that allow it to be deployed in the spectrum of less
than 1 MHz.
3.4.2.7
High-Speed, Circuit-Switched Data
High-speed, circuit-switched data (HSCSD) is an evolutionary tech-
nology for GSM systems moving towards 3 G UMTS. It can provide
a data rate up to 43.2 Kbps using multiple time slots simultaneously.
HSCSD allows various error correction methods to be used, whereas
GSM has only one error correction method to deal with transmission
errors in the worst case. HSCSD can also be an option in EDGE and
UMTS systems. A major issue that wireless operators must consider

132
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
while upgrading GSM/GPRS to EDGE or to 3G UMTS/WCDMA is
to make the most out of the existing GSM infrastructures. GPRS
and EDGE are considered intermediate solutions for early adopters
before 3G.
3.5 Code-Division Multiple Access
The notion of CDMA has two distinct meanings: It can refer to the
multiplexing scheme of code-division multiple access, or it can refer
to second-generation cellular systems that use DSSS as the spread
spectrum scheme and code-division multiplexing as the underlying
multiplexing technology. Unlike GSM, which is also the name of the
standard, the standard for CDMA cellular systems is IS-95.
3.5.1
Code-Division Multiple Access Concept
Section 3.2 introduced CDM. CDMA is actually DSSS utilizing CDM.
Like GSM, CDMA uses a dedicated frequency band for multiple simul-
taneous signal transmission, but what underlies this frequency use
scheme is spread spectrum, which essentially spreads a single signal
from a transmitter over the entire shared frequency band in such
a way that signals will not interfere with each other, thanks to a
spreading code assigned to each signal. A single data bit of 1 from a
mobile station is mapped to a chip sequence that identiﬁes the mobile
station. For a data bit of 0, the complement of the chip sequence
is used. The chip sequence is normally 64 or 128 chips long and
is pairwise orthogonal, meaning that the normalized inner product
(i.e., dot product) of any two distinct chip sequences (they are con-
sidered vectors of +1 and –1 in mathematical terms) is 0. After the
mapping, multiple data bitstreams from different mobile stations are
added linearly and transmitted. The intended receiver knows the chip
sequence of the individual mobile station and uses it, along with the
received aggregated bitstream, to compute data bits of that mobile
station. The computation is quite straightforward: Simply compute
the normalized inner product of the chip sequence of the desired

Supporting Wireless Technologies
133
mobile station and the received bitstream. In this way, the data bits
sent by that mobile station will be recovered. Without knowing the
correct chip sequence of a transmitter, the computation will yield
some pseudorandom bits like noise. An implicit assumption of the
decoding procedure is that the receiver and the transmitter are well
synchronized in time, which allows the necessary computations for
the correct portion of the transmitted bitstream. This is often done
by utilizing a special synchronization bit sequence.
The chip sequences assigned to mobile stations can be gener-
ated by the Walsh code, an algorithm that produces mathematically
orthogonal codes derived from the Walsh matrix.
The Walsh-
encoded chip sequences appear to be random noise to mobile ter-
minals. Initially, the chip sequences are of equal length. To increase
the number of usable chip sequences in the coding space, variable-
length chip sequences have been devised and used in today’s CDMA
systems. Interested readers can refer to A. J. Viterbi’s book “CDMA –
Principles of Spread Spectrum Communication” for more details of
CDMA codes.
3.5.2
IS-95
IS-95 is the underlying standard of CDMA systems. It is worth noting
that CDMA is primarily designed and promoted by Qualcomm Inc.,
which holds key intellectual property rights related to CDMA tech-
nology. IS-95 is also commonly referred to as cdmaOne. Table 3.3
outlines key parameters of IS-95.
The forward link refers to the link from a base station to a mobile
station, whereas the reverse link is the link from a mobile station
to a base station. For both types of links, voice is encoded at a rate
of 9600 bps after some error correction code is added. In a forward
link, both data and voice are encoded by a forward error correc-
tion (FEC) scheme, resulting in a doubled bit rate of 19.2 Kbps. In
a reverse link, because a different FEC scheme is used, the resulted
data rate is 28.8 Kbps. For each forward link, 64 logical channels, each
corresponding to a mobile station, are scrambled to prevent repeti-
tive patterns. A reverse link is comprised of up to 32 logical access

134
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 3.3
IS-95 Key Parameters.
IS-95 Parameter
Description
Multiple access method
CDMA with FDM
Frequency range of down links
869–894 MHz
Frequency range of up links
824–849 MHz
Number of channels of the frequency range
20
Channel spacing
1.25 MHz
Number of logical channels in forward link
64 (of which 55 can be trafﬁc logical channels)
Number of logical channels in reverse link
94 (of which up to 62 can be trafﬁc channels)
Number of users per channel
798
Voice trafﬁc bit rate
9600 bps
Encoded trafﬁc bit rate in forward link
19.2 Kbps
Encoded data bit rate in reverse link
28.8 Kbps
Chip sequence size
64 bits
Digital modulation scheme of forward link
Quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK)
Digital modulation scheme of reverse link
Orthogonal quadrature phase shift keying (OQPSK)
Channel bit rate
1.2288 Mbps
channels for paging and 62 logical trafﬁc channels. For both types of
links, the DSSS function spreads data of the logical channels over the
available frequency range, resulting in an overall 1.228-Mbps data
rate. Speciﬁcally, a 42-bit-long mask code is used on a reverse link
to identify logical trafﬁc channels that are dedicated to connecting
mobile stations to a base station. The same mask code is also used
to produce a bitstream that will be modulated onto the carrier using
orthogonal QPSK or offset QPSK (OQPSK). OQPSK differs from QPSK
in that in the implementation of OQPSK one of the two half-rate bit-
streams of the original input signal is delayed for one bit period to
reduce phase shift at a time. Because of duplex communication, the
total number of reverse-link logical channels for trafﬁc must be the
same as the total number of forward-link channels.
3.5.3
Software Handoff
Global system for mobile (GSM), as well as other TDMA or FDMA sys-
tems, uses hard handoff, in which a mobile station will not switch

Supporting Wireless Technologies
135
to a new base station until connection to the current mobile sta-
tion is released. Generally, only when the signal strength of the new
base station is sufﬁciently stronger than that of the current one plus a
threshold does the mobile station proceed to connect to the new base
station. The reason for utilizing signal strength for hard handoff is
frequency reuse among neighbor cells. As a mobile station moves
toward a neighboring cell, the signal strength from the new one
tends to increase gradually. Unfortunately, such spatial frequency
reuse does not exist in CDMA at all. In CDMA, a different handoff
approach is used, namely soft handoff. Because all cells essentially use
the same frequency band, it is not possible to switch frequency for
the handoff. In fact, a mobile station will connect to more than two
base stations at a time and constantly monitor the signal strength of
them. The handoff will take place only when one of them shows fairly
stronger signal strength than others. Before that, all the base stations
service the mobile station independently. Soft handoff is advanta-
geous over hard handoff because the mobile station does not lose
contact with the cellular network during handoff execution, increas-
ing the possibility of successful handoff. The standard allows up to
six base stations to be connected from a mobile station during hand-
off execution, although in real systems not that many can actually
be connected.
3.5.4
Road to 4G
IS-95, or cdmaOne, has been designated by Qualcomm as the
second-generation digital CDMA cellular system standard. The next
generation of cdmaOne is cdma2000,
and others are in vari-
ous stages of development, such as cdma2000 1x RTT, cdma2000
1x EV, cdma2000 1x DV, cdma2000 1x DO, and cdma2000 3x RTT
(explained shortly). As mentioned before, the second-generation
GSM systems are evolving to a different type of CDMA system:
UMTS/WCDMA. It is quite clear that the concept and underlying
technologies of CDMA ﬁnally dominate the air interface of the future
cellular world, after a long round of debates and remarkable business
practices.

136
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2G
2.5G
3G
cdma2000
cdma2000 1×
RTT
cdma2000 3×
RTT
cdma2000 1×
EV,DV,DO
UMTS/WCDMA
4G – All IP Network
WiMax
Wireless LAN
WPAN
Wireless Mesh
GSM
HSCSD
TD-SCDMA
WCDMA
GPRS
EDGE
IS95B
PDC
D-AMPS (IS-
136)
cdmaOne
(IS-95)
Figure 3.5
Road to 4G.
Figure 3.5 shows the evolution of 2G cellular systems toward 3G.
On the road to 3G, TDMA systems such as GSM, PDC, and D-AMPS
may take different paths involving GPRS, EDGE, or HSCSD as 2.5G
solutions. Things are much clearer on the CDMA side: cdmaOne (IS-
95A) will be replaced by IS-95B as a 2.5G system, then by cdma2000
systems. The standardization body supporting UMTS/WCDMA is
3GPP, whereas the counterpart for cdma2000 is 3GPP2. Figure 3.5
also shows wireless networks beyond 3G — the so-called All IP 4G
networks.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
137
3.6 GSM Versus CDMA
The two major 2G cellular systems are not compatible with each
other. GSM and CDMA networks are both widely used worldwide.
For example, in the United States, Verizon Wireless, Sprint PCS, and
ALLTEL are CDMA operators, whereas Cingular Wireless, AT&T Wire-
less (merged with Cingular in 2004), and T-Mobile USA are GSM
operators. Another wireless operator, Nextel, uses iDEN, a TDMA
technology developed by Motorola. While the Europeans enjoy
continent-wide, GSM-dominated wireless services, the world’s largest
mobile wireless market,
China,
with a total number of about
398 million subscribers as of 2005 (source:
Computer Industry
Almanac Inc.), is basically shared by two companies: China Telecom,
which operates a GSM network, and China Unicom, which operates
both GSM and CDMA networks. Table 3.4 provides a technical com-
parison of GSM and CDMA with an emphasis on the data services
for next-generation mobile computing. Most differences between the
two types of systems have been extensively discussed in the preceding
sections, except speech encoding and power control. CDMA employs
variable-rate codec for speech encoding, which is more efﬁcient than
GSM’s ﬁxed-rate codec. Power control of CDMA systems requires
a closed-loop approach, thus it is faster than GSM’s open-loop
approach.
3.7 3G Cellular Systems
There is some debate over which cellular systems should be con-
sidered are so-called 3G systems, especially with regard to EDGE
and some cdma2000 systems. Because GPRS and EDGE are GSM
based, it is fairly intuitive to put them into the 2.5G category. In the
CDMA camp, one cdma2000 system, called cdma2000 1xRTT, has
been arguably considered a 3G system. Generally, all cdma2000 and
UMTS/WCDMA systems may be considered 3G systems, as shown in
Table 3.5.

138
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 3.4
Comparison of GSM and CDMA.
Feature
Global System for Mobile
Code-Division Multiple Access
(GSM)/General Packet Radio
(CDMA)
Service GPRS
Multiple
access
scheme
Time-division multiple access
(TDMA)
CDMA
Duplexing
Frequency-division duplex (FDD)
FDD
Frequency
bands
900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 1900 MHz
800 MHz, 1900 MHz
Channel
bandwidth
200 KHz shared by 8 time-slotted
users
1250 KHz shared by 64 users
(codes)
Data rate
Initially 9600 bps, now 38.4 Kbps
or 115 Kbps shared by 8 users
9.6–14.4 Kbps
Carrier RF
spacing
1.25 MHz
200 KHz
Handoff
Hard handoff
Soft handoff
Speech
encoding
Fixed rate codec
Variable rate codec
Power control
Open-loop and slow power control
Close-loop and faster power
control
Identiﬁcation
SIM card
Hardwired in the handset
3G
UMTS/WCDMA
cdma2000
Road to 3G
GPRS, EDGE, or HSCSD
cdma2000 1x (IS-95B)
Market
Europe, Asia, Australia, South
America, North America,
including some US MNOs such
as Cingular/AT&T wireless, and
T-Mobile
Asia (South Korea and China),
Canada, United States; mobile
network operators (MNOs) such
as Verizon Wireless and Sprint
PCS
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) made a
request
for
proposal
(RFP)
in
1997
for
cellular
technologies
for the International Mobile Telecommunication (IMT)-2000 pro-
gram. A proposal for a universal mobile telecommunications sys-
tem (UMTS) was submitted by the European Telecommunication
Standards Institute (ETSI) to ITU. Its radio interface is universal
terrestrial radio access (UTRA). In addition to the proposals and sys-
tems outlined in Table 5, other 3 G radio access technologies are

Supporting Wireless Technologies
139
Table 3.5
The 3G Landscape.
3 G Systems
Key Features
IMT Proposal
Radio Interface
Universal mobile
telecommunica-
tions system
(UMTS)/wideband
code-division
multiple access
(WCDMA)
144 Kbps satellite and
rural outdoor, 384 Kbps
urban outdoor, 2048
Kbps indoor and low
range outdoor
IMT 2000 CDMA
direct spread
by 3GPP
Direct-sequence
spread spectrum
(DSSS) CDMA; both
frequency-division
duplex (FDD) and
time-division duplex
(TDD) are used
cdma2000 1x RTT
Also known as cdma2000
1x MC (multiple
carriers); data rate up
to 144 kbps
IMT 2000 CDMA
multicarrier by
3GPP2
Uses a 1.25-MHz band,
coexistent with IS95
cdma2000 1x
EV-DO
Downlink (forward-link)
data rates up to 3.1
Mbps and uplink
(reverse-link) rates of
154 Kbps
Backward compatible
with cdmaOne
cdma2000 1x
EV-DV
Downlink (forward-link)
data rates up to 3.1
Mbps and uplink
(reverse-link) rates of
up to 451 Kbps
Backward compatible
with cdamOne
cdma2000 3x RTT
2–4 Mbps
Uses three 1.25 MHz
bands
TD-SCDMA (Time
Division –
Synchronous
Code Division
Multiple Access)
2 Mbps
IMT-2000 CDMA
TDD by China
TDMA and CDMA
combined
listed as follows:
• IMT-2000 TDMA single carrier,
originally promoted by the
Universal Wireless Communications Consortium (UWCC); EDGE
is one of the IMT-2000 TDMA SC technologies
• IMT-2000 FDMA/TDMA, also known as digital enhanced cordless
telecommunications (DECT), the enhanced version of the cordless
phone standard.

140
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3.7.1
UMTS/WCDMA Versus cdma2000
A UMTS system works in two modes; its frequency-division duplex
(FDD) mode is the well-known wideband CDMA (WCDMA), whereas
its time-division duplex (TDD) mode seems to remain unnoticed
by the public. cdam2000 is the evolution of cdmaOne, the cur-
rent CDMA system in the United States. In fact, strictly speaking,
WCDMA only refers to the radio interface aspect of the entire UMTS
system. The same radio interface technology is used by NTT DoCoMo
and J-Phone (a subsidiary of Vodafone) as well. As an FDD system,
WCDMA does not require time synchronization among base stations.
It allows a bit rate up to 384 Kbps, compared with the maximum rate
of 2 Mbps in TDD UMTS system. In particular, China has proposed
a TDD UMTS system, called TD-SCDMA, and is vigorously pro-
moting this technology among Chinese telecommunications device
manufacturers and wireless operators.
cdma2000 is a general term representing technical speciﬁcations
such as cdam2000 1x RTT, cdma200 1xEV-DO, cdma2000 1xEV-DV,
and cdma2000 3xRTT. RTT stands for radio transmission technology,
EV-DO for evolution-data optimized, and EV-DV for evolution-data
and voice. 1xRTT can provide a peak rate of 153.6 Kbps, while 3xRTT
may theoretically offer a peak rate of 3.09 Mbps. The ﬁrst commer-
cial system of cdma2000 1xEV-DO was launched in South Korea
in January 2002. cdma2000 is backward compatible with existing
IS95/cdmaOne systems, whereas WCDMA requires an overhaul of
existing base stations. There is no synchronization in WCDMA sys-
tems, thus sophisticated protocol designs and handoff mechanisms
are not required. On the other hand, cdma2000 requires base-station
synchronization. In some sense, WCDMA can be seen as an oppor-
tunity for operators to challenge Qualcomm’s CDMA technology
monopoly. Readers interested in the evolution of mobile networks
are encouraged to refer to Vriendt et al. [2].
3.7.2
UMTS/WCDMA
A UMTS system is comprised of three components and two interfaces
(see Figure 3.6). The components are the user environment (UE),

Supporting Wireless Technologies
141
UTRAN
Node B
Node B
Node B
RNC
CN
VLR
HLR
MSC
EIR
AuC
Iu-CS
interface
Iub interface
UE
Uu interface
PDN (Packet
Data Network)
SGSN
GGSN
Gi interface
Iu-PS
interface
GMSC
PSTN
Figure 3.6
UMTS architecture.
the UMTS terrestrial radio access network (UTRAN), and the core
network (CN). The interface between UE and UTRAN is referred
to as Uu. The interface between UTRAN and a Node B is Iub.
UMTS introduces Node Bs as base stations (BTSs in GSM) and radio
network controllers (RNCs) as BSCs in GSM. Similar to GSM and
GPRS, MSCs and SGSNs control RNCs through the Iu interface. In
particular, an MSC connects to an RNC through an Iu–CS (circuit-
switching) interface, whereas a SGSN connects to an RNC through
an Iu-PS (packet-switching) interface. In UMTS, GMSCs and GGSNs
connect to PSTN and PDNs. Other components such as HLR and
VLR are the same as in GSM but with enhanced functionality
for UMTS.
UMTS uses a pair of 5-MHz channels, one in the 1900-MHz range
for uplink and one in the 2100-MHz range for downlink. In contrast,
cdma2000 uses one or more arbitrary 1.25-MHz channels for each
direction of transmission. UMTS is expected to deliver a user data
rate of 1920 Kbps, although in reality 384 Kbps is probably what the
system can really offer. A future version of UMTS/WCDMA, high-
speed downlink packet access (HSPDA), will offer data speeds up
to 8 to 10 Mbps and 20 Mbps for multiple-input, multiple-output
(MIMO) antenna systems. The data modulation scheme is QPSK
for uplink and BPSK for downlink. The chip rate is 3M chips per
second.

142
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
As a spread spectrum radio interface, WCDMA uses soft handoff
just as cdmaOne does for the same reason: It is quite difﬁcult to
control power beyond the hysteresis if hard handoff is employed
because in CDMA systems forcing a mobile station to operate over
some hysteresis level will cause large interference.
The ﬁrst UMTS network went into operation in the United King-
dom in 2003. AT&T Wireless in the United States deployed UMTS
in selected cities in late 2004. Japan’s largest telecommunication ser-
vice provider NTT DoCoMo launched the ﬁrst WCDMA-based 3G
network, dubbed FOMA (Freedom of Mobile Multimedia Access),
in 2001.
3.7.3
cdma2000
cdma2000 is another standard under the ITU-2000 program (see
Figure 3.7). It comes in two stages: 1X and 3X. Using the existing
cdmaOne infrastructure, cdma2000 1X can supply a maximum user
data rate of 207 Kbps and a typical data rate of 144 Kbps in gen-
eral. It doubles the voice capacity of cdmaOne systems and offers six
times the capacity of GSM or TDMA systems. cdma2000 3X further
improves the user data rate to 2 Mbps.
In cdma2000, three major components exist in the overall net-
work architecture: mobile station, radio access network, and core
PCN
RAN
Node B
Node B
Node B
RNC
CN
VLR
HLR
MSC
EIR
AuC
A interface
Iub interface
MS
Um interface
PDN (Packet
Data Network)
PDSN
Pi interface
PSTN
Ai
AAA
Figure 3.7
cdma2000 architecture.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
143
network. The interface between a mobile station and radio access
network is called Um, and the interface between radio access net-
work and core network is called A. In addition, the core network can
be further decomposed into two portions: One portion, the packet
core network (PCN), connects to external IP networks via a Pi inter-
face, whereas the other connects to PSTN via an Ai interface. Similar
to a UMTS network, the core network of cdma2000 also has MSCs,
HLRs, and VLRs. The principle difference between the core network
of cdma2000 and those of other cellular systems is the PCN that pro-
vides IP network access to mobile stations. A component in PCN, the
packet data service node (PDSN), performs roughly the same task as a
SGSN in UMTS or GPRS; however, in cdma2000, two IP access meth-
ods are provided: simple IP access and mobile IP access. Simple IP
access is the traditional way to obtain and retain an IP address within
a geographically located subnet. When the mobile station moves to
another subnet, it has to redo the DHCP procedure and obtain a new
IP address. This is the case when a mobile worker uses a laptop com-
puter to connect to an enterprise network across several buildings.
Mobile IP access enables a mobile station to use the same IP address
across different regions. In this case, a home agent of the mobile sta-
tion will assume the responsibility of maintaining the same IP address
for the mobile station. A foreign agent that is part of the PDSN is used
to assign a temporary address to the mobile station that just moved
in, and tunnels packets from the home agent to the mobile station.
Note that GPRS has only a single IP access method: the simple IP
access. It has to be emphasized that cdma2000 has better IP support.
This is indeed a tremendous advantage of cdma2000 over UMTS, as
in the long run the core cellular network will be interoperable with
other wired or wireless networks with IP as the underlying network
protocol.
Another major task of the PCN is authentication, authoriza-
tion, and accounting (AAA). Three parties are involved: home AAA
(HAAA), broker AAA (BAAA), and visited AAA (VAAA). HAAA stores
a subscriber’s proﬁle information. Once requested by a VAAA, it will
authenticate and authorize a subscriber and send the response to back
to the VAAA. For accounting, VAAA is able to receive accounting

144
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
information from HAAA and provides the subscriber’s proﬁle to the
PDSN. BAAA is used as an intermediate server when VAAA and HAAA
are not directly associated with each other.
3.7.4
4G Cellular Systems
As of 2004, UMTS/WCDMA and cdma2000 3G services have been
rolled out in a number of countries and continue to gain some ground
among business professionals. It is widely agreed that 3G will replace
2G and 2.5G systems in the next several years, providing a seem-
ingly high throughput of several megabits per second for a mobile
station. While this data rate seems sufﬁciently large for popular appli-
cations such as text messaging and web browsing on a cell phone, it
cannot meet the relentless demand of emerging applications such as
full-motion video broadcasting and videoconferencing. In response,
researchers have moved on to 4G cellular systems, which provide
even higher data rates of 20 Mbps to 100 Mbps. It has to be noted
that wireless LANs can now provide data rates of up to 54 Mbps,
much higher than current and future variants of 3G systems, whether
UMTS or cdma2000. On the other hand, a signiﬁcant effort has been
made to coalesce voice and data communication in all 3G systems to
leverage the legacy systems as much as possible. As voice over IP tech-
nology matures, an all-IP wireless network that supports voice and
data over the same packet-switching infrastructure will become tech-
nically feasible to build and will be more cost effective than current
3G frameworks.
Emerging technologies for 4G wireless networks are summarized as
follows; note that the application of these technologies is not limited
to cellular systems:
• Smart antenna technologies exploit spatial separation of signals
to allow an antenna to focus on desired signals as a way to reduce
interference and improve system capacity.
• MIMO (multiple-in, multiple-out) utilizes antenna arrays at both
the transmitter end and receiver end to boost the link data
rate and system capacity. MIMO takes advantages of multi-path

Supporting Wireless Technologies
145
propagation of signals by which more data can be sent in a single
channel by splitting and recombining data onto multiple paths.
• Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), multiple-
carrier-code-division multiple access (MC-CDMA), modulation,
and multiplexing technologies will improve the robustness of
signal transmission and the data rate.
• Software radio or software-deﬁned radio will make it possi-
ble to reconﬁgure channel modulation and multiplexing on
the ﬂy.
In a broader vision, 3G cellular systems are merely one type of
wireless access in the world of mobile computing. Other wireless
access technologies, such as wireless LANs and WiMax, have demon-
strated great potential to become a primary means of network access,
as shown in Figure 3.5. These technologies may complement each
other and may certainly compete head-on with each other in a vari-
ety of industry segments, leading to coexistence and integration of
these systems and spurring new services and applications. The fol-
lowing section talks about a galaxy of new services and applications
in the wireless arena.
3.8 2G Mobile Wireless Services
Aside from traditional voice services, other cellular wireless services
have proliferated in some countries. For example, Short Message Ser-
vice (SMS) is a vastly successfully service in some Asian countries, and
has become a major revenue source to MNOs. Customized mobile
web surﬁng also gain some ground as WAP and iMode mature. In this
section, we discuss these two types of 2G mobile wireless services.
3.8.1
WAP and iMode
Wireless application protocol (WAP) is an open-application layer
protocol for mobile applications targeting cell phones and wireless

146
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
terminals. It was developed by the WAP Forum, which has been con-
solidated into the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA). The current release
is WAP 2.0. WAP is intended to be the World Wide Web for cell
phones. It is independent of the underlying cellular networks in use.
To a cell phone or personal digital assistant (PDA) user, WAP is per-
ceived as a small browser application that can be used to browse some
speciﬁc websites, quite similar to the web browsing experience on a
desktop computer but with signiﬁcant constraints due to the form
factor of the mobile terminal. A WAP system employs a proxy-based
architecture to overcome the inherent limitations of mobile devices
with respect to low link bandwidth and high latency. Below is a list
of features that separate WAP from other application protocols:
• Wireless markup language (WML), WML script, and supporting
WAP application environment — Together, they are referred to
as WAE. WML is an HTML-like markup language speciﬁcally
devised for mobile terminals that have limited bandwidth, fairly
small screen size, limited battery time, and constrained input
methods. WSL is a scaled-down scripting language supported by
the WAP application environment. In addition, WAP 2.0 supports
XHTML language, which allows developers to write applications
for both desktop computers and mobile terminals.
• WAP protocol stack — WAP Version 1.0 includes wireless ses-
sion protocol (WSP), wireless transaction protocol (WTP), wireless
transport layer security (WTLS), and wireless datagram protocol
(WDP). Version 2.0 incorporates standard Internet protocols into
its protocol stack, such as TCP, transport layer security (TLS), and
HTTP (Hyper Text Transport Protocol). Both TCP and HTTP are
optimized for wireless environments.
• WAP services, such as push and traditional request/response, user
agent proﬁle, wireless telephony application, external function-
ality interface, persistent storage interface, data synchronization,
and multimedia messaging service.
WAP 1.0 has proved to be a technological hype; it has been
intensively promoted by wireless operators and content providers

Supporting Wireless Technologies
147
but has received little, if any, positive feedback from users. Because
of that, WAP has sometimes been referred to as “wait and pay.”
Interestingly, it is not only the protocol but also the applications uti-
lizing WAP that, as a whole, push users away because of application
performance, input methods, and the GUI interface, among other
reasons. Moving toward standard IP protocols rather than special-
ized wireless protocols, WAP 2.0 addresses most of the problems of
the protocol stack and the application environment, thereby giving
the technology a brighter future.
iMode is a successful wireless application service provided by NTT
DoCoMo. It is very similar to WAP in that it deﬁnes an architec-
ture of web access on mobile terminals, primarily cell phones. Like
WAP 2.0, iMode adopted standard Internet protocols as transport for
applications, but iMode does not use any gateways. Instead, it utilizes
overlay packet network on top of a cellular network for direct com-
munication. The fundamental difference between WAP and iMode is
that iMode requires mobile terminals to be designed to adapt to the
services and applications of iMode, while WAP focuses on adapt-
ing itself to ﬁt into general mobile terminals. Furthermore, NTT
DoCoMo’s effective WAP initiative has managed to attract many sat-
isﬁed providers who can offer a wide array of services and applications
to users [4].
3.8.2
Short Message Service
No one ever expected that short message service (SMS) would be such
a tremendous success, one that exempliﬁes the perfect marriage of
a business model with a wireless technology. European and Asian
subscribers have been using SMS for years. More than a billion SMS
messages are sent each month in some countries. Finally, as of 2004,
SMS began to take off in North America. SMS allows two-way trans-
mission of 160-character alphanumeric messages between mobile
subscribers and external computing systems such as e-mail systems
and paging systems. Because of its increasing popularity, SMS has
been extensively combined with many new types of information ser-
vices in addition to traditional usage. For example, both Google and

148
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Yahoo offer Internet searching via SMS. SMS was initially designed
to replace alphanumeric paging service with two-way guaranteed
messaging and notiﬁcation services.
Two new types of SMS components have been added to the cellu-
lar network: short message service center (SMSC) and signal transfer
point (STP). An SMSC is a central controller of SMS services for the
entire network. It interfaces with external message sources, such as
voice-mail systems, e-mail systems, and the web. Messages sent from
a mobile subscriber will also be stored and forwarded by the SMSC. An
STP is a general network element connecting two separate portions
of the network via SS7 signaling protocol. In the case of SMS, numer-
ous STPs interface with the SMSC, each handling SMS transmission
and delivery to and from a large number of mobile stations. No mat-
ter where the messages come from, the SMSC will guarantee delivery
and inform the transmitter. For the SMSC to locate a mobile station
for message delivery, it must utilize the cellular network, especially
the HLR, VLR, and MSC of the mobile station.
Short message service has been enhanced with new capabilities to
support enhanced message service (EMS) and multimedia message
service (MMS). If you consider SMS to represent very early plain-text
e-mails, you might think of EMS as the fancier HTML e-mails con-
taining pictures, animations, embedded objects such as sound clips,
and formatted text. MMS is the next-generation messaging service
that supports rich media such as video and audio clips. The wide
use of picture messages sent from a camera cell phone is merely one
example of MMS in action. MMS consumes more bandwidth so it
requires a high data rate for the underlying network and consider-
able computing capability of the mobile handset. The multimedia
service center (MMSC) performs similar tasks as the SMSC for SMS.
The following list outlines the necessary steps of an MMS procedure:
• The transmitter sends a message to the MMSC from a cell phone,
PDA, or networked computer.
• The MMSC replies to the transmitter with a conﬁrmation of “mes-
sage sent.” In fact, it is not sent to the receiver yet, as the message
is stored at the MMSC.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
149
• The MMSC locates the receiver with the help of a number of cel-
lular network elements, such as MSCs, HLRs, and VLRs. If the
mobile station of the receiver is on, the MMSC sends a notiﬁca-
tion of a new message to it, along with a URL to the new message.
Otherwise, it waits and tries again later.
• The receiver can choose to download the message right away or
save the URL to download it later.
• The MMSC will be notiﬁed by the receiver that the mes-
sage has been downloaded and presumably read,
then the
MMSC notiﬁes the transmitter that the message has been
delivered.
MMS is the natural evolution of SMS, with EMS as an optional
intermediate messaging service, but it is very unlikely that MMS will
replace SMS completely as plain text messages are preferable in many
cases. Additionally, MMS does not require 3G; it can be done in
2.5G systems such as GPRS and EDGE. Problems that may hinder the
widespread use of MMS include digital rights management of content
being exchanged among many mobile subscribers, development of
a user-friendly interface design, and sufﬁciently large bandwidth for
message delivery.
3.9 Wireless Technologies Landscape
In the wireless world, aside from cellular technologies, myriad wire-
less technologies have emerged and matured. At the eve of the
new millennium, “wireless” typically referred to the use of cell
phones. After only a few years, the dramatic growth of new wire-
less communication and computing technologies has fundamentally
changed our perception of wireless technologies. This section dis-
cusses these technologies from an overall perspective. Once again,
the emphasis of the discussion is on mobile data access in the greater
domain of mobile computing, rather than on wireless communi-
cation. Figure 3.8 depicts the landscape of existing and emerging

150
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Low Data Rate
(<10 Mbps)
Medium Data Rate
(10 ~ 100 Mbps)
High Data Rate
(>100 Mbps)
BAN/PAN
MAN/
WAN
Range
LAN
GSM/
CDMA
2.5G/3G
Zigbee
Bluetooth
802
802.11a
802.11g
802.11n
UWB
802.16a
WiMax
802.16e
WiMax
Infrared
802.11s
Wireless
Mesh
Figure 3.8
Wireless technology landscape.
wireless technologies with respect to two signiﬁcant characteristics
pertaining to mobile computing: data rate and signal transmission
range. As the ﬁgure suggests, cellular systems are positioned in a grid
of low data rate and high signal range. Wireless LANs (the 802.11 fam-
ily) provide medium and high data rates in a local area range. Within
the body area network (BAN)/personal area network (PAN) range,
ultra-wideband (UWB) is expected to supply a quite high data rate,
whereas Bluetooth, ZigBee, and infrared fall into the low data rate
range. For point-to-point and multipoint wireless communications,
802.16a and 802.16e offer a high data range for communication over
a metropolitan area network (MAN). A broad set of applications has
been created to make use of the data rates in each range for various
cases where wireless communication is preferred.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
151
3.10 802.11 Wireless LANs
A wireless LAN is a local area network that utilizes radio frequency
communication to permit data transmission among ﬁxed, nomadic,
or moving computers. Wireless LANs can be dividend into two oper-
ational modes: infrastructure mode and ad hoc mode, depending on
how the network is formed. Most wireless LANs operate in infras-
tructure mode. In many cases, a wireless LAN is used to avoid the
hassle of establishing a wired LAN (e.g., cabling in a multiroom build-
ing or a large open space such as a warehouse or a manufacturing
plant). Several computers are connected over the air to a central
access point that in turn links to the wired network. At the same
time, a laptop computer with a wireless LAN interface is able to
access the backend wired network across different access points in an
intermittent or real-time fashion. In all these scenarios, a wireless
LAN infrastructure of networked access points is needed. These access
points may connect directly to each other via wireless links or rely
on the wired network for interconnection.
Ad hoc mode is more ﬂexible than infrastructure mode in that
it does not require any central or distributed infrastructure devices
or computers to operate. Instead, computers in an ad hoc wireless
LAN temporarily self-organize into a group to serve each other in a
peer-to-peer manner. In some cases when it is not feasible to build
a network infrastructure for technical or other reasons (e.g., troops
on the battleﬁeld or sports spectators in a huge stadium), an ad hoc
wireless LAN seems a good solution.
Today, the dominant radio frequency technology used to build a
wireless LAN is a spread spectrum on the unlicensed 2.4-GHz fre-
quency band, as deﬁned in the IEEE 802.11 standards and ETSI
HIPERLAN (High Performance Radio Local Access Network). Other
radio frequency technologies such as infrared wireless LANs and nar-
rowband microwave LANs have faded away following the explosive
growth of spread spectrum wireless LANs. The following is a list of
advantages of radio frequency wireless LANs over infrared; narrow-
band microwave LANs are not considered because they are primarily

152
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
used for point-to-point wireless communication rather than group
communication:
• High bandwidth — 802.11 wireless LANs support a link bandwidth
up to 11 Mbps for 802.11b and 55 Mbps for 802.11a and HIPER-
LAN2, much higher than that of infrared, which is only up to
several megabits per second.
• No line-of-sight (LOS) restriction — Infrared requires LOS for
transmission, but radio does not as long as the frequency in use is
not too high. This is the major reason why 802.11 wireless LANs
are the number one choice for home networking.
• Easy to set up and use — The 802.11 protocols are designed to
allow almost zero conﬁguration of the network and the inter-
faces. Of course, the default setting is by no means secure but it
does work.
3.10.1
Architecture and Protocols
According to the IEEE 802.11 standard, a basic service set (BSS) is a
number of computers equipped with wireless LAN interfaces connect-
ing to an access point (AP). Multiple access points can be connected
to a wired or wireless distribution system (DS), whereas several BSSs
interconnected via the distribution system comprise an extended ser-
vice set (ESS) uniquely identiﬁed by an extended service set identiﬁer
(ESSID) or SSID. The APs may broadcast the ESSID such that anyone
within its coverage is able to discover it and conﬁgure the wireless
LAN interface to participate in the ESS. If the ESSID is not broad-
cast, users have to know it from other sources in order to access the
network.
In many ways, wireless LANs are designed to be the wireless
equivalent of LANs such as Ethernet; consequently, similar to other
802 LAN standards, these IEEE 802.11 standards deﬁne two bottom
layers of protocols: PHY (physical layer) and MAC (medium access
layer), retaining the upper layers of the TCP/IP stack. These two layers
essentially hide the underlying low-level details of data transmission

Supporting Wireless Technologies
153
and medium access, supplying the same interface to the logical link
control (LLC) sublayer of data link as that of a wired LAN. Hence,
applications will not detect any difference when running in a wired
LAN or a wireless LAN. The various 802.11 wireless LAN standards
differ only in physical layer (i.e., frequency band being used), signal
multiplexing schemes, modulation schemes, and data rates.
According to the MAC layer of 802.11, to ensure reliable frame
transmission between two stations an ACK (acknowledgement) frame
will be sent from a destination station to the source station when
the destination receives a data frame from the source. If no ACK
is received at the source, it may simply retransmit the data frame.
The MAC layer of 802.11 also employs the carrier sense multiple
access/collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) medium access mechanism
to provide reliable frame transmission service, formally known as
the distribution coordination function (DCF), which was deﬁned
as a sublayer of MAC. On top of it is a partial sublayer, the point
coordination function (PCF), as shown in Figure 3.9. Two trafﬁc
services are supported by 802.11: asynchronous data service and
time-bounded service. The ﬁrst is commonly the best effort service,
while the latter can guarantee a maximum delay but relies on a cen-
tralized polling master to offer contention-free service. DCF supports
Logical Link Control (LLC)
Physical (PHY)
Medium Access
Control (MAC)
Point Coordination Function (PCF)
For Asynchronous Data Service and Time
Bound Service
Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) [CSMA/CA]
For Asynchronous Data Service
Figure 3.9
802.11 protocol architecture.

154
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
asynchronous data services only in either infrastructure mode or
ad hoc mode, whereas PCF is used for time-bounded service only in
infrastructure mode. In particular, in addition to a general CSMA/CA
mechanism, DCF has an optional MAC mechanism that addresses the
hidden terminal problem and exposed terminal problem (discussed
shortly). On the other hand, the contention-free service offered by
PCF is realized by a centralized polling master called the point coordi-
nator. 802.11 deﬁnes a time interval called superframe that consists
of two separated stages, ﬁrst for the poll and second for regular
asynchronous contention-based access. The resulting effect resem-
bles time-division multiple access, where each station receives an
evenly distributed share of the bandwidth.
Radio communication is via a shared medium. To use the shared
medium, a station must ﬁrst sense the communication channel (the
carrier) and make sure it is not occupied, a procedure called CSMA.
If the channel is idle, it can begin to transmit; otherwise, it will wait
for a random amount of time with a contention window and sense
the channel again. In addition, the radio communication of wireless
LANs is a half-duplex operation in that it cannot transmit and receive
at the same time. This is because when the station is transmitting the
strength of its own transmission will mask all other signals nearby in
the air. Recall that, for Ethernet, collision detection (CD) is used (by
monitoring abnormal current of the wire) when a station is sending
data. In wireless LANs, such an approach is not possible because a
station has no way to detect a collision while sending data; therefore,
collision avoidance is used instead of CD and is implemented by a
three-way handshake protocol described as follows.
Due to spatial limitations of signal strength, a station may not
draw a correct conclusion on channel usage, leading to signal inter-
ference or channel underutilization. Usually, collisions occur when
a station is receiving two signals at the same time. This “hidden ter-
minal” problem is depicted in Figure 3.10a. In the ﬁgure, station B
initiates a transmission to A, and station C also begins transmitting to
A at the same time because C, after sensing the channel, is unaware
of B’s transmission. Hence, two simultaneous transmissions cause
interference at A. In this case, C is a hidden terminal to B.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
155
(b) Exposed Terminal Problem: A cannot
transmit to D because it senses B’s
transmission
B’s signal range
A’s signal range
(a) Hidden Terminal Problem: C’s
transmission to A will collide with
transmission from B to A 
C’s signal range
B’s signal range
B
A
C
X
D
A
B
C
X
Figure 3.10 (a) Hidden terminal problem and (b) exposed terminal problem.
Another problem is the “exposed terminal,” where the transmis-
sion of station B to station C effectively prevents B’s neighbor (A)
from transmitting because A senses the channel and ﬁnds B is using
it; however, A, the exposed terminal, should be able to transmit to
D without any problem, as A cannot reach C and the transmission
from A to D should not affect the ongoing transmission from B to C.
The exposed terminal problem causes channels to be underutilized
and thereby reduces the data throughput of the system. Figure 3.10b
shows the exposed terminal problem.
To address these problems, some sort of coordination of chan-
nel use among stations is needed. The MAC layer of 802.11 solved
the problems by introducing a handshake protocol along with small
RTS and CTS frames. A request-to-send (RTS) frame is ﬁrst sent from
the source to the destination. Then, if the destination is not receiv-
ing, it replies with a clear-to-send (CTS) frame. Upon receiving the
CTS frame, data frame transmission can begin. With this enhance-
ment, both the hidden terminal and exposed terminal problems are
avoided. For the hidden terminal problem, C will not receive CTS
until the transmission from B to A is over. Thus, it will refrain from
transmission to A during that period. For the exposed terminal prob-
lem, between B and C, B ﬁrst sends an RTS to C. A also receives this
RTS. Then C sends a CTS message to B indicating that B’s transmis-
sion to C can begin. This CTS message will not reach A, meaning

156
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
that the RTS it received belongs to a transmission beyond its cover-
age (B to C, in this case). Thus, A can safely proceed to send frames to
D. Note that RTS and its CTS both contain the time duration of the
data transmission plus ACK transmission. Stations that must refrain
from this imminent data transmission will have to wait until it is
over and then contend for the channel (CSMA). Collisions may only
occur when multiple stations access the channel by sending RTSs or
data frames.
3.10.2
Frame Format
The 802.11 frame format is depicted in Figure 3.11. The ﬁgure on
the top shows the frame structure of nine ﬁelds in bytes. The ﬁgure
on the bottom shows the ﬁrst ﬁeld, the frame control ﬁeld, in bits.
Depending on the control ﬁeld, some of the other ﬁelds may contain
speciﬁc information:
• Frame control — Indicates the frame type and provides related
control information.
• Duration/connection ID — Duration indicates the time in
microseconds that the channel is occupied which can be used
for network allocation vector computation during the RTS/CTS
exchange. The ﬁeld may also be used as a station ID for power-save
poll messages.
2
Frame
Control
2
Duration
2
Sequence
0-2312
data
2
CRC
6
Address 1
6
Address 2
6
Address 3
6
Address 4
2
Version
2
Type
1
To
DS
4
Sub-Type
1
From
DS
1
MF
1
Retry
1
Power
1
More
1
WEP
1
Order
Byte:
Bit:
Figure 3.11 802.11 frame format.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
157
• Address 1–4: Up to four 48-bit addresses can be speciﬁed in these
four ﬁelds. The usage of these four ﬁelds depends on the To DS and
From DS bits in the frame control for both ad hoc mode and infras-
tructure mode. These addresses may specify a frame source station,
a frame destination station, a transmitting station or access point,
and a receiving station or access point.
• Sequence control — Contains a 4-bit fragment number for frag-
mentation and reassembly and a 12-bit sequence number to detect
duplicates.
• Frame data — Up to 2312 bytes of data can be transmitted with
one frame.
• CRC — Contains a 32-bit cyclic redundancy check of the frame.
The following ﬁelds are deﬁned in the frame control:
• Version — Indicate 802.11 version number (0).
• Type — These 2 bits indicate frame type: management, control, or
data. Management frames are used for communication between
stations and access points such as association, dissociation, prob-
ing, and beaconing. Control frames are used to provide reliable
frame delivery service.
• Subtype — Depending on the type of ﬁeld, subtype further
identiﬁes the function of a frame.
• To DS — This ﬁeld is set to 1 if the frame is destined to a DS from
a station or an access point to another access point.
• From DS — This ﬁeld is set to 1 if the frame is leaving from a DS
for a station or an access point. This ﬁeld is set when a frame is
sent from an access point.
• MF — Indicates that more fragments follow the current one.
• Retry — Indicates that this frame is a retransmission of a previous
one that does not has an ACK.

158
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Power control — This ﬁeld is set to 1 if the transmission station is
in sleep mode; it is set to 0 if it is in active mode.
• More data — Indicates that the transmitter has more data for the
intended receiver. If the transmitter is an access point, the ﬁeld
informs a station in sleep mode that more data are buffered at the
access point.
• WEP — This ﬁeld is set to 1 to indicate that the frame body is
encrypted using the WEP algorithm (described later).
• Order — This ﬁeld is set to 1 to inform the receiver that a number
of fames are in strict order.
3.10.3
Beacon Frame
802.11 beacon frames are used for a number of purposes including
time synchronization, power saving, and access point discovery. Like
other types of frames, a beacon frame contains source MAC address
and destination MAC address. The source MAC address is the phys-
ical address of the access point that sends the beacon, whereas the
destination MAC address consists of all 1s for broadcasting. A num-
ber of ﬁelds make up the beacon frame body, such as beacon interval,
timestamp, SSID, supported data rates, wireless LAN capability, and
trafﬁc indication map (TIM). Beacon interval and TIM are used for
power management. A station may sleep to save power and only
wake up periodically to check if the associated access point has some
buffered frames destined for it. The beacon interval indicates the next
time a beacon from the access point will be sent and whether there are
buffered frames at the access point. The TIM will further inform lis-
tening stations which ones have buffered unicast frames at the access
point. Stations will go back to sleep if no buffered unicast frames are
intended for them. Others will stay awake to receive the buffered
unicast frames. The timestamp in a beacon frame allows a station to
synchronize its local clock with the access point, as time synchroniza-
tion is needed for DCF and physical layer signal transmission. SSID
identiﬁes the underlying ESS. A station can automatically associate

Supporting Wireless Technologies
159
to an access point by reading beacon frames from it. Some vendors
have an option to disable SSID in beacon frames to enhance security.
The supported rates ﬁeld in a beacon frame tells stations which data
rates are supported by the access point. The wireless capability ﬁeld
indicates the requirements of stations that wish to participate in the
wireless LAN.
3.10.4
Roaming in a Wireless LAN
Roaming in wireless LANs is conduced in a nomadic way: Connection
to the current access point will be lost before a new one is discovered
and associated with it. If a mobile station is moving within a set
of access points sharing the same ESSID, what is needed is a layer-2
roaming procedure that does not involve IP change. The procedure
is also called roaming in a roaming domain or a broadcast domain
and is brieﬂy outlined as follows.
• The station senses a roaming operation is necessary based on
monitored signal strength, frame acknowledgment, and missed
beacons, if any. The client then starts the roaming procedure by
looking for adjacent access points.
• The station scans for access points. It can perform active scan-
ning by sending out probe messages on each channel or passive
scanning in which it silently listens to beacon messages of an
access point. Either approach can be taken before or after the
decision to roam. Beacon messages and probe response messages
have necessary information used to associate to the new access
point.
• The station tries to associate itself with a new access point by
sending an association request message. The access point will
reply with an association reply message, and the station can then
participate in the new BSS.
The 802.11 standard does not specify the algorithm to determine
when roaming is needed and the algorithm to scan access points.

160
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Products from different vendors are likely to be incompatible in their
support of roaming among different access points. To address this
issue, the IEEE 802.11f (Inter Access Point Protocol, or IAPP) working
group has been formed and a standard for roaming among APs in the
same network segment has been devised. The IAPP protocol deﬁnes a
set of operations for access points to handle roaming stations. It can
be implemented using UDP/IP or SNAP (Sub Network Access Proto-
col). Two basic operations are announce and handover. The 802.11f
does not support cross-subnet roaming, meaning that vendors will
still have to design proprietary protocols for wireless handoff and
routing.
Roaming across different roaming domains requires layer 3 oper-
ations in addition to layer 2 operations because a mobile station will
obtain a new IP address while moving to a new network segment. The
association process and authentication based on 802.11i (introduced
in Chapter 6) may introduce a delay of hundreds of milliseconds. For
ongoing data connections, this does not result in noticeable down-
time, but for voice trafﬁc it is noticeable. As voice over wireless LAN
is gaining some traction, fast roaming that eliminates noticeable
disconnections primarily for voice trafﬁc is needed. To speed up
authentication, 802.11i has been enhanced with key caching” and
preauthentication. Key caching caches a user’s credential on the
authentication server so users do not need to reenter that information
when they return to the system. Preauthentication allows a station
to be authenticated to an AP before moving to it. On the other hand,
IEEE 802.11r working group was formed to solve the fast roaming
problem.
Another imminent problem in this realm is roaming among WiFi
hotspots operated by wireless internet service providers (WISPs).
The Wi-Fi Alliance has published WISPr Best Current Practices for Wire-
less Internet Service Provider (WISP) Roaming. WISPr recommends that
WISPs adopt a web-browser-based universal access method (UAM),
which essentially speciﬁes some log-on/log-off web pages for user
authentication using a web browser. RADIUS (Remote Authentica-
tion Dial in User Service) is the preferred AAA protocol for Wi-Fi
roaming. AAA data exchange among WISPs allows users to be

Supporting Wireless Technologies
161
authenticated and billed for services by their home entities (the users’
WISPs). For details of WISPr, please consult the WISPr document at
http://www.wi-ﬁalliance.org/opensection/wispr.asp.
3.10.5
IEEE 802.11 Family
Within the IEEE 802.11 family, a few wireless LAN technologies
represent the evolution and reﬁnement of wireless LANs. Table 3.6
provides a comparison of these technologies. Note that, to the gen-
eral public, Wi-Fi is probably the term that links to 802.11 wireless
LANs. The Wi-Fi Alliance is a nonproﬁt industry association formed
in 1999 to certify the interoperability of wireless LAN products based
on IEEE 802.11 speciﬁcations. It has over 200 member companies.
The goal of the Wi-Fi Alliance is to enhance the user experience
through product interoperability and, understandably, promote the
wireless technology and products for business interest.
The initial 802.11:1997 standard contained three incompatible
options — infrared, FHSS, and DSSS — to support data rates of 1 to
2 Mbps. For FHSS, 79 channels are allocated in the 2.4-GHz ISM
band in the United States and Europe. For DSSS, an 11-chip Barker
sequence is used. A Barker sequence is a special binary sequence of −1
Table 3.6
802.11 Wireless LAN Technologies.
802.11b
802.11a
802.11g
802.11n
Maximum
Up to 11
Up to 54
Up to 54
108–320 Mbps
data rate (Mbps)
Frequency band
2.4 GHz
5 GHz
2.4 GHz
2.4 GHz
Modulation
CCK (Complementary
OFDM
CCK and/or
OFDM
Code Keying)
OFDM
Number of
3
8-12
3
Not yet speciﬁed
nonoverlapped
channels
Range (meter)
100
50
100
100
Power
Low
High
Low
Low
consumption

162
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
and +1 possessing mathematical characteristics that can be uti-
lized to improve a coding scheme’s robustness and error-correction
capability. Only a few Barker sequence are known. The one that is 11
in length is used in the initial 802.11 DSSS, which only supports data
rates of 1 and 2 Mbps. The updated 802.11b:1999 standard discon-
tinued further speciﬁcation of infrared and FHSS, focusing instead
on only enhancements to DSSS WLANs. 802.11b added new 5.5- and
11-Mbps data rates, based on CCK modulation, a new chip sequence
using 8-chip complementary code keying. Wi-Fi-certiﬁed products
implement DSSS as deﬁned by 802.11b:1999, supporting both 1 and
2 Mbps with the Barker code and 5.5 to 11 Mbps with CCK. 802.11b
deﬁnes a total number of 14 channels separated by a 5-MHz gap, from
2414 to 2484 MHz, but only 11 are usable due to FCC regulations in
the United States. Furthermore, for DSSS to operate, the bandwidth
of these channels should be 22 MHz apart in the frequency domain.
As a result, only channel 1 (2412 MHz), channel 6 (2437 MHz), and
channel 11 (2462 MHz) can be used at the same time. In Europe,
these channels are channel 1 (2412 MHz), channel 7 (2442 MHz),
and channel 13 (2472 MHz).
In 802.11a, OFDM is used instead of DSSS. 802.11a operates on
the UNNI 5-GHz band with a total number of 12 nonoverlapping
channels. Channel spacing is 20 MHz. Recall that OFDM leverages
multiple carriers (52 in the case of 802.11a) of different frequencies
to transmit the same bitstream. Each channel of 802.11a leverages 52
subcarriers that are evenly separated by a distance of 312.5 KHz, plus
some virtual subcarriers that are not used. The data rates of 802.11a
are 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, 49, and 54 Mbps, each of which is realized by
a combination of a speciﬁc PSK or QAM digital modulation scheme
and OFDM symbol setting.
802.11g wireless LANs operate at the 2.4-GHz band but can offer
much higher data rates up to 54 Mbps. To be backward compatible,
802.11g incorporates 802.11b’s CCK to achieve bit transfer rates of
5.5 and 11 Mbps in the 2.4-Ghz band. To obtain higher data rates
at the 2.4-GHz band, it adopts 802.11a’s OFDM scheme. Use of the
2.4-GHz ISM band permits 802.11g to have almost the same signal
coverage as 802.11b.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
163
802.11n is the latest wireless LAN standard and promises to
offer data rates up to 108 to 320 Mbps at the 2.4-GHz ISM band.
As of this writing, no ofﬁcial release has been made by the IEEE
802.11n working group. Two proposals are being considered, and
it is unclear which one will ﬁnally win. One group, TG nSynch,
advocates using a 40-MHz bandwidth for each channel. The com-
peting World Wide Spectrum Efﬁciency (WWiSE) group wants to
retain the 20-MHz bandwidth (as in 802.11b, a, and g) and utilize
2X2 MIMO (two transmitters and two receivers in each device) and
OFDM. Recall that MIMO is in essence a spatial-division multiplexing
technology that leverages multipath propagation to generate quasi-
independent paths in space in order to boost the capacity of the
system.
In addition to new wireless LANs, some other 802.11 working
groups are focusing on speciﬁc issues of general wireless LANs.
For example, 802.11c and 802.11d work on wireless switching
that enables extension of wireless LANs, while 802.11e empha-
sizes providing QoS support at the MAC layer for audio and
video services. Probably the most notable one is 802.11i, the new
security mechanism to replace WEP and intermediate WPA (see
below).
High-performance radio LAN (HIPERLAN) is a wireless standard
developed by ETSI. HIPERLAN version 1 offers up to 10 Mbps of data
rate within a range of 50 meters, targeting the wireless home net-
working market. HIPERLAN version 2 was actually codeveloped with
802.11a. As a result, HIPERLAN/2 uses the 5-GHz UNNI band and
provides data rates up to 54 Mbps. An interesting component of the
HIPERLAN/2 is the so-called convergence layer deﬁned in its protocol
stack. The convergence layer uniﬁes the data link layer (data link con-
trol layer in HIPERLAN terminology) functionality of various wireless
access technologies and provides a uniﬁed interface and services to
the network layer. This enables a HIPERLAN/2 node to interconnect
with heterogeneous networks such as UMTS and the Internet. The
standard speciﬁes a cell-based convergence layer for ATM networks
and a packet-based convergence layer for general packet-switching
networks.

164
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3.10.6
Security in Wireless LANs
Security was undoubtedly the biggest problem of wireless LANs. It
has been shown that air serves as an excellent ﬁeld for network-
based hacks and attacks targeting wireless LANs. The topmost security
issue of wireless LAN is no security at all. Wireless LANs without any
security conﬁguration account for most home wireless networks and
many enterprise wireless LANs. In most cases, these open wireless
LANs allow any computers with a wireless LAN interface to join the
network with little or no trouble. Some security professionals have
demonstrated this problem by driving around an area in a city and
detecting available wireless LANs along the road, an activity called
“war driving” [5]. Another major problem of wireless LANs is the
security mechanism of 802.11 protocols: wired equivalent privacy
(WEP), the ﬁrst security mechanism implemented in 802.11b, has
proved to have a serious ﬂaw in the key scheduling algorithm that
may result in unauthenticated access. New security standards have
been devised and incorporated in 802.11. Chapter 6 (Mobile Security
and Privacy) presents a detailed discussion of these topics.
3.11 Bluetooth
3.11.1
Architecture and Protocols
Bluetooth is probably the most widely used Wireless Personal Area
Network (WPAN) technology now. A WPAN is a small-scale wireless
network that connects a few computing or communication devices
in the range of several meters. A WPAN may be comprised of a wide
range of ﬁxed or mobile devices that have been equipped with radio
interfaces, such as computers, cell phones, PDAs, mp3 players, portal
game devices, digital cameras, digital camcorders, and so on. The
vision of mobile computing encompasses a more rapid and broad
proliferation of WPAN technologies in our daily lives that renders
convenient and high-performance data access among any intelligent
electronic devices. This section and the following section introduce

Supporting Wireless Technologies
165
two wireless PAN technologies: the widely used Bluetooth and the
emerging ultra-wideband (UWB).
3.11.2
Bluetooth Overview
Harald I. Bluetooth (Danish Harald Blåtand), King of Denmark
between 940 and 985 A.D., conquered Norway in the year 960 AD.
His “bluetooth” was a result of eating too many blueberries. More
than 1000 years later, in 1994, his nickname was used to name a
wireless technology that connects cell phones or other devices with-
out using cables. The company that took the initiative to invent the
short-range, low-power, and low-cost radio technology is Ericsson.
In February 1998, an industry consortium, called SIG (Special Inter-
est Group) of Bluetooth was formed by ﬁve companies across three
different sectors of the industry: Ericsson, Nokia, IBM, Toshiba, and
Intel. Ericsson and Nokia were major cell phone manufacturers, IBM
and Toshiba were major laptop computer manufacturers, and Intel’s
strength was signal processing (in addition to computer processors).
In July 1999, the Bluetooth SIG released a 1500-page speciﬁcation
(Bluetooth 1.0). In 2001, the ﬁrst Bluetooth-enabled products, pri-
marily cell phones and PDAs, were announced. More than 1500
companies adopted Bluetooth for their products. To date, Bluetooth
has become the de facto short-range wireless technology for mobile
devices. The IEEE 802.15 working group for personal area networks
has adopted Bluetooth as one of the IEEE 802.15 standards: IEEE Std
802.15.1-2002. Other 802.15 standards are 802.15.2 for the coexis-
tence of WPAN and wireless LAN, 802.15.3 and 802.3a for UWB, and
802.15.4 for ZigBee. The features of Bluetooth are summarized as
follows:
• Short range — 10 to 100 m
• Low cost — less than $5
• Low power — 10 to 100 mW
• Low data rate — 1 to 2 Mbps

166
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
The interoperable applications of Bluetooth fall into the following
categories:
• Cable replacement — Computers are notorious for having clut-
tered cables for various peripherals such as a keyboard, a mouse,
speakers, and a headset. More and more people use an earpiece
connected to a cell phone while making a call. It would be far more
convenient to have wireless connections between the peripherals
and the devices. Bluetooth can be used for this purpose.
• Ad hoc data networking — As more mobile devices are used by
the general public, ad hoc networking capability is often desired
to facilitate occasional data transfer and interaction. Bluetooth
is designed to allow effortless network setup of a number of
compatible devices in a short range.
It is worth noting that Bluetooth and wireless LANs are not exactly
targeting the same application scenarios of wireless connectivity,
even if both of them (i.e., 802.11b wireless LANs and Bluetooth)
operate at the same 2.4-GHz band. Bluetooth by and large is used
for power-limited mobile devices for data transfer within a person’s
reach, which is why it is considered a WPAN technology. Wireless
LANs, on the other hand, provide much higher bandwidths over a
longer distance but consume more power.
3.11.3
Bluetooth Architecture
The basic unit of a Bluetooth network is a piconet consisting of up
to eight devices. One of the devices is the designated master, which
actually controls all the other slave devices in terms of radio com-
munication, data transfer, and security mechanisms. Bluetooth uses
frequency-hopping spreading spectrum for its radio interface. Each
slave will be notiﬁed with the same frequency hopping sequence
by the master; thus, all devices in a piconet hop simultaneously on
the same sequence. Communication between any two of the eight

Supporting Wireless Technologies
167
devices has to go through the master in a time-division manner, shar-
ing the 1-Mbps data rate. Multiple piconets can connect together via
some overlapping devices, forming a scatternet.
How do two Bluetooth devices communicate with each other? To
answer this question, one needs to ﬁrst look at the Bluetooth protocol
stack, which makes up the core portion of the Bluetooth speciﬁ-
cation. Figure 3.12 shows a simpliﬁed protocol stack of Bluetooth.
Keep in mind that the ofﬁcial Bluetooth speciﬁcation has incorpo-
rated many new protocols that can be divided into two categories:
core speciﬁcation and proﬁle speciﬁcation. The core speciﬁcation
is mainly concerned with the physical layer and data link layer,
whereas the proﬁle speciﬁcation covers the applications and func-
tions required for Bluetooth to support data or voice wireless appli-
cations. In addition, the Bluetooth protocol stack architecture has
been designed to facilitate the operation of many existing commonly
used protocols on top of the core protocols. The basic functions of
each component in the Bluetooth protocol stack are summarized
in Table 3.7. The “Adopted” category refers to existing protocols.
Baseband
Radio
Link Manager
Protocol
Logical Link and Adaptation Protocol (L2CAP)
Service
Discovery
Protocol
RFCOMM
TCP/IP
Object Exchange
Protocol (OBEX)
Telephony Control
Spec. Binary
Control
Applications
Audio
Host-Controller Interface
Figure 3.12 Bluetooth protocol stack.

168
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 3.7
Bluetooth Protocol Stack Components.
Protocol Stack Com-
ponent
Category
Description
Radio
Core
Radio signal modulation and
transmission
Baseband
Core
Frequency-hopping and
time-division multiplexing
between a master and its slaves
Link manager protocol
(LMP)
Core
Establishment of logical channels,
authentication, and power
management
Host controller
interface
N/A
Software interface to baseband
and link manager, as well as
Bluetooth hardware status and
registers
L2CAP (logical link
control and
adaptation protocol)
Core
Adaptation of upper layer services
and application to the
Bluetooth; key component of
Bluetooth stack from
application developer’s point of
view
Control
Adopted
Control over link manager
protocol
RFCOMM (Radio
Frequency
Communications)
Cable replacement protocol
Emulation of serial line interface
following the widely used
EIA-232 (formerly known as
RS-232) standard
Service discovery
protocol (SDP)
Core
Discovery of services provided on
Bluetooth devices
TCS-BIN (telephony
control
speciﬁcation,
binary)
Cable replacement protocol
Establishment of speech and data
calls between a master and a
slave
OBEX (object
exchange protocol)
Adopted
Exchange of structured data
objects such as calendar, vCard
(electronic business card), and
calendar entries
Audio
Adopted
Supporting audio communication
directly on top of baseband

Supporting Wireless Technologies
169
Key components are discussed to explain how Bluetooth supplies
desired data services as follows.
3.11.4
Radio and Baseband
The radio layer of Bluetooth utilizes the 2.4-GHz ISM band, the
globally free available frequency band, for spread spectrum com-
munication. Seventy-nine MHz of bandwidth is used for frequency
hopping, with 1-MHz carrier spacing. The modulation scheme is
GFSK at a rate of 1 bit per Hz, providing a data rate of 1 Mbps. The
frequency-hopping rate is 1600 hops per second with a dwell time of
625 µsec. As a WPAN, the radio interface of Bluetooth imposes strict
emitted power control. Three classes of transmitters are deﬁned based
on power and signal transmission range.
• Class 1 outputs a maximum of 100 mW and a minimum of 1 mW
for the greatest distance (around 100 m without obstacles). Power
control is mandatory.
• Class 2 outputs power between 0.25 mW and 2.4 mW for a range
of about 10 m without obstacles. Power control is optional.
• Class 3 outputs around 1 mW with range of a few meters or less.
The power control algorithm can be implemented in the link con-
trol protocol and controlled by the control component in the protocol
stack.
The baseband layer controls transmission of frames in associa-
tion with frequency hopping. The master in a piconet takes the
channel to transmit in even-numbered hops, and slaves transmit in
odd-numbered hops, reﬂecting a time-division duplex for all devices
in a piconet. A single frame can be transmitted in the duration
of 1, 3, or 5 hops. Depending on the nature of the logical link
between a slave and the master, two types of links are offered. One
is the asynchronous connectionless (ACL) link for best-effort packet
data transmission. The other is synchronous connection oriented

170
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
(SCO) for time-critical data such as voice. Frames sent on ACL links
may have to be transmitted if lost, whereas frames sent over SCO
links will never be retransmitted, necessitating upper layers for error
correction.
The baseband layer has deﬁned some types of frames that corre-
spond to various purposes of the baseband frames. Different types
of frames can carry different sizes of payload data and error correc-
tion schemes. In particular, the access code ﬁeld in a baseband frame
indicates the purpose of the frame in a special state. For example, a
frame with the inquiry access code (IAC) will be sent when a device
elects to scan for other devices within the radio range in a series of
32 frequency hops. Bluetooth devices can be conﬁgured to period-
ically hop according to the inquiry scan hopping sequence to scan
inquires. When an inquiry is detected, the device, now the slave, will
reply with its address and timing information to the master, then the
master and the slave begin the paging process to determine a com-
mon hopping sequence to establish a connection. Eventually, both
the master and slave will hop on the same sequence of channels for
the duration of the connection.
3.11.5
L2CAP and Frame Format
The L2CAP layer loosely matches the data-link layer of the OSI
model. Apart from framing and multiplexing of packet streams, it
also supplies QoS for the ACL links. Two alternatives services are
provided:
• Connectionless service — Datagram-like service without establish-
ing a connection
• Connection-mode service — A connection is required before a data
exchange between the master and a slave
Three types of channels are provided by the L2CAP layer. For
each type, a channel identiﬁcation (CID) is assigned to identify the

Supporting Wireless Technologies
171
channel in use:
• Connectionless — Unidirectional channel used primarily for
broadcasting by the master. A slave can only have one connection-
less channel to the master. Its CID is 2. Connectionless channels
are used to implement connectionless service.
• Connection-oriented — Full-duplex channel for connection-
mode service. Between a slave and the master there can be multiple
connection-oriented channels, each of which is identiﬁed by a
unique CID larger than 63.
• Signaling — This is not for data exchange but for signaling
between L2CAP entities.
Protocol Data Units (PDUs) handled by the L2CAP layer are of
a similar format across the three types of channels. In addition to
the payload data (in the case of a signaling command PDU, the
payload is the command representation), a ﬁeld of PDU length
and a ﬁeld of CID are encapsulated. CIDs of connection-oriented
channels are used to conduct multiplexing and demultiplexing of
upper layer data sources. For connectionless channels, a PDU that is
carried by the channel has a protocol/service multiplexing (PSM) ﬁeld
to indicate its upper layer source. On the transmitter side, the L2CAP-
layer PDUs may be fragmented into small segments if the underlying
logical channel cannot send packets of that length.
3.11.6
RFCOMM
RFCOMM (Radio Frequency Communications) is a cable replace-
ment protocol that can be used to connect two Bluetooth devices
using a virtual serial line interface. It emulates the 9-pin circuit of an
RS-232 interface. Multiple emulated serial connections (up to 60) can
be multiplexed into the same Bluetooth connection, while the actual
number of connections supported is implementation speciﬁc. A com-
plete communication path involves two applications running on two

172
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
devices with a communication segment between them. The applica-
tions utilizing RFCOMM treat the connection as a regular serial line
connection via one of its serial ports.
In Bluetooth, a proﬁle is a set of interrelated protocols and per-
tinent parameters that are chosen for a speciﬁc user case. The
proﬁle that accounts for virtual serial line communication is the
serial port proﬁle, which includes RFCOMM, SDP, LMP, and L2CAP
in addition to baseband and radio. The serial port proﬁle essen-
tially deﬁnes a point-to-point wireless link between two Bluetooth
devices that can be used by the general network layer. The two
Bluetooth devices are called endpoints, each identiﬁed by a unique
address. SDP is the protocol used to obtain the address of the other
endpoint.
3.11.7
SDP
A service is a shared function that provides some data and performs
an operation on behalf of a consumer. Service discovery is a key
issue in an ad hoc network environment such as Bluetooth piconet or
point-to-point direct communication. The service discovery protocol
(SDP) in Bluetooth deﬁnes a simple request-and-response mechanism
that uses service records and service classes for service discovery and
browsing. A Bluetooth device that is conﬁgured to offer a service
should implement an SDP server. The service is described in a service
record with a number of service attributes. A service record is iden-
tiﬁed by a 32-bit handle. A service attribute consists of an attribute
ID and a value. SDP deﬁnes the following attributes: ServiceRecord-
Handle, ServiceClassIDList, ServiceRecordState, ServiceID, Proto-
colDescriptionList, BrowseGroupList, LanguageBaseAttributeIDList,
ServiceInfoTimeToLive, ServiceAvaliability, BluetoothProﬁleDescrip-
torList, DocumentationURL, ClientExecutibleURL, IconURL, Servi-
ceName, ServiceDescription, and ProviderName. Semantics of the
attributes are further structured into service classes. As a result, a ser-
vice record must have a ServiceClassIDList attribute that contains a
list of service classes representing the general and exact descriptions
of capabilities of the underlying service. Each class ID is a universally

Supporting Wireless Technologies
173
unique identiﬁer (UUID) that is guaranteed to be unique in space
and time.
Before service discovery between two Bluetooth devices occurs,
they must be powered-on and initialized such that a Bluetooth link
between them can be established, which may require the discovery
of the address of the other device by initiating an inquiry process and
the paging of the other device, as introduced in the previous section.
Then a client can search for desirable services using a list of service
attributes or browse the services offered by an SDP server by issuing
a speciﬁc UUID of the BrowseGroupList attribute that represents the
root browse service group of the SDP server. All services that may be
browsed at the top level are members of the root browse group.
3.11.8
Bluetooth Evolution
Since its inception, the Bluetooth SIG has made signiﬁcant effort
to improve and promote the technology. In response to feedbacks
on Bluetooth speciﬁcation 1.1, the Bluetooth SIG has released veri-
ons 1.2 and 2.0 of the speciﬁcations. Enhancements of Bluetooth
include high data rates, interference resistance, and security. As
shown in the protocol stack, Bluetooth supports both voice and
data, and audio communication can be built directly on top of base-
band. Bluetooth audio communication provides two types of encod-
ing schemes: PCM and continuously variable slope delta (CVSD).
The voice channels support 64 Kbps. A piconet can have up to three
simultaneous full duplex voice channels. For asymmetric data trans-
mission, the data rate can be as high as 721 Kbps one way and
57.6 Kbps the other way. For symmetric data transmission, the max-
imum data rate is 432.6 Kbps. Bluetooth 1.2 and 2.0 are expected
to support a maximum data rate of 2.1 Mbps. The 2.4-GHz ISM
band is used by many wireless enabled devices; thus, the potential
interference between Bluetooth devices and others such as wire-
less LANs has to be addressed. Bluetooth 1.2 incorporates adaptive
frequency hopping (AFH), which allows the selection of idle fre-
quencies for frequency hopping, thereby improving resistance to
interference.

174
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Bluetooth security has been criticized to some extent due to the
user’s lack of total control over wireless connections and data trans-
mission. Bluetooth provides link-level authentication and encryp-
tion using unit address, a secret authentication key, a secret privacy
key, and a random number. A number of concerns have been
raised over Bluetooth security mechanisms as a result of a few
proof-of-concept attacks on communication and user data, such as
Bluesnarﬁng and Bluejacking. This topic is discussed in more detail
in Chapter 6.
3.12 Ultra-Wideband
Ultra-wideband (UWB) is a disruptive short-range radio frequency
wireless technology that could provide a potential solution to many
problems in the WPAN communication and computing domain,
such as low data rate and insufﬁcient frequency. Despite the stan-
dardization controversy with regard to UWB, commercial UWB
products were demonstrated at the Consumer Electronics Show in
early 2005. Prototypes of UWB-enabled cell phones, HDTVs, DVD
players, and music players are expected to hit the market very soon.
One example of such an effort is the wireless USB technology, a
short-range wireless connectivity technology resembling the wired
USB standard. UWB was initially developed in the 1960s for high-
resolution radar communication. The primary inventor of UWB was
Gerald Ross, who held several patents for this technology. UWB was
originally referred to as “baseband,” “carrier-free,” or “impulse.” In
1978, Bennett and Ross published a seminal paper on UWB titled
Time-Domain Electromagnetics and Its Applications. The year 1986
saw the birth of the ﬁrst UWB system, and the FCC approved the
marketing and operation of UWB in 2002.
The FCC’s First Report and Order [6] deﬁnes a UWB device as
any device emitting signals over a bandwidth that is 20% greater
than the center frequency or a bandwidth of at least 500 MHz at
all times of transmission within a frequency band between 3.1 and
10.6 GHz, as shown in Figure 3.13. UWB devices operate by emitting

Supporting Wireless Technologies
175
UWB
802.11a
802.11a/b
Frequency
y
Output Power
3GHz
10GHz
5GHz
2.4GHz
Figure 3.13 Ultra-wideband.
a large number of very short pulses (often of a duration of only
nanoseconds or less) of signals over a wide bandwidth within a range
of 10 m, resulting in an unprecedented data rate on the level of
several hundred megabits per second. UWB does not require any
dedicated frequency allocation. Instead, it is designed to operate
in frequency spectrum occupied by existing radio technologies. The
channel capacity of UWB is linearly proportional to the bandwidth
occupied for signal transmission. The advantages of UWB include:
• High data capacity — Due to the use of wide bandwidth, UWB
offers very high data capacity up to several gigabits per second.
• Use of a license-exempt frequency band — As a short-range wire-
less technology, UWB does not require any licensed frequencies
to operate.
• Low power — The output power of UWB is at the level of less than
1 mW, compared with tens to a few hundred milliwatts of wireless
LAN access points; typically 3 mW is allowed for a cell phone.

176
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Resilient to multi-path fading and distortions — Because the signal
is transmitted over a wide bandwidth with sufﬁcient redundancy,
fading and distortion are signiﬁcantly reduced.
• Security — UWB is inherently secure. Like other spread spectrum
technologies, the signal appears to be random noise to outsiders.
3.12.1
UWB Standards
The ﬁrst standard for UWB was IEEE 802.15.3, which was released
in 2002. This standard does not offer many advantages for wireless
services and applications, as the data rate can be easily obtained in
a wireless LAN (See Table 3.8). A new workgroup, IEEE 802.15.3a,
was formed to address high data rate UWB standardization. Two
major proposals from different groups of companies are under review:
multiband OFDM (MB-UWB) and DS-CDMA. Table 3.8 provides
a comparison of the 802.15.3 UWB system and the forthcoming
802.15.3a UWB system.
3.12.2
UWB Applications
In addition to military use of the UWB technology, many companies
are working to bring UWB to industrial operations and to people’s
daily lives. The application scenarios of UWB for the consumer
Table 3.8
Ultra-Wideband System Comparison.
802.15.3
802.15.3a Proposals
Frequency allocation
3.1–10.6 GHz
3.1–10.6 GHz
Channel bandwidth
15 MHz
500 MHz–7.5 GHz
Number of radio channels
5
1–15
Spreading
—
Multiband OFDM or DS-CDMA
Digital modulation
QAM and DQPSK
BPSK and QPSK
Range
10 m
2–10 m
Data rate
11 Mbps (QPSK) to 55 Mbps
(64 QAM) with a
minimum of 22 Mbps
110 Mbps at 10 m, 200 Mbps at
4 m, up to 1300 Mbps at 2 m
Emitted power
200 uW
100 uW or –41.3 dBm/MHz

Supporting Wireless Technologies
177
market can be summarized as follows:
• High-speed data transfer between mobile devices in a WPAN —
Given a data rate of 100 to 500 Mbps at a distance of 1 to 10 m,
computers, PDAs, cell phones, and consumer electronic devices
are able to exchange data much faster than via other wireless
technologies. The ﬁrst wave of UWB products will probably target
wireless home networks, where interconnection between a wide
range of computing, communication, and consumer electronics
devices has always been a troublesome problem.
• Cable replacement — It may be possible to link an LCD screen or
a television to a computer or any other UWB-enabled electronic
devices without using a video cable. The data rate may be fur-
ther improved to 1 to 2.5 Gbps but only within a short distance
of several meters. This would allow video streaming over a num-
ber of wireless devices, ranging from handheld mobile devices to
computers and HDTVs.
• Wireless measurement in a short distance — An example of this
application scenario would be measuring the oil level in a storage
tank.
• Location and movement detection — Used in vehicular radar sys-
tems, UWB devices can detect the locations of ﬁxed or moving
objects near a vehicle. Such information can be used for various
applications such as collision avoidance in a parking lot.
Inventory tracking and supply chain management — Products in a
warehouse or a store can have embedded UWB RF tags containing
a small amount of data, permitting any UWB readers to access
such information.
3.13 Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is a wireless radiofrequency
technology that allows objects, persons, and spaces to be remotely

178
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
identiﬁed using low-cost electromagnetic tags. In its simplest form,
an RFID tag attached to an object can store data that can be used
to identify the existence of the object or maintain other informa-
tion regarding the object. The RFID technology has been in place for
more than 40 years, primarily being used in a very narrow range of
industrial and military applications and remaining unnoticed by the
mass market. In the last several years, RFID technology has matured
in many ways such as a longer signal range, faster data transfer rate,
and shorter tag reading intervals. The reduced cost of RF tags has fos-
tered mass deployment and use of this technology. The retail chain
company Wal-Mart was arguably the strongest driving force behind
the application of RFID technology. The company requires its top
100 suppliers to have RF tags attached to pallets and cases by 2005
following the Electronic Product Code (EPS).
3.13.1
RFID System
The form factor of RF tags varies largely, but the components that
make up a tag are usually the same: a transponder, an antenna, and
a tiny integrated circuit (IC). For example, some tags are in the form
of planar labels with an aluminum spiral coil on a polymer substrate
and delivered in reels, and a ﬂip-chip at its center. Figure 3.14 shows
4 such tags. The antenna of a tag (the dark lines circling the tag
in Figure 3.16) is printed on the tag. Depending on how they are
powered, RF tags can be divided into two categories: passive tags
and active tags. A passive tag does not have a battery; it relies on
the interrogation signal from the reader to transmit data back to the
reader using a transponder and a small antenna. An active tag has
a battery and an onboard transceiver. Compared with passive tags,
active tags provide a long signal range but at a high cost.
A typical RFID system is composed of readers and tags, as shown
in Figure 13.15. A reader is electronic equipment composed of a
transceiver and an antenna. Some reader can even be integrated into
a mobile device such as a PDA or a cell phone. A reader is able to
interrogate many tags at a time within its transmission range. Once
interrogated, a tag will respond with a unique digital ID. The reader

Supporting Wireless Technologies
179
Figure 3.14 High-frequency passive RFID tags. (Photograph courtesy of Texas Instruments;
© Copyright 1995–2005 Texas Instruments Incorporated.)
then uses the ID to retrieve corresponding information from a back-
end database. Examples of potential IDs that can use RFID include bar
codes, license plates, student and employee IDs, conference attendee
IDs, passports, ISBNs of publications, and software license keys. Some
tags allow the reader to “write” or modifying the stored information.
The frequency bands used by RFID communication are 100 to
500 KHz, 10 to 16 MHz, 850 to 950 MHz, and 2.4 to 5.8 GHz. Modern
RFID systems choose to operate on high-frequency bands in order to
achieve a higher data rate and longer signal range. The downside
of choosing a high-frequency band is the line-of-sight requirement.
Collision will occur if two tags respond to the same interrogation
from a reader; thus, some readers can only read one tag at a time.
Others implement anticollision mechanisms to schedule the tags’
responses, making it possible to read multiple tags simultaneously.
The standard of RFID radio interfaces for different frequency bands
is ISO/IEC 18000 created by ISO/IEC/JTC1/SC31.
3.13.2
RFID Applications
Radio frequency identiﬁcation technology has already been used by
many industry sectors ranging from security systems in a building

180
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
RFID Reader
I
C
Tag
Antenna
Antenna
I
C
Tag
I
C
Tag
I
C
Tag
Figure 3.15 An RFID system.
to automatic toll systems on highways. The cost of each passive
tag is expected to eventually drop to less than 5¢, thereby mak-
ing it cost effective to deploy tags for a vast number of objects
for tracking and monitoring that otherwise would be highly error
prone and labor intensive. Active RFIDs can be used in the following
applications:
• Warehouse inventory tracking for logistics and supply chain
management (tags can be embedded into pallets, cases, and
containers)
• Equipment maintenance in a hospital and part tracking in a
factory
• Vehicle tracking and toll payment, such as EZPass on some U.S.
highways
• Product and book positioning in a store, warehouse, manufactur-
ing plant, etc.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
181
Passive tags are powered by signals from a reader via magnetic
induction. Passive tags can be used in the following applications:
• Automated entry in security systems that currently utilize pass-
code entry pads and magnetic card swipe machines (tags would
be embedded into personal IDs that are scanned wirelessly at the
point of entry)
• Product tagging in a store, replacing bar codes and UPCs (e.g.,
smart grocery stores and smart department stores)
• Wild animal, livestock, and pet tracking on farms and by pet-
control organizations
• Vehicle antitheft systems
• Luggage tagging in airports
• Pallet and case tracking for retailers
• Passport control in customs, airports, and government ofﬁces
(U.S. passports will soon have embedded RFID tags)
Needless to say many potential applications overlap the two cat-
egories. Depending on speciﬁc application scenarios and business
objectives, users may choose either active tags or passive tags to ful-
ﬁll their needs in a cost-effective manner. In addition, a smart phone
or a smart handheld device with built-in or attached RFID readers can
replace speciﬁc reader devices in many circumstances. Conversely, a
smart phone may contain an RF tag that is mapped to the phone user.
Radio frequency tags may be combined with wireless sensors to
extend the capability of the radio frequency system. Embedded
sensors in tagged objects allow real-time monitoring of some environ-
mental factors within the proximity of the objects. In addition, in the
long run, RF tags may use tiny microprocessors and store more valu-
able data in local memory. They can even self-organize into a network
with collaborative ambient intelligence and in-network information
processing without readers.

182
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
As is true for many pervasive computing technologies, RFID raises
some privacy concerns with regard to tagging and our daily lives.
Imagine a world where everything is tagged, and readers are every-
where. From the point of view of a manufacturer or retailer, real-time
supply-chain visibility boosts productivity and aids future product
development by providing extensive information regarding con-
sumers (e.g., who they are, where they are, and when and how they
use the products). But consumers, for the most part, may not want to
reveal this information to those manufactures and retailers. Suppose
a consumer purchases an electronic shaver that has an embedded RF
tag uniquely identifying the shaver. When the consumer travels with
the shaver, he may be tracked by any RF readers that can reach the
shaver. These privacy issues are very common in the mobile com-
puting domain, as wireless technologies tend to pervade our lives
to an unimaginable level of imbedding and integration. Chapter 6
discusses mobile privacy issues in further detail.
3.14 Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks
Wireless MANs refer to a set of wireless data networks that provide
wireless data access in a metropolitan area. The principle advantage
of building wireless MANs for data access as opposed to establish-
ing a wired network infrastructure is the cost of copper-wire or ﬁber
optic cable, installation, and maintenance. In rural areas and devel-
oping countries where telephone lines and cable televisions are not
in place, a wireless data access solution is more cost effective than
a wired network solution. Depending on how wireless technologies
are used in the infrastructure, wireless MANs can be categorized into
the following types:
• Wireless “last mile” (ﬁxed broadband wireless access)
• Wireless data access for mobile terminals
• Wireless backbones or wireless mesh
The ﬁrst type is still based on a wired network infrastructure;
that is, base stations connect directly to a backend wired network.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
183
Point-to-multipoint wireless communication replaces wired network
communication between a base station and the end-user’s computer,
the so-called “last mile.” Telephone-line-based last-mile access allows
dial-up data access and ADSL (with necessary modems), whereas
cable-television-based last-mile access permits higher bandwidths
and an always-on connection. Dedicated T1 is commonly used by
businesses. For the general public, these Internet service providers
coined the terms “broadband Internet” or “high-speed Internet
access” in order to differentiate high-speed data access services such
as ADSL and cable television from traditional dial-up service. In fact,
one of the driving forces behind the wireless last-mile technology
is that the broadband Internet access of ADSL and cable has grown
rapidly in recent years.
The second type of wireless MANs target mobile data access. In
a sense, 2.5 and 3G cellular networks could be considered wireless
MANs or wireless WANs as they have provided wide-area mobile
data access for cell phone users. On the other hand, it would be
natural to speculate on extending wireless LANs to cover a larger
area and to allow roaming across areas covered by these base sta-
tions. Still, this type of wireless MAN relies on a wired network
infrastructure to function, as the base stations connect directly to a
wired network. Many proprietary wireless MANs have been in oper-
ation for years. They mainly target a very narrow business market
such mobile professionals, rather than the general public.
The third type of MAN is a pure wireless network, in which back-
bones as well as the means of access are both wireless. Base stations
are not connected to a backend wired network; instead, they coordi-
nate with adjacent base stations, forming a mesh for data forwarding
over a wide area. This is a signiﬁcant development with regard to pro-
viding data access services to underdeveloped areas where no ﬁxed
networks exist.
3.14.1
Wireless Broadband: IEEE 802.16
The most noticeable technological development in wireless MANs
and wireless WANs are embodied by the IEEE 802.16, 802.20, and
ETSI HIPERMAN standards. Based on the open IEEE 802.16 and

184
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
HIPERMAN, a commercialized technology called WiMax has been
devised. The WiMax Forum, an industry consortium of over 100
companies, has been formed to promote the technology and provide
certiﬁed, interoperable WiMax products. IEEE 802.16 speciﬁes the
PHY and MAC layers. It will support higher network layers and trans-
port layer protocols such as ATM, Ethernet, and IP. Characteristics of
IEEE 802.16 are listed in Table 3.9.
It is noteworthy that the frequency band of 10 to 66 GHz speci-
ﬁed by the initial 802.16 standard requires line-of-sight transmission.
Some other frequency bands are also speciﬁed in later versions of
the standard in order to provide indoor wireless access. The MAC
layer portion of 802.16 addresses QoS by introducing a bandwidth
request and grant scheme. Terminals can be polled or actively signal
the required bandwidth, which is based on trafﬁc QoS parameters.
802.16 employs a public-key infrastructure in conjunction with a
digital certiﬁcate for authentication.
Extensions of IEEE 802.16 include:
• 802.16a, which speciﬁes a data rate up to 280 kbps per base station
over the 2- to 11-GHz frequency band reaching a maximum of
50 km and mesh deployment
• 802.16b, which addresses QoS issues surrounding real-time mul-
timedia trafﬁc
• 802.16c, which deﬁnes system proﬁles that operate at 10 to 66 GHz
for interoperability
Table 3.9
IEEE 802.16 Summary.
Feature
Description
Frequency band
10–66 GHz, 2–11 GHz
Range
UP to 40 km (about 30 miles)
Multiplexing/modulation
OFDM, adaptive modulation
Channel data rate
75 Mbps for both uplink and downlink
Antenna
Directional antenna, point-to-multipoint
Multiple access
Demand-assignment multiple
access–time-division multiple access (DAMA-TDMA)

Supporting Wireless Technologies
185
• 802.16d, which represents system proﬁle for 802.16a devices
• 802.16e, which standardizes handoff across base stations for
mobile data access.
The ETSI HIPERMAN standard is similar to 802.16a. It has been
developed in very close cooperation with IEEE 802.16, such that the
HIPERMAN standard and IEEE 802.16a standard can work together
seamlessly. As a result, many of the characteristics of 802.16 are
available in HIPERMAN, such as QoS support, adaptive modulation,
and strong security. HIPERMAN supports both point-to-multipoint
and mesh network conﬁgurations. The differences between HIPER-
MAN and 802.16 are primarily on the PHY layer. In order to create
a single interoperable standard for commercialization, as well as
product testing and certiﬁcation, several leaders in the wireless indus-
try formed the WiMax Forum. Another IEEE working group, called
IEEE 802.20 Mobile Broadband Wireless Access (MBWA), uses the
500-MHz to 3.5-GHz frequency band for mobile data access, an
application also targeted by 802.16e; however, 802.20 does not have
as strong industry support as 802.16 does.
3.14.2
WiMax
The WiMax Forum harmonizes IEEE 802.16 and ETSI HIPERMAN into
a WiMax standard. The core components of a WiMax system include
the subscriber station (SS), also known as the customer premise envi-
ronment (CPE), and the base station (BS). A BS and one or more
CPEs can form a cell with a point-to-multipoint (P2MP) structure,
in which the BS acts as central control over participating CPEs. The
WiMax standard speciﬁes the use of licensed and unlicensed bands
within the 2- to 11-GHz range, allowing non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
transmission, which is highly desired for wireless service deployment,
as NLOS does not require high antennas in order to reach remote
receivers, which reduces site interference and the deployment cost
of CPE. NLOS raises multi-path transmission issues such as signal
distortion and interference. WiMax employs a set of technologies to

186
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
address these issues [7]:
• OFDM — As discussed earlier in this chapter, OFDM uses multiple
orthogonal narrowband carriers to transmit symbols in parallel,
effectively reducing intersymbol interference (ISI) and frequency-
selective fading.
• Subchannelization — The subchannelization of WiMax uses fewer
OFDM carriers in the upstream link of a terminal, but each carrier
operates at the same level of the base station. Subchannelization
extends the reach of upstream signals from a terminal and reduces
its power consumption.
• Directional antennas — Directional antennas are advantageous in
ﬁxed wireless systems because they are more powerful in pick-
ing up signals than are omnidirectional antennas; hence, a ﬁxed
CPE typically uses a directional antenna, while a ﬁxed BS may use
directional or omnidirectional antennas.
• Transmit and receive diversity — WiMax may optionally employ a
transmit and receive diversity algorithm to make use of multi-path
and reﬂection using MIMO radio systems.
• Adaptive modulation — Adaptive modulation allows the transmit-
ter to adjust modulation schemes based on the SNR of the radio
links. For example, if the SNR is 20 dB, 64 QAM will be used to
achieve high capacity. If the SNR is 16 dB, 16 QAM will be used,
and so on. Other NLOS schemes of WiMax, such as directional
antenna and error correction, are also used.
• Error correction techniques — WiMax speciﬁes the use of several
error correction codes and algorithms to recover frames lost due
to frequency-selective fading or burst errors. These codes and
algorithms are Reed Solomon Forward Error Correction (FEC),
convolutional encoding, interleaving algorithms, and Automatic
Repeat Request (ARQ) for frame retransmission.
• Power control — In a WiMax system, a BS is able to control power
consumption of CPEs by sending power-control codes to them.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
187
The power-control algorithms improve overall performance and
minimize power consumption.
• Security — Authentication between a BS and an SS is based on the
use of X.509 digital certiﬁcates with RSA public key authentica-
tion. Trafﬁc is encrypted using Counter Mode with Cipher Block
Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP) which
uses AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) for transmission secu-
rity and data integrity authentication. WiMax also supports 3DES
(Triple Data Encryption Standard).
Initially, the WiMax Forum has focused on ﬁxed wireless access for
home and business users using outdoor antennas (CPEs), and indoor
ﬁxed access is under development. A base station may serve about
500 subscribers. WiMax vendors have begun to test ﬁxed wireless
broadband access in metropolitan areas such as Seattle. Due to its
relatively high cost, the major targets of this technology are business
users who want an alternative to T1, rather than residential home
users. A second goal of the forum is to address portable wireless
access without mobility support, and another is to achieve mobile
access with seamless mobility support (802.16e). Recall that a WiFi
hotspot offers wireless LAN access within a limited coverage of an
access point; the WiMax Forum plans to build MetroZones that allow
portable broadband wireless access. A MetroZone is comprised of base
stations connected to each other via line-of-sight wireless links, and
802.16 interfaces for laptop computers or PDAs that connect to the
“best” base station for portable data access. This aspect of WiMax
seems more compelling in terms of potential data rate compared with
3G cellular systems.
Like the WiFi forum, the WiMax forum aims at providing certiﬁ-
cation of WiMax products in order to guarantee interoperability. In
March 2005, Alvarion, Airspan, and Redline began to conduct the
industry’s ﬁrst WiMAX interoperability test. WiMax chips for ﬁxed
CPEs and base stations developed by Intel will be released in the
second half of 2005, and WiMax chips for mobile devices will be
released in 2007. As the time of this writing, some WiMax systems
were expected to go into trial operation in late 2005.

188
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
3.15 Satellite
Global wireless communication is comprised of two elements: terres-
trial communication and satellite communication. Cellular networks
are primarily terrestrial based, consisting of a vast number of base
stations across heavily populated areas. In some circumstances,
such as research laboratories established in the Antarctic, satellite
communication is the only means of communication. Some other
applications of satellite communication include military satellite
espionage, global television broadcast, satellite radio, meteorological
satellite imaging, and global positioning system (GPS). In addi-
tion, satellite complements cellular networks in reaching far rural
areas and have been integrated into worldwide GSM and CDMA
systems.
3.15.1
Satellite Communication
Despite the advantage of providing global coverage, satellite com-
munication is known to have signiﬁcant drawbacks. For one thing,
satellite links introduce greater propagation latency than ﬁber optic
links due to the much longer distance a signal must travel back
and forth between a terminal and a satellite. A delay of even half
a second when using a geostationary satellite phone is noticeable.
Bandwidth is another downside of satellite communication com-
pared to terrestrial wired or wireless communications. Although
a single satellite may cover a large geographical area (known as
the “footprint”), the cost of the entire system remains extremely
high, making its acceptability by the general public economically
impossible.
3.15.2
Satellite Systems
Satellites orbit the Earth at different heights in various periods. The
higher the satellite, the longer the period of the satellite will be.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
189
Table 3.10
Satellite Systems.
Geostationary
(GEO)
Medium Earth Orbit
(MEO)
Low
Earth
Orbit
(LEO)
Orbit height (km)
36,000
5000–20,000
1000–2000
Orbit period (hours)
24
6
1.5–2
Number
of
satellites
required to cover the
Earth
3
12
>66
Frequency band
L, S, C, Ku, Kaa
La
La
See text for description of frequency bands.
The orbits can be circles or eclipses. Earlier satellites were composed
of transponders that received signals on one frequency and trans-
mitted them on another. Digital technologies were introduced later
to allow improved quality of the signals and more reliable commu-
nication. Signals transmitted from a satellite to the Earth attenuate
proportional to the square of the distance. A variety of atmospheric
conditions also inﬂuence satellite signal transmission, such as rain
absorption and meteors in the space.
Communication satellites can be divided into four categories
based on the orbit of the satellite in space: geostationary (GEO) satel-
lite, medium Earth orbit (MEO) satellite, and low Earth orbit (LEO)
satellite, as shown in Table 3.10.
Geostationary satellites remain relatively stationary at a height of
about 36,000 km. Three of them are required to cover the entire
surface of the Earth. The frequency bands allocated for GEO satel-
lite communication by the ITU are L band (1.5-GHz downlink,
1.6-GHz uplink, 15-MHz bandwidth), S band (1.9-GHz downlink,
2.2-GHz uplink, 70-MHz bandwidth), C band (4.0-GHz downlink,
6.0-GHz uplink, 500-MHz bandwidth), Ku band (11-GHz downlink,
14-GHz uplink, 500-MHz bandwidth), and Ka band (20-GHz down-
link, 30-GHz uplink, 3500-MHz bandwidth). GEO satellite systems
are primarily used for television broadcasting, such as Direct TV and
Dish Networks, and mobile communications. The newest member of

190
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
this family is satellite digital radio, which provides CD-quality music
over more than 1000 channels.
Medium Earth orbit satellites orbit the Earth at heights of around
10,000 to 20,000 km. GPS systems use MEO satellites to provide pre-
cise location identiﬁcation with a range of several meters. 24 GPS
satellites operated by U.S. Department of Defense orbit the Earth
twice a day at a height of about 19,320 km. The civilian use of GPS
operates at 1575.42 MHz, part of the L band. A GPS receiver must
communicate with at least three GPS satellites in order to compute
a speciﬁc two-dimensional location via triangulation. With four or
more signals from GPS satellites, the receiver is able to calculate a
three-dimensional location.
Low Earth orbit satellites are much closer to the surface of the Earth
than MEO and GEO satellites. Their period can be as short as 1 or
2 hours. Because of the considerably shorter distance between LEO
satellites and receivers, propagation latency is reduced down to about
10 msec; however, to offer global coverage, many more satellites
are needed. For example, the Iridium system was originally designed
to have 77 satellites in space (element 77 is iridium). The Teledesic
project planed to launch 840 LEO satellites. These numbers had to be
scaled back in order to keep costs under control. Aimed at reducing
the cost of satellites, another system, Globalstar, has 48 satellites
and a large number of ground base stations. (It must be noted that
Iridium went bankrupt in 1999 as a result of a small user base and
high operational cost.) The data rate offered by LEO satellite systems
varies from kilobits per second to megabits per second, depending
on the target applications.
3.16 Wireless Sensor Networks
Data communication continues to expand in both scope and
complexity, from internal communication among the hardware
components of an individual computer to intercomputer network
communication via wired or wireless BANs, PANs, LANs, MANs,
and WANs. At the same time, computers are becoming more

Supporting Wireless Technologies
191
closely related to the physical world and human beings, gathering,
monitoring, processing, and analyzing data to allow instrumentation
and automation and to facilitate decision making. Wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) represent networks that are embedded into our
physical environments. A sensor is a tiny electronic device that can
respond to a physical stimulus and convert it into numeric data. A
wireless sensor network is composed of many low-power, low-cost,
autonomous sensor nodes interconnected with wireless communi-
cation of sensory data. A myriad of measurements can be done by
sensors, including environmental properties such as temperatures,
humidity, and air pressure; presence, vibration, and motion detec-
tion of objects; chemical properties; radiation levels; GPS; light; and
acoustic and seismic activities. Data gathering is conducted intermit-
tently at a speciﬁed frequency. A sensor node in a WSN possesses
sufﬁcient computing power to process sensory data gathered locally
or transmitted from other sensor nodes via wireless links. Further-
more, sensor nodes in a WSN self-organize into a network topology,
thereby improving robustness and reducing maintenance costs.
3.16.1
WSN Applications
The wide range of sensors and collective instrumental functional-
ity of WSNs, coupled with the underlying wireless networks, make
it possible to provide unprecedented levels of data access and asso-
ciated intelligence, bringing about a new dimension of application
for different industry sectors. WSN applications can be divided into
three categories [8]: monitoring space, including objects as part of
the space; monitoring operation states of objects; and monitoring
interactions between objects and space. The ﬁrst category represents
the most common and basic use of WSNs (dealing with physical envi-
ronments), whereas the second is mainly concerned with a speciﬁc
entity rather than its surroundings. The third category encompasses
more sophisticated monitoring and control over communications
and interactions between objects and between an object and its sur-
roundings. Some pilot projects have explored WSNs for a number
of different application scenarios. Many potential applications are

192
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
being developed to leverage WSNs. Some examples are introduced
as follows.
3.16.1.1
Environmental Sensing
Using a large number of sensor nodes deployed in a target geographic
location, it is possible to derive useful patterns and trends based on
datasets collected over time. Examples of environmental sensing are
light sensing, microclimate monitoring, trafﬁc monitoring, pollution
level monitoring, indoor climate control, and habitat monitoring.
Very often users are only concerned with independent characteristics
of an entity, such as the number of vehicles passing by during a time
period or the propagation speed of some contaminant in a river.
3.16.1.2
Object Sensing
Aside from environmental sensing, sensors can be attached to objects
and collect data regarding motion, pressure, or any mechanical, elec-
tronic, or biological characteristics of the host. Object sensing is
predominantly used in industrial control and maintenance. Exam-
ples include structural monitoring of buildings, bridges, vehicles, and
airplanes; sensing machinery wear in a factory; industrial asset track-
ing in warehouses and stores; surveillance in parking lot and streets;
crop monitoring; and military-related object sensing in battleﬁelds.
In particular, RFID, a scaled-down wireless sensing technology, uti-
lizes small tags of very limited local computing power and storage to
identify and inventory objects. Section 13 has presented a detailed
introduction to RFID.
3.16.1.3
Sensing with Intelligence
More challenging application scenarios require embedded intel-
ligence that goes beyond raw data sensing, thus requiring the
simultaneous sensing of multiple related quantities and in-network
processing so as to detect internal interactions between objects.
Examples
of
this
category
are
monitoring
wildlife
habitats,
telemedicine sensing, context-aware pervasive computing using sen-
sors, and disaster management. For instance, researchers at the

Supporting Wireless Technologies
193
University of California, Berkeley, and Intel have developed a suc-
cessful experimental WSN to monitor petrels on an uninhabited
island off the coast of Maine [9,10]. The birds being observed are
Leach’s store petrels, a type of tiny reclusive seabirds that burrows in
sandy soil and emerges only at night. To ornithologists, monitoring
and understanding the comings and goings of these birds in a wild
area are not simple tasks, as they would have to dig into the birds’ bur-
rows for more information. The WSN deployed on the island consists
of 190 wireless sensor nodes called motes, some of which are located
in burrows and others on the ground, and a solar-powered central
computer station that collects sensory data from a gateway mote and
reports back to a remote site in real-time via satellite links. Sensors on
the motes monitor temperature, humidity, barometric pressure, and
ambient light. The temperature reading within a burrow can be used
to infer if a petrel is present or not. Other data also contribute to our
understanding of the behavior of these petrels and their responses to
changes in their surroundings.
3.16.2
Wireless Sensor Node
A sensor node is made up of four basic components: sensing unit,
processing unit, transceiver unit, and power unit. The sensing unit
usually consists of two components: a sensor and an analog-to-digital
converters (ADC). The processing unit acts as a tiny computer: a
microprocessor and some RAM. The processing unit runs an embed-
ded operating system and executes WSN applications that control the
operations of the sensor and communication between sensor nodes.
The transceiver unit is a low-power radio operating on an unlicensed
frequency band. The power unit is a battery for regular sensor nodes.
Note that in most cases a WSN will have a special sensor node that
acts as the gateway for other sensor nodes with respect to ultimate
data delivery. The gateway node interfaces to computers via RS232
or Ethernet links. As a result, the gateway node is different from
other regular nodes, in both size and processing functionality, thus
requiring more power supply.

194
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Following is a list of sensor node characteristics that affect the
design of WSN system architectures and applications:
• Size — Sensor nodes are very small, due to advancements in
semiconductor technologies.
• Low power — Sensor nodes are expected to operate for a long time
before the battery drains out. In many cases, it is prohibitive to
replace batteries.
• Autonomous, unattended operations — Once deployed, sensor nodes
should self-organize to work as programmed. Remote reprogram-
ming is sometimes possible.
• Inexpensive — Their low cost makes it possible to deploy a large
number of sensor notes at a moderate cost.
• Adaptive to environments and themselves — Sensor nodes are able to
adapt to environmental and status changes.
3.16.3
Self-Organized Networks
The physical layer of a WSN is nothing new: radiofrequency trans-
mission at unlicensed bands. Line-of-sight is not required. The data
link layer monitors the channels and transmits frames only when the
channel is idle. The network layer and transport layer require more
discussion. Like ad hoc networks, the routing paths between each
two nodes cannot be determined and conﬁgured prior to deploy-
ment because there is no predeﬁned ﬁxed infrastructure in WSNs.
Sensors nodes have to discover multi-hop routes to relevant nodes
themselves. This is often done via routing data dissemination, in
which packets that contain the transmitter and the distance to
the root are ﬂooded in the network. A sensor node, upon receiv-
ing such packets, will be able to ﬁnd a “parent” who is closer to
the root; hence, a distribution tree can be generated. Data collec-
tion from sensor nodes can be routed back the root following the
distribution tree.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
195
Task or query dissemination throughout a sensor network is data-
centric in association with data aggregation, a routing scheme known
as directed diffusion [11]. Sensor nodes are not addressed uniformly
using numeric identiﬁcations; instead, the addressing and naming
schemes are correlated with the application. They are identiﬁed by
“attribute–value” pairs in their data. A task in the form of some
attribute inquiry, is sent out from some nodes in the hopes of
obtaining relevant data from other nodes, and then all participat-
ing nodes form a routing gradient toward the originators. In the case
where a WSN is used as a platform of the sensory database, the appli-
cations and underlying routing schemes must support declarative
queries, thereby making the detail of in-network query process-
ing and optimization transparent to the user. Power consumption
is another crucial factor when it comes to in-network aggregation
support of query processing. Sophisticated power-aware query pro-
cessing and packet routing schemes have been devised to reduce the
overall power consumption of a WSN.
Sensory data delivery can be performed in several ways. Sensor
nodes can actively report readings periodically to its parent or only
report when an event occurs. The delivery procedure can also be
initiated by a user issuing a command that is diffused across the
network. Depending on the design objectives, a WSN may apply dif-
ferent data delivery models to different sensor nodes. For example,
some high-level roots in the distribution tree may employ a request-
and-response mechanism for queries, whereas some low-level sensor
nodes may simply report data continuously.
Compared with mobile ad hoc network, network communica-
tion over WSNs imposes additional constraints other than node
mobility and power consumption. Sensors node are more prone
to failure, and their computational capability and memory capac-
ity are greatly limited. When designing a protocol stack of a WSN,
these constraints have to been taken into account. Speciﬁcally,
because complete raw data forwarding is not necessary in many
circumstances, data aggregation may be conducted at various lev-
els of the distribution tree to reduce the amount of data being
transferred upward to the gateway while still providing sufﬁcient

196
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
information to other nodes. Furthermore, data aggregation can be
combined with applications of the WSN to further improve the efﬁ-
ciency of data collection and dissemination schemes. This reﬂects
one of the most important characteristics of WSNs: cross-layer design.
The well-known sensor operating system is TinyOS [12], which is
an open-source, event-based embedded operating system developed
at the University of California, Berkeley. TinyOS provides a set of
components for networking, memory management, and power man-
agement, as well as data acquisition and query processing tools. The
programming language supported by TinyOS is nesC, a C-like lan-
guage for embedded network system development. Issues of wireless
sensor networks are further discussed in Chapter 5.
3.16.4
ZigBee
One of the emerging applications of WSN is wireless monitoring and
control. ZigBee is a such an application that uses low-power and low-
data-rate networked sensors. It was developed by the ZigBee Alliance,
an industry association of semiconductor companies and net-
work equipment companies such as Ember, Honeywell, Mitsubishi
Electric, Motorola, Samsung, and Philips. It has to be noted that the
term ZigBee refers to the silent communication between honeybees
where the bee dances in a zig-zag pattern to tell others the location,
distance, and direction of some newly found food. Wireless sensor
network communication somewhat resembles the ZigBee principle
in that they must be simple and effective.
The idea is to take advantage of wireless sensors to monitor
environments, objects, and human beings and control devices, appli-
ances, and facilities. Wireless sensors make it possible to remotely
and conveniently monitor or be notiﬁed of operational states or cru-
cial state change of an object, such as a dying battery in a smoke
detector and rapidly increasing temperature in a truck carrying frozen
goods. Wireless sensor networks in ZigBee are not designed to carry
large data transfer due to the limited capability of wireless communi-
cation; however, these sensors are able to form a fully functional
networks, self-organize for efﬁcient data routing and in-network

Supporting Wireless Technologies
197
processing, and self-heal in case of node failure. The initial target
markets of ZigBee products are home control, building control,
industrial automation, personal healthcare, consumer electronics,
PC and peripherals control, etc. Key specs of ZigBee include the
following:
• Frequency bands: 868 MHz, 915 MHz, and 2.4 GHz
• Data transfer rate up to 250 Kbps
• Signal transmission range of 10 to 100 m, depending on the
sensors being used
• AES encryption of data
• Various ZigBee applications can work with each other
• Low power usage
Unlike UWB or Bluetooth, ZigBee speciﬁcations do not deﬁne
radio interface and data link layer protocols; ZigBee simply uses
the IEEE 802.15.4 physical radio standard, as shown in Figure 3.16.
The ZigBee network application support layer and application pro-
ﬁle are the major components that make up the ZigBee speciﬁcation.
Because ZigBee is a proprietary protocol rather than an open standard
like those ratiﬁed by IEEE, its fate hinges on how it reﬁnes itself to
become the de facto industry standard. To this end, standardization
battles seem inevitable.
3.17 Standardization in the Wireless World
The advent of next-generation mobile computing calls for open
standards and platforms to enable interoperability. As has been dis-
cussed in this chapter, a full spectrum of wireless technologies is set
to be integrated to allow roaming in on unprecedented level. Propri-
etary technologies do not ﬁt into this new era of convergence, as it
would be difﬁcult for them to gain ground to a great extent due to

198
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
802.15.4
868/915 MHz PHY
802.15.4
868/915 MHz PHY 2.4 GHz PHY
802.15.4 MAC
802.15.4 LLC
802.2 LLC, Type1
ZigBee Application Profiles and API
Application
Network Layer (NWK)
Topology Mgmt
Routing
Route Mgmt
Security Mgmt
Figure 3.16 ZigBee protocol stack.
the limited number of vendors and compatible products. On the con-
trary, open, well-crafted standards for the technology will enable and
encourage any interested business parties to engage in developing
and manufacturing products or offering services that are guaran-
teed to be interchangeable or compatible. Open standards essentially
provide a solid foundation of framework of a technology as well as
design constraints, thereby boosting the spread and acceptance of
the technology.
A standard is a speciﬁcation or deﬁnition that has been approved
by a recognized standards organization such as ITU, IEEE, and ETSI,
or is generally accepted as a de facto model by the industry. In the
context of computing, standards exist for computer hardware, com-
munication protocols, programming languages, operating systems,
and some applications. Network communications have a wide range
of standards, such as IEEE 802.3 Ethernet standard for LANs, IEEE
802.11 and ETSI HIPERLAN for wireless LANs, GSM, and IS-95 and
IS136.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
199
In addition to communication standard bodies such as ITU, IEEE,
and ETSI, some other standards bodies have been founded for special-
ized technological ﬁelds. The American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) is primarily responsible for software and programming lan-
guage standardization; it has created ANSI C and C++. HTML and
XML have been adopted by the International Organization for Stan-
dardization (ISO) and the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has released a num-
ber of requests for comments (RFCs) that serve as the basis of
many network protocols. Many computer peripheral standards such
as the Personal Computer Memory Card International Association
(PCMCIA), Universal Serial Bus (USB), and compact ﬂash have been
created by industrial forums or associations.
3.17.1
Cellular Standard Groups
The two standards bodies behind competing cellular technologies
are the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) and Third Gen-
eration Partnership Project 2 (3GPP2). 3GPP is an international
organization supporting the development of UMTS/WCDMA sys-
tems. 3GPP partners include ETSI of Europe, ATIS of the United States,
ARIB and TTC of Japan, TTA of Korea, and CCSA of China. 3GPP
has released two versions of UMTS standards, namely Release 99 and
Release 2000. 3GPP2 is the parallel partnership project for cdma2000
technology. It consists of TIA of the United States, ARIB and TTC of
Japan, TTA of Korea, and CCSA of China. ITU is a United Nations
organization responsible for maintaining and extending worldwide
coordination of different governments and private sectors and man-
aging THE radiofrequency spectrum. 3GPP and 3GPP2 are formed
under ITU.
3.17.2
IEEE Standards
The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) has been
the key standards organization in promoting networking technolo-
gies for many years. For wireless technologies, IEEE has established

200
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
802.2 Logical Link
802.1 Bridging
802.3
Medium
Access
802.3
Physical
802.5
Medium
Access
802.5
Physical
802.11
Medium
Access
802.11 
Physical
802.15
Medium
Access
802.15 
Physical
802.16
Medium
Access
802.16
Physical
802.1 Management
802 Overview and Architecture
802.10 Security
Data Link
Layer
Physical
Layer
Figure 3.17 IEEE 802 Standards.
several working groups mainly under the 802 standard committee.
Figure 3.17 shows an overview of 802 standards. Below is a list of
such working groups and their tasks:
• IEEE 802.1 — LAN/MAN architecture with emphasis on internet-
working and link security (inactive)
• IEEE 802.2 — Logical link control, part of the data link layer
protocol of a LAN
• IEEE 802.3 — Ethernet, the dominating LAN technology
• IEEE 802.4 — Token bus, a LAN technology utilizing token rings
over coaxial cables
• IEEE 802.5 — Token ring, another token ring LAN technology
(inactive)
• IEEE 802.6 — Metropolitan area networks, a speciﬁcation of MANs
using Distributed Queue Dual Bus (DQDB) (inactive)
• IEEE 802.7 — Broadband TAG (Technical Advisory Group), a
broadband LAN
• IEEE 802.8 — Fiberoptic TAG, a ﬁber optic LAN standard (inactive)
• IEEE 802.9 — Isochronous LAN, an Isochronous Ethernet (IsoEnet)
(inactive)

Supporting Wireless Technologies
201
• IEEE 802.10 — Security, specifying key management, access
control, and data integrity for LANs and WAN (inactive)
• IEEE 802.11 — Wireless LAN, a set of protocols for wireless LANs
operating on unlicensed 2.4-GHz and 5-GHz bands
• IEEE 802.12 — Demand priority, 100BaseVG-AnyLAN (inactive)
• IEEE 802.13 — Not used (for some reason)
• IEEE 802.14 — Cable data, a MAC layer speciﬁcation for multime-
dia trafﬁc over hybrid ﬁber and coaxial networks
• IEEE 802.15 — Wireless PAN, a set of protocols for short-range
wireless networks, including Bluetooth (802.15.1)
• IEEE 802.16 — Broadband wireless access, PHY and MAC layer pro-
tocols for point-to-multipoint broadband wireless access; WiMax
is based on 802.16
• IEEE 802.17 — Resilient packet ring (RPR), a protocol to improve
resilience for packet data trafﬁc over ﬁber rings
• IEEE 802.20 — Mobile Broadband Wireless Access, PHY and MAC
layer protocols for mobile data access
3.17.3
Standards War
Emerging innovational technologies usually imply huge business
opportunities. Different groups of industry alliances always attempt
to inﬂuence the standardization of these technologies in favor of
their own business interests. This sometimes leads to serious conﬂicts
within a standardization body which inevitably put the technology
in stalemate and affect the promotion of the underlying technology
with respect to providing a uniﬁed, interoperable solution frame-
work for interested parties. For instance, the IEEE standardization
of UWB (802.15.3) has been deadlocked due to proposals from two
rivalry groups: the MBOA Alliance (Intel and TI lead) and UWB Forum
(Motorola leads). Each side claims its proposal is superior to the
other. Seeing no immediate ratiﬁcation of a standard, both groups are

202
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
moving forward to advance their approaches in commercial develop-
ments, effectively creating a segmented UWB market. The evolution
of cellular networks is another example of a standards war. The lack
of a global standard of cellular networks has resulted in two dominat-
ing 2G GSM and CDMA systems and two ongoing 3G deployments:
UMTS/WCDMA and cdma2000, backed up by two organizations,
3GPP and 3GPP2, respectively. If a united standard agreement cannot
be reached by the different groups, it is very likely the market will
make the ﬁnal decision. The standards body will supposedly pick
the approach that is the most popular in the marketplace. Interest-
ingly and understandably, it is not always the technically superior
approach or system that eventually wins the majority of the market.
We have seen this happen with Betamax versus VHS, two competing
videotape standards back in the 1990s. It would be interesting to see
what will happen to those emerging wireless technology standards.
3.18 Summary
Mobile wireless is probably the most active area in the domain
of computing and communications. For one thing, the boundary
between data networking and voice communication continues to
blur, as voice over IP begins to gain some ground in enterprise
networks to replace PBX. The dominance of mobile voice commu-
nications in the wireless world, including cellular network services,
walkie-talkies, and cordless phones, may begin to change as a result
of evident growth of mobile data services and applications, enabled
by a multitude of wireless technologies operating within the ranges of
BAN, PAN, LAN, and WAN. In addition, mobile communications and
computing are taking place in many forms, including interperson,
intrasystem, intersystem, and person to system. This implies ubiqui-
tous mobile access to a converged mobile wireless infrastructure from
everywhere, all the time, and from all mobile devices.
This chapter talked about the technical details of the state of the
art of many wireless technologies, including cellular, wireless LANs,
wireless MANs, Bluetooth, UWB, satellite, wireless sensor networks,

Supporting Wireless Technologies
203
and RFID. The emphasis was on explaining how the technology
works, how it compares to other competing or complementary tech-
nologies, and what are the possible applications are that can take
advantage of the technology. To readers not familiar with these
technologies, thorough basic understanding of these technologies is
required before proceeding to the remaining chapters. The next chap-
ter will focus on hardware and software platforms for smart phones.
It will cover topics such as mobile processor, memory and storage,
input method, display, existing software solutions, and application
development environment.
Further Reading
Federal
Communication
Commission
(FCC)
Spectrum
page,
http://www.fcc.gov/oet/spectrum/;
National Telecommunica-
tions and Information Administration (NITA) Spectrum page,
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/osmhome/osmhome.html.
WAP 2.0,
http://www.openmobilealliance.org/tech/afﬁliates/wap/
wapindex.html.
3 GPP group, http://www.3gpp.org; MMS speciﬁcation for stage
1 and stage 2, http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/status-
report.htm
IEEE 802.11 work group, http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/;
802.11
wireless
LAN
standard
download
site,
http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/802.11.html.
A good survey on IEEE 802.11 standards is William Stallings’ IEEE
802.11: wireless LANs from a to n, IT Prof. Mag., 6(5): 2004,
page 32–37.
Ofﬁcial Bluetooth membership website, http://www.bluetooth.org/;
speciﬁcations download, https://www.bluetooth.org/spec/.
IEEE 802.15 working group for WPAN, http://standards.ieee.org/
getieee802/802.15.html.

204
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
MBOA (Multi Band OFDM Alliance),
UWB industry alliance,
http://www.multibandofdm.org/.
UWB forum, another camp of UWB vendors, propos ed DS-CDMA,
http://www.uwbforum.org/.
EPC Global (RFID code standard body), http://www.epcglobalinc
.org/; RFID speciﬁcations version 1.0/1.1 can be downloaded
from
http://www.epcglobalinc.org/standards_technology/
speciﬁcations.html.
WiMax
Forum,
http://www.wimaxforum.org;
WiMax
white
papers can be downloaded from http://www.wimaxforum.org/
technology/White_Papers/.
Intel’s WiMax site, http://www.intel.com/netcomms/technologies/
wimax/.
IEEE 802.16 working group, http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/16/;
a list of 802.16 standards can be accessed at http://grouper
.ieee.org/groups/802/16/published.html.
For a survey on wireless sensor networks and applications, see D.
Estrin, D. Culler, and K. Pister, Connecting the physical world
with pervasive networks, IEEE Pervasive Comput., 1(1): 2002, page
59–69.
ZigBee Alliance, http://www.zigbee.org/; ZigBee whitepapers can
be
downloaded
from
http://www.zigbee.org/en/resources/
#WhitePapers.
IEEE 802 LAN/MAN standards list, http://standards.ieee.org/catalog/
olis/lanman.html.
References
[1] W. Stallings, Wireless Communications and Networks, Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002.
[2] J. D. Vriendt, P. Laine, C. Lerouge, and X. Xu, Mobile net-
work evolution: a revolution on the move, IEEE Commun., 40:
104–111, 2002.

Supporting Wireless Technologies
205
[3] WAP
Forum,
WAP
2.0
Technical
White
Paper,
Open
Mobile Alliance, La Jolla, CA, 2002 (http://www.wapforum
.org/what/WAPWhite_Paper1.pdf).
[4] S. J. Barnes and S. L. Huff, Rising sun: iMode and the wireless
internet, Commun. ACM, 46(11):78–84, 2003.
[5] H. Berghel, Wireless inﬁdelity. I. War driving, Commun. ACM,
47(9):21–26, 2004.
[6] FCC, Revision of Part 15 of the Commission’s Rules Regard-
ing Ultra-Wideband Transmission Systems, First Report and
Order, Federal Communications Commission, Washington,
D.C., 2002.
[7] WiMax Forum,
WiMax’s Technology for LOS and NLOS
Environment, White Paper, The WiMax Forum, Hillsboro, OR,
2004.
[8] D. Culler, D. Estrin, and M. Srivastrava, Overview of Sensor
Networks, IEEE Computer, 37(8):41–49, 2004.
[9] A. Mainwaring,
J. Polastre,
R. Szewczyk,
D. Culler,
and
J. Anderson, Wireless sensor networks for habitat monitoring,
in Proceedings of the ACM International Workshop on Wireless
Sensor Networks and Applications (WSNA’02), Atlanta, Georgia,
September 28, 2002.
[10] J. Kumagai, Life of birds: wireless sensor network for bird study,
IEEE Spectrum, 41(4):42–49, 2004.
[11] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, Directed diffu-
sion: a scalable and robust communication paradigm for sensor
networks, in Proceedings of the Sixth Annual International Confer-
ence on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom’00), Boston,
MA, 2000.
[12] TinyOS Forum, TinyOS, 2004 (http://www.tinyos.net).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

4
Mobile Terminal Platforms
The previous chapter was dedicated to supporting wireless technolo-
gies for implementing next-generation mobile services and applica-
tions. Those technologies could be used in a network infrastructure
or on mobile terminals. Here, the notion of mobile terminal refers
to any networked mobile device in the context of general com-
munication systems. As explained in Chapter 1, mobile terminals
operate on inherently resource-constrained devices, thus an array
of design challenges confronts smart phones for next-generation
mobile computing. In order to better understand and address these
issues, we must ﬁrst possess a clear understanding of the constraints
and how they inﬂuence the role and functionality of mobile termi-
nals such as smart phones; consequently, this chapter will focus on
the hardware and software platforms for mobile terminals. Hardware
components that make up mobile terminals such as mobile proces-
sors, storage and memory, display, battery, and network interface are
discussed in detail. In addition, a high-level overview of competing
software platforms is presented, including Palm, Symbian, Microsoft
Windows Mobile, Linux, J2ME, and BREW. Readers who are familiar
with these topics may skip this chapter and go directly to the next
chapter.
4.1 Mobile Hardware
As a small computer, a mobile device consists of integrated or
interconnected hardware components and software. These hard-
ware components include a microprocessor (referred to as processor
207

208
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
hereafter), read-only memory (ROM), random access memory (RAM),
expansion storage, network interfaces, an antenna, a battery, and a
display. Some mobile devices also have a hard disk. Among these
hardware components, we are particularly interested in the pro-
cessor, memory and storage, network interfaces, and display. This
section discusses these hardware components to present an overall
picture of mobile terminals. Batteries used in mobile devices were
introduced in Chapter 2.
4.1.1
Mobile Processors
A mobile device is controlled by a small, embedded computer system.
The notion of an embedded system refers to a specialized computer
system that performs a ﬁxed set of functions to control almost any
electronic appliance or equipment ranging from industrial systems
to DVD players and microwave ovens. Mobile devices such as cell
phones, PDAs, laptop computers, specialized handheld scanners,
pagers, walkie-talkies, and wireless-enabled portable gaming devices
constitute a large portion of embedded systems.
The number of microprocessors in embedded systems is far greater
than processors for desktop computers. Almost all electronic devices
now have one or more microprocessors as part of the embedded
system, including consumer electronics devices (e.g., mp3 players,
digital cameras, and televisions), as well as computer peripherals and
network devices such as keyboards, universal serial bus (USB) drives,
printers, network switches, routers, wireless access points, and cable
modems. The automobile industry consumes a vast number of 8-bit
processors; each modern car has about more than a dozen embedded
processors controlling the engine, transmission, lighting circuitry,
stereo systems, etc. Many embedded processors are used in machine
tools and other equipment in manufacturing plants. The micropro-
cessors (CPUs) used in mobile/portable devices are generally referred
to as mobile processors, a type of embedded processor. The number
of mobile processors is huge — just consider the vast number of cell
phones, PDAs, laptop computers, and mp3 players alone.

Mobile Terminal Platforms
209
Mobile
processors
possess
several
distinct
characteristics
as
follows [1]:
• Limited programmability — A mobile processor can only supply lim-
ited computing capability (compared to desktop processors) due
to power consumption constraints.
• High I/O to computation ratio — Network and other I/O communi-
cations are more frequent on mobile terminals than on desktop
computers.
• Stream data processing — Multimedia processing is indispensable
on many mobile terminals; hence, mobile processors are required
to incorporate those multimedia capabilities.
Just as a few types of processor families dominate the desktop com-
puter processor market, a few mobile processor families have emerged
to become the major players in this segment. Following is a summary
of these processors.
4.1.1.1
ARM
The advanced reduced instruction set computer (RISC) machine
(ARM) is a microprocessor architecture initially developed by a British
company called Acron. The ARM Company (a spin-off of Acron),
licenses ARM technologies to semiconductor manufacturers and elec-
tronics device manufacturers. The ARM core is the leading 32-bit
embedded processor architecture for a variety of mobile devices. In
particular, the StrongARM SA-100 processor, a processor based on a
32-bit ARM core developed by Digital Equipment Company (DEC),
was used in Apple’s Newton. Intel’s XScale microarchitecture is
largely, if not completely, based on StrongARM, as DEC sold its entire
chip division to Intel in 1997. It consists of an ARM-compliant execu-
tion core with instruction and data memory management units; data
caches and buffers; power management, performance monitoring,
debug, and JTAGunits; coprocessor interfaces; multiply-accumulate
unit coprocessors; and core memory bus. (JTAG commonly refers
to IEEE Std 1149.1-1990,
IEEE Standard Test Access Port and

210
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Figure 4.1
Intel XScale PXA 270 processor (© 2005 Intel Corporation, Courtesy of Intel
Corporation.)
Boundary-Scan Architecture,
which was originally proposed by
some electronics and semiconductor manufactures as a solution
to the problem of board test.) The XScale architecture features
Intel’s Dynamic Voltage Management technology, which allows
operating voltage and frequency scaling on the ﬂy. Figure 4.1
shows an Intel XScale processor. Palm PDAs that previously used
Motorola DragonBall processors have begun to switch to StrongARM
processors.
4.1.1.2
MIPS
The MIPS family was original developed by the MIPS Company,
founded by John Hennessy. Its core is the MIPS RISC architecture.
MIPS embedded processors and application-speciﬁc integrated cir-
cuits (ASICs) are claimed to have the smallest silicon footprint and
lowest power consumption. They are widely used in cable modems
and videogame devices such as Nintendo Gameboy/DS, and Sony
Play Station Portable. The MIPS family offers both 32-bit and 64-bit
processors. RISC based PowerPC processors are the outcome of a joint
alliance of Apple, IBM, and Motorola. As is true for many other pro-
cessor lines, PowerPC processors mainly target desktop and laptop
computers rather than small mobile devices.

Mobile Terminal Platforms
211
4.1.1.3
x86 and Centrino
Intel’s x86 family started with the 8086 microprocessor back in
1978, followed by 8088, 80286, 80386, 80486, Pentium, Pentium
Pro™, Celeron™, Pentium II™, Pentium III™, and Pentium IV™.
Because of the dominance of x86 processors in the desktop com-
puter market, some other vendors such as AMD and Cyrix have
been developing x86-compatible processors for years. These desk-
top system processors are not suitable for mobile devices, as they
consume quite a bit of power, and the microarchitecture is not opti-
mized for mobile computing. To that end, Intel provides mobile
processors such as Pentium M as part of the Centrino platform
and individual Mobile Pentium II, III, and IV, primarily for lap-
top computers. Most of these processors are complex instruction
set computer (CISC) based, but some of the latest ones have incor-
porated a signiﬁcant portion of RISC techniques. Intel’s mobile
hardware platform, Centrino, consists of Pentium M processors,
mobile chipsets, and on-board wireless adaptors for wireless LAN
and the upcoming WiMax. For example, at the time of this writ-
ing, the latest Centrino platform, code-named Sonoma, features
Pentium M processors up to 2.13 GHz, 2-MB on-chip memory,
533-MHz font-side bus, Intel 915 Express Chipset, 802.11 a/b/g
adaptors, dual-channel 400/533-MHz memory, graphic accelerators,
and high-deﬁnition audio. Future versions of Centrino will include
WiMax support. AMD’s x86 compatible mobile processors, mobile
Athlon 64 and Turion 64, differ signiﬁcantly from Pentium M in
their support for 64-bit computing. Despite its remarkable success in
the desktop processor market, mobile x86 processors fall far behind
ARM and Motorola 68K for mobile computing and are being replaced
by Intel’s XScale line of processors.
4.1.1.4
Transmeta Crusoe and Efﬁceon
Cruose™and Efﬁceon™are two mobile processor families developed
by Transmeta. These processors utilize a LongRun power manage-
ment technology that enables processors to change voltage and
frequency dynamically to delivery high performance while con-
siderably reducing energy consumption [2]. The LongRun power

212
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
management technology continuously samples a processor’s vari-
ous sleep states and adjusts the CPU cycle frequency and operational
voltage in response to the needs of the operating system and appli-
cation software. In addition, LongRun power management does not
require system BIOS, an operating system, device drivers, or exist-
ing applications to use software interfaces in order to take advantage
of them. Crusoe and Efﬁceon are both x86-compatible processors
that employ a so-called “code morphing” technique to translate
x86 instructions into native instructions of the underlying very
long instruction word (VLIW) engine. In this sense, Crusoe can be
regarded as a virtual CPU engine. Transmeta’s mobile processors are
primarily used in systems in which the need for power saving holds
a high priority, such as laptop computers, tablet PCs, ultrapersonal
computers (handheld computers that run full versions of desktop
operating systems), and embedded devices, as well as servers in data
centers.
4.1.1.5
Other Mobile Processors
Other microprocessors for mobile devices include Sun Sparc,
Motorola 68000, and SuperH, each of which has managed to gain
some ground in the mobile device market. For example, SuperH
processors from Hitachi are very common on Sega game devices.
Some of the Palm PDA lines have used Motorola 68000-based
DragonBall processors. Some companies such as Nazomi and ARM
have licensed Java technology for mobile devices, notably Java 2
Micro Edition (J2ME) from Sun Microsystems, and have developed
hardware/software combined Java chips (namely, Java accelerators)
that ofﬂoad execution of native and Java applications from baseband
processors in a mobile device. J2ME is discussed in more detail in
Section 4.7.
4.1.2
Mobile Processor Performance
Moore’s law, which claims that the computing power of semiconduc-
tor chips will double every 18 months without additional cost, surely
holds for desktop computer microprocessors, but it is a different

Mobile Terminal Platforms
213
situation for mobile processors. Usually, computing power is mea-
sured as the number of million instructions per second (MIPS, not
to be confused with MIPS processors), but mobile devices have the
constraint of limited power, which most likely is provided by a bat-
tery. Thus, when measuring the performance of a mobile processor,
power consumption has to be taken into account as well. As a result, a
new metric, MIPS per watt (MIPS/W), has been devised. Commonly,
the MIPS/W values of mobile processors fall within the ranges of
1000 to 2000, and power usage is in the tens of milliwatts to several
hundred milliwatts.
Mobile processors such as Intel’s XScale offer a clock speed of sev-
eral hundred MHz to meet the ever-growing need for high computing
power of high-end mobile devices such as smart phones. In addi-
tion, Intel researchers have demonstrated 1-GHz mobile processors.
On the other hand, mobile processors have embraced system-on-chip
(SoC) technology, which allows a processor to incorporate a set of dis-
tinct functionalities in the same package. For example, Intel’s XScale
provides digital signal processing and wireless communication in
addition to the microprocessor core.
4.1.3
Memory and Storage
Memory represents another dimension of constraints for mobile
devices, as it requires a small program footprint for both mobile oper-
ating systems and mobile applications. Three types of memory are
used in this domain: RAM, ROM, and ﬂash memory. Flash memory
is a special form of nonvolatile electrically erasable programmable
read-only memory (EEPROM). The prime advantage of ﬂash mem-
ory over other regular ROM is that it allows data to be read or erased
on a block level, as opposed to the byte level of other ROM types.
Earlier mobile devices usually provide 4 to 16 MB of static RAM
(SRAM) for user data storage and 8 to 32 MB EEPROM or ﬂash mem-
ory for system code. Today’s mobile terminals typically offer much
larger memory capacity: 64 to 128 MB SRAM for application code,
128 to 256 MB ﬂash memory for system code, and 128 to 256 MB

214
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Figure 4.2
MultiMedia and Compact Flash memory cards.
(Courtesy of Kingston Tech-
nology Co.)
ﬂash memory for user data. Some mobile devices use battery-powered
nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM) to store data ﬁles. Flash memory is also
used as external removable storage cards, such as SmartMedia cards,
Compact Flash (CF) memory cards, memory sticks, MultiMedia Mem-
ory Cards (MMCs), and Secure Digital (SD). Compact Flash memory
cards can supply as much as 4 GB of capacity. Figure 4.2 shows a CF
memory card of 256 MB and an MMC of 128 MB.
On desktop computers, physical memory is considered ﬁrst-level
storage and hard drives (hard disk) are secondary storage. Memory is
much faster for data access but generally is more expensive, whereas a
hard disk typically provides much larger storage space. Due to limited
physical memory, operating systems employ a virtual memory mech-
anism to achieve efﬁcient memory management and high overall
performance. If desktop systems were able to have tens of gigabytes of
physical memory, hard disks would be eliminated completely. In fact,
some high-end, mission-critical server systems use huge amounts of
physical memory to ensure high performance; however, this is not
a cost-effective approach to building general-purpose desktop com-
puter systems. For mobile computer systems, because of the size of
the system code and because the application codes are comparatively
smaller than those of desktop computer systems, a pure ﬁrst-level
memory design can be implemented at moderate cost to achieve
good performance. As a result, today’s PDAs and cell phones only
use memory for code and data storage.

Mobile Terminal Platforms
215
Mobile devices very often support one or more I/O extension
interfaces, thus allowing the use of large ﬂash cards with gigabyte
capacity. There are several reasons to use ﬂash memory instead of a
hard disk:
• Flash memory allows faster access.
• Flash memory is far smaller and lighter than hard disks.
• Flash memory is quiet.
• Flash memory does not have mechanical parts, which are suppos-
edly not suitable for mobile devices.
On the other hand, hard disks offer much greater capacity than ﬂash
memory can provide. The cost of a hard disk is also much lower
than a ﬂash memory of the same capacity, if available. As more and
more multimedia applications begin to appear on mobile devices, the
need for very large storage space will dominate. Eventually a small,
high-performance, low-power, and low-cost mobile hard disk will
probably be preferred to ﬂash memory.
So far, hard disks are not considered a standard component of a
mobile device. Their power consumption is prohibitively high, and
data access speed does not satisfy the needs of mobile applications.
Ordinary 3.5-inch or 2.5-inch hard disks used in desktop and lap-
top computers cannot ﬁt into the small packages of mobile devices.
Recent breakthrough in hard disk research promises a brighter future
for mobile storage. Some Samsung cell phones are reported to have
a 1.5-GB hard disk. Portable mp3 players such as Apple’s iPod
provide a large hard disk of more than 10 GB in a small form
factor.
4.1.4
Extension Interfaces
A variety of mobile device extension interfaces have been devel-
oped by different industry associations so as to enhance the storage

216
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
capacity and functionality of a mobile device. These interfaces can
be divided into two categories:
• Memory and storage extensions — These extensions are only used
for code and data storage. Examples are MMC, SD, SmartMedia,
MicroDrive, and xD Picture Card.
• General I/O extensions — These allow both memory and net-
work cards to be used through the same interface. Examples
are SDIO, Compact Flash, and Personal Computer Memory Card
International Association (PCMCIA).
Table 4.1 highlights some of the existing extension interfaces sup-
ported by cell phones, PDAs, smart phones, digital cameras, and
digital video recorders. It should be noted that some vendors pro-
vide CF adaptors that permit memory cards to be used on mobile
devices with CF interface slots.
4.1.4.1
Input Device
The input device of a mobile device is crucial to the adoption of the
device. Below is a list of input devices used on cell phones, PDAs, and
other handheld computing devices:
• A cell phone keypad is typically a 12-button keypad consisting of
keys 0 to 9, each also representing some letters and characters,
plus the * key and # key. In addition, a cell phone keypad usually
has four function keys (call, hang up, menu, cancel), as well as up
and down keys.
• The QWERTY keyboard is a tiny version of standard English com-
puter keyboards or typewriters. “QWERTY” refers to the six letters
on the top left of a standard keyboard.
• The alphabetic keyboard is another type of small keyboard, with
keys arranged alphabetically.
• The stylus-based virtual keyboard and handwriting recognition are
mostly popular on PDAs. A user can either use a stylus to write

Table 4.1
Mobile Device Extension Interfaces
Category
Name
Size
Spec
General I/O
extensions
Compact Flash (CF)
Connector: 43 mm wide;
case: 36 mm deep;
thickness: 3.3 mm for CF
1, 5 mm for CF II
Identical to PCMCIA–ATA (Advanced
Technology Attachment) interface; CF
memory is based on NOR ﬂash memory
technology (NOR refers to the logic gate
type); it supports up to 4 GB, as of 2004,
operating at 3.3 V and 5 V.
Personal Computer
Memory Card
International
Association
(PCMCIA)
85.6 mm long × 54.0 mm
wide; thickness: 3.3 mm
for type I, 5.0 mm for
type II, and 10.5 mm for
type III.
68 pins; used for memory and network
interfaces; operate at 3.3 V and 5 V.
Secure Digital
Input/Output
(SDIO)
Same as SD
SD expanded with network capability
including wireless LANs, Bluetooth,
Ethernet, scanner, global positioning
system (GPS), etc.; also supports SD
memory cards.
Memory and
storage
extensions
MultiMedia Memory
Card (MMC)
24 mm × 32 mm × 1.5 mm
(roughly the size of a
postage stamp)
Based on NAND ﬂash memory technology
(NAND refers to the logic gate type);
supports up to 2 GB, as of 2004.
Secure Digital (SD)
24 mm × 32 mm × 2.1 mm;
similar to MMC
Based on MMC; provides encryption to allow
secure distribution of copyrighted content;
supports up to 2 GB, as of 2004.
SmartMedia
25.0 × 37.0 × 0.76 mm
Based on NAND ﬂash memory technology;
supports up to 128 MB.
Memory stick
Standard: 50.0 mm × 21.5
mm × 2.8 mm; duo: 31.0
mm × 20.0 mm × 1.6 mm
Based on NAND ﬂash memory technology;
supports up to 256 MB.
xD Picture Card
(eXtreme Digital)
20 mm × 25 mm × 1.78
mm (about 2.8 g)
Supports 1 GB, as of 2004; only available
from Toshiba.

218
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
on the device screen or click keys on a virtual keyboard dis-
played on the screen. This input method eliminates letter keys and
number keys.
Cell phones predominantly use the 12-button keypad as their
input device. The keypad does not require much space, but enter-
ing a single English letter may require two or three presses. Micro
keyboards provide a similar experience as on desktop computers, but
they also tend to make the device wider and the keys smaller, mak-
ing it difﬁcult to use. The stylus-based input method is well suited
for frequent text input on PDAs but usually cannot be operated with
one hand. Smart phones primarily use the cell phone keypad, as
phone functionality dominates the usage of such devices. Some PDA-
like smart phones use micro keypads or stylus-based input, such as
Microsoft Pocket PC™Phones and the Palm Treo™series.
4.1.4.2
Display
The display of mobile devices has evolved in a number of directions at
a fast pace for many years. The very preliminary low-resolution chro-
mosome displays on early cell phones and PDAs have been replaced
by high-resolution color displays. Display screen dimensions vary
from device to device, predominantly determined by the purpose of
the device. For example, PDAs used to have a much bigger display
screen than that of cell phones, because the personal information
management (PIM) user interfaces tended to require more display
space than the early fairly rudimentary cell phone applications.
Mobile consumer electronics devices such as mp3 players usually pro-
vide very simple user interfaces on a small screen. The convergence
of these mobile devices will surely have a great impact on mobile
displays. The aggregation of multiple functions on a single mobile
device requires a display that can satisfy the diverse requirements of
those functions while retaining a desirable form factor and optimized
power consumption. As an example, smart phones often have a sufﬁ-
ciently large display screen for wireless Internet applications as well as
for PIM applications. Design choices have to be made with regard to a

Mobile Terminal Platforms
219
number of factors:
• Size — Size certainly matters. Cell phones usually have 2.2-inch
(5.588-cm) diagonal LCD screens with backlights. The diagonal
screen sizes for PDAs range from 2 to 10 inches.
• Resolution — Low resolutions (176 × 220 or 128 × 160) are still very
common among mobile devices; however, QVGA (320 × 240),
a quarter of standard VGA (640 × 480), is being supported by
more newer smart phones. Some even support VGA on a 2.2-inch
screen. The points-per-inch (PPI) value is around 300.
• Color depth — It is very common to see consumer mobile devices
with a color depth of 12 bit (4096 colors), 16 bit (65536 colors),
or 18 bit (262144 colors).
• Backlight — For a better display effect, the display screens of cell
phones or PDAs usually have a backlight.
• Power consumption — Thin-ﬁlm transistor (TFT) displays tend to
consume more power than earlier passive matrix displays. The typ-
ical power consumption of displays on mobile devices is around
several hundred milliwatts.
Because the display screen of a mobile device accounts for a
signiﬁcant amount of the power consumption of the mobile sys-
tem, it must be considered in the overall power management
scheme. In addition to employing advanced low-power display
technologies, mobile software, including the operating systems
and applications, must be power aware and adaptively control the
display.
A fundamentally different class of display, ﬂexible display, is loom-
ing on the horizon. Like a piece of electronic paper, a ﬂexible
display can be rolled up and even folded. When used on a mobile
device, a ﬂexible display can provide a much larger screen size.
Research on ﬂexible displays is underway at several companies, such
as Philips, Lucent Bell Labs, and Universal Display. These devices uti-
lize advanced material fabricating technologies on plastics, organic
transistors, and organic LEDs. For example, researchers at Philips

220
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
have demonstrated a thin (100 µm), ﬂexible, active-matrix plastic
display. These products will target such niche markets as the mil-
itary and scientiﬁc research. Tired of staring at the phone display,
smart phone users may try eyewear, a glass-like device that provides
a big-screen viewing effect.
4.2 Software Platforms
A mobile software platform is deﬁned as the combination of an
operating system for a collection of compatible mobile devices
with a set of related software development libraries, application
programming interfaces (APIs), and programming tools. A mobile
software platform essentially provides a complete solution to appli-
cation development on mobile devices. Mobile software platforms
are either proprietary for special devices or open to all indepen-
dent software providers. Mobile devices used by consumers such as
cell phones and PDAs are generally powered by well-known operat-
ing systems in conjunction with a rich set of software development
tools and resources. Industrial mobile devices usually have propri-
etary operating systems designated for a limited range of devices.
As mobile hardware technologies and wireless technologies continue
to advance, mobile operating systems are required to take advantages
of those advancements and provide strong support for applica-
tion developers. This section looks at six prevalent mobile software
platforms:
• Symbian — Symbian OS (Figure 4.3a)
• Palm — Palm OS (Figure 4.3b)
• Microsoft Windows Mobile for Smartphone and Pocket PC with
Net Compact Framework (Figure 4.3c)
• Embedded Linux — Linux (Figure 4.3d)
• J2ME — KVM and conﬁgurations
• BREW

Mobile Terminal Platforms
221
Figure 4.3
Smart phones running (from left to right) Symbian (Nokia 6620), Palm OS (Treo
650), I-Mate SP3, and NEC N900iL. (Courtesy of Symbian, Ltd.; Palm Source,
Inc.,
src
http://www.palmsource.com/products/products.cgi?Cat=Smartphones;
Microsoft Corp.; Ziff Davis Publishing.)
Technically speaking, J2ME is not a full-blown software platform
but a runtime environment that relies on an underlying operating
system to execute Java applications. Each of these mobile platforms is
bundled with a software development kit. RIM Blackberry is a propri-
etary mobile software platform only available on devices from RIM,
so we do not cover it here. Indeed, the mobile software platform
sector is a highly dynamic market undergoing fundamental reorga-
nization, especially after Microsoft decided to engage in the battle
with their Windows Mobile offerings. Understandably, traditional
cell phone and PDA software platform providers such as Symbian
and Palm have already sensed the pressure from those newcomers.
It is too still early to predict how this diverse sector will evolve toward
next-generation mobile computing, but one thing is for sure: All of
these mobile software platforms will invariably target smart phones.

222
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
4.3 Symbian
Symbian is a private, independent company that develops and sup-
plies the open standard mobile operating system Symbian OS. It is
owned by some large cell phone manufacturers including Nokia,
Ericsson, Sony Ericsson, Siemens, and Samsung. The primary targets
of Symbian OS are cell phones and smart phones. Initially, Symbian
was founded by Nokia, Ericsson, Motorola, Matsushita, and Psion as a
joint venture in an effort to extend a proprietary cell phone operating
system into an open standard. As of May 2005, 48 Symbian-powered
cell phone models were on the market with sales of 32 million units
in total.
Symbian OS was originally based on the EPOC operating system
and was mainly used for PDAs developed by Psion. Interestingly,
Symbian OS began with version 6.0, following EPOC version 5.0.
The latest version of Symbian OS is 9.0. Symbian OS deﬁnes a few
platforms of user interface (UI) reference models to accommodate
disparate mobile devices. For example, the Quartz model targets PDA-
like devices, the Crystal model is for common cell phones, the UIQ
model is for customizable pen-based touch-screen mobile devices,
and the Series 60 model is for numerical keyboard high-end cell
phones and smart phones.
Symbian OS is designed to support a wide range of voice and
data services in 2G, 2.5G, and 3G cellular systems, as well as
multimedia and data synchronization. Key features of Symbian
OS are mobile telephony supporting wideband code-division mul-
tiple access (WCDMA), global system for mobile (GSM)/general
packet radio service (GPRS), and cdma2000 1x RTT; messaging ser-
vices supporting short message service (SMS), enhanced message
service (EMS), and multimedia message service (MMS); Internet
e-mail servers; multimedia recording, playback, and streaming;
communication protocols supporting Bluetooth, USB, and general
transmission control protocol (TCP)/Internet protocol (IP) suites; and
security in terms of full encryption (e.g., 3DES, RC5, AES, RSA, SHA1,
HMAC) and digital certiﬁcates, as well as secured protocols includ-
ing transport layer security (TLS)/secure sockets layer (SSL), wireless

Mobile Terminal Platforms
223
Communication Services
Kernel Architecture
Base Services
Generic OS
Services
Telephony
Services
Serial
Communication and
Sort Link Services
Networking
Services
Multimedia
Services
Connectivity
Services
Application Services
UI Framework
Java 2 Micro Edition
WAP
Services
Figure 4.4
Symbian OS architecture.
transport layer security (WTLS), and IPSec. Symbian OS supports ARM
processors and x86 emulation. Figure 4.4 depicts the architecture of
Symbian OS version 8.1 [3].
Symbian OS is a real-time, multithreaded, preemptive kernel (ver-
sions prior to 8.0 do not provide real-time kernels) that performs
memory management, process and thread scheduling, interprocess
communication, process-relative and thread-relative resource man-
agement, hardware abstraction, and error handling. The kernel runs
natively in the ARM core.
The basic services provide a programming framework for Symbian
OS components, such as kernel and user API library, device drivers,
ﬁle systems, and standard C++ library. On top of the basic services is a
set of communications services, multimedia services, PC connectivity
services, and generic OS services. Communication services act as the
core to mobile telephony and data network access applications. Per-
sonal area network (PAN) connectivity such as Bluetooth, IrDA, and
USB is also enabled by these services. Multimedia services deal with
audio and video recording, playback, and streaming. Connectivity
services are software components that implement PC synchroniza-
tion. Generic OS services offer typical OS-related components such

224
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
as memory management and ﬁle system access. Application ser-
vices allow user programs to be executed in separated processes. An
exception handling mechanism is also provided, as well as interna-
tionalization support. The UI framework is comprised of an array of
UI components and an event-handling mechanism that permit easy
porting of UI programs between different Symbian OS devices.
Symbian OS uses EPOC C++, a pure object-oriented language,
as the supporting programming language for both system services
implementations and application programming interfaces. It also
allows Java applications for mobile devices ( J2ME applications) to
run on top of a small Java runtime environment. Symbian OS imple-
ments a CLDC/MIDP 2.0 proﬁle of J2ME speciﬁcations. Further
details on Java 2 Micro Edition are provided in Section 4.7.
4.4 Palm OS
Palm, Inc., is the company that created the PDA market. As explained
in Chapter 2, the PalmPilot is believed to be the ﬁrst successful PDA
product (Palm has recently started to use Microsoft Windows Mobile
for Smartphone on some of its smart phone products.). Palm OS is
the underlying operating system for Palm PDAs. Palm also licenses
Palm OS to other PDA manufacturers such as Handspring (merged
with Palm in 2003), Sony, and IBM. Ofﬁcially, the company that
develops Palm OS is Palm Source, a spin-off from PalmOne, the new
name of Palm, Inc., after it merged with Handspring. (Interestingly,
PalmOne changed its name back to Palm, Inc., in 2005.) PalmOne is
the PDA maker of a few product lines including Palm V, Tungsten,
Zire, and Treo.
Palm OS up to version 4 follows a simpliﬁed design philosophy:
making use of limited computing power to allow efﬁcient opera-
tions. Applications on Palm devices are mostly consumer oriented
and have an excellent user-friendly interface. The most notorious
drawback of the old versions of Palm OS is a lack of multitasking
support; the system can only run a single application at a time,
like early DOS systems. This drawback did not seem to matter when

Mobile Terminal Platforms
225
only a few applications were available on the PDAs, and execution
of those applications was generally fast without signiﬁcant delay. As
users began to demand more functionality, such as mobile telephony
and PAN/LAN access, applications on Palm PDAs became more versa-
tile and sophisticated, requiring a more advanced operating system
to facilitate software development. In response to this trend, Palm
designed Palm OS version 5 and 6, which have incorporated a wide
range of improvements.
A major design goal of Palm OS 5 is to move from 68000 (or
68K) processors to several ARM processors such that Palm OS 5 can
be executed on a broader hardware base. At the same time, Palm
OS 5 is backward compatible with legacy Palm applications, thanks
to the built-in Palm Application Compatibility Environment (PACE).
In addition, Palm OS 5 supports multitasking, cryptographic provider
management (CPM) with default crypto provider, mobile telephony,
wireless PAN capabilities, and better graphical user interface (GUI)
support. Palm OS 6 (Cobalt) is a milestone in Palm OS history. It
is a complete rewrite of Palm OS and is the ﬁrst Palm OS to support
multithreading. It also provides more wireless capability, multimedia
application support, and a variety of extension slots support. Some
Palm OS applications are expected to be ported to Linux in the future,
according to Palm Source, Inc.
The Palm OS 6 reference architecture is illustrated in Figure 4.5.
Palm OS allows third-party hardware to be used as part of the sys-
tem provided the hardware abstraction layer and system services
support the third party hardware. The kernel of Palm OS is based
on AMX, licensed from Kodak, which offers preemptive multitask-
ing and protective memory management. System services are a set of
modular components that provide communication, input method
(Grafﬁtti 2), GUI event handling, and multimedia processing. Palm
OS 6 has built-in Bluetooth and Wi-Fi support. Core OS libraries
supply low-level ﬁle system management functionality and TCP/IP.
Third party software libraries can also be plugged into the system; for
example, J2ME proﬁle implementations can be added as third-party
libraries. The PACE layer emulates non-ARM processors, thus allow-
ing legacy applications to execute. A Palm device also provides a set

226
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Palm Device Hardware
3rd Party Hardware
HAL: Hardware Abstraction Layer
System Services
3rd Party Libraries
Core OS Libraries
PACE (Palm Application Compatibility
Environment)
Micro Kernel
68K Applications
ARM Applications
Figure 4.5
Palm OS 6 architecture.
of device applications including PIM applications, e-mail, messaging,
mobile telephony, Internet browser, media player, hot sync, remote
access, and ﬁle system access. Palm OS employs a database model
to store ﬁles, rather than a block-based ﬁle model. Everything is a
database: a PRC (Palm Resource Code)for a program (.exe) and a PDB
(Palm DataBase) for program database. Synchronization between a
Palm device and a computer is done using Palm HotSync Conduit.
We are particularly interested with the network communication
capabilities of Palm OS 6 Cobalt. Multiple communication tasks can
be performed at the same time on a Palm OS Cobalt device. Its I/O
subsystem has been greatly enhanced to support several extension
standards, such as SD, MMC, and SDIO. Palm OS Cobalt provides an
integrated Bluetooth protocol stack and proﬁles including generic
access proﬁle, serial port proﬁle, dialup networking proﬁle, LAN
access proﬁle, service discovery application proﬁle, generic object
exchange proﬁle, object push proﬁle, headset proﬁle, and hands-free
proﬁle. It has built-in Wi-Fi support along with wired equivalent pri-
vacy (WEP) and Wi-Fi protected access (WPA). The drawback of the
Palm OS Cobalt is that the APIs, namely Palm OS Protein APIs, do
not run on older versions of Palm OS; hence, devices powered by

Mobile Terminal Platforms
227
older Palm OS releases must be upgraded to Palm OS Cobalt to take
advantage of the enhanced features.
Application development for Palm OS is based on the Palm OS
68K/Protein SDKs and developer suite in a programming environ-
ment. Developers can choose programming languages from C, C++,
Visual Basic, and Java, although C is most widely used for Palm OS
software development. A developer suite allows a developer to create
both ARM-native Palm OS Protein powered applications for Palm OS
Cobalt (Palm OS 6) and 68-K applications. Palm developers usually
use Metrowerks CodeWarrior (www.codewarrior.com), PRC Tools
(www.palmos.com/dev/tools/gcc),
or Eclipse (http://www.eclipse
.org/) as the cross-platform programming environment.
4.5 Microsoft Windows Mobile
Microsoft is a relatively newcomer in the mobile software platform
market but has managed to achieve substantial growth with the
Microsoft Windows Mobile platform. Windows Mobile refers to a
complete solution to mobile software that consists of a Windows
CE-based operating system, a programming framework, and support-
ing software development tools. Hoping to clone its success in the
desktop system arena, Microsoft has evidently taken advantage of its
experience with desktop Windows so as to lower the barrier of soft-
ware development for mobile systems. Windows Mobile is clearly on
the rise. For one thing, Windows Mobile for Pocket PC is gradually
overtaking Palm OS as the number one platform for PDAs. As a major
win, Microsoft Windows Mobile will replace Palm OS to power the
Palm Treo™smart phones.
As a general mobile software platform, Windows Mobile is tailored
for PDAs and cell phones or smart phones, respectively. The latest
device added to the Windows Mobile family is a portal media cen-
ter, which can display recorded television programs, home videos,
music, and photographs. For each type of device, a platform has
been deﬁned, such as Pocket PC 2003 (i.e., Windows Mobile 2003
for Pocket PC), Smartphone 2003 (i.e., Windows Mobile 2003 for

228
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Smartphone), and Windows Mobile 5.0 for Smartphone. A Windows
Mobile platform is actually a combination of the underlying oper-
ating system (an optimized variant of Windows CE), APIs, software
development tools, and a set of standard applications. Notice the lack
of a space between “Smart” and “phone” in the word “Smartphone.”
This usage more or less exclusively represents the Microsoft Windows
Mobile platform for smart phones.
4.5.1
Windows Mobile
Figure 4.6 illustrates the architecture of Windows Mobile. On top of
the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) hardware is the operat-
ing system, a version of Windows CE that was designed to support
a variety of low-capability mobile devices such as PDAs, cell phones,
smart phones, bar code readers, handheld computers, and embedded
devices in automobiles, among others. The .Net Compact Framework
Hardware
Operating System (Windows CE)
Platform Adaptation Layer
Execution Engine
Base Class Library
Platform Specific Class Library
Managed Applications
.Net Compact Framework
Windows Mobile Platforms
Win32 APIs
Unmanaged
Applications
Figure 4.6
Windows Mobile.

Mobile Terminal Platforms
229
provides a facility and classes that allow one to develop managed
applications. The traditional Wind32 application design paradigm
utilizing Win32 APIs or Microsoft Foundation Classes (MFC) is still
supported.
It is noteworthy that prior to the strategic brand “Windows
Mobile” Smartphone and Pocket PC were initially two different soft-
ware platforms both based on Windows CE. As the convergence of
communication and computing becomes more imminent, the dis-
tinction between these two types of mobile devices has begun to
disappear. In fact, some people envisage a single “Windows Mobile”
software platform for next-generation smart phones in the next
several of years.
Windows Mobile 5.0 for Smartphone is based on the Windows
CE.Net 5.0 operating system. The .Net Compact Framework is loaded
into the ROM of the underlying smart phone device. So, what
is .Net, exactly? .Net is Microsoft’s general software infrastructure
of Internet-based computing. Its core is eXtensible Markup Lan-
guage (XML) Web services. XML Web services are widely accepted
as the solution to enabling seamless, robust, and secure collabora-
tion among heterogeneous Internet services and applications. What
makes it possible to achieve this goal is the open-standard XML
that is able to integrate data and its structure into a self-explanatory
format such that they can be organized, edited, programmed, and
exchanged between any applications, services, websites, and smart
devices. The mechanisms that deﬁne how applications and service
interoperate with each other using XML are simple object access pro-
tocol (SOAP) and universal data description interface (UDDI). With
such a vision in mind, Microsoft has provided a wide variety of build-
ing blocks to enable .Net based Internet application development, as
shown in Figure 4.7.
The heart of the .Net infrastructure is .Net Framework on most
Windows-based operating systems, including Windows desktop sys-
tems, Windows servers, tablet PCs, Pocket PCs, and Smartphones.
.Net Framework consists of two components: a common language
runtime (CLR) and the .Net Framework class libraries. CLR is a layer
between .Net application code and the underlying operating system.

230
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Operating System
Common Language Runtime
Base Framework Class Library
Data and XML Classes
Windows Forms
Web Forms
XML Web
Services
Visual Studio .Net
Common Language Specification
C++
C#
Visual
Basic
J++
Cobol
…...
Figure 4.7
Microsoft .Net framework for desktop and server systems.
Developers can choose from a number of .Net-compatible program-
ming languages, including C, C++, C#, and Microsoft Visual Basic,
as well Fortran and Perl, for .Net application development. Programs
developed using different languages will be compiled into platform-
independent intermediate language (IL) code. When the code is
executed on a .Net system, CLR performs a just-in-time compilation
at run time to generate native code of the application based on the
IL code. In a sense, CLR works like a virtual machine to the applica-
tion in handling memory management including garbage collection,
type checking, exception handling, and security enforcement. It
supports common type system (CTS) and common language speciﬁ-
cation (CLS), two components of the Microsoft Common Language
Infrastructure (CLI). Windows systems have .Net Framework as part
of the operating systems. Some efforts have been made to port .Net
Framework to non-Windows systems, such as the Mono Project [4].
The other component of the .Net Framework, .Net class libraries,
is a package of classes and APIs available for any .Net-compatible
programming languages. The libraries can be divided into three

Mobile Terminal Platforms
231
categories: ASP.Net for web application and web services develop-
ment, ADO.Net for database access, and Windows Forms for building
GUI applications for smart client (i.e., desktop) applications.
4.5.2
.Net Compact Framework for Mobile Devices
For mobile devices such as PDAs, cell phones, and smart phones,
a stripped-down heavily optimized version of .Net, the .Net Com-
pact Framework, is introduced. Similar to its desktop cousin, the
.Net Compact Framework also has two components: a CRL specif-
ically designed for mobile devices and the .Net Compact Framework
class libraries. The CLR is extremely small (less than 2 MB) and
efﬁcient compared to the desktop CLR .Net Framework due to restric-
tions of target mobile devices such as CPU power, memory, storage,
networking capability, and power consumption. The .Net Compact
Framework class libraries are composed of a subset of optimized desk-
top .Net Framework classes, plus some new classes specially designed
for mobile device applications and services.
Mobile software development based on the .Net Compact Frame-
work is facilitated by Microsoft’s ﬂagship programming tool, Visual
Studio .Net, which provides support for smart device projects includ-
ing the Pocket PC, Smartphone, and Windows CE projects. Develop-
ers can choose either C# or Visual Basic as the programming language.
(According to Microsoft, managed C++ will be supported by .Net
Compact Framework in the near future.) .Net Compact Framework
is still undergoing intense development. Features and functionalities
are being added to it on a regular basis along with newer versions.
This suggest that, if .Net Compact Framework does not support a
speciﬁc function, then developers must resort to traditional native
Windows CE APIs, thus bypassing the .Net Compact Framework
runtime environment. As part of the Smartphone platform offer-
ing, Microsoft also provides a Smartphone software development
kit (SDK) for independent software vendors (ISVs). Developers can
use the Smartphone SDK in conjunction with Visual Studio .Net for
.Net Compact Framework-based managed code application devel-
opment. Additionally, the Smartphone SDK also allows C or C++

232
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
unmanaged application programming using Win32 (WinCE) APIs,
bypassing .Net Compact Framework runtime. Windows Mobile for
Smartphone applications can leverage the following features pro-
vided by the underlying Windows CE system and the .Net Compact
Framework:
• Platform invoke (P/Invoke) — This allows a managed program
to call a platform-dependent API provided by the Windows CE
operating system.
• ADO.NET — This allows convenient data access in connected or
disconnected mode.
• Web services — These make it possible for a piece of software to
communicate and operate with other entities on the network via
a secure, uniﬁed interface.
• Rich Forms Designer — This GUI designer coupled with Visual
Studio .Net is an indispensable tool for highly efﬁcient user
interface design.
• XML support — This leverages XML as the general structured data
representation for both local and remote data interchange.
4.6 Embedded Linux
Linux is a free, open-source, UNIX-like operating system. It actually
refers to a combination of two portions: Linux kernels and Linux
applications. Linux kernels are developed and maintained by a group
of people led by Linus Torvalds, creator of the Linux operating sys-
tem. The latest Linux kernel can be obtained from http://kernel.org.
A vast number of free, open-source applications have been developed
and are in use on various Linux systems. Source code of Linux ker-
nels and applications are mostly available under Gnu Public License
(GPL). The GPL states that anyone making use of the GPL-protected
source code for public release must also ensure free and open access
to the code under the same terms of the GPL. A number of Linux

Mobile Terminal Platforms
233
distributions (i.e., bundles of a Linux kernel and selected applica-
tions) have been provided by some companies such as RedHat and
SuSe Linux. Thanks to the support of such companies as IBM, Oracle,
and Novell, Linux is generally viewed as a serious server OS alterna-
tive to Windows and proprietary UNIX such as SunOS. It also has
potential for the desktop OS market.
Linux is making giant strides in the embedded system market as
well, powering up a broad range of network equipment, consumer
electronics, industrial facilities, and mobile devices. In particular,
several Linux distributions for PDAs are free for download on the
Internet. Aside from those offerings from Linux enthusiasts, com-
mercial Linux systems for mobile devices such as Monta Vista Linux
are available in the market. Some PDAs and cell phone manufactures,
especially those in East Asia, have begun to release Linux-based cell
phones and smart phones. For example, NTT DoCoMo will use Linux
on its 3G cell phones, and Chinese telecom equipment manufactur-
ers have selected Linux as the embedded operating system for 3G
TD-SCDMA cell phones. Numerous cell phone manufacturers such
as Motorola and NEC are developing Linux smart phones.
Embedded Linux systems could be either hard real time or soft real
time. Hard real time means the system must respond in a determin-
istic way every time a relevant event occurs. Examples of hard real
time systems are autonomous control systems that require a real-time
operating system (RTOS). In soft real time systems, quick responsive-
ness is desired but not guaranteed. Mobile devices used by consumers
generally fall into the soft real time category. The latest Linux kernels
support both hard real time and soft real time applications, due to
the preemptive kernel design and the so-called O(1) process scheduler
that utilizes a special task queue to achieve constant time scheduling.
Below is a list of characteristics of embedded Linux systems:
• The monolithic kernel supports multitasking and multithreading
and can be tailored for different applications scenarios.
• The open-source community provides support for the latest
network technologies, including Bluetooth, wireless LAN, and
wireless sensor networks.

234
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Applications under GPL licenses are modiﬁable and extensible.
• License fee is low or nonexistent.
Because Linux can be customized to ﬁt into different mobile
devices with various hardware conﬁgurations, it is of great impor-
tance to standardize hardware and software interface and interoper-
ability between conforming devices. To this end, some companies
have formed the Consumer Electronics Linux Forum (CELF) as an
effort to promote advancement of open embedded Linux systems
for consumer electronics devices. Another industry organization, the
Embedded Linux Consortium (ELC), is focused on general embedded
Linux standard development.
Due to the recent development of Linux smart phones and wireless
network equipment, the future of Linux in mobile computing seems
quite exciting. For Linux to reach its full potential in the mobile sec-
tor, it must address “fear, uncertainty, and doubt (FUD)” with regard
to how Linux will perform as a reliable, robust, and yet low-cost
platform, let alone the recent litigation addressing UNIX intellec-
tual property between SCO Group Inc. and some UNIX and Linux
providers.
Application development on open source or commercial embed-
ded Linux systems differs signiﬁcantly from system to system.
Aside from vendor-speciﬁc tools, standard Linux toolchains coupled
with speciﬁc libraries are often used. For example, QT/Embedded
(http://www.trolltech.com/products/embedded/) is a popular GUI
development framework optimized for Linux mobile devices. Widely
used embedded application development tools include GnuPro
Toolkit (http://www.redhat.com/software/gnupro/) and the general
Gnu toolkit.
4.7 Java 2 Micro Edition (J2ME)
Java is not a mobile operating system, but it is mentioned here
because other mobile operating systems can leverage Java platforms

Mobile Terminal Platforms
235
to enable code portability and enforced security. In this sense, Java,
in particular J2ME, performs as a common middle layer between
a speciﬁc mobile operating system and valued-added services and
applications offered by wireless service providers.
4.7.1
Java Primer
Java by deﬁnition is a cross-platform, object-oriented, interpretive
programming language developed by Sun Microsystems. At the heart
of Java is a set of Java virtual machines ( JVMs) for different platforms
that interpret compiled Java bytecode. Here, the notion of platform
refers to a computer system’s processor and its operating system. For
example, Linux on an x86 processor and Linux on a Sun SPARC pro-
cessor are considered two distinct platforms. Popular platforms that
have Java support are Windows on x86 processors, Linux on x86
processors, Solaris on SPARC processors, Solaris on x86 processors,
Linux on AMD processors, and Windows CE on ARM processors,
among others. On each of those platforms a Java runtime environ-
ment ( JRE) is required to run Java applications. A JRE consists of a
JVM for the underlying platform in question, core classes in standard
packages, and some supporting ﬁles. The latest Java version is Java 2
version 1.5, code-named Tiger.
A Java platform is the combination of a JRE and its software devel-
opment kit. A Java source ﬁle is ﬁrst compiled into a bytecode ﬁle by a
compiler. Bytecode is platform independent and is not machine code.
Java was designed to allow the same bytecode to be interpreted by
JVMs on different platforms, a feature referred to as “compile once,
run everywhere.” In reality, this is not always the case due to the
inconsistency of JVM interpretation across different platforms. As an
interpretation language, Java has long been criticized for being con-
siderably slower than those languages that generate native code for
a platform. To improve the performance of Java programs, today’s
JVMs offer an option to leverage the just-in-time (JIT) technology,
which loads bytecode and compiles it into native machine code
on the ﬂy before a program is executed. Compared to traditional
interpretation of bytecode, native machine code runs signiﬁcantly

236
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
faster. As a side note, recall that similar JIT technique is also used in
Microsoft .Net Framework.
Interestingly, Java was initially created to allow code to be easily
ported across a variety of embedded devices. This design goal fell
short as few embedded device manufacturers considered code porta-
bility a very important feature of their offerings. Along with the
explosive growth of the Internet, Java found its way to the World
Wide Web. In addition to static HTML web pages, a new scheme was
needed to allow the delivery of a web-based dynamic user interface,
usually wrapped into some software components over different plat-
forms. For some time Java seemed to be ﬁtting well into the web
environment; as long as a JVM for the underlying web browser was
available for each targeted platform, the same web-based Java appli-
cation (Applet classes) could be downloaded and interpreted by the
JVM. This idea of Java applets served to promote Java technology in
the software development community, but this momentum did not
last for long as more and more people began to complain about the
poor performance of client-side applet executions.
Key characteristics of Java language include:
• Java bytecode is platform independent.
• Java is an object-oriented language with a large set of standard
packages and third-party packages.
• Java has multithreading and thread synchronization support.
• Java employs automatic memory management and garbage col-
lection; pointers are not used in Java.
• Java comes with internationalization support.
The following is a list of ofﬁcial Java platforms available from Sun
Microsystems, each targeting one type of computer system:
• Java 2 Standard Edition (J2SE), for desktop and server systems
• Java 2 Enterprise Edition (J2EE), for enterprise application systems

Mobile Terminal Platforms
237
• Java 2 Micro Edition (J2ME), for embedded systems
• Java Card, for smart card applications
Java 2 Standard Edition is a complete software development solu-
tion of Java applications for desktop and server systems, whereas J2EE
subsumes J2SE and provides a set of tools for developing enterprise
multiple-tier component-based services that implement speciﬁc busi-
ness logic across heterogeneous application servers. It was J2EE that
eventually contributed to Java’s highly anticipated success — not
on embedded devices or the web, but on enterprise server systems,
which nobody ever expected. J2ME is aimed at the ever-expanding
embedded devices market. Due to the diversity of devices in this
segment, J2ME has been furthered packaged into two distinct con-
ﬁgurations: Connected Limited Device Conﬁguration (CLDC) for
mobile devices and Connected Device Conﬁguration (CDC) for con-
sumer and embedded devices. Java Card is speciﬁcally designed for
smart card application development.
4.7.2
J2ME Conﬁgurations
A J2ME conﬁguration consists of a set of fundamental requirements
for JVMs and supportive Java classes and APIs that as a whole repre-
sent Java runtime environment for a collection of embedded devices
with similar hardware and network capabilities. J2ME has provided
CLDC and CDC conﬁgurations. The characteristics of CLDC devices
can be summarized as follows:
• A 16-bit or 32-bit processor with a clock speed of 16 MHz or higher
• Low memory budget: 160 to 512 Kbyte
• Lower power consumption and limited power supply (mostly
battery)
• Simple user interface or no interface at all
• Low bandwidth and possibly intermittent network connection

238
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Examples of CLDC devices include cell phones, low-end PDAs,
pagers, wireless sensors, radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) devices,
etc. CLDC devices are resource constrained in terms of power, pro-
cessing capability, memory capacity, and network capability; there-
fore, standard JVM cannot be used. Instead, a stripped-down JVM,
the kilobyte virtual machine (KVM), is highly desirable for CLDC
conﬁguration. Sun has supplied a reference implementation (RI) of
KVM along with the CLDC conﬁguration. Other KVM implementa-
tions are also available, such as IBM’s J9 virtual machine, which has
been selected for the BREW platform by Qualcomm. KVMs for dif-
ferent operating systems such as Symbian OS, Palm OS, Embedded
Linux, and Windows Mobile enable Java applications to run on these
systems.
The following are characteristics of CDC devices:
• A 32-bit processor
• Large memory budget: 2 MB RAM and 2.5 MB ROM available to
the Java application environment
• Wired power supply or long battery time
• Stable network connection
• Various user interface, from sophisticated GUIs to no UI
Examples include high-end PDAs, television set-top boxes, and RFID
readers. Unlike CLDC, the CDC conﬁguration uses standard JVM.
J2ME conﬁgurations are deﬁned based on hardware and network
speciﬁcations rather than vertical classiﬁcation of application sce-
narios of various devices. The functionality provided by devices of
the same J2ME conﬁguration may vary greatly, requiring additional
APIs that are not provided by the underlying common-ground J2ME
conﬁguration. For this reason, some J2ME proﬁles have been deﬁned
for each conﬁguration. A proﬁle is a set of standard Java APIs for
a speciﬁc narrower class of devices within a J2ME conﬁguration.
For the CDC conﬁguration, a foundation proﬁle, a personal basis
proﬁle, and a personal proﬁle are deﬁned; the foundation proﬁle acts

Mobile Terminal Platforms
239
JVM
CDC (Connected Device
Configuration)
KVM
CLDC (Java Connected
Limited Device
Configuration)
MIDP (Mobile
Information
Device Profile)
PDA
Virtual Machine
Configuration
Profile
Consumer and
Embedded Devices
Mobile Devices
Foundation
Personal Basis
Personal
Figure 4.8
J2ME conﬁgurations.
as the core to the other two proﬁles. For the CLDC conﬁguration,
mobile information device proﬁles (MIDPs) and PDA proﬁles have
been devised. For cell phones and smart phones, the CLDC conﬁg-
uration and the MIDP proﬁle made up a standard Java platform, as
shown in Figure 4.8. Similar to the Java applet scheme for the web,
MIDP applets can be downloaded and executed in a CLDC conﬁgu-
ration on a mobile device. For each conﬁguration, optional packages
are also provided for speciﬁc purposes such as database access and
remote method invocation.
Java 2 Micro Edition provides inherent security mechanisms such
as sandbox and crypto APIs. MIDP 2.0 of the CLDC conﬁguration
introduced digital signatures and code signing to ensure bytecode
security.
To date, J2ME has been widely used in the development of mobile
applications on cell phones, PDAs, pagers, handheld PCs, set-top
boxes, and many consumer electronics devices. An assortment of
J2ME-based mobile applications is being used worldwide, ranging
from cell phone games [5] to multimedia download and playback to
enterprise applications.
Unlike desktop computers, the operating system of a mobile device
is often greatly customized to leverage underlying mobile hardware.

240
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Sometimes installing a new operating system on a device designed
to run a different operating system can be extremely difﬁcult and
dangerous, because it can render the device unusable due to hard-
ware failure. On the other hand, in order to improve developer
productivity and mobile code security, people are free to choose
a virtual-machine-based, managed software development platform
such as J2ME and .Net Compact Framework. (Managed code is exe-
cuted within a software execution environment, which is responsible
for enforcing type-safe execution, memory management, and code
security.) A comparison between J2ME and .Net Compact Framework
is presented in the last section of this chapter.
4.8 BREW
Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless (BREW) is a wireless
software platform solution for CDMA cell phones developed by Qual-
comm, the company that created CDMA technology. According to
Qualcomm, as of November 2004, more than 40 million BREW
units were being used worldwide, and more than 150 device models
were utilizing BREW as the runtime environment and application
development platform. Contrary to popular perception, BREW is
independent of the air interface of the underlying cellular technol-
ogy, meaning that GSM and UMTS/WCDMA cell phones are also
supported by BREW.
BREW consists of three components: a binary runtime environ-
ment, an application development environment, and a distribution
system. The binary runtime environment allows native BREW appli-
cations to operate regardless of the air interface used by the cell
phone. The application development environment provides a set
of platform APIs and supporting tools for BREW software devel-
opment. The BREW distribution system (BDS) allows wireless data
service providers to deliver content to subscribers. Like Microsoft’s
.Net Compact Framework, any mobile applications that are about to
be deployed on a mobile device must be signed using a digital key
and certiﬁed. BREW is generally regarded as a hardware-independent

Mobile Terminal Platforms
241
wireless solution for mobile devices. In this sense, BREW is com-
peting with J2ME. However, these two technologies are not entirely
competitors. For example, Qualcomm has selected IBM’s J9 Java vir-
tual machine for BREW, thereby making it possible to execute Java
applications.
4.9 Comparisons of Mobile Software Platforms
Symbian OS and Palm OS are historically dedicated mobile operat-
ing systems for cell phones and PDAs, respectively. Both of them
are tightly connected to a group of mobile device manufacturers:
Symbian is in effect funded by a number of cell phone manufacturers,
and Palm OS is dedicated to Palm devices. The trend of conver-
gence of these mobile devices opens up enormous opportunities for
Symbian and Palm, potentially allowing each to enter the other’s
stronghold with smart phone offerings. The challenge is to provide
a wide range of mobile telephony and mobile data services with
very limited resource on a small form factor. In contrast, Microsoft
Windows Mobile for Smartphone is rooted in the general-purpose
Windows CE operating system and is known to require much more
in the way of computing resources due to the generalized architecture
of Windows CE even though it has been tailored for smart phones.
As an open-source operating system, Linux has been embraced by
a number of mobile device manufacturers as a low-cost and highly
customizable solution. Both Windows Mobile and Linux are general-
purpose operating systems and must be tailored for use on mobile
devices. J2ME CLDC is platform independent and can be used on
any mobile operating systems supporting J2ME. Among proprietary
mobile platforms, Qualcomm’s BREW managed to gain considerable
acceptance, primarily by CDMA cell phone manufacturers.
Palm OS, Microsoft Smartphone, and BREW are proprietary sys-
tems in that they only provide largely restricted APIs but no mech-
anism to tweak the system itself. On the other hand, Symbian,
Linux, and J2ME are completely open systems in this sense. Table 4.2
provides a comparison of these mobile platforms.

Table 4.2
Mobile platform comparisons
Symbian
Palm OS
Microsoft
Smartphone
(with .Net
Compact
Framework)
Linux
J2ME
BREW
Multitasking
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Depending on
OS
Yes
Supported
processors
TI OMAP
(ARM
based) and
Intel XScale
Intel XScale,
Motorola
DragonBall, TI
OMAP (ARM
based)
Intel
StrongARM
and XScale
Intel StrongARM
and XScale
Depending on
devices
Qualcomm
processors
Footprint
Small
Small
Large
Large
Medium
Small
Power
Excellent
power man-
agement
Excellent power
management
Lacks power
manage-
ment
Shows potential
for power
management
Relies on the
operating
system
Chipset for
power
management
Mobile
telephony
Inherent
support
Enhanced
feature for
high-end Palm
devices
Limited
support
Limited support
Extensive
support for
mobile
operating
systems
Strong support
Wireless data
connection
support
Bluetooth,
IrDA
Bluetooth, Wi-Fi,
IrDA
Bluetooth,
Wi-Fi, IrDA
Bluetooth, Wi-Fi,
IrDA
Bluetooth
Bluetooth and
IrDA
Open or not?
Open
Proprietary
Proprietary
Open
Open
Proprietary
Programming
language
support
Native C and
C++
C
Native C,
C++, and
.Net
runtime
support
Native C and
C++
Java
Native C/C++
Industry
support
Major cell
phone
manufac-
turers
PalmOne
Several
wireless
service
providers
and some
Palm smart-
phones
Asia cell phone
manufacturers
Licensees
include major
cell phone
manufacturers
CDMA cell
phones

Mobile Terminal Platforms
243
Due to its supreme portability and established support in the
mobile application developer community, J2ME is well positioned
for next-generation mobile application development. The fact that
every mobile software platform has some kind of Java environment
(even Windows Mobile may be equipped with a third-party KVM)
is a clear indication of J2ME’s advantage over other application
platform solutions. On the other hand, .Net Compact Framework
along with Windows Mobile does have a chance to gain some trac-
tion, provided mobile device manufacturers continue to embrace
Microsoft Windows Mobile in their future offerings. Considering the
heterogeneity of mobile devices in terms of hardware and software
platforms, J2ME and .Net Compact Framework are likely to ﬂourish,
while other mobile software platforms dedicated to speciﬁc operat-
ing systems may experience only limited acceptance, which depends
on the popularity of mobile devices running the operating system in
question.
4.10 Supporting Tools
In addition to the operating system and its development interfaces,
a complete mobile software platform also includes a range of mid-
dleware and mobile development supporting tools that can be used
to address the issue of device and network heterogeneity, as well as
to facilitate efﬁcient cross-platform development. In this section, we
will look at three major elements in this arena: mobile web browsers
and markup languages, and device emulators.
4.10.1
Mobile Web and Markup Languages
Heterogeneity is everywhere in the mobile wireless world. In the case
of mobile markup language, several HTML-like languages are being
used on a variety of mobile devices. Table 4.3 provides a summary of
these markup languages.

Table 4.3
Wireless Markup Languages
Language
Description
Example
Hypertext markup
language (HTML)
The markup language of web pages
displayed on web browsers
This is a paragraph:
<h2><b>example</b></h2><br>
Extensible markup
language (XML)
The markup language that allows
users to create their own tags for
the deﬁnition, validation, and
interpretation of structured data
<Team>
<Employee>
<Name>John Doe</Name>
<EmployeeID> 1234 </EmployeeID>
</Employee>
<Employee>
<Name>Joe Smith</Name>
<EmployeeID> 1235 </EmployeeID>
</Employee>
</Team>
Wireless markup
language (WML)
The markup language optimized for
text-based WAP (1.0) devices;
WML code is compiled into
binaries before being sent out
<card id=“mycard’‘ title=“card
example’‘>
text example</p>
</card>
Extensible hypertext
markup language
(xHTML)
A transition between HTML 4.0 and
XML; compared to HTML, xHTML
imposes stricter rules with tagging
(e.g., elements must be properly
nested and closed); used in
WAP 2.0
This is a paragraph </p>
<h2><b>text
example</b></h2><br>
Compact HTML
(cHTML)
A subset of HTML optimized for
small information devices;
primarily used by Japan’s iMode
service
See HTML example
Standard generalized
markup language
(SGML)
A meta-language that deﬁnes how to
deﬁne a speciﬁc markup language;
HTML and XML are based on
SGML
N/A

Mobile Terminal Platforms
245
Mobile web platforms such as WAP and i-Mode (as discussed
in Chapter 3) use one or two markup languages in the above-
mentioned list. Both of them require a special browser applica-
tion on mobile software platforms to render web pages designed
using selected markup languages. A more general mobile platform
is to use a stripped-down version of web browsers to access both
normal web pages designed for desktop computer displays and
mobile web pages for small mobile displays. Major “micro web
browsers” include Opera Mobile (http://www.opera.com/products/
mobile/), Microsoft Pocket Internet Explorer (http://www.microsoft
.com/windowsmobile/about/tours/sp/pocketie.mspx), and Mozilla
Minimo (http://www.mozilla.org/projects/minimo/). Opera Mobile
is by far the most widely used mobile web browser on cell phones.
Of course, mobile website designers face the challenge of authoring
mobile web pages optimized for small display rendering. To convert
a normal web page into a format suitable for small displays, some
“page transformation” techniques are often applied for mobile web
servers or wireless application gateways. This issue is discussed further
in Chapter 7 (Mobile Application Challenges).
4.10.2
Mobile Device Emulators and Simulators
Each software platform discussed above provides a device emulator
or a simulator program that can be used to debug and test code
without a physical target mobile device. A mobile device emulator
is a software-based execution environment that emulates a complete
set of hardware as well as the mobile operating system on a target
mobile device. In contrast, a mobile device simulator is an instance
of the target mobile operating system or software platforms compiled
natively for the hardware platform of the development computer
hosting the simulator software. For Palm OS mobile application
development, both an emulator and a simulator are provided. Other
platforms only provide an emulator or a simulator. The emulators
and simulators provide a virtualized execution environment support-
ing target CPU instruction set emulation/simulation and memory
and I/O device emulation/simulation. Figure 4.9 shows screenshots
of these emulators.

246
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Symbian emulator for Nokia
Series 60
Palm Cobalt simulator
Microsoft Smartphone emulator
J2ME MIDP emulator
BREW simulator
Figure 4.9
Device emulators. (Courtesy of Nokia Communications; Palm Source; Microsoft;
Sun Microsystems, and Qualcomm.)
4.11 Summary
All wireless services and applications eventually rely on a mobile
terminal to deliver to users. Terminal platforms of next-generation
mobile devices are undergoing signiﬁcant changes in both hardware
and software. On the hardware side, mobile processors continue

Mobile Terminal Platforms
247
to achieve faster speed. We can expect dramatic improvement of
mobile hardware capabilities primarily in the areas of wireless con-
nectivity and storage. A broad range of wireless interfaces have been
developed as built-in features or extension interfaces pluggable to a
mobile device. Radio frequency functionality, digital signal process-
ing, multimedia functionality, and security mechanisms will appear
in the system-on-chip form and will be integrated into various mobile
devices. Memory and persistent storage of mobile devices will not be
a problem for future mobile applications. More nonvolatile mem-
ory is being used at a lower cost, and secondary storage for mobile
devices is beginning to appear, although low-power computing and
power management will remain key challenges. The power con-
sumption of each hardware component and the overall system has
been greatly reduced. In addition, system-wide power management
schemes based on hardware control chips have been introduced to
some mobile devices. Flexible display technologies may provide a
solution to the issue of mobile display.
On the software side, multiple mobile software platforms such
as Symbian, Palm OS, Microsoft Smartphone, BREW, and J2ME are
supplied by various industry consortiums targeting the same market
of next-generation mobile devices. Because of this remarkable diver-
sity, it is quite clear that in the foreseeable future no single platform
will dominate the entire segment as is the case in desktop computer
systems. It is also evident that all the mobile platforms are mov-
ing quickly toward converged mobile devices, and smart phones are
among the top priorities to target. Another trend is that support for
a wide range of wireless technologies is becoming standard.
This chapter presented coverage of existing mobile terminals
that are likely to leverage those wireless technologies discussed in
Chapter 3 with respect to providing building blocks for next gener-
ation mobile services and applications. Needless to say, a number of
issues in this regard remain unsolved. For one thing, mobile con-
vergence calls for seamless integration and interoperation among
mobile terminals and network infrastructures, but the diversity of
those non-interoperable mobile platforms would seem to be a bar-
rier to this trend. In the next several chapters, we will discuss these

248
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
challenges and solutions surrounding smart phones in the domain
of next-generation mobile computing.
Further Reading
A. Wigley,
S. Wheelwright,
R. Burbidge,
R. MacLeod et al.,
Microsoft .Net Compact Framework (Core Reference), Microsoft
Press, Redmond, CA, 2003.
ARM processors core documentation, http://www.arm.com/
documentation/ARMProcessor_Cores/index.html.
For a good reference on mobile software platforms and tools, see
M. Mallick, Mobile and Wireless Design Essentials, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 2003.
For a good source on J2ME, see C. E. Ortiz, E. Giguere, and C. E.
Ortiz, Mobile Information Device Proﬁle for Java 2 Micro Edi-
tion (J2ME): Professional Developer’s Guide, John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 2001.
GPL license, http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.
Intel XScale technology, http://www.intel.com/design/intelxscale/.
J2ME, http://java.sun.com/j2me/; J2ME CLDC conﬁguration, http://
java.sun.com/products/cldc/overview.html.
Linux
on
PDAs,
http://www.handhelds.org/;
Linux
devices,
http://www.linuxdevices.com/ (website about the latest embed-
ded devices using Linux).
Microsoft Windows Mobile, http://www.microsoft.com/
windowsmobile/default.mspx; Windows Mobile for
Smartphone, http://www.microsoft.com/windowsmobile/
smartphone/default.mspx.
Palm OS at Palm Source,
http://www.palmsource.com/palmos/;
overview of Palm OS Cobalt, version 6.1, http://www.
palmsource.com/palmos/cobalt.html.

Mobile Terminal Platforms
249
Qualcomm Brew, http://brew.qualcomm.com/.
Symbian OS White Papers: http://www.symbian.com/technology/
whitepapers.html.
References
[1] F. Koushanfar, V. Prabhu, M. Potkonjak, and J. M. Rabaey, Pro-
cessors for mobile applications, in Proc. 2000 IEEE Int. Conf.
Computer Design: VLSI in Computers and Processors, Austin, TX,
2000, page 603–608.
[2] M. Fleischmann, Dynamic Power Management for Crusoe Proces-
sors, White Paper, Transmeta Corp., Santa Clara, CA, 2001.
[3] Symbian OS v8.1 technical speciﬁcations, 2004 (http://www.
symbian.com/technology/symbos-v81-det.html).
[4] The Mono Project website: http://www.mono-project.com/.
[5] J. Krikke, Samurai Romanesque: J2ME, and the battle for mobile
cyberspace, IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 23(1): 2004, page 16–23.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

5
Mobile Networking Challenges
The trend of convergence in the domain of mobile computing
encompasses a multitude of wireless technologies that must coex-
ist and interoperate seamlessly. These technologies have opened up
enormous opportunities for applications that can provide ubiquitous
wireless data access and real-time communication over the forthcom-
ing, fully integrated, high-speed networks. This chapter concerns a
number of open issues with regard to the heterogeneous mobile wire-
less networks that smart phones or other mobile devices will access.
A signiﬁcant amount of effort by the network research community
has been made to address these problems. The following issues rep-
resent the most important problems that must be addressed as 3G
cellular networks and a variety of new wireless technologies are being
rolled out:
• Mobile IP and mobile IPv6 (the foundation of future mobile
wireless networks)
• Wireless transmission control protocol (TCP; enhancement for
wireless environment)
• Convergence of heterogeneous wireless networks (issues and solu-
tions in the integration of different wireless technologies)
• Wireless local area networks (LANs) and Bluetooth coexistence
(schemes for wireless LANs and Bluetooth coexistence)
• Mobile next-generation networks (mobility support in next-
generation networks)
251

252
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Mobile ad hoc networks (major issues such as topology control,
routing, and service discovery)
• Quality of service (QoS) in mobile computing (QoS support in
various wireless technologies)
5.1 Mobile IP
Recall that cdma2000 offers two types of services: simple IP and
mobile IP. Simple IP service only allows a mobile station to roam
seamlessly within areas under the umbrella of the same packet data
service node (PDSN), because the IP address assigned to the mobile
terminal is valid across these areas. If the mobile terminal moves to an
area controlled by another PDSN, it has to obtain a new IP address
to replace the old one, thereby disconnecting the current connec-
tion. In order to maintain a steady packet stream on a mobile device,
transparent handoff is needed, which in turn implies transparent IP
mobility. Of course, theoretically, mobility can also be achieved on
layers other than the IP layer, such as on layer 2, using some kind
of hardware address, or on an application layer. These approaches,
however, do not scale well.
Mobile IP was initially proposed to solve the problem of IP mobil-
ity in a cellular network. Figure 5.1 shows how mobile IP works. A
mobile device will always be identiﬁed by its home address, main-
tained by its home agent (HA). When the mobile device moves to
another area, it receives a care-of address (CoA) from a foreign agent
(FA). The foreign agent and home agent will coordinate to provide a
connection as though the mobile device can still be reached via its
home address. In fact, the home agent, most likely an access router,
maintains a mapping between the mobile device’s home address and
foreign address. Any packet sent to the home address will be put into
an IP-in-IP tunnel by the HA, and forwarded to the foreign address. At
the end of this tunnel is the FA, whose job is to decapsulate the packet
and forward the original data to the mobile device. To make the tun-
nel go through a network address translation (NAT) box, IP-in-IP

Mobile Networking Challenges
253
Home Network
Home Agent
Correspondent
Station
Foreign Agent
Mobile Station
Foreign Network
IP-in-IP Tunnel
Figure 5.1
Mobile IP.
has been replaced by IP-in-UDP (User Datagram Protocol). Details of
the mobile IP protocol can be found in RFC 3220 (All RFCs can be
obtained from IETF’s website: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/)[2][1]. Mobile
IP essentially offers a way to identify a mobile device using the same
address when it moves to another location and cannot be serviced by
its original home agent. It does not require any modiﬁcation to the
application layer. Its drawback is the overhead of signaling and IP
tunneling. To reduce the delay of signaling between the FA and HA,
some techniques have been proposed to offer uninterrupted service
during roaming. For example, one approach tries to create a tempo-
rary tunnel before a handoff begins (make-before-break). As a result,
the packet sent to the mobile device will always be forwarded without
interruption.
5.1.1
Mobile IPv6
It is commonly agreed that next-generation mobile networks will be
based on IP. Ideally, in the foreseeable future, every networked com-
puting or communication device will have an IP address allowing for

254
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
some kind of network communication. This means that your land-
line telephone, television, portable music players, cell phones, and
even your watch will all have IP addresses, and the list of devices is
growing longer everyday. Given the IP address space (version 4) of
32 bit, the total number of IPv4 addresses is about 4 billion, less than
the number of human beings on Earth. A short-term solution to the
IP address shortage problem is network address translation (NAT), as
described in RFC 1631. NAT leverages ranges of globally nonroutable,
private IP addresses1 for internal use. NAT relies on a gateway known
as the NAT box to translate source IP address (e.g., 192.168.1.10) to a
global IP address when an internal host is about to access the Internet.
Outside the private network, hosts will only see the global IP address
of the NAT box. For TCP and UDP connections, the original source
port of a packet must be replaced as well. To deliver incoming TCP
and UDP trafﬁc corresponding to packets sent by an internal host, the
NAT box must maintain a mapping between its serving source port
and a tuple (internal host IP address, its original source port). NAT
effectively enables many hosts to access the Internet with a single
global IP address. Because of this unique advantage, NAT has been
widely used in enterprise networks, cellular data networks, home
networks, and wireless LAN hotspots; however, NAT does have some
obvious problems. For one thing, a NAT extension is required for each
application layer protocol using the IP address in the TCP or UDP
payload (such as FTP and some instant messaging protocols), com-
plicating the conﬁguration and upgrade of NAT boxes because these
applications will not pass through the NAT box otherwise. Further-
more, some argue that NAT violates the fundamental rule of protocol
layering, because NAT in effect involves data from both the network
layer and the transport layer. RFC 2993 describes the major draw-
backs of NAT. Considering the staggering increase in the number of
mobile wireless devices, it is not difﬁcult to realize that the days of
1 As deﬁned in RFC 1918, private IP addresses are: 10.0.0.0 -10.255.255.255, 172.16.0.0
- 172.31.255.255, 192.168.0.0-192.168.255.255. Additionally, an APIPA (Automatic
Private IP Address) range is deﬁned as 169.254.0.0 - 169.254.255.255. The APIPA is
not reserved but often used by a host in case no DHCP server is available.

Mobile Networking Challenges
255
IPv4 are numbered. IPv6, the long-awaited upgrade to the founda-
tion of today’s Internet protocol, is ﬁnally making its way to reality,
thanks to the convergence of computing, communication, and con-
sumer electronics. Details of IPv6 can be found in RFC 2460, 2461,
2462, and 1881.
5.2 Wireless TCP
The TCP/IP protocol suite effectively dominates the Internet. TCP
provides connection-oriented service over packet switching net-
works. Acknowledgment schemes are used to ensure TCP connec-
tion reliability. Round-trip time (RTT) estimates allow dynamic
adjustment of the sliding window in order to achieve maximum
throughput. The ﬂow control and congestion control mechanisms
of TCP help the transport adapt to network conditions and endpoint
characteristics.
TCP assumes all packet losses are caused by congestion at links
where buffers overrun and packets are dropped. Congestion con-
trol using slow-start, congestion avoidance, fast retransmission, and
fast recovery are commonplace among many TCP implementations.
Slow-start works by allowing exponential growth of the sender’s con-
gestion window for each received acknowledgment until it reaches a
threshold, when the congestion window will enlarge linearly (con-
gestion avoidance) until it reaches the receiver’s advised window.
The threshold is an estimate by the sender of how many packets can
be transmitted at one time without causing congestion. Any packet
loss detected by a timeout or duplicate acknowledgment will result
in a threshold that is half the current congestion window size and a
congestion avoidance procedure starting from a congestion window
of 1 (or 2 in the Linux kernel). A receiver will send an immediate
“duplicate ACK” message with an indication of the lost sequence
number when an out-of-order segment is received. After receiving
three “duplicate ACK” messages, the sender initiates fast retransmis-
sion by retransmitting the lost segment immediately without waiting
for that segment’s timeout. After that, the sender will begin fast

256
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
recovery by conducting congestion avoidance rather than slow-start.
Details of TCP congestion control can be found at RFC 2001 and
Jacobson[13].
5.2.1
Wireless TCP Challenges
It should be noted that all the TCP schemes mentioned above are
based on characteristics of wired networks. With regard to TCP for
wireless communication, however, one must consider whether these
TCP schemes will still perform well, as the underlying communica-
tion infrastructure is completely different. Wireless communications
have imposed a number of challenges on TCP, including:
• High packet drop rate — In contrast to wired networks, wireless
channels are known to have a quite high bit error rate, resulting in
a high packet drop rate over IP and TCP layers. Handoff of mobile
terminals across base stations also causes packet losses. Common
TCP does not distinguish between packet drop due to network
congestion or transmission error because the latter is extremely
rare; however, wireless TCP must deal with both cases.
• Unreliable wireless link — The physical connection of wireless net-
works is subject to open-air interference from any radios in the
proximity. The connection may break at any time, interrupting
the TCP connection.
• Mobility — Mobile devices connecting to a wireless network move
within a base station, across base stations, across administrative
domains, or across heterogeneous networks, making it difﬁcult to
maintain a stable TCP connection.
• Resource-limited mobile device — Mobile devices usually have quite
limited computing power, memory and storage, and power sup-
ply. Wireless TCP on mobile devices must take these into account.
• Wireless link bandwidth vs. wired link bandwidth — Wireless link
bandwidths are generally much lower than wired link bandwidths.

Mobile Networking Challenges
257
5.2.2
Wireless TCP Protocols
Wireless TCP can be enhanced in several ways, including TCP-split,
link-layer-assisted TCP, and regular TCP modiﬁcations (see Table 5.1).
For wireless communication between a ﬁxed host and a mobile host,
TCP-split separates the wired connection between a ﬁxed host and
a base station or wireless access point with the wireless connec-
tion being made between a mobile terminal and the base station
or wireless access point. As a result, the involved wired link does not
require any modiﬁcation because it is isolated from the wireless part
where speciﬁc TCP modules are needed. Link-layer- and network-
layer-assisted TCP aims to address packet loss at the link layer, instead
of leaving it to the transport layer to detect and recover. Regular TCP
modiﬁcations include enhancements to TCP mechanisms for wireless
communication.
Below is a brief summary of some of the well-known solutions
within each category.
• TCP-split (I-TCP) — In I-TCP [14], every connection from a mobile
host (MH) to a ﬁxed host (FH) through a mobility support router
(MSR) is decomposed into two distinct portions: one wireless con-
nection between the MH and MSR and one wired connection
between the MSR and FH. The MSR maintains the association
Table 5.1
Wireless TCP Protocols
Category
Examples
TCP-split
I-TCP
M-TCP
Link-layer-assisted TCP
Snoop/delayed duplicated acknowledgment
(DDA)
AIRMAIL
RLP
TCP modiﬁcation
Eifel
TCP SACK
Fast start

258
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
between the two links. If the MH moves to an area under the con-
trol of another MSR, related links will handoff to the new MSR.
TCP-split solutions leverage the isolation of wired and wireless
links, thus the FH does not require any modiﬁcation for wireless
communication. A drawback is that the TCP semantics of end-to-
end connections is broken because the MSR serves as a proxy of
MHs for the FH, and ACKs to the FH actually come from the MSR,
not the MH. For applications that are unaware of the underlying
environment, TCP semantics should not be altered. M-TCP [15]
is another TCP-split scheme that was mainly proposed to work in
wireless environment with frequent disconnections. M-TCP does
not alter TCP semantics.
• Link-layer-assisted wireless TCP (Snoop) — Snoop [16] is a network-
layer solution that utilizes a trafﬁc interception module at the
base station that resides between the ﬁxed host sender and the
mobile host receiver. In some sense, it can be considered a TCP-
split solution, with the exception that Snoop does not change the
semantics of TCP for either the sender and receiver. The Snoop
module caches every unacknowledged TCP packet sent by the
FH, which can be used for fast retransmission to the MH with-
out notifying the FH in case of packet losses. Only if the base
station receives ACKs from the MH does the Snoop module clear
the buffered messages and propagate these ACKs back to the FH.
For TCP packets sent from the MH to the FH, the Snoop module
maintains those unacknowledged messages in case of packet loss
in the wired network. It also generates negative acknowledges of
lost packets in the wireless link (from the MH to the base station)
and sends them to the MH for fast retransmission. Duplicate ACKs
are suppressed by the Snoop module in either case. Delayed dupli-
cated acknowledgment (DDA) is an extension of Snoop. It differs
from Snoop in that the third and subsequent duplicate ACKs will
be delayed for some time to avoid immediate retransmission to
the sender.
• TCP modiﬁcations (Eifel algorithm) — For a long end-to-end, high-
delay path that is composed of a number of wireless links, wireless

Mobile Networking Challenges
259
TCP suffers two major problems: spurious timeout and spurious
retransmits. Spurious timeout occurs when the TCP sender does
not wait for a sufﬁciently long time before timeout of the packet.
Spurious fast retransmit happens because IP out-of-order delivery
causes the sender to retransmit the packet when the acknowledg-
ment duplicate threshold is reached. These two issues are largely
due to the intrinsic TCP characteristics of ambiguous acknowl-
edgments that may be caused by either the original TCP packet
or the retransmitted ones. Aiming to address these issues, the
Eifel algorithm [17] introduces the TCP time-stamp option in
the TCP header. The time stamp consists of the sender clock,
slow-start threshold, and congestion window size. Any ACKs will
contain the time stamp of the corresponding packets, allowing
the sender to restore the slow-start threshold and congestion
window size in case the original packet is being acknowledged.
As a result, spurious timeouts and fast retransmits are elimi-
nated. TCP selective ACK (SACK) uses two TCP option ﬁelds
to carry information of noncontiguous blocks of data in the
ACKs from the receiver to the sender. TCP SACK is not specially
designed for wireless networks, thus it cannot handle mobile
handoff.
TCP modiﬁcations and link-layer-assisted protocols generally sat-
isfy TCP semantics; however, TCP modiﬁcations require an upgrade
of TCP modules on FHs, which does not seem to be feasible. Link-
layer-assisted protocols are most suitable for a wireless environment
that shows a higher bit error rate (BER), as the base station effec-
tively reduces link-layer overhead by suppressing duplicate ACKs
from the MH. TCP-split does not require any modiﬁcation of the
ﬁxed network side, but it breaks TCP end-to-end semantics. Some
TCP-split schemes such as I-TCP do not handle handoff disconnec-
tions. For a detailed review of wireless TCP protocols and compar-
isons, please refer to Hu and Sharma [18] and Elaarag [19]. Another
major issue, mobile security and privacy, is discussed in the next
chapter.

260
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
5.3 Convergence of Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
Wireless is everywhere. A large array of wireless technologies is being
used in our everyday life, not to mention those used in indus-
try, military, government agencies and organization, and scientiﬁc
research; consequently, there are many types of communication
networks, each comprised of intelligent mobile devices and ﬁxed net-
work infrastructures. In this broad domain, convergence is bound to
happen in many aspects. Below is a list of issues that have been exten-
sively explored by researchers from both academia and the wireless
industry:
• Integration of cellular networks and wireless LAN hotspots
• Integration of wireless LAN and Bluetooth
• Integration of wireless LAN and cellular for enterprises
• Integration of wireless LAN and corporate IP private branch
exchange (PBX)
An imminent trend in the domain is integration of cellular net-
works and wireless LAN hotspots. Integration of wireless LAN and
Bluetooth implies coexistence with reduced interference rather than
full integration. Integration of wireless LAN and cellular for enterprise
emphasizes using wireless LAN as the preferred access network when-
ever available, whereas the problem of integration of wireless LAN
with existing corporate IP PBX is primarily concerned with providing
voice over wireless IP for mobile users.
5.3.1
Integration of Cellular Network and Wireless LANs
The integration of cellular networks and wireless LANs will bene-
ﬁt both wireless service providers who operate 2G and 3G cellular
systems and wireless Internet service providers (WISPs) who control
and administer a large number of wireless LAN hotspots. In many

Mobile Networking Challenges
261
ways, these two services complement each other. Roaming between
wireless LANs has been standardized by IEEE Std 802.11f (inter-access
point protocol, or IAPP) and 802.11r (fast roaming eliminating per-
ceptible disconnections). The wireless LAN section of Chapter 3
provides more details regarding these two standards. Cellular ser-
vices have historically been facilitated by wireless wide area networks
(WANs), in which each base station covers an area of a few square
miles and a large number of such stations and backend mobile service
controllers have been deployed to allow roaming across cities and
even countries. Cellular networks are a well-established infrastructure
in most populated areas. Designed for voice communication, cellular
services cannot provide a very high data rate; even the 3G cdma2000
and universal mobile telecommunications system (UMTS)/wideband
code-division multiple access (WCDMA) networks can only offer a
peak data rate of up to 2 or 3 Mbps. Wireless LANs such as 802.11b,
802.11a, and 802.11g, on the other hand, are local area network
technologies covering a distance of only a few hundred feet from
the access point, but wireless LANs can deliver signiﬁcantly higher
performance in terms of data rate, which usually ranges from 11 to
54 Mbps. Because of the high data rate and the easy, no-wire setup,
wireless LANs are becoming the most popular network access tech-
nology for home networks, enterprise networks, and networks for
airports, hotels, conferences, parks, sport stadiums, school campuses,
and so on. The marriage of wireless LANs and cellular networks will
allow wireless operators to offer high data rate for mobile data access,
while enabling WISPs to reach the huge user base of cellular ser-
vice subscribers. End-to-end voice communication can be achieved
via pure cellular networks or a combination of cellular and wireless
LANs using voice over IP, and mobile data access can be optimized
as well, depending on the coverage and trafﬁc load of these two
networks.
To access both cellular networks and wireless LANs, mobile ter-
minals must be equipped with these two radio interfaces. More
importantly, the mobile terminal must be smart enough to determine
which access method will deliver better performance at minimal cost
dynamically at a physical location. With regard to the convergence

262
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
of cellular networks and wireless LANs, some relevant guidelines are
listed here:
• The core of both networks should not be altered. This means that
both networks should still work independently for their own busi-
ness. In particular, radio interfaces and functional components of
both networks need not be changed; software upgrades to these
components are preferred.
• Both roaming and handoff across various types of networks should
be supported in an integrated architecture. Roaming enables the
use of a mobile access method in a new system or domain, while
handoff ensures that network connection will not drop while a
mobile terminal is moving across different networks or domains.
Within the same type of cellular networks, roaming and handoff
are already in place. These problems are particularly interesting
when different types of networks are involved.
• Different scenarios may require different integrated network archi-
tectures. For example, for consumers who roam across wireless
LAN hot spots and cellular covered areas, the key to the integra-
tion solution is to allow seamless roaming for both voice and data
sessions. Such a solution is often provided by a union of wireless
operators. For mobile workers who have a constant need to access
an enterprise network, cellular-based mobile access can be aug-
mented by wireless LAN based mobile access via some specialized
components in the enterprise network. In either case, authentica-
tion, authorization, and accounting (AAA) mechanisms in both
networks have to been coordinated.
• QoS policies and guarantees in one network should be maintained
in the other.
5.3.2
Internetworking Systems Architecture
Let’s begin with a most general case. A cellular network and a number
of well-maintained wireless LANs operated by a WISP or a wireless

Mobile Networking Challenges
263
operator are about to integrate to meet the needs of the above-
mentioned list. The cellular network could be a global system for
mobile (GSM)/general packet radio service (GPRS), a UMTS/WCDMA,
or a type of cdma2000, each of which was discussed in the previous
chapter. Whatever the cellular network, it is apparent that one or
more “gateway”-like components are necessary to connect the cel-
lular network and many wireless LANs. Depending on the way in
which these components operate, two types of integration schemes
have been devised [1]:
• Tightly coupled internetworking
• Loosely coupled internetworking
In the tightly coupled integration architecture, a wireless LAN gate-
way is necessary to act as an agent for a group of access points. It
appears to the core cellular network as in a normal wireless access
network. Data access to the Internet from a wireless LAN has to go
through the cellular network. In the loosely coupled internetwork-
ing scheme, wireless LANs directly connect to the Internet and do
not have any links to cellular core elements. High-speed data access
from a mobile terminal within a wireless LAN is completely sepa-
rated from that originating from cellular networks. Figure 5.2 shows
a conceptual architectural comparison of these two schemes.
Recall that in a cdma2000 network, the packet data service node
(PDSN) is responsible for controlling packet data trafﬁc between
mobile stations and the Internet. In GRPS and UMTS/WCDMA, it
is the gateway GPRS node (GGSN) that performs the same task.
According to the tight coupling scheme, a wireless LAN has a direct
link to a PDSN in cdma2000 network or a GGSN in a UMTS network
via different interfaces. By utilizing the wireless LAN air interface,
high-speed data rate for a mobile station within the range of that
wireless LAN can be achieved. The mobile station must support both
types of air interfaces and implement both signaling and transport
protocols. The wireless gateway that controls the connection from
the wireless LAN to the PDSN works is a packet control function
(PCF) in cdma2000 or a serving GPRS service node (SGSN) to the

264
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Figure 5.2
Tightly coupled integration and loose coupled integration [1].
PDSN in charge. Consequently, cellular-based authentication, autho-
rization, and accounting (AAA) services can be extended to those
wireless LANs. Handoffs between a wireless LAN and cellular access
network (UMTS terrestrial radio access network [UTRAN] in UMTS
and radio access network [RAN] in cdma2000) are carried out the
same as handoffs within a cellular network. The prime disadvantage
of the tightly coupled scheme is that a wireless operator’s cellular
network components are exposed to coupled wireless LANs that may
not be under the same administration of the operator. Integrating
wireless LANs deeply into the infrastructure of a cellular network
necessitates reengineering the trafﬁc load to avoid degradation of
voice and data communication performance, because the wireless
LAN brings a possibly heavy load into the cellular network.
The loosely coupled integration takes another approach to solve
the problem. Here, the wireless LAN does not have a direct link to
PDSN or GGSN; instead, as usual, it connects to the Internet via
backhaul links. A mobile station equipped with a wireless LAN air
interface will no longer go through the cellular network for packet
data access. When the mobile terminal moves within the coverage

Mobile Networking Challenges
265
area of a cellular base station where no wireless LAN hotspot is avail-
able, data access falls back to cellular-based packet switching service.
Because the cellular network and the wireless LAN are physically sep-
arated, a gateway component is required on the wireless LAN side to
enable the interoperability of these two types of networks. To allow a
uniﬁed per-user policing, the gateway component must collect iden-
tiﬁcation information from mobile stations and AAA data from AAA
servers in cellular networks. Speciﬁcally, when the cellular network
is a cdma2000, the wireless LAN can take advantage of the mobile IP
service provided by cdma2000 to enable roaming and handoff.
The existing 802.11 wireless LANs do not implement any quality of
services (QoS) mechanism. Like many IP networks, they provide best-
effort packet switching services with no guarantee of performance.
No specialized signaling protocol has been accepted as the predom-
inant mechanism for resource reservation for data access; however,
cellular networks are based on connection-oriented circuit switching
for both voice and data communication. QoS in cellular networks
is generally implemented by employing signaling protocols such as
packet data protocol (PDP) signaling in GRPS and UMTS networks.
In an integrated network, wireless LANs are required to impose QoS
such that the user’s service level can be ensured in both types of net-
works. Expanding on the idea of QoS in wired IP networks, some
researchers have proposed the use of differentiated services, inte-
grated services, or multiple protocol label switching (MPLS) for the
signaling of resource reservation in the core heterogeneous network
and access network.
5.3.3
Integration of UMTS Networks and Wireless LANs
In UMTS networks coupled with wireless LANs, the GGSNs and
SGSNs handle mobility across different types of networks. Because
mobile IP has not ofﬁcially been adopted as the protocol, this is an
open issue that must be addressed. The general idea is to have hand-
off control functionality implemented at some selected components
in the integrated network, with or without an implementation of
mobile IP service. Figures 5.3 and 5.4 show two examples of this
general approach.

266
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Figure 5.3
A Client-centric UMTS and WLAN integration [3].
A client-centric approach [3] requires the mobile station to main-
tain two simultaneous connections: a data connection (PS) to a
wireless LAN and a voice connection (CS) through UMTS, in par-
allel. The UMTS connection is used only for voice service, while
the wireless LAN connection provides both PS signaling and PS data
transmission. This is effectively a tightly coupled solution in that a
wireless LAN in the integrated network relies on a GGSN to connect
to the Internet. This implies that a mobile station is able to use the IP
address acquired from a serving GGSN of the GRPS/UMTS network,
even if it is served by a wireless LAN for data access to the Internet. In
addition, the mobile station and some access routers in the wireless
LAN maintain the wireless LAN mobility context, whereas SGSNs and
the mobile station both utilize the GPRS mobility context. Intersys-
tem handover is performed by the mobile station, an access router
(AR), an SGSN, and the serving radio network controller (SRNC),

Mobile Networking Challenges
267
Figure 5.4
OWLAN elements [4].
on layer 2 and layer 3 sequentially. The mobile station detects the
handover condition by constantly monitoring the wireless LAN bea-
con messages. PDP contexts are sent from SGSN to the AR if the
mobile station is roaming from a cellular network to a wireless LAN.
Ala-Laurila et al. [4] presented a loosely coupled integration
scheme for wireless operators to complete their cellular-based offer-
ing with operator wireless LANs (OWLANs). An OWLAN oper-
ates the same way as regular wireless LANs, the only exception
being that control signaling of mobile station authentication is
done in association with the GSM/GPRS/UMTS core network. To
allow for subscriber identiﬁcation module (SIM) authentication
within an OWLAN, the proposed architecture must have four key
components — authentication server, access controller, access point,
and mobile terminal, each conceptually corresponding to a counter-
part in a GPRS network. An authentication server acts as the gateway
between the cellular core network and the operator IP core network.
Like the SGSN of a GPRS network, the authentication server is in

268
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
charge of authentication and billing signaling to the home location
register (HLR) and GPRS charging server via Signaling System No. 7
(SS7). It may communicate with many access controllers according to
the remote authentication dial-in user service (RADIUS) protocol. An
access controller is the gateway on the wireless LAN side which gath-
ers accounting information regarding mobile terminals within the
range of those access points under its control. An access control is like
a GGSN in a regular GRPS network. An access point provides phys-
ical wireless links to serving mobile terminals. It interfaces with the
ﬁxed operator IP core network through an access controller. A mobile
terminal in this architecture is not necessarily a cell phone; instead,
it could be any mobile device with a wireless LAN interface, a SIM
reader, and a SIM authentication software module.
The OWLAN architecture employs a network access authentica-
tion and accounting protocol (NAAP) for signaling between a mobile
terminal and an access controller. NNAP is a UDP/IP-based trans-
port protocol but is enhanced with retransmission mechanism in
case a packet is lost. GSM authentication messages are encapsu-
lated into NNAP packets when they are sent to an access controller.
The OWLAN approach can only provide SIM-based mobile roam-
ing, not seamless handover, as uninterrupted dual-mode (wireless
LAN and UMTS) mobile access is not considered in the architectural
design; however, the OWLAN approach can be regarded as a near-
term integration scheme for wireless operators to quickly incorporate
the widespread wireless LAN technology into their cellular core, tak-
ing advantage of the high data rate offered by wireless LANs without
affecting the core business of cellular voice services.
In practice, mobile network operators and cell phone manufac-
tures have begun to design integration protocols for GSM/GPRS
and wireless LANs. Unlicensed Mobile Access (UMA; http://www.
umatechnology.org/) is such a speciﬁcation supported by mobile net-
work operators such as AT&T Wireless (now Cingular), T-Mobile US,
and cell phone manufacturers such as Nokia and Ericsson, as well as
wireless network equipment providers such as Alcatel and Nortel Net-
works. As a loosely coupled integration architecture, UMA enables
a mobile device to access GSM/GPRS cellular backhaul via a local

Mobile Networking Challenges
269
unlicensed wireless LAN and Bluetooth connections. According to
the UMA speciﬁcation, a key component in the UMA architec-
ture is the UMA network controller (UNC), which interfaces with
a mobile switching center (MSC), SGSN, and AAA server (or proxy)
via an A-interface between an MSC and a base station controller
(BSC)/UNC for circuit switch service, a Gb interface between SGSN
and a BSC/UNC for packet switch service, and a Wm interface
between an AAA server and a BSC or a secure gateway in UNC for
AAA handling, respectively. A Wd interface is deﬁned for communi-
cation between the AAA server in a home mobile network and the
AAA proxy server in a visiting mobile network. A mobile station (MS)
connects to a UNC via one or more wireless LAN/Bluetooth access
points, which in turn connect to a broadband IP network. Figure 5.5
depicts the UMA functional architecture.
The MS in the UMA architecture must be able to operate in dual
mode (GSM and unlicensed) and switch between them transparently.
MS roaming and transaction control are provided by network ele-
ments in the core network such as MSC, visitor location register
(VLR)/home location register (HLR), and SGSN/GGSN; a UNC is not
involved but simply passes location updates and transaction data to
MS
Standard AP
(802.11, Bluetooth)
Broadband 
IP Network
UNC Secure
Gateway
UMA
Network
Controller
(UNC)
Home Mobile Network
Visiting/Home Mobile Network
MSC
SGSN
AAA Proxy/
Server
VLR/
HLR
HLR
AAA Server
Server Mobile
Location Center
Out of Scope of OMA
A
Gb
Wm
Up
Lb
Wd
Figure 5.5
Unlicensed Mobile Access (UMA) functional architecture [5].

270
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
corresponding elements in the core network. UMA speciﬁes the use
of a number of GSM/GPRS and wireless LAN protocols without mod-
iﬁcation. Particularly, a UNC includes a security gateway (SGW) that
terminates secure remote access tunnels from the MS, interfacing to
an AAA server and providing mutual authentication, encryption, and
data integrity for signaling, voice, and data trafﬁc. UMA employs a
layered security solution for voice, data, and control signaling secu-
rity, including radio interface security between an MS and an AP,
GSM/GPRS “Up” interface between an MS and a UNC, GSM/GPRS
CN authentication and encryption between MS and the core net-
work, and application security such as SSL between an MS and an
application server. Overall, we consider UMA to be a solution likely
to win the favor of mobile network operators, as it basically allows
any public or private wireless LANs or Bluetooth networks to be a part
of a cellular system. UMA could be a temporary solution to wireless
LAN and cellular integration, but it may not prevail in the long run
because it does not support the session initialization protocol (SIP;
see Chapter 7) and handoff between wireless access points. In the
communication industry, despite increasing debate over the idea of
voice over wireless IP, voice over IP service providers have begun to
offer voice over Wi-Fi servers along with Wi-Fi phones. For example,
Vonage launched such services in the United Kingdom in early 2005.
5.3.4
Integration of cdma2000 Networks and Wireless LANs
For a cdma2000 network to support mobile IP, PDSNs must imple-
ment FA functionality to deal with visiting mobile stations, and the
carrier’s network must maintain an HA for its users. To integrate
loosely with a wireless LAN, the wireless LAN gateway must also
implement FA functionality so as to establish a tunnel between
the visiting mobile station and its home agent back in the cellular
network. The wireless gateway also must be able to interface with
the AAA server of the mobile station to retrieve user account pol-
icy and accounting information, as well as tunneling parameters
and home IP address. An example of cdma2000 cellular network
and wireless LAN integration is the integration of two access (IOTA)

Mobile Networking Challenges
271
technologies gateway proposed and implemented by researchers at
Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies [1]. The IOTA gateway is deployed
in each wireless LAN to support mobile IP functions for the mobile
devices served by the wireless LAN. In addition to mobility manage-
ment, the IOTA gateway also has a component of AAA server that can
either relay 802.11-based information between the underlying wire-
less LAN’s access points and the mobile device’s home AAA server or
interact with the gateway’s mobile IP agent to authenticate a mobile
device with its home AAA server. Seamless QoS implementation can
also be achieved on the IOTA gateway.
The IOTA gateway is software system consisting of the following
components:
• Remote authentication dial-in user service — A RADIUS server is an
AAA server that relays authentication packets between a mobile
station’s home AAA server and the 802.11 wireless LAN access
points.
• Mobile IP agent — The IOTA implements both the foreign agent and
home agent, thereby bringing mobility support to wireless LANs.
The FA will handle new moving-in mobile devices by issuing a
care-of address (CoA) and notifying the HA, just like a foreign
agent works in cellular networks. The HA is somewhat special in
that it will be used to support dynamic home agent allocation,
which allows a mobile device to have a non-ﬁxed home agent
(and home address) close to the foreign agent.
• Dynamic ﬁrewall — Per-user ﬁrewall polices and packet man-
gling rules obtained from home AAA servers can be installed
dynamically.
• QoS module — The IOTA gateway obtains user service class from
home AAA servers and imposes individual bandwidth control over
wireless LAN access points and backhaul links to the Internet.
The QoS guarantee is only valid within the wireless LAN access
network. The provision of true end-to-end QoS service requires
the entire cdma2000 network infrastructure to implement a QoS
mechanism.

272
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Accounting module — The IOTA gateway maintains an accounting
table that can be queried by authentication entities such as foreign
agents, local AAA servers, or web authenticators used in the simple
IP service.
• Integrated web cache — The IOTA employs a web cache that utilizes
IP packet mangling techniques to avoid unnecessary round-trips
to a mobile station’s home network for mobile IP services.
• Simple IP module — This module enables roaming of mobile access
but not seamless handoff. It combines dynamic IP address assign-
ment and IP packet ﬁltering to provide browser redirection service,
in which the user must be authenticated when a web browser is
launched.
The IOTA approach can also be applied to the integration of
UMTS/WCDMA and wireless LANs. More precisely, mobile IP and
IEEE AAA can be introduced as an overlay on top of UMTS networks.
GGSN in UMTS will handle the tasks of a FA, and authentication can
be done by standard mobile IP procedures using SIM cards. No matter
what underlying cellular network is being used, the client software
of the IOTA architecture remains the same, within which a complete
mobile IP stack and an intelligent multi-interface selector have been
provided. The client software has an interface abstraction layer that
supplies a uniﬁed virtual interface to the underlying mobile station
system.
5.3.5
Integration of Wireless LANs and Cellular Networks for Enterprise
The above-mentioned cellular and wireless LAN integration archi-
tectures are operator oriented in that the wireless service providers
(wireless operators or WISPs, or both) must build an integrated or
interoperable wireless WAN and negotiate service and billing agree-
ments. Another scenario in this domain must be addressed, though:
integrated data access to enterprise networks. Very often mobile pro-
fessionals must frequently access enterprise networks via secured
connections, such as virtual private networks (VPNs). Cellular data

Mobile Networking Challenges
273
service (i.e., using a GSM or CDMA modem on a laptop com-
puter or a handheld mobile device) used to be the prime access
method for this purpose. With the proliferation of public and pri-
vate wireless LANs, it would be quite compelling for mobile users
to be able to access enterprise networks via a secure, integrated
environment within which cellular data service and wireless LAN
data service are interoperable and roaming between them does not
break the ongoing connection. To achieve this goal, the enterprise
network must be enhanced to realize functionality for secure IP
mobility.
An solution to this issue is Internet roaming [6,7], which provides
seamless internetworking across ofﬁce wireless LANs, residential
wireless LANs, public wireless LANs, and cellular networks for cor-
porate mobile users. Internet roaming is a mobile access system
built into the enterprise network and mobile devices, rather than
a set of add-on entities to existing cellular networks or wireless LAN
networks; therefore it can be applied to mobile access for different
cellular data networks. It is comprised of four building blocks:
• Virtual single account (VSA) server, which is a backend user
authentication server. It stores various security credentials for
users and provides a single sign-on procedure for users who may
use various wireless access networks to log onto the enterprise
network.
• Secure mobility gateway (SMG), which acts as the gateway
between an enterprise network and the Internet to enable secure
data transmission between the mobile station and an enterprise
computer. Depending on the wireless access method the mobile
station is using, packets relayed by SMG may be encrypted using
IPSec.
• Internet roaming client (IRC), which is the client (hardware or
software) installed on the mobile station. The major task of the
IRC is to create and maintain a mobile IPSec tunnel (mobile IP
with IPSec encryption) to the SMG interface. In this case, the SMG
is the home agent, and the IRC acts as the foreign agent. Mobile IP

274
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
packets in the tunnel are encrypted and encapsulated while being
transmitted in the tunnel in an IP-in-UDP fashion.
When the mobile station is using an ofﬁce wireless LAN to access
the enterprise network, IPSec encryption over the mobile IP tunnel is
not necessary, assuming that the ofﬁce wireless LAN is well secured.
Similar to OWLAN, the Internet roaming architecture requires mobile
stations to detect the optimal (not necessarily faster) wireless net-
work access method and to dynamically and properly conﬁgure itself
without user intervention. Researchers at AT&T who proposed the
Internet roaming solution have implemented a hardware-based IRC
called iCard. More details can be found at the AT&T website (provided
in the Further Reading section at the end of this chapter).
Virtual private networks are widely used to secure enterprise data
access at public and residential wireless LANs. A VPN essentially pro-
vides secured communication over public networks by encrypting
trafﬁc in a tunnel. Traditional VPNs are designed for wired network
access; roaming is not supported. VPNs supporting station roaming
are called mobile VPNs and include NetMotion and Ecutel.
5.3.6
Integration of Wireless LANs and Corporate IP PBX
We have talked about dual-mode (cellular and wireless LAN) mobile
devices for corporate professionals allowing access to wireless LANs
and wide area cellular networks, but what about replacing aged
corporate PBXs with an IP PBX supporting voice over IP using a
LAN? Not only do IP PBX-based solutions reduce operating cost,
but they also make it easier to integrate the communication infras-
tructure and applications with the computing infrastructure and
applications. To this end, companies such as Cisco and Nortel
have developed IP PBX systems and associated IP telephones and
mobile phones. For example, Cisco’s 7900 series IP phones include
both Ethernet-based telephones and 802.11-based wireless phones.
While wireless IP phones may work well within a corporate net-
work, roaming between an enterprise VoIP system and a wide area
cellular system remains a big challenge. UMA is not ideal in this

Mobile Networking Challenges
275
scenario because it lacks support for SIP, a seemingly prevalent
multimedia session management protocol in all-IP networks. 3GPP
proposed an alternative solution called IP Multimedia Subsystem
(IMS). Unlike UMA, IMS supports SIP and largely utilizes the Inter-
net for call routing and presence services. Compared to UMA, IMS
is a more fully ﬂedged all-IP solution for 3G systems. The IMS
architecture supports multiple application servers providing both
traditional telephony services and enhanced data services such as
instant messaging (IM), push-to-talk (PTT), audio and video stream-
ing, or multimedia messaging service (MMS). Readers interested in
reading more about IMS should refer to the following 3GPP techni-
cal speciﬁcations: 3GPP TS 22.228 (Service Requirements for the IP
Multimedia Core Network Subsystem, Stage 1) and 3GPP TS 23.228
(IP Multimedia Subsystem, Stage 2).
5.4 Wireless LAN and Bluetooth Coexistence
Wireless LANs and Bluetooth are the two most widely used wireless
technologies aside from cellular networks. Bluetooth is mainly used
for wireless personal area networks (PANs) as a cable replacement
extending up to 10 m, whereas wireless LANs are able to cover up to
several hundred meters. In this sense, they complement each other
rather than competing head to head. In fact, in many cases, mobile
devices are equipped with both interfaces.
5.4.1
Frequency Overlapping
As discussed in Chapter 3, wireless LAN and Bluetooth both oper-
ate at the 2.4-GHz unlicensed frequency band. Recall that wireless
LANs (e.g., IEEE 802.11b and g), employ the spread spectrum over the
2.4-GHz band, which greatly reduces interference with other radios
operating in the same band. Bluetooth radio uses frequency hop-
ping at a rate of 1600 times per second over 79 channels shared
by a master device and up to 7 slave devices. Nevertheless, it has
been observed that when these two radios operate in very close

276
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
proximity (for example, on a PDA with both air interfaces), interfer-
ence will occur and the performance of both will drop signiﬁcantly.
To address this issue, IEEE 802.15.2 and Bluetooth SIG working
groups have been formed. The IEEE 802.15.2-2003 standard was com-
pleted in August 2003. The basic approaches can be divided into
two categories: collaborative and noncollaborative. The collabora-
tive approach aims to coordinate frequency use between two types
of radios, thus requiring interprotocol communication that must be
implemented on the same device. The noncollaborative approach
looks at only one side; that is, it tries to mitigate interference by
reducing the chances of frequency overlapping, but it requires the
acting device to detect interference or conduct interference estima-
tion. We introduce packet trafﬁc arbitration (PTA) [8] as an example
of the collaborative approach and adaptive frequency hopping (APH)
[9] as an example of the noncollaborative approach.
5.4.2
PTA and Adaptive Frequency Hopping
Packet trafﬁc arbitration is a coexistence scheme recommended by
the IEEE 802.15.2 group. As shown in Figure 5.6, the PTA control
entity acts as an arbitrator between wireless LAN MAC and Bluetooth
MAC in a time-division multiplexing (TDM) fashion. Communica-
tion between them is accomplished using a handshake protocol. The
PTA control entity constantly monitors the status of each MAC and
ensures that transmissions from each side are ﬁrst authorized before
they can take place. To do so, the wireless LAN interface and the Blue-
tooth interface have to be located on the same board or device where
the PTA resides. Alternating wireless medium access (AWMA) is a sim-
ilar approach that divides time into Bluetooth time slots and wireless
LAN time slots, thereby avoiding any overlapping of frequency use.
Adaptive frequency hopping is a noncollaborative approaching
aimed at addressing the coexistence issue by dynamically adjusting
the frequency hopping sequence of Bluetooth. The master device
selects 32 frequencies out of a total number of 79 available frequen-
cies within the 2.402- to 2.480-GHz range. After all the 32 frequencies
have been visited, 16 of them and another 16 new ones from the

Mobile Networking Challenges
277
802.11 Device
802.15.1 Device
Tx Request
Tx Confirm
(Status)
Tx Request
Tx Confirm
(Status)
802.11
MAC
802.11
PLC+PHY
Status
Status
802.15.1
Control
802.15.1
Baseband
802.15.1
LM+LC
802.11b
Control
PTA
Control
Figure 5.6
Packet trafﬁc arbitration (PTA) collaborativemechanism for coexistence of 802.11b
and Bluetooth technology (courtesy of Intel Corp. © 2005 Intel Corporation).
original list are selected for the next hopping sequence. The new
hopping sequence among devices is broadcast within a link manage-
ment protocol (LMP) message. Thus, the ﬁrst problem that must be
addressed is to let the master device be aware of “bad” frequencies
so it can skip them to avoid overlapping. This is often done by both
the master device and the slaves to conduct measurement based on
received data. Metrics frequently used are received signal strength
indication (RSSI), packet error rate (PER), signal-to-interference ratio
(SIR), and packet loss rate, on a frequency basis. For each metric a
threshold can be used to identify occupied frequencies. To further
improve resilience against frequency overlapping interferences, AFH
requires the master and the slave device to communicate within
the same channel, unlike regular Bluetooth speciﬁcations in which
slaves respond using a frequency channel other than that used by
the master. This method eliminates the possibility that one of the
two channels used by either the master or the slave is bad. Aside
from AFH, another idea is to postpone data transmission on those
bad frequencies, rather than changing hopping sequence. Bluetooth

278
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
interference aware scheduling (BIAS) is such a mechanism. It is worth
noting that the collaborative approach requires hardware modiﬁca-
tion to the Bluetooth radio interface. A detailed review of solutions
to Bluetooth and wireless LAN coexistence problems can be found in
Golmie et al. [10].
5.5 Mobile Next-Generation Networks
The notion of mobile next-generation networks (NGNs) refers to
futuristic computer and communication networks that are character-
ized by a dazzling diversity of wireless and wired technologies as well
as a myriad of mobile applications and services. Some view NGNs as a
merger of the Internet and intranets with mobile networks and with
media and broadcast technologies [11]. 3G cellular systems such as
cdma2000 and UMTS are simply technological steps toward mobile
NGNs, which essentially enable pervasive and ubiquitous computing
on a variety of mobile terminal devices. The integration of cellular
networks and wireless LANs and coexistence problems of wireless
LAN and Bluetooth are subsets within the scope of mobile NGNs.
Integrating and coordinating various wireless and wired tech-
nologies in mobile NGNs have generated several challenges, such
as mobility management, security, and terminal convergence. In
addressing those issues, Internet protocol (IP) has been generally rec-
ognized as the universal network layer protocol in the interconnected
infrastructure. Notice that the cdma2000 standard has shown a clear
trend toward an all-IP solution with the introduction of mobile IP
services. UMTS has also introduced IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS),
an IPv6-based architecture for real-time voice and video data services
in a packet switch domain. In this section, we focus on IP-based
mobility management in mobile NGNs, leaving security to the next
chapter and mobile application issues to Chapter 7.
Issues of mobility management in mobile NGNs can be divided
into two categories: roaming and handoff. Here, roaming refers to
mobile access availability in a new system (or domain), whereas
handoff refers to network connections staying active when the

Mobile Networking Challenges
279
mobile station moves to a new system (or domain). No wonder
handoff is more seamless but more difﬁcult to achieve. In particular,
within the context of mobile NGNs, vertical handoff (i.e., handover
between different networks, systems, service provides, or administra-
tive domains) is the key issue, as horizontal handoff (i.e., handover
between the same types of networks) can be resolved relatively easily
due to homogeneity of underlying networks. Mobility management
of mobile NGNs can be performed at different layers; for example,
mobile IP, as described in Section 5.1, is a network layer solution
for both roaming and handoff (although enhancement is needed to
achieve true seamless mobility), and cdma2000 provides support for
mobility at the link layer.
5.5.1
Mobile IP for Macromobility
Mobile IP is able to facilitate both macromobility and micromobil-
ity. In the case of macromobility, where a mobile station is moving
across two administrative domains (thus, two access routers) of the
same or different wireless networks, mobile IP requires both networks
to implement home agents and foreign agents on some network ele-
ments. Recall that packets sent by a correspondent station from a
home network to the mobile station are intercepted by the home
agent and then tunneled to the mobile station in the form of an
encapsulated packet headed for the care-of address (CoA) via the
foreign agent. Because the mobile station is able to directly com-
municate with the correspondent station, a triangular routing path
is formed which, on the one hand, effectively allows communication
from and to the mobile station but, on the other hand, introduces IP
routing overhead for trafﬁc from correspondent station to the mobile
station, as shown in Figure 5.7a. This problem can be solved by allow-
ing the home agent to notify the correspondent station the CoA of
the mobile station in question using a “binding update” message. The
corresponding station maintains what is called a “binding cache” for
the latest known CoA of the mobile station. Hence, direct commu-
nication between the two parties can be performed within the home
agent’s relay. Figure 5.7b depicts the routing optimization scheme

280
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Home Network
Home Agent
Correspondent
Station
Foreign Agent
Home Network
Home Agent
Correspondent
Station
Binding Update
(a)
(b)
Mobile Station
Foreign Network
Foreign Agent
Mobile Station
Foreign Network
Foreign Agent
Figure 5.7
Mobile IP enhancements.
for mobile IP. Whenever the mobile station moves from one foreign
agent to another, the new foreign agent notiﬁes the old one of this
change, and corresponding stations will be informed as well.
5.5.2
Mobile IP for Micromobility
Within one domain a mobile station may frequently move across dif-
ferent subnets. It is inefﬁcient to notify the home agent every time
such intradomain roaming occurs, as signaling of the CoA change
and binding update may impose a large overhead on communica-
tion between a correspondent station and the mobile station. The
solution, as in many other computer or network scenarios, is to
leverage locality in some sense. In this case, a basic idea is to build
a hierarchical architecture based on mobile IP such that mobility
within a domain will not result in any CoA updates on the home
agent of a mobile station. In its simplest form, a two-layer scheme
called mobile IP regional registration, shown in Figure 5.8a, intro-
duces a gateway foreign agent (GFA) in a domain along the path
between the home agent in the home network and the foreign agents.
The home agent simply maintains the public routable address of the
GFA, rather than the CoA of the mobile station. CoA updates from

Mobile Networking Challenges
281
Home Network
Home Agent
Correspondent
Station
Gateway Foreign Agent
Home Network
Domain Root Router
(Home Agent)
Correspondent
Station
(a)
Mobile Station
Foreign Network
Foreign Agent A
(b)
Domain Root Router
Mobile Station
Router
Figure 5.8
Mobile IP regional registration and HAWAII.
a foreign agent only reach the underlying GFA; consequently, the
home agent has been relieved of micromobility update messaging.
For data trafﬁc from corresponding stations to the mobile station, the
GFA is responsible for forwarding those packets to the foreign agent at
that point of time, which further relays trafﬁc to the mobile station.
If the mobile station roams beyond the control of the GFA, regular
mobile IP operation that involved signaling to the home agent will
be performed. For large domains with many subnets, multiple levels
of foreign agents can be formed to reduce the overhead of signaling
for mobility management.
Another scheme, called handoff aware wireless access internet
infrastructure (HAWAII), aims to build host-speciﬁc paths among
routers in a domain for visiting mobile stations [12]. A “domain root
router” for each domain is designated to handle intradomain and
interdomain mobility, as shown in Figure 5.8b. When the mobile
station is in its home domain, it initiates a path discovery by sending
out a power-up message to serving base stations toward the domain
root router. Routers on the way to the domain root router create
a soft-state routing entry for the mobile station. In addition, the

282
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
mobile station will send path refresh messages periodically to indi-
cate its presence, thereby refreshing relevant routing caches. When
the mobile station moves within the home domain, it performs a
path update operation so as to build an updated path to the domain
root router. When it moves to another domain (foreign domain),
the domain root router of the new domain will act as the foreign
agent to the mobile station, allowing intramobility within the for-
eign domain. It achieves this by assigning a co-located care-of address
(CCoA) to the visiting mobile station and notifying the home agent
(the domain root router of the home domain) of this change. The
mobile station also performs path update and path refresh opera-
tions in order to build a host-speciﬁc path toward the domain root
router in the foreign domain, as it does in its home domain. The path
is made up of a sequence of routers that relay packets destined to the
mobile station in a hop-by-hop manner. As in common mobile IP
architecture, packets destined to the mobile station from correspon-
dent stations will still be tunneled by the home agent to the foreign
agent. Intradomain mobility in the foreign domain results in rout-
ing path updates over those intermediate routers and the domain
root router of the foreign domain, but the CCoA of the mobile sta-
tion will not change, thus no signaling to the home agent is needed.
Notice that host-speciﬁc routing based on speciﬁc mobile addresses
rather than IP routing is used in both the home domain and foreign
domain.
The major advantage of host-speciﬁc routing in HAWAII is that
it avoids the overhead of IP address changes and additional lay-
ers of gateways. The disadvantage is the high cost of building and
maintaining paths within a domain, which considerably limits its
scalability in serving many mobile stations in the domain. A similar
scheme is used in cell IP.
5.5.3
Link Layer Mobility Management
Mobility management for heterogeneous next-generation networks
can be performed at the data link layer as well as the network layer.
Roaming and seamless handoff of mobile stations can be achieved

Mobile Networking Challenges
283
by translating different formats of signaling messages, data packets,
and QoS specs among heterogeneous wireless systems. This often
implies the introduction of some gateway entities such as the wireless
LAN gateway used for integration of wireless LAN and cellular net-
works discussed in Section 5.3.1. The newly added gateway entities
not only perform mobility management but also deal with location
management across a variety of wireless systems.
The UMTS standard deﬁnes an optional network entity called gate-
way location register (GLR) for intersystem roaming. In UMTS, the
service area is partitioned into gateway location areas (G-LAs), which
are further divided into location areas (LAs), which are comprised of
a number of cell sites. Depending on the extent of mobility, three
scenarios can be identiﬁed:
• G-LA — An HLR location update is performed when a mobile
station crosses the boundary of a G-LA.
• LA — A GLR location update is performed when a mobile station
crosses the boundary of an LA.
• Cell — A VLR location update is performed when a mobile station
completes d movements between cells, where d is the movement
threshold
As shown in Figure 5.9, the gateway location register (GLR) is a
node between the VLR and the HLR which may be used to optimize
the handling of subscriber proﬁle data across network boundaries.
In the visited network, the GLR plays the role of the HLR toward the
VLR, whereas in the home network the GLR plays the role of VLR
toward the HLR. Because of the layered location management used
in UMTS, the GLR handles any location changes between various
VLR service areas (LAs) in the visited network without involving the
HLR. The G-LAs and LAs can represent of different types of wireless
networks such as UMTS and cdma2000.
Link layer mobility management usually involves MAC layer
communication across interconnected system. Due to the diver-
sity of wireless technologies, it is rather difﬁcult to devise a uniﬁed

284
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
G-LA #1
G-LA #2
LA
LA 
LA
LA
HLR Update
GLR Update
VLR Update
Figure 5.9
Gateway location register (GLR) in UMTS.
link layer handoff mechanism for mobile next-generation networks.
Instead, depending on the overlapping or adjacent wireless systems,
specialized MAC-based entities are added to one or both of the inter-
connected networks; for example, the PCA for Bluetooth and wireless
LAN coexistence monitors and controls the MAC operations of both
networks.
5.6 Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) have been the subject of mobile
computing research for years. Unlike infrastructure-based networks,
an ad hoc network does not have any preexisting or ﬁxed central-
ized server nodes to perform packet routing, directory assistance,
service discovery, resource management, and signaling. Nodes in an
ad hoc network must self-organize to form a fully distributed, coop-
erative environment within which a variety of computing systems
can be built. A MANET is an ad hoc network of mobile nodes that
communicate with each other over wireless links, thereby creating a
highly a dynamic network environment in terms of topology, packet
routing, and service provision and consumption. Communication
between two nonadjacent nodes in a MANET is conducted in a self-
discovered multihop fashion. In many circumstances, a hybrid ad hoc

Mobile Networking Challenges
285
network of a ﬁxed network infrastructure and collaborative mobile
nodes is often desired. For simplicity, MANET is deﬁned as includ-
ing both fully mobile multihop ad hoc networks and hybrid ad hoc
networks.
The intrinsic ﬂexible network architecture of MANET, along with
the advancement of mobile wireless technologies, has spawned a
variety of potential applications. Some of the examples are listed as
follows:
• Rescue operations and disaster recovery — A MANET of mobile devices
such as laptop computers, PDAs, smart phones, and handheld
industrial devices can be formed autonomously onsite to supply
fast and reliable data communication.
• Military operations in a battleﬁeld — Vehicles and soldiers equipped
with wireless communication capabilities and embedded sensory
devices may utilize the underlying ad hoc network for real-time
communication in a remote battleﬁeld. In conjunction with mil-
itary satellites and global positioning system (GPS) facilities, the
mobile ad hoc network can be further empowered to allow accurate
positioning, quick response, and commanding.
• Conferences and events — Attendees in a conference room, a sports
stadium, or anywhere an event takes place can form temporary
ad hoc networks that permit efﬁcient mobile access to the Internet
or other resources, as well as one-to-one and group-based instant
collaboration. For example, smart phone users in a sports stadium
can leverage a MANET of cellular ad hoc network for mobile access.
• Remote monitoring and surveillance system — Wireless-enabled cam-
eras, sensors, and computing devices can be used to build a perva-
sive ad hoc surveillance system that does not require preconﬁgured
central control.
• Vehicular communication system — Cars on a highway can tem-
porarily form an ad hoc network to provide Internet access, real-
time trafﬁc information, location tracking, and location-based
searches. In conjunction with the increasing use of telematics,

286
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
vehicular ad hoc networks can be used to link data access to in-car
sensory functionality.
5.6.1
MANET Categories
A mobile ad hoc network (MANET) essentially encompasses several
other networking applications involving various wireless technolo-
gies. Wireless sensor networks (WSNs), for example, are MANETs in
the sense that sensor nodes, either ﬁxed or moving, are very often
used as an ad hoc network environment for various purposes such
as habitat monitoring, industrial monitoring and control, and home
networking, among others. A wireless mesh network is another exam-
ple of a MANET. In a wireless mesh network, wireless LAN or cellular
base stations placed across a geographical area form an ad hoc network
to provide ﬁxed wireless Internet access to mobile devices. Because
of the diversity of speciﬁc MANET application scenarios, this section
concentrates on general MANET.
The challenge of providing reliable and highly efﬁcient computing
and communication services in a fully decentralized architecture has
spurred a vast amount of research effort in the domain of mobile
computing.
• Topology control — A mobile node in a MANET must establish a
localized view of the network within which neighboring nodes
can be identiﬁed. Because the network topology of a MANET is
subject to rapid changes, it has to be adaptive for performance
with minimal communication overhead.
• Routing — Not only are the network dynamics of a MANET (such
as topology changes) considered with regard to packet routing,
but also power consumption and location-based data.
• Service discovery and access — A key issue in a MANET is to discover
provisioned services and consume them in a highly efﬁcient and
reliable manner. This involves node addressing, data caching, and
service proxying.

Mobile Networking Challenges
287
• Data acquisition and aggregation — In WSNs, a predominant
application scenario is a sensory network database, in which
sensory operations are tightly coupled with network-based data
acquisition and aggregation over the ad hoc transport.
• Security and privacy — Because mobile nodes in a MANET rely
on others to work properly, a number of security and privacy
issues such as node authentication, integrity security of data
communication, and bilateral trust must be carefully addressed.
In the following subsections, we focus on the ﬁrst four issues, leaving
the last security issue to the next chapter.
5.6.2
Topology Control in a MANET
Two key issues of topology control in a MANET are neighbor discovery
and network organization. The neighbor discovery problem is con-
cerned with controlling transmission power and antenna of a mobile
node with the objective of constructing an optimal topology. The
network organization problem aims to adjust MANET topology in
response to node mobility and wireless network dynamics. In either
case, network throughput is a key factor in choosing the appropriate
topology for a MANET. In addition, a topology control scheme has
to be energy efﬁcient; that is, the construction of a desired topology
must consume only a minimal amount of power. The fundamental
challenge of topology control in MANET lies in the fact that a mobile
node can only possess a local knowledge of the network connectivity,
thereby making a globally optimal topology very difﬁcult to achieve.
Many topology control algorithms have been proposed to solve
these two problems. The basic idea is described as follows: Given a
transmission graph that models node connectivity of a MANET, ﬁnd a
distributed algorithm that generates a subgraph comprised of optimal
paths between any nodes with respect to network throughput and
power consumption. Figure 5.10 illustrates an example of MANET
topology control. There are seven mobile nodes, N1 to N7. Some
nodes, such as N1 and N3, are capable of reaching everyone else

288
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
N1
N2
N3
N4
N5
N6
N7
Figure 5.10 An example of MANET topology control.
in the network by adjusting their transmission power. Others can
only directly communicate with some adjacent nodes. Solid lines are
used to denote direct wireless links between two nodes. The length
of a line in the ﬁgure represents the distance between two neigh-
bor nodes. As a simple example of topology control, let’s look at
N1. For N1 to communicate with N6, it can simply increase trans-
mission power to discover N6 as a neighbor node; hence, as long
as the received signal power is above some threshold at N6 after
path loss, the unidirectional link between N1 and N6 works. How-
ever, N1 may opt for a path of N1–N2–N5–N6 because it is highly
possible that the cumulative power required for N1, N2, and N5 to
transmit over direct links is lower than the power needed to transmit
directly between N1 and N6 (the reason for this is discussed in the
following paragraph), and the performance (e.g., throughput, delay)
of this transmission still satisﬁes the needs of applications. Such a
justiﬁcation is based on the objective of topology control in this
example: overall power efﬁciency for network longevity assuming
every node possesses the same amount of power. Similar topology
control occurs with N3 and N7, as well. A slightly different example of
trafﬁc control is N4, which has three nodes, N3, N5, and N6, within
its signal transmission range. Suppose N4 uses a directional antenna
for wireless communication; it can either link to both N3 and N5 in

Mobile Networking Challenges
289
one direction or N6 in another direction. If N4 can detect that, by
adjusting the antenna, it can reach anyone else through N3 and N5
with moderate power consumption and acceptable performance, it
may not have to establish a direct link to N6 because unnecessary
wireless links tend to result in contention and interference, as well
as hidden terminal and exposed terminal problems.
These examples illustrate that the basic idea of topology control
in MANET is to leverage controllable parameters such as transmis-
sion power and directional antenna to build a network topology for
power-efﬁcient operations, network connectivity, and good perfor-
mance. The challenges are also evident: How does a node know,
based on its local knowledge, that some nodes should be selected as
neighbors and some should not? How does a node know another
reachable node has to be a neighbor node in order to maintain
network connectivity?
Among almost all topology control schemes, it is often assumed
that mobile nodes in a MANET are denoted by points on a Euclidean
plane, and there is a line between two points if and only if the two
nodes can communicate directly. A unit disk graph is thus applied
to model a MANET, in which two nodes are connected if and only if
their Euclidean distance is at most 1, indicating a normalized trans-
mission range. Generally, the power loss ratio along a wireless link
in a MANET is determined by dr, where d is the distance between the
two nodes and r is a path loss exponent between 2 and 4. For one
node to reach another, its transmission power must be sufﬁciently
higher than the product of dr and the receive power threshold of the
destination node. If the receive power threshold is the same across
all the nodes in a network, then the “cost” of each wireless link in
the network can be modeled by dr. A path (route) that consists of
a number of links is characterized by the sum of the costs of all links
in the path. Thus, it is quite clear that using a route with several
intermediate links is more efﬁcient in terms of power consumption
than the use of a long, single, direct link. The minimum power route
is a route that has the smallest link cost among all routes between two
nodes. The total energy consumption of the network is the sum of
the transmission power of all nodes. Furthermore, minimum energy

290
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
network connectivity (MENC) [20] requires a strongly connected
ad hoc network topology (the graph) and minimized total energy
consumption of the network.
Topology control in a MANET is often addressed by apply-
ing computational geometry structures, such as Delaunay triangu-
lation, spanning trees, Gabriel graphs, and three-dimensional cones.
Delaunay triangulation is a computational geometric method that,
given a set of points on a graph, produces a set of edges connecting
each point to some neighbors for triangulation, such that the small-
est angle in each triangle is maximized [21]. An approach based on
Delaunay triangulation [22] employs a few heuristic guidelines, such
as not exceeding an upper bound of node degree and choosing links
with an eye toward the creation of regular and uniform graph, but it
does not take power consumption into account.
An approach based on the spanning tree [23] aims to minimize
transmission power under the constraints of connectivity and bicon-
nectivity, using a centralized graph structure for static networks. For
mobile networks, two distributed heuristics for topology control are
introduced: local information, no topology (LINT) and local informa-
tion, link-state topology (LILT). As the names of these two heuristics
implies, LINT depends solely on local neighbor information, while
LILT exploits both local neighbor information and global topology
snapshot information obtained from some routing protocols such as
link-state protocols. They both try to minimize power consumption
by limiting node degrees in an incremental manner. As a pioneer-
ing work toward achieving power-efﬁcient topology control, this
approach opens up many opportunities. The power model used in
this approach is rather simpliﬁed in that the power consumption of
a node is denoted by the number of its neighbors (i.e., node degree
in the graph). Because LINT and LILT are heuristics, they do not
guarantee network connectivity.
The idea of using the spanning tree for topology control has been
extended to a graph structure known as the local minimum spanning
tree (LMST) [24]. In this case, each node in a MANET intermittently
uses its maximum transmission power to conduct a broadcast-based
neighbor discovery process by sending out “hello” messages. Any

Mobile Networking Challenges
291
node receiving “hello” messages replies with its identiﬁcation and
position. In this way, the initiator node is able to determine its dis-
tance from all reachable nodes. It then uses that information to build
a local minimum spanning tree, the root of which is the initiator
node. The initiator node selects as neighbors any nodes that are one
hop away on the local spanning tree.
Using the minimum spanning tree to model a subgraph of reach-
able nodes at each node offers some very nice features. First, it can be
proved that in a minimum spanning tree node degree is bounded up
to 6, which effectively limits the number of neighbors for each node,
thereby reducing power consumption. Second, the network topol-
ogy derived from LMST is connected. Finally, the network topology
can be transformed into a bidirectional topology. Another spanning-
tree-based topology control algorithm utilizes an important observa-
tion: The optimal solution of total power consumption of a MANET
is upper bounded by the sum of the costs (power consumption) in
a spanning tree and the edges in its critical paths [20]. A critical
path is the longest (highest cost) path from internal nodes to leaves
in the spanning tree. It is quite straightforward to devise central-
ized and distributed algorithms to identify these critical paths and
reduce their costs as much as possible. Two centralized heuristics, one
based on the minimal spanning tree and one based on the minimum
incremental power tree, have been proposed.
A Gabriel graph of point set S contains an edge between point
u and point v if and only if the disk with diameter (u, v) does not
enclose any other point from S. A Gabriel graph is planar; that is,
no two edges intersect. The Gabriel-graph-based approach [25] is a
distributed topology control algorithm that guarantees strong con-
nectivity. It introduces the notion of relay region and enclosure so
as to build a Gabriel graph. This approach generates the global mini-
mal energy solution for static networks and suboptimal solutions for
mobile networks. For any node i that intends to transmit to node j
using r as the relay node, a relay region of pair (i, r) is deﬁned as the
area within which j may reside and node i will consume less power
when it chooses to relay through node r to transmit to j instead of
transmitting directly. The enclosure of node i is then deﬁned as the

292
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
union of the complement of relay regions of all the nodes that node
i can reach by using its maximal transmission power. The proposed
approach aims at topology control for a MANET in which a master-
site node is the data sink of all other nodes. A two-phase distributed
protocol has been devised to ﬁnd the minimum power topology for
a static network. In the ﬁrst phase, each node i begins to perform
a broadcast-based discovery process using maximum power and to
detect relay regions of every node pair. After that, the enclosure graph
of node i can be computed, which in turn will be used in the second
phase to compute the shortest path to the master-site node, with
power consumption as the cost of the edges. For mobile networks,
the same two-phase operations are conducted periodically to cope
with node mobility.
A cone-based topology control algorithm [26] has been proposed
to address the problem of facilitating power efﬁcient operations.
It achieves this goal by permitting each node to ﬁnd its minimal
operational power based solely on local information, while still
satisfying global network connectivity requirements. As a conse-
quence, each node will be able to control transmission power in
favor of both energy efﬁciency and network connectivity. This dis-
tributed algorithm is performed in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage,
each node on a two-dimensional space continues to broadcast
neighbor-discovery messages at an increasing transmission radius
until it ﬁnds at least one neighbor in every cone of α degree cen-
tered at the node or maximum transmission power is reached.
Each receiving node acknowledges all neighbor-discovery messages.
The original sender node then collects those acknowledgments and
derives spatial directions (cone) of those receivers using directional
antennas or angle of arrival (AOA) techniques in place in many
wireless systems. In the second stage, redundant links of each node
are pruned in an edge removal procedure, which results in a low-
degree network topology and thus low transmission interference
among nodes. This cone-based algorithm has been proved to always
yield the maximum connected set of nodes for the network when
α ≤2π/3. For smaller angels, the algorithm can guarantee minimum
power routes as well.

Mobile Networking Challenges
293
In a more general sense, the topology control problem in MANET
can be characterized by a triple of the form <M, P, O>, where M
denotes the graph model (directional or unidirectional), P denotes
the desired graph property such as the k-edge connected and bounded
maximum node degree, and O represents the power minimiza-
tion objective (i.e., maximum power and total power) [27]. The
problem of minimizing the maximum power is NP-complete (A deci-
sion problem is NP-complete if and only if it is in NP and it is
NP-hard. Readers who are interested in computational complex-
ity can refer to M. Garey and D. Johnson’s book “Computers
and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness”.).
Furthermore, the problem of minimizing the number of nodes that
use maximum power is also NP-complete. Total power minimiza-
tion has been proved to be NP-hard, and only approximation and
heuristics such as those approaches described above may be applied.
5.6.3
Routing in MANET
A major advantage of a MANET is its conﬁguration-free deployment,
which means that nodes will evolve to form a fully distributed net-
work for data communication without any routing conﬁguration on
each node. Furthermore, a MANET must adapt itself to dynamically
changing network topology. In contrast to topology control, ad hoc
routing aims to react to topology changes for power-efﬁcient and
high-performance operations rather than generate a good topology.
The prime problem of ad hoc routing is to maintain an up-to-date
routing table at each node against a number of factors such as over-
head and scalability, power consumption, fast convergence, and
stability.
Routing in a MANET is done on a multihop basis, as there is no
preexisting or elected dedicated router in a MANET. Unlike a host
in a wired network, a node in MANET cannot have a preconﬁgured
default router speciﬁed in the routing table. Nodes collaborate with
each other in maintaining routing tables, thus each may serve as a
router. As shown in Figure 5.11, at its initial location node N1 relies
on nodes N2 and N3 to forward a packet to node N4. When it moves

294
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
2
3
7
6
1
4
5
1
Data route
Node Trjactory
Figure 5.11 MANET routing.
to the second location, it then detects another path (N5–N4) and uses
it. Note that every node in this example may move around, including
those intermediate “router” nodes and the destination node. The
problem will be far more complicated in that case.
Routing protocols in MANET can be broadly classiﬁed into the
following categories:
• Unicast routing protocols — (1) Topology-based routing, including
proactive routing protocols, on-demand routing protocols, and
hybrid routing protocols, and (2) location-based routing protocols
• Multicast routing protocols
• Broadcast routing protocols
Some routing protocols emphasize low-power operations, but secu-
rity and QoS are also considered in some protocols.
5.6.3.1
Routing Basics: Link State and Distance Vector Algorithms
Intuitively, one might think that traditional routing protocols in the
wired network could be employed in wireless ad hoc networks. These

Mobile Networking Challenges
295
protocols use either link state or distance vector routing algorithms
[3], such as Dijkstra’s and Bellman–Form’s algorithms. These algo-
rithms will ﬁnd the shortest paths from one node to all the other
nodes it can reach in the network. The metric used by the Internet
can be the number of hops, physical distance, or route trip delay. In
link state protocols such as OSPF (Open Shortest Path First)[28], each
router discovers and maintains a list of link costs to its neighbors
(a local view) and broadcasts the list to all other routers whenever a
link cost in the list changes in the form of link state packets. Based
on the received link state packets, each router computes the shortest
path to every other router (a global view). In distance vector protocols
such as RIP (Routing Information Protocol)[29], each router main-
tains a distance vector of link cost for each router in the network.
A node also monitors the link cost to each of its neighbors. When
some of these link costs change, the updated vector is reported to
all its neighbors and a router computes an updated routing table. In
addition to the routing-loop problem and counting-to-inﬁnity prob-
lem, the major drawbacks of these traditional routing protocols are
long convergence times and the highly complex messages, which
may create too much overhead for the CPU [30].
Both link state and distance vector algorithms are proactive rout-
ing protocols in the sense that they require a router to periodically
broadcast network change. Because topology changes are far more
frequent in ad hoc networks than in ﬁxed networks, simply porting
proactive routing protocols to a MANET may not work well because
of the resulting signiﬁcant communication overhead.
5.6.3.2
Proactive Routing: DSDV and OLSR
A destination sequenced distance vector (DSDV) [31] is a modiﬁ-
cation of the distributed Bellman–Ford algorithm in that a tag of
sequence number for each destination node is used in the vector
maintained at each node. The sequence number can be used to dis-
tinguish between stale routes and fresh ones because a router will
increment the sequence number when sending a route update mes-
sage to its neighbors. To reduce the amount of information in these
packets two types of update messages are deﬁned: full dump and

296
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
incremental dump. The full dump carries all available routing infor-
mation, and the incremental dump only carries the information
that has changed since the last dump. As based on the Bellman–
Form algorithm, DSDV is dependent on periodic broadcasts of route
update packets. It requires some time to converge before a route can
be used. This convergence time can probably be considered negligi-
ble in a ﬁxed wired network, where the topology does not change
frequently; however, in an ad hoc network, where the network topol-
ogy is highly dynamic, the long convergence time may result in a
large number of dropped packets before a valid route is detected. The
periodic broadcast also adds a large amount of overhead into the
network.
Optimized link state routing (OLSR) aims at providing low-
overhead routing for large, dense MANETs using a combination of
a link state algorithm and a multipoint relay (MPR) technique. MPR
is an improvement over the plain broadcasting method. With MPR,
a node chooses a subset of its neighbors discovered by the schemes,
discussed in the preceding Topology Control section, and sends link
state “hello” messages to them. As a result, only those selected nodes,
namely MPR nodes, will further forward those messages from the
node in question (the selector). The MPR nodes also periodically
broadcast their selector lists using MPR, and every node learns the
route to every other node by collecting these selector lists. OLSR
avoids ﬂooding of “hello” messages and reduces communication
overhead while maintaining link state.
5.6.3.3
On-Demand Routing: DSR
DSR (Dynamic Source Routing) [32] uses source routing rather than
hop-by-hop routing. Each packet to be routed carries in its header
the complete, ordered list of nodes through which the packet must
pass to its destination. The key advantage of source routing is that
intermediate nodes do not need to maintain up-to-date routing infor-
mation in order to route the packets, as the packets themselves
already contain all the routing decision. DSR works in an on-demand
fashion, in which a route will be discovered by a node only when
necessary, eliminating the need for periodic route advertisement

Mobile Networking Challenges
297
and neighbor-detection packets in those proactive routing protocols;
therefore, DSR dramatically reduces routing overhead. Additionally,
battery power is also saved for the same reason, as a node could
choose to switch into sleep mode while it is not involved in packet
forwarding. In DSR, a node uses a route cache to temporarily store
entries of source route, which is a complete, hop-by-hop path to
a destination. If no source route to a destination is present in the
route cache, the node must perform route discovery. It does this
by broadcasting route query packets throughput the network. Each
query packet records the hop sequence it traverses. Thus, when the
query packet reaches its destination, a route reply packet will be sent
back that contains the entire hop sequence of that query packet.
All the intermediate nodes between the source and destination may
also beneﬁt by collecting route information from those route reply
packets.
The downside of DSR is twofold: First, each packet must carry the
complete sequence of the route; this overhead grows when the packet
has to go through more hops to reach the destination. Second, the
route discovery imposes some delay when a packet is being routed
and the route cache does not contain the source route for it.
5.6.3.4
On-Demand Routing: AODV
AODV (Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector) is essentially a com-
bination of both DSR and DSDV. It borrows the basic on-demand
mechanism of route discovery and route maintenance from DSR
and the use of hop-by-hop routing, sequence numbers, and periodic
beacons from DSDV. It enables multihop routing between partici-
pating mobile nodes seeking to establish and maintain an ad hoc
network. As an on-demand routing protocol, AODV only requests a
route when needed and does not require nodes to maintain routes to
destinations that are not actively used in the communications. As
long as the endpoints of a communication connection have valid
routes to each other, AODV does not take any action. Features of this
protocol include loop freedom and the fact that link breakages cause
immediate notiﬁcations to be sent to the affected set of nodes, but

298
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
only that set. The use of destination sequence numbers guarantees
that a route is “fresh.”
5.6.3.5
TORA
TORA (Temporally-Ordered Routing Algorithm) is a distributed rout-
ing protocol based on a link-reversal algorithm. It can be separated
into three basic functions: creating routes, maintaining routes, and
erasing routes. It is designed to discover routes on demand, provide
multiple routes to a destination, establish routes quickly, and mini-
mize communication overhead by localizing algorithmic reaction to
topological changes when possible. Route optimality (shortest-path
routing) is considered of secondary importance, and longer routes are
often used to avoid the overhead of discovering newer routes. TORA
does not guarantee the shortest path. The actions taken by TORA
can be described in terms of water ﬂowing downhill toward a des-
tination node through a network of tubes that models the routing
state of the real network. The tubes represent links between nodes
in the network, the junctions of tubes represent the nodes, and the
water in the tubes represents the packets ﬂowing toward the destina-
tion. Each node has a height with respect to the destination that is
computed by the routing protocol. If a tube between nodes A and B
becomes blocked such that water can no longer ﬂow through it, the
height of A is set to a height greater than that of any of its remaining
neighbors, such that water will now ﬂow back out of A (and toward
the other nodes that had been routing packets to the destination
via A). A comparison of unicast ad hoc routing protocols is presented
in Table 5.2.
5.6.3.6
Hybrid Routing Protocols (Gradient, Clustering)
Hybrid routing protocols aim at leveraging advantages of both proac-
tive and on-demand routing protocols at the same time. Zone routing
protocol (ZRP) is an example of hybrid routing protocol. In ZRP,
a MANET is divided into zones, which are deﬁned by a set of all
the nodes within a distance of n hops away. Within a zone, a
proactive intrazone routing technique is used; across zones, an on-
demand interzone routing technique is employed. Consequently,

Mobile Networking Challenges
299
Table 5.2
Unicast Ad Hoc Routing Protocols
DSDV
OLSR
DSR
AODV
TORA
Routing method
Proactive
Proactive
On-demand
On-demand
On-demand
Neighbor
discovery
Periodical
broadcast of
“hello”
messages
Multipoint
relay of link
state
messages
(selector list)
N/A
Periodical
broadcast of
“hello”
messages
N/A
Communication
overhead
High
High
Low
Medium
Medium
Routing delay
No delay
No delay
No delay if a
route cache
is available
No delay
No delay if a
route cache is
available
communication overhead incurred by proactive routing advertise-
ment is largely reduced by the scope of the zone. Within a zone, a
route is always available whenever it is needed. Link cost changes in
a zone do not affect other zones.
Cluster-based
routing
protocol
(CBRP)
[33]
takes
a
similar
approach. A cluster in CBRP has a diameter of two hops. Nodes in
a cluster elect the one with the smallest ID (e.g., IP address) as the
“head” of the cluster. The head knows everyone in the cluster; there-
fore, routing is performed between cluster heads rather than all the
nodes. A node in the network periodically sends “hello” messages to
its neighbors, and a head uses “hello” messages to notify members
of its existence. A regular node uses “hello” messages to give each
neighbor a list of all neighbors and adjacent cluster heads. Thus, a
node is able to obtain a view of nodes that are two hops away. It
can also collect “hello” messages from its neighbors (nodes from the
same cluster or other clusters) so as to maintain a cluster adjacency
table, which contains a list of neighboring cluster heads and the next-
hop nodes to reach them. To detect other neighboring heads, a head
can inspect the “hello” messages of its members that contain cluster
adjacency tables. As a result, a two-tier hierarchy of network topol-
ogy can be established. Similar to DSR, CBRP uses on-demand source
routing but only among heads across clusters. When a source has

300
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
to send data to a destination, it sends route request packets to the
neighboring cluster heads. Upon receiving the request a cluster head
checks to see if the destination is in its cluster. If yes, then it sends the
request directly to the destination; otherwise, it forwards the request
to all its adjacent cluster heads, and so on. Due to the two-hop cluster
size, CBRP is more suitable for a dense MANET with slow movement,
where topology updates are not very frequent.
5.6.3.7
Location-Based Routing Protocols
Outdoor localization technologies such as GPS and cellular triangu-
lation are becoming standard on mobile devices, enabling a broad
range of location based networks, services, and applications. For
example, routing in a MANET can leverage location information
of mobile nodes rather then network topology to reduce commu-
nication and computing overhead associated with topology updates.
Location information is obtained via proactive ﬂooding of location
change packets or reactive location query packets. A packet is routed
toward its destination based on the location of the destination node;
thus, design challenges of location-based routing in a MANET have
been reduced to: (1) obtain location information at each node with
low overhead, and (2) provide a location-based routing decision for
the destination without using ﬂooding.
Location-aided routing (LAR) [34] is an example of location-based
routing protocols for MANET. In LAR, a node is assumed to know
the location of the destination node at some point of time. Using
this information, a source node is able to discover an expected zone, a
region within which the destination node may fall during the rout-
ing process. Route discovery is done in a similar way as in DSR but
with one exception — only neighbor nodes in the request zone will
forward the route request. The request zone of a source node is of
limited scope deﬁned as a rectangle that includes the location of
the source node and the expected zone. The source node explicitly
puts the request zone into its route request message; hence, only
those nodes falling into the request zone will forward these mes-
sages toward the destination node. Other nodes will simply discard
these messages. LAR also provides another scheme to guide the route

Mobile Networking Challenges
301
request messages toward the destination node. In this scheme, the
route request message contains the distance between the source node
and the destination node at some point Ds. Each intermediate node,
upon receiving this message, calculates its distance to the destination
node (Di) and compares the result with Ds. The node forwards the
message only if Di is smaller than Ds. In this case, Di will replace Ds
in the message for the next hop node.
Location-aided routing effectively reduces routing overhead but
lacks a mechanism to distribute location information throughput
the network. In fact, in location-based routing, aside from location
message ﬂooding, it is quite difﬁcult to obtain up-to-date location
information for every node in a MANET. Intuitively, a hierarchical
location system could be a solution to this problem. For exam-
ple, the Landmark hierarchy [35] employs a scheme that leverages
well-known root nodes (the landmarks) to distribute location infor-
mation. Each node in the Landmark system has a location server that
is responsible for providing locations of the nodes in question. Nodes
in a Landmark network have unique permanent IDs that are not
directly useful for routing; instead, the node ID is hashed to obtain
the address of the location server. As in source routing, the location
information of a node maintained at its location server is identiﬁed by
a list of intermediate nodes along the path to the root landmark. To
ﬁnd the location of a destination node, a source node simply applies
the same hashing algorithm to obtain the location server’s address
of the destination node and then queries the location server for the
location of the destination node. After receiving this information,
the source node can compute a path that runs through the hierar-
chy. The Landmark approach works well when the nodes close to
the root landmark in the hierarchy are quite stable; otherwise, main-
tenance overhead becomes a signiﬁcant issue. Grid [36] is another
hierarchical location-based routing protocol. The area of a MANET
in Grid is divided into small squares, four of which compose a big-
ger square, and so on. Location updates for a mobile node are made
among all other nodes within the 1-order square and some selected
nodes in upper-level squares. Table 5.3 provides a brief comparison
of these location-based ad hoc routing protocols.

302
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 5.3
Location Based Ad Hoc Routing Protocols
LAR
Landmark
Grid
Network
organization
Flat
Hierarchy based on
well-known root
nodes
Hierarchical grid
Location
discovery
N/A
Path to the root nodes
Position in the grid
Location
maintenance
On-demand
Location server for
each node
Selected nodes in the
grid hierarchy
Communication
overhead
Low
Medium
High
Scalability
Low
Medium
High
5.6.3.8
Multicast Routing
Multicast is a point-to-multipoint communication method in which
a single message can be received by a group of designated mobile
nodes. Compared to broadcast or multi-unicast, multicast is much
more efﬁcient with respect to communication overhead, which is a
crucial problem in mobile environment where network bandwidth
is limited and connections are not quite reliable. For multicast rout-
ing protocols in a MANET, the problem is to build a multicast group
against node mobility. Tree-based multicast routing protocols focus
on building an on-demand spanning tree for a source node that
wishes to send a message to a group of nodes. Mesh-based multicast
routing protocols use mesh topology for group management, thus
improving protocol resilience against network dynamics. By deﬁni-
tion, multicast is carried out on the network layer (IP), meaning that
it requires the participating routers to support IP multicast; however,
application layer, or overlay, multicast is also used in some cases to
allow end-to-end deployment of multicast at the absence of multicast
support on mobile nodes.
5.6.3.9
Broadcasting
Broadcasting refers to the communication means of delivering a
single message to every node within the range of a network or sub-
net. In a wired network, the broadcast “storm” is restricted within

Mobile Networking Challenges
303
the subnet by routers at the border of a network. In a MANET, to
broadcast a message, a node initiates a wireless transmission to a spe-
cially deﬁned broadcast address. Hence, all neighbors of the node
can receive the message. Notice that wireless signal broadcasting is
subject to contentions and collisions within the physical channel
among the neighbor nodes. Network-wide broadcast allows a note
receiving a message to forward the message to its neighbors, resulting
in a “ﬂooding” or “blind broadcasting” of the message. It is a sim-
ple and effective way to reach every node in the network. Because
of this, ﬂooding serves as a building block in a number of unicast
and multicast routing protocols. Flooding is used in the following
circumstances: route updates in proactive routing protocols such
as DSDV and OLSR, route discovery in on-demand routing proto-
cols, location updates in location-based routing protocols, and group
establishment in multicast routing protocols.
A major problem with ﬂooding is the redundant transmission of
the same message. This problem is particularly important in wire-
less networks where the channels are shared media and bandwidth is
largely limited. To cope with this problem, ﬂooding is very often cou-
pled with tagging a message identiﬁer on the message to eliminate
redundant retransmission and loops. Some consolidation techniques
for ﬂooding messages can also be used to reduce the number of
messages to be transmitted at a node. Instead of simply forwarding
a message, a node may choose to aggregate several messages to be
forwarded into a single message that it then transmits. The aggrega-
tion operation often involves application-layer logic, an example of
cross-layer design in a MANET.
Aside from simple ﬂooding, other broadcast methods are location-
based broadcast, topology-based broadcast, and probability-based
broadcast. Similar to location-based unicast routing (discussed ear-
lier), the idea of a location-based broadcast is to let a node rebroadcast
only if the expanded coverage area obtained via rebroadcast is sufﬁ-
ciently large compared with the area where the sender and the node
reside.
Topology-based broadcast schemes utilize a local topology to
decide if a rebroadcast is necessary. Multipoint relay (MPR) and

304
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
scalable broadcast algorithms (SBAs) are two examples of this cate-
gory. Schemes falling into this category require a node to periodically
broadcast a list of its one-hop neighbor nodes to all of its one-hop
neighbors; thus, a node is able to maintain a local topology within
the range of two hops. In MPR ﬂooding [37], a node selects some
of its one-hop neighbor nodes, called MPRs, and asks them to for-
ward the message being broadcast. The selected MPRs are those that
can reach all the two-hop neighbor nodes. Unlike MPR, where the
source node makes the decision as to which neighbors will rebroad-
cast a message, SBA [38] shifts this decision-making procedure to
those neighbor nodes. More precisely, upon receiving a message,
a node will check to see if its own neighbor list contains those
nodes that are one-hop neighbors of the message sender. Only those
that have not been covered by the sender will receive the message.
Probability-based broadcast shifts this decision-making procedure to
those neighbors that can simply rebroadcast with a ﬁxed or adjustable
probability in response to local trafﬁc statistics and topology change.
All of the schemes introduced here require a buffering mechanism
at each node to track messages received in the last short period of
time. This information will be used by a node to decide whether or
not to rebroadcast and who should receive the message according to
the speciﬁc algorithm used by each protocol.
5.6.3.10
Power-Aware Routing Protocols
Power-aware computing is a common design goal in the domain of
mobile computing. In the case of routing protocols in a MANET,
power-aware computing imposes a new dimension of constraint with
regard to route discovery, route selection, and routing table mainte-
nance. There are several approaches to power-aware unicast routing
in a MANET. One is to ﬁnd the optimal, energy-efﬁcient path at
each node when a message is being forwarded to the destination
step by step; therefore, route updates among nodes will contain
power-related information that can be used to compute the cost of a
path. The energy metric usually consists of two interrelated parts: the
power necessary to transmit and receive over the link and residual
power of the sender normalized to the initial energy.

Mobile Networking Challenges
305
The second approach aims at keeping the entire network con-
nected and operating as long as possible, rather than looking for and
using an individual energy-efﬁcient path that may result in a discon-
nected network due to uneven power consumption. Here, multiple
good paths will be discovered for a connection, and one of them
will be selected probabilistically. Another way to reduce power con-
sumption for a routing protocol in a MANET is to make use of the
idle listening time; for example, a protocol may choose to turn off
some nodes with little energy for a certain duration to forcibly direct
messages to other nodes. For multicast and broadcast in a MANET,
power consumption could be considered as a factor when choosing
the set of nodes to rebroadcast. In addition to topology-related fac-
tors such as coverage area or node connectivity, the transmission
power required to reach a speciﬁc node may be considered as well
so as to reduce total transmission power needed for rebroadcast. For
spanning-tree-based multicast protocols, the cost of the spanning
tree may be denoted by the total transmission power of all the direct
links in the tree. Thus, while building a spanning tree, an energy
metric can be factored in.
5.6.3.11
Security in Ad Hoc Routing
Security is an important issue for MANETs. The ad hoc nature of a
MANET fosters a variety of challenging security issues, such as mes-
sage conﬁdentiality and integrity, node authentication, certiﬁcate
management, and trust association. Because each node in a MANET
works as a router for others, mobile privacy becomes another key
issue. Ideally a node should be completely unaware of messages being
forwarded, and the system should also guarantee that sensitive infor-
mation regarding the node, such as identity and location, is revealed
only to designated nodes, not anyone else.
General security-related mechanisms of a MANET are discussed
in detail in the next chapter. It should be quite obvious that secure
ad hoc routing protocols are based on the routing protocols described
above. Here, we brieﬂy introduce security issues and solutions in
the domain of ad hoc routing. First, a simple approach for secure
routing would be directing messages to highly trusted nodes for

306
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
routing; aside from network topology, a node’s level of credibility
can also be used when choosing a path. Second, a symmetric
key or PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) infrastructure (PKI, digital
signitures, and digital certiﬁcates are introduced in the next chap-
ter) can be introduced to a MANET such that message integrity
can be ensured and the source node can be authenticated before
a message is received. A node authenticates a sender by check-
ing its digital signature enclosed in the route discovery message
using the sender’s public key. The route discovery message is also
encrypted by the receiver’s public key so only the designated receiver
is able to decrypt the message. Ariadne [39] is an example of such
protocols.
Ariadne is a DSR-based, on-demand routing protocol. In Ariadne,
each route request message is appended with a message authentica-
tion code (MAC) computed with a shared secret key (KSD) between
the initiator (S) and the target (D) over a time stamp. This allows
the target to verify the authenticity and freshness of the route
request. Recall that in DSR a route request will contain a list of
intermediate nodes when it ﬁnally reaches the target. The target
then generates a request reply message and sends it back to the ini-
tiator following the node list. Two security problems arise during
this procedure: (1) The target has to authenticate the nodes in
the node list, and (2) the initiator must also authenticate those
nodes. Three techniques have been devised to tackle these two
problems: digital signature, pairwise secret key, and a broadcast
authentication protocol called TELSA (Timed Efﬁcient Stream Loss-
Tolerant Authentication):
• Digital signature requires each node to have a private key and a
public key certiﬁed by a certiﬁcate authority (CA). The public keys
are either preinstalled at each node or are distributed in a PKI so
the nodes can authenticate each other’s public key by checking
its digital certiﬁcate using the CA’s public key.
• Pairwise secret key assumes that a shared secret key is made known
to any pair of nodes.

Mobile Networking Challenges
307
• TELSA requires loose clock synchronization among nodes and a
hash key chain that is disclosed at a certain interval by the sender.
The one-way hash key chain is initialized by an initial random key
but published by the sender in a reverse order according to a well-
known schedule. Because of clock synchronization, the receiver is
able to detect, at a speciﬁc time point upon receiving a message,
whether a key in the chain has been published by the sender.
The receiver simply discards the message if that round of hash
key has been published by the sender, indicating that the mes-
sage may be forged; otherwise, the receiver stores the message and
authenticates it later when it receives the key. TELSA is described
in RFC 4082.
The digital signature technique and the pairwise secret key tech-
nique require a trusted third party to provide preexisting keys,
whereas TELSA does not require any such servers. The downside of
TELSA is the mechanism by which a key is authenticated: clock syn-
chronization and delay estimate in the underlying MANET. In highly
dynamic networks, such a mechanism may become impractical. It is
also difﬁcult to select a keychain publish interval to balance network
performance and security control message (key publishing messages)
overhead.
Aside from message integrity and node authentication, another
problem in this domain is anonymous misbehaving or uncoopera-
tive nodes in a MANET. Three types of nodes fall into this category:
malicious nodes controlled by attackers, faulty nodes that do not
function correctly, and selﬁsh nodes (leeches) that consume services
but do not contribute enough. These problems will become even
more important when MANETs begin to ﬁnd their way into consumer
applications where no single administrative authority is available.
Again, these issues are discussed under the general topic of mobile
computing security in the next chapter. For a routing protocol in
a MANET to take advantage of all the cooperative nodes, the sec-
ond and third categories of nodes that do not contribute enough to
packet routing must be identiﬁed and penalized or eliminated from
the network. One approach is to build a distributed credit system

308
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
in which mobile nodes receive credit by forwarding the messages of
others and consume credit by sending out their own messages. For
this purpose, there are two types of credit systems that address the
issues in different perspectives:
• A self-claim credit system relies on the node itself to maintain its
credit using either tamper-proof hardware or incentive techniques
supplied by a central credit server.
• A neighbor-claim credit system provides neighbor-based ratings on
a node’s behavior with respect to forwarding messages.
In both systems, countermeasures to forged claims and collabora-
tive cheating are required, such as coupling distributed evaluation
techniques with security mechanisms used in node authentication
and security associations. This topic is beyond the scope of ad hoc
routing.
5.6.4
Service Discovery
To a mobile node, a MANET is a virtual server that provides a number
of services. Those services can be broadly divided into the following
three classes:
• Network services, such as point-to-point or group communica-
tion, mobile access proxying, network performance monitoring,
or power alert
• Computational services, such as distributed job scheduling, dis-
tributed storage, or distributed caching
• Application services, such as printing, web caching, or web
services
A mobile node must have an efﬁcient way to determine what ser-
vices are offered by a MANET and how to consume those services.
This problem (service discovery) raises another key issue in MANETs.

Mobile Networking Challenges
309
Sometimes the notion of service discovery problem encompasses two
other issues: network self-conﬁguration and service delivery. Net-
work self-conﬁguration refers to the process where mobile devices
identify themselves and others using addresses and thus form into a
network with necessary conﬁgurations on each device. Service deliv-
ery speciﬁes how a mobile device uses a service provided by another
device after the location of that service is discovered.
In a wired network, a centralized directory server is often used
to provide a mapping between a service and a pointer to the ser-
vice. For example, a Windows active directory is responsible for
providing pointers to a number of services ranging from domain
management and application sharing. In a MANET, where such a
centralized infrastructure is not available, mobile nodes must self-
organize into a distributed structure to advertise services. In a sense,
the service directory establishment process can be considered one
stage toward the establishment of the network; other stages are
addressing, localization, and service provision.
Several service discovery protocols are utilized in a general net-
working environment, such as:
• Universal plug and play (uPnP)
• Jini (Java Naming and Directory Interface)
• Rendezvous
• IETF’s service location protocol (SLP)
Universal plug and play is an open peer-to-peer service discov-
ery and delivery framework promoted by the UPnP Forum led by
Microsoft. It mainly targets small ad hoc networking environments
such as home networks and business ofﬁce networks. No central-
ized directory server is needed to register and advertise services for
a network. In UPnP, a consumer of a service is called a control point,
a software module operating on a device. All devices in a UPnP net-
work use IP addressing. If a DHCP server is available in the vicinity,
a device will simply contact the DHCP server to obtain a dynamic IP

310
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
address. If no DHCP server is detected, the device chooses an unused
private IP address in the range of 169.254.0.0. A CP is able to retrieve
UPnP service and device descriptions from a device that offer some
services, send actions (commands) to services, and receive events
from services. After addressing is done, a CP initiates the service dis-
covery process in the network. The communication protocol between
a CP and a service provider is the simple service discovery protocol
(SSDP). SSDP utilizes HTTP multicast (HTTPMU) and HTTP unicast
(HTTPU) to provide the service search and service announcement
functions. HTTPU is a protocol using UDP for message exchange,
whereas HTTPMU is a protocol that sends HTTP packets to a multicast
group over UDP. In the “description” stage, the URL sent from the
device to the CP points to a network location that provides descrip-
tion of available services, as well as a list of URLs that will be used
to access those services. In the “control” stage, the CP will in turn
use those URLs obtained in the “description” stage to gather addi-
tional information about service commands and parameters. In the
“eventing” stage, the CP subscribes to some services and the services
notify the CP of changes in device status. If the device supports a web
interface, a presentation URL can be used to control the service via a
web interface. All the messages exchanged between a service provider
and a CP through URLs can be formatted in the form of XML and
encapsulated into simple object access protocol (SOAP) messages to
allow simple HTTP-based, machine-to-machine communication over
the TCP.
Jini is a Java-based device coordination solution from Sun Micro-
systems. Jini uses the term federation to deﬁne a set of autonomous
Java-compatible devices forming an importune network and provid-
ing some services by resources in the federation. The services may
include communication, storage, and computation alike. Unlike
UPnP, Jini requires centralized directory entities called lookup services
to work closely with every participating device in the underlying fed-
eration. If the location of a lookup service is not known, a device
can use multicast to discover one. The lookup service then serves
as a directory for those devices to maintain service registration and
answer service queries. Jini employs a unique Java technology, Java’s

Mobile Networking Challenges
311
remote method invocation (RMI), to provide convenient service
interface distribution among consumers. A distributed messaging
mechanism like RPC (Remote Procedure Call), Java RMI allows a Java
object to communicate remotely with other Java objects residing on
different computers. During the service registration process, a device
is able to upload some Java stub code to the lookup service. The
code is a complete description of the interface on the serving device,
which is similar to the Web Service Deﬁnition Language (WSDL) used
by web services. When a querying device (the potential consumer)
contacts the lookup service, it can automatically download the stub
code and use Java RMI to call the service of the serving device. The
lookup services can even form a hierarchy for service query resolu-
tion. Security in Jini is provided in two aspects: user authentication
based on access control list and Java virtual machine (JVM) secu-
rity mechanisms. Only authenticated users can make requests to a
service. A service can also be “leased” to a user for a speciﬁc dura-
tion of time. Jini does not specify a low-level device addressing
scheme.
Rendezvous is a zero-conﬁguration networking solution from
Apple that is supported by every network application in the Mac
world. Although mainly designed for Macintosh computers in wired
IP networks, Rendezvous can also be ported to other software plat-
forms in a wireless environment. Rendezvous requires that devices
do three essential things: allocate IP addresses without a DHCP
server,
translate between names and IP addresses without a
DNS server, and locate or advertise services without using a directory
server. The addressing is achieved by a protocol called Dynamic Con-
ﬁguration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses, which is very similar to auto
IP. Rendezvous conducts service or device name resolution in the
absence of a traditional DNS server utilizing the multicast DNS service
discovery (mDNS-SD) protocol. In essence, each participating device
advertises its services via a multicast tree of devices. Each device also
has a lightweight DNS server to store caches of service notiﬁcations
from other devices. For a device to look up a service, it ﬁrst consults
its local cache for such a service before sending out requests to other
devices in a multicast fashion. Any devices that can fulﬁll the request

312
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
can send a multicast reply back to the requester; therefore, mDNS-
SD solves the problem of service location as well. The downside of
Rendezvous is that it does not support service discovery in different
subnets separated by router interfaces.
IETF’s service location protocol (SLP) is another service discovery
protocol. In SLP, a device can assume one or more of the following
three roles at the same time: user agents (UAs), which are devices that
search for services in a local area network; service agents (SAs), which
are devices that announce one or more services, and optional directory
agents (DAs), which are devices that act as directory servers to collect
and cache service advertisements and answer service queries. Each
service offered by a device is uniquely identiﬁed by a URL. Service-
speciﬁc name/value pairs (called attributes) can also be used. When
a device joins a network, it ﬁrst searches for a DA using multicast.
If a DA is present, subsequent service registration and query will be
done with the DA. If not, the device will simply send a UDP ser-
vice query, again using multicast. All SAs that can fulﬁll the query
will send a UDP reply back to the UA. In addition, the device will
periodically send heartbeat multicast messages to discover DAs. SLP
can operate on both UDP and TCP. As a general service location pro-
tocol, SLP assumes that devices in a local area network have been
properly addressed prior to service discovery or advertisement. SLP
can be used by other protocols as a component for service location.
For example, the session initialization protocol (SIP) can use SLP to
locate multimedia services over a distributed, self-organized network.
Table 5.4 presents a comparison of service discovery protocols dis-
cussed in this section. It can be seen that multicast is very often
used in an ad hoc network environment for service advertisement and
look up. For service discovery in a MANET, a protocol that requires a
centralized directory is not practical. To this end, distributed ser-
vice discovery protocols have shown clear advantages over those
using a directory server. Ideally, in a pervasive computing environ-
ment, additional mobile-device-speciﬁc information such as power,
location, and service load, should also be considered in the service
discovery process such that a MANET is able to operate in a globally
optimal fashion.

Mobile Networking Challenges
313
Table 5.4
Service Discovery Protocols
Universal Plug and
Play (uPnP)
Jini
Rendezvous
Service Location
Protocol (SLP)
Directory
No
Yes
Yes
Optional
directory
Addressing
Dynamic host
conﬁguration
protocol (DHCP)
or auto IP
Not
speciﬁed
Dynamic con-
ﬁguration
of IPv4
link-local
address
Not speciﬁed
Service discovery
Simple service
discovery
protocol (SSDP)
Directory-
assisted
remote
method
invoca-
tion
(RMI)
Multicast
DNS service
discovery
(mDNS-SD)
Multicast
lookup
Service locator
and attributes
Standard
Standard
Standard
Standard
Service
invocation
Simple object access
protocol (SOAP)
Java’s RMI
Not speciﬁed
Not speciﬁed
Communication
method
Unicast and
multicast
Unicast
and
multicast
Multicast
Multicast
Service event
and status
notiﬁcation
Eventing
(notiﬁcation) and
polling
Notiﬁcation
Notiﬁcation
and polling
Not speciﬁed
5.6.5
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks in the Real World
A major application of mobile ad hoc networks in consumer electronic
market is wireless gaming. Portable gaming devices such as Nintendo’s
Game Boy are mostly single-player game devices, where a gamer usu-
ally plays against the device. Because many computer games allow
remote gamers to play together via a network such as a LAN or the
Internet, it would be natural to facilitate multiplayer wireless gaming
on portal game devices, cell phones, and any other mobile devices.
Like mobile nodes in an 802.11 wireless LAN, gaming devices can

314
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
work in two modes: infrastructure mode and ad hoc mode. For exam-
ple, numerous portable gaming devices may connect to a GPRS data
network or some access points of a wireless LAN for communica-
tion. In ad hoc mode, no access points or cellular connections are
needed; instead, gaming devices may self-organize into an ad hoc net-
work within which gamers can discover others and join one or more
shared gaming sessions. In addition, gamers holding gaming devices
are free to move, thus creating a mobile ad hoc network supporting
a rich set of applications beyond gaming, as gamers could engage
in text chat, voice chat, video conferencing, and so on. Compared
with infrastructure-based wireless gaming, mobile ad hoc gaming
does not suffer from single point failure and incurs no communi-
cation overhead for the wireless network infrastructure. Moreover,
because gamers would be physically close to each other, the game
could be extended to incorporate the gamers’ locations, thus leading
to a marriage of location-based service and wireless gaming.
Sony’s Play Station Portable (PSP) is arguably the ﬁrst portal gam-
ing device to support ad hoc wireless gaming. The PSP device features
a 4.3-inch, 16:9 widescreen, thin-ﬁlm transistor (TFT), liquid-crystal
display (LCD) with 24-bit colors on a 480 × 272 pixel, high-resolution
screen; a USB 2.0 interface; and an 802.11b wireless LAN interface.
The PSP supports both online gaming at a Wi-Fi hotspot or ad hoc
gaming with up to 16 gamers within a range of 100 feet. Game titles
leveraging the ad hoc mode of PSP are already available in the market.
PSP’s major competition, Nintendo DS, has similar functionality. As
multiplayer gaming continues to gain momentum among gamers,
we will see more portable gaming devices equipped with wireless
network interfaces. These devices will support infrastructure-based
networking, ad hoc networking, and a hybrid of them.
On the other hand, from the perspective of digital convergence,
we expect future PDAs, music players (e.g., Apple iPod), cell phones,
and smart phones to be “ad hoc-able,” enabling a broad set of
mobile application in addition to wireless gaming. For example,
an interesting application of mobile ad hoc networks is multimedia
streaming among mobile devices. Users may choose to share their
MP3 collections, pictures, books, and any other resources with

Mobile Networking Challenges
315
other mobile devices users within the mobile ad hoc network. An
example of enabling tools is Pocketster (http://www.simeda.com/
pocketster.html), which is a wireless personal web server for Win-
dows Pocket PCs that advertises itself to other Pocket PCs in
the neighborhood in a wireless LAN. Its resource advertisement-
and-discovery protocol is Rendezvous. Green Packet’s SONbuddy
(http://www.sonbuddy.com) is yet another Wi-Fi-based mobile ad
hoc networking tool. SONbuddy allows mobile device users to com-
municate securely via a self-organized private community network.
Applications provided by SONbuddy include chat rooms, virtual
whiteboards, application sharing, screen sharing, voIP, ﬁle sharing,
and gaming. A feature worth noting is Internet sharing, which effec-
tively allows multiple users to share a single Internet connection
offered by another user acting as a BuddyGateway.
5.7 Quality of Service in Mobile Computing
Quality of service (QoS) in a network refers to the capability of the
network to prioritize trafﬁc and guarantee performance of data com-
munication. The principle reason for QoS provisioning is that the
Internet is inherently a best-effort network, meaning that packets
are delivered from the source to the destination without guarantee
of performance such as bandwidth, packet delay, delay jitter, packet
drop rate, bit packet error rate, and in-order delivery, among others.
However, in many cases, the trafﬁc of some applications and ser-
vices, due to their intrinsic characteristics, must have higher priority
over others in order to achieve desired performance. For example, IP
telephony applications may require strict limit on packet delay and
delay jitter, while video streaming applications may demand guar-
anteed bandwidth. Because the Internet or IP networks do not offer
QoS guarantees, it is very common for the data link layer and network
layer of some protocols to rely on higher layers for QoS provision-
ing on an end-to-end basis. For the network to provide QoS, special
trafﬁc engineering mechanisms must be implemented. In the mobile
computing arena, the need for QoS of mobile applications becomes

316
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
even more evident in resource-constrained settings where overpro-
visioning is not possible. Additionally, mobility support in a mobile
wireless network imposes another challenge on QoS provisioning.
This section discusses these QoS issues within the context of mobile
computing.
5.7.1
An Overview of QoS
Key elements of a QoS provisioning mechanism are listed as follows:
• Trafﬁc classiﬁcation and marking (the process of classifying trafﬁc
into a set of classes)
• Trafﬁc policing (the process of discarding trafﬁc that exceeds a
proﬁle)
• Trafﬁc scheduling and shaping (the process of controlling multiple
queues and possibly delaying or dropping some packets according
to some rules)
• Resource reservation and signaling protocols (the process of explicitly
reserving and allocating network resources such as bandwidth for
speciﬁc trafﬁc)
• Admission control (the process of deciding if a packet stream should
be allowed to enter a network)
The following is a list of three QoS mechanisms for wired networks:
• Differentiated services (DiffServ)
• Integrated services (IntServ) with resource reservation protocol
(RSVP)
• Multiprotocol label switching (MPLS)
DiffServ uses a portion of the type of service (TOS) byte, namely the
DiffServ CodePoint (DSCP), in the IPv4 header to deﬁne a set of trafﬁc
classes that will be treated differently by DS-compatible routers on a

Mobile Networking Challenges
317
per-hop basis. An autonomous domain consisting of DS-compatible
edge routers and core routers is a DS domain. Trafﬁc coming into a
network is classiﬁed, evaluated, and possibly shaped at the bound-
aries of the network and assigned to different behavior aggregates
identiﬁed by a single DSCP. The mapping rule between a user’s traf-
ﬁc and a DSCP ID is derived from the service-level agreement between
the user and the network service provider. Class-based queuing tech-
nique and various scheduling techniques can be used to implement
these sophisticated operations. Notice that these operations only take
place at the boundary of a network. Within the core of the net-
work, packets are forwarded according to the per-hop behavior (PHB)
associated with the DSCP.
A number of trafﬁc classes have been deﬁned in two PHB groups:
expedited forwarding (EF) and assured forwarding (AF). With a sin-
gle DSCP pattern, The EF PHB group primarily targets applications
requiring low delay and low delay jitter of trafﬁc. User trafﬁc that
complies with a proﬁle will be guaranteed to enjoy relatively better
performance than others. Out-of-proﬁle trafﬁc will simply be dis-
carded. The AF PHB group uses a total of 12 DSCP patterns, each
indicating a combination of trafﬁc class and a drop precedence.
Out-of-proﬁle trafﬁc may be delayed or have a lower probability of
delivery than that of in-proﬁle trafﬁc but may not necessarily be
dropped. The AF PHB group can be used for applications that require
better reliability than plain best-effort service. For example, the AF
PHB group could be used to implement so-called Olympic service,
which consists of three service classes: bronze, silver, and gold, with
increasing quality. Packets classiﬁed into different services are treated
by corresponding PHBs such that high-priority packets have a greater
probability for timely forwarding than low-priority packets.
DiffServ does not use any signaling mechanism for resource reser-
vation. QoS provisioning of DiffServ is based on relative priority of
trafﬁc classiﬁcation, rather then real performance metrics. It oper-
ates in the granularity of trafﬁc class instead of packet ﬂow, making it
scalable in providing QoS for a large number of user connections. On
the downside, end-to-end QoS is difﬁcult to achieve as a result of the
coarse service differentiation. The problem becomes more difﬁcult

318
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
when multiple DS domains under different administrations engage
in QoS provisioning.
IntServ is a ﬁnely grained QoS mechanism that operates at indi-
vidual trafﬁc ﬂows instead of trafﬁc classes. It utilizes RSVP to signal
network resource reservations for speciﬁc packet streams along a rout-
ing path. The ﬂow specs of IntServ deﬁne both trafﬁc speciﬁcation
and service request speciﬁcations. Two service classes in addition
to the best effort service have been deﬁned: guaranteed service for
delay-sensitive applications and controlled-load service for reliable
best-effort services.
According to the RSVP, to be able to utilize these two services
a sender must ﬁrst send a PATH message to the receiver before
data transmission. The PATH message contains characteristics of the
upcoming trafﬁc ﬂow. Intermediate routers receiving the PATH mes-
sage will forward it to the next hop determined by regular routing
protocols. When the PATH message reaches the receiver, it ﬁrst deter-
mines the appropriate resource needed for the ﬂow, such as dedicated
bandwidth and buffer space, and then sends an RESV message con-
taining the ﬂow spec to the sender. Depending on the admission
control routine, intermediate routers may either grant requested
resources to the ﬂow and forward the RESV message to the next
hop or reject the request and send an error message to the receiver,
which in turns terminates the resource reservation process. Clearly,
an IntServ router must maintain the ﬂow state for the duration of
the ﬂow.
IntServ essentially provides a simple resource reservation mech-
anism for the Internet, but it conﬂicts with a fundamental design
objective of the Internet: The network should operate at the packet
level rather than ﬂow level. Some ﬂow aggregation techniques have
been proposed to reduce the ﬂow states that must be maintained at
each router, but this again adds overhead to the underlying trafﬁc
and signiﬁcant complexity to participating routers. As a result, it is
generally agreed that IntServ works on a small-scale network but not
on a large scale.
Multiprotocol label switching (MPLS) was initially proposed as a
fast packet forwarding mechanism for wide area networks. MPLS uses

Mobile Networking Challenges
319
a label stack, a 32-byte ﬁeld called MPLS SHIM between the IP header
and link layer header, to identify the path — namely, the label switch-
ing path (LSP) — by which the packet will be forwarded to a MPLS
domain, as well as the QoS speciﬁcations of the packet. Within the
MPLS domain, traditional packet routing is replaced by much faster
label switching on a hop-by-hop basis, so MPLS does not provide an
end-to-end service guarantee.
Routers in an MPLS domain can be classiﬁed into label edge routers
(LERs) and label switching routers (LSRs) in the core of a network.
The LER operates at the edge of the access network and MPLS net-
work, classiﬁes a packet into a new or existing forward equivalence
class (FEC, not to be confused with forward error checking) accord-
ing to some service level agreement, and assigns a label to the packet.
Label distribution can be done by static conﬁguration or by employ-
ing dynamic signal protocols. In the latter case, LERs and LSRs work
together to distribute new labels in the MPLS using the label dis-
tribution protocol (LDP), RSVP, CR–LDP (constraint-based routing),
protocol-independent multicast (PIM), or border gateway protocol
(BGP). LSRs only perform label switching of the data trafﬁc based
on a locally maintained label table and the label stack of the packet.
Depending on the content of the topmost label in the packet’s label
stack, the LSR may perform one of three operations: swap, push, or
pop. The swap operation replaces the topmost label with a new one.
The push operation adds a new label to the label stack, and the pop
operation removes the topmost label from the label stack. After that,
the packet is forwarded to the appropriate next hop based on the
label table of the LSR. Notice that, during the process, the contents
of the packet, including source and destination addresses, are not
examined at all; instead, the MPLS label is used as an efﬁcient index
to a particular LSP.
It has been debated as to whether an ISP should begin to deploy
a particular QoS mechanism and supply such services to users in
conjunction with a service-level agreement. A principal barrier to
QoS deployment is that the Internet in itself is a collection of
self-administrative networks which makes interdomain service-level
agreement quite difﬁcult to achieve; hence, large ISPs do not see

320
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
an incentive to offer QoS. In reality, many ISPs that operate an IP
backbone network choose to simply provide more network capac-
ity (as known as overprovision) to avoid any packet loss and trafﬁc
degradation, largely due to the fact that the cost to deploy ﬁbers
has dropped in recent years. Some access network ISPs leverage
QoS techniques to impose resource limitations instead of provid-
ing QoS. The situation of slow QoS deployment may change when
more resource-intensive applications begin to surface and eventually
dominate network trafﬁc.
5.7.2
End-to-End QoS Support in Mobile Computing
Providing QoS in wireless networks is signiﬁcantly different and far
more challenging than in wired networks. QoS mechanisms desig-
nated for wired networks are not suitable for wireless networks, as
most of those solutions are based on some assumptions that cannot
hold in wireless networks. As in wired networks, QoS provision in
wireless networks is performed in one of two ways: resource reserva-
tion before trafﬁc begins to ﬂow or per-hop differentiated treatment
while the trafﬁc is ﬂowing in the network. In the ﬁrst case, a signal-
ing protocol over wireless links is required to build a path based on
the QoS speciﬁcations for the application in question. In the latter
case, the wireless data routing protocol must be augmented with QoS
support. In both cases, some fundamental differences between wire-
less and wired networks have created an array of challenging issues
in providing QoS in wireless networks and interconnected wireless
systems. Below is a brief summary of these issues:
• Link bandwidth on QoS — Wireless link bandwidth is much lower
than wired network bandwidth. In a cellular network, it is
extremely costly and even impossible to acquire more bandwidth
for data communication; hence, bandwidth overprovision is not
possible.
• Link quality on QoS — Wireless links, in contrast to wired network
links, are strongly affected by environmental factors such as rain

Mobile Networking Challenges
321
and lightening, as well as obstructions and other radio signals in
space. A low signal-to-noise ratio and high bit error rate are com-
monplace in wireless networks. Even worse, wireless link quality
is highly variable due to various changes in radio propagation,
mobility, and power supply. This in turns makes resource reserva-
tion difﬁcult to guarantee. This fundamental difference between
wireless links and wired links results in a natural principle of QoS
in wireless networks: The wireless link layer must be taken into
account.
• Mobility on QoS — Movement of a mobile device has a huge impact
on performing reliable and adaptive operations across several lay-
ers. During a handover, dynamic QoS management mechanisms
can be applied to discover the most appropriate base station to
which a mobile station should be linked. Mobility also brings
about topology changes and route advertisements in ad hoc net-
works, suggesting that QoS provision in such scenarios must be
adaptable to these frequent changes.
• Mobile devices on QoS — Due to the intrinsic limitation of mobile
devices, particularly battery life and form factor, QoS provision
over wireless networks of mobile devices must ensure low power
and highly effective operations on mobile devices.
Quality of service mechanisms in wireless networks address the
above-mentioned problems at different layers and even employ a
cross-layer design to add QoS support for various wireless circum-
stances. For example, because wireless links play a signiﬁcant role
in QoS provision in wireless networks, some proposed mechanisms
have focused on enhancing the link layers of different wireless net-
work protocol stacks to achieve QoS adaptation. As mentioned in
the previous chapter, the IEEE 802.11e standard introduced the
enhanced distribution coordination function (EDCF), which lever-
ages eight trafﬁc categories or service levels to provide link-layer
probabilistic service differentiation. The Maser device in a Bluetooth
piconet can take a similar approach to manage QoS across slave
devices in the piconet. As it turns out, link-layer QoS mechanisms

322
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
primarily target wireless access networks. The impact of mobility
and mobile device capability on QoS provision are being intensively
investigated with regard to routing protocols, group communication
methods, and topology control schemes, mainly targeting MANETs
as well as hybrid wireless systems.
Figure 5.12 shows an overall view of QoS provision in the
general context of mobile computing. Three scenarios are iden-
tiﬁed on the ﬁgure. First, link-layer QoS provision mechanisms
in a wireless access network provide service differentiation that is
transparent to applications. Thus, when the wireless access net-
work is connected to a wired backbone network via an access
router, it can be easily integrated into the QoS framework of the
wired network. Second, in a multi-hop ad hoc network, QoS rout-
ing protocols are able to ﬁnd a path that satisﬁes a given end-
to-end QoS requirement. Finally, ﬁxed wireless mesh networks, as
part of the mobile computing paradigm, also present interesting QoS
issues. In providing a complete end-to-end solution for QoS, QoS
Core Network
(Internet backbone or wireless
mesh network)
Wireless
Access Network
(Wireless LAN, Bluetooth,
GSM/CDMA with QoS
Support)
Wired
IP based Access Network
Ad Hoc Network
(Sensor network, wireless
LAN, or Bluetooth with QoS
Support)
Figure 5.12 QoS Provision in a heterogeneous wireless environment.

Mobile Networking Challenges
323
mechanisms for different scenarios must coordinate. Not surpris-
ingly, this is sometime an administrative issue rather than a tech-
nological issue. The following discussion addresses QoS mechanisms
in these three scenarios.
5.7.2.1
QoS in Wireless Access Networks
For wireless access networks (a cell controlled by a base station or
access point) to provide QoS, it is quite intuitive to adopt DiffServ
to the wireless and wired combined environment because DiffServ
does not require stateful signaling as is the case in IntServ, which
not only results in communication overhead and delay but also may
become ineffective when wireless link quality is largely affected by
environmental factors. Furthermore, in many cases it is meaningless
to absolutely guarantee a performance metric in a wireless network.
A statistical differentiation of wireless trafﬁc coupled with some per-
hop treatment seems a better approach. Therefore, a basic idea is to
use DiffServ in the core wired network that provides abundant net-
work resources and design a QoS mechanism for the wireless access
network that can be integrated into the overall DiffServ architecture.
As a component in the DiffServ network, the access router between
a wireless access network and the core network acts as the gateway
for all mobile nodes within the access network and performs QoS
management for the wireless access network. The access router may
implement an admission control or a signaling protocol that allows
mobile nodes to request network resources such as bandwidth for
egress trafﬁc. The access router then has the choice to determine
whether or not to grant the resource based on the SLA of the source.
Network level trafﬁc classiﬁcation, marking, policing, and shaping
can be applied to the access router according to the service level pro-
vision for an individual packet stream. (A dedicated router device or
a Linux-based host supporting advanced trafﬁc control can work as
the access router for QoS provision.) The layer 3 QoS approach can
be further augmented with link-layer scheduling schemes (also called
“over-the-air” QoS such as those deﬁned in the IEEE 802.11e stan-
dard) to reduce contentions and retransmission over wireless links,
a requirement for voice over wireless LAN applications. Because of

324
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
the nature of voice communication, voice trafﬁc in a wireless access
network has to be differentiated from data trafﬁc and treated differ-
ently at layer 2 before any layer 3 QoS mechanisms take effect. To
this end, wireless LAN chipmakers, such as Atheros and ViXS, and
access point manufacturers, such as AutoCell and Meru Networks,
have developed proprietary QoS solutions to support multimedia
streaming over wireless LAN.
Another function of the access router is to support QoS-aware
handoff with other access routers. When a mobile node moves from
one access network to another, the access router in the new access
network receiving the handoff request must check to see if sufﬁ-
cient resource can be granted to the incoming mobile node, based
on the mobile node’s QoS spec obtained from the access router of
its original network. If the handoff request is granted, the corre-
sponding QoS conﬁguration and state on the original access router
must be transferred to the new access router in charge. If the hand-
off request is denied, the mobile node may either resort to another
wireless network, if any, or simply accept degraded service from the
requested one.
5.7.2.2
QoS in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Node mobility and mobile node capability essentially make wired
QoS mechanisms inapplicable to MANETs. Constrained resources on
mobile nodes in MANETs generally cannot handle the processing,
storage, and communication overhead brought about by stateful
QoS mechanisms such as IntServ/RSVP. The mobility of MANET
further complicates these solutions by incurring higher communica-
tion overhead. On the other hand, DiffServ seems a better solution,
but it still must be modiﬁed because a MANET does not distinguish
between ingress nodes, core nodes, and edge nodes. Each node in
a MANET may assume one of three roles at any time for a particu-
lar packet stream and may assume more than one role for different
packet streams simultaneously. An example of this idea is the ﬂexible
QoS model for MANETs (FQMM) [40]. FQMM combines both IntServ
and DiffServ but with major enhancements for MANETs. As in nor-
mal DiffServ, packets are classiﬁed into classes that require different

Mobile Networking Challenges
325
service levels. The role of a mobile node in this model varies signif-
icantly over time depending on its operation for a packet stream:
transmission (ingress node), forwarding (code node), and reception
(egress node). Per-ﬂow QoS provisioning is only performed for traf-
ﬁc of the highest service level, thus ﬂow state management will be
limited to a small scale.
Node mobility also has a profound impact on QoS aware rout-
ing protocols for MANETs. Not only route reachability but also link
quality become highly variable and both of them must be taken into
consideration when selecting one or more paths if multi-path routing
is used. For a routing protocol to support QoS, a set of QoS parameters
should be encapsulated into route update messages as characteris-
tics of a wireless link. For example, the QoS version of AODV adds
a QoS extension of four parameters to Route Request (RREQ) mes-
sages before a route discovery is performed. The four parameters
are maximum delay, minimum available bandwidth, list of sources
requesting delay guarantees, and list of sources requesting bandwidth
guarantees. Along a path from the original source to the destination,
these ﬁelds are updated on a per-hop basis to reﬂect the current QoS
request. Only those nodes that meet the requirement of these param-
eters will take further action with the updated RREQ message. If a
local route cache (again, with updated QoS parameters) is available,
the node will send a Route Reply (RREP) back to the original source;
otherwise, the node will rebroadcast the updated RREQ message. The
QoS AODV also copes with link dynamics as a result of node mobility
or battery drain.
A node periodically broadcasts perceive QoS
parameters of its links in a “hello” message to direct neighbors. Any
time a node notices a change of link capacity or latency of its direct
links, it will notify all the nodes that may be affected by this change
with respect to QoS guarantee. The list of nodes can be obtained from
the two ﬁelds in cached RREQ messages: (1) list of sources request-
ing delay guarantees and (2) list of sources requesting bandwidth
guarantees.
A number of QoS routing protocols for MANETs make use of QoS
parameters in conjunction with the routing algorithms discussed in
Section 5.6.3. The fundamental design choice is to achieve a balance

326
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
between communication overhead incurred by the augmentation of
QoS support and the need for QoS provision toward building a glob-
ally optimized MANET. In some sense, power-aware ad hoc routing
can also be considered as a QoS routing problem.
5.7.2.3
QoS in Fixed Wireless Mesh Networks
A wireless mesh network is a special type of ad hoc networks. In a wire-
less mesh network, base stations are wirelessly connected to form a
mesh to provide wireless connections for mobile nodes. Each base
station acts as an access router in the wireless access network but
may have multiple wireless links to other base stations; however, the
backbone network is a ﬁxed wireless network rather than a wired net-
work. The problem of QoS provision in wireless mesh networks can be
decomposed into two related issues: QoS management at a base sta-
tion (e.g., the wireless broadband “last-mile”) and QoS management
in the backend mesh.
The ﬁrst issue can be addressed by adopting QoS solutions to the
wireless access networks described above (i.e., MAC layer service dif-
ferentiation). For instance, IEEE 802.16, a standard for broadband
wireless mesh networks (WiMax), speciﬁes a MAC protocol that
deﬁnes a variety of QoS parameters for packets ﬂows, including traf-
ﬁc priority, maximum and sustained rate, minimum reserved rate,
maximum latency, and tolerated jitter. These parameters are used
for QoS scheduling in the granularity of individual frames.
The second issue is not that easy to tackle because the backend
mesh is not as reliable as a wired network, and it is not as dynamic
as an ad hoc network. Although mobility is not a problem in this sce-
nario, those base stations have the capability to accommodate newly
deployed base stations and self-organize into a new mesh. As in a
MANET, QoS provision in a mesh network must include some signal-
ing scheme that performs network resource reservation for mobile
nodes served by a base station. In addition, routing protocols in
a wireless mesh network must also support QoS. In discovering an
appropriate path for a packet stream or a trafﬁc class, a base sta-
tion may choose to maintain a routing table with QoS extensions or
preconﬁgured with a set of per-class packet forwarding functions. It is

Mobile Networking Challenges
327
understandable that QoS provision in wireless mesh networks does
not seem to be viewed as a high-priority issue, as upstarts are more
focused on robustness, performance, and cost.
5.8 Summary
This chapter has examined a broad set of challenging issues in the
domain of mobile computing. Our emphasis is on the design issues
of the underlying heterogeneous networks. Mobile terminals such as
smart phones are also considered when a network service is deliv-
ered to the end unit. With regard to wireless networks, this chapter
has discussed network organization issues (heterogeneous network
integration, mobile next-generation networks, and ad hoc networks),
network service issues (QoS provision and routing protocols), and
network transport (wireless TCP). As wireless technologies continue
to emerge with new applications and services, it is undoubtedly
impossible to cover every aspect of the entire wireless arena. This
chapter has merely presented a glimpse into the latest development
of wireless technologies and has provided in-depth discussions of
selected topics regarding the utilization of fundamental computer
networking techniques and methodologies.
Major issues not addressed in this chapter are mobile security
and privacy. Indeed, as more and more mobile devices begin to
invade our daily life and people become increasingly dependent on
them, security and privacy issues are receiving tremendous attention
from both academic researchers and industry practitioners. The next
chapter talks about wireless data communication security, mobile
network security, and mobile privacy issues in a variety of wireless
environments.
Further Reading
3GPP IMS speciﬁcations, 3GPP TS 22.228 service requirements for the
Internet protocol (IP) multimedia core network subsystem (IMS),
stage 1, http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/22228.htm.

328
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Dynamic conﬁguration of IPv4 link-local addresses (Internet draft),
http://ﬁles.zeroconf.org/draft-ietf-zeroconf-ipv4-linklocal.txt.
For a comprehensive discussion of mobile ad hoc networks, refer to
G. Aggelou, Mobile Ad Hoc Networking, McGraw-Hill Professional,
New York, 2004.
For general QoS issues and solutions, see Z. Wang, Internet QoS: Archi-
tectures and Mechanisms for Quality of Service, Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, CA, 2001.
For Linux’s QoS support,
see Linux Advanced Trafﬁc Control,
http://lartc.org.
For QoS in IEEE 802.16/WiMax networks, see IEEE 802.16 MAC and
service
provisioning,
Intel
Technical
Journal,
http://www.
intel.com/technology/itj/2004/volume08issue03/art04_
ieee80216mac/vol8_art04.pdf.
For wireless sensor networks, refer to F. Zhao, Wireless Sensor Net-
works: An Information Processing Approach, Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, CA, 2004.
iCard and Secure Mobility Management at AT&T Labs, http://www.
research.att.com/areas/wireless/Mobile_Interdomain_Roaming/
Mobility_Management/internet_roaming.html.
IETF Mobile IP Charter,
http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/mip4-
charter.html; RFC 3344, IP mobility support for IPv4, http://
www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3344.txt; mobile IP regional registration,
http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-mip4-reg-tunnel-
00.txt.
IETF SLP (Service Discovery Protocol),
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc2608.txt.
Jini speciﬁcation, http://java.sun.com/products/jini/.
Multicast DNS, http://ﬁles.multicastdns.org/draft-cheshire-dnsext-
multicastdns.txt.

Mobile Networking Challenges
329
UPnP device architecture, http://www.upnp.org/resources/documents.
asp; SSDP, http://www.upnp.org/download/draft_cai_ssdp_v1_
03.txt.
References
[1] M. Buddhikot,
G. Chandranmenon,
S. Han,
Y. W. Lee,
S. Miller, and L. Salgarelli, Integration of 802.11 and Third-
Generation Wireless Data Networks, in Proc. INFOCOM ‘03,
2003.
[2] Network Working Group, RFC 3220: IP Mobility Support for IPv4,
2003 (http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3220.txt).
[3] M.
Jaseemuddin,
An
architecture
for
integrating
UMTS
and 802.11 WLAN networks,
in Proc. Eighth IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Computers and Communications,
July
2003.
[4] J. Ala-Laurila, J. Mikkonen, and J. Rinnemaa, Wireless LAN
access network architecture for mobile operators, IEEE Commun.,
39:11, November 2001, pp. 82–89.
[5] Unlicensed Mobile Access, UMA Stage 2 Speciﬁcation R1.0.3,
2005.
[6] H. Luo, Z. Jiang, B.-J. Kim, N. K. Shankaranarayanan, and
P. Henry, Integrating wireless LAN and cellular data for the
enterprise, IEEE Internet Comput., 7:2, March 2003, pp. 25–33.
[7] H. Luo, Z. Jiang, B. J. Kim, N. K. Shankar, and P. Henry, Internet
roaming: A WLAN/3G integration system for enterprise, in Proc.
Asia–Paciﬁc Optical and Wireless Communications: Wireless and
Mobile Communications II, Shanghai, China, 2002.
[8] O. Bar-Shalom, K. Chinn, and U. Gadamsetty, On the union
of WPAN and WLAN mobile computers and hand-held devices,
Intel Technol. J., 7:2003, pp. 20–36.

330
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
[9] N. Golmie, Bluetooth adaptive frequency hopping and schedul-
ing, in Proc. MILCOM ’03, Military Communications Conference,
October 2003.
[10] N. Golmie, N. Chevrollier, and O. Rebala, Bluetooth and WLAN
Coexistence: Challenges and Solutions, IEEE Wireless Commun.,
10:6, December 2003, pp. 22–29.
[11] J. F. Huber, Mobile next-generation networks, IEEE Multimedia,
11:72–83, 2004.
[12] R. Ramjee, K. Varadhan, L. Salgarelli, S. R. Thuel, S.-Y. Wang,
and T. L. Porta, HAWAII: a domain-based approach for support-
ing mobility in wide area wireless networks, IEEE/ACM Trans.
Networking, 10:396–410, 2002.
[13] V. Jacobson, Congestion avoidance and control, in Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM ‘88, 1988, pp. 314–329.
[14] A. Bakre and B. R. Badrinath, I-TCP: indirect TCP for mobile
hosts, in Proc. 15th International Conference on Distributed Com-
puting Systems, 1995.
[15] K. Brown and S. Singh, M-TCP: TCP for mobile cellular networks,
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Commun. Rev., 27:19–43, 1997.
[16] H. Balarishnan, V. N. Padmanabhan, S. Seshan, and R. H. Katz,
A comparison of mechanisms for improving TCP performance
over wireless links, IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking, 5:756–769,
1997.
[17] R. Ludwig and R. H. Katz, The Eifel algorithm: making TCP
robust against spurious retransmissions, Computer Commun.
Rev., 30:30–36, 2000.
[18] F. Hu and N. K. Sharma, Enhancing wireless Internet perfor-
mance, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, 4:1, 2002.
[19] H. Elaarag, Improving TCP performance over mobile networks,
ACM Comput. Surv., 34:357–374, 2002.

Mobile Networking Challenges
331
[20] M. X. Cheng, M. Cardei, X. Cheng, L. Wang, Y. Xu, and
D.-Z. Du, Topology control of ad hoc wireless networks for energy
efﬁciency, IEEE Trans. Computer, 53:12, 2004, pp.1629–1635.
[21] S. Meguerdichian, F. Koushanfar, M. Potkonjak, and M. B.
Srivastava, Coverage problems in wireless ad hoc sensor net-
works, in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’01, 2001.
[22] L. Hu, Topology control for multihop packet radio networks, in
Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’91, 1991.
[23] R. Ramanathan and R. Rosales-Hain, Topology control of multi-
hop wireless networks using transmit power adjustment, in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM ’00, 2000.
[24] N. Li, J. Hou, and L. Sha, Design and analysis of an MST-based
topology control algorithm, in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’03, 2003.
[25] V. Rodoplu and T. H. Meng, Minimum energy mobile wireless
networks, IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., 17:8, 1999, pp.1333–
1344.
[26] R. Wattenhofer, L. Li, P. Bahl, and Y.-M. Wang, Distributed
topology control for power efﬁcient operation in multihop
wireless ad hoc networks, in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’01, 2001.
[27] E. L. Lloyd, R. Liu, and M. V. Marathe, Algorithmic aspects of
topology control problems for ad hoc networks, in Proc. MobiHoc
’02, 2002.
[28] N. B. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Balakrishnan, The
Cricket location-support system, in Proc. Annual ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. on Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM ’00),
2000.
[29] L. M. Ni, Y. Liu, Y. C. Lau, and A. P. Patil, LANDMARC:
indoor location sensing using active RFID, in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. on Pervasive Computing and Communication (PERCOM ’03),
2003.

332
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
[30] D. B. Johnson, Routing in ad hoc networks of mobile hosts, in
Proc. IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applica-
tions, 1994.
[31] C. E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, Highly dynamic destination-
sequenced distance-vector (DSDV) routing for mobile com-
puters, in Proc. SIGCOMM ’94 Conference on Communications
Architectures, Protocols, and Applications, 1994.
[32] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, Dynamic source routing in ad
hoc wireless networks, in Mobile Computing, edited by Tomasz
Imielinski and Hank Korth, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996,
pp. 153–181.
[33] M. Jiang, J. Li, and Y. C. Tay, Cluster Based Routing Protocol,
IEEE Internet Draft,
http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/99mar/
I-D/draft-ietf-manet-cbrp-spec-00.txt, 1999.
[34] Y.-B. Ko and N. H. Vaidya, Location-aided routing (LAR) in
mobile ad hoc networks, in Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. on Mobile
Computing and Networking (MOBICOM ’98), 1998.
[35] P. F. Tsuchiya, The landmark hierarchy: a new hierarchy for
routing in very large networks, in Proc. SIGCOMM ’88, 1988.
[36] J. Li, J. Jannotti, D. S. J. D. Couto, D. R. Karger, and R. Morris, A
scalable location service for geographic ad hoc routing, in Proc.
Annual ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MOBICOM ’00), 2000.
[37] A. Qayyum, L. Viennot, and A. Laouiti, Multipoint Relaying:
An Efﬁcient Technique for Flooding in Mobile Wireless Networks,
Research Report RR-3898, INRIA, Rocquencourt, France, 2000.
[38] T. Camp, J. Boleng, B. Williams, L. Wilcox, and W. Navidi, Per-
formance evaluation of two location-based routing protocols, in
Proc. INFOCOM ’02, 2002.
[39] Y.-C. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. Johnson, Ariadne: a secure on-
demand routing protocols for ad hoc networks, in Proc. ACM/IEEE

Mobile Networking Challenges
333
Int. Conf. on Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM ’02),
2002.
[40] H. Xiao, W. Seah, A. Lo, and K. Chua, A ﬂexible quality of ser-
vice model for mobile ad hoc networks, in Proc. IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference, 2000.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

6
Mobile Security and Privacy
The phenomenal growth of the Internet has given rise to a variety
of network applications and services that are pervading our daily life
at a staggering pace. This trend is being boosted by myriad mobile
devices that essentially make it possible to access network resource
anywhere, anytime. In parallel, security and privacy issues have sur-
faced in almost every aspect of the mobile computing paradigm,
from wireless communication security to network denial of service
(DoS) attacks, to secure network protocols, and to mobile privacy.
Furthermore, the inherent characteristics of mobile computing have
imposed greater challenges on mobile security and privacy solutions
than on general wired network security approaches.
This chapter explores a wide range of mobile security and pri-
vacy issues, presents a big picture of this broad area, and offers
some insight into the fundamental security problems surrounding
the design of secured mobile wireless systems and applications. The
chapter begins with a security primer summarizing a set of basic
network security concepts and security schemes, followed by an in-
depth coverage of security issues in cellular networks, wireless LAN,
Bluetooth, and other emerging mobile wireless systems. When pre-
senting each topic, we introduce technical aspects of each problem
and discuss some proposed approaches for solving it. When possi-
ble, we then outline some real-world solutions to the underlying
problems. Readers will be able to quickly obtain a solid understanding
of key mobile security and the related privacy issues.
335

336
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
The security issues surrounding mobile wireless networks and
applications can be categorized as follows:
• Message conﬁdentiality
• Message integrity
• Message authentication
• Nonrepudiation
• Access control
When discussing differences between security and privacy,
we
consider this list to be comprised of security problems, whereas iden-
tity and location anonymity are topics relevant to mobile privacy.
6.1 Security Primer
Let us ﬁrst consider a typical scenario in a mobile computing
paradigm, where it is possible to use a mobile device (e.g., cell
phone, PDA, smart phone, laptop computer) to access a network ser-
vice using a variety of wireless communication technologies, such
as a wireless local area network (LAN) or cdma2000. This oper-
ation involves utilizing some type of hardware (i.e., the mobile
device being used), one or more wireless network devices, a back-
end wired or wireless network infrastructure, and software, such
as the application and supporting mobile operating system of the
mobile device, operational and management software on wireless
devices, and application software on destination servers. The sce-
nario becomes much more complicated when group communication
is being performed. Nevertheless, the fundamental question is how
we can secure the entire communication environment. This problem
can be approached from several different perspectives:
• End user’s perspective—An end user may use the mobile device for
many purposes, including online shopping, online banking, and

Mobile Security and Privacy
337
personal communication with friends and colleagues, or the end
user may utilize such services as online maps, weather forecasts,
or online gaming. Because in many cases sensitive information is
sent back and forth, the end user’s major concerns are likely to
include data conﬁdentiality and integrity, as well as authenticity
of the other party with which the user is connected.
• Service provider’s perspective—A service provider has to provide a
secure network infrastructure for various mobile applications and
services that directly interface to end users. This implies secured
communication over wireless networks and wired networks. The
service provider and the end user have to authenticate each other,
and the computing platform should guarantee that no informa-
tion will be divulged during the communication between them.
The service provider also has to protect the network infrastructure
against attacks.
• Employer’s perspective—Enterprise networks must be able to ensure
the security of corporate assets. This is particularly crucial when
the enterprise network provides both wired and wireless access.
A well-deﬁned, highly secured wired enterprise network may be
completely open to attackers if a wireless access extension to the
enterprise network is not secured. For example, a rogue access
point in an enterprise network may essentially provide a means
to bypass corporate ﬁrewalls and directly access network resources.
Many technical notions, terms, and technologies have been intro-
duced to address security problems in common network environ-
ments. Table 6.1 provides a brief summary of this terminology.
Depending on the nature of security problems encountered
in the mobile wireless world, they can be addressed in one or
more layers of the network protocol stack. Radio modulation tech-
niques such as FHSS (Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum, see
Chapter 3 for details) can be used to provide wireless signal trans-
mission security at the physical layer. Link encryption is often
used in wireless networks where an access point or master serves
as the gateway for everyone. Internet protocol security (IPSec) is

338
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 6.1
Security Terminology
Term
Description
Encryption
The transformation of some information (cleartext or plaintext) into a
form (ciphertext) that is only readable by intended recipients who
hold some decryption keys
Conﬁdentiality
A security function that ensures that no one except the intended
recipient who holds some key is able to obtain the message being
transferred between the sender and the recipient
Integrity
A security function that allows the intended recipient to detect any
modiﬁcation to a message from a sender performed by a third party
Authentication
A security function that enables veriﬁcation of the identity of a person,
a data object, or a system
Nonrepudiation
A security function that ensures that a message sender cannot deny a
message it sends previously
Cryptography
Mathematical foundations of security mechanisms facilitating the
four security functions: conﬁdentiality, integrity, authentication,
and nonrepudiation
Secret key cryptography
A type of cryptographic mechanism that enables the sender and the
intended recipient to use the same shared key for security functions
Public key/private key
cryptography
Another type of cryptographic mechanisms in which two keys are
used by an entity—a public key that is made available to anyone
and a private key derived from the public key and known only to
the owner and sometimes some trusted parties
Symmetric key
encryption
An encryption mechanism that allows the sender and recipient to use
the same secret shared key to encrypt and decrypt a message; also
called secret key encryption
Asymmetric key
encryption
An encryption mechanism in which the message sender uses the
intended recipient’s public key to encrypt a message and the
recipient uses his or her private key to decrypt it
Cipher
The mathematical algorithm that is used to encrypt cleartext
Message digest
Fixed-size output of a one-way hash function applied to a message of
arbitrary size
Message authentication
code (MAC)
A code of a message that is computed based on the message and a
secret key such that the intended recipient who holds the secret
key can verify the integrity of the message
Hash MAC (HMAC)
A MAC that is computed using a one-way cryptographic hash function
such as MD5 and SHA-1 and a key
continued.

Mobile Security and Privacy
339
Table 6.1
Cont’d
Term
Description
Digital signature
A code that is computed based on the message or a hash code of the
message and the private key of the sender such that anyone can
verify the integrity of the message using the sender’s public key;
the sender “signs” the message (digital signature is the public key
equivalent of MAC)
Digital certiﬁcate
A form of electronic certiﬁcate document issued by a generally trusted
certiﬁcate authority (CA) to certify someone’s public key; a dig-
ital certiﬁcate, signed by the CA, contains the owner’s identity,
the owner’s certiﬁed public key, the name of the issuer (the CA
that issued the digital certiﬁcate), certiﬁcate expiration date, and
some other information; a CA’s public key is often distributed with
software packages such as web browsers and e-mail software
Public key infrastructure
(PKI)
A public-key-based architecture that uses digital certiﬁcate signed by
a CA to create, manage, distribute, and verify public keys and their
associated identity information
Pretty good privacy (PGP)
A technique developed by Phil Zimmermann that uses asymmetric
key encryption for e-mail encryption and authentication between
two entities
Authorization
The process of granting and denying speciﬁc services to an entity
based on its identity and established policy.
an example of a network layer security mechanism. End-to-end
security can be addressed at the transport layer. Applications usu-
ally have to deal with user authentication and access control. This
chapter focuses on security solutions at the data link layer and
above which invariably leverage cryptographic principles as building
blocks.
A cryptographic system is the realization of a cryptographic
scheme or mechanism that can be integrated into a general com-
puter or network system to provide speciﬁc security services. The two
types of cryptographic system are symmetric key systems and asym-
metric public key systems. Symmetric key systems such as the Data
Encryption Standard (DES) and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)

340
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
use the same secret key for encryption and decryption, thus requiring
a secured way to distribute the key; for example, the Difﬁe–Hellman
key exchange protocol (explained later in Section 6.1.4) speciﬁes a
method for symmetric key distribution. In contrast, public key sys-
tems use two different keys for encryption and decryption: a public
key, which is known to public, and a corresponding private key, which
is known only to the owner of the key pair. The public/private key
pair generation algorithm ensures that it is mathematically impossi-
ble to deduce the private key based on a public key. An important
characteristic of public key cryptographic systems is that the two
keys are mathematically related in such a way that data encrypted
by a public key can only be decrypted using the corresponding pri-
vate key, and vice versa. Figure 6.1 depicts both symmetric key
cryptography and asymmetric public key cryptography. Public key
systems essentially provide a foundation for various security solu-
tions to the problems listed earlier. The basic idea of these approaches
is that a message from a sender can be encrypted using its private
key and the recipient can verify that the message is, in fact, from
Plain Text
K
Cipher Text
Encryption
Decryption
K
(a) Symmetric Key Cryptography 
K is the key
Plain Text
K1
Cipher Text
Encryption
Decryption
K2
(b) Asymmetric Key Cryptography
(K1,K2) is the key pair
Figure 6.1
Symmetric cryptography and asymmetric cryptography.

Mobile Security and Privacy
341
the sender (sender authentication). Conversely, by using the recip-
ient’s public key to encrypt data, the sender can be assured that
only the intended recipient is able to decrypt the scrambled data
(recipient authentication). As discussed below, very often a pub-
lic/private key pair is used in combination with other techniques to
provide secure communication during a session. In order to ensure
public key authenticity while it is being distributed in a network,
the public key infrastructure (PKI) can be used (explained later in
Section 6.1.3).
Public key cryptography was ﬁrst proposed in 1976 by Whitﬁeld
Difﬁe and Martin Hellman as an encryption scheme. Public key cryp-
tographic systems have been widely used to provide conﬁdentiality
and authentication between senders and recipients and to secure
transmission of some negotiated secret such as a session key) between
them. In the latter case, the cryptographic system is a hybrid system
combining both asymmetric cryptography and symmetric cryptog-
raphy. Popular public key cryptographic systems include RSA and
elliptic curve cryptography (ECC).
6.1.1
Ciphers and Message Conﬁdentiality
The ﬁrst issue in message security is to encrypt the message such that
no one except the intended recipient is able to recover the message
content. In the context of symmetric key cryptography, this is often
done by a block cipher using some secret key. A block cipher takes
a ﬁxed length of information (for example, a 128-bit block of cleart-
ext) and uses a secret key to produce ciphertext, usually of the same
length as the cleartext block. A block cipher also supplies a decryption
function that takes the cipher text and the secret key and then pro-
duces the original cleartext. For messages that are larger than block
size, a cipher may employ a particular mode to deal with the message.
A mode deﬁnes the way a cipher is applied to cleartext. An important
concept in data encryption is the well-known Kerckhoffs’ principle,
which states that an encryption scheme should be secure even if the
algorithm used is known to the public. This means that an attacker

342
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
is well aware of the algorithm and the ciphertext of a message but
not the secret key.
Asymmetric encryption algorithms use public/private key pairs for
encryption and decryption, thus they do not require the two par-
ties involved to share the same secret key. A good cipher should
make it computationally difﬁcult for an attacker to decrypt a mes-
sage without knowing the key (i.e., the shared secret key or the
private key being used for encryption). Popular symmetric block
ciphers are DES/Triple-DES and AES, whereas well-known asymmet-
ric ciphers include RSA and ECC. Generally, asymmetric ciphers are
much slower than symmetric ones in terms of encryption speed.
In addition to the common ciphers introduced below, a number
of technology-speciﬁc ciphers such as the A5 algorithm are used in
global system for mobile (GSM)/general packet radio service (GPRS)
systems. Following is a brief introduction to these ciphers:
• Data Encryption Standard (DES) and Triple-DES—DES uses a 56-bit
secret key to encrypt message blocks of 64 bits. There are 16 iden-
tical stages of processing, called rounds, and an initial and ﬁnal
permutation. The Feistel function determines how data are pro-
cessed throughout those rounds using carefully generated subkeys
for each round. DES has been a federal standard of data encryp-
tion for years but was ﬁnally superseded by AES in 2002, due to
its weakness of using short 56-bit keys. In fact, as a result of the
fast advancement in computing power, DES has been broken by
brute force attacks in one to two days with the help of some pow-
erful computers. Triple-DES is a relatively improved DES in that it
uses three DES operations sequentially to compute the ciphertext.
It performs a DES encryption, then a DES decryption, and then
a DES encryption again. Triple-DES is generally considered a bet-
ter cipher than DES. Its main drawback is computation overhead
incurred by the three DES procedures.
• Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)—AES has a ﬁxed block size
of 128 bits and a key size of 128, 192 or 256 bits. A data block
is organized into a 4 × 4 array, or state. AES may require 10 to

Mobile Security and Privacy
343
14 rounds of computation, depending on the key size. Because
many operations in a single round can be performed in parallel,
AES is comparatively easier to implement in both hardware and
software and can be done much faster than DES. The real name
of the cipher is Rijndael, a combination of the two designer’s
names: Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen. Rijndael was cho-
sen by National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to
be the government standard. As of this writing, no attack has
broken AES.
• Blowﬁsh and Twoﬁsh—Blowﬁsh is yet another block cipher devel-
oped by Bruce Schneier in 1993. It uses a key up to 448 bits over
blocks of 64 bits. Blowﬁsh has 16 rounds following the Feistel
function. Blowﬁsh is generally regarded as a compact and fast
replacement of DES. Twoﬁsh speciﬁes block size of 128 bits and
uses a key size up to 256 bits. Twoﬁsh also made it to the ﬁnal
list of the AES contest but lost to Rijndael. There is no reported
successful attack over Blowﬁsh and Twoﬁsh.
Other well-known block ciphers are CAST-128, CAST-256, RC5,
and RC6, among others. It is important to remember that, with regard
to data encryption on mobile devices, computational overhead
becomes a much more severe problem than on desktop comput-
ers; hence, while choosing a cipher to encrypt packets in a wireless
network, those ciphers with low overhead such as RC5 will be
advantageous.
In addition to block ciphers, another type of cipher is the stream
cipher. Unlike block ciphers, a stream cipher encrypts one bit or
one byte at a time. The two types of stream ciphers are synchronous
and self-synchronizing ciphers. Synchronous stream ciphers require
a key to produce a keystream, which in turn is used to compute the
ciphertext. The computation is done by XORing (exclusive OR oper-
ation) the keystream with the cleartext. Decryption follows in the
same manner. Self-synchronizing stream ciphers do not require a key.
Instead, they use some bits of the previous ciphertext to produce the
keystream. Stream ciphers are primarily used to secure network data

344
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
transmission where the cleartext is a stream of bits rather than a static
data block.
RC4 is the most widely used stream cipher, although it has been
shown that RC4 is not always secure. RC4 was designed by Ron Rivest
of RSA Security in 1987. RC4 (Rivest Cipher 4) is one of the four
ciphers that Rivest developed. In RC4, a variable-length key is ﬁrst
used to perform a permutation of one byte according to a key schedul-
ing algorithm. The result, along with two index pointers, is fed
into a pseudo-random generation algorithm (PRGA) to produce the
keystream, which will be XORed with the cleartext to obtain the
cipher. RC4 has been found to have serious vulnerability in the
key scheduling algorithm that in some special cases may enable an
attacker to recover the encryption key [1]. This weakness has been
leveraged by some researchers to break wireless equivalent privacy
(WEP) encryption, the security mechanism of IEEE 802.11b wireless
LAN which uses RC4 for data encryption. Details regarding this WEP
vulnerability are provided in Section 6.3.
Most commercial security software supports a list of block or
stream ciphers from which users can choose. A well-known open-
source cipher implementation is the libcrypto library in the OpenSSL
package (http://www.openssl.org/). Both Java and Microsoft .Net pro-
vide a package of these ciphers. In addition, they are also supported
in the mobile platforms J2ME and .Net Compact Framework. Crypto-
graphic schemes discussed in the rest of this section, such as hashing
algorithms, digital signatures, and digital certiﬁcates, are generally
supported by these libraries.
6.1.2
Cryptographic Hash Algorithms and Message Integrity
Aside from message conﬁdentiality, another security problem is how
to ensure message integrity—that is, how to protect data from being
modiﬁed between the two parties. One-way hashing was introduced
for this purpose. Simply put, a one-way hash algorithm, sometimes
referred to as a message digest algorithm, makes sure that any modiﬁ-
cation to a message can be detected. A cryptographic hash algorithm
or message digest algorithm in this regard must possess the following

Mobile Security and Privacy
345
security properties:
• Fixed-length output—Given any size of message, it must produce
a ﬁxed size result, which is the hash code.
• One-way—Given a message m and a hash algorithm h, it is easy to
compute h(m); however, given a hash code x and hash algorithm
h, it is computationally impossible to ﬁnd m such that h(m) = x.
• Collision resistance—Because a hash algorithm is effectively a map-
ping between a large code space to a considerably smaller code
space, collisions are bound to happen, meaning that brute force
attacks are theoretically possible. The challenge is how to ﬁnd col-
lisions within a reasonable amount of time, given a state-of-the-art
computing facility. The two types of collision resistance are strong
collision resistance and weak collision resistance. Strong collision
resistance means it is computationally impossible to ﬁnd two dif-
ferent messages that can be hashed into the same code, whereas
weak collision resistance means it is impossible to ﬁnd a message
that can be hashed into the same hash code of another given
message.
Depending on how a hash algorithm operates, the two types of
cryptographic hash algorithms are keyed and keyless. Keyed hash
algorithms take a message and a key to compute the hash code,
while keyless hash algorithms simply use the message to compute
the hash code. Keyless hash algorithms are used to detect modiﬁ-
cations to a message, assuming that the hash code of the original
message is correctly transmitted to the recipient. Because of the col-
lision resistance property, any change to the transmitted message can
be detected immediately; however a problem arises when an attackers
modiﬁes the intercepted message, generates a hash code, and sends
the tampered message and its hash code to the recipient. In this case,
a hash code produced by a keyless hash algorithm fails to ensure mes-
sage integrity. Message authentication code (MAC) algorithms solve
this problem by including a key (either a symmetric secret key or
the private key of the sender) in the computation of the hash code;

346
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
thus, attackers are unaware that the key cannot generate the correct
hash code for a modiﬁed message. Hash algorithms can also be used
in digital signatures (introduced in the next section). Following is a
list of widely used cryptographic hash algorithms:
• Message digests 4 and 5 (MD4 and MD5)—MD5 splits a message
into blocks of 512 bits and then performs four rounds of hashing
to produce a 128-bit hash code. MD4 is a weaker hash algorithm
that only performs three round of hashing. In August 2004, col-
lisions for MD5 were announced by Wang et al. [2]. Their attack
technique was reported to take only an hour; on a fairly power-
ful computer they were able to ﬁnd an alternative message for a
given message, yet both created the same hash code, proving that
MD5 is vulnerable to a weak collision attack. Using the same tech-
nique, they also devised a method to manually attack MD4 and
two other hash algorithms, HAVAL-128 and RIPEMD. MD5 is still
widely used in existing systems, ranging from digital signature to
ﬁle checksum; however, neither MD4 and MD5 should be consid-
ered for future systems due to the collision problem, especially for
systems utilizing MD5 to generate digital signatures and digital
certiﬁcates.
• Secure hash algorithm 1 (SHA-1)—SHA-0 was initially proposed in
1993 as a hashing standard by the National Security Agency (NSA)
and was standardized by NIST. Later, in 1995, SHA-0 was replaced
by SHA-1 after the NSA found a weakness in SHA-0. The weakness
was also discovered by Chabaud and Joux. Based on MD4, SHA-1
works on blocks of 512 bits and produces a 160-bit hash code.
SHA-1 adds an additional circular shift operation that appears to
have been speciﬁcally intended to address the weaknesses found
in SHA-0. The 160-bit hash code of SHA-1 may not be sufﬁciently
strong against brute force attacks. It has been reported that the
same team of Chinese researchers who broke MD5 has found a
way to signiﬁcantly reduce the computational complexity of dis-
covering collisions in SHA-1. As it turns out, the problem of SHA-1
is the hash code size. NIST published three SHA hash algorithms

Mobile Security and Privacy
347
that produce larger hash code: SHA-256, SHA-384, and SHA-512.
These hash algorithms are able to generate hash codes of 256 bits,
384 bits, and 512 bits, respectively. Not surprisingly, they are
signiﬁcantly slower than SHA-1.
• RACE integrity primitives evaluation message digest −160 (RIPEMD)—
RIPEMD-160 was developed in 1996 by Dobbertin et al. . It is an
improved version of the original RIPEMP, which was developed
in the framework of the EU project RIPE (RACE Integrity Primi-
tives Evaluation, 1988–1992). There are also variants of RIPEMD
supporting hash code length of 128 bits, 160 bits, 256 bits,
and 320 bits. RIPEMD collisions were reported in 2004 [2], and
RIPEMD is not used as often as SHA-1.
• Message digest and MAC (Message Authentication Code)—Message
digest ensures that if someone in the middle alters a message,
the recipient will detect it. On the sender side, the sender will
hash a message or a ﬁle (for checksum computation) to be down-
loaded using a one-way hashing algorithm (such as MD5 or SHA-1,
described above), attach the result (the message digest) to the mes-
sage, and send it out. Upon receiving the message, the recipient
will apply the same hash algorithm to the received message body
and compare the result with the received message digest. If they
match, the message has been transmitted intact; otherwise, the
message has been changed in some way on its way to the recipient,
and the recipient may simply reject the message.
If an attacker forges a hash code of modiﬁed message, the hash-
ing algorithm may utilize a cryptographic key as part of the input in
addition to the message being transmitted. More generally, a MAC
that is computed based on the message and a cryptographic key can
be used to guarantee message integrity. If the computation is done
using a hash algorithm, such a technique is referred to as HMAC,
which essentially uses a keyless hash algorithm and a key to imple-
ment the algorithm of a keyed hash algorithm. Well-known HMAC
algorithms include HMAC-MD5, HMAC-SHA1, and HMAC-RIPEMD.
MAC can also be computed using symmetric block ciphers such as

348
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
DES; for example, a message can be encrypted using the DES CBC
(Cipher Block Chaining) mode. The ciphertext can then be used as
MAC. Furthermore, to prevent tampering of the message digest itself,
the sender can encrypt the message digest using its own private key
so the recipient, with the sender’s public key at hand, can be assured
that this message has come from the sender. This scheme is referred
to as digital signature and will be discussed in the next subsection.
As a last note, an attacker may launch a message reply attack by
simply resending a number of legitimate messages previously cap-
tured. The recipient may be fooled by such legitimate messages.
To counteract these attacks, the sender can use a sequence num-
ber for each message that is contained in the integrity-protected part
of the message. The sequence number keeps increasing so replayed
messages will not be accepted.
6.1.3
Authentication
Common authentication mechanisms are digital signature, digital
certiﬁcate, and PKI, which are described in the following text.
6.1.3.1
Digital Signature
Digital signature is designed to assure recipients that the senders of
messages are really who they claim to be and the messages have not
been modiﬁed along the way. Similar to a signature in the real world,
the sender digitally signs a message, and the receipt is able to verify
the authenticity of the message by looking at the digital signature.
In other words, digital signature offers authentication of the sender
and message integrity.
Digital signing and veriﬁcation between two parties are conducted
as shown in Figure 6.2. The sender:
• Prepares cleartext to send (e.g., an e-mail or a packet).
• Hashes the data using a cryptographic hash algorithm to generate
a message digest; hashing is not reversible.

Mobile Security and Privacy
349
Message
MD
Hash
Digital
Signature
Encryption
Sender’s
Private Key
Message
Digital
Signature
Send to
Recipient
Message
Digital
Signature
Sender:
Recipient
MD
Hash
Decryption
Sender’s
Public Key
MD
Compare
Figure 6.2
Digital signature.
• Encrypts the message digest with the sender’s private key, which
generates the digital signature that uniquely identiﬁes the sender.
• Appends the digital signature to the original cleartext and sends
it to the recipient. Of course, the cleartext can be encrypted using
symmetric or asymmetric ciphers.
The recipient:
• Uses the sender’s public key to decrypt the digital signature; the
result is used in the next step.
• Hashes the received message body with the same algorithm used
by the sender.
• Compares the decrypted message digest with the computation
result from the previous step; if they are the same, the message
must be originated from the sender, and the message has not been
altered.
Now let’s see if an attacker can impersonate the sender. With-
out the sender’s private key, the attacker has no way to create a

350
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
valid digital signature for the message because on the recipient side,
after the message is hashed, the result will never be the same as the
result after decryption of the digital signature. On the other hand,
an attacker who chooses to tamper with the sender’s message body
will also fail, as the hash code of the received message will become
inconsistent with that carried in the digital signature.
6.1.3.2
PKI and Digital Certiﬁcate
Asymmetric cryptographic systems (introduced above) assume that
a party knows the other’s public key. A problem with public authen-
ticity is how someone holding the public key of someone else can be
sure that the key does, indeed, belong to that person. What if the dis-
tribution of pubic keys is not at all secure? For example, an attacker
could generate and publish bogus public keys of some victims.
The general architecture to address this issue is public key infras-
tructure (PKI). In a PKI system, the certiﬁcate authority (CA) has a
public key but its private key is not known to everyone in the sys-
tem. A single CA PKI is depicted in Figure 6.3a. To join the PKI system,
a user must generate his or her own public/private key pair and ask
the CA to certify the public key. The CA will then verify the identity
and the associated public key. The CA then signs a digital document
stating that the public key really does belong to the person in ques-
tion. This digital document is a digital certiﬁcate and should be sent to
a recipient whenever the person is about to communicate with some
party with public key encryption or digital signing. Because everyone
in the PKI system knows the public key of the CA, they can check the
authenticity of the certiﬁcate and thus the public key of the sender.
The certiﬁcate usually contains the owner’s identity, a signature of
the CA, and an expiration date. Table 6.2 shows common ﬁelds in a
digital certiﬁcate. The X.509 standard deﬁnes the format of a digital
certiﬁcate.
In reality, a PKI system is organized into multiple levels in a hier-
archy to distribute certiﬁcate generation and veriﬁcation among a
number of CAs, as shown in Figure 6.3b. On the top of the tree is the
root CA, who is trusted by every user and every other CA. In effect,
a chain-of-trust relationship can be established regardless of which

Mobile Security and Privacy
351
CA
Certificate
Certificate
CA
Certificate
Certificate
Root CA
CA
Certificate
CA
Certificate
Certificate
CA
CA
Certificate
(a) Single CA
(b) Hierarchical PKI
(c) Mesh PKI
Certificate
Figure 6.3
PKI architecture.
low-level CA a user selects, as those CAs can always ﬁnd a common
high-level CA within the hierarchy. Veriﬁcation is done in the same
way as DNS (Domain Name Server) resolution. For example, in a two-
level CA system, the public key certiﬁcate of a user consists of two
parts: (1) a message issued by a high-level CA to certify a low-level
CA and (2) a message issued by the low-level CA who will eventually
certify the public key of the user. This forms a trust chain of two CAs,
and path validation can be conducted. Thus, any party who elects
to receive a user certiﬁcate (as well as the certiﬁcate of the CA cer-
tifying the user certiﬁcate) must ﬁrst compute the public key of the
low-level CA serving that user and then obtain the user certiﬁcate. As
the number of levels increases, certiﬁcate veriﬁcation requires more
computation. A variance of hierarchical PKI is a trust list architec-
ture, in which some high-level CAs maintain a list of trusted CAs
in another hierarchy. A trust chain is therefore established with the
trust list instead of a root CA.

352
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 6.2
Field in a Digital Certiﬁcate
Field
Description
Version
Version number
Serial number
Unique ID of the certiﬁcate
Certiﬁcate signature algorithm
Encryption and hashing algorithms used to create the
signature in the certiﬁcate
Issuer
ID of the issuing CA
Validity
Duration for which the certiﬁcate is valid
Subject
Owner information
Subject public key info
Subject’s public key algorithm (RSA, for example) and
public key
Extensions
Additional information regarding the certiﬁcate
Certiﬁcate Signature Value
Signature of the CA
A third PKI architecture, mesh PKI, is shown in Figure 6.3c. There
is no publicly trusted root CA in a mesh PKI. A CA in a mesh PKI
may choose to trust a subset of other CAs. Users always trust the
CA issuing the certiﬁcates. Path validation of a user certiﬁcate may
involve a means to discover the path itself. A bridge CA can be used
to link a hierarchical PKI to a mesh PKI. It is not a root CA trusted by
everyone; rather, it serves as a common intermediate CA in a trust
chain.
6.1.4
Key Management
Key management refers to the process of creating, distributing, and
verifying cryptographic keys. It determines how an entity binds to
a key. Here, we introduce the Difﬁe–Hellman (DH) key exchange
protocol, RSA, and ECC.
6.1.4.1
Difﬁe–Hellman Key Exchange Protocol
The DH key exchange protocol provides a means for two parties
to agree on the same secret key over an insecure communication
channel. In its simplest form, each party send to the other a number
that is computed with a chosen secret number respectively. The same

Mobile Security and Privacy
353
secret key is thus determined based on the number received from the
other party; however, if the two numbers are transmitted over an
insecure channel, it is computationally difﬁcult for any third party
to recover the secret key. The DH key exchange protocol uses a pair
of publicly available numbers ( p and g) along with the user’s random
variables for the computation of a secret number. In this case, p is
a large prime number and g is an integer less than p, where p and g
satisfy the following property: For any number n between 1 and p−1
inclusive, there is a number m such that n = gm mod p. Each of the
two parties engaging in the DH key exchange protocol will ﬁrst gener-
ate a private random variable. Let’s say the variables are a and b. Each
party proceeds to compute ga mod p and gb mod p and they exchange
results. Then, the shared secret key (k) can be obtained by computing
k = [(gb) mod p]a mod p and [(ga) mod p]b mod p at each party.
Note that [(gb) mod p]a mod p = [(ga) mod p]b mod p = (gab)
mod p. No one other than the two communicating parties will know
a and b, so it is not computationally feasible to compute k using p, q,
and the two public values ga mod p and gb mod p.
Note that, although both sides are able to agree on a secret key,
there is no way for each of them to be sure that the other side is
indeed the person with whom they want to communicate, meaning
that no authentication is being performed during the key exchange
process. This opens up the protocol to a man-in-the-middle attack, in
which an attacker is able to read and modify all messages between the
two parties. Digital signature can be applied in this case to prevent
man-in-the-middle attacks.
6.1.4.2
RSA
Designed by Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adleman [3], RSA is a
public key algorithm that provides both digital signature and public
key encryption. RSA is the public key algorithm used in pretty good
privacy (PGP). Key generation in RSA is based on the fact that fac-
toring very large numbers is computationally impossible. RSA keys
are typically 1024 to 2048 bits long, much larger than the largest fac-
tored number ever. A message is encrypted using the public key of
the recipient. To decrypt the ciphertext, one must know the private

354
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
key corresponding to that public key. Given the public key and the
cipher text, an attacker must factor a large number in the public key
into two prime numbers so as to deduce the private key. In addi-
tion to message encryption, RSA also provides digital signature that
allows senders to sign a message digest using their private keys. Thus,
no one is able to forge a message from the sender unless he or she
knows the private key. RSA was patented in the United States in 1983;
the patent expired in 2000.
6.1.4.3
Elliptic Curve Cryptography
An alternative to RSA, elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) is another
approach to public key cryptography. It was independently proposed
by Victor Miller and Neal Koblitz in the mid-1980s. ECC is based
on the property of elliptic curve in algebraic geometrics. An ellip-
tic curve is deﬁned by a set of points (x, y) over a two-dimensional
space such that y2[+x · y] = x3 + a · x2 + b, where the term in the
square bracket can be optional. ECC allows one to choose a secret
number as a private key, which is then used to choose a point on a
non-secret elliptic curve. A nice property of an elliptic curve is that it
enables both parties to compute a secret key solely based on its pri-
vate key (the number chosen) and the other’s public key. The secret
key speciﬁc to these two parties is a product of those two private keys
and a public base point. A third party cannot easily derive the secret
key. NIST has published a recommendation of ﬁve different sym-
metric key sizes (80, 112, 128, 192, 256). ECC is generally used as an
asymmetric scheme that allows for smaller key sizes than RSA. The
drawback of ECC is the computation overhead associated with the
elliptic curve.
Key management in symmetric cryptographic systems poses a dif-
ferent problem. Using stream ciphers, communication between two
parties can be encrypted with a secret key only known to the two
parties. Naturally it would be better to allow the two parties to fre-
quently change the secret key to reduce the risk of message replay
attacks and cipher breaks. For example, the two parties may agree on
a new secret key for each new session between them. This secret key
is referred to as a session key. In a network environment where many

Mobile Security and Privacy
355
nodes have to communicate with others, a session key can be issued
by a trusted third party every time two nodes are about to communi-
cate. This simple scheme requires a node to have only one secret key
shared with the trusted third party, relieving it from maintaining a
secret key for every other node in the network. An example of such
systems is Kerberos (http://web.mit.edu/kerberos/www/).
As a last note in the authentication section, GSP/GPRS sys-
tems employ a technology-speciﬁc authentication mechanism (the
A3 algorithm) for authentication between a base station and a
mobile station. The A3 algorithm, along with the A5 encryption
algorithm and A8 key management algorithm, are introduced in
Section 6.2.
6.1.5
Nonrepudiation
Nonrepudiation refers to a security function of a system that produces
evidence to prove that an operation has been performed by an entity.
For example, a message recipient should hold a piece of electronic
documentation for the message such that the sender cannot deny
message transmission. Conversely, the sender must be able to show
that the recipient did indeed receive the message. Nonrepudiation
of origin proves that the message was sent, and nonrepudiation of
delivery proves that the message was received.
Nonrepudiation is generally considered a facet of the security func-
tion in electronic transaction settings, as neither sender nor recipient
can repudiate a transaction after it is committed. A digital signa-
ture appended to a message sent by a sender or an acknowledgement
generated by the recipient can be used to provide nonrepudiation.
In this case, the digital signature serves as the evidence for non-
repudiation of origin and delivery. Because only the owner of the
digital signature knows his or her private key, that person can-
not deny transmission of any messages signed by his or her digital
signature. One-time passwords are another scheme to realize the
nonrepudiation function.

356
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
6.1.6
Network Security Protocols
We have discussed security schemes for message conﬁdentiality,
message integrity, and message authentication. Those schemes are
generally used to secure a communication channel between two
parties. Another level of authentication is concerned with user
authentication (i.e., verifying the identity of an entity to prevent
unintended data access or impersonation). Recall that cryptographic
keys are invariably used in those message-centric security mech-
anisms. Now, let us assume that point-to-point communication
channels are secured and look at a network consisting of more than
two nodes in which user authentication is associated with proper
authorization with respect to data access. For example, in a typical
setting, a user elects to log-in to a system (a group of machines) in
order to read or write a ﬁle physically stored somewhere in the system.
A user must be authenticated against some security tokens managed
at a log-in server before the desired access is granted.
6.1.6.1
Password
Each account in a multiple-user system is assigned a password. Users
can change their passwords but must obey some password creation
guidelines to avoid the use of passwords that are too simple. For any
network security protocols, cleartext passwords should never be sent
over a network. This is the reason why the once popular Telnet pro-
tocol has been abandoned in today’s networks. On a log-in server,
users’ passwords are usually hashed. A good password policy should
force a user to change passwords once in a while. In addition, other
means of human identity can be used to replace passwords. Recent
developments in biometrics suggest that ﬁngerprints, voices, faces,
and irises can be utilized to identify humans with much better secu-
rity. The term biometrics refers to systems and techniques that make
use of features of a person’s body for veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation.
Features of a person include ﬁngerprint, facial pattern, hand geome-
try, iris, retina, voice pattern, and signature. Biometrics systems are
further discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 (Mobile Application
Challenges).

Mobile Security and Privacy
357
6.1.6.2
Challenge and Response
For challenge and response schemes, the log-in server of a system
sends a random message (the challenge) to a user who is willing to
authenticate the system. The user applies a security function to the
challenge and sends the result back to the log-in server, which per-
forms the same security function and compares its results with that
from the user. The challenge and response scheme can be applied in
various settings. For example, it can be used to implement a one-time
password, in which each password becomes invalid right after it is
used. Additionally, the security function itself can be the secret. In
effect, no password is transmitted over the network, and the messages
subject to interception are different every time, thereby reducing the
likelihood of success of an eavesdropping attack.
6.1.6.3
Kerberos
Kerberos (http://web.mit.edu/kerberos/www/) is a secret-key-based
network authentication protocol (Figure 6.4). The name Kerberos
comes from Greek mythology (Kerberos was the three-headed dog
that guarded the entrance to Hades). Kerberos can be viewed as a
distributed authentication service that allows a computer program
AS
(Authentication
Server)
TGS
(Ticket Granting
Server)
Alice
Bob
(1)(2)
(3) (4)
(5)
(6)
(1) Alice is authenticated by AS
(2) AS generates TGT (Ticket Granting
Ticket)
(3) Alice sends TGT and her identity
encrypted by the session key to TGS
(4) TGS verifies Alice’s request and then
generates a new session key for
communication between Alice and Bob, and a
service ticket for Alice to pass to Bob.
(5) Alice sends the service ticket to BOB and
identity encrypted by the new session key.
(6) Bob verifies Alice’s identity with the
service ticket 
(7) Alice and Bob start to communicate using
the new session key
KDC (Key Distribution Center)
(7)
Figure 6.4
Kerberos (version 5).

358
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
(a client) running on behalf of a principal (a user) to prove its identity
to a veriﬁer (a server). In the heart of Kerberos is the key distribution
center (KDC), which consists of two logically independently com-
ponents: an authentication server (AS) and a ticket-granting server
(TGS). A user (Alice) who wants to communicate with another user
(Bob) must ﬁrst be authenticated by the AS. To do this, Alice must use
her secret key (e.g., her password) to encrypt a challenge sent from
the AS. The AS generates a ticket-granting ticket (TGT), which is com-
prised of (1) a session key encrypted by Alice’s secret key (password)
for the upcoming communication between Alice and the TGS and (2)
a secured temporal credential used to identify Alice’s request to the
TGS encrypted by the TGS’ secret key (which is unknown to Alice)
and the session key. Alice then sends the TGT along with an authen-
ticator (i.e., Alice’s identity encrypted by the session key of Alice and
the TGS) to the TGS. It is the TGS that eventually generates a session
key for the upcoming communication between Alice and Bob, after
verifying the data in the ticket and the authenticator. At the same
time, a service ticket (encrypted by Bob’s secret key) for Alice to pass
to Bob is also generated.
Finally, Alice sends the service ticket and a corresponding authen-
ticator (her identity encrypted by their session key) to Bob, who
veriﬁes if the identity in the service ticket and Alice’s authentica-
tor match. If yes, Bob and Alice can begin to communicate with the
session key. If Bob is a log-in server of a network system such as in
a Windows domain, Kerberos is used to authenticate a user to access
shared resources in the network. Kerberos relies on time-stamps and
lifespan parameters to prevent message replay attacks. This requires
clock synchronization among the participating machines.
6.1.6.4
Internet Protocol Security
Internet protocol security (IPSec) is a suite of protocols and mech-
anisms that collectively provide message conﬁdentiality, message
integrity, and message authentication at the IP layer. Depending on
whether end systems support IPSec, an IP packet can be delivered
in one of the two modes: transport mode or tunnel mode. In trans-
port mode, the IP payload is secured in terms of message integrity

Mobile Security and Privacy
359
IP Header
AH Header
TCP Header
Data
IPSec AH in
Transport Mode
New IP Header
AH Header
IPSec AH in
Tunnel Mode
IP Header
TCP Header
Data
IP Header
TCP Header
Data
Original IP
Packet
IP Header
ESP Header
TCP Header
Data
IPSec ESP in
Transport Mode
ESP Trailer
ESP Auth
New IP Header
ESP Header
TCP Header
Data
IPSec ESP in
Tunnel Mode
ESP Trailer ESP Auth
IP Header
Figure 6.5
IPSec.
and authentication when the authentication header (AH) protocol
is used or conﬁdentiality when the encapsulating security payload
(ESP) protocol is used; but the IP header is not protected. In tunnel
mode, a new IP header is used, followed by the encrypted IP packet.
IPSec provides ESP and AH protocols for message security, as
shown in Figure 6.5. The AH protocol determines how an IPSec sys-
tem uses the AH header, which is a hash code of all immutable ﬁelds
in the IP packet, for message integrity and origin authentication. In
contrast, the ESP protocol provides message conﬁdentiality in addi-
tion to message integrity and authentication. In transport mode, an
ESP header is inserted after the original IP header, and the original
IP payload is encrypted. In tunnel mode, a new IP header is used for
tunneling, followed by an ESP header and by the encrypted IP packet.
In both cases, message integrity and authentication are provided by
an ESP authentication ﬁeld appended to the end of the packet.
In addition, the Internet key exchange (IKE) protocol is supplied
for symmetric key management. The IKE protocol is a hybrid of
three key management protocols: Internet Security Association and
Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP), Oakley, and SKEME (Versa-
tile Secure Key Exchange Mechanism for Internet). These protocols

360
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
work together to allow dynamic negotiation of cryptographic keys
using the DH key exchange algorithm. IPSec is widely used to imple-
ment virtual private networks (VPNs), which enable secure access to
a remote network via the public Internet.
6.1.6.5
Secure Socket Layer
Unlike IPSec, which works at the IP layer, secure socket layer (SSL)
and its successor, transport layer security (TLS), are network security
protocols at the transport layer. SSL and TLS support any connection-
oriented application layer protocols such as HTTP (HyperText Trans-
port Protocol), LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol), IMAP
(Internet Message Access Protocol), and NNTP (Network News Trans-
port Protocol). In reality, SSL and TLS are mainly used in conjunction
with HTTPS protocol to secure communication between a web server
and a web client, and TLS is being increasingly used with other appli-
cation protocols such as POP3 (Post Ofﬁce Protocol 3) and SMTP
(Simple Mail Transfer Protocol). The default HTTPS port number on
a SSL-enabled web server is 443. SSL requires a server certiﬁcate such
that the server can be authenticated by a client or a browser accord-
ing to an RSA public/private key encryption scheme. Subsequent web
trafﬁc is encrypted with a 128-bit or longer session key generated by
a symmetric cipher such as DES, 3DES, RC2, or RC4. SSL can also be
used to authenticate the client, in which case the client must obtain
a public/private key pair and a digital certiﬁcate.
6.1.7
General Considerations of Mobile Security and Privacy
Mobile security and privacy essentially possess sets of unique char-
acteristics that separate them from wired network security, such as
open-air transmission of wireless signals, comparatively low comput-
ing power of mobile devices, high error rate of wireless signal trans-
mission, security management for mobility, and location-sensitive
security concerns. The need for security is much stronger than in
wired networks, yet to build a secure mobile wireless system one
must address a variety of constraints unique to the mobile wireless

Mobile Security and Privacy
361
environment. Some security solutions such as those cryptographic
ciphers and security network protocols may not be applicable to
a mobile computing environment. For example, computationally
intensive ciphers may not work on mobile devices, and in many
cases the stable network connection required by many network
authentication schemes is not always available.
Even if some security mechanisms can be ported to a mobile wire-
less system, they must be enhanced with sophisticated components
so as to provide conﬁdentiality, integrity, authentication, and non-
repudiation in highly varying mobile wireless settings. In addition,
many network protocols are designed without security in mind and
must be augmented with security considerations. For example, rout-
ing protocols in ad hoc networks must offer some security to prevent
eavesdropping and message tampering. The following is a list of
threats in mobile wireless networks:
• Loss and theft of mobile devices—Every year hundreds of thousands
of mobile devices are lost in airports, hotels, restaurants, etc. This
is probably by far the most serious threat to enterprise data and
individual privacy.
• Channel eavesdropping—An attacker may capture messages trans-
mitted in a wireless channel without being detected.
• Identity masquerading—An attacker may impersonate a legitimate
user or service provider.
• Message replay—An attacker may capture a series of messages
between two parties and send them to someone later.
• Man-in-the-middle attack—An attacker may intercept and modify
messages being sent between two parties or inject new messages
without being detected.
• Wireless signal jamming and interference—An attacker may use
powerful antennas to transmit noisy signals with appropriate
modulation in order to disrupt the normal operation of radio
receivers.

362
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Denial of service—An attacker may use rogue access points, mobile
stations, or speciﬁc frequency jamming devices to generate a huge
amount of network trafﬁc toward a target computer.
• War-driving and unauthorized access—An attacker may use special
radio equipment to pinpoint unsecured wireless access points in
an area while driving around. Those unsecured wireless LANs,
many of which are linked to corporate networks, are wide open
to unauthorized users.
• Virus and wireless spamming—Small, malicious programs may
propagate among mobile device users via short message service
(SMS) messages or the wireless Internet. SMS spamming could be
another big issue, as subscribers have to pay for that.
In the following sections, security issues in speciﬁc wireless net-
works are discussed in detail.
6.2 Cellular Network Security
As more mobile applications are being delivered to cell phone users,
the security mechanism employed by underlying traditional cellular
systems must be redesigned to adapt to various new network set-
tings. Moreover, because of the extensive use of cell phones and smart
phones, a security breach or a network attack may have an enormous
impact on every aspect of the modern society, far beyond the scope
of the Internet. Emerging cellular systems have provided the means
to secure wireless data transmission and e-commerce transactions, in
addition to providing a more general authentication, authorization,
and accounting (AAA) solution.
6.2.1
Secure Wireless Transmission
Data transmission in a cellular network can be categorized as user
trafﬁc or signaling trafﬁc. Four security issues with regard to cellular
trafﬁc are user trafﬁc conﬁdentiality, signaling trafﬁc conﬁdentiality,
user identity authentication, and user identity anonymity. For user

Mobile Security and Privacy
363
trafﬁc between subscribers and the back-end system, encryption is
necessary to ensure conﬁdentiality. Aside from radio layer frequency
hopping modulation and code-division multiple access (CDMA)
coding schemes, GSM/GPRS, CDMA, universal mobile telecommuni-
cations system (UMTS), and cdma2000 all employ some encryption
for user trafﬁc to achieve end-to-end security. For user authentica-
tion, authentication schemes generally utilize some sort of identity
module on the cell phone. We use GPRS and CDMA as examples to
show how end-to-end security is implemented in cellular networks.
GSM/GPRS (later Third Generation Partnership Project, or 3GPP)
deﬁned an encryption protocol based on an A5 algorithm (GEA3 for
GPRS), an authentication protocol based on an A3 algorithm, and a
cryptographic key management protocol based on an A8 algorithm.
Table 6.3 provides a summary of these algorithms.
In a GSM/GPRS network, a subscriber is identiﬁed by a unique
international mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) stored in the sub-
scriber identity module (SIM) module along with the handset (the
phone). The SIM module also has a secret key (Ki) associated with the
IMSI. On the network side, IMSI and its Ki are stored in an authen-
tication center (AuC). The subscriber authentication is carried out in
a challenge-and-response fashion, whereby a random number as a
challenge is generated and sent to the mobile station by a serving
GPRS service node (SGSN). The mobile station uses its Ki to produce
a code as the response according to the A3 algorithm. The encryption
key (Kc) is derived from the same random number and Ki by the A8
Table 6.3
GSM/GPRS (3GPP) Security Algorithms
Type
Algorithm
Description
Key management
A8
Uses a 128-bit RAND and a 128-bit Ki to produce a 64-bit Kc.
Challenge and
response
authentication
A3
Uses 1280-bit RAND (the challenge) and a 128-bit authentica-
tion key Ki (allocated during user subscription) to produce
32-bit expected response SRES. Implemented on MS SIM
and HLR or AuC.
Symmetric
encryption
A5
Uses 22-bit COUNT (TDMA frame number) and 64-bit cipher
key Kc to produce 140-bit cipher blocks on both BSS and
MS for encryption and decryption, respectively.

364
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
algorithm. On the mobile station, this is performed by the SIM mod-
ule. Data and voice trafﬁc is encrypted using Kc by applying the A5
algorithm, a stream cipher. It is said that the Kc is 40 bits long, but
no ofﬁcial document reveals its actual length. When the mobile sta-
tion moves around, a temporary mobile subscriber identity (TMSI)
is issued by the network to track the mobile station. Whenever a
mobile station changes its associated mobile switching center (MSC),
it will obtain a new TMSI that is only valid within the location area
of the MSC in charge. A TMSI is encrypted with Kc as part of a TMSI
reallocation request message and sent to the mobile station. After
applying the A5 algorithm with Kc, the mobile station then con-
ﬁrms reception of the TMSI by replying with a TMSI reallocation
conﬁrmation message. Thus, the TMSI reallocation process is again
a challenge-and-response scheme.
The
universal
mobile
telecommunications
system
(UMTS)/
wideband CDMA (WCDMA) improved GPRS mobile security by
introducing large cipher keys of 128 bits and providing data integrity.
Signaling messages and data messages are protected by a KASUMI
block cipher protocol that uses the 128-bit cipher key. The same algo-
rithm generates a 64-bit message authentication code to ensure data
integrity. Unlike proprietary algorithms used in GSM/GPRS, KASUMI
is publicly available for cryptanalytic review.
The Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has formed a
working group TSG SA (i.e., Technical Speciﬁcation Group: Services
and Systems Aspects) WG3 Security responsible for the investiga-
tion of security issues, and setting up security requirements and
frameworks for overall 3GPP systems. The SA WG3 has published
a number of technical speciﬁcations (TSs) and technical reports (TRs)
of security issues ranging from 3G security threats to cryptographic
algorithm requirement and speciﬁc algorithms to 3GPP and wireless
LAN Internet security.
cdma2000 1x uses a 64-bit authentication key (A Key) and an elec-
tronic serial number (ESN) to derive two encryption keys for signaling
messages and data messages, respectively. The encryption algorithm
is AES. Cdma2000 1x EVDO uses a 128-bit A Key derived from a DH
key exchange. The authentication protocol in cdma2000 networks is

Mobile Security and Privacy
365
Table 6.4
CDMA Security Algorithms
Type
Algorithm
Description
Key management
Cellular
authentication
and voice
encryption
(CAVE)
Uses a 64-bit reprogrammable authentication
key (A Key, allocated with the handset); the
electronic serial number (ESN) and a home
location register (HLR)/authentication cen-
ter (AC)-generated random number are used
to derive a 128-bit subkey called the shared
secret data (SSD), known to the mobile sta-
tion and its MSC.
Challenge and
Response
Authentication
CAVE
Uses SSD- and MSC-generated random number
(the challenge) to produce an 18-bit authen-
tication signature and a key to replace a
well-known value used for voice encoding.
Symmetric Encryption
Cellular message
encryption
algorithm
(CMEA), ORYX,
and AES
Uses 64-bit CMEA key derived from part of SSD
for signaling message encryption. ORYX is a
stream cipher for data messages.
cellular authentication and voice encryption (CAVE). Table 6.4 shows
a summary of algorithms in CDMA networks. The 128-bit SSD gener-
ated by the CAVE algorithm has two equal-length parts: SSD_A and
SSD_B. Using CAVE with SSD_A and a random number (the chal-
lenge) generated by the MSC, a mobile station is able to generate an
18-bit authentication signature (the response) and send it to the base
station. A mobile station also uses SSD_B to generate a secret key that
will be used to scramble the voice. In addition, using the CAVE algo-
rithm, a mobile station can also generate a 64-bit CEMA key and a
32-bit data key. The CEMA key is used to encrypt signaling trafﬁc,
and the data key is used to encrypt and decrypt data trafﬁc.
Authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) are an inte-
gral part of 3G cellular systems. In cdma2000, AAA functionalities
are provided by home AAA servers and visited AAA servers along with
other mobile IP components. The packet data service node (PDSN)
(foreign agent) in a visited network forwards usage data of a mobile
station to the home AAA, possibly through a broker AAA. In UMTS,

366
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
the CN has a home agent and an AAA server. Using serving GPRS
service nodes (SGSNs) and gateway GPRS support nodes (GGSNs) as
gateways, a mobile station’s visited AAA server can communicate
with its home AAA server for usage updates, roughly the same proce-
dure as for location updates with the exception that the data being
transmitted are related to AAA functions.
6.2.2
Secure Wireless Transaction
Mobile applications are primarily deployed in a heterogeneous net-
work environment in which wireless and wired networks, secured
enterprise networks, and wide open home wireless networks coexist
and interconnect. One cannot count solely on wireless commu-
nication security even though the underlying wireless network is
highly secure. Higher layer (network layer or beyond) security mech-
anisms are invariably required when user trafﬁc is exposed to the
unsecured Internet or wireless networks fail to provide the desired
security functions. In the following, the wireless transport layer secu-
rity (WTLS) and WAP (Wireless Application Protocol) identiﬁcation
module (WIM) of WAP and IPSec or SSL VPNs are introduced as the
most widely used security protocols on today’s mobile devices. Note
that they can also be used in other wireless networks, such as wireless
LANs and Bluetooth.
6.2.2.1
Wireless Transport Layer Security
Wireless transport layer security (WTLS), as deﬁned in WAP 2.0, pro-
vides message conﬁdentiality, message integrity, and unidirectional
or mutual authentication at the transport layer. It is logically identi-
cal to SSL/TLS but has been adapted to the wireless environment.
Message encryption is performed using RC4, DES, and triple-DES
or 3-DES. Message integrity is guaranteed using HMAC. Authenti-
cation is based on PKI, using RSA, ECC, or DH. A WAP server (also
called WAP gateway) uses a WTLS certiﬁcate, a particular form of
X.509 certiﬁcate. A WAP client may also use a digital certiﬁcate
obtained from a CA for authentication, although it is uncom-
mon. The following is a description of session establishment for the

Mobile Security and Privacy
367
case when the WAP server must be authenticated (class 2 service
of WTLS).
When a client and a server begin a handshake, they ﬁrst exchange
two random numbers in the “hello” messages. When the public key
of the server has been veriﬁed with a certiﬁcate, the client sends
a pre-master secret key encrypted by the server’s public key. This
pre-master secret key and the random numbers exchanged will be
used on both sides to compute a 160-bit master secret key. For data
encryption, an encryption key block is calculated based on the master
secret key, a sequence number, random numbers exchanged, and a
string indicating the party of the calculation. This key block will be
eventually used to derive encryption keys for an algorithm such as
RC4, DES, or triple-DES that has been negotiated during the “hello”
message exchange.
WTLS speciﬁes keyed hashing algorithms such as SHA-1 and
MD5 for the computation of MAC over compressed data.
For
mobile devices with limited computing power, a light overhead
SHA_XOR_40 algorithm is also provided in earlier version of WTLS.
The key used during MAC computation, also known as the MAC
secret, is also derived from the encryption key block. In order to make
denial-of-service attacks more difﬁcult to accomplish, the WTLS spec-
iﬁcation suggests that a WAP server should not allow an attacker
to break up an existing connection or session by sending a single
message in plaintext from a forged address.
Figure 6.6 depicts the WTLS architecture. At its heart is the
record protocol, which interfaces with the wireless datagram protocol
(WDP) and the wireless transport protocol (WTP) and is responsi-
ble for data encryption and integrity veriﬁcation. The handshake
protocol deﬁnes the negotiation of cryptographic parameter such
as algorithms, authentication schemes, and compression methods.
When the negotiation is complete, the change cipher spec protocol
is performed, indicating that the party is ready to use the negotiated
mechanism. After that application, data can be exchanged according
to the application data protocol.
An earlier version of WTLS is not secure, as researchers have
found some security problems [4]. For example, in WTLS predicable

368
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
HP (Handshake
Protocol)
AP (Alert Protocol)
CCP (Change
Cipher Spec
Protocol)
ADP (Application
Data Protocol) 
WTLS
To WTP (Wireless
Transaction Protocol)
To WDP (Wireless
Datagram Protocol) 
Record Protocol
Figure 6.6
WTLS architecture.
initialization vectors (IVs) may lead to encryption key breach, and
the SHA_XOR_40 algorithm does not provide message integrity if
stream ciphers are used. In light of these problems, the latest ver-
sion of WTLS (version 06-Apr-2001) has made signiﬁcant changes;
for example, the SHA_XOR_40 algorithm has been removed.
6.2.2.2
WAP Identiﬁcation Module
In order to seamlessly integrate WAP into an e-commerce environ-
ment, a WAP client must be authenticated with respect to mobile
device identity. A tamperproof WIM module can be embedded into
a WAP client device for this purpose. It could be a component of the
SIM card or an external smart card containing the following informa-
tion: a public/private key pair of the device for signing and another
pair for authentication, manufacturer’s certiﬁcates, and user certiﬁ-
cates or their URLs. A WIM module implements the WTLS class 3
service, allowing the WAP client associated with it to be authen-
ticated. This class of service speciﬁes that, in addition to server
authentication during the handshake, the client must generate a dig-
ital signature using one of its public/private key pairs stored in the
WIM module, enabling nonrepudiation of client messages.
As a similar wireless web platform, iMode also provides SSL-based
server authentication, message encryption and integrity. Because

Mobile Security and Privacy
369
iMode is a proprietary architecture, details of its security mechanisms
are not publicly available. Other wireless web platforms have been
developed by Japanese companies, such as EZWeb (KDDI) and J-Sky
(J-Phone). Although internals of those systems are not revealed to
the public, it is commonly believed that they offer the same set of
security services based on SSL or TLS.
6.2.2.3
IPSec/SSL VPNs
IPSec/SSL VPNs are widely used in mobile wireless networks to allow
for secure remote network access. These protocols are transparent to
the underlying radio technologies used for wireless communication.
As long as a network is IP based, theoretically IPSec will work without
a problem, although in reality there are some problems with respect
to the nature of wireless transmission and mobility. For example, a
VPN tunnel may be interrupted during handoff. Unlike IPSec VPNs,
which provide secure access to a network, SSL VPNs enables secure
remote access to an application inside a network.
Mobile VPN is particularly useful when a mobile device is used by
a salesperson, ﬁeld engineer, or other type of mobile worker wishing
to remotely access an enterprise network via the Internet. A mobile
VPN, based on either IPSec or SSL, could solve the problem. Aside
from a VPN client on the mobile device, a VPN gateway must be
set up for client authentication and data encryption/decryption. A
problem with using VPN is related to U.S. export control on cryp-
tography, which basically imposes strict control over the export of
cryptographic software and hardware for national security consid-
erations. Strong cryptographic systems such as 128-bit key VPNs
are not allowed to be exported unless certain licenses have been
obtained. Worldwide corporate networks are at risk when VPN clients
in overseas ofﬁces use 40-bit encryption.
Aside from these two protocols,
smart phones running an
advanced operating system such as Windows Smartphone allow for
normal SSL to be used within a mobile web browser. It is expected that
higher layer security protocols will be directly ported onto relatively
powerful mobile devices such as smart phones.

370
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
6.3 Wireless LAN Security*
Because more cell phones and smart phones are being equipped with
Wi-Fi interfaces, related security problems of IEEE 802.11 wireless
LANs have become a hot topic, especially after numerous serious
vulnerabilities of wired equivalent privacy (WEP), the security mech-
anism of 802.11, were discovered. Understandably, when the 802.11
wireless LAN standard was developed, security was apparently not a
top priority. The “wired equivalence” design rationale essentially led
to some earlier versions of wireless LAN security solutions that clearly
failed to deliver security functions they were supposed to provide.
Many Wi-Fi products in use are based on these ﬂawed protocols and
mechanisms. Fortunately, the IEEE 802.11 working group has offered
several new standards with enhanced security. Wireless LAN prod-
ucts often incorporate enhanced security as an option in addition to
wide-open conﬁgurations. For example, WAP has been required in
all new Wi-Fi certiﬁed products since 2004, and WPA2 (for 802.11i)
was required for Wi-Fi certiﬁcation beginning in 2005.
Security risks in wireless LANs include eavesdropping, unautho-
rized access, masquerading, man-in-the-middle attacks, denial of
service (DoS), and rogue access points:
• Eavesdropping—Eavesdropping is highly possible because the cov-
erage of wireless signals is quite difﬁcult to determine, and anyone
within the range with an appropriate interface will be able to pick
up the signal and intercept ongoing data transmissions at will.
Weak encrypted signals can be cracked with modest effort. Power-
ful tools such as AirSnort and Kismet made wireless eavesdropping
on unsecured wireless LANs much easier.
• Unauthorized access—Unauthorized access happens when a home
or enterprise wireless LAN operates in default conﬁguration mode,
which permits anyone to use its Internet access as well as other
resources shared in the network.
* Here, we use the most popular wireless LAN standard (IEEE 802.11) for discussion.

Mobile Security and Privacy
371
• Masquerading—Many wireless LANs use wireless adaptor’s MAC
address (physical address) as ﬁlters. Thus, attackers may masquer-
ade themselves by spooﬁng MAC addresses. This can be done in
conjunction with eavesdropping.
• Man-in-the-middle attacks—Wireless LANs are designed to allow
an access point to authenticate a station but not the other way
around; hence, a station cannot be sure that the access point in
question is what it claims to be. Attackers may pretend to be an
access point sitting between a station and a real access point to
intercept, modify, and forge packets.
• Denial of service ( DoS)—DoS is very common on the wired Internet.
Many machines are organized to attack a single website, making it
unable to service legitimate users. In wireless LANs, attackers may
use rogue APs, their own stations, or other non-802.11 spectrum
jammers to send a large amount of forged 802.11 management
or control frames or broad-spectrum noise. The IEEE 802.11 MAC
protocol also has been shown to be vulnerable to DoS attack [10].
• Rogue access points—Due to the ease of network setup and conﬁg-
uration, one may quickly build a small insecure wireless LAN and
make it work instantly by connecting it to the wired back-end;
hence, the entire wired network may become insecure because of
the rogue wireless LAN.
6.3.1
Common 802.11 Security Myths
In practice, wireless LANs are often wide open without any access
control or simply employ a MAC-based (here MAC refers to the
adapter’s physical address) access control list (ACL) to authenti-
cate legitimate mobile stations. An ACL is essentially a list of MAC
addresses that are permitted to access the network. Those data frames
not originating from legitimate MAC addresses will be rejected by
the access point without going through further authentication. As
in a wired LAN, a MAC address in a frame header is always trans-
mitted in cleartext regardless of encryption method in use, allowing

372
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
anyone to gather a list of MAC addresses of stations associated with
an access point. An attacker can forge data frames that use those
authorized MAC addresses and gain access to the network; therefore,
contrary to common belief, the MAC base access control solution
does not solve the problem.
Another common security myth associated with 802.11 is the use
of extended service set identiﬁer (ESSID). Because an ESSID identi-
ﬁes an access point, many believe that by disabling beacon messages
containing the ESSID of an access point an attacker will not be able to
determine the ESSID and thus cannot associate to the access point. In
fact, this does not prevent an attacker from getting the ESSID because
it is still sent in probe messages when a client associates to an access
point; also, many wireless LANs use default, well-known ESSIDs.
Given the fact that a large number of wireless LAN access points
are being used and there is no effective way to prevent wireless LAN
signals from traveling far, it is tempting to get free access to adja-
cent wireless LANs while walking, driving, or even ﬂying by using
appropriate wireless LAN equipment. In an effort to detect wireless
LANs in a regional area, some people have been intensively engaged
in activities known as war walking, war driving, and war ﬂying
[5]. In all cases, a PDA or a laptop computer with a wireless LAN
interface and a global positioning system (GPS) receiver, a handy soft-
ware tool such as Net Stumbler (http://www.netstumbler.com/) or
Air Magnet (http://www.airmagnet.com/), and an optional high-gain
antenna are all it takes to produce a so-called wireless access point
(WAP) map of access points, either secured (using WEP/WPA/WPA2
or higher layer security measured) or unsecured. With a powerful
antenna, a war driver could be many miles away from the physi-
cal location of a wireless LAN yet still manage to pick up its signals.
Figure 6.7 is a Wi-Fi map of Seattle made by students at the University
of Washington (http://depts.washington.edu/wiﬁmap). The dots in
the ﬁgure represent 802.11 access points (secured and unsecured)
within reach of the war drivers. Unsecured wireless LANs detected
by war driving not only offer war drivers a free ride on the Inter-
net but also invite attackers to obtain remote access to a network
without being ﬁltered by ﬁrewalls or detected by intrusion-detection
systems.

Mobile Security and Privacy
373
Figure 6.7
A Wi-Fi map of Seattle, WA (Courtesy of University of Washington.)
6.3.2
WEP Vulnerability
The service set identiﬁer (SSID)-based access control indeed does not
offer any security functions. Besides, it is common sense that wireless
communication should be encrypted and properly authenticated.
WEP is the ﬁrst security mechanism for wireless LANs. A shared secret
key of 40 or 104 bits is used by all participating stations within a BSS
(Basic Service Set)bounded to the same access point. The encryption
algorithm is RC4. For every packet sent between a station and the
associated access point, a 32-bit integrity check value (ICV) is com-
puted according to a CRC-32 algorithm. Then RC4 uses a 64-bit key
to encrypt the data and the ICV. The encryption key is composed
of a 24-bit randomly generated initialization vector (IV) and a 40-bit
shared secret key, as shown in Figure 6.8a. Using the 64-bit encryp-
tion key, the pseudo-random generation algorithm (PRGA) of RC4
computes a keystream, which will be XORed with a plaintext mes-
sage (see Figures 6.8b and c). To let the other party know the IV,
it is added to the encrypted payload data as part of the packet (the
ciphertext), as shown in Figure 6.8d.

374
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Wired equivalent privacy (WEP) is known to have numerous secu-
rity problems. The ﬁrst problem is the lack of key management, such
as the DH key exchange protocol. The secret key must be distributed
by other means of communication and is subject to social engineer-
ing attacks, where attackers trick legitimate users of a system in order
to obtain passwords, addresses, or other sensitive information. As the
network grows, more stations must be informed of the same secret
IV
Key
ID
Data
ICV
24 bits
8 bits
32 bits
>= 1 byte
Encrypted with RC4
IV
Shared Secret Key
24 bits
40 bits
(a) WEP Encryption Key
(d) An Encrypted Message
Data
ICV
(c) Plaintext Message
Computed using PRGA and WEP Encryption Key
(b) RC4 Keystream
XOR
=
Figure 6.8
WEP encryption.

Mobile Security and Privacy
375
key, and it would be quite cumbersome to change the secret key for
security reasons. Very often the secret key is not secret any more after
some time.
The second problem with WEP is the 24-bit IV. Because each packet
transmitted has an IV, it is possible that the same IV will be used
again after some time. (The code space of IV will exhaust after 224
packets have been sent.) On the other hand, RC4 has been found
by Fluhrer et al. [1] to have a severe weakness in its key scheduling
algorithm; when an encryption key is constructed by the above-
mentioned method, an attacker will be able to derive the 40-bit secret
part of the encryption key by analyzing those packets that share the
same encryption key (secret key + IV) [1]. This attack is referred to as
the FMS attack. It has been shown that a WEP key can be cracked in
a matter of several hours.
The third problem with WEP is the CRC-32 algorithm used to
calculate the ICV [7]. CRC in itself is a simple mechanism for detect-
ing random errors; it was not designed to detect deliberate data
falsiﬁcation. In fact, it has been shown that it is possible to mod-
ify the encrypted payload of an 802.11b message without disrupting
the checksum (ICV). Furthermore, the CRC-32 algorithm does not
involve any keying function, such as HMAC. Thus, an attacker who
knows a keystream that corresponds to an IV can safely inject forged
packets into the BSS.
6.3.3
802.11 Authentication Vulnerabilities
The IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN speciﬁcation deﬁnes two authentica-
tion modes: open and shared key authentication. The default open
authentication imposes no authentication on a station that wants
to communicate with the access point. In the shared key mode, a
challenge-and-response scheme is used. Upon receiving an authenti-
cation request from a station identiﬁed by its MAC address, the access
point responds with a 128-byte randomly generated challenge text in
cleartext. The station then encrypts the challenge text with a shared
key using RC4 and sends the result back to the access point. The
access point uses the same shared key to decrypt the response. If the

376
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
decrypted value matches the challenge text, the station is authen-
ticated and can proceed to send and receive messages in the BSS;
otherwise, the station is rejected.
As mentioned earlier, the problem of this authentication mech-
anism stems from RC4, stated in a paper by Fluhrer et al. [6].
An attacker who obtains a large number of challenge-and-response
authentication sequences corresponding to WEP encryption keys
(the same IV) can easily deduce the keystreams produced by RC4
by leveraging those weaknesses described in the previous section.
From that point, the attacker can authenticate himself to the access
point by correctly responding to any challenge texts using the
keystream without knowing the shared secret key. Even worse, with
the keystream, the cleartext of those messages being analyzed can
be revealed by simply XORing the ciphertext against the keystream,
exactly
the
same
operation
that
the
associated
access
point
should perform. Using tools such as WEPCrack (http://wepcrack.
sourceforge.net/) or AirSnort (http://airsnort.shmoo.com/), it would
not take long to crack a WEP key.
6.3.4
802.1X, WPA, and 802.11i
To address the security issues of WEP, one method suggested is to
build security overlay on top of the insecure wireless LAN. VPN is
often used in practice. 802.11i, which was complete in 2004, was
designed to address wireless LAN security issues. 802.1X is a security
standard for a more general LAN environment. The Wi-Fi protected
access (WPA) protocol has been developed by the Wi-Fi Alliance as an
interim solution for 820.11i; hence, 802.11i includes WPA features
and some new features, such as AES, CCMP (see discussion below),
preauthentication, and key caching for fast handoff.
The IEEE 802.1X standard enables port-based mutual authen-
tication and ﬂexible key management in an IEEE 802 local area
network. It DOES not specify a single authentication method but
uses the extensible authentication protocol (EAP) as the underly-
ing authentication framework to support various authentication
methods such as smart cards, one-time passwords, and certiﬁcates.
When an unauthenticated supplicant (a client) attempts to connect

Mobile Security and Privacy
377
to an authenticator (a wireless access point), the authenticator opens
a port for the supplicant to pass only EAP authentication messages
to the back-end authenticator server, which could be, for example,
a remote dial-in user service (RADIUS) server. Initially designed for
authentication and authorization of dial-in modem access, RADIUS
as a protocol (standardized in RFC 2058) has been augmented to
facilitate any form of secure remote access with respect to authen-
tication, authorization, and accounting. The supplicant submits its
identity to the authentication server, which makes the decision as to
whether or not the supplicant should be granted access to the LAN.
The authentication server will send either “accepted” or “rejected” to
the authenticator. If the result is “accepted,” the authenticator will
change the client’s port to an authorized state, meaning that the port
can be used to pass any other additional trafﬁc. As shown in Figure
6.9, 802.1X can be integrated with an existing AAA infrastructure
such as RADIUS to provide user-based centralized authentication.
Wireless protected access (WPA) is an interim solution to wire-
less LAN security that is required by the Wi-Fi Alliance. WPA is
backward compatible with WEP in place on widely deployed wire-
less LAN devices; WPA only requires software or ﬁrmware upgrades
to existing systems. Each station using WPA will use a differ-
ent 128-bit encryption key for RC4 data encryption, which can
be “refreshed” frequently. The protocol enabling these features is
Authenticator
(Access Point)
Authentication Server
(e.g., Radius Server)
Wireless
Network
Wired Network
EAP over LAN
or WLAN
Supplicant
(client)
Accept/Reject
EAP message with
client’s identity
Figure 6.9
802.1X in a wireless LAN setting.

378
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
temporal key integrity protocol (TKIP). Key elements of TKIP are
listed as follows [8]:
• Michael—Michael is a message integrity code (MIC) algorithm that
uses a 64-bit key, called the MIC key, to produce a 64-bit tag
(a MAC) for a packet, in addition to ICV. Michael is designed to
impose dramatically lowered computational overhead on a mobile
station than are other MAC algorithms.
• Per-packet key mixing—TKIP employs a key mixing function that
takes the base WEP key, source MAC address, and packet sequence
number as inputs and produces a new 128-bit WEP key for each
individual packet. The mixing function is carried out in two
phases to reduce computational overhead.
• Packet sequencing—Each packet has a 48-bit sequence number,
which will be further used to compute the encryption key. This
feature defeats message replay attacks.
WPA adopted IEEE 802.1X to provide both authentication and key
management. For enterprise networks where a separate AAA server
such as a RADIUS is in place, WPA can be integrated with the AAA
server for authentication and key distribution. In WPA and WPA2-
Enterprise (WPA2 is the product certiﬁcation available through the
Wi-Fi Alliance for 802.11i compatible products. Both WPA and WPA2
have two authentication modes: Enterprise and Personal), the AAA
server authenticates individual users and then delivers per-session
pairwise master keys (PMKs). In WPA and WPA2-Personal, all stations
and the AP have the same pre-shared secret key (PSK) used for both
group authentication and PMK. In both cases, the PMK is not used
for encryption; it is mixed with the station’s MAC and an IV to derive
a pairwise temporal key (PTK), which in turn will be used to deduce
the AES encryption key.
The encryption key and MIC key used by TKIP are derived from
a master key generated by 802.1X. Frequent key changes enabled
by 802.1X allow the encryption key and MIC key used by the TKIP
to be refreshed every once in a while, thus reducing the risk of key

Mobile Security and Privacy
379
breach due to eavesdropping. Created by the Wi-Fi Alliance, WPA is
supported by a large number of devices vendors.
Because WPA serves as a quick patch to WEP, it effectively makes it
more difﬁcult to compromise a wireless LAN. The downside of WPA
is that it is rather complicated to implement, which could give rise to
more security risks. It is also not efﬁcient to introduce an additional
MIC key other than the encryption key and use both ICV and MIC
for message integrity. Unlike WPA, 802.11i is designed to provide a
long-term solution to 802.11 security. Like WPA, it employs 802.1X
as the underlying authentication mechanism. Other key features of
802.11i are:
• Countermode–CBC–MAC protocol (CCMP)—Like TKIP, CCMP
provides message conﬁdentiality and integrity but uses AES as the
cipher instead of RC4. The cipher block chaining message authen-
tication code (CBC–MAC) protects both header and data integrity.
The 128-bit encryption key is also used for computation of the
64-bit MAC. The IV is still 48 bits.
• Pairwise key hierarchy—802.11i does not compute an encryption
key for each packet; instead, the same PMK generated by the
802.1X authentication procedure is used for all packets during an
association. PMK is ﬁrst used to derive a PTK by the access point
and the station after proper handshakes between them. The AES
encryption key is further deduced from PTK.
• Key caching and preauthentication—A user’s credentials are kept on
the authentication server; thus, when the user leaves and returns
shortly, it is not necessary to prompt the user for log-in informa-
tion; the reauthentication is done transparently. Preauthentica-
tion enables a station to be authenticated to an AP before moving
to it. Both schemes are designed to speed up authentication in
supporting fast handoff.
It should be noted TKIP is also part of 802.11i, but it should only be
considered as a short-term solution. Table 6.5 presents a comparison
of the three security protocols for 802.11 wireless LAN.

380
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
Table 6.5
802.11 Security Protocols Comparison
WEP
WPA
802.11i
Stage
Initial
security
mechanism;
insecure
Intermediate solution
(a snapshot of
802.11i taken in
2002)
Long-term solution
(completed
in 2004) (WPA2
certiﬁes 802.11i
products)
Encryption
algorithm
RC4
Enhanced RC4
AES
Key length
40 bits
128 bits refreshable
128 bits
Key
management
None
802.1x EAP
802.1x EAP
Message integrity
CRC-32
Michael
(including
header)
CCMP
(including
header)
Logical
equivalence
None
802.1X + TKIP + RC4
802.1X + CCMP +
AES
6.4 Bluetooth Security
As a simple personal area network (PAN) solution, Bluetooth has
become the de facto standard interface on cell phones and PDAs.
People use Bluetooth to transmit ﬁles between a mobile device and a
desktop computer or between two Bluetooth-enabled devices. Blue-
tooth earphones enable voice over Bluetooth channels within a short
range. Even though the Bluetooth signal can travel only a very
limited distance (usually less than 10 m), there are still security
issues with respect to data conﬁdentiality and authentication. The
Bluetooth SIG (Special Interest Group) has incorporated a security
architecture into the ofﬁcial Bluetooth speciﬁcation.
6.4.1
Bluetooth Security Architecture
Recall that the Bluetooth speciﬁcation deﬁnes a number of “pro-
ﬁles” for different types of typical usages, such as dial-up networking
proﬁle, fax proﬁle, headset proﬁle, LAN access proﬁle, ﬁle transfer
proﬁle, and synchronization proﬁle. Each proﬁle has been speciﬁed

Mobile Security and Privacy
381
with a set of protocols suitable for those applications falling into
the proﬁle. In providing security for various applications, the Blue-
tooth SIG has deﬁned a number of proﬁle security policies, each of
which speciﬁes recommended baseband security options and proto-
cols for different usage models and proﬁles. Aside from frequency
hopping, the basic Bluetooth baseband security mechanisms are list
below:
• Challenge-and-response authentication—If device A wishes to be
authenticated by device B, device B will send a 128-bit random
number (RAND) to device A upon being requested to do so by
device A, which uses a 128-bit secret authentication key (link
key), RAND, and its 48-bit device address (BD_ADDR) to com-
pute a response according to an algorithm called E1. When the
response is received at device B, device B performs the same com-
putation and compares the result with the response. If they match,
then device B is authenticated. Bluetooth devices in a piconet of
multiple devices use a shared link key for mutual authentication
between two devices. The same link key is also used to derive the
encryption key.
• Per-packet encryption using E0—Bluetooth devices may use an
encryption key of length 4 to 128 bits, subject to an individual
country’s regulations. The encryption key is generated by an E3
algorithm each time the device enters encryption mode. Because
communication is always between a slave and a master, the mas-
ter should initiate the encryption sequence by sending a RAND
to the slave. On the slave side, it performs the E0 algorithm
that takes the encryption key, the device address of the mas-
ter, current clock value, and RAND to compute a keystream. The
keystream is then XORed with the packet payload to produce to
ciphertext.
In a Bluetooth piconet, a session refers to the period of time
a devices stays in a piconet. A link key can be either a semiper-
manent key or a temporary key, depending on the application.

382
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
A semipermanent link key allows a device to use the same link key
to connect to other devices in a piconet after a session is over. This
is useful when some devices must communicate frequently once in
a while. A temporary link key is valid only within a session and will
be discarded when the session is over. For different scenarios, four
different types of link keys are deﬁned. Below is a summary of these
keys and when they should be used:
• Combination link key is used for each new pair of Bluetooth devices
if they decided to use this type of link key. The procedure to estab-
lish a combination link key between two devices is called pairing,
in which both devices generate a random number and use it to
produce a key. They then exchange those random numbers and
compute the combination key. It is used for multiple connections
from a single device.
• Unit link key is speciﬁc to a single device and is stored in non-
volatile memory. It is used in installation or when the device
is ﬁrst activated and is never changed afterwards. A device can
use another device’s unit key as a link key. Which link key
should be used is determined during initialization. It is used for
communication between two trusted devices.
• Master link key is a temporary link key generated by a master device
to replace the current link key. It is used for point-to-multipoint
communication such as a master broadcasting to its slaves.
• Initialization link key is generated using a shared PIN code and
device address. The PIN code must be entered to both devices. It is
used only to protect initialization parameters transmission when
no other keys are available during Bluetooth pairing.
Bluetooth security proﬁle policies have provided general recommen-
dations as to what protocols and algorithms as well as keys should
be used in different settings. For speciﬁc applications, however,
care must be taken to ensure that desired security functions or
countermeasures to possible attacks are implemented.

Mobile Security and Privacy
383
6.4.2
Bluetooth Weakness and Attacks
The use of a PIN code during pairing presents some security risks [9].
The length of a PIN can be between 8 and 128 bits. It could come
with the device or can be selected by the user. Prior to link key
exchange, an initialization key will ﬁrst be computed, which in
turn uses the PIN code. An attacker may make an exhaustive search
over all possible PINs up to a speciﬁc length. To verify its guess,
the attacker only needs to eavesdrop on the communication chan-
nel between two victims to capture random numbers in cleartext
and perform the initialization key algorithm. When the PIN code
is obtained, the attacker can compute the initialization key and
the link key. Eventually, the encryption key can also be obtained,
and the communication between those two devices is completely
compromised. For this reason, longer PIN codes are strongly sug-
gested by the Bluetooth SIG. An even better countermeasure to PIN
attacks is to conduct initialization of two devices in a private and
closely secured environment where no wireless communication can
be eavesdropped.
The nature of the Bluetooth technology allows mobile device
manufacturers to choose a set of conﬁgurations optimized for a spe-
ciﬁc application model. Although this does offer some ﬂexibility to
mobile device manufacturers and effectively promote the technol-
ogy, it also results in security risks to some extent because in some
cases security mechanisms are not well implemented or not taken
into account, even if the security building blocks are clearly spec-
iﬁed in Bluetooth speciﬁcation. The ﬁve types of attacks targeting
Bluetooth implementation problems are:
• Bluesnarﬁng
• Bluebugging
• Bluejacking
• Back-door attack
• Virus and battery draining attack

384
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
In a Bluesnarﬁng attack, an attacker uses modiﬁed Bluetooth equip-
ment and directional antennae to capture data from some Bluetooth
devices that could be a mile away. The weakness being leveraged in
this case is a default insecure mode enabled by some mobile device
manufacturers (see below for details). After successful Bluesnarﬁng,
everything on the device is exposed to the attacker.
In a Bluebugging attack, an attacker may remotely control a Blue-
tooth device, intercepting or rerouting communication without a
trace. Bluesnarﬁng and Bluebugging attacks are mainly targeting
cell phones with a Bluetooth interface. They usually require the
victim devices to be in “discoverable” mode; that is, the device will
respond to discovery queries sent from other Bluetooth devices. It
turns out that many cell phones are in this mode by default, which
makes them susceptible to these attacks. Worse, a brute force MAC
address scan could possibly discover those devices that are not in
“discoverable” mode, aided by tools such as RedFang and Blues-
niff (http://bluesniff.shmoo.com/); thus, Bluetooth war walking or
war driving (i.e., the activity of discovering Bluetooth devices in the
proximity) are also possible using these tools.
Bluejacking involves sending unsolicited messages to a Blue-
tooth cell phone utilizing a security vulnerability in the Bluetooth
handshake protocol when two devices are pairing for mutual authen-
tication. During the handshake, the other party’s device name will
be displayed. Thus, by manipulating the device name, an attacker
can send anonymous messages or broadcast messages (proximity
spamming) among visible devices. Contrary to public perception,
Bluejacking does not imply hijacking of a Bluetooth device. Personal
data on a device remain secure and the device is still under the total
control of the user, but it does make the victim worry about the
security of the device because unwanted messages from someone are
being displayed on the device.
A back-door attack allows an attacker to take advantage of a
secretly established trusted “pairing” relationship such that the target
Bluetooth device can be remotely monitored and controlled without
the user’s notice. Not only can personal data such as phone books,
business cards, calendar, pictures, and e-mail be downloaded from

Mobile Security and Privacy
385
the target device, but also all services available on the device, such as
the cellular network connection, built-in camera, audio recorder, or
music player, may be accessed and surreptitiously controlled.
The insecure “discoverable” mode of Bluetooth provides a vehicle
for mobile virus and worm propagation. Although today’s mobile
operating systems have imposed strict security mechanisms whereby
users are prompted when any installation of programs is about to
occur, most people do not even bother to read the warning mes-
sage and simply click “OK.” Worms such as the Cabir worm have
certainly demonstrated that cell phones can easily be infected by a
mobile virus. Several variants of the Cabir worms have spread among
smart phones running Symbian OS with Bluetooth conﬁgured in the
“discoverable” mode. As a worm, the program tries to propagate
by scanning for vulnerable cell phones using Bluetooth and then
sends itself to those victims. A side effect of this worm is that the
device’s battery drains quickly while the worm is constantly scanning
for other devices. Other forms of battery draining attacks use some
properly powered attacking Bluetooth device to query a victim repet-
itively, effectively disabling the device after some time. Code signing
is a defending technique against these threats. Only those programs
developed by trust vendors will be registered and digitally signed, so
users have the chance to reject any unsigned downloaded code.
It is clear that, in ﬁghting with mobile viruses, users have to bear
the responsibility to be alert to any suspicious programming. Mobile
antivirus software may also help users detect any possible infections.
6.5 Ad Hoc Network Security
We introduced secured routing protocols for mobile ad hoc networks
(MANETs) in the last chapter. In fact, security issues in mobile ad hoc
networks encompass a much broader range of challenges, in addi-
tion to secured routing at network layer. As communication in a
MANET involves one-hop link layer protocols between two directly
connected nodes and multihop packet routing protocols across a
set of nodes, security mechanism in MANET should also take into

386
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
account both the link layer and network layer accordingly, assuming
the wireless physical layer is properly secured.
6.5.1
Link Layer Ad Hoc Security
For a MANET application, end-to-end security service can be provided
by authentication and encryption, which in turn rely on lower layer
security protocols to function. IEEE 802.11 WEP is an example of a
link layer security mechanism that unfortunately fails to protect one-
hop communication between a mobile station and an access point.
As discussed earlier, 802.11i has been designed to address the prob-
lem of WEP. Speciﬁcally, in the distribution coordination function
(DCF) mode, when a node senses the channel and ﬁnds out it is used
by other transmission, it will initiate a binary exponential back-off
procedure waiting until the next try. This scheme does not guaran-
tee any fairness over channel access. In fact, it favors the last node
among contending nodes. Therefore, one heavily loaded node may
keep occupying the channel whereas a lightly loaded node may have
to back off many times. Modiﬁcations to the back-off scheme have
been proposed, mainly to penalize those misbehavior nodes with a
large back-off value.
Secured ad hoc routing protocols were discussed extensively in the
previous chapter. The principle idea of those protocols is to add secu-
rity extensions to traditional ad hoc routing protocols. Note that
secured ad hoc routing protocols can be categorized as “proactive”
security services that are based on node authentication and message
conﬁdentiality [11] and the assumption that a node will forward mes-
sages according to its routing table or routing mechanism. When a
node is compromised and does not forward messages as expected,
“reactive” schemes such as ACK (Acknowledgement)-based malicious
node detection and coordinated rating are needed.
6.5.2
Key Management
Node authentication in MANET is much more complicated than
in a ﬁxed network because of the nature of transient network

Mobile Security and Privacy
387
organization and dynamically changing network topology. Indeed,
there is hardly a centralized trusted authority in MANET. And, even
when there is, it may not constantly be accessible to every node in
the network. Thus, a PKI-based authentication scheme is not directly
applicable to MANET. To provide authentication among mobile
nodes in such a distributed environment, threshold cryptography
can be used.
Threshold
cryptography
essentially
distributes
cryptographic
functions of an individual node to each node in a group, thus elim-
inating central authority. It is based on the idea that, even if some
individual nodes may be compromised, the majority of a group can
be always trusted. In its simplest form, in the context of CA, each
node in a group of n nodes holds a distinct piece of the group’s pri-
vate key, and any t nodes can work together to perform the security
function as a whole for the group, but any t – 1 nodes cannot. This
scheme can be used to distribute the security function (i.e., provid-
ing certiﬁcate for a node’s public key) of a single CA over a number
of servers [12]. Each server (a fairly stable node in an ad hoc net-
work) holds a share of the private key (k). It computes a public key
corresponding to its private key share. The public key (K) correspond-
ing to the private key (k) is known to each server. To sign a digital
certiﬁcate, each server generates a partial digital signature using its
private key share. A combiner (a server that directly interfacing ser-
vice requester) needs to gather t such partial signatures in order to
produce a signed digital certiﬁcate. Hence, compromised servers will
not affect the digital signature service provided by these servers as
a whole because they can only generate at most t – 1 partial digital
signatures. A combiner also veriﬁes the combination using its public
key. Tampered partial signatures from compromised servers will be
detected by the combiner.
Constructing partial signatures for CA certiﬁcation is highly
computationally intensive and cannot be performed on mobile
devices with inherent resource constraints. To adapt threshold
cryptography to MANET, a scheme that combines ID-based cryp-
tography and threshold cryptography has been introduced [13].
An ID-based cryptosystem provides public/private key encryption

388
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
using node ID to derive the effective public key of each node. An
ID-based encryption scheme consists of four algorithms as follows:
• Setup takes an input security parameter and returns a master pub-
lic/private key pair for the system. Every node in the system knows
the master public key but not the private key.
• Encrypt takes the master public key, the identity of the recipient,
and a plaintext message and returns a ciphertext. Note that in
normal encryption, the recipient’s public key and the plaintext
are fed into a cipher.
• Extract takes the master private key and an ID (an identity
string,such as a MAC address) and produces a personal private
key to the identity. Every node must obtain its private key from a
private key generation (PKG) service.
• Decrypt takes the master public key, a cipher text, and a personal
private key and returns the plaintext.
It is obvious that an attacker cannot decrypt an intercepted mes-
sage without knowing the master private key or personal private key
of the node to which the message is headed. The combined key man-
agement approach aims at leveraging ID-based public/private key
pair generation to reduce computational overhead. It works as fol-
lows. First, the initial participating nodes decide on a set of security
parameters, such as threshold t, and their identities. Then a thresh-
old PKG is performed by these initial nodes to compute a master
public/private key pair in a distributed fashion. The master public key
is known to everyone. The personal private key of each node is gener-
ated based on the node’s identity conforming to t-out-of-n threshold
cryptography such that fewer than t nodes cannot recover the master
private key. Nodes joining the system later must communicate with
at least t nodes serving the PKG to obtain t shares of the personal
private keys (not the private keys) and compute the personal private
key. Because node ID is commonly available in a message header,
this approach does not require any speciﬁc public key propagation

Mobile Security and Privacy
389
mechanism, as is the case in the CA approach. Another way to
introduce low-overhead asymmetric cryptography to mobile devices
is using ECC. To this end, some ECC-based distributed key generation
schemes have been proposed, such as that of Boneh–Franklin [14].
6.5.3
Wireless Sensor Network Security
Wireless sensor networks have been used in a number of application
scenarios, including wild habitat monitoring, lighting and temper-
ature control of a building, and glacial monitoring. More wireless
sensor applications that closely relate to our daily life are on the way.
As a consequence, security problems of wireless sensor networks have
surfaced in response to concerns that potential data interception or
tampering could result in serious damage to a system.
The principle challenge of security in a wireless sensor network
is the seriously constrained sensor hardware that cannot facilitate
generally used security mechanisms on regular desktop comput-
ers. Below is a summary of the hardware capability of a Smart-
Dust node developed at the University of California, Berkeley (see
Table 6.6) [15]. It is worth noting that new wireless sensor modules
tend to have signiﬁcantly improved hardware components as a result
of the rapid advancements in wireless sensor technology but still lag
behind regular desktop computers and even PDAs.
Table 6.6 Characteristics of Prototype SmartDust Nodes
CPU
8-bit, 4 MHz
Storage
8-KB instruction ﬂash
512-bytes RAM
512-bytes EEPROM
Communication
916-MHz radio
Bandwidth
10 Kbps
Operating system
TinyOS
Operating system
code space
3500 bytes
Available
code space
4500 bytes

390
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
A wireless sensor is generally expected to operate for years without
battery replacement, thus reducing power consumption is always a
key design objective. Even if it is possible to incorporate powerful
processors and communication capabilities into sensor nodes, their
power consumption may exceed what a small battery can support.
Consequently, given such a hardware conﬁguration, it would be
impractical to use traditional security mechanisms in a wireless sen-
sor network, as they usually require a large amount of memory during
operation and impose signiﬁcant communication and computing
overhead on the sensor nodes; for example, asymmetric digital signa-
tures for authentication are too expensive for sensor nodes because
they may drain a battery too quickly. One way to provide authen-
tication is to employ symmetric key cryptographic systems between
sensor nodes, each sharing a secret key with the central trusted base
station. To establish a new key, two nodes use the base station as a
trusted third party to set up a secured communication channel.
Another security problem in this domain is secured routing in both
static wireless sensor networks and future mobile wireless sensor net-
work. Ad hoc routing protocols such as DSR (Dynamic Source Rout-
ing) or AODV (Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector) (described in
Chapter 5) are again unsuitable for wireless sensor networks because
of the communication overhead and requirement for state mainte-
nance at each node. In addition, message routing in a wireless sensor
network often follows a pattern of many-to-one, meaning that many
sensor nodes communicate back to a base station, and, as opposed to
routing in ad hoc networks of mobile devices, in-networking process-
ing (intermediate nodes processing messages being forwarded) for
data aggregation makes secured routing in a wireless sensor network
more challenging. Commonly used end-to-end security mechanisms
cannot be applied in this case because the contents of messages are
subject to modiﬁcation. Karlof and Wagner [16] compiled a list of
attacks on sensor network routing:
• Spoofed, altered, or replayed routing information
• Selective forwarding (a sensor node does not forward messages
faithfully)

Mobile Security and Privacy
391
• Sinkhole attacks (a compromised node spoofs messages to attract
trafﬁc from adjacent nodes according to the routing algorithm)
• Sybil attacks (a compromised node pretends to be multiple nodes,
thereby confusing routing algorithms and resulting in potential
identity theft)
• Wormholes (multiple compromised nodes can collude to establish
out-of-band channels, effectively disrupting network topology)
• “Hello” ﬂood attacks (a node simply broadcasts bogus “hello” mes-
sages or overheard messages in the network hoping to manipulate
topology)
• Acknowledgment spooﬁng (a node sends spoofed link layer
acknowledges to senders of overheard messages)
Among these types of attacks, bogus routing information, Sybil
attacks,
“hello” ﬂoods,
and acknowledgment spooﬁng can be
defeated by employing link layer encryption and authentication
along with identity veriﬁcation and authenticated broadcast. Multi-
path routing can be used to defeat selected forwarding attacks. In
order to provide symmetric key cryptography, the network must
ensure that no other nodes can impersonate the trusted base sta-
tion, as each node will obtain a symmetric key from the trusted base
station, which also initiates an authenticated broadcast to perform a
query. Asymmetric authentication is needed to make sure compro-
mised nodes cannot perform authenticated broadcasts. One way to
achieve this is to use delayed disclosure of a series of keys derived from
a one-way symmetric key chain [15], which requires the base station
and nodes to be loosely synchronized. The base station uses a secret
key (Kn) as the last key in the key chain and computes Kn−1 using
a one-way function F: Kn−1 = F(Kn). Then, it uses K1, K2, . . . during
a speciﬁc time period subsequent to computing the MAC (Message
Authentication Code) of packets sent within that time slot. Nodes
receiving those packets can verify the integrity as well as authentic-
ity of those packets later when the base station discloses keys in the
same order as they were used to compute the MAC.

392
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
6.6 Mobile Privacy
As in wired networks, security issues in mobile computing environ-
ment are closely related to privacy issues. Generally, the notion of
privacy encompasses two types of problems. One is data privacy: the
protection of sensitive user information that by all means should be
secured during transmission or in storage, such as a credit card num-
ber being transmitted over a secure socket layer (SSL) connection, or
Social Security number stored in a database on disks and tapes. These
problems also fall into the mobile security domain, and various secu-
rity mechanisms to ensure data privacy have already been discussed
in this chapter. The second type of privacy issue—namely, privacy
services—is primarily concerned with adjustable privacy exposure
and enabling mechanisms. The key challenge to this type of secu-
rity issues is the conﬂict between more pervasive mobile applications
utilizing the sensitive information of users and the need for privacy
protection in a computing environment of many such applications.
Three approaches have been proposed to offer general privacy-related
services in a pervasive mobile computing environment [17]:
• Increasing awareness of potential privacy breach—Let the system
notify the user whenever sensitive information is being revealed
to an external service or system that the user cannot control. For
example, a smart phone user should be notiﬁed when the user’s
location and identity are being tracked by a location-based service.
• Maintaining an audit trail—The system keeps an audit log of
all privacy-related information exposure, interactions, and data
exchanges. This does not prevent privacy violation but at least
provides some record of what information has been exposed, how,
and when.
• Intelligent alert—In some cases a user’s privacy is exposed not by
the system but by an adversary; for example, a smart phone user
engaging in a Bluetooth data transmission may be detected by
someone nearby and the identity of the user may be revealed
because of the data transmission. In this case, ideally the system

Mobile Security and Privacy
393
should be able to detect such a privacy breach even if it is directly
involved.
Mobile privacy is more complicated than mobile security because
you cannot just draw a line between what information can be used
or shared and what cannot, whereas in security we know that a set of
security functions should be implemented in a system. Moreover, leg-
islation is very often involved, because privacy is indeed surrounded
by sensitive legal issues. Because a system may surreptitiously detect,
use, expose, distribute, or abuse people’s privacy-related information,
it seems quite reasonable to regulate the use of personal data by credit
card companies, telecoms, banks, etc. For example, laws pertaining
to privacy include the Privacy Act of 1974, Electronic Communica-
tions Privacy Act (1986), and No Electronic Theft (NET) Act (1997).
Also, in response to security challenges on the web, W3C has been
working on a project called P3P (Platform for Privacy Preference
Project, http://www.w3.org/P3P), aimed at developing a framework
of protocol for an international privacy policy.
Technologically, the fundamental challenge in this domain is to
provide more new services to improve productivity and the user’s
experience while still guaranteeing a minimal, satisfactory level of
privacy exposure. Below we introduce two major mechanisms in this
ﬁeld: identity privacy and location privacy.
6.6.1
Identity and Anonymity
Anonymity in the context of computing refers to a service that pre-
vents the disclosure of the identity of someone who is engaged in
network communication or interaction to a system. Anonymity is
not always a priority; in many cases, we are not particularly con-
cerned that when we surf the web our travels on the Internet are being
logged by nearly all web servers. In some cases, however, anonymity
is required, such as:
• Users do not want to be censored when accessing some websites.
Information censorship is largely due to political reasons.

394
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
• Users do not want to reveal information about operations such as
ﬁle sharing being performed with a computer or a cell phone.
• Users do not want to expose personal information to an untrust-
worthy online community or they simply do not want to be traced
in a network.
• Users want to remain anonymous to prevent identity theft.
Many people think that the Internet offers anonymity. This was
reﬂected by a now-famous cartoon in an issue of The New Yorker maga-
zine published in 1993. It showed a dog sitting at a computer, talking
to another one: “On the Internet, no one knows you are a dog.”
Unfortunately, without using a specially designed privacy-enhancing
system, nearly every action of a user, as well as the user’s identity, is
traceable as long as interested parties such as law enforcement agen-
cies, Internet service providers (ISPs), and network administration
authorities consider it worth the time and money to do so. In the
mobile wireless world, we are well aware that every phone call is
logged and can be tapped, and technically every bit can be traced back
to the sender. Thus, the challenge of mobile privacy lies in the fact
that a mobile system must provide both privacy and accountability.
When there is a direct logical mapping between the user’s
identity and network location such as IP address,
cell phone
number, or processor identiﬁer, the goal of anonymity is thus
reduced to protecting the network location from being exposed
to unintended parties. A simple solution is to introduce a proxy
between the user and the place of interest (a website, for example)
to hide the network location of the user. An example of such
a proxy-based anonymity system is Anonymizer (http://www.
anonymizer.com).
A user always goes through the proxy (the
anonymizer) in order to reach the destination using a URL such as
http://www.anonymizer.com:8080/www.yahoo.com. The proxy acts
on behalf of the user when visiting a website. Although a user’s iden-
tity is hidden from the visited server, this approach does not protect
the anonymity of the server. To this end, a proxy for the server could
be a solution, which hides the real URL of the server and simply

Mobile Security and Privacy
395
exposes a cryptic URL to users. Rewebber (http://www.rewebber.de/)
is an example of such a system. In both user–proxy and server–proxy
setups, a user has to trust the proxy, and communication between
a user and the proxy is not protected in terms of privacy. For this
reason, cryptographic mechanisms are introduced in some systems
such as Mix-Net and Onion Ring.
A mix network is a set of router nodes (mixes) that allow for anony-
mous message transfer using a layered public-key encryption. They
have been used to maintain privacy during e-mailing, web surﬁng,
electronic voting, and electronic payment. The idea of mix networks
as a solution to e-mail privacy was ﬁrst proposed by David Chaum
in 1981. In its initial design, a computer (called a mix) processes
each e-mail (or any type of data item) before it is delivered. A sender
may choose intermediate mix nodes to form a path across a mix
network, or the mix network can enforce a path for every message.
The latter approach is referred to as a cascade. Figure 6.10 depicts
the logical architecture of a cascade. Depending on the number of
mix nodes a message will traverse, a message (M) is encrypted ﬁrst
using the public key of the recipient (Ka) and a random number
(R1). The result is then appended with the address of the recipient
and further encrypted using the public key of the last mix node
along the path (Kn). Each intermediate mix node decrypts the mes-
sage using its private key and forwards the result to the next mix
Encrypted Message
A -> B
Mix #n
Encrypted Message
C -> D
Encrypted Message
A -> C
Encrypting a Message:
Kn(Rn, Kn-1(Rn-1, …,
K1(R1, Ka(R0, M), A))…))
Decrypting a Message:
Kn-1(Rn-1, …, K1(R1,
Ka(R0, M), A))…))
Mix #n-1
Mix# 1
Message
delivery
Decrypting a Message:
Kn-2(Rn-2, …, K1(R1,
Ka(R0, M), A))…))
Decrypting a Message:
 Ka(R0, M)
A batch
of equal-
size items
Figure 6.10 A cascade mix network.

396
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
node. Output messages at a mix node are also permutated to disguise
the order of arrival. In effect, no single mix node knows both the
sender address and recipient address. Input messages to a mix node
are reordered; therefore, correspondence between items in its input
and those in its output at a mix node is protected. The downside
of a mix network is that it requires mix nodes to trust each other,
meaning that everyone will perform normally. Later improvements
to the approach have employed credit-based mix node selection and
threshold cryptography to relax this requirement while still ensuring
message anonymity.
A similar idea—namely,
Onion Routing (http://www.onion-
router.net)—is designed to use a collection of widely distributed
routers (Tor nodes) to create random paths for the sender such that
no individual server knows the complete path. Before sending data
over an anonymous path, the ﬁrst Tor router adds a layer of encryp-
tion for each subsequent one in the path. As the message traverses
the network, each Tor router removes one layer of encryption.
Unlike Mix-Net and Onion Ring operating at the network layer,
Crowds [18] is an application layer protocol designed for web trafﬁc
anonymity, utilizing a crowd of proxies to hide the network location
of a message. The basic idea is to blend a user’s trafﬁc with that of
many others such that it is not possible to trace a single web request
or reply back to the sender. Any user willing to participate in the
crowd could be a proxy in the crowd. The user’s trafﬁc will ﬁrst be
forwarded to the crowd along a probabilistic virtual path before going
to the public Internet.
Freenet is an example of peer-to-peer-based anonymity network
(http://freenet.sourceforge.net/). It allows anybody to publish and
read information with complete anonymity. Freenet achieves this by
pooling the nodes’ storage for data replication services while the true
origin or destination of the data remains completely anonymous. In
Freenet, shared ﬁles are mapped into a key space. Aside from locally
stored ﬁles, a node maintains a local key routing table allowing the
node to forward a query message from one neighbor (the predecessor)
to another appropriate neighboring node on behalf of that predeces-
sor, in case the key in question is not locally served. Note that, unlike

Mobile Security and Privacy
397
IP routing, where the source IP address is always forwarded hop-by-
hop as part of the IP header, query routing messages in Freenet do
not carry the request’s identity along the path. Therefore, requestor
(a node querying a ﬁle) anonymity is preserved because a node for-
warding or replying to a query does not know the requester’s identity
(a node ID in Freenet). In order to maintain the insertor’s anonymity
(or, more precisely, key anonymity, as a ﬁle is identiﬁed by a routable
key), Freenet employs a variation of the mix network approach for
inserter (a node that shares a ﬁle in the network) anonymity: mes-
sages between a sender and a recipient must go through a chain of
prerouting nodes, each acting as a mix to impose public-key-based
encryption over links along the chain. After going through the mix
network, a message is disguised as if it is originated from the last mix.
Then the message is sent to Freenet for normal routing.
In the context of mobile wireless services, identity anonymity is
sometimes necessary in mobile payment, mobile trading, and infor-
mation sharing. Considering the amount of web trafﬁc in current
mobile Internet and wireless network applications, an application
layer anonymity system is preferable to network layer solutions. For
example, we can use a set of WAP proxies acting like a crowd to mix
WAP trafﬁc from many mobile users. Alternatively, depending on
the requirements of a speciﬁc mobile service, a service anonymizer
can be introduced as part of the back-end system by a mobile ser-
vice provider. The predominant task of a service anonymizer in an
m-commerce environment is hiding one user’s real identity from the
other during a transaction. In addition, a service anonymizer can be
integrated with an authentication system. An example of such sys-
tems used for mobile micropayment is described in Hu et al. [19]. We
will discuss micropayment in more detail in the next chapter.
6.6.2
Location Privacy
A particularly signiﬁcant class of privacy issues is location privacy in
a mobile wireless environment. Location privacy refers to the capa-
bility of a mobile application or service to prevent unintended parties
from obtaining a person’s current or past location. The fact that more

398
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
location-based services, including GPS, Wi-Fi, radiofrequency identi-
ﬁcation (RFID), and wireless sensor network technologies, will have
the capability to monitor a user’s location has led to increasing con-
cerns as to how to protect the location information from unintended
access. Technical details of location-based services are discussed in
the next chapter; here, we focus on a subsystem in a location-aware
system that enables location privacy.
There are three categories of problems surrounding location pri-
vacy for a mobile system, each solving the problem from a different
viewpoint:
• Category I—Location information security (secure location data
gathering and transmission with respect to privacy requirement)
• Category II—Identity pseudonym (applying identity anonymity
schemes to location service)
• Category III—Location information policy (building interactive
social and legal privacy aware framework)
The ﬁrst category, location information security, is mainly con-
cerned with the formatting and secure transmission of location
information in order to protect user privacy. The IEEE Work Group
Geographic Location/Privacy (Geopriv) [20] has provided a location
privacy framework that is independent of the underlying location
determination mechanism. The framework deﬁnes a location object
that conveys location information and possibly privacy rules to
which Geopriv security mechanisms and privacy rules are to be
applied. Geopriv recommends the use of security mechanisms of the
location object itself, such as MAC (Message Authentication Code)
and encryption as part of the location object. In addition, secure
transport of location objects should be used whenever possible in pro-
tocols carrying location objects to ensure appropriate distribution,
protection, usage, retention, and storage of location objects based
on the rules that apply to those location objects. One example of
such a privacy-preserving communication protocol is Mist [21]. This
approach is based on an overlay network in the form of a hierarchy of

Mobile Security and Privacy
399
Mist routers that perform limited PKI-secured handle-based routing
to hide the location of a connection (here, location is the addresses
of the source and the destination). A handle is an ID that uniquely
identiﬁes an upward Mist router in the hierarchy. Intermediate Mist
routers are unaware of the endpoints of a connection (source and des-
tination addresses). The protocol effectively prevents insiders, system
administrators, and the system itself from tracking a user’s location
without affecting normal secured communication.
The second category, identity pseudonym, hides the user’s iden-
tity by making network trafﬁc anonymous in a location-based
application. A broad range of anonymity techniques used in wired
network applications could be adopted to location-based appli-
cations. For example, Beresford and Stajano [22] have designed
a privacy-protecting framework based on frequently changing
pseudonyms, thereby effectively mapping the problem of location
privacy onto that of anonymous communication. An anonymizing
proxy is introduced to leverages the idea of mix networks in the gen-
eral anonymity service domain to delay and reorder messages when
users exit mix zones.
The last category of solutions, location information policy, focuses
on building a framework of privacy policies and mechanisms that
allow users to interact with location-based applications to control
location information release with respect to corresponding privacy
policies. Privacy solutions in this category in essence rely on respect
and social and legal norms to enforce privacy. The most notable effort
in this direction includes the Privacy Preference Project (P3P) [23] and
pawS [24], which provides an industry standard of privacy policies
that websites can use to announce their speciﬁc privacy practices.
The goals of P3P include simplifying the process of reading privacy
policies, minimizing latency delays, and making polices conforming
to the law. The P3P architecture consists of user agents, privacy ref-
erence ﬁles, and privacy policies. User agents can be part of a web
browser or a browser plug-in. A user agent automatically fetches the
P3P policies of a website when the user visits the site and checks
these policies against the user’s predetermined preferences. A policy
reference ﬁle is used to collect the P3P policies of certain regions of a

400
Smart Phone and Next-Generation Mobile Computing
website (such as a web page), portions of a website, or the entire web-
site. P3P employs an XML encoding scheme for P3P policies. pawS
[24] is a similar approach. Both P3P and pawS are speciﬁcally designed
to address privacy issues on the Web. A more general approach uti-
lizing the same basic idea has been proposed to protect privacy when
arbitrary location-based applications request a user’s location [25].
6.7 Summary
Mobile security and privacy are by all means interrelated issues that
must be addressed as a whole. Because of the potentially pervasive
nature of future mobile computing applications, people are far more
concerned with these issues than common security risks in a wired
network environment. A mobile wireless system must take security
and privacy into account at the very beginning of the design phase
and utilize appropriate security service building blocks to provide
data conﬁdentiality, integrity, authentication, and nonrepudiation,
as well as efﬁcient access control. Different mobile wireless systems
and applications may employ a set of security mechanism at different
layers, due to the intrinsic restrictions of the underlying network and
mobile devices. In this chapter, we have explored security issues in
some widely deployed mobile wireless systems, such as cellular net-
works, wireless LAN, and Bluetooth. We also introduced interesting
yet challenging security issues in emerging mobile ad hoc networks.
3G cellular networks by design provide strong low-layer security
for mobile applications and services. On the other hand, wireless
LAN is an excellent example of bad design strategy to demonstrate
that security has to be considered a high priority when it comes
to designing a mobile wireless system. The well-known WEP vul-
nerabilities have largely hindered the widespread implementation
of 802.11 wireless LAN in business organizations and government
agencies. The IEEE 802.11 working group has designed a new stan-
dard, called 802.11i, to address these weaknesses. Bluetooth security
concerns grew signiﬁcantly after researchers demonstrated that they
could use Bluetooth equipment to hack into a Bluetooth cell phone

