F r o n t  C o v e r
A  S e r i e s  o f  U n f o r t u n a t e  E v e n t s
Book the Thirteenth      by LEMONY SNICKET
*  THE END *
Backcover
Dear Reader,
You are presumably looking at the back of this book, or the end of THE END. The end of THE END is the best  place to
begin THE END, because if you read THE END from the beginning of the beginning of THE END to the end of the end
of THE END, you will arrive at the end of the end of your rope.
This  book  is  the  last  in  A  Series  of  Unfortunate  Events,  and  even  if  you  braved  the  previous  twelve
volumes, you probably can't stand  such  unpleasantries  as a fearsome storm,  a  suspicious  beverage,  a  herd  of  wild
sheep, an enormous bird cage, and a truly haunting secret about the Baudelaire parents.
It has been my solemn occupation  to complete the history of the Baudelaire orphans,  and at last I am finished.
You likely have some other occupation, so if I were you I would drop this book at once, so THE END does  not finish
you.
With all due respect, Lemony Snicket
US $12.99/$16.99 CAN
ISBN-13: 978-0-06-441016-8 ISBN-10: 0-06-441016-1
HarperCollinsPublishers www.lemonysnicket.com
Cover art © 2006 by Brett Helquist Cover design by Alison Donalty
9 780064 410168
5 1 2 9 9
EX LIBRIS

NAMETHE END
A Series of Unfortunate Events
THE BAD BEGINNING
THE REPTILE ROOM
THE WIDE WINDOW
THE MISERABLE MILL
THE AUSTERE ACADEMY
THE ERSATZ ELEVATOR
THE VILE VILLAGE
THE HOSTILE HOSPITAL
THE CARNIVOROUS CARNIVAL
THE SLIPPERY SLOPE
THE GRIM GROTTO
THE PENULTIMATE PERIL
THE END
A Series of Unfortunate Events
BOOK the Thirteenth
THE END
by LEMONY SNICKET
illustrations by Brett Helquist
 HARPERCOLLINS Publishers
The End
Copyright © 2006 by Lemony Snicket
Illustrations copyright © 2006 by Brett Helquist
All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book  may  be  used  or  reproduced  in  any  manner  whatsoever  without  written
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. Printed in the United States
of  America.  For  information  address  HarperCollins  Children's  Books,  a  division  of  HarperCollins  Publishers.  1350
Avenue of rhe Americas. New York, NY 10019.
www.lemonysnicket.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Available
ISBN-10: 0-06-441016-1 (trade bdg.)
ISBN-13: 978-0-06-441016-8(trade bdg.)
ISBN-10: 0-06-02644-5(lib. bdg.)
ISBN-13: 978-0-06-029644-5 (lib. bdg.)
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
First Edition


For Beatrice—
I cherished, you perished,
The world's been nightmarished.
Blank pageTHE END
 *
Blank page
Caption: The Baudelaires orphans and Count Olaf in his boat at seaC H A P T E R
One
If  you have ever  peeled  an onion, then you know that the first thin, papery layer reveals another
thin,  papery  layer,  and  that  layer  reveals  another,  and  another,  and  before  you  know  it  you  have
hundreds of layers all over  the kitchen table  and  thousands  of tears  in your eyes,  sorry  that  you ever
started peeling in the first place and wishing that you had left the onion alone to wither away on the shelf
of the pantry while you went on with your life, even if that meant never  again enjoying the complicated
and overwhelming taste of this strange and bitter vegetable.
In this way, the story of the Baudelaire orphans is like an onion, and if you insist on reading each
and every thin, papery layer in A Series of Unfortunate Events, your only reward will be 170 chapters of
misery in your library and countless tears in your eyes. Even if you have read the first twelve volumes of
the Baudelaires' story, it is not too late to stop peeling away the layers, and to put this book back on the
shelf to wither away  while you read  something less  compli-cated  and  overwhelming.  The  end  of
this  unhappy chronicle is like its  bad  beginning,  as  each  misfortune  only  reveals  another,  and
another, and another, and only those with the stomach for this strange and bitter tale should venture any
farther into the Baudelaire onion. I'm sorry to tell you this, but that is how the story goes.
The Baudelaire orphans would have been happy to see an onion, had  one  come  bobbing  along as
they  traveled  across  the  vast  and  empty  sea  in  a  boat  the  size  of  a  large  bed  but  not  nearly  as
comfortable. Had such a vegetable appeared, Violet, the eldest Baudelaire, would have tied
          2 
up her hair in a  ribbon  to  keep  it out of her eyes,  and  in moments would have  invented  a  device  to
retrieve the onion from the water. Klaus, the middle sibling and the only boy,  would have remembered
useful facts from one of the thousands  of books  he had  read,  and  been  able  to  identify which type  of
onion it was,  and  whether  or  not it was  edible.  And Sunny, who was  just scarcely  out of babyhood,
would have sliced the onion into bite-sized  pieces  with  her  unusually  sharp  teeth,  and  put  her  newly
developed cook-ing  skills to  good  use  in order  to  turn a  simple onion  into  something  quite  tasty

indeed.  The elder Baudelaires could imagine their sister announcing "Soubise!" which was her way of
saying "Dinner is served."
But  the  three  children  had  not  seen  an  onion. Indeed,  they had  not seen  much  of  anything
during their ocean voyage, which had begun when the Baudelaires had pushed the large,  wooden  boat
off the roof of the Hotel Denouement in order to escape from the fire
3   
engulfing the hotel, as well as the authorities who wanted to arrest the children for arson and murder. The
wind and tides had quickly pushed the boat away from the burning hotel, and by sunset the hotel and all
the other buildings in the city were a distant, faraway blur. Now, the following morning, the only things the
Baudelaires had seen were the quiet, still surface of the sea and the gray gloom of the sky. The weather
reminded them of the day at Briny Beach when the Baudelaires had learned of the loss of their parents
and their home in a terrible fire, and the children spent much of their time in silence, thinking about  that
dreadful day and all of the dreadful days that had followed. It almost would have been peaceful to sit in a
drifting boat and think about their lives, had it not been for the Baudelaires' unpleasant companion.
Their companion's name was Count Olaf, and it had been the Baudelaire orphans' misfortune to be in
this dreadful man's company since they had become orphans and he had become
4
their  guardian.  Olaf  had  hatched  scheme  after  scheme  in  an  attempt  to  get  his  filthy  hands  on  the
enormous fortune the Baudelaire  parents  had left behind, and although each scheme had failed, it
appeared as if some of the villain's wickedness  had  rubbed  off on the children, and  now Olaf and  the
Baudelaires  were  all in the same  boat.  Both  the  children  and  the  count  were  responsible  for a
number of treacherous crimes, although at least the Baudelaire orphans had the decency  to  feel terrible
about this, whereas all Count Olaf had been doing for the past few days was bragging about it.
"I've triumphed!" Count  Olaf reiterated,  a  word  which here  means "announced for  the  umpteenth
time." He stood proudly at the front of the boat, leaning against a carving of an octo-pus attacking a man
in a diving suit that served as the boat's figurehead. "You orphans thought you could escape me, but at
last you're in my clutches!"
"Yes, Olaf," Violet agreed wearily. The eldest
5
Baudelaire did not bother to point out that as they were all alone in the middle of the ocean, it was just as
accurate to say that Olaf was in the Baudelaires' clutches as it was to say they were in his. Sighing, she
gazed up at the tall mast of the boat, where a tattered sail drooped limply in the still air. For some time,
Violet had been trying to invent a way for the boat to move even when there  wasn't  any wind, but the
only mechanical materials on board  were  a  pair  of enormous  spatulas  from  the  Hotel  Denoue-
ment's rooftop sunbathing salon. The children had been using these spatulas as oars, but row-ing a boat is
very hard work, particularly if one's traveling companions are too busy bragging to help out, and Violet

was trying to think of a way they might move the boat faster.
"I've burned down the Hotel Denoue-ment," Olaf cried, gesturing dramatically, "and destroyed
V.F.D. once and for all!"
"So you keep telling us," Klaus muttered, without looking up from his commonplace book.
6
For quite some time, Klaus  had  been  writing down the details of the Baudelaires' situation in this
dark blue notebook, including the fact that it was the Baudelaires, not Olaf, who had burned down
the Hotel Denouement. V.F.D.  was  a  secret  organization that  the Baudelaires  had  heard  about  during
their travels, and as far as the middle Baudelaire knew it had not been destroyed—not  quite—although
quite  a  few  V.F.D.  agents  had  been  in  the  hotel  when  it  caught  fire.  At  the  moment,  Klaus  was
examin-ing his notes on V.F.D. and the schism, which was an enormous fight involving all of its mem-bers
and had something to do with a sugar bowl. The middle Baudelaire did not know what the sugar bowl
contained,  nor  did he know  the  pre-cise  whereabouts  of  one  of  the  organization's  bravest  agents,  a
woman named Kit Snicket. The children had met Kit only once  before  she  headed  out to  sea  herself,
planning to meet up with the Quagmire triplets,  three  friends the Baudelaires  had  not seen  in
quite some time
       7   
who  were  traveling  in  a  self-sustaining  hot  air  mobile  home.  Klaus  was  hoping  the  notes  in  his
commonplace book  would help him figure  out  exactly  where  they  might  be,  if  he  studied  them  long
enough.
"And the Baudelaire fortune is finally mine!" Olaf cackled. "Finally, I am a  very wealthy
man, which means everybody must do what I say!"
"Beans,"  Sunny  said.  The  youngest  Baude-laire  was  no  longer  a  baby,  but  she  still  talked  in  a
somewhat  unusual  way,  and  by  "beans"  she  meant  something  like,  "Count  Olaf  is  spouting  pure
nonsense," as the Baudelaire fortune was not to be found in the large, wooden boat, and so could not be
said to belong to anyone. But when Sunny said  "beans," she  also  meant "beans." One of the few
things the children had found on board the boat was a large clay jar with a rubber seal, which had been
wedged under-neath one of the boat's wooden benches. The jar was quite dusty and looked very
old, but the
8
seal was intact, a word which here means "not broken, so the food stored inside was still edible." Sunny
was grateful for the jar,  as  there  was  no  other  food  to  be  found  on  board,  but  she  couldn't  help
wishing that it had contained something other than plain white beans. It is possible to cook a number
of delicious dishes with white beans—the Baudelaire parents used to make a cold salad of white beans,
cherry tomatoes, and fresh basil, all mixed together with lime juice, olive oil, and cayenne pepper, which
was a delicious thing to eat on hot days— but without any other ingredients, Sunny had  only been

able to serve her boat mates handfuls of a bland, white mush, enough to  keep  them alive, but certainly
nothing  in  which  a  young  chef  like  herself  could  take  pride.  As  Count  Olaf  continued  to  brag,  the
youngest Baudelaire was peering into the jar, wondering how she could make something more interesting
out of white beans and nothing else.
"I think the first thing I'll buy for myself is
9
a shiny new car!" Count Olaf said. "Something with a powerful engine, so I can drive faster than the legal
limit, and an extra-thick bumper, so I can ram into people without getting all scratched up! I'll name the
car Count Olaf, after myself, and whenever people  hear  the squeal  of brakes  they'll say,  'Here  comes
Count Olaf!' Orphans, head for the nearest luxury car dealership!"
The Baudelaires looked at one another. As I'm sure you know, it is unlikely for a car dealer-ship to
be found in the middle of the ocean, although I have heard of a rickshaw salesman who does business in
a  grotto  hidden  deep  in  the  Caspian  Sea.  It  is  very  tiresome  to  travel  with  someone  who  is
constantly making demands, particularly if the demands are for utterly impossible things, and  the
children found that they could  no longer hold their  tongues,  a  phrase  which here  means "keep
from confronting Olaf about his foolishness."
"We can't head for a car dealership," Violet said. "We can't head anywhere. The wind has
1   0
died out, and Klaus and I are exhausted from rowing."
"Laziness is no excuse," Olaf growled. "I'm exhausted  from all my schemes,  but you don't  see  me
complaining."
"Furthermore," Klaus  said,  "we have no idea  where  we  are,  and  so  we  have  no  idea
which direction to go in."
"I know where we are," Olaf sneered. "We're in the middle of the ocean."
"Beans," Sunny said.
"I've had enough of your tasteless mush!" Olaf snarled. "It's worse than that salad your parents used
to make! All in all, you orphans are the worst henchmen I've ever acquired!"
"We're not your henchmen!" Violet cried. "We simply happen to be traveling together!"
"I think you're forgetting who the captain is around  here,"  Count  Olaf said,  and  knocked  one
dirty knuckle against the boat's  figurehead. With his other  hand,  he twirled his harpoon  gun, a  terrible
weapon that had one last sharp harpoon
1 1
available for his treacherous use. "If you don't do what I say, I'll break open  this helmet and  you'll be
doomed."

The Baudelaires  looked  at  the figurehead in dismay. Inside  the  helmet  were  a  few  spores  of  the
Medusoid Mycelium, a terrible fungus that could poison anyone who breathed it in. Sunny would have
perished from the mushroom's deadly power not so long ago, had the Baude-laires not managed to
find a helping of wasabi, a Japanese condiment that diluted the poison.
"You wouldn't dare release the Medusoid Mycelium,"  Klaus  said,  hoping  he  sounded  more
certain than he felt. "You'd be poisoned as quickly as we would."
"Equivalent flotilla," Sunny said sternly to the villain.
"Our sister's right," Violet said. "We're in the same boat, Olaf. The wind has died down, we have no
idea which way to go, and we're run-ning low on nourishment. In fact, without a des-tination, a way of
navigating, and some fresh
12
water, we're likely to perish in a matter of days. You might try to help us, instead of ordering us around."
Count Olaf glared at the eldest Baudelaire, and then stalked to the far end of the boat.  "You three
figure out a way to get us out of here," he said, "and I'll work on changing the nameplate of the boat.  I
don't want my yacht called Carmelita anymore."
The Baudelaires peered over the edge of the boat, and noticed for the first time a nameplate attached
to the rear  of the boat  with thick tape.  On  the nameplate,  written  in  a  messy  scrawl,  was  the  word
"Carmelita," presumably referring to Carmelita Spats, a nasty young girl whom the Baudelaires had  first
encountered  at  a  dreadful  school  they were  forced  to  attend,  and  who  later  had  been  more  or  less
adopted by Count Olaf and his girlfriend Esmé Squalor, whom the vil-lain had  abandoned  at  the hotel.
Putting  down  the  harpoon  gun,  Count  Olaf  began  to  pick  at  the  tape  with  his  dirt-encrusted
fingernails,
1 3
peeling away at the nameplate to reveal another name underneath. Although the Baudelaire orphans did
not care about the name of the boat they now called home, they were grateful that the villain had found
something to do with his time so they could spend a few minutes talking among themselves.
"What can we do?" Violet whispered to her siblings. "Do you think you can catch some fish for us to
eat, Sunny?"
The youngest Baudelaire shook her head. "No bait," she said, "and no net. Deep-sea dive?"
"I don't think so," Klaus said. "You shouldn't be swimming down there without the proper equipment.
There are all sorts of sinister things you could encounter."
The Baudelaires shivered, thinking of some-thing they had encountered while on board a submarine
called the Queequeg. All the children had seen was a curvy shape on a  radar  screen  that  resembled  a
question mark, but the captain of the submarine had told them that it was
1 4
something even worse than Olaf himself. "Klaus is right," Violet said. "You shouldn't  swim down  there.

Klaus, is there anything in your notes that might lead us to the others?"
Klaus shut his commonplace  book  and  shook his head. "I'm afraid not," he said.  "Kit told  us
she was going to contact Captain Wid-dershins and meet him at a certain clump of sea-weed, but even if
we knew exactly which clump she meant, we wouldn't know how to get there without proper navigation
equipment."
"I could probably make a compass," Violet said. "All I need  is a  small piece  of magnetized metal
and a simple pivot. But maybe we shouldn't join the other volunteers. After all, we've caused them a
great deal of trouble."
"That's true," Klaus admitted. "They might not be happy to see us, particularly if we had Count Olaf
along."
Sunny looked at the villain, who was still scraping away at the nameplate. "Unless," she said.
1 5
Violet and Klaus shared a nervous glance. "Unless what?" Violet asked.
Sunny was silent for a moment, and looked down at the concierge uniform she was still wearing from
her time at the hotel. "Push Olaf overboard," she whispered.
The  elder  Baudelaires  gasped,  not  just  because  of  what  Sunny  had  said  but  because  they
could  easily  picture  the  treacherous  act  Sunny  had  described.  With  Count  Olaf  overboard,  the
Baudelaires could sail someplace without the vil-lain's interference, or his threats to release the Medusoid
Mycelium. There would be one fewer person with whom to share the remaining beans, and if they ever
reached Kit Snicket and the Quagmires they wouldn't have Olaf along. In uneasy silence they turned their
gazes  to  the  back  of  the  boat,  where  Olaf  was  leaning  over  to  peel  off  the  nameplate.  All  three
Baudelaires could imagine how simple it would be to push him, just hard enough for the villain to lose his
balance and topple into the water.
1 6
"Olaf wouldn't hesitate to throw us over-board,"  Violet said,  so  quietly her siblings could  scarcely
hear her. "If he didn't need us to sail the boat, he'd toss us into the sea."
"V.F.D. might not hesitate, either," Klaus said.
"Parents?" Sunny asked.
The  Baudelaires  shared  another  uneasy  glance.  The  children  had  recently  learned
another mysterious fact about  their parents  and  their shadowy  past—a  rumor concerning their parents
and a box of poison darts. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny, like all children, had always wanted to believe the
best about their parents, but as time went on they were less and less sure. What the siblings needed was
a compass, but not the sort of compass Violet had mentioned. The eldest Baudelaire was talking about a
navigational compass, which is a device that allows a person to tell you the proper direction to travel in
the ocean. But the Baudelaires needed a moral com-pass, which is something inside a person, in the
  1 7

brain or perhaps in the heart, that tells you the proper  thing to  do  in a  given situation. A navi-gational
compass, as any good inventor knows, is made from a small piece of magnetized metal and  a  simple
pivot, but the ingredients in a  moral compass are not as clear. Some believe that everyone is born
with a moral compass already inside them, like an appendix, or a fear of worms.  Others  believe that  a
moral compass develops over time, as  a  person  learns about  the decisions  of others  by observing the
world and reading books. In any case, a moral compass appears to be a delicate device, and as people
grow older and venture out into the world, it often becomes more and more difficult to fig-ure out which
direction one's moral compass is pointing, so it is harder and harder to figure out the proper thing to do.
When the Baudelaires first encountered Count Olaf, their moral com-passes never would have told them
to get rid of this terrible man, whether by pushing him out of his mysterious tower  room  or  running
him
1 8
over with his long, black automobile. But now, standing on the Carmelita, the Baudelaire  orphans
were not sure what they should do with this villain who was leaning so far over the boat  that  one  small
push would have sent him to his watery grave.
But as it happened, Violet, Klaus,  and  Sunny did not have to  make  this decision,  because  at  that
instant, as with so many instants in the Baudelaire lives, the decision was made for them, as Count Olaf
straightened up and gave the children a triumphant grin. "I'm a genius!" he announced. "I've solved all of
our problems! Look!"
The villain gestured  behind  him  with  one  thick thumb, and  the Baudelaires  peered  over  the
edge  of  the  boat  and  saw  that  the  CARMELITA  nameplate  had  been  removed,  revealing  a
nameplate  reading  COUNT  OLAF,  although  this  nameplate,  too,  was  attached  with  tape,  and  it
appeared that yet another name-plate was underneath this one. "Renaming the
1  9
boat doesn't solve any of our problems," Violet said wearily.
"Violet is right," Klaus  said.  "We still need  a  destination,  a  way  of  navigating,  and  some  kind  of
nourishment."
"Unless," Sunny said, but Count Olaf inter-rupted the youngest Baudelaire with a sly chuckle.
"You three are really quite slow-witted,"  the villain said.  "Look  at  the horizon, you fools,  and  see
what is approaching! We don't need a desti-nation or a way of navigating, because we'll go wherever it
takes us! And we're about to get more fresh water than we could drink in a lifetime!"
The Baudelaires looked out at the sea, and saw what Olaf was talking about. Spilling across the sky,
like ink staining a precious document, was an immense bank of black clouds. In the middle of the ocean,
a fierce storm can arrive out of nowhere, and this storm promised to be very fierce indeed—much fiercer
than Hurricane Herman, which had menaced the Baudelaires
2 0

some time ago  during a  voyage across  Lake  Lachrymose  that  ended  in tragedy.  Already  the children
could see the thin, sharp lines of rain falling some distance away, and here and there the clouds flickered
with furious lightning.
"Isn't it wonderful?" Count Olaf asked, his scraggly hair already fluttering in the approach-ing wind.
Over the villain's nefarious chuckle the children could hear the sound of approach-ing thunder. "A storm
like this is the answer to all your whining."
"It might destroy the boat," Violet said, looking nervously up at the tattered sails. "A boat of this size
is not designed to withstand a heavy storm."
"We have no idea where it will take us," Klaus said. "We could end up even further from civilization."
"All overboard," Sunny said.
Count Olaf looked out at the horizon again, and smiled at the storm as  if it were  an old friend
coming to visit. "Yes, those things might
  21
happen," he said with a wicked smile. "But what are you going to do about it, orphans?"
The Baudelaires followed the villain's gaze to the storm. It was difficult to believe that just moments
ago the horizon had been empty, and now this great black mass of rain and wind was staining the sky as
it drew closer and  closer.  Violet, Klaus,  and  Sunny could  do  nothing about  it. An inventing mind, the
notes of a researcher, and  surprisingly adept  cooking  skills were  no match for what was  coming. The
storm clouds unfurled wider and wider, like the layers of an onion unpeeling, or a sinister secret becoming
more and more mysterious. Whatever their moral compass told them about the proper  thing to  do,  the
Baudelaire orphans knew there was only one choice in this situation, and that was to do noth-ing as the
storm engulfed the children and the villain as they stood together in the same boat.
2 2
C H A P T E R
Two       
It is useless for me to describe to you how terri-ble Violet, Klaus, and even Sunny felt in the hours that
followed. Most people who have sur-vived a storm at  sea  are  so  shaken  by the expe-rience  that  they
never want to speak of it again, and so if a writer wishes to describe a storm at sea, his only method of
research is to stand on a large,  wooden  boat  with a  notebook  and  pen,  ready  to  take  notes  should a
storm suddenly strike. But I have already stood on a large, wooden boat with a notebook and pen, ready
to take notes should a storm suddenly strike, and by the time the storm cleared I was so shaken

by the experience that I never wanted to speak of it again. So it is useless for me to describe the force of
the wind that tore through the sails as if they were paper, and  sent  the boat  spinning like an ice-skater
showing off. It is impossible for me to convey the volume of rain that  fell, drenching the Baudelaires  in
freezing water so their concierge uniforms clung to them like an extra layer of soaked and icy skin. It is
futile for me to portray the streaks of lightning that clat-tered down from the swirling clouds, striking the
mast of the boat and sending it toppling into the churning sea. It  is inadequate  for me to  report on
the deafening thunder that rang in the Baudelaires' ears, and it is superfluous for me to recount how the
boat began to tilt back and forth, sending all of its contents tumbling into the ocean: first the jar of beans,
hitting the sur-face of the water with a loud glop!, and then the spatulas, the lightning reflecting off their
mir-rored surfaces as they disappeared into the swirling tides, and lastly the sheets Violet had
2 4
taken from the hotel laundry room and fash-ioned into a drag chute so the boat would sur-vive its drop
from the rooftop sunbathing salon, billowing in the stormy air like jellyfish before sinking into the sea. It is
worthless for me to specify the increasing size of the waves rising out of water, first like shark fins, and
then like tents, and then finally like glaciers,  their icy peaks  climbing higher and  higher until they finally
came crashing down on the soaked and crippled boat with an unearthly roar  like the laughter of some
terrible beast. It is bootless for me to render an account  of the Baudelaire  orphans clinging to one
another in fear and des-peration, certain that at any moment they would be dragged away and tossed to
their watery  graves,  while Count  Olaf clung  to  the  harpoon  gun  and  the  wooden  figurehead,  as  if  a
terrible weapon  and  a  deadly  fungus were  the  only  things he loved  in the world,  and  it is of no
earthly use to provide a report on the front of the figurehead detaching from the boat with a
2 5
deafening  crackle,  sending  the  Baudelaires  spinning  in  one  direction  and  Olaf  spinning  in  the
other, or the sudden jolt as the rest of the boat abruptly stopped spinning, and a horrible scraping
sound came from beneath the shudder-ing wood floor of the craft, as if a gigantic hand were grabbing the
remains of the Count Olaf from below, and holding the trembling siblings in its strong  and  steady  grip.
Certainly the Baudelaires did not find it necessary  to  wonder  what had  happened  now,  after  all those
terrible, whirling hours in the heart of the storm, but simply crawled together to a far corner of the boat,
and huddled against one another, too stunned to cry, as they listened to the sea rage around  them, and
heard the frantic cries  of Count Olaf, wondering if he were being torn limb from limb by the furious
storm, or if he, too, had found some strange safety, and not knowing which fate  they wished upon  the
man who had flung so much misfortune on the three of them. There is no need for me to describe
2 6
this storm, as it would only be another layer of this unfortunate onion of a story, and in any case by the

time the sun rose  the next morning,  the  swirling  black  clouds  were  already  scurrying  away  from  the
bedraggled Baudelaires, and the air was silent and still, as if the whole evening had only been  a  ghastly
nightmare.
The children stood up unsteadily in their piece of the boat, their limbs aching from cling-ing to
one another all night, and tried to figure out where in the world they were, and how in the world they had
survived. But as they gazed around at their surroundings, they could not answer these questions, as they
had never seen anything in the world like the sight that awaited them.
At first, it appeared  that the Baudelaire  orphans  were  still  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean,  as  all  the
children could  see  was  a  flat  and  wet  landscape  stretching  out  in  all  directions,  fading  into  the  gray
morning mist. But as they peered over the side of their ruined boat, the children
2  7
saw that the water  was  not much deeper  than a  puddle,  and  this enormous  puddle  was  littered  with
detritus,  a  word  which here  means "all sorts of strange items." There  were  large pieces  of wood
sticking  out  of  the  water  like  jagged  teeth,  and  long  lengths  of  rope  tangled  into  damp  and
complicated knots. There were great heaps of seaweed, and thousands of fish wrig-gling and  gaping at
the sun as  seabirds  swooped  down  from  the  misty  sky  and  helped  them-selves  to  a  seafood
breakfast.  There  were  what  looked  like  pieces  of  other  boats—anchors  and  portholes,  railings  and
masts, scattered every which way like broken  toys—and  other  objects  that  might have been  from the
boats'  cargo,  including  shattered  lanterns,  smashed  barrels,  soaked  documents,  and  the  ripped
remains of all sorts of clothing, from top hats to roller skates.  There  was  an old-fashioned  typewriter
leaning against a large, ornate bird cage, with a family of guppies wriggling through its keys. There was
a large, brass cannon, with a large
2 8
crab  clawing its way out of the barrel,  and  there  was  a  hopelessly  torn  net caught in the blades  of a
propeller. It was as if the storm had swept away the entire sea, leaving all of its contents scattered on the
ocean floor.
"What is this place?" Violet said, in a hushed whisper. "What happened?"
Klaus took his glasses out of his pocket, where he had put them for safekeeping, and was relieved to
see they were unharmed. "I think we're on a coastal shelf," he said. "There are places in the sea  where
the water is suddenly very shallow, usually near  land.  The storm  must have thrown our  boat  onto  the
shelf, along with all this other wreckage."
"Land?"  Sunny  asked,  holding  her  tiny  hand over  her eyes  so  she  might see  farther.  "Don't
see."
Klaus stepped carefully over the side of the boat. The dark water only came up to his knees, and he
began to walk around the boat in care-ful strides. "Coastal shelves are usually much
2 9

smaller than this," he said, "but there must be an island somewhere close by. Let's look for it."
Violet followed her brother  out of the boat,  carrying her sister,  who was  still quite short.  "Which
direction do you think we should go?" she asked. "We don't want to get lost."
Sunny gave her siblings a small smile. "Already lost," she pointed out.
"Sunny's right," Klaus said. "Even if we had a compass, we don't know where we are or where we
are going. We might as well head in any direction at all."
"Then I vote we head west," Violet said, pointing in the opposite direction of the rising sun. "If we're
going to be walking for a while, we don't want the sun in our eyes."
"Unless we find our concierge sunglasses," Klaus said. "The storm blew them away, but they might
have landed on the same shelf."
"We could find anything here," Violet said, and the Baudelaires had walked only a few steps
 30
before they saw this was so, for floating in the water was one piece of detritus they wished had  blown
away from them forever. Floating in a particularly filthy part of the water, stretched out flat on his back
with his harpoon  gun  lean-ing  across  one  shoulder,  was  Count  Olaf.  The  villain's  eyes  were  closed
underneath his one  eyebrow,  and  he  did  not  move.  In  all  their  mis-erable  times  with  the  count,  the
Baudelaires had never seen Olaf look so calm.
"I guess we didn't need to throw him over-board," Violet said. "The storm did it for us."
Klaus leaned down to peer closer to Olaf, but the villain still did not stir. "It must have been terrible,"
he said, "to try and ride out the storm with no kind of shelter whatsoever."
"Kikbucit?"  Sunny  asked,  but  at  that  moment  Count  Olaf's  eyes  opened  and  the  youngest
Baudelaire's question was answered. Frowning, the villain moved his eyes in one direction and then the
other.
3 1
"Where am I?" he muttered, spitting a piece of seaweed out of his mouth. "Where's my fig-urehead?"
"Coastal shelf," Sunny replied.
At the sound of Sunny's voice,  Count  Olaf blinked and  sat  up,  glaring at  the children and  shaking
water  out of his ears.  "Get me some  cof-fee,  orphans!"  he  ordered.  "I  had  a  very  unpleasant
evening, and I'd like a nice, hearty breakfast before deciding what to do with you."
"There's no coffee  here,"  Violet said,  although there  was  in fact  an espresso  machine about
twenty feet away. "We're walking west, in the hopes of finding an island."
"You'll walk where I tell you to walk," Olaf growled. "Are you forgetting that I'm the cap-tain of this
boat?"
"The boat is stuck in the sand," Klaus said. "It's quite damaged."
"Well, you're still my henchpeople," the vil-lain said, "and my orders are that we walk west,
3 2

in the hopes of finding an island. I've heard about islands in the distant parts of the sea.  The prim-itive
inhabitants  have  never  seen  civilized  people,  so  they  will  probably  revere  me  as  a  god."  The
Baudelaires looked at one another and sighed. "'Revere" is a word which here means "praise highly, and
have a  great  deal  of respect  for,"  and  there  was  no  person  the  children  revered  less  than  the
dreadful man who was  standing before  them, picking his teeth  with  a  bit  of  seashell  and  referring  to
people who lived in a certain region of the world as "primitive." Yet it seemed that no matter where the
Baude-laires traveled,  there  were  people  either so  greedy  that  they respected  and  praised  Olaf
for his evil ways, or so foolish that they didn't notice how dreadful he really was. It was enough to make
the children want to abandon Olaf there on the coastal shelf, but it is difficult to aban-don someone in a
place where everything is already abandoned, and so the three orphans
3 3
and the one villain trudged  together  westward  across  the cluttered  coastal  shelf in silence, won-dering
what was in store for them. Count Olaf led the way,  balancing the harpoon  gun on one  shoulder,  and
interrupting the silence  every  so  often  to  demand  coffee,  fresh  juice,  and  other  equally  unobtainable
breakfast  items. Violet walked  behind him, using a  broken  banister  she  found as  a  walking  stick  and
poking at interest-ing mechanical scraps she found in the muck,  and  Klaus  walked  alongside his sister,
jotting the occasional  note  in his commonplace  book.  Sunny climbed  on  top  of  Violet's  shoulders  to
serve  as  a  sort  of  lookout,  and  it  was  the  youngest  Baudelaire  who  broke  the  silence  with  a
triumphant cry.
"Land ho!" she  cried,  pointing into the mist, and  the  three  Baudelaires  could  see  the  faint
shape of an island rising out of the shelf. The island looked narrow and long, like a  freight train, and  if
they squinted they could see clus-ters of trees and what looked like enormous
3 4
sheets of white cloth billowing in the wind.
"I've discovered an island!" Count Olaf cackled. "I'm going to name it Olaf-Land!"
"You didn't discover the island," Violet pointed out. "It appears that people already live on it."
"And I am their king!" Count Olaf pro-claimed. "Hurry up, orphans! My royal subjects are going to
cook me a big breakfast, and if I'm in a good mood I might let you lick the plates!"
The Baudelaires had no intention of licking the plates of Olaf or anyone else, but neverthe-less they
continued walking toward the island, maneuvering around the wreckage that still lit-tered the surface  of
the shelf. They had just walked around a grand piano, which was stick-ing straight out of the water as if it
had  fallen  from  the  sky,  when  something  caught  the  Baudelaire  eyes—a  tiny  white  figure,  scurrying
toward them.
"What?" Sunny asked. "Who?"
"It might be another survivor of the storm,"
3 5

Klaus said. "Our boat couldn't have been the only one in this area of the ocean."
"Do you think the storm reached Kit Snicket?" Violet asked.
"Or the triplets?" Sunny said.
Count Olaf scowled,  and  put one  muddy fin-ger on the trigger of the harpoon  gun.  "If  that's  Kit
Snicket  or  some  bratty  orphan,"  he  said,  "I'll  harpoon  her  right  where  she  stands.  No  ridicu-lous
volunteer is going to take my island away from me!"
"You don't  want to  waste  your  last  harpoon,"  Violet  said,  thinking  quickly.  "Who  knows
where you'll find another one?"
"That's true," Olaf admitted. "You're be-coming an excellent henchwoman."
"Poppycock," growled Sunny, baring her teeth at the count.
"My sister's right," Klaus  said.  "It's  ridicu-lous  to  argue  about  volunteers  and  hench-people
when we're standing on a coastal shelf in the middle of the ocean."
3 6
"Don't be  so  sure,  orphan,"  Olaf replied.  "No matter where we are, there's always room  for
someone  like me." He  leaned  down  close  to  give Klaus  a  sneaky  smile, as  if he were  telling  a  joke.
"Haven't you learned that by now?"
It was an unpleasant question, but the Baudelaires did not have time to answer it, as the figure drew
closer and closer until the chil-dren could see it was a young girl, perhaps six or seven years old. She was
barefoot, and dressed in a simple, white robe that was so clean she  could  not have been  in the storm.
Hanging from the girl's belt was  a  large white seashell,  and  she  was  wearing a  pair  of sunglasses  that
looked very much like the ones the Baudelaires had worn as concierges. She  was  grinning from ear  to
ear,  but when she  reached  the Baudelaires,  panting from her long run, she  suddenly looked  shy,  and
although the Baudelaires  were  quite curious as  to  who  she  was,  they  also  found  themselves  keeping
silent. Even Olaf did not speak, and merely admired his reflection in the water.
 3 7
When  you  find  yourself  tongue-tied  in  front  of  someone  you  do  not  know,  you  might  want  to
remember something the Baudelaires'  mother told them long ago, and something she told me even
longer ago. I can see her now, sit-ting on a small couch she used to keep in the corner of her bedroom,
adjusting the straps of her sandals with one hand and munching on an apple with the other, telling me not
to worry  about  the party  that was  beginning downstairs.  "People  love  to  talk  about  themselves,  Mr.
Snicket," she  said  to  me, between  bites  of apple. "If you find yourself wondering what to  say  to
any of the guests,  ask  them which secret  code  they prefer,  or  find out whom they've  been  spying on
lately." Violet, too,  could  almost hear  her  mother's  voice  as  she  gazed  down  at  this  young  girl,  and
decided to ask her something about herself.
"What's your name?" Violet asked.
The girl fiddled with her seashell, and then
3 8

looked up at the eldest Baudelaire. "Friday," she said.
"Do you live on the island, Friday?" Violet asked.
"Yes," the girl said. "I got up early this morning to go storm scavenging."
"Storm scavawha?" Sunny asked, from Vio-let's shoulders.
"Every time there's a storm, everyone in the colony gathers everything that's collected on the coastal
shelf," Friday said. "One never knows when one of these items will come in handy. Are you castaways?"
"I guess we are," Violet said.  "We were  travel-ing by boat  when we  got caught in the storm.  I'm
Violet Baudelaire, and this is my brother, Klaus, and my sister, Sunny." She turned reluc-tantly to Olaf,
who was glaring at Friday suspi-ciously. "And this is—"
"I am your king!" Olaf announced in a grand voice. "Bow before me, Friday!"
3 9
"No, thank you," Friday said politely. "Our colony is not a monarchy. You must be exhausted from
the storm, Baudelaires. It looked so enor-mous from shore that we didn't think there'd be any castaways
this time. Why don't you come with me, and you can have something to eat?"
"We'd be most grateful," Klaus said. "Do castaways arrive on this island very often?"
"From time to time," Friday said, with a small shrug. "It seems that everything eventu-ally washes up
on our shores."
"The shores  of Olaf-Land,  you mean," Count Olaf growled. "I discovered the island, so I get
to name it."
Friday peered at Olaf curiously from behind her sunglasses. "You must be confused, sir, after your
journey through the storm," she said. "People have lived on the island for many, many years."
"Primitive people," sneered the villain. "I don't even see any houses on the island."
"We live in tents," Friday said, pointing 
4 0

at the billowing white cloths on the island. "We grew tired of building houses that would only get blown
away during the stormy season,  and  the rest  of the time the weather  is so  hot that  we  appreciate  the
ventilation that a tent pro-vides."
"I still say you're primitive," Olaf insisted, "and I don't listen to primitive people."
"I won't force you," Friday said. "Come along with me and you can decide for yourself."
"I'm not going to come along with you," Count  Olaf said,  "and neither are  my hench-people!  I'm
Count Olaf, and I'm in charge around here, not some little idiot in a robe!"
"There's no reason to be insulting," Friday said. "The island is the only place you can go, Count Olaf,
so it really doesn't matter who's in charge."
Count Olaf gave Friday a terrible scowl, and he pointed his harpoon gun straight at the young girl. "If
you don't bow before me, Friday, I'll fire this harpoon gun at you!"
4 1
The Baudelaires gasped, but Friday merely frowned at the villain. "In a few minutes," she said, "all the
inhabitants of the island will be out storm scavenging. They'll see any act of violence you commit, and you
won't be allowed on the island. Please point that weapon away from me."
Count Olaf opened his mouth as if to say something, but after a moment he shut it again, and lowered
the harpoon gun sheepishly, a word which here  means "looking quite embarrassed  to  be  following the
orders of a young girl."
"Baudelaires, please  come  with me," Friday  said,  and  began  to  lead  the way toward  the  dis-tant
island.
"What about me?" Count Olaf asked. His voice was a little squeaky, and it reminded the Baudelaires
of other voices they had heard, from people who were frightened of Olaf himself. They had  heard  this
voice from guardians of theirs, and from Mr. Poe when the villain would confront him. It was a tone  of
voice they had heard from various volunteers when discussing
4 2
Olaf's activities, and even from his henchmen when they complained about their wicked  boss.  It  was  a
tone of voice the Baudelaires had heard from themselves, during the countless times the dreadful man
had threatened  them, and  promised to get his hands on their fortune, but the children never  thought
they would hear  it from Count  Olaf himself. "What  about  me?"  he  asked  again,  but  the  siblings  had
already fol-lowed Friday  a  short  way from where  he was  standing, and  when the Baudelaire  orphans
turned to him, Olaf looked like just another piece of detritus that the storm had blown onto  the coastal
shelf.
"Go away," Friday said firmly, and the cast-aways  wondered  if finally they had  found a  place
where there was no room for Count Olaf.

4 3
Blank page   44C H A P T E R
Three
As I'm sure you know, there are many words in our myste-rious and confusing language that can mean
two completely different things. The word  "bear," for instance, can refer to a rather husky mammal
found in the woods, as in the sentence  "The  bear  moved  quietly toward  the camp  counselor,  who
was too busy putting on lipstick to notice," but it can also refer to how
Caption: A herd of sheepmuch someone can handle, as in the sentence "The loss of my camp counselor
is more than I can bear." The word "yarn" can refer both to a colorful strand of wool, as in the sentence
"His sweater was made of yarn," and to a long and  rambling story,  as  in the sentence  "His yarn about
how he lost his sweater almost put me to  sleep."  The word  "hard" can  refer  both  to  something that  is
difficult and something that is firm to the touch, and unless you come across a sentence like "The bears
bear  hard  hard  yarn yarns" you are  unlikely to  be  confused.  But as  the  Baudelaire  orphans  followed
Friday across the coastal shelf toward the island where she lived, they experienced both definitions of the
word "cordial," which can refer both to a per-son who is friendly and to a drink that is sweet, and the
more they had of one the more they were confused about the other.
"Perhaps you would care for some coconut cordial," Friday said, in a cordial tone of voice, and she
reached down to the seashell that hung

4 6
around her neck. With one slim finger she plucked  out a  stopper,  and  the children could  see  that  the
shell had  been  fashioned into a  sort  of canteen.  "You must be  thirsty from your jour-ney  through the
storm."
"We are thirsty," Violet admitted, "but isn't fresh water better for thirst?"
"There's no fresh water  on the island," Fri-day  said.  "There's  some  saltwater  falls that  we  use  for
washing, and a saltwater pool that's per-fect for swimming. But all we drink is coconut cordial. We drain
the milk from coconuts and allow it to ferment."
"Ferment?" Sunny asked.
"Friday means that the coconut milk sits around for some time, and undergoes a chemi-cal process
making it sweeter and stronger," Klaus explained, having learned about fermen-tation in a book about a
vineyard his parents had kept in the Baudelaire library.
"The sweetness will wash away the taste of the storm," Friday said, and passed the seashell
4 7
to the three  children. One  by one  they  each  took  a  sip of the cordial.  As  Friday  had  said,  the
cordial was quite sweet, but there was another taste beyond the sweetness,  something odd  and  strong
that made  them a  bit dizzy. Violet and  Klaus  both  winced  as  the  cordial  slipped  thickly  down  their
throats, and Sunny coughed as soon as the first drop reached her tongue.
"It's a little strong for us, Friday," Violet said, handing the seashell back to Friday.
"You'll get used to it," Friday said with a smile, "when you drink it at every meal. That's one of the
customs here."
"I see,"  Klaus  said,  making a  note  in his commonplace  book.  "What other  customs  do  you have
here?"
"Not too  many,"  Friday  said,  looking  first  at  Klaus's  notebook  and  then  around  her,  where  the
Baudelaires could see the distant figures of other islanders, all dressed in white, walking around the costal
shelf and poking at the wreck-age they found. "Every time there's a storm, we
 4 8  
go storm scavenging and present what we've found to a man named Ishmael. Ishmael has  been  on this
island longer than any of us, and he injured his feet some time ago and keeps them covered in island clay,
which has healing powers. Ishmael can't even stand, but he serves as the island's facilitator."
"Demarc?" Sunny asked Klaus.
"A facilitator is someone who helps other people make decisions," the middle Baudelaire explained.
Friday nodded  in agreement.  "Ishmael decides what detritus might be of use  to  us,  and  what
the sheep should drag away."
"There are sheep on the island?" Violet asked.
"A herd of wild sheep washed up on our shores many, many years ago," Friday said, "and they roam
free, except when they're needed to drag our scavenged items to the arboretum,  on the far side  of the
island over that brae over there."
4 9
"Brae?" Sunny asked.
"A brae is a steep hill," Klaus said, "and an arboretum is a place where trees grow."

"All that grows in the island's arboretum is one enormous apple tree," Friday said, "or at least, that's
what I've heard."
"You've never been to the far side of the island?" Violet asked.
"No one goes to the far side of the island," Friday said. "Ishmael says it's too dangerous with all the
items the sheep  have  brought  there.  Nobody  even  picks  the  bitter  apples  from  the  tree,  except  on
Decision Day."
"Holiday?" Sunny asked.
"I guess it's something of a holiday," Friday said. "Once a year, the tides turn in this part of the ocean,
and the coastal shelf is completely covered in water. It's the one time a year that it's deep enough to sail
away from the island. All year long we build an enormous outrigger, which is a type of canoe, and
the day the tides turn we have a feast and a talent show. Then
5 0
anyone who wishes to  leave our  colony  indicates  their  decision  by  taking  a  bite  of  bitter  apple  and
spitting it onto the ground before boarding the outrigger and bidding us farewell."
"Yuck," the youngest Baudelaire said, imag-ining a crowd of people spitting up apple.
"There's nothing yucky about  it," Friday  said with a frown. "It's the colony's most impor-tant
custom."
"I'm sure it's wonderful," Violet said, remind-ing her sister with a stern glance that it is not polite to
insult the customs of others.
"It is," Friday said. "Of course, people rarely leave this island. No  one  has  left since before  I was
born,  so  each  year  we  simply light the out-rigger  on fire, and  push it out to  sea.  Watching  a  burning
outrigger slowly vanish on the hori-zon is a beautiful sight."
"It sounds beautiful," Klaus said, although the middle Baudelaire thought it sounded more creepy than
beautiful, "but it seems a waste to build a canoe every year only to burn it up."
5 1
"It gives us something to do," Friday said with a  shrug. "Besides  building the outrigger, there's  not
much to occupy us on the island. We catch fish, and cook meals, and do the laundry, but that still leaves
much of the day unoccupied."
"Cook?" Sunny asked eagerly.
"My sister is something of a chef," Klaus said. "I'm sure she'd be happy to help with the cooking."
Friday smiled,  and  put  her  hands  in  the  deep  pockets  of  her  robe.  "I'll  keep  that  in
mind," she said. "Are you sure you don't want another sip of cordial?"
All three  Baudelaires  shook  their heads.  "No, thank you," Violet said, "but it's kind of you to
offer."
"Ishmael  says  that  everyone  should  be  treated  with kindness,"  Friday  said,  "unless they are
unkind themselves. That's why I left that horrible man Count Olaf behind. Were you traveling with him?"
The Baudelaires looked at one another,
5 2

unsure of how to answer this question. On one hand, Friday seemed very cordial, but like the cordial she
offered,  there  was  something  else  besides  sweetness  in  her  description  of  the  island.  The
colony's customs sounded very strict, and although the siblings were relieved to be  out of Count
Olaf's  company,  there  seemed  something  cruel  about  abandoning  Olaf  on  the  coastal  shelf,  even
though he certainly would have done the same to the orphans if he'd had the opportunity. Violet, Klaus,
and Sunny were not sure  how Friday  would react  if they admitted  being in the villain's company,  and
they did not reply for a  moment, until  the  middle Baudelaire  remembered  an expression  he had
read in a novel about people who were very, very polite.
"It depends  on how you look  at  it," Klaus  said,  using a  phrase  which sounds  like  an  answer  but
scarcely means anything at all. Friday gave him a curious look, but the children had reached the end  of
the coastal shelf and were standing
5 3
at the edge  of the island. It  was  a  sloping beach  with sand  so  white that  Friday's  white  robe  looked
almost invisible, and at the top of the slope was an outrigger, fashioned from wild grasses and the limbs of
trees,  which looked  nearly finished, as  if Decision Day was  arriving  soon.  Past  the  outrigger  was  an
enormous white tent, as long as a school bus. The Baudelaires followed Friday inside the tent, and found
to their surprise that it was filled with sheep, who all lay dozing on the ground. The sheep appeared
to be tied together with thick, frayed rope, and towering over the sheep was an old man smiling at  the
Baudelaires through a beard as thick and wild as the sheep's woolly coats. He sat in an enormous chair
that looked as if it were fashioned out of white clay, and two more piles of clay rose up where  his feet
should have been. He was wearing a robe like Friday's and had a similar seashell hanging from his belt,
and his voice was as cordial as Friday's as he smiled down at the three siblings.
5 4
"What have we here?" he said.
"I found three castaways on the coastal shelf," Friday said proudly.
"Welcome, castaways," Ishmael said. "For-give me for remaining seated, but my feet are quite sore
today, so I'm making use of our heal-ing clay. It's very nice to meet you."
"It's nice to  meet you, Ishmael," said  Vio-let,  who thought healing clay was  of  dubious  sci-entific
efficacy, a phrase which here means "unlikely to heal sore feet."
"Call me Ish," said Ishmael, leaning down to scratch the heads of one of the sheep. "And what shall I
call you?"
"Violet,  Klaus,  and  Sunny  Baudelaire,"  Fri-day  chimed  in,  before  the  siblings  could  intro-duce
themselves.
"Baudelaire?" Ishmael repeated, and raised his eyebrows. He gazed at the three children in silence as
he took a long sip of cordial from his seashell, and for just one moment his smile seemed to  disappear.
But then he gazed down
5 5

at the siblings and grinned heartily. "We haven't had new islanders in quite some time. You're welcome to
stay as long as you'd like, unless you're unkind, of course."
"Thank you," Klaus said, as kindly as he could. "Friday has told us a few things about the island. It
sounds quite interesting."
"It depends on how you look at it," Ishmael said.  "Even if you want to  leave,  you'll only have the
opportunity once  a  year.  In the meantime, Friday,  why don't  you  show  them  to  a  tent,  so  they  can
change their clothes? We should have some new woolen robes that fit you nicely."
"We would appreciate that," Violet said. "Our concierge uniforms are quite soaked from the storm."
"I'm sure they are," Ishmael said, twisting a strand of beard in his fingers. "Besides, our cus-tom is to
wear nothing but white, to match the sand of the islands, the healing clay of the pool, and the wool of the
wild sheep. Friday, I'm sur-prised you are choosing to break with tradition."
5 6
Friday  blushed,  and  her  hand  rose  to  the  sun-glasses  she  was  wearing.  "I  found  these  in  the
wreckage," she said. "The sun is so bright on the island, I thought they might come in handy."
"I won't force you," Ishmael said calmly, "but it seems to me you might prefer to dress according to
custom, rather than showing off your new eyewear."
"You're right, Ishmael," Friday said quietly, and removed  her sunglasses  with one  hand while
the other hand darted into one of her robe's deep pockets.
"That's better,"  Ishmael said,  and  smiled at  the Baudelaires.  "I  hope  you  will  enjoy  living  on  this
island," he said. "We're all castaways here, from one storm or another, and rather than trying to  return
to the world, we've built a colony safe from the world's treachery."
"There was  a  treacherous  person  with them," Friday piped up eagerly. "His name was Count
Olaf, but he was so nasty that I didn't let him come with us."
5 7   
"Olaf?" Ishmael said, and his eyebrows raised again. "Is this man a friend of yours?"
"Fat chance," Sunny said.
"No,  he isn't," Violet translated  quickly. "To tell you the truth, we've  been  trying to  escape  from
Count Olaf for quite some time."
"He's a dreadful man," Klaus said.
"Same boat," Sunny said.
"Hmmm," Ishmael said thoughtfully. "Is that the whole story, Baudelaires?"
The children looked at one  another.  Of course, the few sentences they'd uttered were not the
whole story.  There  was  much, much more  to  the story  of the Baudelaires  and  Count  Olaf,  and  if the
children had recited all of it Ish-mael probably would have wept until the tears melted away the clay so
his feet were bare and he had nothing to sit on.  The Baudelaires  could  have told  the island's  facilitator
about all of Count Olaf's schemes, from his vicious murder of Uncle Monty to his betrayal  of Madame
Lulu at the Caligari Carnival. They could have told
5 8
him about his disguises, from his false peg leg when he was pretending to be Captain Sham, to his running

shoes and turban when he was calling himself Coach Genghis. They could have told Ishmael about
Olaf's  many  comrades,  from  his  girlfriend  Esmé  Squalor  to  the  two  white-faced  women  who  had
disappeared  in the Mortmain Mountains,  and  they could  have told  Ishmael  about  all  of  the  unsolved
mysteries that still kept the Baudelaires awake at night, from the disappearance of Captain Widdershins
from an underwater cavern to the strange taxi driver who had approached the children outside  the
Hotel Denouement,  and  of course  they could  have told  Ishmael about  that  ghastly  day  at
Briny Beach,  when they first heard  the news  of their parents'  deaths.  But if  the  Baudelaires  had  told
Ishmael the whole story, they would have had to tell the parts that put the Baudelaires in an unfavorable
light,  a  phrase  which  here  means  "the  things  the  Baudelaires  had  done  that  were  perhaps  as
treacherous as Olaf." They would
5 9
have talked about their own schemes, from dig-ging a pit to trap Esmé to starting the fire that destroyed
the Hotel Denouement. They would have mentioned their own disguises, from Sunny pretending to
be Chabo the Wolf Baby to Violet and Klaus pretending to be Snow Scouts, and their own comrades,
from Justice Strauss, who turned out to be more useful than they had first thought, to Fiona, who turned
out to be more treacherous than they had imagined. If the Baudelaire orphans had told Ishmael the whole
story, they might have looked as villain-ous as  Count  Olaf.  The Baudelaires  did not want to find
themselves back on the coastal shelf, with all the detritus of the storm. They wanted  to  be  safe  from
treachery and  harm, even if the customs of the island colony were not exactly to their liking, and so,
rather than telling Ishmael the whole story, the Baudelaires merely nodded, and said the safest thing they
could think of.
"It depends on how you look at it," Violet
6 0
said, and her siblings nodded in agreement.
"Very well," Ishmael said. "Run along and find your robes,  and  once  you've  changed,  please
give all of your old things to Friday and we'll haul them off to the arboretum."
"Everything?" Klaus said.
Ishmael nodded. "That's our custom."
"Occulaklaus?" Sunny asked,  and  her  sib-lings  quickly  explained  that  she  meant  some-thing  like,
"What about Klaus's glasses?"
"He can scarcely read without them," Vio-let added.
Ishmael raised his eyebrows  again. "Well, there's  no library here,"  he said  quickly, with a  nervous
glance at Friday, "but I suppose your eyeglasses are of some use. Now, hurry along, Baudelaires, unless
you'd like a sip of cordial before you go."
"No, thank you," Klaus said, wondering how many times he and  his siblings would be  offered  this
strange, sweet beverage. "My siblings and I tried some, and didn't care much for the taste."
6   1     
"I won't force you," Ishmael said again, "but your initial opinion on just about  anything may change
over time. See you soon, Baudelaires."

He gave them a small wave, and the Baude-laires waved back as Friday led them out of the tent and
farther uphill where more tents were fluttering in the morning breeze.
"Choose any tent you like," Friday  said.  "We all switch tents each day—except for Ish-mael,
because of his feet."
"Isn't it confusing to sleep in a different place each night?" Violet asked.
"It depends on how you look at it," Friday said, taking a sip from her seashell. "I've never slept any
other way."
"Have you lived your whole life on this island?" Klaus said.
"Yes," Friday said. "My mother and father took an ocean cruise while she was pregnant, and ran into
a terrible storm. My father was devoured by a manatee, and my mother was washed ashore  when she
was pregnant with me.
6 2
You'll meet her soon. Now please hurry up and change."
"Prompt," Sunny assured her, and Friday took her hand out of her pocket and  shook  Sunny's.
The Baudelaires  walked  into  the  near-est  tent,  where  a  pile  of  robes  lay  folded  in  one  corner.  In
moments,  they  changed  into  their  new clothes,  happy  to  discard  their concierge  uniforms,  which
were soaked and salty from the night's storm. When they were finished, how-ever, they stood and stared
for a moment at the pile of damp clothing. The Baudelaires felt strange to don the garments of shibboleth,
a phrase which here means "wear the warm and somewhat unflattering clothing that  was  custom-ary  to
people they hardly knew." It felt as if the three siblings were casting away everything that had happened
to them prior to their arrival on the island. Their clothing, of course, was not the Baudelaires' whole story,
as clothing is never any-one's whole story, except perhaps in the case of Esmé Squalor, whose villainous
and fashionable
 6 3
clothing revealed just how villainous and fash-ionable  she  was.  But the Baudelaires  could  not help but
feel that they were abandoning their previous lives, in favor of new lives on an island of strange customs.
"I  won't  throw  away  this  ribbon,"  Violet  said,  winding  the  slender  piece  of  cloth  through  her
fingertips. "I'm still going to invent things, no matter what Ishmael says."
"I'm not throwing away my commonplace book," Klaus said, holding the dark blue note-book. "I'll
still research things, even if there's no library here."
"No throw this," Sunny said, and held up a small metal implement so her siblings could see. One end was a
small, simple handle,  perfect  for Sunny's petite  hands,  and  the other  end  branched  into several  sturdy
wires that were meshed together like a small shrubbery.
"What is that?" Violet asked.
"Whisk," Sunny said, and she was exactly right. A whisk is a kitchen tool used to mix
64ingredients together rapidly, and the youngest Baudelaire was happy to have such a useful item in her
possession.
"Yes," Klaus  said.  "I remember  our  father used  to  use  it when he prepared  scrambled  eggs.  But

where did it come from?"
"Gal Friday," Sunny said.
"She knows Sunny can cook," Violet said, "but she  must  have  thought  Ishmael  would  make
her throw the whisk away."
"I guess she's not so eager to follow all of the colony's customs," Klaus said.
"Guesso," Sunny agreed, and put the whisk in one of her robe's deep pockets. Klaus did the same
with his commonplace  book,  and  Violet did the  same  with  her  ribbon,  and  the  three  of  them  stood
together for a moment, sharing their pock-eted secrets. It felt strange to be keeping secrets from people
who had taken them in so kindly, just as it felt strange not to tell Ishmael their whole story. The secrets of
the ribbon, the com-monplace book, and the whisk felt submerged,
6 5
a word for "hidden" that usually applies  to  things underwater, such as a submarine sub-merged
in the sea,  or  a  boat's  figure-head  submerged  in a  coastal  shelf, and  with each step the
Baudelaires took out of the tent, they felt their submerged secrets bumping up against them from within
the pockets of their robes.
The word  "ferment," like the words  "bear,"  "yarn," and  "hard," can  mean two  completely different
things. One meaning is the chemical process by which the juice of certain fruits becomes  sweeter  and
stronger,  as  Klaus  explained to his siblings on the coastal  shelf. But the other  meaning of "ferment"
refers to something building inside someone,  like a  secret that may be eventually found out,  or  a
scheme  that  someone  has  been  planning  for  quite  some  time.  As  the  three  Baudelaires
exited the tent,  and  handed  the  detritus  of  their  previous  lives  to  Friday,  they  felt  their  own  secrets
fermenting inside them, and wondered
6 6
what other secrets and schemes lay undiscov-ered. The Baudelaire orphans followed Friday back down
the sloping beach,  and  wondered  what else  was  fermenting on this strange  island  that  was  their  new
home.

6 7
Blank page 68C H A P T E R
Four
By the time the Baudelaire orphans returned to Ishmael's tent, the joint was hopping, a phrase which here
means "full of islanders in white robes, all holding items they had scavenged from the  coastal  shelf."
The  sheep  were  no  longer napping but standing stiffly in two  long  lines,  and  the  ropes  tying  them
together led to a large wooden sleigh—an unusual form of

Caption: The islanders on storm  scavengingtransportation in such warm weather. Friday led the children
through the colonists and sheep, who stepped aside and looked curiously at the three new castaways.
Although this was the first time that the Baudelaires were castaways, they were accustomed to being
strangers in a com-munity, from their days at Prufrock Preparatory School to their time spent in the
Village of Fowl Devotees, but they still did not enjoy being stared at. But it is one of the strange truths of
life that practically nobody likes to be stared at and that practically nobody can stop themselves from
staring, and as the three children made their way toward Ishmael, who was still sitting on his enormous
clay chair, the Baudelaires could not help looking back at the islanders with the same curiosity,
wondering how so many people could become castaways on the same island. It was as if the world was
full of people with lives as unfortunate as that of the Baude-laires, all ending up in the very same
place.
7 0
Friday led the Baudelaires  to  the  base  of  Ishmael's  chair,  and  the  facilitator  smiled  down  at  the
children  as  they  sat  at  his  clay-covered  feet.  "Those  white  robes  look  very  handsome  on  you
Baudelaires," he said. "Much better  than those  uniforms you were  wearing earlier.  You're  going to  be
wonderful colonists, I am sure of it."
"Pyrrhonic?" Sunny said, which meant something along the lines of, "How can you be sure of such a
thing  based  on  our  clothing?"  But  rather  than  translate,  Violet  remembered  that  the  colony  valued
kindness and decided to say something kind.
"I can't tell you how much we appreciate this," Violet said, careful not to lean against the mounds of
clay that hid Ishmael's  toes.  "We  didn't  know  what  would  happen  to  us  after  the  storm,  and  we're
grateful to you, Ishmael, for taking us in."
"Everyone is taken in here," Ishmael said, apparently forgetting that Count Olaf had been
71
abandoned. "And please, call me Ish. Would you like some cordial?"
"No,  thank  you," said  Klaus,  who could  not bring himself to  call the facilitator by  his  nick-name.
"We'd like to meet the other colonists, if that's all right."
"Of course," Ishmael said, and clapped his hands for attention. "Islanders!" he cried. "As I'm  sure
you've noticed,  we  have three  new castaways with us today—Violet, Klaus, and  Sunny, the only
survivors of that terrible storm. I'm not going to force you,  but as  you bring up your storm  scavenging

items for my suggestions, why don't you introduce yourselves to our new colonists?"
"Good idea, Ishmael," said someone from the back of the tent.
"Call me Ish," said Ishmael, stroking his beard. "Now then, who's first?"
"I suppose  I am," said  a  pleasant-looking  man who was  holding  what  looked  like  a  large,  metal
flower. "It's nice to meet you three. My
7 2
name is Alonso, and I've found the propeller of an airplane. The poor pilot must have flown straight into
the storm."
"What a shame," Ishmael said. "Well, there's no airplane to be found on the island, so I don't think a
propeller will be of much use."
"Excuse me," Violet said hesitantly, "but I know something about  mechanical devices.  If we  rigged
the  propeller  up  to  a  simple  hand-powered  motor,  we'd  have  a  perfect  fan  for  keeping  cool  on
particularly hot days."
There was  a  murmur of appreciation  from the crowd,  and  Alonso  smiled  at  Violet.  "It  does  get
mighty hot around here," he said. "That's a good idea."
Ishmael took a sip of cordial from his seashell, and then frowned at the propeller. "It depends
on how you look at it," he said. "If we only made one fan, then we'd all be arguing over who got to stand
in front of it."
"We could take turns," Alonso said.
"Whose turn will it be on the hottest day of
7 3
the year?" Ishmael countered, a word which here means "said in a firm and sensible tone of voice, even
though it was not necessarily a sensible thing to  say." "I'm not going to  force  you,  Alonso, but I
don't think building a fan is worth all the fuss it might cause."
"I suppose you're  right," Alonso said,  with a  shrug, and  put the propeller  on the wooden  sleigh.
"The sheep can take it to the arbore-tum."
"An excellent decision," Ishmael said, as a girl perhaps one or two years older than Violet stepped
forward.
"I'm Ariel," she said, "and I found this in a particularly shallow part of the shelf. I think it's a dagger."
"A dagger?" Ishmael said. "You know we don't welcome weapons on the island."
Klaus was peering at the item Ariel was holding, which was made of carved wood rather than metal.
"I don't think that's a dagger," Klaus said. "I believe it's an old tool used for cutting
7 4
the pages  of books.  Nowadays  most books  are  sold  with  their  pages  already  separated,  but
some years ago each page was attached to the next, so you needed an implement to slice open the folds
of paper and read the book."
"That's interesting," Ariel remarked.
"It depends on how you look at it," Ishmael said. "I fail to see how it could  be  of use  here.  We've
never had a single book wash ashore— the storms simply tear the pages apart."
Klaus reached into his pocket and touched his hidden commonplace  book.  "You never  know
when a book might turn up," he pointed out. "In my opinion, that tool might be useful to keep around."

Ishmael sighed, looking first at Klaus and then at the girl who had found the item. "Well, I'm not going
to force you, Ariel," he said, "but if I were you I would toss that silly thing onto the sleigh."
"I'm sure you're right," Ariel said, shrugging at Klaus, and she put the page cutter next to the
7 5
propeller as a plump man with a sunburned face stepped forward.
"Sherman's the name," said Sherman, with a little bow  to  all three  siblings. "And I found a  cheese
grater. I nearly lost a finger prying it away from a nest of crabs!"
"You shouldn't have gone to  all  that  trouble," Ishmael said.  "We're  not going to  have much
use for a cheese grater without any cheese."
"Grate coconut," Sunny said. "Delicious cake."
"Cake?" Sherman said. "Egad, that would be  delicious. We  haven't  had  dessert  since I've  arrived
here."
"Coconut cordial is sweeter  than dessert,"  Ishmael said,  raising his seashell to  his lips. "I certainly
wouldn't force you, Sherman, but I do think it would be best if that grater were thrown away."
Sherman took a sip from his own seashell, and then nodded, looking down at the sand.
7 6
"Very well," he said, and the rest of the morn-ing proceeded in a similar manner. Islander after  islander
introduced  themselves  and  presented  the  items  they  had  found,  and  nearly  every  time  the  colony's
facilitator discouraged them from keeping anything. A bearded man named Robin-son found a  pair  of
overalls,  but  Ishmael  reminded  him  that  the  colony  only  wore  the  cus-tomary  white  robes,  even
though Violet could imagine herself wearing them while inventing some sort of mechanical device, so  as
not to get her robe dirty. An old woman named Erewhon held up a pair of skis that Ishmael dismissed as
impractical,  although  Klaus  had  read  of  people  who  had  used  skis  to  cross  mud  and  sand,  and  a
red-haired  woman named Weyden  offered  a  salad  spinner,  but  Ishmael  reminded  her  that  the
island's only salads were to be made from the sea-weed that was rinsed in the pool and dried out in the
sun, rather than spun, even though Sunny could almost taste a dried coconut snack that such an appliance
could have made. Ferdinand
7 7  
island  to  dump  the  items  in  the  arboretum,  and  the  islanders  excused  themselves,  at  Ishmael's
suggestion, to  wash  their hands  for  lunch.  Within moments the only occupants  of the tent  were
Ishmael, the Baudelaire orphans, and the girl who had first brought them to the tent,  as  if the  siblings
were merely another piece of wreckage to be picked over for approval.
"Quite a storm, wasn't it?" asked Ishmael, after a short silence. "We scavenged even more junk than
usual."
"Were any other castaways found?" Violet asked.
"Do  you  mean  Count  Olaf?"  Ishmael  asked.  "After  Friday  abandoned  him,  he'd  never  dare
approach the island. He's either wandering around the coastal shelf, or he's trying to swim his way
back to wherever he came from."
The Baudelaires  looked  at  one  another,  knowing full well that Count Olaf was likely hatching
some scheme, particularly as none of the islanders had found the boat's figurehead,

8 0
where the deadly  spores  of the Medusoid  Mycelium were  hidden.  "We weren't  just think-ing of
Olaf," Klaus said. "We had some  friends who may have been  caught in the same  storm—  a  pregnant
woman named Kit Snicket who was in a  submarine with some  associates,  and  a  group of people
who were traveling by air."
Ishmael frowned,  and  drank  some  cordial  from his seashell.  "Those people  haven't  turned  up," he
said,  "but  don't  despair,  Baudelaires.  It  seems  that  everything  eventually  washes  up  on  our  shores.
Perhaps their crafts were unharmed by the storm."
"Perhaps," Sunny agreed, trying not to think that they might not have been as lucky as that.
"They might turn up in the next day or so," Ishmael continued. "Another storm is heading this way."
"How do you know?" Violet asked. "Is there a barometer on the island?"
"There's no barometer," Ishmael said, refer-ring to a device that measures the pressure in
8 1 the atmosphere, which is one way of predicting the weather. "I just know there's one coming."
"How  would  you  know  such  a  thing?"  Klaus  asked,  stopping  himself  from  retrieving  his
com-monplace book so he could take notes. "I've always heard that the weather is difficult to  pre-dict
without advanced instruments."
"We don't need any advanced instruments on this colony," Ishmael said.  "I predict  the weather  by
using magic."
"Meledrub,"  Sunny  said,  which  meant  something  along  the  lines  of,  "I  find  that  very  difficult  to
believe," and  her siblings silently agreed.  The  Baudelaires,  as  a  rule,  did  not  believe  in  magic,
although their mother had had a nifty card trick she could occasionally be per-suaded to perform. Like all
people who have seen something of the world, the children had  come  across  plenty of things they had
been unable to explain, from the diabolical hypnotism techniques of Dr. Orwell to the way a girl named
Fiona had broken Klaus's heart, but they had
82never been tempted to solve these mysteries with a supernatural explanation like magic. Late at
night, of course, when one is sitting upright in bed, having been woken up by a sudden loud noise, one
believes in all sorts of supernatural things, but it was early afternoon, and the Baudelaires simply could not
imagine that Ish-mael was some sort of magical weatherman. Their doubt must have shown on their
faces, for the facilitator immediately did what many people do when they are not believed, and
hur-riedly changed the subject.
"What about you, Friday?" Ishmael asked. "Did you find anything else  besides  the cast-aways  and
those awful sunglasses?"
Friday looked quickly at Sunny, but then shook her head firmly. "No," she said.
"Then please go help your mother with lunch," he said, "while I talk to our new colonists."
"Do I have to?" Friday asked. "I'd rather stay here, with the Baudelaires."
83   "I'm not going to force you," Ishmael said gently, "but I'm sure your mother
could use some help."
Without another word, Friday turned and left the tent,  walking up the sloping  beach  toward
the other tents of the colony, and the Baudelaires were alone with their facilitator, who leaned down to
speak quietly to the orphans.

"Baudelaires," he said, "as your facilitator, allow me to give you a piece of advice, as you begin your
stay on this island."
"What might that be?" Violet asked.
Ishmael looked around the tent, as if spies were lurking behind the white, fluttering fab-ric. He took
another  sip  from  his  seashell,  and  cracked  his  knuckles.  "Don't  rock  the  boat,"  he  said,  using  an
expression which here means "Don't upset people by doing something that  is not customary."  His tone
was very cordial, but the children could hear something less cordial almost hidden in his voice,  the
way a coastal
8 4
shelf is almost hidden by water. "We've been living by our customs for quite some time. Most of us can
scarcely remember our lives before we became castaways, and there is a whole genera-tion of islanders
who have never  lived anywhere  else.  My advice  to  you  is  not  to  ask  so  many  questions  or  meddle
around too much with our  customs.  We  have taken  you in, Baudelaires,  which is a  kindness,  and  we
expect kindness in return. If you keep prying into the affairs of the island, people  are  going to  think
you're unkind—just like Friday thought Olaf was unkind. So don't rock the boat. After all, rock-ing the
boat is what got you here in the first place."
Ishmael smiled at  his little joke,  and  although they found nothing funny about pok-ing fun at a
shipwreck that had nearly killed them, the children gave Ishmael a nervous  smile in return,  and  said  no
more. The tent was silent for a  few minutes, until a  pleasant-looking  woman with a  freckly face
walked into the tent
8 5
carrying an enormous clay jar.
"You must be  the Baudelaires,"  she  said,  as  Friday  followed her into the tent  carrying a  stack  of
bowls  fashioned  from  coconut  shells,  "and  you  must  be  starving,  too.  I'm  Mrs.  Cal-iban,  Friday's
mother, and I do most of the cook-ing around here. Why don't you have some lunch?"
"That would be wonderful," Klaus said. "We're quite hungry."
"Whatya fixin?" asked Sunny.
Mrs. Caliban smiled, and opened the jar so the children could peek inside. "Ceviche," she said. "It's
a South American dish of chopped raw seafood."
"Oh," Violet said,  with as  much enthusiasm as  she  could  muster.  Ceviche  is  an  acquired  taste,  a
phrase  which here  means "something you  don't  like  the  first  few  times  you  eat  it,"  and  although  the
Baudelaires  had  eaten  ceviche  before—their  mother  used  to  make  it  in  the  Baudelaire  kitchen,  to
celebrate the beginning
86of crab season—it was none of the children's favorite food, and not precisely what they had in
mind as a first meal after being shipwrecked. When I was shipwrecked recently, for instance, I had the
fortune to wash aboard a barge where I enjoyed a late supper of roast leg of lamb with creamed polenta
and a fricassee of baby arti-chokes, followed by some aged Gouda served with roasted figs, and finished
up with some fresh strawberries dipped in milk chocolate and crushed honeycomb, and I found this to be
a wonderful antidote to being tossed like a rag doll in the turbulent waters of a particularly stormy
creek. But the Baudelaires accepted their bowls of ceviche, as well as the strange utensils Friday
handed them, which were made of wood and looked like a combination of a fork and a spoon.

"They're runcible spoons," Friday explained. "We don't have forks or  knives in the colony,  as  they
can be used as weapons."
"I suppose that's sensible,"  Klaus  said,
87  
although he couldn't  help but think that nearly anything could  be  used  as  a  weapon,  if one  were  in a
weaponry mood.
"I hope you like it," Mrs. Caliban said. "There's not much else you can cook with raw seafood."
"Negihama," Sunny said.
"My sister is something of a chef," Violet explained, "and was suggesting that she could prepare some
Japanese dishes for the colony, if there were any wasabi to be had."
The younger Baudelaires gave their sister a brief nod, realizing that Violet was asking about wasabi
not only because  it might allow Sunny to  make  something palatable—a  word  which here  means "that
wasn't ceviche"—but because wasabi, which is a sort of horseradish often used in Japanese  food,  was
one of the few defenses against the Medusoid  Mycelium, and  with Count Olaf lurking about, she
wanted to think about possible strategies should the deadly fun-gus be let loose from the helmet.
88"We don't have any wasabi," Mrs. Caliban said. "We don't have any spices at all, in fact. No
spices have washed up on the coastal shelf."
"Even if  they  did,"  Ishmael  added  quickly,  "I  think  we'd  just  throw  them  in  the  arboretum.  The
stomachs of the colonists are used to spice-less ceviche, and we wouldn't want to rock the boat."
Klaus took  a  bite of ceviche from his runci-ble  spoon,  and  grimaced at  the taste.  Tradition-ally a
ceviche is marinated  in spices,  which  gives  it  an  unusual  but  often  delicious  flavor,  but  without  such
seasoning, Mrs. Caliban's ceviche tasted like whatever you might find in a fish's mouth while it was eating.
"Do you eat ceviche for every meal?" he asked.
"Certainly not," Mrs. Caliban said with a little laugh. "That would get tiresome, wouldn't it? No, we
only have ceviche for lunch. Every morning we have seaweed salad for breakfast, and for dinner we have
a mild onion soup served with a handful of wild grass. You might get tired
8 9
of such bland  food,  but  it  tastes  better  if  you  wash  it  down  with  coconut  cordial."  Friday's  mother
reached  into a  deep  pocket  in  her  white  robe,  and  brought  out  three  large  seashells  that  had  been
fashioned into canteens, and handed one to each Baudelaire.
"Let's drink a toast," Friday suggested, holding up her own seashell. Mrs. Caliban  raised hers,
and Ishmael wiggled in his clay chair and opened the stopper of his seashell once more.
"An excellent idea," the facilitator said, with a wide, wide smile. "Let's drink a toast to the Baudelaire
orphans!"
"To the Baudelaires!" agreed Mrs. Caliban, raising her seashell. "Welcome to the island!"
"I hope you stay here forever and ever!" Fri-day cried.
The Baudelaires  looked  at  the three  islanders  grinning at  them, and  tried  their  best  to  grin  back,
although they had so much on their minds that their grins were not very enthusiastic. The
9 0Baudelaires wondered if they really had to eat spiceless ceviche, not only for this particular lunch, but

for future lunches on the island. The Baudelaires wondered if they had to drink more of the coconut
cordial, and if refusing to do so would be considered rocking the boat. They wondered why the
figurehead of the boat had not been found, and they wondered where Count Olaf was, and what
he was up to, and they wondered about their friends and associ-ates who were somewhere at sea, and
about all of the people they had left behind in the Hotel Denouement. But at this moment, the
Baude-laires wondered one thing most of all, and that was why Ishmael had called them orphans,
when they hadn't told him their whole story. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny looked first at their bowls of
ceviche, and then at Friday and her mother, and then at their seashells, and finally up at Ishmael, who
was smiling down at them from his enormous chair, and the castaways wondered if they really had
reached a place that
9 1
was far from the world's  treachery  or  if the  world's  treachery  was  just  hidden  someplace,  the  way
Count  Olaf  was  hidden  somewhere  very  nearby  at  that  very  moment.  They  looked  up  at  their
facilitator, uncertain if they were safe after all, and wondering what they could do about it if they weren't.
"I won't force you," Ishmael said quietly to  the children, and  the Baudelaire  orphans  won-dered  if
that were true after all.
9 2
C H A P T E R
Five
Unless  you are  unusually insouciant—which is merely a  fancy way of saying "the  opposite  of
curious"—or one of the Baudelaire orphans yourself, you are probably wondering whether or not
the three children drank the coconut cor-dial that was offered them rather forcefully by Ishmael.

Perhaps you have been in situations
Caption: A very big pile of books floating at the coast with someone over it.yourself, where you have
been offered a bever-age or food you would rather not consume by someone you would rather not
refuse, or per-haps you have been warned about people who will offer such things and told to avoid
suc-cumbing, a word which here means "accepting, rather than refusing, what you are given." Such
situations are often referred to as incidents of "peer pressure," as "peer" is a word for some-one with
whom you are associating and "pres-sure" is a word for the influence such people often have. If you
are a braeman or brae-woman—a term for someone who lives all alone on a hill—then peer pressure
is fairly easy to avoid, as you have no peers except for the occa-sional wild sheep who may wander near
your cave and try to pressure you into growing a woolly coat. But if you live among people, whether they
are people in your family, in your school, or in your secret organization, then every moment of your life is
an incident of peer pres-sure, and you cannot avoid it any more than a
9 4
boat at sea can avoid a surrounding storm. If you wake up in the morning at a particular time, when you
would rather hide your head under your pillow until you are too hungry to stand it any longer, then you
are  succumbing to  the  peer  pressure  of  your  warden  or  morning  butler.  If  you  eat  a  breakfast  that
someone prepares for you, or  prepare  your own breakfast  from food  you have purchased,  when you
would rather stomp your feet and demand delicacies from faraway lands, then you are succumbing to the
peer pressure of your grocer or breakfast chef. All day long, everyone in the world is succumbing to peer
 pressure, whether it is the pressure of their fourth grade peers to play dodge ball during recess or
the pressure of their fellow circus per-formers to balance rubber balls on their noses,  and  if you try to
avoid every instance of peer pressure you will end up without any peers whatsoever,  and  the trick  is
to succumb to  enough pressure  that you do  not drive your  peers  away,  but not so  much that
you end up in
9 5
a situation in which you are dead or otherwise uncomfortable. This is a  difficult trick,  and  most people
never master it, and end up dead or uncomfortable at least once during their lives.
The  Baudelaire  orphans  had  been  uncom-fortable  more  than  enough  times  over  the
course of their misadventures, and having found themselves on a distant island with only one set of peers

to choose from, they succumbed to the pressure of Ishmael, and Friday, and Mrs.  Cal-iban,  and  all of
the other islanders who lived with the children in their new home. They sat in Ishmael's tent, and drank a
bit of coconut cor-dial as they ate their lunch of spice-free ceviche, even though the drink left them
feeling a  bit dizzy and the food left them feeling a bit slimy, rather than leaving the colony and  finding
their own food and drink. They wore their white robes, even though they were a bit heavy for the
warm weather,  rather  than trying  to  fashion  gar-ments  of  their  own.  And  they  kept  quiet  about  the
discouraged items they were keeping in
9 6
their pockets—Violet's hair ribbon, Klaus's com-monplace book, and Sunny's whisk—rather than
rocking the boat, as the colony's facilitator had warned them, not even daring to ask Friday why she had
given Sunny the kitchen imple-ment in the first place.
But despite  the strong  taste  of cordial,  the bland  taste  of the food,  the unflattering robes,  and  the
secret  items, the Baudelaires  still  felt  more  at  home  than  they  had  in  quite  some  time.  Although  the
children  had  always  managed  to  find  a  companion  or  two  no  matter  where  they  wandered,  the
Baudelaires had not really been  accepted  by any sort  of community since Count  Olaf had  framed the
children  for  murder,  forc-ing  them  to  hide  and  disguise  themselves  countless  times.  The
Baudelaires felt safe liv-ing with the colony, knowing that  Count  Olaf was  not allowed  near  them, and
that their asso-ciates, if they, too, ended up as castaways, would be welcomed into the tent  as  long as
they, too, succumbed to the islanders'  peer pressure.
9 7
Spiceless  food,  unflattering clothing, and  suspi-cious  beverages  seemed  a  fair price  to  pay  for a  safe
place to call home, and for a group of people who, if not exactly friends, were at least companions
for as long as they wished to stay.
The days passed, and the island remained a safe if bland place for the siblings. Violet would have
liked to  spend  her  days  assisting  the  islanders in the building of the enormous  out-rigger,  but at
Ishmael's suggestion she  assisted  Friday,  Robinson,  and  Professor  Fletcher  with the colony's  laundry,
and spent most of her time at the saltwater falls, washing everyone's robes and laying them out on rocks
to dry  in the sun. Klaus  would have enjoyed  walking over  the brae  to  catalog  all  of  the  detritus  the
colonists had collected while storm scavenging, but everyone  had  agreed  with the facilitator's  idea  that
the middle Baudelaire would stay at Ish-mael's side at all times, so he spent his days pil-ing clay on the
old man's feet, and running to refill his seashell with cordial.
98Only Sunny was allowed to do something in her area of expertise, but assisting Mrs. Caliban with
the cooking was not very interesting, as the colony's three meals were very easy to prepare. Every
morning, the youngest Baudelaire would retrieve the seaweed that Alonso and Ariel had harvested from
the sea, after it had been rinsed by Sherman and Robinson and laid out to dry by Erewhon and Weyden,
and simply throw it into a bowl for breakfast. In the afternoon, Fer-dinand and Larsen would bring an
enormous pile of fish they had captured in the colony's nets, so Sunny and Mrs. Caliban could mush it
into ceviche with their runcible spoons, and in the evening the two chefs would light a fire and slowly
simmer a pot of wild onions Omeros and Finn had picked, along with wild grasses reaped by Brewster
and Calypso that served as dinner's only spice, and serve the soup alongside seashells full of the
coconut cordial Byam and Willa had fermented from coconuts Mr. Pitcairn and Ms. Marlow had

gathered from the island's
 9 9
coconut  trees.  None  of  these  recipes  was  very  challenging  to  prepare,  and  Sunny  ended  up
spending much of her day  in idleness,  a  word  which here  means "lounging around  with Mrs.  Caliban,
sipping coconut cordial and staring at the sea."
After so many frantic encounters and tragic experiences, the children were not accustomed to leading
such a calm life, and for the first few days they felt a bit restless without the treach-ery of Count Olaf and
his sinister mysteries, and the integrity of V.F.D. and its noble deeds, but with every good night's sleep in
the breezy com-fort of a tent, and every day's work at easy tasks, and every sip of the sweet  coconut
cordial,  the strife and  treachery  of the children's  lives felt farther  and  farther  away.  After a  few  days,
another  storm  arrived,  just as  Ishmael had  pre-dicted,  and  as  the  sky  blackened  and  the  island  was
covered in wind and rain, the Baudelaires huddled with the other islanders in the facilita-tor's  tent,  and
they were grateful for their
100THE END
uneventful life on the colony, rather than the stormy existence they had endured  since their parents  had
died.
"Janiceps," Sunny said to her siblings the next morning, as the Baudelaires walked along the coastal
shelf. According  to  custom,  the  islanders  were  all  storm  scavenging,  and  here  and  there  on  the  flat
horizon, poking at the detritus of the storm. By "Janiceps," the youngest Baude-laire meant "I'm of two
minds about living here," an expression which means that she couldn't decide if she liked the island colony
or not.
"I know  what you mean," Klaus  said,  who was  carrying  Sunny  on  his  shoulders.  "Life  isn't  very
exciting here, but at least we're not in any danger."
"I suppose we should be grateful for that," Violet said,  "even though life in the colony seems
quite strict."
"Ishmael keeps saying he won't force us to do anything," Klaus said, "but everything feels a bit forced
anyway."
1 0 1
"At  least  they  forced  Olaf  away,"  Violet  pointed  out,  "which  is  more  than  V.F.D.  ever
accomplished."
"Diaspora," Sunny said, which meant some-thing like, "We live in such a distant place that the battle
between V.F.D. and their enemies seems very far away."
"The only V.F.D. around here," Klaus said, leaning down to peer into a pool of water, "is our Very
Flavorless Diet."
Violet smiled. "Not  so  long  ago,"  she  said,  "we  were  desperate  to  reach  the  last  safe  place  by
Thursday. Now, everywhere we look is safe, and we have no idea what day it is."
"I still miss home," Sunny said.
"Me too," Klaus said. "For some reason I keep missing the library at Lucky Smells Lum-bermill."

"Charles's  library?" Violet asked,  with an amazed  smile. "It was  a  beautiful room,  but it only  had
three books. Why on earth do you miss that place?"
1 0 2
"Three books are better than none," Klaus said. "The only thing I've read since we arrived here is my
own commonplace book. I suggested to Ishmael that he could dictate a history of the colony to me, and
that I'd  write it down  so  the islanders  would  know  about  how  this  place  came  to  be.  Other
colonists could write down their own stories, and eventually this island would have its own library. But
Ishmael said that he wouldn't  force  me,  but  he  didn't  think  it  would be  a  good  idea  to  write a
book that would upset people with its descriptions  of storms  and  castaways.  I don't  want to  rock  the
boat, but I miss my research."
"I know what you mean," Violet said. "I keep missing Madame Lulu's fortune-telling tent."
"With all those phony magic tricks?" Klaus said.
"Her  inventions  were  pretty  ridiculous,"  Violet  admitted,  "but  if  I  had  those  simple  mechanical
materials, I think I could make a
103
simple water filtration system. If we could man-ufacture fresh water,  the islanders  wouldn't  have
to drink coconut cordial all day long. But Friday said that the drinking of the cordial was inveterate."
"Nospine?" Sunny asked.
"She meant people had been drinking it for so long that they wouldn't want to stop," Violet said.  "I
don't want to rock the boat, but I miss working on inventions. What  about  you,  Sunny? What  do  you
miss?"
"Fountain," Sunny said.
"The Fowl Fountain, at the Village of Fowl Devotees?" Klaus asked.
"No," Sunny said, shaking her head. "In city."
"The Fountain of Victorious Finance?" Vio-let asked. "Why on earth would you miss that?"
"First swim," Sunny said, and her siblings gasped.
"You can't remember that," Klaus said.
"You were just a few weeks old," Violet said.
104

“I remember," Sunny said firmly, as  the Bauadelaires  shook  their heads  in wonder.  Sunny was  talking
about an afternoon long ago, during an unusually hot autumn in the city. The Baudelaire parents had some
business to attend to, and brought along the children, promising to stop at the ice cream store on the way
home.  The  family  had  arrived  at  the  banking  district,  pausing  to  rest  at  the  Fountain  of  Victorious
Finance, and the Baudelaires' mother had hur-ried into a building with tall, curved towers pok-ing out in
all directions,  while  their  father  waited  outside  with  the  children.  The  hot  weather  made
Sunny very cranky, and she began to fuss. To quiet her, the Baudelaires' father dipped  her bare
feet in the water,  and  Sunny had smiled so enthusiastically that he had begun to dunk Sunny's body,
clothes and all, into the fountain, until the youngest Baude-laire was screaming with laughter. As you may
know, the laughter of babies is often very con-tagious, and before long not only were Violet
1 0 5
and Klaus  also  jumping  into  the  fountain,  but  the  Baudelaires'  father,  too,  all  of  them  laugh-ing  and
laughing as Sunny grew more and more delighted. Soon the Baudelaires' mother came out of the building,
and looked in astonishment for a moment at  her soaking  and  giggling fam-ily, before  putting down  her

pocketbook, kick-ing off her shoes, and joining them in the refreshing water.  They laughed all the
way  home, each  footstep  a  wet  squish,  and sat  out on their front steps  to  dry  in  the  sun.  It  was  a
won-derful day, but very long ago—so long ago Vio-let and Klaus  had  almost forgotten  it themselves.
But as  Sunny reminded them, they could  almost hear  her newborn  laughter, and  see  the  incredu-lous
looks of the bankers who were passing by.
"It's hard  to  believe," Violet said,  "that our  parents  could  laugh like that,  when they were  already
involved with V.F.D. and all its troubles."
"The schism must have seemed a world away that day," Klaus said.
"And now," Sunny said, and her siblings
106
nodded in agreement. With the morning sun blazing overhead, and the sea  sparkling at  the edge  of the
coastal  shelf,  their  surroundings  seemed  as  far  from  trouble  and  treachery  as  that  afternoon  in  the
Fountain of Victorious Finance. But trouble and treachery are rarely as far away as one thinks they are
on the clearest of days. On that faraway afternoon in the banking dis-trict, for instance, trouble could be
found  in  the  corridors  of  the  towered  building,  where  the  Baudelaires'  mother  was  handed  a
weather  report and a naval map that would reveal, when she studied them by candlelight that evening,
far greater trouble than she had imagined, and treachery could be found just past the fountain, where  a
woman disguised as a pretzel vendor took a photograph of the laughing family, and slipped her camera
into the coat pocket of a financial expert who was hurrying to a restau-rant, where the coat-check  boy
would remove the camera and hide it in an enormous parfait glass of fruit that  a  certain  playwright
would
107
order for dessert, only to have a quick-thinking waitress  pretend  that  the cream  in the zabaglione
sauce had gone sour and dump the entire dish into a garbage can in the alley, where I had been sitting for
hours,  pretending  to  look  for a  lost puppy  who was  actually  scurrying  into  the  back  entrance  of  the
towered building, removing her disguise, and folding it into her handbag, and this morning on the coastal
shelf was no different. The Baudelaires took a few more steps  in silence,  squinting  into  the  sun,
and then Sunny knocked gently on her brother's head and pointed out at the horizon. The three children
looked carefully, and saw an object resting unevenly on the edge of the shelf, and this was trouble, even
though it didn't look like trouble at the time. It was hard to say what it looked like, only that it was large,
and square, and ragged, and the children hurried closer to get a better view. Violet led the way, stepping
carefully around a few crabs snapping along the shelf, and Klaus followed behind, with Sunny
108still on his shoulders, and even when they reached the object they found it difficult to identify.
At  first  glance,  the  large,  square,  ragged  object  looked  like  a  combination  of  everything  the
Baudelaires missed. It looked like a library, because the object seemed to be nothing more than stacks
and stacks  of books,  piled neatly on top  of  one  another  in  a  huge  cube.  But  it  also  looked  like  an

invention, because wrapped around the cube  of books,  the way string is wrapped  around  a  package,
were thick straps that appeared to be made out of rubber, in vary-ing shades of green, and on one side
of the cube was affixed a large flap of battered wood. And it also looked like a fountain, as water was
trick-ling out of it from all sides, leaking through the bloated pages of the books and splashing down to
the sand of the coastal shelf. But although this was a very unusual sight, the children stared not at the cube
but at something at the top of this strange contraption. It was a bare foot, hanging
1 0 9
over the side  of the cube  as  if there  were  some-one  sleeping on the top  of all those  books,  and  the
Baudelaires could see, right on the ankle, a tattoo of an eye.
"Olaf?" Sunny asked, but her siblings shook  their  heads.  They  had  seen  Count  Olaf's  foot
more times than they would like to count, and this foot was much narrower and cleaner than the villain's.
"Climb onto my back," Violet said to her brother. "Maybe we can hoist Sunny to the top."
Klaus nodded,  climbed carefully onto  his sister's  back,  and  then,  very slowly,  stood  on  Vio-let's
shoulders. The three Baudelaires stood in a trembling tower, and Sunny reached out her little hands and
pulled herself up, as she had pulled herself out of the elevator shaft at 667 Dark  Avenue not so  long
ago, and saw the woman who was lying unconscious on top of the stack of books. She was dressed
in a dress of dark red velvet, which was streaked and soaked
110
from the rain, and her hair lay sprawled behind her like a wide, tangled fan. The foot  that  was  hanging
over the side of the cube was bent a  strange,  wrong way,  but she  looked  otherwise  unharmed.  Her
eyes were  closed,  and  her mouth was  frowning, but her belly, full and  round  from her pregnancy,
rose and fell with calm, deep  breaths,  and  her hands,  covered  in long, white gloves,  lay gently on her
chest, as if she were comforting herself, or her child.
"Kit Snicket," Sunny called down to her sib-lings, her voice hushed with amazement.
"Yes?" replied a voice that was high-pitched and grating, a word which here means "irritat-ing, and
sadly familiar." From behind the cube of books, a figure stepped out to  greet  the chil-dren,  and  Sunny
looked  down  and  frowned  as  the  tower  of  elder  Baudelaires  turned  to  face  the  person  who  was
confronting them. This person was also wearing a talaric—a word which here  means "just reaching the
ankles"—dress that was streaked and soaked, although the dress was
111
not just red but orange and yellow as well, the colors melting together as the person walked closer and
closer to the children. This person was not wearing gloves, but a pile of seaweed had been arranged to
resemble long hair, which cascaded hideously down this person's back, and although this person's belly
was also full and round, it was full and round in an odd and unconvincing way. It would have been very
unusual if the belly were  genuine, because  it was  obvious  from  looking  at  the  person's  face  that  the
person was not a woman, and pregnancy occurs very rarely in males, although the male seahorse  is a
creature that becomes pregnant from time to time.
But this person, stepping closer and closer to the towered elder Baudelaires and gazing angrily up at

the youngest,  was  no seahorse,  of course.  If the odd  cube  of books  was  trouble,  then this  man  was
treachery, and as is so often the case with treachery, his name was Count Olaf. Violet and Klaus stared
at the villain, and
112   Sunny stared at Kit, and then the three children looked out at the horizon, where other islanders
who had spotted the strange object were head-ing toward them. Lastly, the Baudelaire orphans looked
at one another, and wondered if a schism were so very far away after all, or if they had traveled a
world away only to find all the trouble and treachery of the world staring them right in the face.
1 1 3
Blank page 114C H A P T E R
SIX
Caption: The word six written in upper case at the sand beside a clamshell.
At this point, you may find yourself recognizing all of the sad  hallmarks of the Baudelaire  orphans'
sad history. The word "hallmarks" refers to something's distinguishing characteris-tics, such as the frothy
foam and loud fizz that are the hallmarks of a root beer float, or the tearstained photographs and the loud
fizz that are the hallmarks of a broken heart. Certainly the Baudelaires themselves,  who as  far as  I
know have not read their own sad history, but of course are its primary participants, had a queasy feeling
in their stomachs as the islanders approached them, holding various items they
had found while storm  scavenging. It  appeared  that  once  again, after  arriving in a  strange  new home,
Count Olaf would fool everyone  with his latest  disguise, and  the Baudelaires  would once  again  be  in
grave danger. In fact, Count Olaf's talaric disguise did not even cover the tattoo of an eye he wore on his
ankle, as the islanders, living so far from the world, would not know  about  this notorious  mark  and  so

could be  fooled  even more  easily. But as  the  colonists  drew  close  to  the  cube  of  books  where  Kit
Snicket lay unconscious, suddenly the Baudelaires' history went contrary to expectations, a phrase which
here means "The young girl they had first met on the coastal shelf recognized Count Olaf immediately."
"That's Olaf!" Friday  cried,  pointing an accusatory  finger  at  the  villain.  "Why  is  he  dressed  as  a
pregnant woman?"
"I'm dressed  as  a  pregnant  woman because  I am a  pregnant  woman," Count  Olaf  replied,  in  his
high-pitched, disguised voice. "My name
1 1 6
is Kit Snicket, and I've been looking every-where for these children."
"You're not Kit Snicket!" Mrs. Caliban cried.
"Kit Snicket is up on this pile of books," Violet said indignantly, helping Sunny down from the top of
the cube. "She's a friend of ours, and she may be hurt, or ill. But this is Count Olaf, who is no friend of
ours."
"He's no friend of ours, either," Friday said, and there was a murmur of agreement from the islanders.
"Just because you've put something inside your dress to look pregnant, and thrown a clump of seaweed
on your  hair  to  make  a  wig,  doesn't  mean  you  won't  be  recognized."  She  turned  to  face  the  three
children, who noticed for the first time that the islander had a suspi-cious bump under her robe, as if she,
too,  had  hidden  something  under  her  clothing.  "I  hope  he  hasn't  been  bothering  you.  I  told  him
specif-ically to go away."
Count Olaf glared at Friday, but then turned
117
to try his treachery  on the other  islanders.  "You primitive people  won't  tell a  pregnant  woman  to  go
away, will you?" he asked. "I'm in a very delicate condition."
"You're not in a very delicate condition," said Larsen firmly. "You're in a very transparent disguise. If
Friday says you're this Olaf person, then I'm sure you are,  and  you're  not welcome  here,  due  to  your
unkindness."
"I've never been unkind in my life," Olaf said, running a bony hand through his seaweed. "I'm nothing
but a fairly innocent maiden with my belly full of baby. It is the Baudelaires who have been unkind, along
with this impostor sleeping on top of this damp library."
"Library?" Fletcher said with a gasp. "We've never had a library on the island."
"Ishmael said that a library was bound to lead to trouble," said Brewster, "so we were lucky that a
book has never ended up on our shores."
"You see?" Olaf said, his orange and yellow
118
dress rustling in the morning breeze. "That treacherous woman up there has dragged these books to your
colony, just to be unkind to you poor primitive people. And the Baudelaires are friends with her! They're
the ones you should abandon here, and I should be welcomed to Olaf-Land and given gifts."
"This island is not called Olaf-Land!" cried Friday. "And you're the one we abandoned!"

"This is confusing!" cried Omeros. "We need a facilitator to sort this out!"
"Omeros  is right," said  Calypso.  "We shouldn't decide anything until we've talked to  Ishmael.
Come on, let's take all this detritus to Ishmael's tent."
The colonists nodded, and a few villagers walked together to the cube of books and began to push it
along the shelf. It was difficult work, and the cube shuddered as it was dragged along the bumpy surface.
The Baudelaires saw Kit's foot bob violently up and down and feared that their friend would fall.
119
"Stop," Klaus  said.  "It's  not safe  to  move someone  who may be  seriously injured,  partic-ularly  if
she's pregnant."
"Klaus is right," said Dr. Kurtz. "I remem-ber that from my days in veterinary school."
"If  Muhammad  will  not  come  to  the  moun-tain,"  Rabbi  Bligh  said,  using  an  expression  that  the
islanders understood at once, "the mountain will come to Muhammad."
"But how can Ishmael come here?" asked Erewhon. "He couldn't walk all this way with his injured
feet."
"The sheep can drag him here,"  said  Sher-man.  "We can  put his chair on the sleigh. Fri-day,  you
guard Olaf and the Baudelaires, while the rest of us will go fetch our facilitator."
"And some  more  coconut  cordial,"  said  Madame  Nordoff.  "I'm thirsty and  my  seashell  is  almost
empty."
There was  a  murmur  of  agreement  from  the  islanders,  and  they  began  to  make  their  way  back
toward the island, still carrying all of the
120
items they had  found while scavenging. In a  few  minutes,  the  colonists  were  nothing  more  than  faint
shapes on the misty horizon, and the Baudelaires were alone with Count Olaf and with Friday, who took
a big sip from her seashell and then smiled at the children.
"Don't worry, Baudelaires," the girl said, holding one hand over the bulge in her robe. "We'll sort this
out. I promise you that this ter-rible man will be abandoned once and for all."
"I'm not a man," Olaf insisted in his dis-guised voice. "I'm a lady with a baby inside her."
"Pellucid theatrics," Sunny said.
"My sister's right," Violet said. "Your dis-guise isn't working."
"Oh, I don't think you'd want me to stop pretending," the villain said. He was still talk-ing in his
ridiculous high-pitched voice, but his eyes  shone  brightly from behind his seaweed  bangs.  He  reached
behind him and revealed the harpoon gun, with its bright red trigger and one
121
last harpoon ready to be fired. "If I were to say that I was Count Olaf, instead of Kit Snicket,  I might
begin behaving like a villain, rather than a noble person."
"You've never behaved like a noble person," Klaus said, "no matter what name you've  been  using.

And that weapon  doesn't  scare  us.  You only have one  harpoon,  and  this island is full of people  who
know how wicked and unkind you are."
"Klaus is right," Friday said. "You might as well put your weapon down. It's useless in a  place  like
this."
Count Olaf looked first at Friday, and then at the three Baudelaires, and he opened his mouth as if to
say another treacherous thing in his disguised voice. But then he shut his mouth again, and glared down at
the puddles of the coastal shelf. "I'm tired of wandering around here,"  he muttered.  "There's  nothing to
eat but seaweed and raw fish, and everything valuable has been taken by all those fools in robes."
"If you didn't behave so horridly," Friday
1 2 2
said, "you could live on the island."
The Baudelaires looked at one another ner-vously. Although it seemed a bit cruel to aban-don Olaf
on the shelf, they did not like the idea that he might be welcomed into the colony. Fri-day, of course, did
not know the whole story of Count Olaf, and had only experienced his unkindness once, on the day she
first encoun-tered him, but the Baudelaires could not tell Friday the whole story of Olaf without telling the
whole story of themselves, and they did not know what Friday  would think of their own unkindnesses
and treachery.
Count Olaf looked at Friday as if thinking something over. Then, with a suspicious smile, he turned to
the Baudelaires and held out the harpoon gun. "I suppose you're right," he said. "The harpoon  gun is
useless in a place like this." He was still talking in his disguised voice, and his hand caressed his false
pregnancy as if there were actually a baby growing inside him.
The Baudelaires looked at Olaf and then at
1 2 3
the weapon.  The last time the  children  had  touched  the harpoon  gun, the penultimate har-poon
had fired and  a  noble  man by the name of Dewey  had  been  killed.  Violet,  Klaus,  and  Sunny
would never forget the sight of Dewey sinking into the waters of the pond as he died, and looking at the
villain offering them the weapon only reminded them of how dangerous and terrible the weapon was.
"We don't want that," Violet said.
"Obviously this is some trick of yours," Klaus said.
"It's no trick," Olaf said in his high-pitched voice. "I'm giving up my villainous ways, and I want to live
with you on the island. I'm sorry to hear that you don't believe me."
His face was very serious, as if he were very sorry to hear that, but his eyes were shiny and bright,
the way they are when someone is telling a joke. "Fibber," Sunny said.
"You insult me, madam," Olaf said. "I'm as honest as the day is long."
1 2 4
The villain was using an expression that is used by many people despite the fact that it scarcely means
anything at all. Some days are long, such as at the height of summer, when the sun shines for a very long
time, or Halloween day, which always seems to last forever until it is finally time to put on one's costume
and demand candy from strangers, and some days are short, particularly during the wintertime or  when
one is doing something enjoyable, such as reading a good book or following random people on the street
to see where they will go, and so if someone is as honest as the day is long, they may not be honest at all.
The children were relieved to see that Friday was not fooled by Olaf's  use  of a  vague expression,

and she frowned at the villain sternly.
"The Baudelaires told me you were not to be trusted," the young girl said, "and I can  see  that  they
spoke the truth. You'll stay right here, Olaf, until the others arrive and we decide what to do with you."
1 2 5
"I'm not Count  Olaf,"  Count Olaf said,  "but in the meantime, could  I have a  sip  of  this  coconut
cordial I heard mentioned?"
"No," Friday said, and turned her back on the villain to  gaze wistfully at  the cube  of books.  "I've
never seen a book before," she confessed to the Baudelaires. "I hope Ishmael thinks it's O.K. to  keep
them here."
"You've never seen a book?" Violet said in amazement. "Do you know how to read?"
Friday took a quick look  around  the coastal  shelf, and  then nodded  her head  quickly. "Yes," she
said. "Ishmael didn't think it was a good idea to  teach  us,  but Professor  Fletcher  dis-agreed,  and  held
secret classes on the coastal shelf for those of us who were born on the island. From time to time,
I keep in practice  by sketching the alphabet  in the sand  with a  stick,  but without a  library there's  not
much I can do. I hope  Ishmael won't  suggest that  we  let  the  sheep  drag  all these  books  to  the
arboretum."
"Even if he does, you won't have to throw
1 2 6
them away," Klaus reminded her. "He won't force you."
"I know," Friday said with a sigh. "But when Ishmael suggests something, everybody agrees, and it's
hard not to succumb to that kind of peer pressure."
"Whisk," Sunny reminded her, and took the kitchen implement out of her pocket.
Friday smiled at the youngest Baudelaire, but quickly put the item back  in Sunny's pocket. "I
gave you that whisk because you said you were interested in cooking," she said. "It seemed a shame to
deny your interests  just because  Ishmael might not think a  kitchen implement was  appropriate.  You'll
keep my secret, won't you?"
"Of course," Violet said, "but it's also a shame to deny your interest in reading."
"Maybe Ishmael won't object," Friday said.
"Maybe," Klaus said, "or maybe we could try a little peer pressure of our own."
"I don't want to rock the boat," Friday said
127
with a frown. "Ever since my father's death, my mother has wanted me to be safe, which is why we left
the world  far behind and  decided  to  stay  here  on the island. But the older  I get,  it seems  the  more
secrets  I have.  Professor  Fletcher  taught me secretly to read. Omeros  taught me secretly  to  skip
rocks, even though Ishmael says it's dangerous.  I secretly  gave Sunny a  whisk." She  reached  into her
robe, and smiled. "And now I have another secret, just for me. Look what I found curled up in a broken
wooden crate."
Count Olaf had been glaring silently at  the children, but as  Friday  revealed  her secret  he let out a
shriek even more  high-pitched  than  his  fake  voice.  But  the  Baudelaire  orphans  did  not  shriek,  even
though Friday was holding a frightening-looking thing, as  dark  as  a  coal  mine and  as  thick as  a  sewer
pipe,  that uncurled itself and  quickly darted  toward  the  three  children.  Even  as  the  creature

opened  its mouth, the morning  sun  glinting on its sharp  teeth,  the Baudelaires  did not shriek,  but
marveled that once again their
   1 2 8
history was going contrary to expectations.
"Incredi!" Sunny cried, and it was true, for the enormous snake that was wrapping itself around  the
Baudelaires was, incredibly, a crea-ture they had not seen  for quite some  time and  never  thought they
would see again in their lives.
"It's the Incredibly Deadly Viper!" Klaus said in amazement. "How in the world did it end up here?"
"Ishmael said  that everything eventually washes up on the shores  of this island," Violet said,
"but I never thought I'd see this reptile again."
"Deadly?" Friday asked nervously. "Is it poisonous? It seemed friendly to me."
"It is friendly," Klaus reassured her. "It's one of the least  deadly  and  most friendly creatures  in the
animal kingdom. Its name is a misnomer."
"How can you be sure?" Friday asked.
"We knew the man who discovered it," Vio-let said. "His name was Dr. Montgomery Mont-gomery,
and he was a brilliant herpetologist."
1  2  9
"He was a wonderful man," Klaus said. "We miss him very much."
The Baudelaires hugged the snake, particu-larly Sunny, who'd had a special attachment to the playful
reptile, and thought for a moment of kind Uncle Monty and  the days  the children had spent with
him. Then, slowly, they remem-bered  how  those  days  had  ended,  and  they  turned  to  look  at
Count Olaf, who had slaugh-tered Monty as part of a treacherous plot. Count Olaf frowned, and looked
back  at  them.  It  was  strange  to  see  the  villain  just  sitting  there,  shud-dering  at  a  snake,  after  his
murderous scheme to get the orphans in his clutches. Now, so far from the world,  it was  as  if Olaf no
longer had clutches, and his murderous schemes were as useless as the harpoon gun that lay in his hands.
"I've always wanted to meet a herpetolo-gist," said Friday, who of course did not know  the whole
story of Monty and his murder. "The island doesn't have an expert on snakes. There's
1  3  0
so much of the world I'm missing by living here."
"The  world  is  a  wicked  place,"  Count  Olaf  said  quietly,  and  now  it  was  the  Baudelaires  who
shuddered. Even with the hot sun beating down on them, and  the weight of the Incredibly Deadly
Viper in their laps, the children felt a  chill at  the villain's words,  and  everyone  was  silent, watching the
islanders approach  along with  the  sheep,  who  had  Ishmael  in  tow,  a  phrase  which here  means
"dragged along on the sleigh behind them, sitting on his white chair as if he were a king, with his feet still
covered in hunks of clay and his woolly beard billowing in the wind." As the colonists and sheep walked
closer and closer, the children could see that the sheep had something else in tow, too, which sat on the
sleigh behind the  facilitator's  chair.  It  was  the  large,  ornate  bird  cage  that  had  been  found  after  the
previous storm, shining in the sunlight like a small fire.

1  3  1
"Count Olaf," Ishmael said in a booming voice, as soon as his chair arrived. He stared down at the
villain scornfully but also carefully, as if memorizing his face.
"Ishmael," Count Olaf said, in his disguised tone.
"Call me Ish," Ishmael said.
"Call me Kit Snicket," Olaf said.
"I'm not going to call you anything," Ishmael growled. "Your reign of treachery is over, Olaf." In one
swift motion, the facilitator leaned down and snatched the seaweed wig off Olaf's head. "I've been told of
your schemes and disguises, and we won't stand for it. You'll be locked up immediately."
Jonah and Sadie lifted the bird cage from the sleigh, set it on the ground, and pushed open its door,
glaring meaningfully at Count Olaf. With a nod from Ishmael, Weyden and Ms. Marlow stepped toward
the villain, wrestled the harpoon gun from his hands, and dragged him toward the
1 3 2
bird cage, as the Baudelaire orphans looked at one another, unsure exactly how they felt. On one hand, it
seemed  as  if the children had  been  waiting their entire lives for someone  to  utter  precisely  the  words
Ishmael had uttered, and they were eager for Olaf to finally be punished for his dreadful  acts,  from his

recent kidnapping of Justice Strauss to the time, long ago, when he had thrown Sunny into a  bird  cage
and dangled her from his tower window. But they weren't con-vinced that Count Olaf should be locked
in a cage himself, even a cage as large as the one that had washed ashore. It wasn't clear to the children if
what  was  happening  now,  on  the  coastal  shelf,  was  the  arrival  of  justice  at  last,  or  just  another
unfor-tunate event. Throughout their history the Baude-laires had always hoped  that  Count  Olaf would
end up  in  the  hands  of  the  authorities,  and  would  be  punished  by  the  High  Court  after  a  trial.  But
members of the High Court had turned out to be as corrupt and sinister as Olaf himself, and the
1 3 3
authorities were far, far away from the island, and looking for the Baudelaires  in order  to  charge
them with arson and murder. It was dif-ficult to say, so far from the world, how the three  children felt
about Count Olaf being dragged into a bird cage, but as was so often the case, it did not matter how
the three  children felt about  it, because  it happened  anyway.  Wey-den  and  Ms.  Marlow  dragged  the
struggling vil-lain to the door of the bird cage and forced him to duck inside. He snarled, and wrapped his
arms around his false pregnancy, and rested his head against his knees, and hunched his back, and the
Bellamy siblings shut the door of the cage and latched it securely. The villain fit in the cage, but just
barely, and you had to look closely to see that the mess of limbs and hair and orange and  yellow cloth
was a person at all. "This isn't fair," Olaf said. His voice was muffled from inside the cage, although the
chil-dren noticed that he was still using a high-pitched tone, as if he could not help pretending
1 3 4
C a p t i o n
C a p t i o n
Caption: Count Olaf imprisoned in the big bird cage, still dressed with his disguise.

to be Kit Snicket. "I'm an innocent pregnant  woman, and these children are the real villains. You
haven't heard the whole story."
"It depends on how you look at it," Ishmael said firmly. "Friday told me you were unkind, and that's
all we need to hear. And this seaweed wig is all we need to see!"
"Ishmael's  right,"  Mrs.  Caliban  said  firmly.  "You've  been  nothing  but  treacherous,  Olaf,  and  the
Baudelaires have been nothing but good!"
"'Nothing but good,'"  Olaf repeated.  "Ha! Why don't  you look  in the baby's  pockets  if you think
she's so good. She's hiding a kitchen implement that one of your precious islanders gave her!"
Ishmael peered  down  at  the youngest Baudelaire from his vantage point, a phrase which here
means "chair perched on a sleigh dragged by sheep." "Is that true, Sunny?" he asked. "Are you keeping a
secret from us?"
Sunny looked up at the facilitator, and then at
1 3 6
 the bird cage, remembering how uncomfortable was to be locked up. "Yes," she admitted, and took the
whisk out of her pocket as the islanders gasped.
"Who gave this to you?" Ishmael demanded.
"Nobody gave it to her," Klaus said quickly, not daring to look at  Friday.  "It's  just something that
survived the storm along with us." He  reached into his pocket and brought out his com-monplace
book. "Each of us has something, Ishmael. I have this notebook, and my sister has a ribbon she likes to
use to tie up her hair."
There was another gasp from the assembled colonists, and Violet took the ribbon out of her pocket.
"We didn't mean any harm," she said.
"You were told of the island's customs," the facilitator said sternly, "and you chose  to  ignore them.
We were  very kind to  you, giving you food  and  clothing and  shelter,  and  even letting you keep  your
glasses. And in turn, you were unkind to us."
1 3 7
"They made a mistake," Friday said, swiftly gathering the forbidden items from the Baude-laires and
giving Sunny a brief and grateful look. "We'll let the sheep take these things away, and forget all about it."
"That seems fair," said Sherman.
"I agree," Professor Fletcher said.
"Me too," Omeros said, who had picked up the harpoon gun.
Ishmael frowned, but as more and more islanders expressed  their agreement,  he suc-cumbed
to peer pressure and gave the orphans a small smile. "I suppose  they can  stay," he said,  "if they don't
rock the boat any further." He sighed,  and  then  suddenly  frowned  down  at  a  puddle.  During
the  conversation,  the  Incredi-bly Deadly Viper  had  decided  to  take  a  brief swim,  and  was  now
staring up at the facilitator from a pool of seawater.
"What is that?" Mr. Pitcairn asked, with a frightened gasp.
"It's a friendly snake we found," Friday said.
1 3 8
"Who told you it was friendly?" demanded Ferdinand.
Friday shared a quick dismayed look with the Baudelaires. After all that had  happened,  they knew

there was no hope of convincing Ish-mael that keeping the snake was a good idea. "Nobody told me,"
Friday said quietly. "It just seems friendly."
"It looks incredibly deadly," Erewhon said with a frown. "I say we dump it in the arbore-tum."
"We don't want a snake slithering around the arboretum," Ishmael said, stroking his beard quickly. "It
might hurt the sheep. I won't force you, but I think we should abandon it here  with Count  Olaf.  Come
along now, it's almost lunchtime. Baudelaires, please push that cube of books to the arboretum, and—"
"Our friend shouldn't be moved," Violet interrupted, with a gesture to Kit's unconscious figure. "We
need to help her."
"I didn't realize there was a castaway up
1 3 9
there," Mr. Pitcairn said, peering at the bare foot that was still hanging over the side of the cube. "Look,
she has the same tattoo as the villain!"
"She's my girlfriend," said Olaf from the bird cage. "You should either punish us both or set us both
free."
"She's not your girlfriend!" Klaus cried. "She's our friend, and she's in trouble!"
"It seems that from the moment you joined us, the island is threatened with secrecy and treachery,"
Ishmael said, with a weary sigh. "We've never had to punish anyone here before you arrived, and  now
there's another suspicious person lurking around the island."
"Dreyfuss?"  Sunny  said,  which  meant  "What  precisely  are  you  accusing  us  of?"  but  the
facilitator kept talking as if she had not said a word.
"I  won't  force  you,"  Ishmael  said,  "but  if  you  want  to  be  a  part  of  the  safe  place  we've
constructed, I think you should abandon this Kit
140

.
Snicket person, too, even though I've never heard of her."
"We won't abandon her," Violet said. "She needs our help."
"As I said, I won't force you," Ishmael said, with one last tug on his beard. "Good-bye, Baudelaires.
You can stay here on the coastal shelf with your friend and your books, if those things are so important
to you."
"But what will happen  to  them?" asked  Willa. "Decision Day is approaching,  and  the coastal
shelf will flood with water."
"That's their problem," Ishmael said, and gave the islanders an imperious—the word "imperious," as
you probably know, means "mighty and a bit snobbish"—shrug. As his shoulders raised, a small object
rolled out of the sleeve of his robe and landed with a small plop! in a puddle, narrowly missing the bird
cage where Olaf was prisoner. The Baudelaires could not identify the object, but whatever it was, it
 1 4 1
was enough to make Ishmael hurriedly clap his hands to distract anyone who might be wonder-ing about
it.
"Let's go!" he cried, and the sheep began to drag him back toward his tent. A few islanders gave the
Baudelaires apologetic looks, as if they disagreed with Ishmael's suggestions but did not dare to resist the
peer pressure of their fel-low colonists. Professor Fletcher and Omeros, who had secrets of their own,
looked  particu-larly  regretful,  and  Friday  looked  as  if  she  might  cry.  She  even  started  to  say

something to  the Baudelaires, but Mrs. Caliban  stepped  forward  and  put her arm firmly around  the
girl's shoul-ders, and she merely gave the siblings a  sad  wave  and  walked  away  with her mother.  The
Baudelaires were too stunned for a moment to say anything. Contrary to expectations,  Count  Olaf had
not fooled  the  inhabitants  of  this  place  so  far  from  the  world,  and  had  instead  been  cap-tured  and
punished. But still the Baudelaires were not safe, and certainly not happy to find
1 4 2
themselves abandoned on the coastal shelf like so much detritus.
"This isn't fair," Klaus said finally, but he said it so quietly that the departing islanders probably did not
hear.  Only his sisters  heard  him,  and  the  snake  the  Baudelaires  thought  they  would  never  see
again, and  of course  Count  Olaf,  who was  huddled  in the large,  ornate  bird  cage  like  an  imprisoned
beast, and who was the only person to answer him.
"Life isn't fair," he said, in his undisguised voice,  and  for once  the Baudelaire  orphans  agreed  with
every word the man said.
  1 4 3 
Blank page  144C H A P T E R
Seven
The predicament of the Baudelaire orphans as
they sat abandoned on the coastal shelf, with
Kit Snicket unconscious at the top of the cube
of books above them, Count Olaf locked in a
cage  alongside  them,  and  the  Incredibly 
Deadly Viper curled at their feet, is an
excellent opportunity to use the
phrase "under a cloud." The three
children were certainly under a
cloud that afternoon, and not      
just because one lone

Caption: An apple’s core
mass of condensed water vapor, which Klaus was able to identify as being of the cumulus variety, was
hanging over  them in the sky  like  another  castaway  from  the  previous  night's  storm.  The  expression
"under  a  cloud"  refers  to  people  who  are  out  of  favor  in  a  particular  com-munity,  the  way  most
classrooms have at least one child who is quite unpopular, or most secret organizations have at least one
rhetorical  analyst  who  is  under  suspicion.  The  island's  only  com-munity  had  certainly  placed  Violet,
Klaus, and Sunny under a cloud, and even in the blazing afternoon  sun the children felt the chill of the
colony's suspicion and disapproval.
"I can't believe it," Violet said. "I can't believe we've been abandoned."
"We thought we  could  cast  away  everything that  happened  to  us before  we  arrived  here,"  Klaus
said, "but this place is no safer than any-where else we've been."
"But what to do?" Sunny asked.
Violet looked around the coastal shelf. "I
1 4 6
suppose we can catch fish and harvest seaweed to eat," she said. "Our meals won't be much dif-ferent
from those on the island."
"If fire," Sunny said thoughtfully, "then saltbake carp."
"We can't live here," Klaus pointed out. "Decision Day is approaching, and the coastal shelf will be
underwater. We either have to live on the island, or  figure out a  way to  get back  to  where  we  came
from."
"We'll never survive a journey at sea with-out a boat," Violet said, wishing she had her rib-bon back
so she could tie up her hair.
"Kit did," Sunny pointed out.
"The library must have served as a sort of raft," Klaus said, running his hand along the books,  "but
she couldn't have come far on a boat of paper."
"I hope she met up with the Quagmires," Violet said.
"I hope she'll wake up and tell us what hap-pened," Klaus said.
 1  4  7
"Do you think she's seriously hurt?" Violet asked.
"There's no way to  tell without a  complete  medical examination," Klaus  said,  "but except  for  her
ankle, she looks all right. She's probably just exhausted from the storm."
"Worried," Sunny said sadly,  wishing there  was  a  dry,  warm blanket  on the coastal  shelf that  the
Baudelaires might have used to cover their unconscious friend.
"We can't just worry about Kit," Klaus said. "We need to worry about ourselves."
"We  have  to  think  of  a  plan,"  Violet  said  wearily,  and  all  three  Baudelaires  sighed.  Even  the
Incredibly  Deadly  Viper  seemed  to  sigh,  and  laid  its  head  sympathetically  on  Sunny's  foot.  The
Baudelaires stood on the coastal shelf and thought of all their previous predicaments, and all the plans
they'd  thought up  to  make  themselves safe,  only to  end  up in the midst of another  unfortunate
event. The cloud they were under seemed to get bigger and darker,

1 4 8
and the children might have sat there for quite some time had not the silence been broken by the voice of
the man who was locked in a bird cage.
"I have a plan," Count Olaf said. "Let me out and I'll tell you what it is."
Although Olaf was no longer using his high-pitched voice, he still sounded muffled from within  the
cage,  and  when the Baudelaires  turned to look at him it was as if he were  in one  of his disguises.
The yellow and orange dress he had been wearing covered most of him up, and the children could  not
see the curve of his false pregnancy or the tattoo of an eye  he had  on his ankle.  Only a  few toes  and
fingers extended from between the bird cage's bars, and if the sib-lings  peered  closely  they  could
see the wet curve of his mouth, and one blinking eye star-ing out from his captivity.
"We're  not letting you out," Violet said.  "We have enough trouble  without  you  wandering  around
loose."
1  4  9
"Suit yourself," Olaf said, and his dress rus-tled as he attempted to shrug. "But you'll drown as surely
as I will when the coastal  shelf floods.  You can't  build a  boat,  because  the islanders  have scavenged
everything from the storm. And you can't live on the island, because the colonists have abandoned
you. Even though we're shipwrecked, we're still in the same boat."
"We don't need your help, Olaf," Klaus said. "If it weren't for you, we wouldn't be here in the first
place."
"Don't be so sure of that," Count Olaf said, and his mouth curled into a smile. "Everything eventually
washes  up  on  these  shores,  to  be  judged  by  that  idiot  in  the  robe.  Do  you  think  you're  the  first
Baudelaires to find yourselves here?"
"What you mean?" Sunny demanded.
"Let me out," Olaf said, with a muffled chuckle, "and I'll tell you."
The  Baudelaires  looked  at one another
  1 5 0  
doubtfully. "You're trying to trick us," Violet said.
"Of course I'm trying to trick you!" Olaf cried. "That's the way of the world, Baudelaires. Everybody
runs around with their secrets and their schemes, trying to outwit everyone  else.  Ishmael outwitted  me,
and put me in this cage. But I know  how to  outwit him and  all his islander friends. If you let me
out, I can be king of Olaf-Land, and you three can be my new henchfolk."
"We don't want to be your henchfolk," Klaus said. "We just want to be safe."
"Nowhere in the world is safe," Count Olaf said.
"Not with you around," Violet agreed.
"I'm no worse than anyone else," Count  Olaf said.  "Ishmael is just as  treacherous  as  I
am."
"Fustianed," Sunny said.
"It's true!" Olaf insisted, although he prob-ably did not understand what Sunny had said.

1  5  1
"Look at me! I'm stuffed into a cage for no good reason! Does that sound familiar, you stupid baby?"
"My sister is not a baby," Violet said firmly, "and Ishmael is not treacherous. He may be misguided,
but he's only trying to make the island a safe place."
"Is that so?" Olaf said, and the cage shook as he chuckled. "Why don't you reach into that pool, and
see what Ishmael dropped into the puddle?"
The Baudelaires  looked  at  one  another.  They had almost forgotten about the object that  had
rolled  out  of  the  facilitator's  sleeve.  The  three  children  stared  down  into  the  water,  but  it  was  the
Incredibly Deadly Viper who wrig-gled into the murky depths of the puddle and came back with a small
object in its mouth, which it deposited into Sunny's waiting hand.
"Takk," Sunny said, thanking the snake by scratching it on the head.
"What is it?" Violet said, leaning in to look
1  5  2
at what the viper had retrieved.
"It's an apple core," Klaus said, and his sis-ters saw that it was so. Sunny was holding the core of an
apple, which had been so thoroughly nibbled that scarcely anything remained.
"You see?" Olaf asked. "While the other islanders have to do all the work,  Ishmael sneaks off
to the arboretum on his perfectly healthy feet and eats all the apples for himself! Your beloved facilitator
not only has clay on his feet, he has feet of clay!"
The bird cage shook with laughter, and the Baudelaire orphans looked first at the apple core and then
at one another. "Feet of clay" is an expression which refers to a person who appears to  be  honest  and
true, but who turns out to have a hidden weakness or a treacherous secret. If someone turns out to have
feet of clay, your opinion of them may topple, just as a statue will topple if its base turns out to be badly
con-structed. The Baudelaires had thought Ishmael was wrong to abandon them on the coastal shelf,
1 5 3
of course, but they believed he had done it to keep the other islanders out of harm's way,  just as  Mrs.
Caliban had not wanted Friday to upset herself by learning to read, and although they did not agree with
much of the facilitator's phi-losophy, they at least respected the fact  that  he was  trying to  do  the same
thing the Baudelaires  had  been  trying to  do  since that  terrible  day  on  the  beach  when  they  had  first
become orphans: to find or  build a  safe  place  to  call home.  But now,  looking at  the apple  core,  they
realized what Count Olaf said was true. Ishmael had feet of clay. He was lying about his injuries, and he
was selfish about the apples in the arboretum, and he was treacherous in pressuring everyone else on the
island to  do  all the work.  Gazing  at the treacherous  teeth  marks  the  facilitator  had  left  behind,  they
remembered his claim that he predicted the weather by magic, and the strange look in his eye  when he
insisted that the island had  no library, and  the Baudelaires  wondered  what other  secrets  the  bearded
facilitator was

1 5 4
hiding.  Violet,  Klaus,  and  Sunny  sank  to  a  mound  of  damp  sand,  as  if  they  had  feet  of  clay
themselves, and leaned against the cube of books, wondering how they could have traveled so far
from the world only to find the same dis-honesty and treachery they always had.
"What is your plan?" Violet asked Count Olaf, after a long silence.
"Let me out of this cage," Olaf said, "and I'll tell you."
"Tell us first," Klaus said, "and perhaps we'll let you out."
"Let me out first," Olaf insisted.
"Tell us first," Sunny insisted, just as firmly.
"I can argue with you all day," the villain growled. "Let me out, I tell you, or I'll take my plan to my
grave!"
"We can think of a plan without you," Vio-let said,  hoping she  sounded  more  confident than
she felt. "We've managed to escape plenty of difficult situations without your help."
"I have the only weapon that can threaten
1 5 5
Ishmael and his supporters," Count Olaf said.
"The harpoon gun?" Klaus said. "Omeros took that away."
"Not the harpoon  gun, you scholarly moron," Count Olaf said contemptuously, a word which
here means "while trying to scratch his nose within the confines of the bird cage." "I'm talking about the
Medusoid Mycelium!"
"Fungus!"  Sunny  cried.  Her  siblings  gasped,  and  even  the  Incredibly  Deadly  Viper  looked
astonished in its reptilian way as the vil-lain told them what you may have already guessed.
"I'm not really pregnant," he confessed with a caged grin. "The diving helmet containing the spores of
the Medusoid Mycelium is hidden in this dress I'm wearing. If you let me out, I can threaten  the entire
colony with these deadly mushrooms. All those robed fools will be my slaves!"
"What if they refuse?" Violet asked.
1 5  6
"Then I'll smash the helmet open," Olaf crowed, "and this whole island will be destroyed."
"But we'll be destroyed, too," Klaus said. "The spores will infect us, the same as every-one else."
"Yomhashoah," Sunny said, which meant "Never again." The youngest Baudelaire had already  been
infected by the Medusoid  Mycelium not long ago, and the children did not like to think about what
would have happened if they hadn't found some wasabi to dilute the poison.
"We'll escape on the outrigger, you fool," Olaf said.  "The island imbeciles have been  building it all
year. It's perfect for leaving this place behind and heading back to where the action is."
"Maybe they'll just let us leave," Violet said. "Friday said that anyone who wishes to leave the colony
can climb aboard the outrigger on Decision Day."

1 5 7  
"That little girl hasn't been here long," sneered Count Olaf, "so she still believes Ish-mael lets people
do whatever they want. Don't be as dumb as she is, orphans."
Klaus wished desperately that his common-place book was open in his lap, so he could take notes,
instead of on the far side of the island, with all of the other forbidden items. "How do you know so much
about this place, Olaf?" he demanded. "You've only been here a few days, just like us!"
"Just like you," the villain repeated mock-ingly, and the cage shook with laughter again. "Do you think
your pathetic history is the only story in the world? Do you think this island has just sat here in the sea,
waiting for you to wash up on its shores? Do you think that I just sat in my home in the city, waiting for
you miserable orphans to stumble into my path?"
"Boswell," Sunny said. She meant something along the lines of, "Your life doesn't interest me,"
1 5 8
and the Incredibly Deadly Viper seemed to hiss in agreement.
"I could  tell you stories,  Baudelaires,"  Count Olaf said in a muffled wheeze. "I could  tell you
secrets about people and places that you'd never dream of. I could tell you about arguments and schisms
that started before you were  born.  I could  even tell you things about  yourselves  that  you could  never
imagine. Just open the door of my cage,  orphans,  and  I'll  tell you things you could  never  discover  on
your own."
The Baudelaires looked at one another and  shuddered.  Even in broad  daylight, trapped  in a  cage,
Count Olaf was still frightening. It was as if there was something villainous that could threaten them even if
it were  locked  up tight, far away  from the rest  of the world.  The three  siblings  had  always  been
curious children. Violet had been eager to unlock the mysteries of the mechanical world  with her
inventing
 1 5 9
mind  since  the  first  pair  of  pliers  had  been  placed  in  her  crib.  Klaus  had  been  keen  to  read
everything he got his hands on since the alpha-bet was first printed on the wall of his bedroom by a visitor
to the Baudelaire home. And Sunny was always exploring the universe through her mouth, first by biting
anything that interested  her,  and  later  by tasting food  carefully in order  to  improve her cooking  skills.
Curiosity was one of the Baudelaires' most important customs, and one might think that  they would be
very curi-ous indeed to hear more about the mysteries the villain had mentioned. But there was something
very, very sinister about Count Olaf's words. Listening to him talk felt like standing on the edge of a deep
well, or walking on a high cliff in the dead of night, or listening to a  strange  rustling sound  outside  your
bedroom window, knowing that at any moment something danger-ous  and  enormous  could  happen.  It
made the Baudelaires think of that terrible question mark on the radar screen of the Queequeg—a secret
so
  1 6 0

gigantic and important that it could not fit in their hearts or minds, something that had been  hidden their
entire lives and might destroy their entire lives once it was revealed. It  was  not a  secret  the Baudelaire
orphans wanted to hear, from Count Olaf or from anyone else, and although it felt like a secret that could
not be avoided, the children wanted to avoid it anyway, and without another word to the man in the cage
the three siblings stood up and walked around the cube of books until they were at  the far end,  where
Olaf and  his bird  cage  could  not be  seen.  Then,  in  silence,  the  three  siblings  sat  back  down,
leaned against the strange raft, and stared out at the flat horizon of the sea, trying not to think about what
Olaf had  said.  Occasionally  they took  sips  of coconut  cordial  from the seashells  that  hung  from  their
waists, hoping that the strong, strange drink would distract them from the strong, strange thoughts in their
heads. All afternoon, until the sun set on the rip-pling horizon of the sea, the Baudelaire orphans
1 6 1
sat and sipped, and wondered  if they dared  learn what lay at  the heart  of their sad  lives, when every
secret, every mystery, and every unfortunate event had been peeled away.
1 6 2
C H A P T E R
Eight
Caption: Two islanders walking in the dark illuminating their path with a flashlight

Thinking about something is like picking up a stone when taking a walk, either while skipping rocks on
the beach, for example, or looking for a way to shatter the glass doors  of a  museum. When you think
about something, it adds a bit of weight to your walk, and as you think about more and more things you
are liable to feel heavier and heavier, until you are so burdened you cannot  take  any further steps,  and
can only sit and stare at the gentle movements of the ocean waves or security guards, thinking too
hard about too many things to do anything else. As the sun set, casting long shadows on the
coastal shelf, the Baudelaire orphans felt so heavy from their thoughts they could  scarcely  move.  They
thought about the island, and the terrible storm that had brought them there, and the boat that had taken
them through the storm,  and  their own treachery  at  the Hotel  Denoue-ment  that  had  led  them  to
escape  in the boat  with Count  Olaf,  who had  stopped  calling out to  the Baudelaires  and  was  now
snoring loudly in the bird cage. They thought about the colony, and the cloud the islanders had put them
under, and the peer  pressure  that had  led the islanders  to  decide  to  abandon  them, and  the facilitator
who  started  the  peer  pressure,  and  the  secret  apple  core  of  the  facilitator  that  seemed  no
dif-ferent than the secret items that had gotten the Baudelaires in trouble in the first place. They thought
about  Kit Snicket,  and  the storm  that had left her unconscious  on top  of the strange  library raft,
and their friends the Quagmire triplets, who may also have been caught in the same stormy sea,  and
Captain Widdershins's
1 6 4
submarine that lay under the sea, and the mys-terious schism that lay under everything like an enormous
question mark. And the Baudelaires thought, as they did every time they saw the sky grow dark, of their
parents. If you've ever lost someone, then you know that sometimes when you think of them you try to
imagine where  they might  be,  and  the  Baudelaires  thought  of  how  far  away  their  mother  and  father
seemed, while all the wickedness in the world felt so close, locked in a cage just a few feet from where
the children sat.  Violet thought, and  Klaus  thought, and  Sunny thought, and  as  the afternoon  drew  to
evening  they  felt  so  burdened  by  their  thoughts  that  they  felt  they  could  scarcely  hold  another
thought, and yet as the last rays of the sun disappeared on the horizon they found something else to think
about, for in the dark-ness they heard a familiar voice, and they had to think of what to do.
"Where am I?" asked Kit Snicket, and the children heard her body rustle on the top layer
 1 6 5 
of books over the snoring.
"Kit!" Violet said, standing up quickly. "You're awake!"
"It's the Baudelaires," Klaus said.
"Baudelaires?" Kit repeated faintly. "Is it really you?"
"Anais," Sunny said, which meant "In the flesh."
"Where are we?" Kit said. The Baudelaires were silent for a moment, and realized for the first time that

they did not even know the name of the place where they were. "We're on a coastal shelf," Violet said
finally, although she decided not to add that they had been abandoned there.
"There's an island nearby," Klaus said. The middle Baudelaire did not explain that  they were
not welcome to set foot on it.
"Safe," Sunny said, but she did not mention that Decision Day was approaching, and that soon the
entire area would be flooded with seawater. Without discussing the matter, the
1 6 6
Baudelaires decided not to tell Kit the whole story, not yet.
"Of course," Kit murmured. "I should have known I'd  be  here.  Eventually, everything washes
up on these shores."
"Have you been here before?" Violet asked.
"No," Kit said, "but I've heard about this place. My associates have told me stories of its mechanical
wonders, its enormous library, and the gourmet meals the islanders prepare. Why, the day before I met
you, Baudelaires, I shared Turkish coffee with an associate who was say-ing that he'd never had better
Oysters Rocke-feller than during his time on the island. You must be having a wonderful time here."
"Janiceps," Sunny said, restating an earlier opinion.
"I think this place has changed since your associate was here," said Klaus.
"That's probably  true," Kit  said  thought-fully.  "Thursday  did  say  that  the  colony  had  suf-fered  a
schism, just as V.F.D. did."
1 6 7
"Another schism?" Violet asked.
"Countless schisms have divided the world over the years," Kit replied in the darkness. "Do
you think the history of V.F.D.  is the only story  in the world?  But  let's  not  talk  of  the  past,
Baudelaires. Tell me how you made your way to these shores."
"The same way you did," Violet said. "We were castaways. The only way we  could  leave
the Hotel Denouement was by boat."
"I knew you ran into danger there," Kit said. "We were  watching  the  skies.  We  saw
the  smoke  and  we  knew  you  were  signaling  us  that  it  wasn't  safe  to  join  you.  Thank  you,
Baude-laires. I knew you wouldn't fail us. Tell me, is Dewey with you?"
Kit's words were almost more than the Baudelaires  could  stand.  The smoke  she  had
seen, of course, was from the fire the children had  set  in the hotel's  laundry room,  which had
quickly spread to the entire building, inter-rupting Count Olaf's trial and endangering the
1 6 8
lives of all the people inside, villains and vol-unteers alike. And Dewey, I'm sad to remind you, was  not
with the Baudelaires,  but lying dead  at  the  bottom  of  a  pond,  still  clutching  the  harpoon
that  the  three  siblings  had  fired  into  his  heart.  But  Violet,  Klaus,  and  Sunny  could  not  bring
themselves to  tell Kit the whole story,  not now.  They could  not bear  to  tell her what had
happened  to  Dewey,  and  to  all  the  other  noble  people  they  had  encoun-tered,  not  yet.
Not now, not yet, and perhaps not ever.
"No," Violet said. "Dewey isn't here."
"Count Olaf is with us," Klaus said, "but he's locked up."

"Viper," Sunny added.
"Oh, I'm glad Ink is safe," Kit said,  and  the Baudelaires  thought they could  almost hear  her smile.
"That's my special nickname for the Incredibly Deadly Viper.  Ink  kept  me good  company  on this raft
after we were separated from the others."
1  6  9
"The Quagmires?" Klaus asked. "You found them?"
"Yes," Kit said, and coughed a bit. "But they're not here."
"Maybe they'll wash up here, too," Violet said.
"Maybe," Kit said uncertainly. "And maybe Dewey will join us, too. We need as many asso-ciates as
we can if we're going to return to the world and make sure that justice is served. But first, let's find this
colony I've heard so much about. I need a shower and a hot meal, and  then I want to  hear  the whole
story of what happened to you." She started to lower herself down from the raft, but then stopped with a
cry of pain.
"You shouldn't move," Violet said quickly, glad for an excuse to keep Kit on the coastal shelf. "Your
foot's been injured."
"Both my feet have been injured," Kit cor-rected ruefully, lying back down on the raft. "The telegram
device fell on my legs when the submarine was attacked.  I need your help,
1  7  0
Baudelaires. I need to be someplace safe." "We'll do everything we can," Klaus said. "Maybe help is on
the way," Kit said. "I can see someone coming."
The Baudelaires  turned  to  look,  and  in the dark  they saw  a  very tiny, very bright light, skit-tering
toward them from the west. At first the light looked like nothing more than a firefly, darting here and there
on the coastal shelf, but gradually the children could see it was a flash-light, around which several figures
in white  robes  huddled,  walking  carefully  among  the  puddles  and  debris.  The  shine  of  the  flashlight
reminded Klaus of all of the nights he spent reading under the covers in the Baudelaire  man-sion,  while
outside the night made mysterious noises his parents  always insisted were  nothing more  than the wind,
even on windless evenings. Some mornings, his father would come  into Klaus's  room  to  wake  him
up and  find him asleep, still clutching his flashlight in one hand and  his book  in the other,  and  as  the
flashlight
1 7 1
drew closer  and  closer,  the middle Baudelaire  could  not help but think that  it was  his father,  walking
across  the coastal  shelf to  come  to  his children's  aid after  all this time.  But  of  course  it  was  not  the
Baudelaires' father. The figures arrived at the cube of books, and the children could see the faces of two
islanders: Finn, who was holding the flashlight, and Erewhon, who was carrying a large, covered basket.
"Good evening, Baudelaires,"  Finn said.  In the dim light of the flashlight she  looked  even younger
than she was.
"We brought you some supper," Erewhon said, and held out the basket to  the children. "We were
concerned that you might be quite hungry out here."
"We are,"  Violet admitted.  The Baudelaires,  of  course,  wished  that  the  islanders  had  expressed  their
concern in front of Ishmael and the others, when the colony was deciding to abandon the children on the
coastal shelf, but as Finn opened the basket and the children

1 7 2   
smelled the island's customary dinner of onion soup, the children did not want to look a gift horse in the
mouth, a phrase which here means "turn down an offer of a hot meal, no matter how disappointed they
were in the person who was offering it."
"Is there enough for our friend?" Klaus asked. "She's regained consciousness."
"I'm glad to hear it," Finn said. "There's enough food for everyone."
"As long as you keep the secret of our com-ing here," Erewhon said. "Ishmael might not think it was
proper."
"I'm surprised he doesn't forbid the use of flashlights," Violet said, as Finn handed her a coconut shell
full of steaming soup.
"Ishmael  doesn't  forbid  anything,"  Finn  said.  "He'd  never  force  me  to  throw  this  flash-light
away. However, he did suggest that I let the sheep  take  it to  the arboretum.  Instead  I slipped it
into my robe, as a secret, and Madame Nordoff has been secretly supplying me with
1 7 3
batteries in exchange for my secretly teaching her how to  yodel,  which Ishmael says  might frighten the
other islanders."
"And  Mrs.  Caliban  secretly  slipped  me  this  picnic  basket,"  Erewhon  said,  "in  exchange  for  my
secretly teaching her the backstroke, which Ishmael says is not the customary way to swim."
"Mrs. Caliban?" said Kit, in the darkness. "Miranda Caliban is here?"
"Yes," Finn said. "Do you know her?"
"I know her husband," Kit said. "He and I stood together in a time of great struggle, and we're still
very good friends."
"Your friend must be a little confused after her difficult journey," Erewhon  said  to  the Baudelaires,
standing on tiptoes so she could hand Kit some soup. "Mrs. Caliban's husband perished  many years
ago in the storm that brought her here."
"That's impossible," Kit said,  reaching down to take the bowl from the young girl. "I just had
Turkish coffee with him."
1 7 4
"Mrs. Caliban is not the sort to keep secrets," Finn said. "That's why she lives on the island. It's
a safe place, far from the treachery of the world."
"Enigmorama," Sunny said, putting her coconut shell of soup on the ground so she could share it with
the Incredibly Deadly Viper.
"My sister means that it seems this island has plenty of secrets," Klaus said, thinking wist-fully of his
commonplace book and all the secrets its pages contained.
"I'm afraid we have one more secret to dis-cuss," Erewhon said. "Turn the flashlight off, Finn. We
don't want to be seen from the island."
Finn nodded,  and  turned  the  flashlight  off.  The  Baudelaires  had  one  last  glimpse  of  each  other
before  the  darkness  engulfed  them,  and  for a  moment everyone  stood  in silence, as  if afraid to
speak.
Many, many years ago, when even the great-great-grandparents of the oldest person you know
1 7 5

were not even day-old infants, and when the city where the Baudelaires  were  born  was  noth-ing more
than  a  handful  of  dirt  huts,  and  the  Hotel  Denouement  nothing  but  an  architectural  sketch,  and  the
faraway island had a name, and was  not considered  very faraway  at  all, there  was  a  group  of people
known as the Cimmerians. They were a nomadic people, which meant that they traveled constantly, and
they often traveled at night, when the sun would not give them sun-burn and when the coastal shelves in
the area in which they lived were not flooded with water. Because they traveled in shadows, few people
ever got a good look at the Cimmerians, and they were considered sneaky and mysterious people, and
to this day things done in the dark tend to have a somewhat sinister reputation. A man digging a hole in
his backyard during the afternoon, for instance, looks like a gardener, but a man digging a hole at  night
looks like he's burying some terrible secret, and a woman who
1 7 6
gazes out of her window in the daytime appears to be enjoying the view, but looks more like a spy if she
waits until nightfall. The nighttime digger may actually be planting a  tree  to  sur-prise  his niece while the
niece giggles at  him from the window,  and  the morning window watcher  may  actually  be  planning  to
blackmail  the  so-called  gardener  as  he  buries  the  evidence  of  his  vicious  crimes,  but  thanks  to  the
Cimme-rians, the darkness makes even the most inno-cent  of activities seem  suspicious,  and  so  in the
darkness of the coastal shelf, the Baudelaires suspected that the question Finn asked was a sinister one,
even though it could have been something one of their teachers might have asked in the classroom.
"Do you know the meaning of the word mutiny'?" she asked, in a calm, quiet voice.
Violet and Sunny knew that Klaus would answer, although they were  pretty  sure  them-selves  what
the word meant. "A mutiny is when
1  7  7
a group of people take action against a leader."
"Yes," Finn said. "Professor Fletcher taught me the word."
"We are here to tell you that a mutiny will take place at breakfast," said Erewhon. "More and more
colonists are getting sick and tired of the way things are going on the island, and Ish-mael is the root of
the trouble."
"Tuber?" Sunny asked.
'"Root of the trouble' means 'the cause of the islanders' problems,'" Klaus explained.
"Exactly," Erewhon said, "and when Deci-sion Day arrives  we  will finally have the oppor-tunity  to
get rid of him."
"Rid of him?" Violet repeated, the phrase sounding sinister in the dark.
"We're going to force him aboard the outrig-ger right after breakfast," Erewhon said, "and push him
out to sea as the coastal shelf floods."
"A man traveling the ocean alone is unlikely to survive," Klaus said.
"He won't be alone," Finn said. "A number
1 7 8
of islanders support Ishmael. If necessary, we'll force them to leave the island as well."
"How many?" Sunny asked.
"It's hard to know who supports Ishmael and who doesn't," Erewhon said, and the children heard the
old woman sip from her seashell.  "You've seen  how  he  acts.  He  says  he  doesn't  force  anyone,  but

everyone ends up agreeing with him anyway. But no longer. At breakfast we'll find out who supports
him and who doesn't."
"Erewhon says we'll fight all day and all night if we have to," Finn said. "Everyone will have to choose
sides."
The children heard an enormous,  sad  sigh from the top  of the raft of books.  "A schism," Kit said
quietly.
"Gesundheit," Erewhon  said.  "That's  why  we've  come  to  you,  Baudelaires.  We  need  all the
help we can get."
"After the way Ishmael abandoned you, we figured you'd be on our side," Finn said. "Don't
1 7 9
you agree he's the root of the trouble?"
The Baudelaires stood together in the silence, thinking about Ishmael and all they knew
about him. They thought of the way he had taken them in so kindly upon their arrival on the island,
but also how quickly he had aban-doned them on the coastal shelf. They thought about how eager he had
been to keep the Baudelaires safe, but also how eager he was to lock Count Olaf in a bird cage. They
thought about his dishonesty about his injured feet, and about his secret apple eating, but as the children
thought of all they knew about the facilitator, they also thought about how much they didn't  know,  and
after hearing both Count Olaf and Kit Snicket talk about the history of the island, the Baudelaire orphans
realized they did not know the whole story. The children might agree  that  Ishmael was  the root  of the
trouble, but they could not be sure.
"I don't know," Violet said.
"You   don't   know?"   Erewhon   repeated
180
incredulously. "We brought you supper, and Ish-mael left you out here  to  starve,  and  you don't  know
whose side you're on?"
"We trusted you when you said Count Olaf was a terrible person," Finn said. "Why can't  you trust
us, Baudelaires?"
"Forcing Ishmael to leave the island seems a bit drastic," Klaus said.
"It's a bit drastic to put a man in a cage," Erewhon pointed out, "but I didn't  hear  you complaining
then."
"Quid pro quo?" Sunny asked.
"If we help you," Violet translated, "will you help Kit?"
"Our friend is injured," Klaus said. "Injured and pregnant."
"And distraught," Kit added weakly, from the top of the raft.
"If you help us in our plan to defeat Ish-mael," Finn promised, "we'll get her to a safe place."
"And if not?" Sunny asked.
181
"We won't force you, Baudelaires," Erewhon said, sounding like the facilitator she wanted to defeat,
"but Decision Day is approaching, and the coastal shelf will flood. You need to make a choice."
The Baudelaires did not say anything, and for a moment everyone stood in a silence bro-ken only by
Count  Olaf's  snores.  Violet,  Klaus,  and  Sunny  were  not  interested  in  being  part  of  a  schism,  after
witnessing all of the misery that followed the schism of V.F.D., but they did not see  a  way to  avoid  it.
Finn had said that they needed to make a choice, but choosing between living alone on a  coastal  shelf,

endangering themselves and their injured friend, and partic-ipating in the island's  mutinous plan,  did not
feel like much of a choice at all, and they won-dered how many other people had felt this way, during the
countless schisms that had divided the world over the years.
"We'll help you," Violet said finally. "What do you want us to do?"
1  8  2
"We need  you to  sneak  into the arboretum,"  Finn said.  "You mentioned your mechanical abilities,
Violet, and  Klaus  seems  very well-read.  All of  the  forbidden  items  we've  scavenged  over  the  years
should come in very handy indeed."
"Even the baby should be able to cook something up," Erewhon said.
"But what do you mean?" Klaus asked. "What should we do with all the detritus?"
"We need weapons, of course," Erewhon said in the darkness.
"We hope to force Ishmael off the island peacefully," Finn said quickly, "but Erewhon says we'll need
weapons, just in case. Ishmael will notice if we go to the far side of the island, but you three should be
able to sneak over the brae, find or build some weapons in the arbore-tum, and  bring them to  us here
before breakfast so we can begin the mutiny."
"Absolutely not!" cried Kit, from the top of the raft. "I won't hear of you putting your tal-ents to such
nefarious use, Baudelaires. I'm sure
1 8 3
the island can solve its difficulties without resorting to violence."
"Did you solve your difficulties without resorting to violence?" Erewhon asked sharply. "Is that how
you survived the great struggle you mentioned, and ended up shipwrecked on a raft of books?"
"My history is not important," Kit replied. "I'm worried about the Baudelaires."
"And we're worried about you, Kit," Violet said. "We need as many associates as we can if we're
going to return to the world and make sure that justice is served."
"You need to be in a safe place to recuper-ate from your injury," Klaus said.
"And baby," said Sunny.
"That's no reason to engage in treachery," Kit said, but she did not sound so sure. Her voice was
weak  and  faint,  and  the  children  heard  the  books  rustling  as  she  moved  her  injured  feet
uncomfortably.
1 8 4
"Please help us," Finn said, "and we'll help your friend."
"There must be a weapon that can threaten Ishmael and his supporters," Erewhon said, and now she
did  not  sound  like  Ishmael.  The  Baudelaires  had  heard  almost  the  exact  same  words  from  the
imprisoned mouth of Count Olaf, and they shuddered to think of the weapon he was hiding in
the bird cage.
Violet put down her empty soup bowl, and picked up her baby sister, while Klaus took the flashlight
from the old woman. "We'll be back as soon as we can, Kit," the eldest Baudelaire promised. "Wish us
luck."
The raft trembled as Kit uttered a long, sad sigh. "Good luck," she  said  finally. "I wish things were
different, Baudelaires."
"So do we," Klaus replied, and the three children followed the narrow beam of the flash-light back

toward the colony that had aban-doned them. Their footsteps made small splashes
185
on the coastal shelf, and the Baudelaires  heard  the quiet slither of the Incredibly Deadly Viper,  loyally
following them on their errand. There was no sign of a moon, and the stars were cov-ered in clouds that
remained from the passing storm, or perhaps were heralding a new one, so the entire world  seemed  to
vanish outside the secret flashlight's forbidden light. With each damp and uncertain step, the children felt
heav-ier, as if their thoughts were stones that they had to carry to the arboretum, where all the forbid-den
items lay waiting for them. They thought about the islanders,  and  the mutinous schism that  would soon
divide  the  colony  in  two.  They  thought  about  Ishmael,  and  wondered  whether  his  secrets  and
deceptions  meant that he deserved to be at sea. And they thought about  the Medusoid  Mycelium,
fermenting  in  the  hel-met  in  Olaf's  grasp,  and  wondered  if  the  islanders  would  discover  that
weapon  before  the Baudelaires  built another.  The children traveled  in  the  dark,  just  as  so  many
other people had
186
done before them, from the nomadic travels of the Cimmerians to the desperate voyages of the Quagmire
triplets, who at that very moment were in circumstances just as dark although quite a bit damper than the
Baudelaires', and  as  the children drew  closer  and  closer  to  the island that  had  abandoned  them, their
thoughts  made  them  heavier  and  heavier,  and  the  Baudelaire  orphans  wished  things  were  very
different indeed.
1 8 7
page 188
Caption: Several ballerinas dancing with shovels digging holes, the illustration continues on next page 189

C H A P T E R
Nine
The phrase "in the dark," as I'm sure you know, can refer not only to one's shadowy surround-ings, but
also to the shadowy secrets of which one might be unaware. Every day, the sun goes  down  over  all
these secrets, and so  everyone is in the dark in one way or another. If you are sunbathing in
a park, for instance, but you do not know that a locked cabinet is buried fifty feet beneath your blanket,
then you are in the dark even though you are not actually in the dark, whereas if you are on a  midnight
hike, knowing full well that several ballerinas are following close behind you, then you are not in the dark
even if you are in fact in the dark. Of course, it is quite possi-ble to be in the dark in the dark, as well as
to be not in the dark not in the dark, but there are so many secrets in the world that it is likely that you
are always in the dark about one thing or another, whether you are in the dark in the dark or in the dark
not in the dark, although the sun can go down so quickly that you may be in the dark about being in the
dark in the dark, only to look around and find yourself no longer in the dark about being in the dark in the
dark, but in the dark  in the dark  nonetheless,  not  only  because  of the dark,  but because  of the
balleri-nas in the dark, who are not in the dark about the dark, but also not in the dark about the
1  9  0
locked cabinet, and you may be in the dark about the ballerinas digging up the locked cab-inet in
the dark, even though you are no longer in the dark about being in the dark, and so you are in fact in the
dark about being in the dark, even though you are not in the dark about being in the dark, and  so  you
may fall into the hole that the ballerinas have dug, which is dark, in the dark, and in the park.
The Baudelaire orphans, of course, had been in the dark many times before they made their way in
the dark over the brae to the far side of the island, where the arboretum guarded its many, many secrets.
There was the darkness of Count Olaf's gloomy house, and the darkness of the movie theater  where
Uncle Monty had  taken them to see a wonderful film called Zom-bies in the Snow.  There were  the
dark clouds of Hurricane Herman as it roared across Lake Lachrymose, and the darkness of the Finite
Forest as a train had taken the children to work at Lucky Smells Lumbermill. There were the
1 9 1
dark  nights the children spent  at  Prufrock  Preparatory  School,  participating  in  Special  Orphan  Running
Exercises, and the dark climbs up the elevator shaft of 667 Dark Avenue. There was the dark jail cell in which
the chil-dren spent some time while living in the Village of Fowl Devotees, and the dark trunk of Count
Olaf's car, which had carried them from Heimlich Hospital to the hinterlands, where the dark tents of the

Caligari Carnival awaited them. There was the dark pit they had built high in the Mortmain Mountains,
and the dark hatch they had climbed through in order to board the Queequeg, and the dark lobby of the
Hotel Denouement,  where  they thought their dark  days  might be  over.  There  were  the  dark  eyes  of
Count Olaf and  his associates,  and  the dark  notebooks  of the Quagmire triplets,  and  all  of  the  dark
passageways the children had discov-ered, that led to the Baudelaire mansion, and out of the Library of
Records, and up to the V.F.D. Headquarters, and to the dark, dark depths of
1 9 2
the sea, and all the dark passageways they hadn't  discovered,  where  other  people  traveled  on equally
desperate errands. But most of all, the Baudelaire  orphans  had  been  in the dark  about  their own sad
history. They did not understand  how Count  Olaf had  entered  their lives, or  how he had  managed  to
remain  there,  hatching  scheme  after  scheme  without  anyone  stopping  him.  They  did  not  understand
V.F.D., even when they had joined the organization themselves, or how the organization, with all of its
codes, errands, and volunteers, had failed to defeat the wicked  people  who seemed  to  tri-umph again
and again, leaving each safe place in ruins. And they did not understand how they could lose their parents
and their home in a fire, and how this enormous injustice, this bad  begin-ning to  their sad  history, was
followed only by another injustice, and another, and another. The Baudelaire orphans did not understand
how injustice and treachery could prosper, even this far from their home, on an island in the middle
1 9 3
of a vast sea, and that happiness  and  innocence—  the  happiness  and  innocence  of  that  day  on
Briny Beach, before Mr. Poe brought them the dreadful news—could always be so far out of reach. The
Baudelaires were in the dark about the mystery of their own lives, which is why it was such a profound
shock to think at last that these mysteries might be solved. The Baude-laire orphans blinked in
the rising sun, and  gazed at the expanse of the arboretum, and wondered if they might not be  in the
dark any longer.

"Library" is another  word  that can  mean two  different things,  which  means  even  in  a  library  you
cannot  be  safe  from  the  confusion  and  mys-tery  of  the  world.  The  most  common  use  of  the  word
"library," of course, refers to a collection of books or documents, such as the libraries the Baudelaires
had encountered  during their  travels and  troubles,  from the legal library of Jus-tice  Strauss  to  the
Hotel Denouement, which was itself an enormous library—with, it turned
1  9  4
out, another library hidden nearby. But the word  "library" can  also  refer  to  a  mass  of knowledge  or  a
source of learning, just as Klaus Baudelaire is something of a library with the mass of knowl-edge stored
in his brain, or  Kit Snicket,  who was  a  source  of learning for the Baudelaires  as  she  told  them about
V.F.D. and its noble errands. So when I write that the Baudelaire orphans had found themselves in the
largest library they had ever seen, it is that definition of the word I am using, because the arboretum was
an enormous mass of knowledge, and a source of learning, even without a single scrap of paper in sight.
The items that had washed up on the shores of the island over the years could answer any question the
Baudelaires had, and thousands more ques-tions they'd never thought of. Stretched out as far as the eye
could see  were  piles of objects,  heaps  of  items,  towers  of  evidence,  bales  of  mate-rials,  clusters  of
details, stacks of substances, hordes of pieces, arrays of articles, constellations of details,  galaxies of
stuff, and universes of
1  9  5
things—an accumulation, an aggregation, a compilation, a concentration, a crowd, a herd, a flock, and a
register of seemingly everything on Earth.  There  was  everything the alphabet  could  hold—automobiles
and alarm clocks, bandages and beads, cables  and  chimneys, discs  and  dominos,  earmuffs and  emery
boards, fiddles and fabric, garrotes and glassware, hangers and husks, icons and instruments, jewelry and
jog-ging  shoes,  kites  and  kernels,  levers  and  lawn  chairs,  machines  and  magnets,  noisemakers  and
needles, orthodontics and ottomans, pull toys and pillars, quarters and quivers, race cars and rucksacks,
saws  and  skulls,  teaspoons  and  ties,  urns  and  ukuleles,  valentines  and  vines,  wigs  and  wires,
xeranthemums and xylorimbas, yachts and yokes, zithers and  zabras,  a  word  which here  means "small
boats  usually used  off  the  coasts  of  Spain  and  Portugal"—as  well  as  everything  that  could  hold  the
alphabet, from a cardboard box perfect for storing twenty-six wooden blocks, to a  chalkboard  perfect 
for writing  twenty-six
1  9  6
letters. There were any number of things, from a  single motorcycle  to  countless  chopsticks,  and  things
with every number on them, from license plates to calculators.  There  were  objects  from every  climate,
from snowshoes to ceiling fans; and for every occasion, from menorahs to soccer balls; and there were
things you could  use  on certain  occasions  in certain  climates, such as  a  waterproof  fondue set.  There
were inserts and outhouses, overpasses and  underclothes,  uphol-stery  and  down  comforters,  hotplates
and cold creams and cradles and coffins, hopelessly destroyed, somewhat damaged, in slight disre-pair,
and  brand-new.  There  were  objects  the  Baudelaires  recognized,  including  a  triangular  picture
frame and a brass lamp in the shape of a  fish, and  there  were  objects  the Baudelaires  had  never  seen
before,  including the skeleton  of an elephant  and  a  glittering green  mask  one  might wear  as  part  of a
dragonfly costume, and there were objects the Baudelaires did not know if they had seen before, such as
a wooden rocking horse
1 9 7
and a  piece  of  rubber  that  looked  like  a  fan  belt.  There  were  items  that  seemed  to  be  part  of  the

Baudelaires' story, such as a plastic replica of a clown and a broken telegraph pole, and there were items
that seemed part of some other story, such as  a  carving of a  black  bird  and  a  gem that  shone  like an
Indian moon, and all the items, and all their stories, were scattered across the landscape in such a  way
that the Baudelaire orphans thought that the arboretum had either been organized according to principles
so mys-terious they could not be discovered, or it had  not been  organized at  all. In short,  the Baude-
laire orphans had found themselves in the largest library they had ever seen, but they did not know
where to begin their research. The children stood in awed silence and surveyed the endless landscape of
objects and stories, and then looked up at the largest object of all, which towered  over  the arboretum
and covered it in shade. It was the apple tree, with a trunk as enormous as a mansion and branches as
long as
1 9 8
a city street, which sheltered the library from the frequent storms and offered its bitter apples to anyone
who dared to pick one.
"Words fail me," Sunny said in a hushed whisper.
"Me, too," Klaus agreed. "I can't believe what we're seeing. The islanders told  us that  everything
eventually  washes  up  on  these  shores,  but I never  imagined the arboretum  would  hold  so  many
things."
Violet  picked  up  an  item  that  lay  at  her  feet—a  pink  ribbon  decorated  with  plastic
daisies—and began to wind it around  her hair. To  those  who hadn't  been  around  Violet long, nothing
would have seemed  unusual, but those  who knew  her well knew  that  when she  tied  her hair  up  in  a
ribbon to keep it out of her eyes, it meant that the gears and levers of her invent-ing brain were whirring
at top speed. "Think of what I could  build here,"  she  said.  "I could  build splints for Kit's  feet,  a
boat to take us off the island, a filtration system so we could drink
l 9 9
fresh water. . . ." Her  voice trailed off, and  she  stared  up at  the branches  of the tree.  "I could  invent
anything and everything."
Klaus picked up the object at his feet—a cape made of scarlet silk—and held it in his hands. "There
must be countless secrets in a place like this," he said. "Even without a book, I could investigate anything
and everything."
Sunny looked around her. "Service a la Russe," she said, which meant something like, "Even with the
simplest of ingredients, I could prepare an extremely elaborate meal."
"I don't know where to begin," Violet said, running a hand along a pile of broken  white wood  that
looked like it had once been part of a gazebo.
"We begin with weapons," Klaus said grimly. "That's why we're here. Erewhon and Finn are waiting
for us to help them mutiny against Ishmael."
The oldest Baudelaire shook her head. "It doesn't seem right," she said. "We can't use a
2 0 0
place like this to start a schism."
"Maybe a schism is necessary," Klaus said. "There are  millions of items here  that  could  help
the colony, but thanks to Ishmael, they've all been abandoned here."
"No one forced anyone to abandon any-thing," Violet said.
"Peer pressure," Sunny pointed out.
"We  can  try  a  little  peer  pressure  of  our  own," Violet said  firmly.  "We've  defeated  worse

people than Ishmael with far fewer materials."
"But do we really want to defeat Ishmael?" Klaus asked. "He's made the island a safe place, even if it
is a little boring, and he kept Count Olaf away, even if he is a little cruel. He has feet of clay, but I'm not
sure he's the root of the problem."
"What is the root of the problem?" Violet asked.
"Ink,"  Sunny  said,  but  when  her  siblings  turned  to  give  her  a  quizzical  look,  they  saw  that  the
youngest Baudelaire was not answering
2 0 1
their question, but pointing at the Incredibly Deadly Viper,  who was  slithering hurriedly away  from the
children with its eyes darting this way and that and its tongue extended to sniff the air.
"It appears to know where it's going," Vio-let said.
"Maybe it's been here before," Klaus said.
"Taylit," Sunny said, which meant "Let's follow the reptile and see where it heads." With-out waiting
to see whether her siblings agreed, she hurried after the snake,  and  Violet and  Klaus hurried after
her. The viper's path was as curved and twisted as the snake itself, and the Baudelaires found themselves
scrambling over all sorts of discarded items, from a cardboard box, soaked through from the storm, that
was full of something white and lacy, to a painted backdrop of a  sunset,  such as  might be  used  in the
performance of an opera. The children could tell that  the path  had  been  traveled  before, as
the ground was covered in footprints. The snake was slithering so quickly that the
2 0 2
Baudelaires could not keep up, but they could follow the footprints, which were dusted around the edges
in white powder. It was dried clay, of course, and in moments the children reached the end of the path,
following in Ishmael's foot-steps, and they arrived at the base of the apple tree just in time to see the tail
of the snake dis-appear into a gap in the tree's roots. If you've ever stood at the base of an old tree, then
you know the roots are often close to the surface of the earth,  and  the curved  angles of the roots  can
create a hollow space in the tree's trunk. It was into this hollow space  that  the Incredibly Deadly
Viper disappeared,  and  after  the tiniest of pauses,  it was  into this space  that  the Baude-laire  orphans
followed, wondering what secrets they would find at the root of the tree that shel-tered such a mysterious
place. First Violet, and then Klaus,  and  then Sunny stepped  down  through the gap into the secret
space.  It  was  dark  underneath  the roots  of the tree,  and  for a  moment  the  Baudelaires  tried  to
adjust to the
2  0  3
gloom  and  figure  out  what  this  place  was,  but  then  the  middle  Baudelaire  remembered  the
flashlight, and turned it on so he and his siblings would no longer be in the dark in the dark.
The Baudelaire orphans were standing in a space much bigger than they would have imag-ined, and
much better furnished. Along one wall was a large stone bench lined with simple, clean tools,  including
several sharp-looking razor-blades, a glass pot of paste, and several wooden brushes with narrow, fine
tips. Next to the wall was an enormous bookcase, which was stuffed with books of all shapes and sizes,
as well as assorted documents that were stacked, rolled, and stapled with extreme care. The shelves of
the bookcase stretched away from the children past the beam of the flashlight and disappeared into the
darkness, so there was no way of know-ing how long the bookcase was, or the number of books  and
documents it contained. Opposite the bookcase  stretched  an elaborate  kitchen,  with a  huge potbellied
stove, several porcelain

204 sinks, and a tall, humming refrigerator, as well as a square wooden table covered in appliances
ranging from a blender to a fondue set. Over the table hung a rack from which dangled all man-ner of
kitchen utensils and pots, as well as sprigs of dried herbs, a variety of whole dried fish, and even a few
cured meats, such as salami and pro-sciutto, an Italian ham that the Baudelaire orphans had
once enjoyed at a Sicilian picnic the family had attended. Nailed to the wall was an impressive spice
rack filled with jars of herbs and bottles of condiments, and a cupboard with glass doors through which
the children could see piles of plates, bowls, and mugs. Finally, in the center of this enormous
space were two large, comfortable reading chairs, one with a gigantic book on the seat, much taller
than an atlas and much thicker than even an unabridged dictionary, and the other just waiting for
some-one to sit down. Lastly, there was a curious device made of brass that looked like a large tube
with a pair of binoculars at the bottom,
205
which rose  up into the thick canopy  of roots  that  formed the ceiling. As  the Incredibly Deadly  Viper
hissed proudly, the way a dog might wag its tail after performing a difficult trick, the three children stared
around the room, each concentrating on their area of expertise, a phrase which here means "the part of
the room in which each Baudelaire would most like to spend time."
Violet walked over to the brass  device  and  peered  into the eyes  of the binoculars.  "I can  see  the
ocean," she said in surprise. "This is an enormous periscope, much bigger than the one in the Queequeg.
It must run all the way up the trunk of the tree and jut out over the highest branch."
"But why would you want to look at the ocean from here?" Klaus asked.
"From this height," Violet explained,  "you could  see  any storm  clouds  that  might be  head-ing  this
way. This is how Ishmael predicts the weather—not by magic, but with scientific equipment."
2 0 6
 "And these tools are used to repair books," Klaus said. "Of course books wash up on the
island—everything does, eventually. But the pages and bindings of the books are often dam-aged by
the storm that brought them, so Ish-mael repairs them and shelves them here." He picked up a dark
blue notebook from the bench and held it up. "It's my commonplace book," he said. "He must have
been making sure none of the pages were wet."
Sunny picked  up a  familiar object  from the  wooden  table—her  whisk—and  held  it  to  her  nose.
"Fritters," she said. "With cinnamon."
"Ishmael walks to the arboretum to  watch  for storms,  read  books,  and  cook  spiced  food,"  Violet
said. "Why would he pretend to be an injured facilitator who predicts the weather through magic, claims
that the island has no library, and prefers bland meals?"
Klaus walked to the two reading chairs and lifted the heavy, thick book. "Maybe this will tell us," he
said, and shone the flashlight so his
207
sisters could see the long, somewhat wordy title printed on the front cover.
"What does it mean?" Violet asked. "That title could mean anything."
Klaus noticed a thin piece of black cloth stuck in the book to mark someone's place,  and  opened
the book to that page. The bookmark was Violet's hair ribbon, which the eldest Baudelaire quickly
grabbed, as the pink ribbon with plastic daisies was not to her taste. "I think it's a history of the island,"

Klaus said, "written like a diary. Look, here's what the most recent entry says: 'Yet another figure from
the shadowy past has washed ashore—Kit Snicket (see  page  667).  Convinced  the others  to  abandon
her, and the Baudelaires, who have already rocked the boat far too much, I fear. Also managed to have
Count Olaf locked in a cage. Note to self: Why won't anyone call me Ish?'"
"Ishmael said  he'd  never  heard  of  Kit  Snicket," Violet said,  "but here  he writes  that  she's  a
figure from the shadowy past."
2 0 8
"Six six seven," Sunny said, and Klaus nod-ded. Handing the flashlight to his older sister, he quickly
turned the pages of the book, flip-ping back in history until he reached the page Ishmael had mentioned.
"'Inky has learned to lasso sheep,'" Klaus read, '"and last night's storm washed up a post-card from
Kit Snicket, addressed to Olivia Cal-iban. Kit, of course, is the sister of. . .'"
The middle Baudelaire's  voice trailed off, and  his sisters  stared  at  him  curiously.  "What's  wrong,
Klaus?" Violet asked. "That entry doesn't seem particularly mysterious."
"It's not the entry," Klaus  said,  so  quietly that  Violet and  Sunny could  scarcely  hear  him. "It's  the
handwriting."
"Familia?" Sunny asked, and all three Baudelaires stepped as close as they could to one another. In
silence, the children gathered  around  the beam  of  the  flashlight,  as  if  it  were  a  warm  campfire  on  a
freezing night, and gazed down at the pages of the oddly titled book.
2 0 9
Even the Incredibly Deadly Viper crawled up to perch on Sunny's shoulders, as if it were as curious as
the Baudelaire orphans to know who had written those words so long ago.
"Yes, Baudelaires," said a voice from the far end of the room. "That's your mother's hand-writing."
2 1 0
C H A P T E R
Ten

Ishmael  stepped  out of the darkness,  running a  hand along the shelves of the  bookcase,  and
walked slowly toward the Baudelaire orphans. In the dim glow of the flashlight, the children could
not tell if the facilitator was smiling or frowning through his wild, woolly beard,  and  Violet was
reminded of something she'd almost entirely forgotten. A long time ago, before Sunny
Caption: A book with a ribbon bookmarking the book’s pagewas born, Violet and Klaus had
begun an argu-ment at breakfast over whose turn it was to take out the garbage. It was a silly
matter, but one of those occasions when the people arguing are having too much fun to stop, and
all day, the two siblings had wandered around the house, doing their assigned chores and
scarcely speaking to each other. Finally, after a long, silent meal, dur-ing which their parents tried
to get them to rec-oncile—a word which here means "admit that it didn't matter in the
slightest whose turn it was, and that the only important thing was to get the garbage out of the
kitchen before the smell spread to the entire mansion"—Violet and Klaus were sent up to bed
without dessert or even five minutes of reading. Suddenly, just as she was dropping off to sleep,
Violet had an idea for an invention that meant no one would ever have to take out the garbage,
and she turned on a light and began to sketch out her idea on a pad of paper. She became so
interested in her inven-tion that she did not listen for footsteps in the
2 1 2
hallway outside,  and  so  when her mother opened the door, she did not have time to turn out the
light and pretend to be asleep. Violet stared at her mother, and her mother stared back, and in the
dim light the eldest Baudelaire could not see if her mother was smiling or frowning—if she was angry at
Violet for staying up past her bedtime, or if she didn't mind after all. But then finally, Violet saw that her
mother was carrying a cup of hot tea. "Here you go, dear," she said gently. "I know how star anise tea
helps you think." Violet took the steaming cup from her mother, and in that instant she suddenly realized
that it had been her turn to take out the garbage after all.
Ishmael did not offer the Baudelaire orphans any tea, and when he flicked a switch on the wall, and lit

up the secret  space  underneath  the apple  tree  with electric  lights, the children  could  see  that  he  was
neither smiling nor frowning, but exhibiting a strange combination of the two, as if he were  as  nervous
about the Baudelaires
2 1 3 as they were about him. "I knew you'd come here," he said finally, after a long silence. "It's in your
blood. I've never known a Baudelaire who didn't rock the boat."
The Baudelaires  felt all of their questions  bump into each  other  in their heads,  like fran-tic  sailors
deserting a sinking ship. "What is this place?" Violet asked. "How did you know our parents?"
"Why have you lied to us about so many things?" Klaus demanded. "Why are you keep-ing so many
secrets?"
"Who are you?" Sunny asked.
Ishmael took another step closer to the Baudelaires and gazed down at Sunny, who gazed  back  at
the facilitator, and then stared down at the clay still packed around his feet. "Did you know I used to be a
schoolteacher?" he asked. "This was many years ago, in the city. There were always a few children in my
chem-istry classes who had the same gleam in their eyes that you Baudelaires have. Those students
2  1  4
always turned in the most interesting assign-ments." He sighed, and sat down on one of the reading chairs
in the  center  of  the  room.  "They  also  always  gave  me  the  most  trouble.  I  remem-ber  one  child  in
particular, who had scraggly dark hair and just one eyebrow."
"Count Olaf," Violet said.
Ishmael frowned, and blinked at the eldest Baudelaire. "No," he said. "This was a little girl. She had
one  eyebrow  and,  thanks  to  an  accident  in  her  grandfather's  laboratory,  only  one  ear.  She  was  an
orphan, and she lived with her siblings in a house owned by a  terrible  woman,  a  violent drunkard  who
was famous for having killed a man in  her  youth  with  nothing  but  her  bare  hands  and  a  very
ripe cantaloupe.  The can-taloupe was grown on a farm that is no longer in operation,  the Lucky
Smells Melon Farm, which was owned by—"
"Sir," Klaus said.
Ishmael frowned again. "No," he said. "The farm was owned by two brothers, one of whom
215
was later murdered in a small village, where three innocent children were accused of the crime."
"Jacques," Sunny said.
"No," Ishmael said with another frown. "There was  some  argument about  his name,  actually,
as he appeared to use several names depending on what he was wearing. In any case, the student in my
class began to be very suspi-cious about the tea her guardian would pour for her when she  got home
from  school.  Rather  than  drink  it,  she  would  dump  it  into  a  house-plant  that  had  been  used  to
decorate a well-known stylish restaurant with a fish theme."
"Cafe Salmonella," Violet said.
"No," Ishmael said, and frowned once more. "The Bistro Smelt. Of course, my student real-ized she
couldn't keep  feeding tea  to  the house-plant,  particularly  after  it  withered  away  and  the  houseplant's
owner was whisked off to Peru aboard a mysterious ship."
"The Prospero" Klaus said.
  2 1 6   

Ishmael offered the youngsters yet another frown. "Yes," he said, "although at the time the ship was
called the Pericles. But my student didn't know  that.  She  only wanted  to  avoid  being poisoned,
and I had an idea that an anti-dote might be hidden—"
"Yaw," Sunny interrupted, and her siblings nodded in agreement. By "yaw," the youngest Baudelaire
meant "Ishmael's story is tangen-tial," a word which here means "answering questions other than the ones
the Baudelaires had asked."
"We want to know what's going on here on the island, at this very moment," Violet said, "not what
happened in a classroom many years ago."
"But what is happening now and what hap-pened then are part of the same story," Ishmael said. "If I
don't tell you how I came to prefer tea that's as bitter as wormwood, then you won't know how I came
to have a very important con-versation with a waiter in a lakeside town. And
2  1  7
if I don't tell you about that conversation, then you won't know how I ended up on a certain bathyscaphe,
or how I ended up shipwrecked here, or how I came to meet your parents, or anything else contained in
this book." He took the heavy volume from Klaus's hands and ran his fingers along the spine, where the
long, somewhat wordy title was  printed  in gold block  letters.  "People  have been  writing stories  in this
book since the first castaways washed up on the island, and all the stories are connected in one way or
another. If you ask one question, it will lead you to another, and another, and another. It's like peeling an
onion."
"But you can't read every story, and answer every question," Klaus  said,  "even if  you'd  like
to."
Ishmael smiled and tugged at his beard. "That's just what your parents  told  me," he said.  "When I
arrived here they'd been on the island a few months, but they'd become the colony's
2  1  8
facilitators, and  had  suggested  some  new cus-toms.  Your  father had  suggested  that  a  few  cast-away
construction  workers  install  the  periscope  in  the  tree,  to  search  for  storms,  and  your  mother  had
suggested  that a  shipwrecked  plumber devise a water filtration system,  so  the colony could  have
fresh water, right from the kitchen sink. Your  parents  had  begun a  library from all the documents  that
were here, and were adding hundreds of stories to the commonplace book. Gourmet meals were served,
and your parents had convinced  some  of the other  castaways  to  expand  this underground  space."  He
gestured to the long bookshelf, which disappeared into the darkness. "They wanted to dig a passage-way
that  would  lead  to  a  marine  research  center  and  rhetorical  advice  service  some  miles  away."  The
Baudelaires exchanged amazed looks. Captain  Widdershins  had  described  such  a  place,  and  in
fact the children had spent some desperate hours in its ruined basement. "You
2 1 9
mean if we walk along the bookcase," Klaus said, "we'll reach Anwhistle Aquatics?"
Ishmael shook his head. "The passageway was never finished," he said, "and it's a  good  thing, too.
The research center  was  destroyed  in a  fire, which might have spread  through the passageway  and
reached  the  island.  And  it  turned  out  that  a  very  deadly  fungus  was  con-tained  in  that  place.  I
shudder to think what might happen if the Medusoid Mycelium ever reached these shores."
The Baudelaires looked at one another  again, but said nothing, preferring to keep one of their
secrets  even as  Ishmael told  them some  of  his  own.  The  story  of  the  Baudelaire  children  may  have
connected with Ishmael's story of the spores contained in the diving helmet Count Olaf was hiding

under his gown in the bird cage in which he was a prisoner, but the siblings saw no reason to volunteer
this information.
"Some islanders thought the passage was a
2 1 0
wonderful  idea,"  Ishmael  continued.  "Your  par-ents  wanted  to  carry  all  of  the  documents  that  had
washed up here to Anwhistle Aquatics, where they might be sent to a sub-sub-librarian who had a secret
library. Others wanted to keep the island safe, far from the treachery of the world. By the time I arrived,
some islanders wanted to mutiny, and abandon your parents on the coastal shelf." The facilitator heaved a
great sigh, and closed the heavy book in his lap. "I walked into the middle of this story," he said, "just as
you walked into the middle of mine. Some of the islanders  had  found weapons  in the detritus,  and  the
situation might have become  violent  if  I  hadn't  convinced  the  colony  to  simply  abandon  your
parents.  We  allowed  them to  pack  a  few books  into a  fishing boat  your  father  had  built,  and  in  the
morning they left with a few of their comrades as the coastal shelf flooded.  They left behind everything
they'd cre-ated here, from the periscope I use to predict the
2 2 1
weather to the commonplace book where I con-tinue their research."
"You drove our parents away?" Violet asked in amazement.
"They were very sad to go," Ishmael said. "Your mother was pregnant with you, Violet, and after all
of their years with V.F.D. your parents weren't sure they wanted  their children exposed  to  the world's
treachery. But they didn't under-stand that if the passageway had been com-pleted, you would have been
exposed to the world's treachery in any case. Sooner or later, everyone's  story  has  an unfortunate
event or two—a schism or a death, a fire or a mutiny, the loss of a home or the destruction of a tea set.
The only solution, of course, is to stay as far away from the world  as  possible  and  lead  a  safe,  simple
life."
"That's why you keep so many items away from the others," Klaus said.
"It depends on how you look at it," Ishmael said. "I wanted this place to be as safe as possi-ble, so
when I became the island's facilitator, I
2 2 2
suggested some new customs myself. I moved the colony to the other side of the island, and I trained the
sheep to drag the weapons away, and then the books and mechanical devices,  so  none of the world's
detritus would interfere with our safety. I suggested we all dress alike, and eat the same meals, to avoid
any future schisms."
"Jojishoji," Sunny said, which meant some-thing like, "I don't believe that  abridging the freedom  of
expression and the free exercise thereof is the proper way to run a community."
"Sunny's right," Violet said. "The other islanders couldn't have agreed with these new customs."
"I didn't  force  them,"  Ishmael  said,  "but,  of  course,  the  coconut  cordial  helped.  The  fer-mented
beverage is so strong that it serves as a sort of opiate for the people here."
"Lethe?" Sunny asked.
"An opiate is something that makes people drowsy and inactive," Klaus said, "or even for-getful."
223
"The more cordial the islanders drank," Ish-mael explained,  "the less  they thought  about  the

past, or complained about the things they were missing."
"That's why hardly anyone leaves this place," Violet said.  "They're too  drowsy  to  think
about leaving."
"Occasionally someone leaves," Ishmael said, and looked down at the Incredibly Deadly Viper, who
gave him a brief hiss. "Some time ago, two women sailed off with this very snake, and a few years later, a
man named Thursday left with a few comrades."
"So Thursday is alive," Klaus said, "just like Kit said."
"Yes," Ishmael admitted, "but at my sugges-tion, Miranda told her daughter that he died in a storm,
so she wouldn't worry about the schism that divided her parents."
"Electra," Sunny said, which meant "A fam-ily shouldn't keep such terrible secrets," but Ishmael did
not ask for a translation.
 2 2 4
"Except for those troublemakers," he said, "everyone has stayed here. And why shouldn't they? Most
of the castaways  are  orphans,  like  me,  and  like  you.  I  know  your  story,  Baude-laires,  from  all  the
newspaper articles, police reports, financial newsletters, telegrams, private correspondence, and fortune
cookies  that  have  washed  up  here.  You've  been  wandering  this  treacherous  world  since  your  story
began, and you've never found a place as safe as this one. Why don't you stay? Give up your mechanical
inventions and your reading and your cooking. Forget about Count Olaf and V.F.D. Leave your ribbon,
and your commonplace book, and your whisk, and your raft library, and lead a simple, safe life on our
shores."
"What about Kit?" Violet asked.
"In my experience, the Snickets are as much trouble as the Baudelaires," Ishmael said.  "That's
why I suggested you leave her on the coastal shelf, so she wouldn't make trouble for the colony.  But if
you can be convinced to
 2 5 4
choose a simpler life, I suppose she can, too."
The  Baudelaires  looked  at  one  another  doubtfully.  They  already  knew  that  Kit  wanted  to
return to the world and make sure justice was served, and as volunteers they should have been eager to
join her. But Violet, Klaus, and Sunny were not sure  they could  abandon  the first safe  place  they had
found, even if it was a little dull. "Can't we stay here," Klaus asked, "and lead a  more  complicated  life,
with the items and doc-uments here in the arboretum?"
"And spices?" Sunny added.
"And keep them a secret from the other islanders?" Ishmael said with a frown.
"That's what you're doing," Klaus couldn't help pointing out. "All day long you sit in your chair and
make sure the island is safe from the detritus of the world, but then you sneak off to the arboretum  on
your perfectly healthy feet and write in a commonplace book while snack-ing on bitter apples. You
want everyone to lead a simple, safe life—everyone except yourself."
226
"No one should lead  the life I lead,"  Ish-mael  said,  with a  long, sad  tug on his beard.  "I've spent
countless years cataloging all of the objects that have washed up on these shores and all the stories those
objects  tell. I've  repaired  all the documents  that  the storms  have damaged,  and  taken  notes  on every
detail. I've read more of the world's treacherous history than almost anyone, and as one of my colleagues
once said, this history is indeed little more than the regis-ter of crimes,  follies, and  misfortunes of

mankind."
"Gibbon," Sunny said. She meant some-thing like, "We want to  read  this history, no mat-ter  how
miserable it is," and  her siblings were  quick  to  translate.  But Ishmael  tugged  at  his  beard  again,  and
shook his head firmly at the three children.
"Don't you see?" he asked. "I'm not just the island's  facilitator. I'm  the island's  parent.  I keep  this
library far away from the people under my care, so that they will never be disturbed by the
2 2 7
world's terrible secrets." The facilitator reached into a pocket of his robe and held out a  small object.
The Baudelaires saw that it was an ornate ring, emblazoned with the initial R, and stared at it, quite
puzzled.
Ishmael opened the enormous volume in his lap, and turned a few pages to read from his notes. "This
ring," he said, "once belonged to the Duchess of Winnipeg, who gave it to her daughter,  who was  also
the Duchess of Win-nipeg, who gave it to her daughter, and so on and so  on and  so  on.  Eventually,
the last Duchess of Winnipeg joined V.F.D., and gave it to  Kit Snicket's  brother.  He  gave it to  your
mother. For reasons I still don't understand, she gave it back to him, and he gave it to Kit, and Kit gave it
to your father, who gave it to your mother when they were married. She kept it locked in a wooden box
that could only be opened by a key that was kept in a wooden box that could only be opened by a code
that Kit Snicket learned from her grandfather. The
2  2  8
 wooden box turned to ashes in the fire that destroyed the Baudelaire mansion, and Captain
Widdershins found the ring in the wreckage only to lose it in a storm at sea, which eventu-ally
washed it onto our shores."
"Neiklot?" Sunny asked, which meant "Why are you telling us about this ring?"
"The point of the story isn't the ring," Ish-mael said. "It's the fact that  you've  never  seen  it until this
moment. This ring, with its long secret  history,  was  in  your  home  for  years,  and  your  parents  never
mentioned it. Your parents never told you about the Duchess of Winnipeg, or Captain  Widdershins,  or
the Snicket siblings, or V.F.D. Your parents never told you they'd lived here, or that they were forced to
leave, or any other details of their own unfortunate his-tory. They never told you their whole story."
"Then let us read that book," Klaus said, "so we can find out for ourselves."
Ishmael shook his head. "You don't under-stand," he said, which is something the middle
 2 2 9  
Baudelaire never  liked to  be  told.  "Your parents  didn't  tell  you  these  things  because  they  wanted  to
shelter you, just as this apple tree shelters the items in the arboretum from the island's fre-quent storms,
and just as I shelter the colony from the complicated history of the world. No sensible parent would let
their child read  even the title of this dreadful,  sad  chronicle,  when they could  keep  them far from the
treachery of the world instead. Now that you've ended up here, don't you want to respect their wishes?"
He closed  the book  again, and  stood  up,  gazing at  all three  Baudelaires  in  turn.  "Just  because  your
parents have died," he said quietly, "doesn't mean they've failed you. Not if you stay here and lead
the life they wanted you to lead." Violet thought of her mother again, bringing the cup of star anise tea on
that restless evening. "Are you sure this is what our parents would have wanted?" she asked, not knowing
if she could trust his answer.

230
"If they didn't want to keep you safe," he said, "they would have told you everything, so  you could
add another chapter to this unfortu-nate history." He put the book down on the reading chair, and put the
ring  in  Violet's  hand.  "You  belong  here,  Baudelaires,  on  this  island  and  under  my  care.  I'll  tell  the
islanders that you've changed your minds, and that you're abandoning your troublesome past."
"Will they support  you?" Violet asked,  thinking of Erewhon  and  Finn and  their  plan  to  mutiny  at
breakfast.
"Of course they will," Ishmael said. "The life we lead here on the island is better than the treachery of
the world. Leave the arboretum with me, children, and you can join us for break-fast."
"And cordial," Klaus said.
"No apples," Sunny said.
Ishmael gave the children one last nod, and led the children up through the gap in the roots
2 3 1
of the tree, turning off the lights as he went. The Baudelaires stepped out into the arbore-tum, and
looked back one last time at the secret space. In the dim light they could just make out the shape of the
Incredibly Deadly Viper, who slithered over Ishmael's commonplace book and followed the children into
the morning air. The sun filtered through the shade of the enormous  apple  tree,  and  shone  on the gold
block  letters  on  the  spine  of  the  book.  The  children  won-dered  whether  the  letters  had  been
printed there  by their parents,  or  perhaps  by the previ-ous  writer of the commonplace  book,  or  the
writer before  that,  or  the writer before  that.  They  wondered  how  many  stories  the  oddly  titled
history  contained,  and  how  many  people  had  gazed  at  the  gold  lettering  before  paging  through  the
previous crimes, follies, and misfor-tunes and adding more of their own, like the thin layers of an onion.
As they walked out of the arboretum,  led by their clay-footed  facilita-tor,  the  Baudelaire  orphans
wondered about
2 3 2
their own unfortunate history, and that of their parents and all the other castaways who had washed up on
the shores of the island, adding chapter upon chapter to A Series of Unfortunate Events.

2 3 3
Page 234
Caption: Count Olaf’s harpoon being fired, illustration continue on next page 235
C H A P T E R
Eleven
Perhaps  one night, when you were  very small, someone  tucked  you into bed  and  read  you  a  story
called "The Little Engine That Could,"  and if so then you have my profound  sympa-thies,  as  it is
one of the most tedious stories on Earth. The story probably put you right to sleep, which is the reason it
is read to children, so I will remind you that  the story  involves the engine of a train that for some
reason has the ability to think and talk. Someone asks the Little Engine That Could to do a difficult task
too dull for me to describe, and the engine isn't sure it can accomplish this, but it begins to mutter to itself,
"I think I can, I think I can, I think I can," and before long it has muttered its way to suc-cess. The moral
of the story is that if you tell yourself you can do something, then you can actually do  it, a  moral easily
disproved if you tell yourself that you can eat nine pints of ice cream in a single sitting, or  that  you can
shipwreck yourself on a distant island simply by setting off in a rented canoe with holes sawed in it.
I only mention the story  of the Little Engine That Could  so  that  when  I  say  that  the  Baude-laire
orphans, as they left the arboretum with Ishmael and headed back toward the island colony, were  on
board the Little Engine That Couldn't, you will understand what I mean. For one thing, the children

were  being  dragged  back  to  Ishmael's  tent  on  the  large  wooden  sleigh,  helmed  by  Ishmael  in  his
enormous  clay  chair  and  dragged  by  the  island's  wild  sheep,  and  if  you  have  ever  wondered  why
horse-drawn car-riages and dogsleds are far more common modes of travel than sheep-dragged sleighs,
it is because
236
sheep  are  not  well-suited  for  employment  in  the  transportation  industry.  The  sheep  meandered  and
detoured, lollygagged and moseyed, and occasionally stopped to nibble on wild grass or simply breathe
in the morning air, and Ishmael tried to convince the sheep to go faster through his facilitation skills, rather
than through stan-dard shepherding procedures. "I don't want to force you," he kept saying, "but perhaps
you sheep  could  go a  bit faster,"  and  the sheep  would merely stare  blankly at  the old man and
keep shuffling along.
But the Baudelaire orphans were on board the Little Engine That Couldn't not only because of
the sheep's languor—a word which here means "inability to pull a large, wooden sleigh at  a  reasonable
pace"—but because their own thoughts were not spurring them to action. Unlike the engine in the tedious
story, no mat-ter what Violet, Klaus, and  Sunny told  them-selves,  they could  not imagine a  successful
solution to their difficulties. The children tried
2 3 7
to tell themselves that they would do as Ishmael had suggested, and lead  a  safe  life on the colony,  but
they could not imagine abandoning Kit Snicket on the coastal shelf, or letting her return to the world  to
see that justice would be served without accompanying her on this noble errand. The siblings tried to tell
themselves that they would obey their parents' wishes, and stay shel-tered from their unfortunate history,
but they did not think that they could keep themselves away from the arboretum, or from reading what
their parents had written in the enormous book. The Baudelaires tried to  tell themselves that  they
would join Erewhon and  Finn in the mutiny at breakfast, but they could not picture threatening the
facilitator and  his  supporters  with  weapons,  particularly  because  they  had  not  brought  any  from  the
arboretum. They tried to tell themselves that at least they could be glad that Count Olaf was not a threat,
but they could not quite approve of his being locked in a  bird  cage,   and    they   shuddered   to  
think of the
238
fungus hidden in his gown and the scheme hid-den in his head. And, throughout the entire journey over
the  brae  and  back  toward  the  beach,  the  three  children  tried  to  tell  them-selves  that
everything was  all right, but of course everything was not all right. Everything was  all wrong,  and
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny did not quite know how a safe place, far from the treachery of the world, had
become so danger-ous and complicated as soon as they had arrived. The Baudelaire orphans sat in the
sleigh, star-ing at Ishmael's clay-covered clay feet, and no latter how many times they thought they
could, they thought they could,  they thought they  could  think  of  an  end  to  their  troubles,  they
knew it simply was not the case.
Finally, however, the sheep dragged the sleigh across  the beach's  white  sands  and  through
the opening of the enormous  tent.  Once again, the joint was hopping, but the gath-ered  islanders
were in the midst of an argy-bargy, a word for "argument" that is far less cute
2 3 9

than it sounds. Despite the presence of an opi-ate  in seashells  dangling from the waists  of  every
colonist, the islanders were anything but drowsy and inactive. Alonso was grabbing the arm of Willa, who
was shrieking in annoyance  while stepping  on Dr.  Kurtz's  foot.  Sherman's  face  was  even redder  than
usual as he threw sand in the face of Mr. Pitcairn, who appeared to be trying to bite  Brewster's  finger.
Professor  Fletcher  was  shouting  at  Ariel,  and  Ms.  Marlow  was  stomping  her  feet  at  Calypso,  and
Madame  Nordoff  and  Rabbi  Bligh  seemed  ready  to  begin  wrestling  on  the  sand.  Byam  twirled  his
mus-tache at Ferdinand, while Robinson tugged his beard at Larsen and Weyden seemed to tear out her
red hair for no reason at all. Jonah and Sadie Bellamy were standing face-to-face arguing, while Friday
and Mrs. Caliban were standing back-to-back as if they would never speak to each other again, and all
the while Omeros stood near  Ishmael's  chair with his hands  held suspi-ciously behind his back.  While
Ishmael gaped
2 40
at the islanders  in amazement,  the  three  chil-dren  stepped  off  the  sleigh  and  walked  quickly  toward
Erewhon and Finn, who were looking at them expectantly.
"Where were you?" Finn said.  "We waited  as  long as  we  could  for you to  return,  but we  had  to
leave your friend behind and begin the mutiny."
"You left Kit out there alone?" Violet said. "You promised you'd stay with her."
"And you promised us weapons," said Erewhon. "Where are they, Baudelaires?"
"We don't have any," Klaus admitted. "Ish-mael was at the arboretum."
"Count Olaf was right," Erewhon said. "You failed us, Baudelaires."
"What do you mean, 'Count Olaf was right'?" Violet demanded.
"What do you mean, 'Ishmael was at the arboretum'?" Finn demanded.
"What do you mean, what do I mean?" Erewhon demanded.
2 4 1
"What you mean what you mean what I mean?" Sunny demanded.
"Please, everyone!" Ishmael cried from his clay chair. "I suggest we all take a few sips of cordial and
discuss this cordially!"
"I'm  tired  of  drinking  cordial,"  Professor  Fletcher  said,  "and  I'm  tired  of  your  sugges-tions,
Ishmael!"
"Call me Ish," the facilitator said.
"I'm calling you a bad facilitator!" retorted Calypso.
"Please, everyone!" Ishmael cried again, with a nervous tug at his beard. "What is all this argy-bargy
about?"
"I'll  tell you what it's about,"  Alonso said.  "I washed  up  on  these  shores  many  years  ago,  after
enduring a terrible storm and a dreadful political scandal."
"So what?" Rabbi Bligh asked. "Eventually, everyone washes up on these shores."
"I wanted to leave my unfortunate history
242
behind," Alonso said, "and live a peaceful life free from trouble. But now there are some colonists talking
of mutiny. If we're not careful, this island will become as treacherous as the rest of the world!"
"Mutiny?" Ishmael said in horror. "Who dares talk of mutiny?"
"I dare," Erewhon said. "I'm tired of your facilitation, Ishmael. I washed  ashore  on this island after
living on another island even farther away. I was tired of a peaceful life, and ready for adventure.  But
whenever anything exciting arrives on this island, you immediately have it thrown into the arboretum!"

"It depends  on how you look  at  it," Ishmael protested.  "I don't  force  anyone  to  throw  any-thing
away."
"Ishmael is right!" Ariel cried. "Some of us have had enough adventure for a lifetime! I washed up on
these shores after finally escap-ing from prison, where I had disguised myself
  2 4 3
as a young man for years!  I've  stayed  here  for my own safety,  not to  participate  in more  dan-gerous
schemes!"
"Then you should join our mutiny!" Sher-man cried. "Ishmael is not to be trusted! We abandoned the
Baudelaires on the coastal shelf, and now he's brought them back!"
"The Baudelaires never should have been abandoned in the first place!" Ms. Marlow cried. "All they
wanted to do was help their friend!"
"Their friend is suspicious," claimed Mr. Pitcairn. "She arrived on a raft of books."
"So what?" said Weyden. "I arrived on a raft of books myself."
"But you abandoned them," Professor Fletcher pointed out.
"She did nothing of the sort!"  cried  Larsen.  "You helped  her hide them, so  you could  force  those
children to read!"
"We wanted to learn to read!" Friday insisted.
244
"You're reading?" Mrs. Caliban gasped in astonishment.
"You shouldn't be reading!" cried Madame Nordoff.
"Well, you shouldn't be yodeling!" cried Dr. Kurtz.
"You're yodeling?" Rabbi Bligh asked in astonishment. "Maybe we should have a mutiny after all!"
"Yodeling is better than carrying a flash-light!" Jonah cried, pointing at Finn accusingly.
"Carrying a flashlight is better than hiding a picnic basket!" Sadie cried, pointing at Erewhon.
"Hiding a picnic basket is better than pock-eting a whisk!" Erewhon said, pointing at Sunny.
"These secrets will destroy us!" Ariel said. "Life here is supposed to be simple!"
"There's nothing wrong with a complicated life," said Byam. "I lived a simple life as a sailor for many
years, and I was bored to tears until I
2 4 5
was shipwrecked."
"Bored to tears?" Friday said in astonish-ment. "All I want is the simple life my mother and father had
together, without arguing or keeping secrets."
"That's enough," Ishmael said quickly. "I suggest that we stop arguing."
"I suggest we continue to argue!" cried Erewhon.
"I suggest we abandon Ishmael and his sup-porters!" cried Professor Fletcher.
"I suggest we abandon the mutineers!" cried Calypso.
"I suggest better food!" cried another islander.
"I suggest more cordial!" cried another.
"I suggest a more attractive robe!"
"I suggest a proper house instead of a tent!"
"I suggest fresh water!"
"I suggest eating bitter apples!"
"I suggest chopping down the apple tree!"
"I suggest burning up the outrigger!"

246
"I suggest a talent show!"
"I suggest reading a book!"
"I suggest burning all books!"
"I suggest yodeling!"
"I suggest forbidding yodeling!"
"I suggest a safe place!"
"I suggest a complicated life!"
"I suggest it depends on how you look at it!"
"I suggest justice!"
"I suggest breakfast!"
"I suggest we stay and you leave!"
"I suggest you stay and we leave!"
"I suggest we return to Winnipeg!"
The  Baudelaires  looked  at  one  another  in  despair  as  the  mutinous  schism  worked  its  way
through the colony.  Seashells  hung  open  at  the  waists  of  the  islanders,  but  there  was  no  cordial-ity
evident as the islanders turned against one another in fury, even if they were friends, or members of the
same family, or shared a history or a secret organization. The siblings had seen angry crowds before, of
course, from the mob
2 4 7
psychology of the citizens in the Village of Fowl  Devotees  to  the blind justice  of the trial at  the Hotel
Denouement, but they had never seen a community divide so suddenly and  so  com-pletely. Violet,
Klaus, and Sunny watched the schism unfold and could imagine what the other schisms must have been
like, from the schism that split V.F.D., to the schism that drove their parents  away  from the very same
island,  to  all  the  other  schisms  in  the  world's  sad  history,  with  every  person  suggesting  something
different, every story like a layer of an onion, and every unfortunate event like a chapter in an enormous
book. The Baudelaires watched the terrible argy-bargy and wondered how they could  have hoped  the
island would  be  a  safe  place,  far  from  the  treachery  of  the  world,  when  eventually  every  treachery
washed up on its shores, like a castaway tossed  by a  storm  at  sea,  and  divided the people  who lived
there.  The  arguing  voices  of  the  islanders  grew  louder  and  louder,  with  everyone  suggesting
something but nobody
248
listening  to  anyone  else's  suggestions,  until  the  schism  was  a  deafening  roar  that  was  finally
bro-ken by the loudest voice of all.
"SILENCE!" bellowed a figure who entered the tent, and the islanders stopped talk-ing
at once, and stared in amazement at the per-son who stood  glaring at  them in a  long dress  that
bulged at the belly.
"What are you doing here?" gasped some-one from the back of the tent. "We abandoned you
on the coastal shelf!"
The figure strode into the middle of the tent, and I'm sorry to tell you that it was not Kit
Snicket, who was still in a long dress that bulged at the belly on top of her library raft, but Count
Olaf,  whose  bulging  belly,  of  course,  was  the  diving  helmet  containing  the  Medusoid
Mycelium, and whose orange and yellow dress the Baudelaires  suddenly recognized  as  the
dress Esme Squalor wore on top of the Mort-main Mountains, a hideous thing fashioned to look

like an enormous fire, which had somehow
2  4   9    washed onto the island's shores like everything else. As Olaf
paused to give the siblings a par-ticularly wicked smile, the children tried
to imagine the secret history of Esme's dress, and how, like the ring Violet
still held in her hand, it had returned to the Baudelaires' story after all this
time.
"You can't abandon me," the villain snarled to the islander. "I'm the king of Olaf-Land."
"This isn't Olaf-Land," Ishmael said, with a stern tug on his beard, "and you're no king, Olaf."
Count Olaf  threw  back  his  head  and  laughed, his tattered  dress  quivering in mirth, a  phrase
which here means "making unpleasant rustling noises." With a sneer, he pointed at Ish-mael, who still sat
in the chair. "Oh, Ish," he said, his eyes shining bright, "I told you many years ago that I would triumph
over you some-day, and at last that day has arrived. My associ-ate with the weekday for a name told me
that you were still hiding out on this island, and—"
250
"Thursday," Mrs. Caliban said.
Olaf frowned,  and  blinked at  the  freckled  woman.  "No,"  he  said.  "Monday.  She  was  try-ing  to
blackmail an old man who was involved in a political scandal."
"Gonzalo," Alonso said.
Olaf frowned again. "No," he said. "We'd gone bird-watching, this old man and I, when we decided
to rob a sealing schooner owned by-"
"Humphrey," Weyden said.
"No," Olaf said with another frown. "There was some argument about his name, actually, as a baby
adopted by his orphaned children also bore the same name."
"Bertrand," Omeros said.
"No," Olaf said, and frowned yet another  time. "The adoption  papers  were  hidden in the hat of a
banker who had been promoted to Vice President in Charge of Orphan Affairs."
"Mr. Poe?" asked Sadie.
"Yes," Olaf said with a scowl, "although at
251
the time he was better known under his stage  name. But I'm not here  to  discuss  the past.  I'm here  to
discuss the future. Your mutineering islanders let me out of this cage, Ishmael, to force you off the island
and crown me as king!"
"King?" Erewhon said. "That wasn't the plan, Olaf."
"If you want to live, old woman," Olaf said rudely, "I suggest that you do whatever I say."
"You're  already  giving  us  suggestions?"  Brewster  said  incredulously.  "You're  just  like  Ishmael,
although your outfit is prettier."
"Thank  you,"  Count  Olaf  said,  with  a  wicked  smile,  "but  there's  another  important  difference
between me and this foolish facilitator."
"Your tattoo?" Friday guessed.
"No," Count Olaf said, with a frown. "If you were to wash the clay off Ishmael's feet, you'd see he
has the same tattoo as I do."
"Eyeliner?" guessed Madame Nordoff.

"No," Count Olaf said sharply. "The differ-ence is that Ishmael is unarmed. He abandoned
2 5 2
his weapons long ago, during the V.F.D. schism, refusing to use violence of any sort. But today, you'll all
see how foolish he is." He paused, and ran his filthy hands along his bulging belly before  turning to  the
facilitator, who was taking something from Omeros's hands. "I have the only weapon  that  can  threaten
you and  your supporters,"  he bragged.  "I'm the king of Olaf-Land,  and  there's  nothing  you  and  your
sheep can do about it."
"Don't be so sure about that," Ishmael said, and raised an object in the air so everyone could see it. It
was the harpoon gun that had washed ashore  with Olaf and  the Baudelaires,  after  being used to
fire at crows at  the Hotel  Denoue-ment,  and  at  a  self-sustaining hot air mobile home in the Village of
Fowl Devotees, and at a cotton-candy machine at a county fair when the Baudelaires' parents were very,
very young. Now the weapon was adding another chapter to its  secret  history,  and  was  pointing
right at Count Olaf. "I had Omeros keep this weapon
2 5 3 handy," Ishmael said, "instead of tossing it in the arboretum, because I thought you might
escape from that cage, Count Olaf, just as I escaped from the cage you put me in when you set fire to
my home."
"I didn't set that fire," Count Olaf said, his eyes shining bright.
"I've  had  enough  of  your  lies,"  Ishmael  said,  and  stood  up  from  his  chair.  Realizing  that  the
facilitator's feet were not injured after all, the islanders gasped, which requires a large intake of breath, a
dangerous thing to do if spores of a deadly fungus are  in the air.  "I'm going to  do  what I should have
done years ago, Olaf, and slaughter you. I'm going to fire this harpoon gun right into that bulging belly of
yours!"
"No!" screamed the Baudelaires in unison, but even the combined voices of the three chil-dren were
not as loud as Count Olaf's villainous laughter, and  the facilitator never  heard  the chil-dren's  cry as  he
pulled the bright red trigger of this terrible weapon. The children heard a click!
254
and then a whoosh! as the harpoon was fired, and then, as it struck Count Olaf right where Ish-mael had
promised, they heard the shattering of glass, and the Medusoid Mycelium, with its own secret history of
treachery and violence, was free at last to circulate in the air, even in this safe place so far from the world.
Everyone in the tent gasped—islanders  and  colonists,  men  and  women,  children  and  orphans,
volunteers and villains and everyone in between. Everyone breathed in the spores of the deadly fungus as
Count Olaf toppled  backward  onto  the sand,  still laughing even as he gasped  himself, and  in an
instant the  schism  of  the  island  was  over,  because  everyone  in  this  place—including,  of  course,  the
Baudelaire orphans—was suddenly part of the same unfortunate event.
2 5 5    


page 256  Blank pageC H A P T E R
Twelve
It  is  a  curious  thing,  but  as  one  travels  the  world  getting  older  and  older,  it  appears  that
happi-ness is easier to get used to than despair. The second time you have a root beer float, for
instance, your happiness at sipping the delicious concoction  may be  not quite as  enormous  as
when you first had a root beer float, and the
Caption: The Baudelaire orphans reading their parents commonplace book
twelfth time your happiness may be still less enormous, until root beer floats begin to offer you very little
happiness at all, because you have become used to the taste  of vanilla ice cream  and  root  beer  mixed
together. However, the second time you find a thumbtack in your root beer float, your despair  is much
greater than the first time, when you dismissed the thumb-tack as a freak accident rather than part of the
scheme of the soda jerk, a phrase which here means "ice cream shop employee who is trying to  injure
your tongue," and by the twelfth time you  find  a  thumbtack  your  despair  is  even  greater  still,
until you can  hardly utter  the phrase "root beer  float" without bursting into tears.  It  is almost as  if
happiness  is an acquired  taste,  like coconut  cordial  or  ceviche,  to  which  you  can  eventually  become
accustomed, but despair is something surprising each time you encounter it. As the glass shattered in the
tent, the Baudelaire orphans stood and stared at the standing figure of Ishmael, but even as they felt
2 5 8
the Medusoid Mycelium drift into their bodies, each tiny spore feeling like the footstep of an ant walking
down their throats, they could not believe that their own story could contain such despair once more, or
that such a terrible thing had happened.
"What happened?" Friday cried. "I heard glass breaking!"
"Never mind the breaking glass," Erewhon said. "I feel something in my throat, like a tiny
seed!"
"Never mind your seedy throat," Finn said. "I see Ishmael standing up on his own two feet!"
Count Olaf cackled  from the white sand  where  he lay. With one  dramatic  gesture  he yanked  the
harpoon out of the mess of broken helmet and tattered dress at his stomach,  and  threw  it at  Ishmael’s
clay feet. "The sound you heard was the shattering of a diving helmet," he sneered. "The seeds you feel in
your throats are the spores of the Medusoid Mycelium, and the

2 5 9
man standing on his own two feet is the one who has slaughtered you all!"
"The Medusoid Mycelium?" Ishmael repeated  in astonishment, as  the islanders  gasped  again. "On
these  shores?  It  can't  be!  I've  spent  my  life  trying  to  keep  the  island  forever  safe  from  that  terrible
fungus!"
"Nothing's safe forever, thank goodness," Count Olaf said, "and you of all people should know that
eventually everything washes up on these shores. The Baudelaire family has finally returned to this island
after you threw them off years ago, and they brought the Medusoid Mycelium with them."
Ishmael's  eyes  widened,  and  he  jumped  off  the  edge  of  the  sleigh  to  stand  and  confront  the
Baudelaire orphans. As his feet landed on the ground, the clay cracked and fell away, and the children
could see that the facilitator had a tattoo of an eye on his left ankle, just as Count Olaf had said.  "You
brought the Medu-soid Mycelium?" he 
260
asked. "You had a deadly fungus with you all this time, and you kept it a secret from us?"
"You're a fine one to talk about keeping secrets!" Alonso said. "Look at your healthy feet, Ishmael!
Your dishonesty is the root of the trouble!"
"It's the mutineers who are the root of the trouble!" cried Ariel. "If they hadn't let Count Olaf out of
the cage, this never would have hap-pened!"
"It depends on how you look at it," Profes-sor Fletcher said. "In my opinion, all of us are the root of
the trouble. If we hadn't put Count Olaf in the cage, he never would have threatened us!"
"We're the root of the trouble because we failed to find the diving helmet," Ferdinand said. "If
we'd retrieved it while storm  scaveng-ing,  the sheep  would have dragged  it to  the arboretum  and  we
would have been safe!"
"Omeros is the root  of the trouble,"  Dr.  Kurtz said, pointing at the young boy. "He's the one
who gave Ishmael the harpoon gun instead
2 6 1  
of dumping it in the arboretum!"
"It's  Count  Olaf  who's  the  root  of  the  trouble!"  cried  Larsen.  "He's  the  one  who
brought the fungus into the tent!"
"I'm  not  the  root  of  the  trouble,"  Count  Olaf  snarled,  and  then  paused  to  cough  loudly  before
continuing. "I'm the king of the island!"
"It doesn't  matter  whether  you're  king  or  not," Violet said.  "You've breathed  in the fun-gus
like everyone else."
"Violet's  right,"  Klaus  said.  "We  don't  have  time  to  stand  here  arguing."  Even  without  his
commonplace book, Klaus could recite a poem about the fungus that was first recited to him by Fiona
shortly before  she  had  broken  his heart.  "A  single  spore  has  such  grim  power  /  That  you  may  die
within the hour," he said. "If we don't quit our fight-ing and work together, we'll all end up dead."
The tent was  filled  with  ululation,  a  word  which  here  means  "the  sound  of  panicking  islanders."
"Dead?" Madame Nordoff shrieked. "Nobody said the fungus was deadly! I thought
262 we were merely being threatened with forbid-den food!"
"I didn't stay on this island to die!" cried Ms. Marlow. "I could have died at home!"

"Nobody is going to die," Ishmael an-nounced to the crowd.
"It depends on how you look at it," Rabbi Bligh said. "Eventually we're all going to die."
"Not if you follow my suggestions," Ishmael insisted. "Now first, I suggest that everyone take a nice,
long drink from their seashells. The cordial will chase the fungus from your throats."
"No, it won't!" Violet cried. "Fermented coconut milk has no effect on the Medusoid Mycelium!"
"That may be so," Ishmael said, "but at least we'll all feel a bit calmer."
"You mean drowsy and inactive," Klaus cor-rected. "The cordial is an opiate."
"There's  nothing  wrong  with  cordiality,"  Ishmael  said.  "I  suggest  we  all  spend  a  few  min-utes
discussing our situation in a cordial manner.
263
We can decide what the root of the problem is, and come up with a solution at our leisure."
"That does sound reasonable," Calypso admitted.
"Trahison des  clercs!"  Sunny cried,  which meant  "You're  forgetting  about  the  quick-acting
poison in the fungus!"
"Sunny's right," Klaus  said.  "We need  to  find a  solution now,  not sit around  talking about  it over
beverages!"
"The solution is in the arboretum," Violet said, "and in the secret space under the roots of the apple
tree."
"Secret space?" Sherman said. "What secret space?"
"There's a library down there," Klaus said, as the crowd murmured in surprise, "cataloging all of the
objects that have washed ashore and all the stories those objects tell."
"And kitchen," Sunny added. "Maybe horseradish."
"Horseradish is the one way to dilute the
2 6 4
poison," Violet explained, and recited the rest of the poem the children had heard aboard the Queequeg.
"Is dilution simple? But of course I  / Just one small dose of root of horse." She looked around the tent
at  the  frightened  faces  of  the  islanders.  "The  kitchen  beneath  the  apple  tree  might  have
horseradish," she said. "We can save our-selves if we hurry."
"They're lying," Ishmael said. "There's  nothing in the arboretum but junk, and there's nothing
underneath the tree but dirt. The Baudelaires are trying to trick you."
"We're not trying to trick anyone," Klaus said. "We're trying to save everyone."
"The  Baudelaires  knew  the  Medusoid  Mycelium was  here,"  Ishmael  pointed  out,  "and  they
never told us. You can't trust them, but you can trust me, and I suggest we all sit and sip our cordials."
"Razoo," Sunny said, which meant "You're the one not to be trusted," but rather than trans-late, her
siblings stepped closer to Ishmael so
2 6 5
they could speak to him in relative privacy.
"Why are you doing this?" Violet asked. "If you just sit here and drink cordial, you'll be doomed."
"We've all breathed in the poison," Klaus said. "We're all in the same boat."
Ishmael raised  his eyebrows,  and  gave the children a  grim smile. "We'll see  about  that,"  he  said.
"Now get out of my tent."
"Hightail it," Sunny said, which meant "We'd  better  hurry," and  her siblings nodded  in agree-ment.
The Baudelaire  orphans  quickly  left  the  tent,  looking  back  to  get  one  more  glimpse  of  the  worried

islanders, the scowling facilitator, and Count Olaf, who still lay on the sand clutching his belly, as  if the
harpoon had not just destroyed the diving helmet, but wounded him, too.
Violet, Klaus, and Sunny did not travel back to the far side of the island by sheep-dragged sleigh, but
even as they hurried over the brae they felt as if they were aboard the Little Engine That Couldn't,
not only because of the
266
desperate  nature  of their errand,  but  because  of  the  poison  they  felt  working  its  wicked  way
through the Baudelaire systems. Violet and Klaus  learned  what their sister  had  gone
through deep  beneath  the ocean's  surface,  when  Sunny  had  nearly  perished  from  the  fungus's
deadly  poison,  and  Sunny  received  a  refresher  course,  a  phrase  which  here  means  "another
opportunity to  feel the stalks  and  caps  of the Medusoid  Mycelium begin to  sprout  in  her  little
throat." The children had  to  stop  several  times to  cough,  as  the growing fungus  was  making  it
difficult to  breathe,  and  by the time they stood  underneath  the branches  of  the  apple  tree,  the
Baudelaire orphans were wheezing heavily in the afternoon sun.
"We don't have much time," Violet said, between breaths.
"We'll  go  straight  to  the  kitchen,"  Klaus  said,  walking through  the  gap  in  the  tree's
roots as the Incredibly Deadly Viper had shown them.
"Hope horseradish," Sunny said, following
2 6 7
her brother,  but when the Baudelaires  reached  the kitchen they  were  in  for  a  disappointment.  Violet
flicked the switch that lit up the kitchen, and the three children hurried to the spice rack, reading the labels
on the jars and bottles one by one, but as they searched their hopes began to fade. The children found
many of their favorite spices, including sage, oregano, and paprika, which was available in a  number of
varieties organized according to their level of smokiness. They found some of their least favorite spices,
including dried  parsley,  which scarcely  tastes  like  anything,  and  garlic  salt,  which  forces  the  taste  of
everything else to flee. They found spices  they associated  with certain  dishes,  such as  turmeric, which
their father used to use while making curried peanut soup, and nutmeg, which their mother used  to  mix
into gingerbread, and they found spices they did not associate with any-thing, such as  marjoram,  which
everyone  owns  but scarcely  anyone  uses,  and  powdered  lemon  peel,  which  should  only  be  used  in
emergencies,
2 6 8
such as  when fresh lemons have become  extinct. They found spices used practically everywhere,
such as salt and pepper, and spices used in certain regions, such as chipotle peppers and vindaloo rub,
but none of the labels read horseradish, and when they opened the jars and bottles, none of the powders,
leaves, and seeds inside smelled like the horseradish fac-tory that once stood on Lousy Lane.
"It doesn't have to be horseradish," Violet said quickly, putting down a jar of tarragon in frustration.
"Wasabi was an adequate substitute when Sunny was infected."
"Or Eutrema," Sunny wheezed.
"There's no wasabi here, either," Klaus said, sniffing a jar of mace and frowning. "Maybe it's hidden
somewhere."
"Who would hide horseradish?" Violet asked, after a long cough.
"Our parents," Sunny said.
"Sunny's right," Klaus said. "If they knew about Anwhistle Aquatics, they might have

269
known of the dangers of the Medusoid Mycelium. Any horseradish that washed up on the island
would have been very valuable indeed."
"We don't have time to search  the entire arboretum  to  find horseradish,"  Violet said.  She  reached
into her pocket,  her fingers brushing against the ring Ishmael had  given her,  and  found the ribbon  the
facilitator had been using as a bookmark, which she used to tie up her hair so she  might think better.
"That would be harder than trying to find the sugar bowl in the entire Hotel Denouement."
At the mention of the sugar bowl,  Klaus  gave his glasses  a  quick  polish and  began  to  page
through his commonplace book, while Sunny picked  up her whisk and  bit it thought-fully. "Maybe  it's
hidden in one of the other spice jars," the middle Baudelaire said.
"We smelled them all," Violet said, between wheezes. "None of them smelled like horse-radish."
270
"Maybe the scent was disguised by another spice," Klaus said. "Something that was even more bitter
than horseradish would cover the smell. Sunny, what are some of the bitterest spices?"
"Cloves," said Sunny, and wheezed. "Car-damom, arrowroot, wormwood."
"Wormwood,"  Klaus  said  thoughtfully,  and  flipped  the  pages  of  his  commonplace  book.  "Kit
mentioned wormwood  once,"  he said,  thinking of poor  Kit alone  on  the  coastal  shelf.  "She  said  tea
should be as bitter as wormwood and as sharp  as  a  two-edged  sword.  We  were  told  the same  thing
when we were served tea right before our trial."
"No wormwood here," Sunny said.
"Ishmael also  said  something about  bitter  tea,"  Violet  said.  "Remember?  That  student  of  his  was
afraid of being poisoned."
"Just like we are," Klaus said, feeling the mushrooms growing inside him. "I wish we'd heard the end
of that story."
2 7 1
"I wish we'd heard every story," Violet said, her voice sounding hoarse and rough from the poison. "I
wish our parents had told us every-thing, instead of sheltering us from the treach-ery of the world."
"Maybe they did," Klaus said, his voice as rough as his sister's, and the middle Baudelaire walked to
the reading chairs in the middle of the room  and  picked  up A Series  of  Unfortunate  Events.  "They
wrote all of their secrets here. If they hid the horseradish, we'll find it in this book."
"We don't  have time to  read  that entire book," Violet said, "any more than we  have time to
search the entire arboretum."
"If we fail," Sunny said, her voice heavy with fungus, "at least we die reading together."
The Baudelaire orphans  nodded  grimly, and  embraced  one  another.  Like  most  people,  the
children had occasionally been in a curious and somewhat morbid mood, and had spent a few moments
wondering about the circumstances of
2 7 2
their own deaths, although since that unhappy day on Briny Beach when Mr. Poe had first informed them
about the terrible fire, the chil-dren had  spent  so  much time trying to  avoid  their own deaths  that  they
preferred not to think about it in their time off. Most people do not choose their final circumstances,  of
course, and if the Baudelaires had been given the choice they would have liked to live to a very old age,

which for all I know they may be doing. But if the three children had to perish while they were still three
children,  then  perishing  in  one  another's  company  while reading words  written long  ago  by  their
mother  and  father  was  much  better  than  many  other  things  they  could  imag-ine,  and  so  the  three
Baudelaires sat together in one of the reading chairs,  preferring to  be  close  to  one  another  rather  than
having more room to sit, and together they opened the enormous book and turned back the pages until
they reached the moment in history when their parents arrived on the island and began taking notes. The
entries
 2 7 3  
in the  book  alternated  between  the  handwriting  of  the  Baudelaire  father  and  the  handwriting  of  the
Baudelaire  mother,  and  the  children  could  imagine  their  parents  sitting  in  these  same  chairs,
reading out loud what they had written and suggesting things to add to the register of crimes, follies, and
misfortunes of mankind that comprised A Series of Unfortunate Events. The children, of course, would
have liked to savor each word their parents  had  written—the  word  "savor," you probably  know,  here
means "read  slowly, as  each  sentence  in  their  parents'  hand-writing  was  like  a  gift  from  beyond  the
grave"— but as the poison of the Medusoid Mycelium advanced further and further, the siblings had to
skim, scanning each page for the words "horseradish"  or  "wasabi."  As  you  know  if  you've ever
skimmed a book, you end  up get-ting  a  strange  view  of  the  story,  with  just  glimpses here  and
there of what is going on, and some authors insert confusing sentences in the middle of a  book  just to
confuse anyone who
274
might be skimming. Three very short men were carrying a large, flat piece of wood, painted to look like
a  living  room.  As  the  Baudelaire  orphans  searched  for the secret  they hoped  they would  find,
they  caught  glimpses  of  other  secrets  their  parents  had  kept,  and  as  Violet,  Klaus,  and  Sunny
spotted  the names of people  the Baudelaire  parents  had  known,  things  they  had  whispered  to  these
people,  the codes  hid-den  in the whispers,  and  many other  intriguing details,  the  children  hoped  they
would have the opportunity to reread A Series of Unfortunate Events  on a  less  frantic occasion.  On
that after-noon, however, they read faster and faster, look-ing desperately for the one secret that  might
save them as the hour began to pass  and  the Medusoid  Mycelium  grew  faster  and  faster  inside
them, as if the deadly fungus also did not have time to savor its treacherous path. As they read more and
more, it grew harder and harder for the Baudelaires to breathe, and when Klaus finally spotted one  of
the words he had been
275
looking for, he thought for a moment it was just a vision brought on by all the stalks and  caps  growing
inside him.
"Horseradish!" he said, his voice rough and  wheezy. "Look: 'Ishmael's  fearmongering has  stopped
work on the passageway, even though we have a plethora of horseradish in case of any emergency.'"
Violet started to speak, but then choked on the fungus and  coughed  for a  long while. "What does
'fearmongering' mean?" she said finally.
"'Plethora'?" Sunny's voice was little more than a mushroom-choked whisper.
"'Fearmongering' means 'making people afraid,'" said Klaus, whose vocabulary was  unaf-fected  by
the  poison,  "and  'plethora'  means  'more  than  enough.'"  He  gave  a  large,  shuddering  wheeze,  and
continued to  read.  "'We're  attempt-ing  a  botanical  hybrid through the tuberous  canopy,  which  should
bring safety to fruition despite its dangers to our associates in utero. Of

276
course, in case we are banished, Beatrice is hiding a small amount in a vess—'"
The middle Baudelaire interrupted himself with a cough that was so violent he dropped the book to
the floor. His sisters held him tightly as his body shook against the poison and one pale hand pointed  at
the ceiling. "'Tuberous  canopy,'"  he wheezed  finally.  "Our  father  means the roots  above  our
heads. A botanical hybrid is a plant made from the combination of two other plants." He shuddered, and
his eyes, behind his glasses, filled with tears. "I don't know what he's talking about," he said finally.
Violet looked at the roots over their heads, where the periscope  disappeared  into the net-work  of
the tree. To her horror she found that her vision was becoming blurry, as if the fungus was growing over
her  eyes.  "It  sounds  like  they  put  the  horseradish  into  the  roots  of  the  plant,  in  order  to  make
everyone safe," she said. "That's what 'bringing safety to fruition' would
278
be, the way a tree brings its crop to fruition."
"Apples!" cried Sunny in a strangled voice. "Bitter apples!"
"Of course!"  Klaus  said.  "The tree  is a  hybrid, and its apples are bitter because  they contain
horseradish!"
"If we eat an apple," Violet said, "the fun-gus will be diluted."
"Gentreefive,"  Sunny  agreed  in  a  croak,  and  lowered  herself  off  her  siblings'  laps,  wheezing
desperately  as  she  tried  to  get  to  the  gap  in  the roots.  Klaus  tried  to  follow her,  but when he
stood up the poison made him so dizzy that he had to sit back down and clasp his throbbing head.
Violet coughed painfully, and gripped her brother's arm.
"Come on," she said, in a frantic wheeze.
Klaus shook his head. "I'm not sure we can make it," he said.
Sunny reached  toward  the gap  in the roots  and  then curled  to  the  floor  in  pain.  "Kikbucit?"  she
asked, her voice weak and faint.
2 7 9

"We can't  die here,"  Violet  said,  her  voice  so  feeble  her  siblings  could  scarcely  hear  her.  "Our
parents saved our lives in this very room, many years ago, without even knowing it."
"Maybe not," Klaus said. "Maybe this is the end of our story."
"Tumurchap," Sunny said, but before any-one could  ask  what she  meant,  the  children  heard
another sound, faint and  strange,  in the secret  space  beneath  the  apple  tree  their  par-ents had
hybridized  with  horseradish  long  ago.  The  sound  was  sibilant,  a  word  which  might  appear  to  have
something to do with siblings, but actually refers to a sort of whistle or hiss, such as a steam engine might
make as it comes to a stop, or an audience might make after sitting through one of Al Funcoot's  plays.
The Baude-laires were so desperate and frightened that for a moment they thought it might be the sound
of Medusoid Mycelium, celebrating  its poisonous  triumph over  the three  children, or  perhaps  just the
sound of their hopes evaporating. But the
279
sibilance was not the sound of evaporating hope or celebrating fungus, and thank goodness it was not the
sound of a steam engine or a disgrun-tled theatrical audience, as the Baudelaires were not strong enough
to confront such things. The hissing sound  came  from one  of the few inhabi-tants  of the island whose
story contained not one but two shipwrecks, and perhaps because of its own sad history, this inhabitant
was sym-pathetic to the sad history of the Baudelaires, although it is difficult to say how much sympa-thy
can be felt by an animal, no matter how friendly. I do not have the courage to do much research on this
matter, and my only herpeto-logical comrade's story ended quite some time ago, so what this reptile was
thinking as it slid toward the children is a detail of the Baude-laires' history that may never be revealed.
But even with this missing detail, it is quite clear what happened.  The snake  slithered through the
gap in the roots of the tree, and whatever the serpent was thinking, it was quite clear from
280
the sibilant sound that came hissing through the reptile's clenched teeth that the Incredibly Deadly
Viper was offering the Baudelaire orphans an apple.

281
Page 282 Blank page

C H A P T E R
Thirteen
Caption: Several bitter apples floating at sea
If is a well-known but curious fact that the first bite of an apple always tastes the best, which is why the
heroine of a book much more suitable to read than this one  spends  an entire afternoon  eating the first
bite  of  a  bushel  of  apples.  But  even  this  anarchic  little  girl—the  word  "anar-chic"  here  means
"apple-loving"—never tasted a bite as wonderful as the Baudelaire orphans' first bite of the apple from
the tree  their parents  had  hybridized with horseradish.  The apple  was  not as  bitter  as  the Baudelaire
orphans would have guessed, and the horseradish gave the juice
of the apple a slight, sharp edge, like the air on a winter morning. But of course, the biggest
appeal of the apple offered by the Incredibly Deadly Viper was its immediate effect on the
deadly fun-gus growing inside them. From the moment the Baudelaire teeth bit down on the
apple—first  Violet's,  and  then  Klaus's,  and  then  Sunny's—  the  stalks  and  caps  of  the
Medusoid  Mycelium  began  to  shrink,  and  within  moments  all  traces  of  the  dreaded
mushroom had withered away, and the children could breathe clearly and eas-ily. Hugging
one  another  in  relief,  the  Baude-laires  found  themselves  laughing,  which  is  a  common
reaction among people who have nar-rowly escaped death,  and  the snake  seemed  to  be
laughing, too, although perhaps it was just appreciating the youngest Baudelaire scratch-ing
behind its tiny, hooded ears.
"We should each  have another  apple,"  Violet said,  standing up,  "to make  sure
we've consumed enough horseradish."
"And we should collect enough apples for
2 8 4
all of the islanders," Klaus said. "They must be just as desperate as we were."
"Stockpot," Sunny said, and walked to the rack of pots on the ceiling, where the snake  helped  her
take down an enormous metal pot that could hold a great number of apples and in fact had been used to
make an enormous vat of applesauce a number of years previously.
"You two  start  picking  apples,"  Violet  said,  walking  to  the  periscope.  "I  want  to  check  on  Kit
Snicket. The flooding of the coastal shelf must have begun by now, and she must be ter-rified."
"I hope she avoided  the Medusoid  Mycelium," Klaus said. "I hate to think of what that would
do to her child."
"Phearst," Sunny said, which meant some-thing like, "We should rescue her promptly."
"The islanders are in worse shape than Kit," Klaus said. "We should go to Ishmael’s tent first, and
then go rescue Kit."
Violet peered through the periscope and
2 8 5
frowned. "We shouldn't go to Ishmael's tent," she said. "We need to fill that stockpot with apples and get
to the coastal shelf as quickly as we can."
"What do you mean?" Klaus said.
"They're leaving," Violet said, and I'm sorry to say  it  was  true.  Through  the  periscope,  the
eldest Baudelaire could see the shape of the outrigger and the figures of its poisoned passen-gers,

who were pushing it along the coastal shelf toward the library raft where Kit Snicket still lay. The three
children each  peered  through the periscope,  and  then  looked  at  one  another.  They  knew  they
should be hurrying, but for a moment none of the Baudelaires could  move,  as  if they were  unwilling to
travel any farther in their sad history, or see one more part of their story come to an end.
If you have read this far in the chronicle of the Baudelaire orphans—and I certainly hope  you have
not—then you know we have reached the thirteenth chapter of the thirteenth volume
2 8 6
in this sad history, and so you know the end is near, even though this chapter is so lengthy that you might
never reach the end of it. But per-haps you do not yet know what the end really means. "The end" is a
phrase which refers to the completion of a story, or the final moment of some  accomplishment, such
as a secret errand, or a great deal of research, and indeed this thirteenth volume marks the completion
of my investigation into the Baudelaire case, which required much research, a great many secret errands,
and the accomplishments of a number of my comrades, from a trolley driver to a botan-ical hybridization
expert,  with  many,  many  type-writer  repairpeople  in  between.  But  it  cannot  be  said  that  The  End
contains  the  end  of  the  Baude-laires'  story,  any  more  than  The  Bad  Beginning  contained  its
beginning. The children's story began long before that terrible day on Briny Beach, but there would
have  to  be  another  vol-ume  to  chronicle  when  the  Baudelaires  were  born,  and  when  their  parents
married, and who
2 8 7
was  playing  the  violin  in  the  candlelit  restaurant  when  the  Baudelaire  parents  first  laid  eyes  on  one
another,  and  what  was  hidden  inside  that  violin,  and  the  childhood  of  the  man  who
orphaned  the girl who put it there,  and  even then it could not be said that the Baudelaires'  story
had not begun, because you would still need to know about a certain tea party held in a penthouse suite,
and the baker who made the scones served at the tea party, and the baker's assistant  who smuggled
the  secret  ingredient  into  the  scone  batter  through  a  very  narrow  drainpipe,  and  how  a  crafty
volunteer created  the illusion  of  a  fire  in  the  kitchen  simply  by  wearing  a  certain  dress  and  jumping
around, and even then the beginning of the story  would be  as  far away  as  the shipwreck  that  left the
Baude-laire parents as castaways on the coastal shelf is far away  from the outrigger on which the
islanders would depart. One  could  say,  in fact,  that  no story  really has  a  beginning, and  that  no story
really has an end, as all of the world's stories
2 88
are as jumbled as the items in the arboretum, with their details  and  secrets  all heaped  together so
that the whole story, from beginning to end, depends on how you look at it. We might even say that the
world is always in medias res— a Latin phrase which means "in the midst of things" or "in the middle of
a narrative"—and that it is impossible to solve any mystery, or find the root of any trouble, and so  The
End is really the middle of the story, as many people in this history will live long past the close of Chapter
Thirteen, or even the beginning of the story, as a new child arrives in the world at the chapter's close. But
one cannot sit in the midst of things forever. Eventually one must face that the end is near, and the end of
The End is quite near indeed, so if I were you I would not read the end of The End, as it contains the
end of a noto-rious villain but also the end of a brave and noble sibling, and the end of the colonists' stay
on the island, as they sail off the end of the coastal shelf. The end of The End contains all

2 8 9
these ends, and that does not depend on how you look at it, so it might be best for
you to stop looking at The End before the end of The End  arrives,  and  to  stop  reading
The End before you read the end, as the stories that end in The  End  that began  in The
Bad Beginning are beginning to end now.
The Baudelaires hurriedly filled their stock-pot with apples and ran to the coastal shelf,
hur-rying over the brae as quickly as they could. It was past lunchtime, and the waters of
the sea were already flooding the shelf, so the water  was  much deeper  than it had  been
since the chil-dren's arrival. Violet and Klaus had to hold the stockpot high in the air, and
Sunny and the Incredibly Deadly Viper climbed up on the elder Baudelaires' shoulders to
ride along with the bit-ter apples. The children could see Kit Snicket  on the horizon, still
lying on the library raft  as  the  waters  rose  to  soak  the  first  few  layers  of  books,  and
alongside the strange cube was the outrigger. As they drew closer, they saw that the
290
islanders had  stopped  pushing the boat  and  were climbing aboard, pausing from time to  time to
cough, while at the head of the out-rigger was the figure of Ishmael, seated in his clay chair, gazing at his
poisoned colonists and watching the children approach.
"Stop!" Violet cried, when they were close enough to be heard. "We've discovered a way to dilute
the poison!"
"Baudelaires!" came the faint cry of Kit high atop  the library raft.  "Thank goodness  you're  here!  I
think I'm going into labor!"
As I'm sure you know, "labor" is the term for the process by which a woman gives birth, and it is a
Herculean task, a phrase which here means "something you would rather not do on a library raft floating
on a flooding coastal shelf." Sunny could see, from her stockpot perch, Kit holding her belly and giving
the youngest Baudelaire a painful grimace.
"We'll help you," Violet promised, "but we need to get these apples to the islanders."
2 9  1
"They won't  take  them!" Kit said.  "I tried  to tell them how the poison  could  be  diluted, but
they insist on leaving!"
"No  one's  forcing  them,"  said  Ishmael  calmly.  "I  merely  suggested  that  the  island  was  no
longer a safe place, and that we should set sail for another one."
"You and the Baudelaires are the ones who got us into this mess," came  the drowsy  voice of Mr.
Pitcairn, thick with fungus and coconut cordial, "but Ishmael is going to get us out."
"This island used to be a safe place," said Professor Fletcher, "far from the treachery of the world.
But since you've arrived it's become dangerous and complicated."
"That's not our fault," Klaus said, walking closer and closer to the outrigger as the water continued to
rise. "You can't live far from the treachery of the world, because eventually the treachery will wash up on
your shores."
"Exactly," said Alonso, who yawned. "You washed up and spoiled the island forever."
2 9 2

"So we're leaving it to you," said Ariel, who coughed violently. "You can have this danger-ous place.
We're going to sail to safety."
"Safe here!" Sunny cried, holding up an apple.
"You've poisoned us enough," said  Erewhon,  and  the  islanders  wheezed  in  agreement  "We
don't want to hear any more of your treacherous ideas."
"But you were ready to mutiny," Violet said. "You didn't want to take Ishmael's suggestions."
"That was before the Medusoid Mycelium arrived," Finn said hoarsely. "He's been here the longest,
so he knows  how to  keep  us safe.  At his suggestion, we  all drank  quite a  bit of  cor-dial  while  he
figured out the root of the trouble." She paused to catch her breath as the sinister fungus continued to
grow. "And the root of the trouble, Baudelaires, is you."
By now the children had  reached  the outrig-ger,  and  they looked  up  at  Ishmael,  who  raised  his
eyebrows and stared back at the frantic
2 9 3
Baudelaires. "Why are you doing this?" Klaus asked the facilitator. "You know we're not the root of the
problem."
"In medias res!" Sunny cried.
"Sunny's right," Violet said. "The Medusoid  Mycelium was  around  before  we  were  born,  and  our
parents prepared for its arrival by adding horseradish to the roots of the apple tree."
"If they don't eat these bitter apples," Klaus pleaded, "they'll come to a bitter end. Tell the islanders
the whole story, Ishmael, so they can save themselves."
"The  whole  story?"  Ishmael  said,  and  leaned  down  from  his  chair  so  he  could  talk  to  the
Baudelaires  without the others  hearing. "If I told  the islanders  the whole story,  I wouldn't  be  keeping
them safe from the world's terrible secrets. They almost learned the whole story  this morning, and
began to mutiny over break-fast. If they knew  all these  island's  secrets  there'd be a schism in no
time at all."
"Better a schism than a death," Violet said.
294
Ishmael shook his head, and fingered the wild strands of his woolly beard. "No one is going to
die,"  he  said.  "This  outrigger  can  take  us  to  a  beach  near  Lousy  Lane,  where  we  can  travel  to  a
horseradish factory."
"You don't have time for such a long voy-age," Klaus said.
"I think we do," Ishmael said. "Even without a compass, I think I can get us to a safe place."
"You need a moral compass," Violet said. "The spores of the Medusoid Mycelium can kill within the
hour. The entire colony could be poi-soned, and even if you make it to shore, the fun-gus could spread
to anyone you meet. You're not keeping anyone safe. You're endangering the whole world, just to keep
a few of your secrets. That's not parenting! That's horrid and wrong!"
"I guess it depends on how you look at it," Ishmael said. "Good-bye, Baudelaires." He sat up straight
and called out  to  the  wheezing  islanders.  "I  suggest  you  start  rowing,"  he  said,  and  the  colonists
reached their arms into the
2 9 5 
water and began to paddle the outrigger away from the children. The Baudelaires hung on to the side of
the boat, and called to the islander who had first found them on the coastal shelf.
"Friday!" Sunny cried. "Take apple!"

"Don't succumb to peer pressure," Violet begged.
Friday turned  to  face  the  children,  and  the  siblings  could  see  she  was  terribly  frightened.  Klaus
quickly grabbed an apple from the stock-pot, and the young girl leaned out of the boat to touch his hand.
"I'm sorry  to  leave you behind,  Baude-laires," she  said,  "but I must go with my family. I’ve
already lost my father, and I couldn't stand to lose anyone else."
"But your father—" Klaus started to say, but Mrs. Caliban gave him a terrible  look  and  pulled her
daughter away from the edge of the outrigger.
"Don't rock the boat," she said. "Come here and drink your cordial."
"Your mother is right, Friday," Ishmael said
296
firmly. "You should respect your parent's wishes. It's more than the Baudelaires ever did."
"We are respecting our parents' wishes," Violet said, hoisting the apples as high as she could. "They
didn't want to shelter us from the world's treacheries. They wanted us to survive them."
Ishmael  put  his  hand  on  the  stockpot  of  apples.  "What do  your  parents  know,"  he  asked,
"about surviving?" and with one firm, cruel ges-ture the old orphan  pushed  against the stock-pot,  and
the  outrigger  moved  out  of  the  children's  grasp.  Violet  and  Klaus  tried  to  take  another  step
closer  to  the  islanders,  but  the  water  had  risen  too  far,  and  the  Baudelaire  feet  slipped  off  the
surface of the coastal shelf, and the siblings found themselves swimming. The stockpot tipped, and Sunny
gave a small shriek and climbed down to Violet's shoulders as sev-eral apples from the pot dropped into
the water with a splash. At the sound of the splash,  the Baudelaires  remembered  the  apple  core
that
297
Ishmael had dropped, and realized why the facilitator was so calm in the face of the deadly fungus, and
why his voice was the only one of the islanders' that wasn't clogged with stalks and caps.
"We have to go after them," Violet said. "We may be their only chance!"
"We can't go after them," Klaus said, still holding the apple. "We have to help Kit."
"Split up," Sunny said, staring after the departing outrigger.
Klaus shook his head. "All of us need to stay if we're going to help Kit give birth." He gazed at the
islanders  and  listened  to  the  wheezing  and coughing coming from the boat  fashioned  from  wild
grasses and the limbs of trees. "They made their decision," he said finally.
"Kontiki," Sunny said. She meant some-thing along the lines of,  "There's  no way they'll survive the
journey," but the youngest Baude-laire was wrong. There was a way. There was a way  to  bring  the
islanders a single apple that
2 9 8
they could share, each taking a  bite of the pre-cious  bitter  fruit that  might tide  them over—the  phrase
"tide them over," as you probably know, means "help deal with a difficult situation"— until they reached
someplace or someone who could help them, just as the three Baudelaires shared an apple in the secret
space where their parents had enabled them to survive one of the most deadly unfortunate events ever to
wash up on the island's shores. Whoever brought the apple  to  the islanders,  of course,  would need  to
swim very stealthily to the outrigger, and it would help if they were quite small and slender, so they might
escape  the  watchful  eye  of  the  outrigger's  facilitator.  The  Baudelaires  would  not  notice  the
disappearance  of the Incredibly Deadly Viper  for quite some  time, as  they would be  focused  on
helping Kit, and so they could never say for sure what happened to the snake, and my research into the

reptile's story is incom-plete, so I do not know  what other  chapters  occurred  in its history, as  Ink,  as
some prefer to
2 9 9
call the snake, slithered from one place to the next, sometimes taking shelter from the treach-ery  of the
world and sometimes committing treacherous acts of its own—a history not unlike that of the Baudelaire
orphans,  which  some  have  called  little  more  than  the  register  of  crimes,  fol-lies,  and  misfortunes  of
mankind. Unless you have investigated the islanders'  case  yourself, there  is no  way  of  knowing  what
happened to them as they sailed away from the colony that had been their home. But there  was  a  way
they could have survived their journey, a way that may seem fantastic, but is no less fantastic than three
children helping a woman give birth. The Baude-laires hurried to the library raft, and lifted Sunny and the
stockpot  to  the  top  of  the  raft  where  Kit  lay,  so  the  youngest  Baudelaire  could  hold  the  wheezing
woman's gloved hand and the bitter apples could dilute the poison inside her as Vio-let and Klaus pushed
the raft back toward shore. "Have an apple," Sunny offered, but Kit shook her head.
300
"I can't," she said.
"But you've been poisoned," Violet said. "You must have caught a spore or two from the islanders as
they floated by."
"The apples will harm the baby," Kit said. "There's something in the hybrid that's bad for people who
haven't been  born  yet.  That's  why your mother never  tasted  one  of  her  own  bitter  apples.  She  was
pregnant with you, Violet." One of Kit's gloved hands drifted down over the top of the raft and patted the
hair of the eldest Baudelaire. "I hope I'm half as good a mother as yours was, Violet," she said.
"You will be," Klaus said.
"I don't know," Kit said. "I was supposed to help you children on that day when you finally reached
Briny Beach. I wanted nothing more than to take you away in my taxi to someplace safe. Instead, I threw
you into a  world  of treach-ery  at  the  Hotel  Denouement.  And  I  wanted  nothing  more  than  to
reunite you with your friends the Quagmires. Instead, I left them
301
behind." She uttered a wheezy sigh, and fell silent.
Violet continued to guide the raft toward the island, and noticed for the first time that her hands were
pushing against the spine of a book whose title she  recognized  from the library Aunt Josephine  kept
underneath her bed—Ivan  Lachrymose—Lake  Explorer—while her brother  was  pushing against
Mushroom Minutiae, a book that had been part of Fiona's mycological library. "What happened?" she
asked, trying to imag-ine what strange events would have brought these books to these shores.
"I failed you," Kit said  sadly,  and  coughed.  "Quigley managed  to  reach  the  self-sustaining  hot  air
mobile home, just as I hoped he would, and helped his siblings and Hector catch the treacherous eagles
in an enormous net, while I met Captain Widdershins and his stepchildren."
"Fernald and Fiona?" Klaus said, referring to the hook-handed man who had once worked for
   3 0 2   
Count Olaf, and the young woman who had broken his heart. "But they betrayed him—and us."
"The captain had forgiven the failures of those he had  loved," Kit said,  "as I hope  you will forgive
mine, Baudelaires. We made a des-perate attempt to repair the Queequeg and reach the Quagmires as

their aerial battle  continued,  and  arrived  just in time  to  see  the  balloons  of  the  self-sustaining  hot  air
mobile home pop under the cruel beaks of the escaping eagles. They tumbled down  to  the surface
of the sea,  and crashed into the Queequeg. In moments we were all castaways, treading water in the
midst of all the items that survived the wreck." She was silent for a moment. "Fiona was so desper-ate to
reach you, Klaus," she said. "She wanted you to forgive her as well."
"Did she—" Klaus could not bear to finish his question. "I mean, what happened next?"
"I don't know," Kit admitted. "From the
3 0 3
depths of the sea a mysterious figure ap-proached—almost like a question mark, rising out of the
water."
"We saw that on a radar screen," Violet remembered. "Captain Widdershins refused to tell us what it
was."
"My brother used to call it 'The Great Unknown,'"  Kit said,  clasping her belly as  the baby  kicked
violently. "I was terrified, Baude-laires. Quickly I fashioned a  Vaporetto  of Favorite  Detritus,  as
I'd been trained to do."
"'Vaporetto'?" Sunny asked.
"It's an Italian term for 'boat,'"  Kit said.  "It was  one  of many Italian phrases  Monty taught me. A
Vaporetto of Favorite Detritus is a  way of saving  yourself  and  your  favorite  things  at  the same
time. I gathered all the books in reach that I enjoyed, tossing the boring ones into the sea, but everyone
else wanted to take their chances with the great unknown. I begged  the others  to  climb  aboard  as
the question mark
304
approached, but only Ink managed to reach me. The others ..." Her voice trailed off, and for a moment
Kit did nothing but wheeze.  "In an instant they  were  gone—either  swallowed  up  or  rescued  by  that
mysterious thing."
"You don't know what happened to them?" Klaus asked.
Kit shook her head. "All I heard," she said, "was one of the Quagmires calling Violet's name."
Sunny looked into the face of the distraught woman.  "Quigley," the youngest Baudelaire  could  not
help asking "or Duncan?"
"I don't know," Kit said again. "I'm sorry, Baudelaires. I failed you. You succeeded  in your noble
errands at the Hotel Denouement, and saved Dewey and the others, but I don't know if we'll ever
see the Quagmires and  their com-panions  again. I hope  you will forgive my fail-ures,  and  when I see
Dewey again I hope he will forgive me, too."
The  Baudelaire  orphans  looked  at  one
305
another sadly, realizing it was time at last to tell Kit Snicket the whole story, as she had told them. "We'll
forgive your failures," Violet said, "if you'll forgive ours."
"We failed you, too," Klaus said. "We had to burn down the Hotel Denouement, and  we  don't
know if anyone escaped to safety."
Sunny gripped  Kit's  hand in hers.  "And Dewey  is dead,"  she  said,  and  everyone  burst  into tears.
There is a  kind of crying I hope  you have not experienced,  and  it is not just  crying  about  something
terrible that has happened, but a crying for all of the terrible things that have happened, not just to you but
to everyone you know and to everyone you don't know and even the people you don't want to know, a
crying that cannot be  diluted by a  brave  deed  or  a  kind word, but only by someone holding you

as your shoulders shake and your tears run down your face. Sunny held Kit, and Violet held Klaus, and
for a minute the four castaways did nothing but weep, letting their tears run down their faces and
306
into the sea, which some have said is nothing but a library of all the tears in history. Kit and the children
let their sadness join the sadness of the world, and cried for all of the people who were lost to  them.
They cried  for Dewey  Denoue-ment, and for the Quagmire triplets, and for all of their companions
and  guardians,  friends  and  associates,  and  for  all  of  the  failures  they  could  forgive  and  all  of  the
treacheries  they  could  endure.  They  cried  for  the  world,  and  most  of  all,  of  course,  the  Baudelaire
orphans cried for their parents,  who they knew,  finally, they would never see again. Even though
Kit Snicket had not brought news of their parents, her story of the Great Unknown made them see at last
that the people  who had  written all those  chap-ters  in  A  Series  of  Unfortunate  Events  were  gone
forever into the great unknown, and that Violet, Klaus, and Sunny would be orphans forever, too.
"Stop," Kit said finally, through her fading tears. "Stop pushing the raft. I cannot go on."
"We have to go on," Violet said.
307
"We're almost at the beach," Klaus said.
"The shelf is flooding," Sunny said.
"Let it flood," Kit said. "I can't do it, Baude-laires. I've lost too many people—my parents, my true
love, and my brothers."
At the mention of Kit's brothers, Violet thought to reach into her pocket, and she retrieved the
ornate  ring,  emblazoned  with  the  initial  R.  "Sometimes  the  things  you've  lost  can  be  found  again  in
unexpected places," she said, and held the ring up for Kit to see. The dis-traught  woman removed  her
gloves, and held the ring in her bare and trembling hand.
"This isn't mine," she said. "It belonged to your mother."
"Before it belonged to our mother," Klaus said, "it belonged to you."
"Its history began before we were born," Kit said, "and it should continue after we die. Give it to my
child, Baudelaires. Let my child be part of my history, even if the baby is an orphan, and all alone in the
world."
3 0 8
"The baby will not be alone," Violet said fiercely. "If you die, Kit, we will raise this child as our own."
"I  could  not  ask  for  better,"  Kit  said  quietly.  "Name  the  baby  after  one  of  your  parents,
Baudelaires. The custom of my family is to name a baby for someone who has died."
"Ours too,"  Sunny said,  remembering some-thing her father  had  told  her  when  she  had  inquired
about her own name.
"Our families have always been  close,"  Kit said,  "even if we  had  to  stay  apart  from one  another.
Now, finally, we are all together, as if we are one family."
"Then  let  us  help  you,"  Sunny  said,  and  with  a  weepy,  wheezy  nod,  Kit  Snicket  let  the
Baudelaires  push her Vaporetto  of Favorite  Detritus off the coastal  shelf and  onto  the shores  of  the
island, where  eventually everything arrives, just as the outrigger disappeared  on the horizon. The
children gazed at the islanders for the last time—at least as far as I know—and
3  0  9

then at the cube of books, and tried to imagine how the injured,  pregnant,  and  distraught woman
could get to a safe place to birth a child.
"Can you lower yourself down?" Violet asked.
Kit shook her head. "It hurts," she said, her voice thick with the poisonous fungus.
"We can carry her," Klaus said, but Kit shook her head again.
"I'm too heavy," she said weakly. "I could fall from your grasp and hurt the baby."
"We can invent a way to get you to the shore," Violet said.
"Yes," Klaus said. "We'll just run to the arboretum to find what we need."
"No time," Sunny said, and Kit nodded in agreement.
"The baby's coming quickly," she said. "Find someone to help you."
"We're alone," Violet said, but then she and her siblings gazed out at the beach  where  the raft had
arrived, and the Baudelaires saw, crawl-
310
ing out of Ishmael's tent, the one person for whom they had not shed a tear. Sunny slid down to the sand,
bringing the stockpot with her, and the three  children hurried up the slope  to  the struggling figure
of Count Olaf.
"Hello, orphans,"  he said,  his voice even wheezier and  rougher  from the spreading  poi-son  of the
Medusoid Mycelium. Esme's dress had fallen away from his skinny body,  and  he was  crawling on the
sand in his regular clothes, with one hand holding a seashell of cordial and the other clutching at his chest.
"Are you here to bow before the king of Olaf-Land?"
"We don't have time for your nonsense," Violet said. "We need your help."
Count Olaf's eyebrow raised, and he gave the children an astonished glare. "You need my help?" he
asked. "What happened to all those island fools?"
"They abandoned us," Klaus said.
Olaf wheezed horridly, and it took the sib-lings a moment to realize he was laughing.
3 l l
"How do you like them apples?" he sputtered, using an expression which means "I find this situation quite
remarkable."
"We'll give you apples," Sunny said, gestur-ing to the stockpot, "if you help."
"I don't  want fruit," Olaf snarled,  and  tried  to  sit up,  his hand still clutching his chest.  "I want the
fortune your parents left behind."
"The fortune isn't here," Violet said. "None of us may ever see a penny of that money."
"Even if it were here," Klaus said, "you might not live to enjoy it."
"Mcguffin," Sunny said, which meant "Your scheming means nothing in this place."
Count Olaf raised the seashell to his lips, and the Baudelaires could see that he was trembling. "Then
maybe I'll just stay here," he said hoarsely. "I've lost too much to go on—my parents, my true love, my
henchfolk, an enor-mous amount of money I didn't earn, even the boat with my name on it."
3  1  2
The three  children looked  at  one  another,  remembering their time on that boat  and  recall-ing
that  they  had  considered  throwing  him  over-board.  If  Olaf  had  drowned  in  the  sea,  the  Medusoid
Mycelium might never  have threat-ened  the island, although  the  deadly  fungus  eventually  would  have
washed up on its shores, and if the villain were  dead  then there  would be  no one  on the beach
who might help Kit Snicket and her child.
Violet knelt on the sand, and grabbed the villain's shoulders with both  hands.  "We have to  go on,"

she said. "Do one good thing in your life, Olaf."
"I've done lots of good things in my life," he snarled.  "I once  took  in three  orphans,  and  I've  been
considered for several prestigious the-atrical awards."
Klaus knelt  down  beside  his  sister,  and  stared  into the villain's shiny eyes.  "You're  the one
who made us orphans in the first place," he
3 1 3
said, uttering out loud for the first time a secret all three Baudelaires had kept in their hearts for almost as
long as  they could  remember.  Olaf closed  his eyes  for a  moment, grimacing in  pain,  and  then  stared
slowly at each of the three chil-dren in turn.
"Is that what you think?" he said finally.
"We know it," Sunny said.
"You don't know anything," Count  Olaf said. "You three children are the same as when I first
laid eyes on you. You think you can tri-umph in this world with nothing more than a keen mind, a pile of
books, and the occasional gourmet meal." He poured one last gulp of cor-dial into his poisoned  mouth
before throwing the seashell into the sand. "You're just like your parents," he said, and from the shore the
chil-dren heard Kit Snicket moan.
"You have to help Kit," Violet said. "The baby is arriving."
"Kit?" Count Olaf asked, and in one swift gesture he grabbed an apple from the stockpot
 3 1 4 
and took  a  savage  bite.  He  chewed,  wincing  in  pain,  and  the  Baudelaires  listened  as  his  wheez-ing
settled and the poisonous fungus was diluted by their parents' invention. He took another bite, and
another, and then, with a hor-rible groan, the villain rose to his feet, and the children saw that  his chest
was soaked with blood.
"You're hurt," Klaus said.
"I've been hurt before," Count Olaf said,  and  he staggered  down  the slope  and  waded
into the waters of the flooded coastal shelf. In one smooth gesture he lifted Kit from the raft and carried
her onto the shores of the island. The distraught woman's eyes were  closed,  and  as  the  Baudelaires
hurried down to her they were not sure she was alive until Olaf laid her carefully down on the white
sands of the beach, and the children saw her chest heaving with breath. The villain stared at Kit for one
long moment, and then he leaned down and did a strange thing. As the Baudelaire orphans looked
315
on, Count Olaf gave Kit Snicket a gentle kiss on her trembling mouth.
"Yuck," said Sunny, as Kit's eyes fluttered open.
"I told you," Count Olaf said weakly. "I told you I'd do that one last time."
"You're a  wicked  man," Kit said.  "Do you think one  kind act  will make  me forgive you for your
failings?"
The villain stumbled a few steps away, and then sat down on the sand  and  uttered  a  deep  sigh. "I
haven't apologized," he said, looking first at the pregnant woman and then at the Baudelaires. Kit reached
out and touched the man's ankle, right on the tattoo of an eye  that  had  haunted  the  children  since
they had first seen it. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny looked at the tattoo, remembering all of the times it had
been disguised and all the times it had been revealed, and they thought of all the other  places  they had
seen it, for if you looked carefully, the drawing of an eye also spelled out the initials V.F.D., and

  3 1 6   
as  the  children  had  investigated  the  Volunteer  Fire  Department,  first  trying  to  decode  the
organization's sinister mysteries and then trying to participate in its noble  errands,  it seemed  that  these
eyes were watching them, though whether the eyes were noble  or  treacherous,  good or evil,
seemed even now to be a mystery. The whole story of these  eyes,  it seemed,  might always be  hidden
from the children, kept in darkness along with all the other eyes watching all the other orphans every day
and every night.
"'The night has  a  thousand  eyes,'"  Kit  said  hoarsely,  and  lifted  her  head  to  face  the  villain.  The
Baudelaires could tell by her voice that she was reciting the words of someone else.  '"And the day  but
one; yet the light of the bright world  dies  with the dying sun. The mind has  a  thou-sand  eyes,  and  the
heart but one: yet the light of a whole life dies when love is done.'"
Count  Olaf  gave  Kit  a  faint  smile.  "You're  not  the  only  one  who  can  recite  the  words  of  our
associates," he said, and then gazed out at the
317
sea. The afternoon was nearly over, and soon the island would be covered in darkness. '"Man hands on
misery to man,'" the villain said. "'It deepens like a coastal shelf. Get out as early as you can—'" Here he
coughed, a ghastly sound, and his hands clutched his chest. "'And don't have any kids  yourself,'" he
finished, and uttered a short, sharp laugh. Then the villain's story came to an end. Olaf lay back on the
sand, far from the treachery of the world, and the chil-dren stood on the beach and stared into his face.
His eyes shone brightly, and his mouth opened as if he wanted to tell them something, but the Baudelaire
orphans never heard Count Olaf say another word.
Kit  gave  a  cry  of  pain,  thick  with  poisonous  fungus,  and  clutched  her  heaving  belly,  and  the
Baudelaires hurried to help her. They did not even notice when Count Olaf closed  his eyes  for the last
time, and perhaps this is a good time for you to close your eyes, too, not just to avoid reading the end of
the Baudelaires' story, but to
318
imagine the beginning of another. It is likely your own eyes were closed when you were born, so that you
left the safe place of your mother's womb—or, if you are a seahorse, your father's yolk sac—and joined
the treachery  of the world  without seeing exactly where  you  were  going.  You  did  not  yet  know  the
people who were helping you make your way here,  or  the people  who would shelter  you as  your life
began,  when you were  even  smaller  and  more  delicate  and  demanding  than  you  are  now.  It  seems
strange that you would do  such a  thing, and  leave your-self  in the care  of strangers  for so  long, only
gradually opening your eyes to see what all the fuss was about, and yet this is the way nearly everyone
comes into the world. Perhaps if we saw what was ahead of us, and glimpsed the crimes, follies, and
misfortunes  that  would  befall us later  on,  we  would all stay  in our  mother's  wombs,  and  then
there would be nobody in the world but a great number of very fat, very irritated  women.  In any
case, this is
3 1 9
how all our stories begin, in darkness with our eyes closed, and all our stories  end  the same  way,  too,
with all of us uttering some last words—or perhaps someone else's—before slipping back into darkness
as our series of unfortunate events  comes  to  an end.  And in this way,  with the jour-ney  taken  by Kit

Snicket's baby, we reach the end of A Series of Unfortunate Events as well. For some time, Kit Snicket's
labor was very difficult, and it seemed to the children that things were moving in an aberrant—the
word "aberrant" here means "very, very wrong, and causing much grief"—direction. But finally, into the
world came a baby girl, just as, I'm  very,  very sorry  to  say,  her mother,  and  my sister,  slipped  away
from the world after a long night of suffering—but also a night of joy,  as  the birth of a  baby  is always
good news, no matter how much bad news the baby will hear later. The sun rose over the coastal shelf,
which would not flood again for another year, and the Baudelaire orphans held the baby on the shore and
watched
320
as her eyes  opened  for the first time. Kit Snicket's daughter squinted at the sunrise,  and  tried  to
imagine where in the world she was, and of course  as  she  wondered  this she  began  to  cry. The
girl, named after the Baudelaires'  mother,  howled  and  howled,  and  as  her series  of unfortunate events
began, this history of the Baudelaire orphans ended.
This is not to say, of course,  that the Baude-laire  orphans  died  that  day.  They were  far too  busy.
Although they were  still children, the Baudelaires  were  parents  now,  and  there  was  quite a  lot to  do.
Violet designed and built the equipment necessary for raising an infant, using the library of detritus stored
in the shade of the apple tree. Klaus searched the enormous book-case for information on child care, and
kept  careful  track  of  the  baby's  progress.  Sunny  herded  and  milked  the  wild  sheep,  to  provide
nourishment for the baby, and used the whisk Friday had given her to make soft foods as the baby's teeth
came in. And all three Baudelaires
321
planted  seeds  from the bitter  apples  all over  the island, to  chase  away  any traces  of  the  Medu-soid
Mycelium—even though they remem-bered it grew best in small, enclosed spaces—so the deadly
fungus had no chance to harm the child and so the island would remain as safe as it was on the day they
arrived. These chores took all day, and at night, while the baby  was  learning to  sleep,  the Baudelaires
would sit together in the two  large reading chairs and  take  turns reading out loud from the book  their
par-ents had left behind, and sometimes they would flip to the back of the book, and add a few lines to
the history themselves. While reading and writing, the siblings found many answers  for which they had
been looking, although each answer, of course, only brought forth another mystery, as there were many
details of the Baudelaires' lives that seemed like a strange, unreadable shape of some great unknown. But
this did not concern them as much as you might think. One cannot spend forever sitting and
322    .
solving the mysteries of one's history, and no matter how much one reads, the whole story can never be
told. But it was enough. Reading their parents' words was, under the circumstances, the best for which
the Baudelaire orphans could hope.
As the night grew  later  they would drop  off to  sleep,  just as  their parents  did,  in the chairs in the
secret space beneath the roots of the bit-ter apple tree, in the arboretum  on an island far,  far from the
treachery of the world. Several hours later, of course, the baby would wake  up and  fill the space  with
confused  and  hungry  cries.  The  Baudelaires  took  turns,  and  while  the  other  two  children  slept,  one
Baudelaire would carry the baby, in a sling Violet had designed, out of the arboretum and up to the top
of  the  brae,  where  they  would  sit,  infant  and  parent,  and  have  breakfast  while  staring  at  the  sea.
Sometimes they would visit Kit Snicket's grave, where they would lay a few wildflowers, or the grave of
Count Olaf, where they would merely

3 2 3
stand silent for a few moments. In many ways, the lives of the Baudelaire orphans that year is not unlike
my own,  now that I have concluded  my investigation. Like Violet, like Klaus,  and  like  Sunny,  I  visit
certain graves, and often spend my mornings standing on a brae, staring out at the same sea. It is not the
whole story, of course, but it is enough. Under the circum-stances, it is the best for which you can hope.
324

Page 325
Caption: A man with a hat rowing to sea in a small boat

Page 326  Blank page


Page 327
BRETT HELQUIST was
born in Ganado, Arizona, grew up in Orem, Utah, and now lives in Brooklyn, New York. He is hopeful  that  with  the
pub-lication of the last book in A Series of Unfortunate Events, he'll  be  able  to  step  outside  more often in the
daytime, and sleep better at night.
LEMONY SNICKET is
the author of all 170 chapters of A Series of Unfortunate Events. He is almost finished.
Visit him on the Web at www.lemonysnicket.com.
Page 328 Blank page
Page 329
To My Kind Editor:
The end of THS END can be found at the 
end of THE END,
With all  due  respect, Lemony Snicket
Page 330 Blank page
Page 331 Blank Page
Page 332 Blank pageCHAPTER FOURTEEN
A Series of Unfortunate Events
THE BAD BEGINNING
THE REPTILE ROOM
THE WIDE WINDOW
THE MISERABLE MILL
THE AUSTERE ACADEMY
THE ERSATZ ELEVATOR
THE VILE VILLAGE
THE HOSTILE HOSPITAL
THE CARNIVOROUS CARNIVAL
THE SLIPPERY SLOPE
THE GRIM GROTTO
THE PENULTIMATE PERIL
THE END CHAPTER FOURTEEN
A Series of Unfortunate Events
BOOK the Last
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
by LEMONY SNICKET

Illustrations by Brett Helquist
 HARPERCOLLINS Publishers
Chapter Fourteen
Copyright © 2006 by Lemony Snicker 
Illustrations copyright © 2006 by Brett Helquist
Ô Mort, vieux capitaine, il est temps! levons l'ancre!
Ce pays nous ennuie, ô Mort! Appareillons!
Si le ciel et la mer sont noirs comme de l'encre.
Nos coeurs que tu connais sont remplis de rayons!
For Beatrice—
We are like boats passing in the night—
particularly you.
Blank page
Caption: The Baudelaire’s vessel sailing to the sea

C H A P T E R
Fourteen
The  last entry in  the  Baudelaire  parents'  hand-writing  in  A  Series  of  Unfortunate  Events  reads  as
follows:
As we suspected, we are to be castaways once more. The others believe that the island should
stay far from the treachery of the world, and so this safe place is too dangerous for us. We will
leave  by  a  boat  B  has  built  and  named  after  me.  I  am  heartbroken,  but  I  have  been
heartbroken before, and this might be the best for which I can hope.  We  cannot  truly  shelter
our children, here or anywhere else, and so it might be best for us
and for the baby to immerse ourselves in the world. By the way, if it is a girl we will name her
Violet, and if it is a boy we will name him Lemony.
The Baudelaire orphans read this entry one evening after a supper of seaweed salad, crab cakes, and
roast lamb, and when Violet finished reading all three  children laughed. Even Kit's  baby,  sitting  on  Sunny's
knee, uttered a happy shriek.
"Lemony?" Violet repeated. "They would have named me Lemony? Where did they get that idea?"
"From someone who died, presumably," Klaus said. "Remember the family custom?"
"Lemony Baudelaire," Sunny tried,  and  the baby  laughed  again.  She  was  nearly  a  year  old,  and
looked very much like her mother.
"They never told us about a Lemony," Vio-let said, and ran her hair through her hands. She had been
repairing the water filtration system all day
2
and was quite tired.
Klaus poured  his  sisters  more  coconut  milk,  which  the  children  preferred  to  drink  fresh.
"They  didn't  tell  us  a  lot  of  things,"  he  said.  "What  do  you  think  it  means,  'I've  been  heart-broken
before'?"
"You know what 'heartbroken'  means," Sunny said, and then nodded as the baby mur-mured
"Abelard." The youngest Baudelaire was best at deciphering the infant's somewhat  unusual way of
speaking.
"I think it means we should leave," Violet said.
"Leave the island?" Klaus said. "And go where?"
"Anywhere," Violet said. "We can't stay here forever. There's everything we might need, but it's not
right to be so far from the world."
"And its treachery?" Sunny asked.
"You'd think we would have had enough treachery for a lifetime," Klaus said, "but there's
3

more to life than safety."
"Our parents left," Violet said. "Maybe we should honor their wishes."
"Chekrio?" the baby  said,  and  the Baudelaires  considered  her  for  a  moment.  Kit's  daugh-ter was
growing up very quickly, and she eagerly explored the island at every opportunity. All three siblings had to keep
a close eye on her, particularly in the arboretum, which was still heaping with detritus even after a year of
cata-loging. Many of the items in the enormous  library were  dangerous  for babies,  of course,  but the
infant had never had a serious injury. The baby had heard about danger, too, mostly from the register of
crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind from which the Baudelaires read out loud each evening, although they
had not told the infant the whole story. She did not know all of the Baudelaires' secrets, and indeed there
were some she would never know.
"We can't shelter her forever," Klaus said.
  4
"In any case, treachery will wash up on these shores."
"I'm surprised it hasn't already," Violet said. "Plenty of things have been shipwrecked  here,  but we
haven't seen a single castaway."
"If we leave," Sunny asked, "what will we find?"
The Baudelaires fell silent. Because no cast-aways had arrived in the year, they had little news of the
world, aside from a few scraps of newspaper that had survived a terrible storm. Judging from the articles,
there were still vil-lains loose in the world, although a few volun-teers also appeared to have survived all
of the troubles that had  brought  the children to  the island. The articles, however, were from The
Daily  Punctilio,  and  so  the  children  could  not  be  sure  they  were  accurate.  For  all  they  knew,  the
islanders had spread the Medusoid Mycelium, and the entire world might be poisoned. This, however,
seemed unlikely, as the world, no
5
matter  how  monstrously  it  may  be  threatened,  has  never  been  known  to  succumb  entirely.  The
Baudelaires  also  thought of all the people  they hoped  to  see  again, although, sadly,  this  also  seemed
unlikely, though not impossible.
"We won't know until we get there," Violet said.
"Well, if we're leaving, we'd better hurry," Klaus said. He stood  up and  walked  to  the bench,
where the middle Baudelaire had fash-ioned a calendar he believed to be fairly accu-rate. "The coastal
shelf will flood soon."
"We won't need much," Sunny said. "We have quite a bit of nonperishable food."
"I've cataloged quite a bit of naval equip-ment," Violet said.
"I have some  good  maps," Klaus  said,  "but we  should also  make  room  for some  of  our  favorite
detritus. I have some novels by P. G. Wodehouse I've been meaning to get to."
"Blueprints," Violet said thoughtfully.
6
"My whisk," Sunny said, looking at the item that Friday had smuggled her long ago, which had turned
out to be a very handy utensil even after the baby had outgrown whisked foods.
"Cake!" shrieked the baby, and her guardians laughed.
"Do we take this?" Violet asked, holding up the book from which she had read out loud.
"I don't think so," Klaus said. "Perhaps another castaway will arrive, and continue the history."
"In any case," Sunny said, "they'll have something to read."
"So  we're  really  leaving,"  Violet  said,  and  they  really  were.  After  a  good  night's  sleep,  the

Baudelaires began to prepare for their voyage, and it was true they didn't need much. Sunny was able to
pack a great deal of food that would be perfect for the journey,  and  even managed  to  sneak  in a  few
luxuries, such as some roe she had harvested from local fishes, and a somewhat
7bitter but still tasty apple pie. Klaus rolled sev-eral maps into a neat
cylinder, and added a number of useful and entertaining items from the vast
library. Violet added some blueprints and equipment to the pile, and then
selected a boat from all the shipwrecks that lay in the arboretum. The
eldest Baudelaire had been surprised to find that the boat that looked best
for the task was the one on which they had arrived, although by the time
she was done repairing and readying it for the voyage she was not surprised
after all. She repaired the hull of the boat, and fastened new sails to the masts,
and finally she looked at the nameplate read-ing COUNT OLAF, and with a
small frown, she tore through the tape and removed it. As the children
had noticed on their voyage to the island, there was another
nameplate under-neath, and when Violet read what it said, and called her
siblings and adopted daughter over to see, yet another question about
their lives
8
was answered, and yet another mystery had begun.
Finally, the day for departure arrived, and as the coastal shelf began to flood the Baude-laires carried
the boat—or, as Uncle Monty might have put it, "vaporetto"—down to the beach and began to load all
of their supplies. Violet, Klaus, and Sunny gazed at the white sands of the beach, where new apple trees
were beginning to  grow.  The children spent  nearly all of their time in the arboretum,  and  so  the
side of the island where  the colony had  been  now felt like the far side  of the island, rather  than
where their parents had lived. "Are we ready to immerse ourselves in the world?" Vio-let asked.
"I just hope we don't immerse ourselves in the sea," Klaus said, with a small smile.
"Me too," Sunny said, and smiled back at her brother.
"Where's the baby?" Violet said. "I want to
9make sure these life jackets I've designed will fit properly."
"She wanted to say good-bye to her mother," Sunny said. "She'll be along soon."
Sure  enough, the tiny figure of Kit's  daugh-ter  could  be  seen  crawling over  the  brae,  toward  the
children and their boat. The Baudelaires watched her approach, wondering what the next chapter in this infant's
life would be, and indeed that is difficult to say. There are some who say  that  the Baudelaires  rejoined
V.F.D.  and  are  engaged  in brave  errands  to  this  day,  perhaps  under  different  names  to  avoid  being
captured. There are others who say that they perished at sea, although rumors of one's death crop up so
often, and are so often revealed to be untrue. But in any case, as my investigation is over, we have indeed
reached the last chapter  of the Baudelaires'  story,  even if the Baudelaires  had  not.  The three  children
climbed into the boat, and waited for the baby to crawl to 
1 0   the water's edge, where she could pull herself into a stand-ing position by clinging to the back of the
boat. Soon the coastal shelf would flood, and the Baudelaire orphans would be on their way, immersing
themselves in the world and leaving this story forever. Even the baby clutching the boat, whose story
had just begun, would soon vanish from this chronicle, after uttering just a few words.
"Vi!" she cried, which was her way of greet-ing Violet. "Kla! Sun!"

"We wouldn't leave without you," Violet said, smiling down at the baby.
"Come aboard," Klaus said, talking to her as if she were an adult.
"You little thing," Sunny said, using a term of endearment she had made up herself.
The baby paused, and looked at the back of the boat, where the nameplate had  been  affixed. She
had no way of knowing this, of course, but the nameplate had been nailed to the back of
11
the boat by a person standing on the very spot  she  was  standing—at  least,  as  far as  my research  has
shown. The infant was standing on a spot in someone else's story, during a moment of her own, but she
was thinking neither of the story far in the past nor of her own,  which stretched  into the future like the
open sea. She was gaz-ing at the nameplate, and her forehead was wrinkled in concentration. Finally, she
uttered  a  word.  The Baudelaire  orphans  gasped  when they heard  it, but  they  could  not  say  for  sure
whether she  was  reading the word  out loud or  merely stating her  own  name,  and  indeed  they  never
learned this. Perhaps this last word was the baby's first secret, joining the secrets  the Baudelaires
were keeping from the baby, and all the other secrets immersed in the world.  Per-haps it is better
not  to  know  precisely  what  was  meant  by  this  word,  as  some  things  are  better  left  in  the  great
unknown. There are some words, of course, that are better left unsaid—
1  2
but not, I believe, the word uttered by my niece, a word which here means that the story is over.
Beatrice.
1 3
Page 14 Blank page

Page 15
Caption: The sea with a question mark drawing in the water
LEMONY SNICKET is
still at large.
Find him on the Web at www.lemonysnicket.com.
BRETT HELQUIST was
born in Ganado, Arizona, grew up in Orem, Utah, and now lives in Brooklyn, New York. Un-fortunately,  he  gets  out
rarely during the daytime, and sleeps very little at night.

